il l\f 1 
1 
1 
i 1 1 *PF J 
3 PI 
to Home Storage 
and Physical Survival 
Jack A. Spigarelli 
tf o 
r $ 
U P D A T E D 
S E C O N D 
E D I T I O N 

Will You Be Ready? 
We thought it couldn't 
happen, but it did. Now 
we know just how vul- 
Conrad V. Chester, civil defense expert, 
nerable we really are 
^ ^ R'dgc National Laboratory 
What could be next? 
W B ^ W y ^ j I B 
T W ^ B H T ^ B 
X Biochemical terrorism 
Nuclear attack or accidents 
^ ^ 
X Earthquakes or 
* r u c c TlPPer>' 
_. 
n 
, ,. 
Remnant Review, texas 
other natural disasters 
Economic upheaval and 
^ ^ ^ ^ E 
civil riots 
Dr. John Sweeney, 
X Crop failures and famine 
{uhh< H,callh D , r c c t o r' 
r 
New York State 
This handbook will help you 
prepare for our uncertain times by 
showing how to: 
Design a basic food-storage plan George Guillery, manufacturer of 
that fits your needs 
ttudear 
SUI"vival Pallets 
Prepare your home for 
earthquakes 
X Survive nuclear attacks 
msà 
and accidents 
Survival Guide magazine 
Build your own free 
^fflffffPffiffnliffll 
radiation meter 
JriffiBlgWIlJvBfftiB 
X Put together a workable 
Survive magazine 
Emergency Evacuation Kit 
Select appropriate firearms 
PMMrrlfrifrViltifÉH 
X Use communications so you'll 
Duncan Long 
know what's really going on 
survival expert and author 
X Take care of hygienic needs 
Store fuel safely for the 
, 
I 
, 
Internet site review 
long-term...and much more. 
Conrad V. Chester, civil defense expe 
Oak Ridge National Laboratory 
Bruce Tippcry. 
Remnant Review, Texas 
Dr. John Sweeney, 
Public Health Director. 
New York State 
George Guillery, manufacturer of 
nuclear survival products 
Survival Guide magazine 
Survive magazine 
Duncan Long, 
survival expert and author 
Internet site review 
This best-selling guide 
will help you prepare for 
crisis. Why wait? 

CRISIS 
PREPAREDNESS 
HANDBOOK 
A Comprehensive Guide to 
Home Storage 
and Physical Survival 
Jack A. Spigarelli 
Second Edition 
Updated 
Cross-Current Publishing • Alpine, Utah 

CRISIS PREPAREDNESS HANDBOOK 
A Comprehensive Guide to Home Storage and Physical Survival 
by Jack A. Spigarelli 
Published by: 
Cross-Current Publishing 
333 North 425 East 
Alpine, UT 84004-1427 U.S.A. 
(801) 756-2786 
Orders@Cross-Current.com 
http://www.Cross-Current.com 
All rights reserved 
No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any 
means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording or by any 
information storage and retrieval system, without written prior permission 
from the author, except for the inclusion of brief quotations in a review. 
© Copyright: 1984, 2002 by Jack A. Spigarelli 
ISBN, print ed. 0-936348-07-0 
ISBN, PDF ed. 
0-936348-08-9 
First Printing, 1984 
Second Printing, 1984 
Third Printing, 2002, completely revised and updated 
Printed in the United States of America 
Library of Congress Control Number: 
2002090032 
Disclaimer: The purpose of this book is to provide information only to help persons who 
want to prepare for possible future crises. It is sold with the understanding that every 
effort has been made to provide the most current and accurate information available to 
the author's knowledge when written. It is in no way intended to be exhaustive. Any 
errors or omissions, either typographical or in content, are unintentional. No illegal 
activities are suggested or encouraged. Any use or misuse of the information contained 
herein are solely the responsibility of the user, and the author and publisher make no 
warrantees or claims as to the truth or validity of the information. The author and 
publisher shall have neither liability nor responsibility to any person or entity with 
respect to any loss or damage caused, or alleged to have been caused, directly or 
indirectly, by the information contained in this book. Neither the publisher nor author are 
engaged in rendering legal or other professional advice. If legal or other professional 
advice is needed, the services of a competent professional should be sought. 
Cover design by Daniel Ruesch Design www.danielrueschdesign.com 

Contents 
INTRODUCTION 
1 Security in an Uncertain World 
5 
2 Make the Commitment 
9 
3 A Framework for Total Preparedness 
13 
4 Answers to Common Questions 
21 
FOOD AND WATER STOCKPILING 
5 The Fundamentals of Successful Food Storage 
25 
6 How and Where to Store 
33 
7 The Modes of Food 
51 
8 Your Food Storage Plan 
67 
Commercial Plans 
7-Plus Basic Plan 
Custom Advanced Plan 
9 Individual Storage Foods 
97 
10 Food Preparation Equipment and Supplies 
137 
11 Emergency Water Supply 
145 
FOOD PRODUCTION 
12 Sprouting 
155 
13 Growing Your Own 
161 
14 Raising Your Own 
169 
15 Finding Your Own 
177 
FOOD PRESERVATION 
16 Cold Storage 
183 
17 Home Canning 
191 
18 Home Dehydrating 
201 
19 Other Food Preservation Methods 
207 

CRISIS SURVIVAL 
20 
21 
Emergency Evacuation 
General Survival Tools 
Firearms 
Knives & Multi-tools 
Axes & Saws 
OTHER PREPARATIONS 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 
27 
28 
29 
30 
Clothing and Bedding 
Heat, Cooking, and Light 
Medical and Dental 
Sanitation and Personal Care 
Preparing Your Home 
Terrorism and NBC Warfare 
Biological 
Chemical 
Nuclear 
Transportation 
Communications 
Radios 
Cell phones 
Internet 
Home Management 
RESOURCES 
31 
32 
Survival Library 
Sources 
211 
217 
227 
235 
251 
257 
261 
271 
281 
289 
295 
297 
305 
Index 
315 

1 
SECURITY IN AN UNCERTAIN 
WORLD 
We take our modern world for granted. If it's too cold we just turn 
up the thermostat. If it's too hot we turn the air conditioner on. If we've 
run short of milk we think nothing of driving our car to the supermar-
ket to buy more. Dinner can be on the table in minutes with our 
microwave. We dress in the latest fashions, laundered by the newest 
"superpower" detergent in our five-cycle automatic washer. And merely 
flicking a switch lights up the room, let's us listen to a concert in stereo, 
or brings the evening news live, in color, from half way around the 
world. It's really quite a convenient life. It may not always be so. 
We Are Dependent 
Our conveniences are due mainly to specialization. Each of us is 
skilled in our own narrow field but we know less and less about 
everything else. This trend has made us more and more dependent on 
large numbers of interconnected systems for even the most basic 
necessities of life. 
We depend on the farmer to produce our food and he, in turn, 
depends on having the necessary fuel, machinery, fertilizers and 
pesticides, favorable weather and ample water. We depend on the 
truckers, railroads, processors and supermarkets to transport and 
distribute our food, often from thousands of miles away. They depend 
on fuel for the trucks and trains as well as an orderly credit system. 
We depend on the utility companies, with their umbilical cords 
continuously feeding us our heating, cooking, lighting, refrigeration, 
communications and water. We depend on the textile manufacturers for 
our clothing and the hospitals, physicians, dentists and drug companies 
for our health services. The oil companies supply our gasoline and the 
police and firemen our protection. And to pay for all this and more, we 
depend on a reliable source of income. 

6 
INTRODUCTION 
We Are Vulnerable 
The multitude of vast, interdependent systems we depend on form 
a fragile web. Their centralization and complexity create vulnerability 
to disruption and breakdown. Even relatively minor incidents could 
interrupt the flow of food and other essential goods and services, 
bringing instant panic and chaos. 
Consider the Possibilities 
A crisis could result from a wide variety of events, both natural and 
manmade. It may affect only a local area, with modest disruption and 
inconvenience, or be a major catastrophe of global proportions causing 
a total breakdown and collapse of society. And even spared such a 
crisis, many families nevertheless face the occasional accident, illness, 
or unemployment. The temporary loss of income and its associated 
problems can create a personal crisis for that particular family. 
Think about your own situation. Try to imagine what it would be 
like without power for refrigeration or lights to see by. What would you 
do without water to flush the toilets or even to drink? What if one of 
your children were sick and there were no doctors nor hospitals 
available to call for help? What would you do if you had no food to feed 
your family and the stores were empty and closed? Or you had no fuel 
to heat your home during the freezing blizzards of winter? 
Dangerous Times 
On September 11,2001, terrorists hijacked four commercial airliners 
full of passengers and then rammed them into the World Trade Center 
in New York City and the Pentagon in Washington, D.C.. Passengers 
aboard one of the airliners overpowered their captors, preventing it 
from reaching its target, but over 3,000 innocent civilians lost their 
lives in the attack. This atrocity jolted many from their dangerous 
complacency, forcing them to realize that terrible destruction could 
happen, even in America. Many responsible, intelligent individuals 
think the possibilities for even worse events are more than just 
someone's imaginary nightmare. While a calamity of man or nature has 
always been possible, some believe that mankind is entering a time of 
unprecedented peril. 
Attacks by terrorists or rogue states using biological, chemical, or 
even nuclear weapons could bring on major crises. Some feel that the 

SECURITY IN AN UNCERTAIN WORLD 
7 
threat from Russia and China could still trigger a nuclear holocaust, 
while others see the Middle East as the flash point. Scientists studying 
the forces of nature warn of climatic changes and forecast crop failures 
and worldwide famine. Many foresee societal trends that could result 
in hyperinflation, a collapse of the monetary system, depression, 
massive unemployment, rioting and a complete disintegration of 
society. Finally, there are potential cataclysmic events of nature that 
could also occur. 
But, regardless of your personal view, it should be abundantly clear 
how fragile the threads are that hold the fabric of society together and 
how perilous our condition could become at any time. 
Majority Unprepared 
It is human nature to avoid the unpleasant. Simply thinking about 
the crisis possibilities is too disturbing for the majority to even consider. 
Having never suffered any real hardships, they find it difficult to accept 
the fact that they may. They feel secure in the assumption that 
everything will go on working tomorrow just like in the past. The many 
warning signs are ignored and the consequences are rejected. They go 
about their everyday lives sure that nothing bad can happen to them. 
And, if it did, they are confident that someone else would take care of 
them. 
But the majority are often wrong. They don't realize how vulnerable 
they are. They are not aware of how fast a crisis could strike nor how 
severe it could become. They fail to recognize the true nature of their 
condition until it is too late. 
The Prudent Prepare 
The prudent realize there are no guarantees in life. They know the 
only security comes from being independent. They accept responsibility 
for themselves and their families and take steps to become as self-reli 
ant as possible. They recognize potential problems and do what they 
can to minimize their effects. In short, they prepare. 
The Time Is Now 
The sooner you begin preparations the more likely you are to be 
ready. When the crisis appears, the time to prepare is gone. If you knew 
for certain that a major crisis would strike next week, you would spare 

8 
INTRODUCTION 
no effort to make whatever preparations would be necessary. How can 
you be positive it won't happen that fast? If you are a "someday" 
procrastinator or put it off because you are too busy with day-to-day 
concerns, you must realize the urgency. If you are waiting for a better 
time you wait in vain. The best time is now and you have no time to 
waste. The day will come when "today" is too late to prepare. Do it now. 

2 
MAKE THE COMMITMENT 
A major commitment is required to prepare, but it can be done if you 
go about it step-by-step with a plan. 
An Achievable Challenge 
Preparing for major crises takes a good deal of thought and effort. 
It involves considerable expense and may require significant changes 
in lifestyle. The task can seem overwhelming unless you realize it 
doesn't have to be done all at once. First, you must start by building a 
solid foundation of knowledge. You will be making many decisions, and 
intelligent decisions require sufficient and accurate information. Then, 
following the guidelines in this book, devise an orderly, systematic plan. 
Now break the plan up into manageable steps. Since your decisions will 
be highly individual, naturally you should also expect to implement 
them at your own speed. 
Develop Your Own View 
It is easier to make appropriate preparations when you have some 
idea of the potential crises. A wide selection of possibilities has been 
discussed by various authors, and you can become acquainted with 
them by reading their books. Don't limit yourself to particular views but 
study diverse opinions. The views often conflict and no one knows with 
certainty exactly what will happen or when. Many things also happen 
that the "experts" never expected. You will have to make the best 
educated guess you can. It's your future at risk, so don't simply accept 
someone's view. Think through the logic. Do you agree? If not, why not? 
Examine the various perceived threats. Some will occur, many will not. 
Which are most likely to happen? Which are most dangerous? Don't 
ignore a possibility just because it makes you too uncomfortable to 
accept it. 
Anticipate Consequences 
Once you have developed your view, list the crisis possibilities. 
Think what would happen if they occurred. How would they affect you 

10 
INTRODUCTION 
and your family? What could you do now to lessen their impact? 
Does your view of the future include possible winter storms, 
tornadoes, or earthquakes? You may need to strengthen your home, 
build a storm cellar, or put in an emergency power source to ensure 
heat, light and refrigeration. If your area is subject to prolonged 
drought, you should consider alternate water sources. 
Does your view contain increasing governmental control and contin-
ued budget deficits? Then you will need to plan for eventual hyper-infla-
tion. Government may use it as an excuse to set up ineffective price 
controls so you'll need to read about them and their effects. You should 
stock up on basic commodities that the price controls would soon keep 
in short supply and prepare for rationing. 
What about civil disturbances, mob rioting and perhaps a complete 
breakdown of law and order and essential services such as transporta-
tion, communications, police and fire protection and utilities? Will food 
production and distribution be disrupted? Will the lack of medical 
services and proper sanitation lead to epidemics? Will looting and 
violence become widespread and force you to protect yourself? 
Recent events have made us much more aware of potential biologi-
cal, chemical and even nuclear attacks by terrorists or rogue nations. 
There is also still the possibility of an all-out nuclear war. Whatever 
their motives, some claim a nuclear war would annihilate the whole 
earth and entirely destroy civilization. They state flatly that it is 
""unthinkable" but we now know that the "unthinkable" can happen. 
The Russians continue to amass their ICBM arsenal, devise new ways 
of protecting their industry and build shelters for their people. China 
tries its best to increase its nuclear capabilities. Misinformed, we 
continue to believe that nothing can be done to prepare for it and 
therefore do nothing. The truth is there are a number of things you can 
do to greatly increase your chances of surviving a nuclear war. Chapter 
27 tells you the minimal preparations you should make and where to 
learn about more extensive ones. 
Extent Of Crisis 
Obviously crises come in all dimensions and durations. Likewise, it 
is obvious that if you prepare for the worst you will also be prepared for 
everything less. In many parts of the world, if a crisis prevented the 
food crop from being harvested, it would be at least a year before 
substantial replacement food could be grown. Thus, I recommend a 
one-year period as the minimum that should be considered and this 

MAKE THE COMMITMENT 
11 
book is based on that premise. Whether you decide to plan for more or 
less is up to you. 
What It All Costs 
Depending on perceived needs and desires, costs can vary tremen-
dously. A one-year food supply for an adult, for example, can cost 
anywhere from less than $300 to more than $3,000. Some may already 
have a good share of what they feel is needed while others must start 
from scratch. If you feel comfortable with just the basics, you can 
probably prepare for less money than a decent automobile would cost. 
If you see it necessary to establish a full-blown retreat in the wilds of 
Canada complete with a jet helicopter to take you there you can spend 
millions. 
There are many ways to keep costs to a minimum and some of them 
are listed under Budget Basics in the following section. Other budget 
tips are included where appropriate throughout the book. Keep in mind 
that most preparedness items can nearly always be used at some time 
or another no matter what, and they are likely to cost more as time goes 
by. But whatever the costs, the price of doing nothing may be much 
higher. 
How To Get The Money 
If you have limited funds like most people and are just beginning to 
prepare, at this point you are probably looking at your already-strained 
budget and wondering where the extra money is going to come from. 
You may even be thinking you can't afford to prepare. The truth is you 
can't afford not to. Maybe you won't be able to prepare exactly as you'd 
like nor as quickly, but that's no excuse for not doing what you can. 
So where does the money come from? My observation is that most 
people can nearly always find money for the things they really want. 
It's a matter of priorities. It often takes imagination and sacrifice, but 
they do it. And so should you. 
Start by getting the most for your money with the Budget Basics. 
Compare prices and shop the ads, special promotions, liquidations and 
close outs. Don't forget quality often pays in the long run. Check out 
discount stores, wholesalers, factory and freight damage outlets. Buy 
directly from the producer if possible. Get discounts by buying in 
quantity. Join a co-op or set up your own with family, friends, or 
neighbors. Shop garage sales, flea markets, swap meets, nickel ads and 

12 
INTRODUCTION 
newspapers for second-hand items. Buy military surplus. Use your own 
labor by growing a garden and preserving the food, preparing storage 
foods from bulk and making items from kits. Make do with scavenged 
goods. 
Examine your budget for any excess. If you regularly save a portion 
or put some into investments, realize that preparedness is the most 
tangible form of savings and the surest investment. Good storage food 
costs half what the average family spends for food. If they ate similarly 
to the storage food, each month they could store a month's supply from 
the savings. You may find it necessary to temporarily reduce your 
standard of living. Eat cheaper cuts of meat and less prepared food. Eat 
out less. Cut back on recreation, make fewer trips and take less 
expensive vacations closer to home. Make do with what you already 
have by repairing and using items longer. Give preparedness gifts for 
Christmas, birthdays and other occasions. 
If you can't cut expenses enough, get more money coming in. Do 
family fund-raising projects, take a second job, or upgrade your present 
employment. Have a garage sale and sell those items you seldom use. 
Perhaps you should get rid of luxury items such as boats, waverunners, 
snowmobiles, campers and summer cabins. 
In the end, you must decide how important it is to be prepared for 
possible crises. If you are committed, you will prepare. 

3 
A FRAMEWORK FOR TOTAL 
PREPAREDNESS 
Total preparedness means being able to provide for your own needs 
as much as possible. It consists of three areas: material provisions, 
personal preparation, and financial resources. This chapter looks at 
each and then shows you how to integrate them into a workable plan. 
Material Provisions 
Having space for a garden and orchard, acquiring animals, securing 
a reliable source of water, building a root cellar, and modifying your 
home for a wood stove are all part of material provisions. So is stockpil-
ing supplies, tools, and equipment. These aspects and others are 
covered in detail in upcoming chapters. As you read each chapter and 
your family's individual needs become clear, make a list of the provi-
sions you want with amounts where appropriate. One item in particular 
you shouldn't overlook is a good reference library (see Chapter 31). 
Don't skimp in this area because information may be your best 
investment. 
Make sure you plan adequately. People have a tendency to 
underestimate their needs and overestimate their provisions. Many 
"year's supply" would be gone in a few months! Although it is true that 
you might get by with a lot less than you thought possible—you may 
also need a great deal more than planned for. Extra can't hurt and you 
may want some for barter. It's also best to begin a crisis with fresh, 
up-to-date equipment and supplies. This is accomplished by rota-
tion—using the oldest and replenishing with new. A sensible idea is to 
store more than your anticipated needs, use it down to a minimum level 
and then stock back up. 
Include whatever you will need. Many items are mentioned in this 
book but you may also want to double-check by going through your 
home and making a list of all consumable items you find that would be 
difficult to live without. Look for items that could be damaged and 
would need replacing. While it may become necessary at times to "make 
do" during crisis, it is best to prepare in advance. 

14 
INTRODUCTION 
Have redundant systems so if one fails you have a backup. For 
example, store food as well as grow a garden and raise animals. While 
food can usually be securely stored it will eventually run out. Gardens 
and animals are "renewable" on the other hand but are quite vulnerable 
to drought, disease, and vandals. Using both increases your odds. 
Personal Preparation 
There is more to preparedness than the mere accumulation of 
material goods. Personal preparation, although requiring more time 
and effort than stockpiling, can often be the difference between being 
a survivor or just another casualty. Some of the preparation must take 
place prior to a crisis to be effective so you should start working on it as 
soon as possible. The most profitable investment is in yourself. 
Knowledge and Skills 
The more skills and knowledge a person has about a wide variety of 
situations and problems the better he is able to cope with whatever 
may confront him, the less likely he is to panic, and the more confident 
he will be. However, you can not buy the knowledge and skills that may 
be necessary to survive as you can stockpile goods. They come only 
through study, practice, and adaptation to your needs and circum-
stances. And although they may take years to develop, once mastered 
they can't be taken from you. 
One way of learning a skill, perhaps the cheapest and most conven-
ient, is from a good book. Many are guided by the motto: "if I can read 
it I can do it." The surest way is to become an apprentice to a practitio-
ner who is willing to teach you. A third method is to take a class or 
seminar through a university, community college, adult education 
program, special interest club, or from a private source. But learning a 
skill is just the beginning step. Practice is essential to build efficiency 
and familiarity. If this sounds as if it might take a lot of your time, just 
remember during a crisis there may not be a great demand for skills 
such as watching television, golfing, or playing computer games. 
Table 3-1 has a list of skills you may want to consider. It is not 
exhaustive but should get you started. Use it to make your own list of 
skills you think may be necessary. Divide your list into two catego-
ries—essential and desirable—and then mark the ones you already 
have. Now plan to acquire the remaining ones. Don't feel you must 
master all of them immediately, but pick one or two to begin with. 

A FRAMEWORK FOR TOTAL PREPAREDNESS 
15 
Physical Health 
Survival both during and after a crisis may depend on your physical 
health. Build up your general physical condition and stamina now by 
eating a balanced diet, getting adequate rest, and exercising properly. 
Have regular medical checkups and keep immunizations current; 
diseases that are "controlled" now may not remain in that state. In 
particular, be sure to have diphtheria immunizations and have a 
tetanus booster every five to ten years. Get preventative and corrective 
surgery and dental work done. Have regular eye and hearing examina-
tions. Minimize your dependence by relying as little as possible on 
drugs and medication, including alcohol and tobacco. 
Mental Health 
Perhaps more than any other one thing, your survival may depend 
on your state of mind. Major crises create stress for all, but reactions 
differ markedly. Many react with excessive fear that quickly turns to 
panic and sheer terror. If not completely paralyzed by the overwhelm-
ing sense of weakness and vulnerability, they act ineffectively and even 
downright dangerously. Others become deeply depressed and apatheti-
cally give up. But some, although facing the same difficulties, cope with 
an inner strength born of being mentally prepared. With an emotional 
stability unknown by the rest, they function with a clear head and a 
calm mind. Any eventuality is less threatening to them. 
Preparing requires exercising your mind by expanding its perspec-
tive and increasing its adaptability. Try new things and put yourself 
in different situations. Accept the fact that conditions could change 
abruptly for the worst and be aware of what to expect. Your mind can 
be acclimated to the possibilities by reading real or fictional accounts 
of survival experiences. Use worry constructively by planning out 
exactly what actions you would take in various crises. This will not only 
increase your confidence but also tend to reduce anxiety, confusion and 
disorientation if and when it happens. Learn how to reduce tension 
through relaxation and venting of feelings harmlessly with physical 
activity. Keeping a sense of humor also builds resiliency. 
Finally, don't ignore the strength of spiritual anchors. All is lost 
without hope for the future. Consider who you are and what you stand 
for. Think about and discuss your ethics and moral values, your beliefs 
and your relationships with others and God. You've got to want to be a 
survivor and believe you can be one before you will be. 

16 
INTRODUCTION 
TABLE 3.1 PREPAREDNESS SKILLS 
• Grow a garden, cultivate an orchard, and plant field crops. It's not as 
easy as it looks so doing it now is important. You must gain experience 
working with your particular soil, water, climate, insect, and disease 
conditions. Building up the soil can also take years. 
• Raise some rabbits, chickens, goats, or other animals permitted by 
space and local zoning laws. Learn the techniques of animal hus-
bandry and accumulate the necessary equipment and supplies. 
• Process and preserve food by dehydrating, canning, smoking, curing, 
and pickling. 
• Make your own cheese, butter, and yogurt. 
• Plan and prepare nutritious, appetizing meals using the same foods 
and methods of preparation and cooking you would use during a crisis. 
You'll find cooking on a wood stove is a lot different than using 
electricity or gas. 
• Sew, mend, and remodel your own clothing. Learn to quilt, knit, 
crochet, weave, spin, and dye wool. Make and repair your own shoes 
and emergency footwear. Tan leather and do leather craft. 
• Make your own soaps and candles. 
• Make your own gifts, toys, and household furnishings and decorations. 
• Learn how to repair and maintain your home. This includes carpentry, 
painting, plumbing, electrical wiring, masonry, and woodworking. 
Know how to survey and clear land, drill wells, dam streams, and how 
to build using rammed earth and other construction techniques. 
• Cut your family member's hair. 
• Learn metal-working skills such as welding, casting, and black 
smithing. 
• Learn basic auto mechanics and repair and do your own tuneups and 
maintenance. Learn to fix appliances, machines, and small engines. 
• Learn about radio and communications. Understand police and fire 
codes and CB lingo. 
• Take the beginning and advanced first aid classes from Red Cross or 
other service group. Best if every teenager and older knows at least the 
basics. Take Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (CPR), paramedic, and 
Emergency Medical Technician (EMT) courses. Learn practical 
nursing skills and how to handle emergency childbirth. Get practice 
and experience if possible. 
• Learn and practice wilderness and primitive survival skills. These 
include foraging for edible plants, snaring wild game, starting fires 
without matches, cooking without pots and pans, finding water, 
making emergency shelters, map reading and navigation, weather 

A FRAMEWORK FOR TOTAL PREPAREDNESS 
17 
prediction, knot tying, and making primitive tools. You don't really 
have the skills until you can survive on your own in any weather, 
including winter, in a variety of terrains and climates. 
• Participate in outdoor sports to learn survival skills and to keep in 
shape: camping, backpacking, hunting, fishing, trapping, tracking, 
mountaineering, snowshoeing, downhill and cross-country skiing, 
archery, canoeing, rowing, sailing, and swimming. Learn to field dress 
and butcher game. 
• Learn about weapons and practice marksmanship and practical 
defensive shooting. The National Rifle Association (NRA) and local 
gun and archery clubs can help. 
• Learn practical unarmed self-defense. The martial arts are often 
offered by local clubs or schools. 
• Learn to barter. You can hone your techniques as a member of a barter 
club or by trading goods and services locally among friends and 
neighbors. 
Financial Resources 
The first rule of financial preparedness is to preserve what you 
already have before seeking to accumulate more. Pay off your mortgage 
and get out of consumer debt as soon as possible. Financial independ-
ence requires solvency and you should have enough cash and savings 
reserves in Treasury bills—or money market funds invested in 
T-bills—to cover necessary expenses for at least six months. Have a 
current will and use tax avoidance and estate planning to maximize 
your net worth. When trying to increase your worth, don't forget that 
large returns are always accompanied by large risks. Greed and 
speculation often result in losing all you have. 
Realize that paper money has value only in a working economy that 
accepts it and that it may be absolutely worthless in the future. Then 
your storage of real goods for barter will be crucial. Among the best 
trade items are the basic foods (particularly oil), garden seeds, toilet 
paper, hand sewing needles and thread, .22 Long Rifle ammunition, 
matches, razor blades, wire, and cloth. I wouldn't store anything my 
family couldn't use itself and I'd diversify and keep a balance of items. 
While gold and silver can be transporters of wealth to a more normal 
economy, their intrinsic value is low in a basic society. I'd be wary of 
diamonds, other gemstones, rare coins, and collectibles. 
Unless you already perform a basic service or produce an essential 
good, now is the time to develop an alternate livelihood that would 

18 
INTRODUCTION 
TABLE 3.2 MATERIAL PROVISION PRIORITIES 
PRIORITY 1: The most essential storage items to sustain life. 
• Basic food plan for one year with recipes 
Chapter 8 
D Water for two weeks (14 gal/person) and purifier 
Chapter 11 
• Garden seeds for one season 
Chapter 13 
• Manual grain mill 
Chapter 10 
• Basic medical supplies and medicines 
Chapter 24 
• Minimal sanitation needs 
Chapter 25 
• Clothing to last one year 
Chapter 22 
• Bedding to keep warm without additional heat 
Chapter 22 
• Method to cook and heat with fuel for one year 
Chapter 23 
• Basic survival library 
Chapter 31 
PRIORITY 2: Portable Storage for minimal needs for 72-hours. 
D Emergency Evacuation Kit (EEK) 
Chapter 20 
PRIORITY 3: Storage and other items necessary for a more normal 
lifestyle. This priority includes equipment, tools, supplies and other 
items including a self-sufficient homestead or a survival retreat. 
Among the first items to be considered are an advanced food plan and 
additional clothing, bedding, medical supplies and fuel. 
remain in demand. Look over the list of goods and services you would 
need, compare with your interests and abilities and then choose a 
suitable trade. Perhaps it could be a hobby or sideline for now. 
Your Master Action Plan 
As you assess your needs, guided by this and following chapters, you 
will develop lists for each of the three areas. This is the first step in 
making up your own Master Action Plan (MAP). Next you should 
establish priorities among the listed items. Needs and desires vary 
widely, particularly in the personal and financial areas, and you must 
decide your own priorities. However, as a possible help, Table 3-2 lists 
some suggested priorities for the material provisions area. 
Once your priorities are determined you need to set specific goals. 
Naturally you would like to do everything immediately. Realistically, 
however, your timetable will probably be a compromise between 
urgency and available resources. Guided by your timetable, set a target 
date for each item on your lists. Items to be stockpiled should be listed 
together on an Inventory Planning Checklist (IPC) with the 
amount needed, the target date, a space for marking when achieved 

A FRAMEWORK FOR TOTAL PREPAREDNESS 
19 
and the storage location. Buy to complete the IPC consistent with your 
needs and means. Using the amount allowed by your budget, build a 
Master Shopping List (MSL) showing your planned month-by-
month purchases. 
Now the most important step of all: implementation. The best plans 
are useless unless acted upon and the longer you put it off the less 
likely you are to do it. It takes most families months and even years to 
build an adequate program and to learn the skills to use it effectively. 
Keep Track and Update 
With time your stockpile will grow and your preparations will take 
shape. You will need to keep track of your material goods with an 
inventory control system (see Chapter 5). Establish a regular schedule 
for taking a physical inventory to make sure it is all there and in 
working order. Any worn out or malfunctioning items should be 
replaced. As perceived threats and needs change, examine your plan 
and update it. 
Trial By Fire 
When you have completed enough of your preparations that you feel 
you could handle most anticipated crises, it is time for the Preparedness 
Test. This simulated experience is the best thing, short of an actual 
crisis, to check your program and point out any failings. 
The test lasts seventy-two hours and consists of getting by as though 
you were deprived of all outside assistance and services by some crisis. 
(Your food plan requires more time to test sufficiently and a separate 
test is outlined in Chapter 8. The first three days of the food test could 
take place during the Preparedness Test and continue afterwards until 
complete.) The ground rules are simple: start the test without warning 
other members of the household to preclude any last-minute prepara-
tion, turn off or otherwise prevent use of all electricity, gas and water, 
and do not use any item or service you did not have at the beginning (no 
buying, bartering, borrowing, or begging, please). The survival "atmo-
sphere" can be increased by limiting your outside contacts during the 
period (turn off the phone?) And the most revealing test will be one 
undertaken during the worst weather. 
Once started, don't back out. It can seem very trying after a day or 
so but you can certainly survive for the remaining time. If you have any 
doubts about the need to prepare, you'll be surprised how effectively 
this test will convince you. Problems most likely to appear are in the 

20 
INTRODUCTION 
areas of water (toilet won't flush, no baths or showers, no hot water to 
wash or clean up with) and cooking (now just how do you cook in that 
fireplace?) One important precaution: be extremely careful of fire in any 
form and have fire extinguishers handy. Make sure that fuel is burned 
only in well-ventilated rooms and be especially careful, particularly 
with children, that no lamp, heater, or stove gets tipped over. 

4 
ANSWERS TO 
COMMON QUESTIONS 
Don't you think it's being overly pessimistic to expect major 
catastrophes requiring such a level of preparation? Isn't it a bit 
paranoid? 
I think recent events have answered this question pretty well. We 
now know that the "unthinkable" can actually happen, even in 
America. Actually, I think it's quite irrational and irresponsible 
to ignore obvious threats to one's security and to ridicule those 
with more foresight. It's just common sense to prepare. The 
prudent protect themselves with life, home, car and health 
insurance and no one calls them paranoid. Yet crisis prepared-
ness is the most concrete form of insurance possible. I'd much 
rather be prepared for some eventuality and not have it happen 
than the reverse. Only a prepared pessimist can afford to be 
optimistic about the future. 
Isn't it immoral to store food when so many people in the world 
go to bed hungry each night and many are starving? Isn't that 
hoarding? 
The negative connotation of hoarding comes from those who 
attempt to get more than their fair share of a scarce good. But, as 
I write this, we are in the midst of yet another year of record and 
near-record crops. Food prices at the farm level are depressed 
and many farmers are being forced into bankruptcy. The 
government is actually paying them to not grow food. They are 
simply producing more than the market needs. Over the years we 
have seen excess cattle and pigs dumped into pits, grain piled 
high to rot and even half of the orange crop destroyed to keep 
prices up! And according to a Department of Agriculture study 
137 million tons of food is lost, wasted or destroyed each year by 
Americans. Most of it is simply thrown out. 
What person could honestly claim that storing food during a 

22 
INTRODUCTION 
time of such surplus is immoral? Even outside the United States, 
in Africa and Asia where famines are common, starvation is not 
really a problem of scarcity. In India, for example, one-fourth of 
the food supply is destroyed by rats while the nation spends 
hundreds of millions of dollars developing nuclear weapons. This 
is not to say there aren't starving people in the world today. 
There certainly are. But whether or not you store food for leaner 
times won't affect that at all. And the more you store now, the 
less the competition will be later. The immoral are those who 
reject stocking up now but will demand a share of other's storage 
when shortages appear. 
Q. 
Wouldn't it cause a shortage if everyone decided to prepare? 
A. 
If everyone sought to do so all at once it would. In reality, only a 
small minority will even buy a book like this in the first place, 
fewer still will read it and only some of them will actually follow 
through. Stockpiling is normally a gradual process that allows 
producers time to adjust. Another thought is that if a majority of 
the people were sufficiently aware of the possibilities and 
concerned enough to prepare, many of the predicted crises could 
be prevented. 
Q. 
If times do get as bad as some predict, wouldn't I either have to 
share my storage with others who failed to prepare or protect it 
with force? 
A. 
If it gets as bad as some predict the answer is certainly yes. It 
may be a time of real moral decision. Some will choose to share 
while others may exercise their right to protect their lives and 
property with force. But isn't either choice better than being 
unprepared? The truly prudent will store extra and try to 
convince their family, friends and neighbors to do likewise. 
Q. 
Should I keep my preparations secret? 
A. 
It's a real dilemma. By letting others know you can possibly 
recruit them to the cause and reduce the impact on everyone 
later. Or you just might be inviting them to steal your stockpile. 
I think I'd be a bit cautious but I wouldn't try to keep it top-sec-
ret, either. If you are afraid that the minute something happens 

ANSWERS TO COMMON QUESTIONS 
23 
your neighbor is going to stick a gun in your face, then perhaps 
you live in the wrong neighborhood. In any major crisis, you'd 
have to move out fast. You might as well think about moving 
now. 
Q. 
How can I convince my skeptical friends and loved ones to 
prepare? 
A. 
This can be a real problem that is not always easy to solve. You 
can start by not being overly aggressive in your attempts to 
convince. Set a good example by carrying out your own prepara-
tions. If you have additional resources, perhaps you could set 
extra aside for them in case they change their minds. Sometimes 
people respond better if they hear the message from a stranger; 
you might give them a copy of this or another book that explains 
what could happen in the future. You can also give them other 
gifts of practical survival value when the occasions arise. 
Allowing them to help you in your planning and preparation may 
spark an interest in their own. Be patient and remember that 
after all you can do, each individual is responsible for himself. 
Q. 
How can I answer those who reject preparing with the comment: 
"I wouldn't want to live in a world like that"? 
A. 
It's easy to make such comments with a full stomach and a warm 
bed in a relatively secure society. However, the reality of a 
situation can rapidly change minds and morals. Actually in dire 
circumstances, most people will do whatever they have to do to 
stay alive. But, even if not concerned for themselves, how about 
their loved ones? Death by starvation or disease is neither quick 
nor painless. Could they really just stand by and watch them die? 
Q. 
We've survived bad times before, why not again? 
A. 
Admittedly, humans adapt well and we've been able to survive 
many trials in the past. However, we've never been anywhere 
nearly as dependent as we are now on a fragile, technological 
system built on energy and other strategic supplies from unreli-
able sources. Never before have there been the tremendous forces 
of destruction in man's control. And people are also changing. 
The first blackout of New York City in 1965 was followed by an 

24 
INTRODUCTION 
increased birth rate but the second one in 1977 by looting and 
burning. 
Q. 
Things don't seem that bad right now. What makes you think 
they'll get worse? 
A. 
It's simply the calm before the storm. Problems normally don't 
just get progressively worse but respites are to be expected. Don't 
be lulled into thinking they've gone away—because they haven't. 
A period of relative calm is the best time to prepare simply 
because so many others are no longer concerned. 
Q. 
This handbook covers a lot of areas to prepare for, and it can look 
like an insurmountable task to prepare for everything covered 
here. Can anyone possibly do it all? Should I even try? 
A. 
There are a lot of potential crises. It is a monumental task to 
prepare for everything and, almost regardless of the amount of 
preparation, no one can be prepared for them all. However, every 
thing you are prepared for makes one less thing to worry about. 
Just do what you can. 
This book wasn't written with the idea you must do everything 
in it. It gives you ideas to think about and then tells you how to 
prepare for each idea. The choice of which to do is yours. 

5 
THE FUNDAMENTALS OF 
SUCCESSFUL FOOD STORAGE 
It would certainly be a tragic waste of time, money and effort if, 
when needed, you found your stored food unusable. Following certain 
essential principles helps prevent this. 
Store What You Eat—Eat What You Store 
Many people store large quantities of foods they seldom, if ever, eat 
in their normal diet. Often they don't even like the particular foods but 
store them because others have told them to. They seem to think that 
when the time comes they'll simply change their eating habits. Let's 
take a look at some of the problems they might find. 
People Won't Eat Anything 
A common belief is that people "will eat anything" if they are hungry 
enough. While this is obviously true of many, experience shows that a 
substantial proportion will go without, even starve, rather than eat 
unfamiliar or distasteful foods. This is particularly true of the young, 
ill and aged. The stress of crisis tends to increase rejection of strange 
foods even more than during normal times. The solution is twofold: 
store foods as similar to your normal eating habits as possible and 
acquaint your family with and cultivate a taste for the foods you store. 
Sudden Diet Changes Harmful 
Your body's digestive system is used to your regular diet. It takes 
time to adjust to changes. In what is likely to be an already stressful 
situation, a dramatic change can cause additional stress as well as 
severe discomfort, illness and possibly death. Changing suddenly to a 
diet of high fiber, for example, will have a laxative effect accompanied 
by intestinal gas and a bloated, stuffed feeling. Severe diarrhea and 
even dysentery can follow. A family I know switched to their food 
storage and within days the wife was hospitalized. She was unable to 
either eat or drink for two weeks. The Benson Institute at Brigham 
Young University showed the same results when they asked a family 
to live solely on their food storage. The food, largely dehydrated, put a 

26 
FOOD AND WATER STOCKPILING 
couple of the family members in the hospital within weeks. 
This problem can be avoided by slowly building a tolerance now for 
the foods you store. 
You May Be Allergic 
Many people find they are allergic to particular foods. Unfortu-
nately, a number of these are some of the best storage foods. 
The father of one family attempting to live off it's storage found he 
was allergic to wheat. This allergy is usually to the gluten which is 
contained in all cereal grains except rice and corn. Approximately 10% 
of the adult white population and up to 90% of some ethnic groups 
suffer from an intolerance to milk. Their systems lack the enzyme 
lactase needed to break down the milk sugar, and they suffer gas, 
abdominal pain and diarrhea. Others find they are allergic to egg 
whites or that they can't easily digest beans. 
Being allergic to the foods you store isn't a problem you want to 
discover later. Now you can make the necessary adjustments. 
Foods Don't Keep Forever 
All foods deteriorate with time. This fact is examined in detail in the 
next section. Although possible to a limited extent, it is difficult to just 
"store and ignore" your food storage. You will find it to your advantage 
to rotate your food by eating the older and replacing it with new. 
Other Factors 
If you store food you don't normally use, you may find when the time 
comes that you lack the culinary skills to prepare appetizing and 
acceptable meals from it. Learning is a trial and error process and you 
will be wise to develop the necessary skills now. In addition, storing 
what you now eat will automatically tend to increase the variety in your 
storage plan while using the more readily available and affordable 
foods. 
Getting There From Here 
The ideal is to live off your food storage daily, but there is a consid-
erable gap between what most people normally eat and what they store. 
Although you can still eat foods not in your storage, you should make 
adjustments to bring the two closer together. You may need to become 
accustomed to some of the storage foods. Start by incorporating small 

FUNDAMENTALS OF SUCCESSFUL FOOD STORAGE 
27 
amounts of the particular foods into your menu and gradually increas-
ing them. Don't store the foods in large quantities until you are 
comfortable eating them. Never store foods you absolutely can't stand. 
Storage Life of Foods 
As mentioned, no food is entirely static during storage and all 
eventually become inedible. The length of time a food takes to become 
inedible is called its storage or shelf life. Shelf life figures for the 
various foods are easy to find. Nearly every food storage book and 
advertisement has them. The problem arises because the figures often 
don't agree. One source may claim a shelf life of less than six months 
for a particular item while another states it lasts indefinitely. Which is 
right? The answer often lies in what is meant by a food being "no good". 
What "No Good" Means 
A food can become "no good" in four different ways: 
1. Loss of nutrients. Once a food has lost its nutritional value there 
is no reason to eat it. Chemical deterioration causes a loss in 
vitamin potency with the water-soluble vitamins being most 
susceptible. The losses are usually greatest during and soon after 
the processing and packaging, tending to decrease substantially 
with time. Proteins break down and become insoluble. Minerals 
gradually oxidize. 
2. Spoilage and contamination. Microorganisms are found nearly 
everywhere and, given the proper environment, grow rapidly. 
Bacteria cause botulism, salmonella and other food poisons, while 
the fungi—molds, yeasts and slimes—produce many dangerous 
toxins, some deadly. Enzymes, either microbial or natural such 
as bruising or darkening, spoil food. Additional spoilage and 
contamination comes from infestations of weevil, mites, other 
insects and rodents, and the environment adds foreign odors, 
dust and even radioactive fallout. 
3. Loss of palatability. Food may develop a terrible or offensive 
smell. Oxygen causes fat to break down and become rancid. 
Vegetables become "musty", and starch products become stale. 
Crystallization and colloidal modification causes food to soften, 
curdle, turn grainy, lump, cake, oil-out and cast off layers. Color 
pigments oxidize, fade, darken and otherwise discolor. 

28 
FOOD AND WATER STOCKPILING 
Loss of palatability is very subjective. Some people are 
extremely sensitive to off-flavors and odors, while others will eat 
just about anything placed on their plate. Even the freshest foods 
don't satisfy every taste preference. A useful fact to keep in mind 
about palatability is that most studies show food tends to loose its 
aesthetic appeal before losing appreciable nutrients. 
4. Loss of functional properties. Some foods simply loose their 
ability to function as required. They may no longer leaven (yeast, 
baking powder and soda), thicken (corn starch and sauce mixes), 
whip, gel, or "set" (gelatins and instant puddings). 
Clearly a shelf life based on one of these meanings may differ markedly 
from that based on another. 
Determining Shelf Life 
Predicting shelf life is made difficult by the many variables in four 
areas: 
1. Food characteristics. Each component of food (fats, proteins, 
carbohydrates, vitamins, minerals and color pigments) undergoes 
its own forms of deterioration. Individual foods have their unique 
physical and chemical properties, giving each definite storage 
potential. Storage also tends to magnify whatever weakness 
there was in the quality of the original food as well. 
2. Processing methods. A variety of methods are used to preserve 
food, each with a significant influence on product stability and 
shelf life. The method chosen greatly affects the nutrient 
retention, particularly of the water-soluble and heat-susceptible 
vitamins. 
3. Packaging methods. The packaging may be anything from a thin 
paper sack or plastic bag to a hermetically-sealed metal can 
double-coated inside and out with a food-grade enamel and 
containing a special nitrogen atmosphere. 
4. Storage environment. The shelf life depends heavily on where the 
food is stored. Much more will be said about packaging and the 
storage environment in the next chapter. 
Limited Hard Data 
You would think that with all the shelf life claims for various foods 
that there would be a large body of knowledge in this area. But the fact 
is there has been relatively little scientifically-controlled research on 

FUNDAMENTALS OF SUCCESSFUL FOOD STORAGE 
29 
shelf life. Foods usually have not been analyzed at the time of storage 
but have been attributed nutritional values based on fresh foods prior 
to processing. There is even a greater lack of believable data on 
nutritional values after long periods of storage. Although some testing 
has been done, mainly for the military and NASA, in large part we are 
reduced to using extrapolations and making educated guesses. 
All stated shelf lives are estimates. Even those recommended in this 
book are only based upon the best currently-available data modified by 
my own years of experience under various conditions and climates. And, 
because they may not have been determined using exactly the same 
foods and conditions as you have, they are only guides. The unique shelf 
lives you will experience can only be established by frequent sampling 
of your particular storage. 
Recognizing Spoilage 
Medical care will likely be limited during a crisis but, because of 
shortages, food poisoning is more likely. To keep your family safe there 
are some precautions you can take. 
Don't taste an item as soon as you open it but examine it carefully 
for any signs of spoilage. An unbroken seal generally means it's safe but 
it's probably spoiled if the can end or jar lid is bulging or leaking. Gas 
bubbles, foamy or spurting liquids, visible molds or slimes, emulsion 
separation, cloudiness—if not caused by starch from overripe vegetables 
or minerals in the water—and discolorations other than iron and sulfur 
blackening of meats are all signs of spoilage. 
Smell the item. It's likely to be spoiled if it smells acidic, cheesy, 
fermented, musty, putrid, sour, or like rotten eggs. If in doubt, 
remember that heating brings out the characteristic smells of spoilage. 
Heating in a covered pan will also increase the odor. 
Lastly, taste a small portion of the food. Off-flavors do not always 
indicate spoilage but should be considered suspicious. If a bland food 
has a sour or bitter taste spit it out immediately. Unusually soft or 
mushy foods may also be bad. 
Some foods can be salvaged. Mold can be cut off apples, cheese, 
bacon and meat products. If mold is found on butter, other fats, breads, 
grains and other fruits and vegetables, the product should be thrown 
out. As an extra precaution against botulism, home canned meats and 
vegetables other than tomatoes (tomatoes are technically a fruit but are 
used as a vegetable and will be listed as such in this book) can be boiled 
for ten to twenty minutes before taste testing. Botulism may be present 

30 
FOOD AND WATER STOCKPILING 
without any signs of spoilage. If a food is suspected of being spoiled, 
immediately destroy or bury it with its container where it won't 
accidently be eaten by children or animals. Radiation does not harm a 
food unless the actual fallout particles get on it. Clean the outside of 
intact cans before opening them if fallout contamination is suspected. 
Fruits and vegetables can be peeled and the peeling discarded. 
Rotating Your Storage 
By far the best results come through rotating your food storage. 
Rotation insures that the foods are as fresh as possible, are used in your 
daily diet and are sampled on a regular, automatic basis. It also 
minimizes loss of food value and flavor as well as reducing chances of 
loss due to spoilage, contamination, or damage. 
The first consideration for rotating your storage is to have easy 
access to the storage area. Then, each time you purchase or store an 
item, label and date the container with the month and year. You can 
use self-adhesive labels or adhesive tape with permanent ink felt tip 
markers or grease pencils for glass and other slick surfaces. 
Finally, you need a rotation system. You can develop your own to fit 
your circumstances, but it should take into account the approximate 
shelf lives of the food you store and rotate all of it within the recom-
mended periods. Replacement dates could be marked on the label, and 
the foods separated into different locations according to the dates. 
Another system would be to use different shelf rows. Commonly this is 
done by placing fresh items at the back while the older gets pushed to 
the front. A second method is to assign rows of space for each item with 
additional rows for the new. For example, you might have rows A, B 
and C for the regular product with row D for new additions. You would 
use row A first, while adding new to D and go on to row B while adding 
to row A. 
There are also physical helps you can build or buy. These include a 
slant shelf unit for cans (see illustration 6-3), a can dispenser, or even 
an entire built-in wall where cans are put in at one point and taken out 
at another. 
Inventory Control 
Once you have some storage, it is important to know exactly how 
much of which items—food and non-food—you have on hand at any 
particular moment. For this you need an accurate, written record that 

FUNDAMENTALS OF SUCCESSFUL FOOD STORAGE 
31 
is kept current. Don't estimate or guess. Many people get a year's 
supply and think they still have it when in reality they've used a good 
part of it up. 
Your inventory control record needs to tell you the following 
information about each item: 
1. How much you need (your goal). 
2. How much you now have stored (on hand). 
3. Your rotational schedule for the item (replacement date). 
4. Where it is stored (location). 
There are many methods you can use and you should pick one or a 
combination that best suits you. Whatever method you choose, however, 
keep it as simple as possible or you won't use it and that defeats the 
whole purpose. Here are some sample methods: 
1. Set up a card file using 3x5 or 4x6 cards with separate cards for 
each item or category. List the item, shelf life, replacement 
period, storage location, item size, purchase date, replacement 
date, amount purchased, amount on hand and storage goal. 
Cards can be filed in related categories, alphabetically, separated 
into food and non-food, etc. They could also be color coded by 
category or source for the item. 
2. Use a looseleaf binder. Separate lines could be used for each item 
with a sheet for each category. 
3. The Inventory Planning Checklist (IPC) of Chapter 3 could 
be used although this is harder to keep current with rotation. 
This can be done by: 
(a) 
keeping a sheet—taped up or on a bulletin or clipboard 
near storage area. Write down every item removed and use 
as shopping list to replenish. 
(b) 
use blackboard. Write down as removed and erase when 
replaced. 
(c) 
cover the IPC with acetate and tack up or put on clipboard. 
Mark with grease pen or washable marking pen. 
4. A particularly convenient and easy way to keep track of your 
storage inventory is to make an inventory card for each unit of 
every item stored. On each card list the item, its size or amount, 
its purchase date and its replacement date (the dates can be 
changed when you replace the item). Then make a board (poster 
board will do nicely) with a pocket on it for each type of item in 
your storage. Label each pocket by the type or category of item, 

32 
FOOD AND WATER STOCKPILING 
its shelf life, replacement period and the total amount needed 
You could also list the size of each unit and the number of units 
needed to make up the total needed if the size is uniform. 
Whenever an item is used, take the corresponding card and place 
in a pocket, envelope, or other place to keep until buying the 
replacing item. A quick inventory can be taken of each item by 
simply counting the appropriate cards. 
Don't forget to store extra so that you can use some before replacing 
without going below your minimum level. A physical inventory should 
be taken at least once a year—every 3-6 months would be better—to 
correct any mistakes that may have sneaked in. 
SUMMARY 
1. Store what you eat and eat what you store. 
2. Store the best quality possible. 
3. Inspect regularly for possible spoilage and contamination. 
4. Rotate storage by consuming within recommended period and 
replacing. 
5. Keep track of what you need and what you have stored. 

6 
HOW AND WHERE TO STORE 
How and where foods are stored greatly influences their shelf lives. 
Although their deterioration can't be stopped entirely, it can be 
minimized by providing the proper packaging and storage conditions. 
The Storage Environment 
To maximize shelf life the adverse effect of environmental factors 
must be avoided. Each factor not only has its own effect but, together, 
they multiply the rate of deterioration. 
Heat 
Heat is a powerful destroyer of food quality. The rate of a simple 
chemical reaction roughly doubles with each 18° F (10° C) rise in 
temperature, but reactions in food often increase at a far greater rate 
because of their biochemical and enzymatic natures. These reactions 
affect the color, flavor, texture and nutritional value of foods. Heat 
increases the growth rates of both microbes and insects. It dries out 
some foods and generates moisture inside containers, also increasing 
microbial activity. At the other extreme, freezing can bulge and break 
containers as well as damage texture and flavor. 
Moisture 
A certain amount of moisture is necessary to maintain quality in 
most foods but too much moisture—above about 10%—promotes the 
growth of yeasts, molds, bacteria and insects. It also increases 
non-enzymatic browning and the break down of fats, provides a 
medium for chemical reactions and corrodes containers. Foods prepared 
for long-term storage normally contain the correct amount of moisture 
after processing, and the task for prolonging shelf life is to keep that 
level constant. This requires a dry storage environment so containers 
won't corrode and suitable packaging to keep the right amount of 
moisture in and additional moisture out. 

34 
FOOD AND WATER STOCKPILING 
Oxygen 
Oxygen is essential for the growth of fungi—yeasts and molds—and 
some bacteria. Even small amounts of it will oxidize the fat contained 
in nearly all foods, causing rancid odors and flavors, changing colors 
and destroying vitamins. Oxidation is increased by slicing and grinding 
foods and by the presence of heat and light. Foods high in fat are 
particularly affected. The effects of oxygen can be reduced by using 
anti-oxidant additives and airtight containers filled to the top and 
processed with either a vacuum, an inert atmosphere, or absorbers. 
Light 
Although light does inhibit the growth of molds, it is best to shield 
your storage from both artificial and sunlight. Ultraviolet is the 
primary culprit. It bleaches color pigments, damages flavor and texture, 
increases rancidity and destroys vitamins. Highly pigmented foods are 
especially susceptible. Light-penetrating containers can be shielded by 
keeping them in their original cartons, placing them in a closet, or by 
covering with an opaque material. 
Odors and Dust 
Some foods, particularly grains, flours and milk, absorb odors from 
their environment. They should never be stored around strong-odor 
substances such as garlic, onions, soaps and petroleum-based products 
like gas, oil, kerosene, paint, paint thinner and pesticides. Dust should 
be kept to a minimum to avoid contamination of your food. 
Insects and Rodents 
Concern for these pests is obvious. Insects need oxygen, moisture 
and the proper temperatures to survive. Rodents come looking for food. 
Both can be excluded from your storage by the proper containers and 
environmental control. 
Storage Containers 
A suitable container retains the proper moisture and natural food 
odors while keeping out additional moisture, air, light, dust, foreign 
odors, insects and rodents. They can be made from a variety of 
materials in different styles and the "best" is whichever meets your 
particular needs. 

HOW AND WHERE TO STORE 
35 
Metal 
Airtight metal containers are excellent barriers to air, moisture and 
light. Rodents can't chew through them and they are resistant to 
earthquake damage. However, they are usually a bit more expensive, 
have a tendency to react chemically with some foods, and are best used 
in dry areas to prevent rust. When placed in a location subject to 
atmospheric pollution—such as heavy smog, industrial chemicals, or 
near the sea—they are highly susceptible to corrosion. The seams 
frequently are not airtight and even the seaming compound will 
deteriorate. 
They come in a wide variety of sizes and shapes. For those desiring 
to prepare their own foods, the round or square five-gallon cans with 
either the "paint-can" or a small screw-on lid are good choices. They 
may be purchased new or possibly from a local bakery or restaurant 
that buys lard, shortening, or other foods in suitable containers which 
they discard after use. Clean used containers well with a detergent (the 
fat in soaps attracts weevil) and you have a good, inexpensive 
container. Galvanized garbage cans are not airtight. The seams in the 
side and bottom may only be soldered in a couple of spots—leaving the 
rest open—and the lid is another problem. 
Some sources offer a similar container made of spiral-wound 
aluminum lined with a moisture-proof fiber material. They claim it 
costs less to produce than all metal, weighs less, is more dent resistant 
and seals better than regular metal cans. 
Lining and Liners 
To prevent the metal from reacting with food, the inside of the can 
may be commercially lacquered or enameled or you can line it with a 
food-grade polyethylene bag. Enamel sometimes flakes into the food 
and only clear or white plastic bags should be used since color pigments 
can migrate into the food. 
Sealing Lids and Seams 
Two methods, neither particularly convenient, can be used to seal 
seams and lids. Hot paraffin wax does a fair job sealing lids but is 
generally harder to use for sealing seams. Friction-type twist-on lids 
that don't otherwise seal well can have wax poured over their contact 
points. The second method uses sodium silicate or "water-glass" 
available from drugstores. Prepare the water-glass as directed, turn the 

36 
FOOD AND WATER STOCKPILING 
container upside down and then fill the gap around the lid and along 
the seams using a small paint brush or medicine dropper. This is an 
ideal sealant to fill small gaps and make openings airtight but it also 
has a drawback. After hardening it can only be dissolved in boiling 
water and that's hard to do with a large filled can! 
Masking tape, heat duct tape and other heavy tapes can be used to 
help seal lids but shouldn't be counted on by themselves. Even overlap-
ping two or three layers probably won't make it absolutely airtight and 
will permit the escape of fumigants and possible infestation over time. 
Rust Prevention and Inhibition 
There are a number of coatings that may be applied to prevent or 
minimize corrosion due to excessive moisture or pollution: 
1. Rub the outside with automobile wax or polish. 
2. Lacquer the entire outside with varnish or lead-free oil-based 
paint. 
3. Coat small cans with a very thin layer of paraffin wax or dip in 
a solution made from two ounces of wax dissolved in a quart of 
warm mineral spirits. Place the can on a wood block to dry. 
Prepare the cans for coating by first removing any rust spots 
with steel wool, wiping them with an alcohol-soaked cloth and 
then drying with a clean cloth. Keeping small cans in cardboard 
boxes on shelves will also significantly reduce rusting. 
Plastic 
Rigid polyethylene buckets are inexpensive, won't rust or corrode, 
are seamless for easy cleaning, are lightweight, stackable and quite 
resistant to damage by rodents and earthquakes. The negative aspects 
are that after many years they become brittle, crack and emit odors, 
especially in high smog areas. Rodents have been known to chew 
through the thinner walls of plastic garbage cans and sunlight also 
deteriorates plastic. They let some light in and are somewhat 
permeable to water, oxygen and hydrocarbon vapors. 
Again they are available in a wide variety of sizes. The best for home 
storage are the two to six-gallon buckets made from thick high-density 
food-grade polyethylene with molded lids—even better with rubber 
gasket seals—and wire handles if possible. A rubber mallet is handy to 
close them air-tight and a special lid tool is nice to open them easily. 
(Some types have lids that are meant to be cut off and are very hard to 

HOW AND WHERE TO STORE 
37 
open without permanent damage to the lid.) Used buckets can be 
obtained from some sources but be sure they are FDA-approved for 
food. 
Glass 
Glass is easily sterilized, won't corrode, is the least reactive with 
food and is impermeable to air, water and rodents. Its major drawbacks 
are that it is expensive, heavy, lets in light and breaks easily. The last 
two problems can be overcome somewhat by storing the jars in their 
original cartons and tightly packing the spaces around them with 
wadded newspapers, cardboard, excelsior, or other packing material. 
Glass jars also do not stack well and their lids can corrode. 
Other Materials 
Other materials can be appropriate under certain conditions. Some 
sources offer items in polypropylene bags with a liner of metalized 
plastic. Cardboard boxes seldom protect enough but some are 
impregnated with a plastic-wax compound and may suffice in particular 
situations. Both the bags and boxes would need protection from rodents. 
The cellophane, thin plastic, heavy paper and cardboard containers 
commonly found in supermarkets are not for long-term storage. They 
are not airtight, are easily punctured and are quickly penetrated by 
insects. Even the heavy-duty ten to twelve-mil polyethylene used to 
package the MRE military rations is easy game for the little 
Rhyzopertha dominica beetle! Of course, they could be placed inside 
larger, more protective containers. 
Size Considerations 
When choosing sizes for your containers there are a few things to 
keep in mind. Smaller containers reduce the possibility of 
contamination of large amounts, are easier to rotate and can often be 
stored in spaces too small for larger containers. They may also be more 
portable in mobile situations and for evacuations. I know people who 
have 55-gallon drums of wheat in their basements that weigh over four 
hundred pounds and would require a forklift to move. Larger 
containers, on the other hand, can be much more economical, 
particularly for items not costing much per pound. Wheat, for example, 
can be purchased in six-gallon poly buckets for about half what it costs 
in #10 cans. Dehydrated fruits and vegetables cost about one-third 
more in #2*/2 cans compared to #10 cans. 

38 
FOOD AND WATER STOCKPILING 
Vacuums and Inert Atmospheres 
Excluding oxygen can significantly increase the shelf life of some 
foods by retarding oxidation. For example, it's a necessity with most 
freeze dried meats. However, it doesn't seem to make much difference 
with powdered foods such as tomato powder where the oxygen is 
apparently trapped by the small particles. Lack of oxygen does prevent 
the growth of insects, their larvae and microbes. 
The simplest method to remove the oxygen is by creating a vacuum 
and then hermetically sealing the container. A second method is to 
replace the oxygen with an inert gas like nitrogen or carbon dioxide. A 
third method is to use oxygen absorbers. Oxygen absorbers are quick 
and easy to use with dry ingredients, but don't replace as much of the 
oxygen as using nitrogen. There is also some indication that the 
absorber ingredients might combine with the food, contaminating it. 
You can save substantially by preparing your own with dry ice (see 
the fumigation section of this chapter for instructions), vacuum-packing 
your own at home with readily available systems, or using oxygen 
absorbers. Complete directions for using oxygen absorbers are available 
at waltonfeed.com./self/upack/oxyintro.html. Sources for the packets are 
listed in Chapter 32. 
Packaging Your Own 
As noted above, you can save large amounts of money by buying 
bulk grains, beans, sugar, powdered milk and other food items to re-
pack in your own containers. The commercially-packed are ready to 
store and if you have the money and don't want to mess with it perhaps 
that's the way to go. On the other hand, you should at least be aware 
just what you're paying for that convenience. Buying the basics in #10 
cans will cost about two to five times as much as doing your own in 
five-gallon poly buckets. That's about $300 to $500 extra per person! 
Even getting them commercially prepared in five to six-gallon poly 
buckets will cost about 50% more than if you did it yourself. 
Powdered milk can also be canned at home and keeps as long as the 
commercially-canned (7 years or so). Doing your own can save lots of 
money and it is not difficult to do: 
1. Obtain the proper number of suitable containers. Table 6-1 can 
help you determine how many you will need. 
2. Obtain the food items and re-pack as soon as possible. This is 
best done on a low-humidity day with no wind if doing outside. 

HOW AND WHERE TO STORE 
39 
3. Make sure the containers are clean of all foreign matter, contami-
nants and condensation. If necessary, clean with detergent, let 
dry thoroughly and then wipe with a clean, dry cloth. 
4. Line, if necessary, with a heavy-duty white food-grade bag. 
5. Add food item to container and fumigate if desired (instructions 
in following section). The amount you get in each container 
depends a lot on the particular item but can be increased by 
vibrating and tamping down. 
6. Put any desired desiccant or oxygen absorber on top of the food. 
7. Seal tightly. This step is critical and you should make sure the 
rim is not contaminated with dust or other matter. This is best 
assured by wiping with a clean, dry cloth after filling. 
8. Label container with contents and date prepared (month and 
year). 
Fumigation 
The need for fumigation depends on your situation. If you start with 
properly cleaned, low-moisture grains, store them in suitable containers 
and live in a dry climate, you probably don't need to go to the bother of 
fumigation. If you live in a high-humidity climate or have had 
infestation problems before, you will want to fumigate In either case 
you'll want to inspect regularly and take appropriate action if needed. 
Generally, legumes do not need fumigation. 
Dry Ice 
Dry ice is the most widely used method for home fumigation of grains, 
pasta and dehydrated fruits and vegetables. It is inexpensive, generally 
costing less than a dime per five-gallon container, safe and easy to use, 
and the method I recommend. Because it is solidified carbon dioxide 
that creates tremendous pressures when it returns to its gaseous state, 
it should never be used with glass containers. It does not affect the 
sprouting capabilities of grain other than perhaps of that very near the 
dry ice as it vaporizes. Adult insects and larvae are suffocated by the 
lack of oxygen, but their eggs and pupae remain dormant in the food. 
You will need about one pound for each thirty gallons of containers 
(four grams per liter). Dry ice is sold at many grocery stores or look in 
the Yellow Pages under dry ice or beverage companies. Although 
non-toxic, dry ice is very cold—as low as -100° F (-73° C)— and you 
should use folded newspapers, tongs, or heavy gloves to avoid being 
"burned". 

40 
FOOD AND WATER STOCKPILING 
TABLE 6-1. PROXIMATE WEIGHT PER CONTAINER VOLUME 
The following list can be used to estimate how many 5-gallon containers are 
needed to store a particular amount of an item. Other sizes can be calculated from 
the 5-gallon size. The actual amount possible per container depends on the actual 
food particle size, its moisture content, the grade of the product and how well it is 
tamped or vibrated down when put in. 
Food Item 
Pounds per 5-gallon container 
GRAINS 
wheat, rice, popcorn 
34-36 lbs 
corn, barley, rice 
32-35 lbs 
buckwheat, millet, triticale 
30-33 lbs 
cracked wheat 
25-28 lbs 
cornmeal 
22-27 lbs 
flour 
23-25 lbs 
macaroni 
16-23 lbs 
rolled oats 
15-19 lbs 
BEANS 
small white (Navy) 
35-38 lbs 
baby lima, Great Northern, black, 
whole and split peas 
33-35 lbs 
pinto, garbanzo, large lima 
31-34 lbs 
soybeans, lentils, light red kidney, 
black eye peas 
30-33 lbs 
MILK 
regular non-fat dry 
22-25 lbs 
instant non-fat dry 
13-17 lbs 
SUGAR 
granular 
29-34 lbs 
brown 
30-36 lbs 
SALT 
36-38 lbs 

HOW AND WHERE TO STORE 41 
Follow this process to fumigate: 
1. Brush off any water vapor that may have condensed on the dry 
ice from the atmosphere. This prevents additional moisture from 
being added to the food. 
2. Use two to three ounces (about two to three cubic inches) for a 
four to six-gallon container (two cubic centimeters per liter) and 
place in the middle and as low as possible in the container. That 
can be directly on the bottom of metal containers but, because the 
intense cold may crack the bottom of a plastic one, first place an 
inch or two of grain in a plastic container and set the dry ice on 
that. 
3. Finish filling the container. After the visible fumes have dis-
appeared, loosely place the lid over the top. Do not seal the lid 
until the dry ice is entirely evaporated or the pressure may cause 
the container to explode! Depending on the container size, this 
may take thirty minutes or longer. If any bulging should occur 
quickly remove the cover, wait a few minutes and then replace it. 
Unlike nitrogen, carbon dioxide is heavier than air and will tend to 
remain in the container even after opening. Much of it will stay in the 
container if you scoop the food out rather than pour it. 
Other Chemical Fumigants 
There are many chemical poisons that can be used as fumigants but 
they are often hazardous, toxic when used improperly and may be 
regulated or illegal in your area. Many will even kill insect eggs, but 
they also usually destroy the sprouting capabilities. If you desire to use 
any of these compounds, I strongly suggest you call or visit your local 
county extension agent or a reliable commercial firm for complete 
directions on how to do it properly and safely. 
Dusts 
Grains and seeds may be preserved by coating them with a small 
amount of fine dust. The dust suffocates and scratches the insect 
bodies, causing them to dehydrate and the insect to die. Although a 
variety of dusts can be used, diatomaceous earth is the most common. 
It is a very fine dust made from the ground-up silicate shells of a 
pre-historic, microscopic algae called a diatom. 

42 
FOOD AND WATER STOCKPILING 
You will need about one cup for each five-gallon container. A 
protective mask should be worn to prevent irritation of the lungs. To be 
sure every kernel is coated, it can be mixed in small quantities or 
placed between alternating layers of grain, finishing with dust on top, 
sealed and then shaken or rolled to mix thoroughly. Small amounts of 
the dust are not harmful to the digestive system and, as it is quite 
difficult to remove, you will probably simply eat it. It does not affect the 
milling, baking, nutrition, or germination of the grain. However, if you 
desire to remove it, either shake thoroughly in a fine mesh bag or rinse 
with clear water. The kind of diatomaceous earth sold by swimming 
pool maintenance firms has been heat-treated and crystallized for 
water filtering, is inedible and not what you want. Suitable dusts are 
available from Diatect and Whole Wheat (see Chapter 32). 
Organic Insecticides 
Pyrethrum is an insecticide made from the flower of the pyre thrum 
chrysanthemum. It is generally safe for humans and readily breaks 
down when exposed to heat and light. It is quick acting and is usually 
combined with piperonly butoxide or sulfoxide to increase its effective-
ness. Use it the same way as dusts. It is sold in garden supply stores in 
aerosol cans or powder form. Food that has been treated with it should 
be washed or exposed to light for a few days before eating. 
Ineffective Methods 
Methods you should not count on, but recommended by some, 
include bay leaves, chewing gum and ten-penny nails. Salt is also poor 
because it concentrates the moisture. 
Desiccants (Dehydrating Agents) 
Dehydrated foods, including grains, tend to attract moisture from 
the air, which may result in spoilage or infestation. If there is doubt 
about the stored foods being dry enough, or you will be opening the 
container regularly to use the contents, you may want to use a 
desiccant to keep the food dry. They are available commercially or you 
can make your own. Besides those mentioned below, calcium oxide is 
also used extensively by the U.S. Army. 

HOW AND WHERE TO STORE 
43 
Silica Gel 
Silica gel (also alumina gel) is the desiccant used by the government 
and industry to protect fine guns, new cameras and delicate electronic 
equipment from moisture. It is relatively expensive but its reusability 
makes it practical for keeping dehydrated foods dry. It should be 
desiccant grade and is available from most general chemical supply 
stores. Often it can be bought with an added moisture indicator that 
makes it look like small grains of sharp blue sand when dry. As it 
becomes saturated it then turns pink, white, or clear. 
Although an ounce will protect about two cubic feet of space when 
used with equipment, because of the high moisture content with food 
you will need about 2V& ounces (about a quarter cup) per five-gallon 
container. The silica gel can be placed in a porous cloth bag or you can 
make a bag from a cloth approximately one foot square by tying with a 
wire or string. 
The bag should be checked every month or so. If the color has 
changed, indicating it is saturated with moisture, it should be removed 
for reactivation. This is done by heating in an oven at 300° F (150° C) 
for about ten minutes. Overheating—about 450° F (230° C)—will 
destroy its dehydrating ability. The blue color will return when it is dry. 
Let it cool before returning it to the container for re-use. Unused gel 
should be stored in well-labeled, airtight containers. 
Prepackaged units with built-in indicators are available from the 
Hydrosorbent Company. 
Calcium Chloride 
Calcium chloride—that's CaCl2 and not calcium hydroxide or slaked 
lime—is not reusable but is quite inexpensive (less than $10 for a 
twenty-five pound sack) and can be used in the final drying of large 
quantities of food. It looks like pieces of chalk, is available from some 
building supply stores and is used to keep icy roads from freezing and 
in construction work as an additive to set up concrete. Pharmacies also 
carry pellets in smaller quantities at higher prices. 
You need about an ounce (one-fifth cup) per gallon of container. Fill 
an open glass or plastic container half-full or less with the chips or 
pellet and bury it upright in the grain almost to the top so it won't tip. 
Make sure the lid won't touch its top and then seal. Check every few 
months and replace if it is quite moist or has turned to liquid. Although 
not highly dangerous, it should be kept in airtight jars out of the reach 
of children. 

44 
FOOD AND WATER STOCKPILING 
Decontamination 
Three methods can be used to destroy or prevent infestations in new 
or salvaged storage foods: 
1. Cold. Place small bags—ten pounds or less—of infested foods in 
the freezer. Two or three days at or below 0° F (-18° C) will kill 
the adult insects while the same time at -10° F (-23° C) will 
destroy the eggs and larvae as well. Upon removal, wait twenty-
four hours and then dry off any condensation prior to storing. 
2. Heat. All stages of insects can be killed by heating the internal 
temperature of the food to 150° F (66° C) and maintaining for four 
minutes, 140° F (60° C) for ten minutes or 120° F (49° C) for 
twenty minutes. Higher temperatures or longer periods of time 
may reduce the germinating abilities and affect the qualities of 
flours subsequently milled from the grains. Small packages may 
be heated directly while the contents of larger packages should 
be placed on a shallow pan to a depth not greater than 34 inch to 
assure complete penetration of heat. The oven door should be left 
slightly ajar to avoid overheating and you may want to stir the 
food occasionally at the higher temperatures to keep it from 
scorching. Check oven temperature prior to use with an accurate 
thermometer. Food should be placed in insect-proof containers 
before it cools to avoid re-infestation. This method can also be 
used to reduce the moisture content of foods. 
A variation of this method, for use with lightly infested 
raisins, prunes, or home-dried fruits, is to place the food in a 
small cheesecloth bag and dip in boiling water for one minute. 
Then thoroughly dry the contents before storing. 
3. Mechanical. Infested grains can be submerged in a container filed 
with cold water and the bugs will float to the top where they can 
be skimmed off. Then either use the grain quickly or oven dry 
with the above method until hard for milling or storage. Flours 
can be cleaned by sifting through a #64 wire screen. 
Keep for Reuse 
Don't throw a container away just because you've used its contents. 
It can often be recycled for other uses limited only by your imagination 
and needs. For example, glass jars and jugs can be used to store grains, 
beans, powdered milk, salad dressings and pickles. Canning jars you're 
saving for the next harvest can store water in the meantime. The #2Vè 

HOW AND WHERE TO STORE 
45 
and #10 cans can store home-dehydrated foods, be used to save wax and 
lard in, or even made into emergency stoves or homemade water filters. 
A five-gallon bucket can store water or be used as an emergency toilet. 
Storage Areas 
Your storage areas should be orderly and readily accessible to 
accommodate rotation and inventory control. You may also want to 
spread your storage among a number of locations rather than have it 
in just one place to decrease the chance of it all being affected at one 
time by flood, theft, or other mishap. 
Ideally you will want two different types of storage areas, one with 
high humidity for storing fresh produce (see Chapter 16) and one with 
low humidity for storing preserved foods such as canned and 
dehydrated foods, grains, legumes, milk, sugar, salt, etc. This latter 
area should be: 
1. Cool. As close to 32° F (0° C) as practical without freezing. About 
40° F (5° C) would be ideal but 50-70° F (10-21° C) is acceptable 
and attainable by most. Avoid extremes if possible. 
Lower locations are normally best—basements as opposed to 
attics—while north and east walls minimize the heat from the 
sun. Insulating food by storing in closed cardboard boxes stuffed 
with newspapers can keep foods about five degrees cooler than 
the surrounding air on hot days. Good ventilation will help 
control temperature as well as moisture. Locate storage away 
from heat sources such as furnaces, heaters, heat ducts and 
vents, steam and hot water pipes, radiators and hot water 
heaters, dishwashers, dryers, ovens and stoves. Placing sensitive 
foods like milk, eggs, fats and oil near the bottom of a seven foot 
stack can keep them five to ten degrees cooler on a very hot day. 
2. Dry. Locate away from water sources such as steam and water 
pipes, cooling vents, radiators, dishwashers, clothes washers and 
unvented dryers. Never store containers directly on concrete or 
dirt floors but place on wood slats, racks, boards, blocks, plywood, 
cardboard, or even rolled newspapers. Keep containers one inch 
from walls to prevent picking up moisture and to improve 
circulation. Keep humidity below 60-70%. 
3. Dark. Keep out of direct light, particularly sunlight. 
4. Away from dust, smoke and strong odors. 

46 
FOOD AND WATER STOCKPILING 
Space Needs 
Obviously, the amount of space needed depends on how many people 
you are storing for, how long you're storing for and types of food. This 
book's basic plan—and similar plans—will take about seventeen cubic 
feet (thirteen in square cans) per person for a year's supply. The 
advanced plan takes about thirty cubic feet, less with air dried fruits 
and vegetables and more if extensive freeze dried is used. 
Finding the Space 
Finding the needed space is never easy, particularly for those in 
small apartments or a highly-mobile situation. A survey showed that 
nearly three out of five families felt they had inadequate storage space 
in their homes. However, by being creative you can probably find it. 
Here are some ideas to get you started: 
1. Make space for food items by re-arranging present storage and 
placing items such as clothing, bedding and other items not 
affected by temperature in un-insulated garages and attics. 
Foods like salt, sugar and whole wheat could be placed there. 
2. Make better use of cupboard, pantry, or closet space. 
3. Use "dead space" behind furniture placed across corners, on 
balconies, under stairways, beds, sofas and tables. 
4. Make furniture, such as bookcases, beds, coffee and end tables, 
from the storage containers. 
5. Partition part of a large room with a false wall, room divider, 
decorator screen ,or curtain and use the space for storage. 
6. Use "hidden space" between studs on inside walls or between the 
joists under floors. 
7. Crawl space under a house or mobile home can be used if you can 
keep it dry and safe from rodents. Coated metal or plastic 
containers covered with plastic and set on a plywood sheet up on 
concrete blocks may work. 
8. Store outside in a well-ventilated shed, a large weather-resistant 
drum, or in an air and watertight underground fiberglass tank. 
9. Rent space in a mini-warehouse or maybe you have friends or 
relatives that can find space they don't currently use. 

HOW AND WHERE TO STORE 
47 
Shelving, Racks and Bins 
You can buy or build shelves. Most of the commercial variety are 
three feet wide and can be equipped with shelves twelve to eighteen 
inches deep. You can also make your own with normal shelves or with 
slanted shelves that automatically rotate the cans as they roll from the 
loading end to the other for removal as needed (see Figure 6-3). If you 
build your own, remember to leave two inches of head space and use 
vertical supports at least every three feet. A half to one inch strip can 
be placed on the outer edge for security and XA by V2 inch molding can 
be used to separate cans. 
Minimizing Earthquake Damage 
If you live in an earthquake-prone area there are some simple 
precautions you can take: 
1. Use unbreakable containers as much as possible. Glass jars can 
be stored in their original cartons and cushioned with 
newspapers. 
2. Store heavy, large items near the floor to minimize breakage. 
Plastic and even metal containers filled with heavy foods have 
been known to split open when falling several feet or more. 
3. Either don't stack storage or stabilize the stack against tipping. 
4. Use sturdy shelving and anchor at top to wall by bolting or tying 
down securely. Portable shelves are especially easy to tip over. 
5. Enclose cupboards with sliding doors, sturdy latches, or hooks so 
they won't dump their contents if tipped or jarred. Open shelves 
can have "lips" or guard rails installed all around (use piano 
wire, strong fish line, or nail dowels or lath a couple of inches 
above each shelf). Metal shelves can be installed upside down to 
give a small "lip" that will help. 
6. Locate the storage areas in the sturdiest part of the home. 
7. Have an outside entrance so you can still get to it if your home 
happens to collapse over the storage area. 

48 
FOOD AND WATER STOCKPILING 
remove cans here 
Figure 6.3. Slanted shelves automatically rotate canned goods. 

HOW AND WHERE TO STORE 
49 
TABLE 6-2. CONTAINER SIZES 
Size 
#300 
#303 
#2 
#2Vè 
#3 
#5 
#10 
Proximate Contents 
14-16 oz l3/4 cups 
16-17 oz 2 cups 
20 oz 
2*£ cups 
27-29 oz 3V£cups 
46 fl oz 
5*4 cups 
56 fl oz 
7 cups 
112floz 13 cups 
Normal Case 
24 cans 
24 cans 
24 cans 
6 cans 
12 cans 
6 cans 
6 cans 
Proximate Case 
12 x 9 x 9 
123/4 x 9** x 83/4 
14 x IOVA x 9*4 
12*4 x 8** x 5 
17 x 123/4 x 7*4 
16 x 11 x 6*4 
19 x 123/4 x 73/4 
Pest Control 
Cockroaches, silverfish, ants and rodents ruin billions of dollars of 
food each year. They contaminate far more than they eat. They also 
carry diseases such as bubonic plague, dysentery, infectious hepatitis, 
rabies, trichinosis, tuberculosis, tularemia, typhoid fever and typhus. 
During an extended crisis, with poor or nonexistent sanitation and a 
buildup of refuse, pests could be a major problem. Prepare now to 
minimize it. 
Prevention starts by building out pests. Inspect your storage area 
for places where pests can get in or hide. Fill cracks in foundations, 
close off spaces around doors, windows, wires and pipes, and put 
adequate wire mesh screening over air vents and other openings. 
Eliminate dark, humid and warm places where they love to hide and 
don't bring pests in with already-infested foods. Prevent their access to 
food by using insect and rodent-proof containers and cleaning up any 
food spilled. It is extremely important to keep the area clean and to 
prevent trash from accumulating. Walls and floors can be washed and 
disinfected. 
If infestations occur, destroy the contaminated food immediately, 
clean the shelves and then use pyrethrum dust (see fumigation section) 
or two tablespoons malathion in a gallon of water. Dust or paint the 
solution on and under shelves, floors and baseboards. Spray carefully 
into hard-to-reach places such as cracks, crevices ,and behind the 
baseboards. Don't spray on food or near open packages. After the 
solution dries the shelves may be covered with clean paper or foil. 
Applications may be repeated every few months if needed. 
You may want to use stronger insecticides such as diazinon or 
ronnel in smaller, restricted areas—such as behind radiators—to kill 
ants, earwigs and silverfish. Read label instructions for details. One 

50 
FOOD AND WATER STOCKPILING 
form of diazinon, KNOX OUT, is in time-release capsules and is less 
likely to be inhaled by humans or pets than a spray. Recommendations 
of pesticides for use around food are constantly changing and even the 
available pesticides change according to EPA edicts. Check with the 
local county extension agent before buying for use or storage. 
Chlordane, lindane and methoxychlor are not currently recommended 
around food, and diazinon is being totally phased out. 
The best solution for cockroach problems is to deposit boric acid 
dust—no more than half teaspoon in any one spot—into the dark, 
narrow and inaccessible places that roaches hide in. Wear a dust mask 
because boric acid is poisonous to people, too. It acts as a nervous 
system and stomach poison, killing in one to two weeks. Some 
drugstores carry it. Ants can be controlled by placing small bottles of 
Antrol or ant stakes in ant runs and around foundations. These are 
very toxic and should be kept out of the reach of children and pets. 
Store a supply of DECON or similar poisons containing warfarin 
and a dozen or so traps to control mice, rats and other rodents. Traps 
are often preferred to poison grains and other toxic baits because it 
can't be mistaken for food by children or useful animals. You may even 
want to store a few larger traps for possible problems with wild dog 
packs. A cat or two may also come in handy. Females are best because 
of their stronger hunting instinct. 
Local Problems 
If you have a storage condition or problem peculiar to your 
particular geographical area, contact your local county extension agent 
for advice. Other information sources include government agencies, 
colleges and universities and those engaged professionally in the food 
storage business. 
SUMMARY 
1 
Use durable, airtight containers in convenient sizes that are 
impermeable to moisture and resistant to pests. 
2. Store food in cool, dry and dark locations away from strong 
odors. 
3. Keep the storage area clean and store disinfectants, pesticides 
and traps. 

7 
THE MODES OF FOOD 
Foods can be stored in different modes, from fresh to freeze dried. 
This chapter examines the characteristics of each mode so that you can 
make intelligent choices for your food storage plan. 
Keep in mind that individual foods may be superior in a particular 
mode while completely unsatisfactory in another. The best plan will 
consist of a combination of modes appropriate to your needs. Consider-
ations affecting your choices are: (1) budget limitations, (2) desired 
convenience and (3) personal preferences. Combination foods (casse-
roles, stews, etc.) are almost always more expensive, regardless of 
mode, than buying the separate foods. And you really should sample all 
foods before including them in your storage. 
The Basics 
The majority of every adequate food storage plan consists of the 
basics: grains, flours, pasta, dried legumes, powdered milk, sugar, 
honey and salt. They are available conveniently packed in cans and 
poly buckets, or you can prepare your own by buying in bulk and 
repackaging. Doing your own is by far the least expensive, and you'll 
know exactly what you have. You may also choose to buy some 
commercially prepared while doing the rest yourself. Besides some of 
the sources listed in Chapter 32, many of the basics can be purchased 
in bulk locally from feed and seed stores. 
Canned Goods 
Although given a bum rap by some, canned foods deserve consider-
ation for your plan. They are familiar to all, readily traded and can be 
consumed right from the can without heat or additional water if need 
be. Foods that are usually cooked thoroughly are especially suited to 
canning, and most people consider them much tastier than their 
dehydrated counterparts. Industry and military research shows that at 
70° F (21° C) most canned goods keep anywhere from two and a half to 
more than seven years (see Chapter 9 for specifics on individual foods). 
A system rotating fruits within two years and other items within four 
would be adequate. 

52 
FOOD AND WATER STOCKPILING 
Nutritional Value 
Undoubtedly the processing of canned goods causes them to loose 
some of their original nutritional value, but this is certainly not unique 
to them. Losses occur during the preparation of all foods, and even 
fresh foods suffer losses soon after picking. The blanching process is 
responsible for a large portion of nutrient loss, but it is an essential step 
for many frozen or dehydrated vegetables. Major losses occur during the 
final preparation and cooking in the kitchen, no matter what the mode. 
For example, approximately 50% of the vitamin C originally in fresh 
beets is destroyed when they are peeled and sliced! The Benson 
Institute at Brigham Young University finds that canned goods 
effectively retain 70-90% of their vitamins and all their protein, 
carbohydrates, fats and minerals. And a 1983 study by Del Monte 
showed that forty-year-old canned creamed corn, fruit cocktail and 
green peas was essentially nutritionally equal to fresh-canned. 
Compared with frozen—generally credited with being the most 
nutritional of all preserved foods—canned fruits and vegetables both 
retained vitamin A equally well. One study of ten canned vegetables 
showed no significant loss of vitamin A after three years of storage with 
an average of 61% of the vitamin C remaining. In fact, after five to six 
years there was still 50% of the original vitamin C left. 
Most fruits and some other canned goods have sugar added during 
processing, but sugar is an important energy food. If you don't want the 
extra sugar, you can buy or can your own in lighter syrups or juices. 
Costs 
Canned goods are quite inexpensive when compared with dehy-
drated (see actual comparison under dehydrated foods). Studies have 
shown that about 60% of commercially canned goods are even cheaper 
than comparable fresh. Various canned items are nearly always on sale, 
and you can save considerably by price shopping. One thing to avoid, 
though, are the case lot sales in late summer and early fall that are 
closing out old product to make room for the new. The lower prices are 
accompanied by shorter shelf lives. Further savings are possible by 
canning your own with in-season or home-grown produce. 
Retort Foods and MREs 
Retort foods, a fairly recent development in food packaging that 
requires no refrigeration, have been sold outside the United States 

THE MODES OF FOOD 
53 
since 1967. The Japanese purchase over one and a half million of them 
each day and they are widely used throughout Western Europe and 
Canada. They were used as early as 1969 by NASA for the Apollo 
mission to the moon. The Department of Defense calls them MREs 
(Meal Ready to Eat) and they are used now for all combat rations. 
The food is placed in a thin, flexible "pouch" made from a three-layer 
laminate. The air is then evacuated and the pouch is sealed. Next, it is 
placed in a special pressure cooker called a retort oven where it is 
sterilized at temperatures of 240-250° F to prevent deterioration. 
Because the thin pouch requires less processing than metal cans, the 
food undergoes less deterioration and has the potential of being 
superior in quality to even frozen food. Foods remain moist, and their 
colors, textures and flavors compare favorably with canned and frozen. 
It contains no preservatives and can be eaten directly from the pouch. 
The pouch is lighter than metal cans and requires less time to heat. The 
sealed pouch is simply placed directly into boiling water for three to five 
minutes. Shelf life is approximately equal to or a bit longer than 
canned. 
Now the bad news. Current prices, at $3-6 per pound for mixed 
entrees, are substantially more expensive than frozen and in the same 
range as freeze dried. The pouch is also susceptible to puncture and 
rodent damage. In its carton it takes up more space than canned. 
It is highly unlikely that retort foods will ever entirely replace 
canned goods or make them obsolete for crisis storage as some have 
claimed. However they are a good alternative to both canned and 
dehydrated foods and certainly have a place wherever refrigeration is 
an uncertainty. 
SAP Foods 
Sterile Aseptically Packaged (SAP) foods are similar to retort in that 
they are also very rapidly sterilized at high temperatures to allow 
non-refrigerated storage for periods up to one year. The container, a 
flexible bag or rigid carton, is sterilized in hot hydrogen peroxide, blown 
dry with sterilized air, filled, vacuum packed and then sealed. Fruit 
juices keep about six months, and milk keeps about eight months. 
There is come controversy whether the milk tastes canned, cooked and 
chalky or is "indistinguishable" from regular pasteurized milk. Other 
milk products, margarine and peanut butter are also available. 
Again, costs are high and, although expected to come down over 
time, are anticipated to remain 20-30% above conventional items. Once 

54 
FOOD AND WATER STOCKPILING 
the container is opened the foods must be treated as fresh. That means 
refrigerate the milk! 
Dried Foods 
As the term is used here, dried foods refer to those whose moisture 
content has only been reduced to the 20-25% level. These foods include 
raisins, prunes, figs, dates and slices of apples, apricots, peaches and 
pears. They feel moist and soft to the touch and are available from 
supermarkets, usually packaged in a plastic or cellophane bag or in a 
box. Because of their relatively high moisture content, dried foods tend 
to mold easily and are not particularly suited for long-term storage. 
However, if placed in an airtight, pest-proof container and kept in a 
cool, dry and dark location they may keep one to two years. If they 
become overly hard they can be soaked overnight in warm water or 
stewed. 
Dehydrated Foods 
Dehydrated foods—also called low-moisture foods—have had the 
moisture level reduced to only a few percent. They are produced by two 
different processes: 
1. Air dried. The foods are dried by heated air at temperatures 
anywhere from 140° to 400° F in large ovens or drums. The foods 
shrink and become hard and brittle. After reconstitution they 
look similar to cooked foods. 
2. Freeze dried. The foods are flash frozen at temperatures as low 
as -50° F and then radiant heat is used to turn the ice crystals 
directly into water vapor which is drawn off by a vacuum. The 
cellular structure of the food is unchanged and results in a 
sponge-like, porous food that basically retains its original size 
and shape. 
Both types result in reduced weight. Dehydrated fruits weigh about 
one-seventh of their original weight, while vegetables average about 
one-tenth. Freeze dried meats, not containing as much water to begin 
with, weigh about one-third of their fresh weight. 
A wide variety of foods are available in dehydrated forms including 
most popular fruits and vegetables as well as meat, fish and poultry. 
They are widely used by backpackers, campers, other sportsmen, 
schools, restaurants, hospitals and by the armed forces. Many are 

THE MODES OF FOOD 
55 
commonly sold as "convenience foods" in the supermarket: instant 
potatoes, powdered milk, dry soup and cake mixes, cereals and instant 
puddings. They come in heavy-duty metal foil pouches for short-term 
use as well as in #2^ and #10 cans with inert atmospheres for 
long-term storage. 
Store dehydrated foods in their original cartons in a cool, dry 
location. Because they contain almost no water, freezing doesn't affect 
them, and dented cans are okay as long as the seal remains intact. 
Shelf Life 
Foil pouches will keep up to two years if stored properly while the 
food in metal cans will last from about four to more than ten years at 
70° F (21° C). Rotation of dehydrated foods within a four to five year 
period is best. Otherwise you'll want to at least check the quality of 
some of the more sensitive items—milk, butter, margarine and 
meats—on a regular basis. 
Open Shelf Life 
Upon opening, the food begins to oxidize and absorb moisture, 
increasing deterioration. You can minimize this by keeping open cans 
covered with airtight plastic lids except for brief periods when actually 
removing ingredients. About three dozen lids should be enough to cover 
all cans open at any one time. Dipping into a level can will expose the 
food less than pouring, and desiccants can be used to reduce moisture 
content. Store the open cans in a cool, dry area—not above stoves or 
next to dishwashers. Most importantly, rehydrated foods should be 
treated as fresh and used within a short period of time or refrigerated. 
Covered properly, opened cans of air dried foods will keep from 
about three months to more than a year. High-fat foods have the 
shortest lives and fruits and vegetables the longest. Freeze dried foods, 
because of their open cell structure, tend to attract moisture much more 
readily and store for periods of only four to eight weeks to perhaps three 
months. 
Air Dried versus Freeze Dried 
Nutritional value. Freeze dried has slightly higher values when 
packed because of lower processing heats. However, air dried tends to 
loose nutrients more slowly because its shriveled form protects itself 
better than the porous structure of freeze dried. Within a year or so 
their value is approximately equal. 

56 
FOOD AND WATER STOCKPILING 
Shelf life. Air dried keeps a bit longer under the same conditions. 
The freeze drying leaves less moisture and is more effective at destroy-
ing microorganisms, but the resulting porous structure allows faster 
deterioration. This also explains why open shelf life for air dried is 
substantially longer. Foods using preservatives keep longer. 
Appeal. Although some claim they can't tell the difference, 
subjective data is that freeze dried fruits and vegetables are plumper 
and appear more like fresh, but air dried have better flavor and texture. 
Except for pineapple, air dried fruits are particularly better. 
Variety. Air dried offers a wider selection of fruits and vegetables, 
while more combinations are available freeze dried. Certain foods come 
in only one form. Milk and milk products, for example, are all air dried, 
but nearly all meats are only freeze dried. 
Convenience. Freeze dried saves both time and fuel. Many are 
pre-cooked, and their porous nature allows many of them to be 
table-ready in five to fifteen minutes by simply pouring boiling water 
over them. Air dried often need hours of soaking in cold water or 
cooking in water for ten to twenty-five minutes before being ready. 
There are also many freeze dried casserole dishes, possibly reducing the 
number of cans open at any one time. This advantage is offset by their 
shorter open shelf lives, their being pre-seasoned to "normal" taste and 
the fact they cost about 20-25% more than the same individual foods 
not pre-mixed. 
Cost. Freeze dried foods average about twice the cost of air dried, 
with the vegetables costing one and a half to three times and the fruits 
two and a half to more than three times their counterparts. This could 
mean an additional $500 or more per person for a year's supply 
compared with air dried. 
Ease of Storage. Unlike freeze dried, air dried shrink to a fraction 
of their original size and, therefore, take up roughly one-third the 
space. Compressing can overcome this disadvantage for freeze dried but 
makes them even more expensive. 
To Sum Up. Air dried costs half as much, takes one-third the space 
and lasts much longer after opening. Freeze dried are more convenient 
to prepare, require less fuel and offer the only dehydrated meat, fish 
and poultry similar to fresh. My personal choices would be air dried for 
most fruits and vegetables with freeze dried meats. 
Dehydrated versus Canned 
Claims are made that dehydrated foods weigh one-eighth as much 
as canned goods and take up only one-fifth the space. They are 

THE MODES OF FOOD 
57 
supposed to be more convenient with absolutely no waste. Their shelf 
lives are sometimes described as "more than fifteen years" or even 
"indefinite". They're even represented as costing half as much as 
canned goods because "you're not buying water at food prices". Often 
you are lead to believe that they taste like fresh-picked from the garden 
and that the original nutritional wholesomeness has been locked in. 
Together, these claims make dehydrated foods seem like improvements 
over fresh foods. 
The fact is that many of these claims are greatly exaggerated, 
misleading, or simply false. Sales promotion pressure too easily distorts 
reality. Prejudiced words such as "ordinary", "mass-produced" and 
"penny-pinching chemical processing" are used to downgrade canned, 
while other words like "special", "exclusive" and "superior" are used to 
favorably impress. Selective positive information is played-up in 
simplistic charts while any negatives are ignored. 
It's time to look at the facts: 
Nutritional Values. All foods loose nutritional value in processing 
and during storage. Dehydrated foods are no exception, and research 
shows they loose considerable nutritional value during both stages. 
All vegetables and some fruits are blanched prior to dehydrating to 
inactivate the enzymes and to fix colors. This blanching, along with 
washing, results in the leaching of water-soluble compounds such as 
vitamin C which can be reduced as much as 50%. The dehydration heat, 
along with the blanching heat, damages most of the major vitamins, the 
protein—particularly the lysine and methionine amino acids—and the 
essential fatty acids. Further losses come from the sulfites frequently 
added to reduce oxidation. Nearly all foods contain some fats and/or 
sugars, and that isn't changed by taking the water out. During storage 
the fats oxidize and the sugars brown, creating rancid tastes and 
undesirable colors. The lower moisture content actually increases the 
degradation of protein. With time, the food loses its ability to re-hydrate 
and becomes tough when reconstituted and cooked. 
The tables of nutritional values put out by the dehydrated food 
companies won't tell you about the losses. With rare exceptions, they 
have little data on the losses and have simply calculated the table 
values using data for the fresh product as if no losses occur. However, 
there are some reliable research results from tests conducted by major 
universities and research laboratories for NASA and the military. 
Research by the U.S. Army (published in the Journal of the 
American Dietetic Association, Vol. 39, No. 2, August 1961, pp. 105-116) 
showed high losses just from the dehydration process. Cabbage lost over 

58 
FOOD AND WATER STOCKPILING 
half its vitamin C and more than 90% of its vitamin A. Corn lost about 
one-third of the vitamin A and upwards of two-thirds of the vitamin C. 
Both green beans and carrots lost more than two-thirds of their vitamin 
C. Freeze dried ground beef lost 90% of its thiamine, chicken lost over 
half its thiamine, riboflavin and niacin, and shrimp lost over half of its 
thiamine and over two-thirds of its niacin. And these figures ignore 
storage losses! 
Indications of the loss during storage come from a study by NASA 
for the Skylab program (reported by Dr. Clayton S. Huber, one of the 
researchers, in Family Perspective, Vol. II, No. 3, Summer 1977, pp. 3-
10, Brigham Young University Press). After sixteen months of storage, 
air dried pea soup lost over half its original after-processing amount of 
vitamin A, and potato soup lost about two-thirds of its. Air dried bacon 
wafers lost 25% of their thiamine in one year. In eighteen months 
freeze dried chicken and rice lost over one-third of its vitamin A, while 
scrambled eggs lost half of it within twelve months. Freeze dried 
strawberries, naturally high in vitamin C, lost over 60% of it after only 
fourteen months. They only retained 40% of the original vitamin C after 
dehydration, so after fourteen months of storage the freeze dried 
strawberries had less than one-sixth the vitamin C of fresh berries! 
Other studies show that freeze dried beef stored for four years at 
room temperature lost 32% of the lysine, 40% of the tryptophan and 
12% of the methionine and leucine amino acids. Freeze dried casseroles 
stored for forty-four months, although still acceptable for eating, 
suffered significant losses of thiamine and riboflavin as well as showing 
signs of rancidity and major changes in odor, texture, flavor and color. 
Comparing dehydrated foods with canned foods shows that the 
vitamin A contents are roughly the same as is the vitamin C in corn. 
Canned carrots, on the other hand, only have about half as much 
vitamin C as the dehydrated version. Comparing meats, freeze dried 
ground beef has about 50% more thiamine but about the same 
riboflavin while the chicken is clearly superior in thiamine but inferior 
in riboflavin and niacin versus the canned. 
Both dehydrated and canned foods suffer nutritional losses in 
processing and during storage. So do frozen foods. And a study of retort 
foods (MREs)—ham and chicken loaf, beefsteak and beef stew—stored 
for four and a half years at room temperature showed losses after 
processing from one-third to more than half of the thiamine. No storage 
food will retain the nutritional values of its fresh original. You'll just 
have to choose which best suits you. 

THE MODES OF FOOD 
59 
Taste and Appearance. Taste is very subjective, but many who 
have tried dehydrated foods do not like their taste as well as the 
equivalent canned products. Although some call them "delicious" and 
"fresh tasting", other descriptive terms used are "cardboardy", "inedi-
ble" and "artificial, chemical tasting". At the very least it shows how 
wide people's tastes vary! Certainly dehydrated foods do have their 
flavors and appearances changed during the processing and storage, 
and they are not "just like fresh" as some would have you believe. And, 
as was pointed out in the air versus freeze dried comparison, even 
appearances can be deceiving. 
Shelf Life. Dehydrated food shelf life is often greatly exaggerated. 
Many dehydrated food companies base their "keeps forever without 
rotation" claim on the fact that dehydrated foods can be stored almost 
indefinitely without actual spoilage or decomposition. However, 
removal of the water not only drastically decreases the growth of 
microorganisms but also tends to concentrate the reactant compounds 
in the remaining water and leads to increased interactions during 
storage. And, as discussed in Chapter 5, the lack of actual spoilage 
doesn't guarantee the food will be nutritional nor edible. 
Tests of freeze dried casseroles showed that after forty-five months 
they were definitely showing deterioration and some were nearing the 
end of their useful shelf life. Other tests, of differing validity, show 
dehydrated foods to remain viable during a four to ten year period. 
Generalizing is difficult but, at best, dehydrated foods may keep twice 
as long as the comparable canned. I recommend rotation within four to 
five years. 
Cost Comparisons. Often dehydrated foods are touted to be 
inexpensive, particularly when compared with canned goods. They 
supposedly save you money and stretch your food budget. Don't you 
believe that nonsense. While dehydrated foods may well be less 
expensive than fresh, out-of-season produce, with extremely few 
exceptions they cost substantially more than regular canned goods. 
As a general rule, air dried foods cost about two to three times as 
much and freeze dried are about four to six times the cost of canned 
foods. Obviously, some brands cost two to three times as much as others 
for the same amount of reconstituted product, retail outlets charge 
different prices and even canned goods don't all cost the same. It's easy 
to use Table 8-3, though, to make your own cost comparisons because 
it shows how many pounds of a particular dehydrated product it takes 
to provide an equivalent amount. Here is how you can calculate the cost 
comparisons: 

60 
FOOD AND WATER STOCKPILING 
EXAMPLE 1: A #10 can of dehydrated fruit cocktail costs $25 and 
contains 2V£ pounds for a $10 per pound cost. Table 8-3 shows that 
you need 9.7 pounds for a serving per day for one year. Thus the cost 
would be $97. The local supermarket sells #303 cans of fruit cocktail 
for $.55 each and you need 91 of them for the equivalent amount, 
giving a cost of $50.05. Dividing the $97 by the $50.05 shows the 
dehydrated would cost 94% more than the canned, or about double. 
EXAMPLE 2: Dehydrated green beans come in a one pound #10 can 
for $16. A serving per day for one year requires 5.3 pounds for a 
total cost of $84.80. Green beans at the supermarket are $.40 for a 
#303 can so 91 of them cost $36.40. Dividing the $84.80 by the 
$36.40 tells you the dehydrated cost 133% more than the canned 
(21/3 times). 
The above examples fairly represent the cost differences although 
your exact figures will vary. Always use Table 8-3 because comparison 
figures provided by the companies are often not accurate. Don't fall for 
the "but inflation will make dehydrated foods cost less" gambit, either. 
It just makes both cost more. 
Space and Weight Savings. Although dehydrated foods may 
weigh only one-eighth as much as canned and, in the case of air dried, 
take up only one-fifth as much space, that certainly isn't the entire 
story. 
Those great savings in weight and space are due to a drastic 
reduction in water content. But water is vital, second only to oxygen in 
importance to the human body, and dehydrated foods aren't much good 
without water to re-hydrate them. The fruits and vegetables need about 
a gallon per pound of dehydrated product, while the eggs and meats 
average one-third gallon. So while the dehydrated foods may be easier 
to store, conceal and transport, you should store lots of water for them. 
And water is heavy, takes up lots of space and is hard to move! 
The space savings advantage also doesn't hold up in reality. 
Manufacturers tend to pack the cans lightly, using up additional space. 
This cuts the savings to where they take up about one-third the space 
of canned, but there is more to consider! Only a portion of any good 
storage plan is made up of fruits, vegetables and meats, the main 
dehydrated foods. The rest consists of grains, sugars, legumes, etc. that 
are the same regardless of the plan. When this is all considered, 
dehydrated food will only save one-fourth to one-fifth the total space. 
Actually, freeze dried uses more. 

THE MODES OF FOOD 
61 
The same holds true for weight. Because dehydrated foods are only 
a portion of the total plan, they save only 40% or less of the total weight 
rather than the 90% claimed. No one is going to put a year's supply on 
their back and walk off with it! And it won't weigh any less than the 
basic plan outlined in Chapter 8. 
Convenience. Dehydrated foods are suggested as more convenient 
and having "no waste, no pits and no peelings". What are they being 
compared with? If you've found pits or peelings in your canned, frozen 
or retort foods you had better switch brands fast! Other modes of food 
needn't be re-hydrated, and retort foods only need to be placed in 
boiling water for a few minutes. And what could be quicker or easier 
than simply opening and eating from a can as you can do with many 
canned foods? 
To Sum Up. All modes of food have their advantages and disadvan-
tages. You'll want at least some dehydrated foods in your plan but they 
are not the panacea some believe them to be. The dehydrated foods in 
my ideal plan would include powdered milk, buttermilk, potatoes, 
cheese, eggs, some fruits and vegetables, and a decent supply of freeze 
dried meats. 
Buying Dehydrated Foods 
Most dehydrated food is sold to people who don't take the time to 
thoroughly investigate what they are buying and, therefore, know very 
little about what they actually buy. Many salesmen also know nothing 
more about their product than the advertising literature tells them. If 
you don't want to be surprised, you must spend some time and effort 
making sure what you get is what you want. 
There are many brands of dehydrated food available with more 
being added as others go out of business. This is because it's fairly easy 
to start offering dehydrated foods under your own brand name. 
Although nearly every company claims to sell only foods that are 
"clearly superior", the fact is nearly all of them merely purchase the 
already-dehydrated food in bulk from processors such as Beatrice 
Foods, General Foods and General Mills. Most use the same sources, 
and some even re-pack it by hand before placing their label on it and 
shipping to the customer or distributor. 
Despite coming from the same basic suppliers, there is a wide 
variance in the quality of the product and packaging due to particular 
companies' buying standards and quality control. Often dehydrated 
foods are made from substandard pieces or over-ripe produce that can't 

62 
FOOD AND WATER STOCKPILING 
be used for fresh, frozen or canned goods. Some companies are not 
above buying this inferior product and re-selling for abnormal profits. 
Some companies use better quality cans. There are also different 
methods of using inert gases and oxygen absorbers with widely varying 
results. Don't believe that an unique name for a process makes it 
anything special! 
Follow these guidelines in buying: 
1. Never buy in quantity without sampling. You should not only try 
each individual food (there are many differences among foods of 
the same brand) but also sample the competition. Compare the 
taste, texture and appearance of the re-hydrated as well as the 
dry. Test older product if at all possible to better approximate 
what the food will taste like after it is stored a while. Local 
dealers usually offer free samples, while mail order companies 
sell sample packs for a nominal fee. You can also buy the smaller 
packages used by backpackers and other outdoors men. Some 
brands also conduct tasting parties, but be aware that as a rule 
they like to offer samples of only the better-tasting items. 
2. Buy by the weight of the product and not by the number of cans. 
It may seem obvious but some brands only put half as much in 
their cans as others do. Compare prices per pound of product. 
And realize that price is only one factor in a bargain. 
3. Can labels should include a description of the food item and its 
ingredients, the method of dehydrating, product dry weight, 
complete directions for reconstituting, approximate fresh equiva-
lent, amount of yield when reconstituted, date packed, nutritional 
information with calories and proper storage information. It is 
also helpful if some recipes are included. Check the can lip 
because some are too deep and difficult to open. Most companies 
also provide a plastic lid with each can to re-close after opening. 
4. After buying, open all cartons, check to make sure you got what 
you expected and then reseal them. A few dealers prominently 
display the logotypes of well-known high-quality brands, but take 
out the more expensive items or substitute with cheaper brands. 
Most people never open the cartons to find out. 
You can buy from local dealers or national mail order companies (see 
Chapter 32). Sales and specials are frequent, volume buying will often 
bring discounts and commercial and government contract overruns are 
sometimes available. Be aware that local supermarkets may also carry 
some dehydrated items, usually at much lower prices than a food 

THE MODES OF FOOD 
63 
storage dealer. These may include soups, onion and parsley flakes, 
powdered eggs, instant puddings, macaroni and cheese meals, instant 
potatoes, lemon crystals and freeze dried coffee. Sizes may even be more 
manageable for your family's needs. Most are packed in flimsy 
packaging and will need re-packing for long-term storage, but others 
will already be in suitable containers. 
Dehydrating Your Own 
When produce is harvested the food processors first take care of the 
needs for fresh produce and their large canning customers. What is left, 
often old and overripe, is then dehydrated at temperatures up to 400° 
F. The result is frequently a product inferior in quality and nutrition to 
what may be produced at home using a good dehydrator where you 
select quality produce and dry it at much lower heats—usually in the 
110-145° F range. By purchasing fruits and vegetables in season or in 
bulk during specials or by growing your own, you can even save money. 
Proper dehydrating, packaging and storing will provide shelf lives of 
anywhere from six months to more than two years. 
Frozen Foods 
Although generally considered—along with retort foods—superior 
in nutritional value and appeal to canned or dehydrated foods, frozen 
foods still suffer considerable losses during processing and storage. 
After six to twelve months storage frozen fruits, for example, contain 
only 70% of the original vitamin C while vegetables retain only 50%. 
Frozen food is also costly to store, often tripling the initial price after 
one year. Shelf life is anywhere from about three months to somewhat 
beyond one year. But their biggest negative is their vulnerability. 
Frozen food is totally dependent on refrigeration. Freezers can suffer 
mechanical breakdown at any time and need a continuing supply of 
electricity or gas. This makes them vulnerable in times of crisis. 
One way around part of the vulnerability is to be independent of the 
utility company so that outages and shortages won't affect you as much. 
Refrigerators and freezers are available that run on propane or 
kerosene, which you can store (see Chapter 26). They could be used as 
a backup to your regular freezer. 
What to Do When the Freezer Goes Off 
If your freezer does go off, for whatever reason, there are some 
things you can do to salvage the food, but you'll have to act fast. 

64 
FOOD AND WATER STOCKPILING 
The first thing to realize is that even a non-working freezer will keep 
food frozen for some time. Just how long depends on how filled it is, the 
type of food, the size—bigger is better—and how cold the room is where 
the freezer is kept. A fully-stocked freezer can keep temperatures at 
satisfactory levels for two to three days or so providing it is kept closed. 
A partially-filled freezer may keep food only half as long. You can 
conserve cold by insulating the freezer with blankets and newspapers. 
Transfer foods that you will soon use to a good camping cooler to avoid 
opening the door any more than absolutely necessary. 
Dry ice will extend the time. A twenty-five to fifty pound block will 
keep the temperature of a half-full freezer below freezing for two to 
three days. Put the food close together and then, using tongs or gloves, 
place the dry ice on a layer of heavy cardboard over the center of the 
food. A large block of ice will last longer than several small ones. 
Because dry ice evaporates and produces tremendous amounts of 
carbon dioxide, the area should be ventilated and the freezer door left 
slightly ajar to prevent a dangerous buildup of pressure. 
If you have advance warning or are subject to frequent power 
failures, set the freezer to its lowest temperature setting. The colder it 
is at the start, the longer the food will keep. You may be interested in 
a power failure alarm to alert you whenever the power goes off. 
Should your freezer be inoperable beyond these measures, you can 
do one of three things: (1) take the frozen food to a commercial 
locker—assuming the outage hasn't affected them, (2) immediately can, 
dry, smoke, or otherwise preserve the food, or (3) invite the neighbor-
hood over for a feast! 
When to Re-freeze 
As a general rule, if a food is safe to eat it is safe to re-freeze. In 
practice, with most foods that means they have not thawed completely 
and are still under 40° F (5° C). How can you tell? Some ice crystals will 
still be present. Their existence means the food is between 32° and 40° 
F and can be re-frozen. Exceptions to this are variety meats, fish and 
other seafood that tends to spoil very quickly. Re-frozen foods will likely 
have a lower quality and won't keep as long. They should be used as 
soon as possible. 
If foods have completely thawed, don't re-freeze. Use at once if still 
good or discard. Uncooked vegetables, meats and poultry can be cooked 
and then re-frozen while fruits can be canned or made into preserves. 
Fruit juice concentrates ferment when spoiled and can cause the cans 
to explode. Throw out any "off-flavor" fruits. 

THE MODES OF FOOD 
65 
Fresh Foods 
The only fresh foods you can consider for storage are those you can 
keep in root cellars and similar facilities (see Chapter 16). However, 
even these methods only provide storage lives from less than one month 
to a bit over six from the time of harvest into the spring. And they work 
best only in northern climates with generally cool or cold winters—an 
average of freezing or less is best. Apples, beets, carrots, onions, 
parsnips, pears, sweet and white potatoes, pumpkins and winter 
squash store fairly well with cabbage, rutabagas and turnips having 
shorter storage lives. 
SUMMARY 
1. Consider any budget limitations, desired convenience and 
personal preferences. 
2. Know what you are getting. Sample all foods before buying in 
quantity and compare the competition for prices and quality. 
3. The best plan will normally consist of a carefully planned, 
thoughtfully considered combination of modes appropriate to 
your needs. 


8 
YOUR FOOD STORAGE PLAN 
Whether you are an old hand at food storage or just beginning, this 
chapter shows you how to design the best possible plan. By following a 
few simple steps you can determine exactly how much of what to store 
for your particular needs. If you already have some food storage you can 
compare this "ideal" plan with what you have stored. This will point out 
possible shortcomings, areas needing improvement or, perhaps, that 
your current plan is adequate. You can also use it to evaluate any 
commercial unit. 
Planning Methods 
A plan is vital to avoid indiscriminate stockpiling. Therefore, nearly 
every book on preparedness contains at least a method or two for your 
suggested use. The methods differ, however, and even a plan that looks 
good at first glance may turn out to be much less so in actual use. It is 
helpful to examine the various types of methods to see how well they fit 
your needs. 
The List Method 
Rare indeed is the preparedness book without a list of items you 
should store. Many even give multiple choices. The lists vary from 
extremely simple to quite complex but all share the same deficiencies. 
First, the suggested amounts of the very same items often differ 
drastically. One list will recommend one hundred pounds of grains 
versus another's five hundred, twenty pounds of sugar or honey versus 
180 or no peanut butter versus fifty pounds of it! Many ignore fats 
entirely. One list suggests milk "for those with children under three" 
while another recommends 150 pounds per person. Beans, if mentioned 
at all, range from fourteen to 150 pounds. A 150 pounds would mean 
more than two cups of cooked beans per person for every day of the 
year, winter and summer! Yet a shortage in any critical area can have 
very serious results. The obvious question is which list is best for you. 
Or do you just grab a list, any list, and hope it works? 
A second concern is that most lists are made for the "average" adult 
woman and you are usually told to adapt it for children and men. But 

68 
FOOD AND WATER STOCKPILING 
they almost never tell you how! The majority don't even tell you what 
they provide in total calories, protein and other nutrients to give you a 
place to start—and some that do are wrong. 
In addition, lists invariably lack variety and often show ignorance 
of basic nutrition. 
The result of simply following a list is that the storage often falls 
short. A family I know used such a list and felt they had a "good" 
storage plan. The time came, however, when they were forced to live 
from it for six months and the father found he was allergic to all that 
wheat they had stored. Many items ran out quickly, some had been 
overlooked entirely and others seemed like they'd never run out! 
Computer-analyzed surveys conducted by Utah State University of 
more than 5,000 storage plans showed the vast majority were consider-
ably undersized and largely unbalanced. Most contained more than 
enough protein but were short on total calories, sugars, starches and 
milk. They usually were seriously low in fats and oils. Many contained 
foods the families didn't normally eat or even like. Sometimes only 
minor additions or changes could have greatly improved the plans. 
At best, any list of specific items never quite fits your family's 
particular situation. At worst, the list will prove dangerously lacking 
but the discovery may be made too late to correct even if you know how. 
Frankly, a list is only as good as the knowledge and reliability of the 
person who developed it. With so little room for error, do you really 
want to trust any list without knowing for yourself? 
What I Did Method 
Found in a number of sources, this method is simply a specialized 
list of what one particular individual stored. The peculiar list given is 
probably far from your needs. They are more historical curiosities than 
anything else. 
What You Normally Eat Method 
This method mimics current eating habits and comes in two 
variations. The first is known as "copy-canning" and is simply buying 
two of everything you regularly use, putting one into storage while 
eating the other. The second is more accurate because a detailed record 
is kept of all food consumed during a particular time period, usually two 
weeks to a month. Then the total amount of food used during the period 
is multiplied out to find the amount necessary for an entire year. Both 
a summer and a winter period are usually recommended to account for 

YOUR FOOD STORAGE PLAN 
69 
seasonal variations. As is readily apparent, this requires a great deal 
of time and effort. 
Although better than lists, this method has some major shortcom-
ings. 
First of all, you are not planning for normal times. This method is 
based on current nutritional needs and habits which not only change 
over time but will likely be very different during times of crisis due to 
extra work and stress. It won't always match those needs and it would 
take a large amount of additional effort to determine the nutritional 
content so it could be adapted. 
Also, certain items eaten routinely now don't lend themselves to 
long-term storage. How do you go about making substitutions? 
Perhaps the biggest problem for many is that storing the foods 
normally eaten can be very expensive and may be much more than 
their budget allows. Sure the steak you ate for dinner can be stored as 
freeze dried, but it may cost $25 a pound! Trying to duplicate the meat 
an average family of four eats in a year with freeze dried would cost in 
excess of $7,000 just for the meat! 
Finally, are you sure a two-week "slice" from your diet will be all 
that well balanced? And have you included the food you eat away from 
home—over 30% of all meals? Any short-run imbalances now can easily 
be corrected, but that may not be true of your storage. 
Basically, the end result gives a fair idea of your normal preferences 
and you will want to have similar information for the plans presented 
later. The method, however, is not ideal. 
Rotating Menu Method 
Here you pre-plan a number of meals and then use them on a 
rotating schedule to feed your family now. Once you know how often 
each will be used you calculate the total of all individual ingredients 
needed to last the appropriate period. Although it can be built around 
what the family likes and solves the "what shall I fix for dinner" 
syndrome, it shares the shortcomings of the "What You Normally Eat" 
method: 1) it won't match crisis needs, 2) you must substitute items, 3) 
it is expensive and 4) it may not be truly representative and balanced. 
It also takes a lot of time and effort to make work and results in an 
excessively rigid plan requiring constant updating as even minor 
changes occur. Again, somewhat useful in highlighting preferences, but 
again is not ideal. 

70 
FOOD AND WATER STOCKPILING 
Commercial Units 
Some believe buying a pre-planned pre-packaged unit is the way to 
go. It seems an easy way of avoiding the time and thought required to 
put your own together. Nothing could be easier than just making out a 
check and enclosing it with the order. In reality, however, all you are 
doing is purchasing someone else's list, usually made up to provide as 
many calories and as much protein as cheaply as possible. In spite of 
lavish claims of furnishing well-balanced diets, many are poorly 
planned and have serious nutritional problems. Even the best are often 
not all they are cracked up to be. Designers and sellers with integrity 
admit units are not for the serious. Nearly all suffer from at least one 
of these weaknesses: 
1. Low in calories. The average adult may not be alive in six months 
on the fewer than 1,000 calories per day offered in some "year's 
supplies"! At least 2,600 calories is recommended—and that 
compares with the average 3,576 consumed in the United States. 
2. Low in amount or quality of protein. There should be a minimum 
of sixty grams protein per day with at least six grams from meat 
and eggs. Often gelatin and TVP are used instead, but they are 
inferior as well as cheaper sources. 
3. Unbalanced in other areas. They may be low or entirely lacking 
in some nutrients while providing too much of others. Check 
carefully (using Table 9-1 if necessary): 
Fats and oils: 
40 to 100 grams per day 
Calcium sources: 
40 to 80 lbs dry milk or equivalent 
Fruits & Vegetables: 
two servings of each daily 
Sugar sources: 
50 to 80 lbs 
Grains: 
100+ lbs, four to eight times the amount 
of beans 
4. Lack of variety. Fifty different foods or combinations may seem 
like a lot but comparing to the number stored in the average 
pantry quickly shows it could get monotonous fast. Seasonings 
and leavenings, ignored altogether by many plans, are necessities 
to enhance variety. 
5. Not personalized. You shouldn't expect it to be because no 
company can know and plan around your individual needs and 
circumstances. All units are based on averages and will fit your 
personal preferences about as well as having the local supermar-
ket clerk select your weekly groceries. 

YOUR FOOD STORAGE PLAN 
71 
6. Very expensive. You can put together a better plan for one third 
the cost. They also don't save you money over "store-bought" 
foods. The claim of low-cost meals is only true for awfully small 
meals! 
If you already have a commercial unit or still want one, you should 
at least compare it to the above guidelines. Never buy any unit without 
knowing what is in it. That means checking the quality by sampling 
each different food and knowing the total calories, protein and fat. 
Standards vary and companies do not prepare all items equally well. 
The Perfect Plan 
The perfect plan is one that fits your specific needs and circum-
stances perfectly. Because no two individuals or families are identical 
and needs and circumstances vary considerably, there can be no hard 
and fast rules, no set pattern for everyone to follow, and no easy 
"fill-in-the-blanks" method. But you know your situation better than 
anyone else, and the best plan for your needs is the one you come up 
with after careful, thoughtful planning. Your plan will be as unique as 
your family and only you can determine its size and makeup. This 
chapter shows you how, but you must do it. 
Criteria for Adequate Plan 
An extended crisis is not the time to discover that your food plan is 
unbalanced, insufficient or unacceptable to your family. To avoid that 
requires a "living" plan that is used and altered as needed. However, 
there are basic guidelines relevant to any plan: 
1. Nutritionally adequate. Taking into account the individual ages, 
weights, sexes and dietary needs, it must provide sufficient 
calories, protein, fats, carbohydrates, vitamins and minerals in 
balance and moderation. This is best done by properly selecting 
from the various food groups. 
2. Enough variety to avoid eating fatigue. This means different 
flavors, textures and colors to add interest to meals. A "one-
theme" plan creates additional stress and can lead to loss of 
appetite and eventual malnutrition. Self-designed plans are 
commonly limited in variety, but following the steps outlined 
here easily avoids that. Some "treat" foods for special occasions 
can also help. 

72 
FOOD AND WATER STOCKPILING 
3. Allows individual and family preferences. It should resemble 
established eating habits as closely as practical. Accustomed 
tastes, likes, dislikes and desires should all be considered, 
especially for young children and the elderly. Any particularly 
favorite food should be included if possible, and the convenience 
or preparation and skills required should be taken into account. 
4. Stores well. The methods of storage must match the climate. For 
example, the high heat and humidity of the tropics make food 
storage more difficult and may require greater dependence on a 
year-around "living" food supply—animals, garden or foraging. 
5. Space and weight. The plan should fit available space and meet 
requirements for mobility and anticipated emergency portability. 
6. Available. The items chosen should normally be readily available 
for easy replenishment. 
7. Affordable. The plan should be of reasonable cost and within any 
budget limitations. Many luxury items may be omitted while still 
providing an adequate diet. For cost planning, there are three 
possible levels: 
Basic level. Exemplified by the 7-PLUS plan detailed later in 
this chapter, this is the minimal plan and can be done for about 
$300 per person by preparing your own bulk foods. Buying it 
already prepared in plastic buckets will about double it while #10 
cans can triple the cost. 
Balanced level. This plan includes fruits, vegetables, eggs and 
canned meats and costs about $600 or so. Buying it pre-packaged 
in buckets will add 25% while #10 cans with dehydrated fruits 
and vegetables in place of canned will double the cost. This 
compares with the average $1,000-1,400 spent per person per 
year for food in the United States. 
Comfortable level. This means replacing some canned meat 
with freeze dried and adds $200-l,000+—depending on the 
number of servings—to the balanced plan. Using freeze dried 
fruits and vegetables would add another $500-800. 
Designing Your Own Plan 
You should have a good idea by now as to the plan level and modes 
of food your budget will allow. Unless you have the necessary means to 
immediately buy all other Priority I and II items along with a more 
advanced food plan, you should start with the basic plan. It can always 
be upgraded over time to an advanced plan as more money is available. 

YOUR FOOD STORAGE PLAN 73 
But regardless of the plan, keep these general points in mind: 
1. You will probably want to include extra for additional mouths 
(new babies, unforeseen guest, sharing with friends and rela-
tives), a longer than expected crisis and for barter. 
2. Plan ahead. Needs change as babies mature and require different 
foods, and children grow up and eat more. I suggest planning two 
years ahead. 
3. Review periodically. Re-evaluate your needs at least yearly and 
update your plan. Harvest time might be best because of abun-
dant supplies. 
At this point you are ready to start designing your own plan. You 
need some paper, pen or pencil, and a calculator will be very helpful. If 
your plans include any infants or young children, pregnant or nursing 
women or those with allergies or chronic health problems, turn now to 
the Special Dietary Needs section at the end of this chapter and read 
the appropriate parts. Write down any pertinent information and, as 
you return to this point and start through a plan, begin to make up 
your own list of included foods and amounts needed. Choose wisely. 
NOTE: Don't worry about extreme accuracy in your calculations. Be 
careful and double-check all work but it's okay to round off. 
For metric conversion, 2.2 pounds equals one kilogram. 
The 7-PLUS Basic Plan 
Prior to detailing the 7-PLUS plan, it might be useful to look at a 
similar plan used and recommended by many. Often referred to as the 
Mormon Basic Four plan due to its origin, it consists of three hundred 
pounds of wheat, one hundred pounds of powdered milk, one hundred 
pounds of sugar or honey and five pounds of salt. 
The plan provides adequate protein (ninety-four grams per day) and 
is absolutely the cheapest way of storing a year's supply. With the 
exception of milk it has a nearly unlimited shelf life, can be stored in 
less than twelve cubic feet using square cans and is the simplest, most 
trouble-free plan possible. Unfortunately, it also has some major 
drawbacks. Most importantly, it is essentially lacking in fat as well as 
the vitamins A, C and D. It offers an extremely limited variety of foods, 
requiring considerable skill and energy to prepare into palatable meals, 
for a very austere subsistence-level diet drastically different than most 
are accustomed to. Finally, it only contains 2,160 calories. 

74 
FOOD AND WATER STOCKPILING 
The 7-PLUS 
Advantages of the 7-PLUS plan are its low cost, minimal need for 
rotation and its compactness and low weight. Compared to the Mormon 
Basic Four, it costs very little more and takes up a couple of extra cubic 
feet, but it contains 20% more calories. It also provides better nutri-
tional balance and an improved, although still low, variety of foods. If 
it still doesn't look much like your usual fare, you'll definitely want 
some specialized cookbooks (see list in Chapter 31). The plan consists 
of: 
1) Salt (M* table, V2 pickling & canning) 
8 lbs 
2) Milk, nonfat dry 
60 lbs 
3) Oil (2 gal liquid, 6 lbs shortening) 
21 lbs 
4) Sugar 
65 lbs 
5) Grains (wheat, rice, corn, etc.) 
375 lbs 
6) Legumes (beans, peas, lentils) 
60 lbs 
7) Multi-vitamins (with minerals) 
365 
+) Leavening agents (34 lb yeast, 1 lb baking powder) and seasonings 
(herbs, spices, flavorings, bouillon, etc.) 
Depending on the exact selection of grains and legumes, the 
amounts given provide about 2,600 calories, one hundred grams of 
protein and thirty-five grams of fat per day for one year. You can 
personalize it if desired by substituting any of the wide variety of foods 
discussed under the advanced plan in the proper ratios. This will, of 
course, increase the cost. 
The plan is sufficient for the average person in a population 
(referred to as a population equivalent) and you can adapt it to your 
family using Table 8-1. 
The final figure you get by using Table 8-1 is the number of times 
you need to multiply by the amounts listed for the 7-PLUS plan to meet 
your family's needs. Obviously it is a rough estimate; a much more 
exact method is used with the advanced plan, but you could choose to 
use it here, also. You probably should add 5% for waste. 
To help you follow this and later calculations, an example family will 
be used to illustrate each. You will see exactly what they would do in 
each step to design their plan. I also have attempted to make the 
example selections representative of practical, economical choices. 
While being as close to average usage as possible, they are not 
suggested amounts appropriate for you. Only you can decide that. 

YOUR FOOD STORAGE PLAN 75 
TABLE 8-1. DETERMINING POPULATION EQUIVALENTS 
Infants 
Children 
Males 
Females 
Ages 
0-1 
1-3 
4-8 
9-13 
14-18 
19-30 
31-50 
51+ 
9-13 
14-18 
19-30 
31-50 
51+ 
Pregnant 
Nursing 
Percent of 
2600 cal 
Required 
35 
52 
81 
104 
125 
133 
123 
115 
98 
94 
88 
85 
83 
+12 
+25 
Number 
in 
Category 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
Percent 
Total divided by 100 equals population equivalents, 
(move decimal 2 places to left) 
Total 
+ 100 
EXAMPLE FAMILY: The family consists of four people, a middle age 
couple and two teenagers, a boy seventeen and a girl fourteen. Using the 
table and checking two years ahead: 
Males 
Females 
In this particular example it won't change much over two years. That will 
not always be the case. The example family thus chooses the higher figure, 
adds 5% for waste (+.22) and gets a 4.57 total. They then multiply the 4.57 
by the amounts listed and get: 
14-18 
19-30 
31-50 
14-18 
19-30 
31-50 
125 
133 
123 
94 
88 
85 
Current Year 
X 
1 
X 
X 
1_ 
X 
1 
X 
X 
1_ 
Total 
= ~ 
= 
= " 
= _ 
125 
123 
94 
85 
427 
Two Years Ahead 
1 
1_ 
1 
1_ 
Total 
_ 
= 133 
= 123 
= 
94 
= 
= 
85_ 
= 435 

TABLE 8.2. RECOMMENDED DAILY DIETARY ALLOWANCES & REFERENCE INTAKES (RDIs) 
Based on tables published by Food and Nutrition Board, National Academy of Sciences. Revised 1998. 
Modified to reflect moderate activity level, stress and protein score of 70. 
Copyrighted © 2002 by Jack A. Spigarelli 
INFANTS 
CHILDREN 
MALES 
FEMALES 
Age 
years 
0-6 mo 
6-12 mo 
1-3 
4-8 
9-13 
14-18 
19-30 
31-50 
51+ 
9-13 
14-18 
19-30 
31-50 
51+ 
Weight 
kg 
6 
9 
13 
24 
38 
62 
70 
70 
70 
39 
53 
55 
55 
55 
lb 
13 
20 
29 
53 
84 
136 
154 
154 
154 
86 
116 
120 
120 
120 
Height 
cm 
60 
71 
90 
122 
147 
172 
177 
178 
178 
147 
163 
163 
163 
163 
in 
24 
28 
35 
48 
58 
68 
70 
70 
70 
58 
64 
64 
64 
64 
Pregnant (last half) 
Nursing 
Energy Calories 
KCAL 
lbx54 
lbx49 
1350 
2100 
2700 
3250 
3450 
3200 
3000 
2550 
2450 
2300 
2200 
2150 
+350 
+650 
Protein 
Grams 
lb x 1.1 
lb x 1.0 
32 
44 
56 
74 
77 
77 
77 
57 
63 
60 
60 
60 
+41 
+27 
Fat-Soluble 
Vitamins 
Vitamin A R.E. 
Ug 
420 
400 
400 
500 
1000 
1000 
1000 
1000 
1000 
800 
800 
800 
800 
800 
+200 
+400 
Vitamin D 
Wi 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
10 
5 
5 
5 
5 
10 
+0 
+0 
Vitamin E 
mg 
3 
4 
5 
6 
8 
10 
10 
10 
10 
8 
8 
8 
8 
8 
+2 
+3 
Water-Soluble Vitamins 
Vitamin C 
mg 
35 
35 
45 
45 
50 
60 
60 
60 
60 
50 
60 
60 
60 
60 
+20 
+40 
Thiamin Bl 
mg 
0.2 
0.3 
0.5 
0.6 
0/9 
1.2 
1.2 
1.2 
1.2 
0.9 
1.0 
1.1 
1.1 
1.1 
+0.3 
+0.4 
Riboflavin B2 
mg 
0.3 
0.4 
0.5 
0.6 
0.9 
1.3 
1.3 
1.3 
1.3 
0.9 
1.0 
1.1 
1.1 
1.1 
+0.3 
+0.5 
Niacin 
mg 
2 
4 
6 
8 
12 
16 
16 
16 
16 
12 
14 
14 
14 
14 
+4 
+3 
Vitamin B6 
mg 
0.1 
0.3 
0.5 
0.6 
1.0 
1.3 
1.3 
1.3 
1.7 
1.0 
1.2 
1.3 
1.3 
1.5 
+0.4 
+0.5 
Folate 
ug 
65 
80 
150 
200 
300 
400 
400 
400 
400 
300 
400 
400 
400 
400 
+200 
+100 
Vitamin B12 
ug 
0.4 
0.5 
0.9 
1.2 
1.8 
2.4 
2.4 
2.4 
2.4 
1.8 
2.4 
2.4 
2.4 
2.4 
+0.2 
+0.4 
Minerals 
Calcium 
mg 
210 
270 
500 
800 
1300 
1300 
1000 
1000 
1200 
1300 
1300 
1000 
1000 
1200 
+200 
+200 
Phosphorus 
mg 
100 
275 
460 
500 
1250 
1250 
700 
700 
700 
1250 
1250 
700 
700 
700 
+100 
+200 
Magnesium 
mg 
30 
75 
80 
130 
240 
410 
400 
420 
420 
240 
360 
310 
320 
320 
+40 
+30 
Iron 
mg 
10 
15 
15 
10 
18 
18 
10 
10 
10 
18 
18 
18 
10 
10 
+60 
+30 
Zinc 
mg 
3 
5 
10 
10 
15 
15 
15 
15 
15 
15 
15 
15 
15 
15 
+5 
+10 
Iodine 
Pg 
40 
50 
70 
J 
90 
150 
150 
150 
150 
150 
150 
150 
150 
150 
150 
+25 
+50 

YOUR FOOD STORAGE PLAN 
77 
36 lbs salt (18 iodized table, 18 pickling and canning) 
275 lbs milk, nonfat dry 
96 lbs oil (9 gal liquid, 27 lbs shortening) 
300 lbs sugar 
1715 lbs grain (e.g. 1250 wheat, 275 rice, 50 corn, 100 oats, 
20 barley, 10 buckwheat, 10 rye) 
275 lbs legumes (e.g. 70 pinto, 50 Navy, 30 red, 25 lima, 
30 Great Northern, 30 soy, 30 pea, 10 lentils) 
1460 multi-vitamins (with minerals) 
4 lbs yeast, 5 lbs baking powder, seasonings, etc. 
The CUSTOM Advanced Plan 
The great advantage of the CUSTOM plan is its flexibility. It 
literally will accommodate any storable food and allow as much variety 
as you may wish while maintaining nutritional balance—as long as the 
ten steps are carefully followed. Compared to the 7-PLUS plan, it will 
cost at least double, require more rotation, probably weigh more and 
take up more space. It will match the normal diet much more closely, 
however, and be satisfactory to all. The CUSTOM is more involved and 
takes some time and effort but it is fully illustrated with examples and 
not overly complicated. 
STEP 1- Determining Energy Needs 
Table 8-2 gives nutritional recommendations for various ages and 
sexes. Figures are based on listed weights and should be modified to 
reflect actual weights. For example, an adult male weighing 180 pounds 
would require 3,750 calories (180 -r 154 = 1.17 x 3,200 = 3,750 rounded 
to the nearest fifty). 
Use the table to estimate your energy needs. Obviously, it is based 
on average metabolism and yours may differ—many do. You can 
"fine-tune" for your needs by checking your current intake of calories 
and comparing with the table, realizing that it includes an average 
increase of 15% for additional crisis needs. If you anticipate even 
greater exertion you will want to increase the calories further (a large 
man doing hard labor or hunting on a cold day with snow on the ground 
can require in excess of 6,000 calories!) Plan for pregnant and nursing 
women and allow an additional 5% for waste (spillage, spoilage and food 
remaining on preparation and eating utensils). 

78 
FOOD AND WATER STOCKPILING 
EXAMPLE FAMILY: Assuming weights of 175 lbs, 136 lbs, 165 lbs 
and 95 lbs respectively, the calculations would be: 
175 -r 154 = 1.14 x 3,200 = 3,650 
136 -r 120 = 1.13 x 2,200 = 2,500 
165 -r 154 = 1.07 x 3,450 = 3,700 
95-r 116= .82 x 2,450 = 2,000 
Subtotal 
11,850 
Add 5% for waste 
+ 600 
Total calories per day = 
12,450 
STEP 2-Salt 
Although current usage is probably excessive, the recommended 
amount is still eight grams per day. That amounts to 6V6 pounds per 
year and is 25-50% less than normal average usage. Some occurs 
naturally in food, leaving about four pounds to store as salt. Because 
needs increase during illness and high environmental temperatures 
(such as in fallout shelters), it would be best to store five pounds of 
table salt per person. Another five pounds of pickling salt per person is 
recommended for canning, salting meat and fish, and other uses. Salt 
is cheap—store enough. 
EXAMPLE FAMILY: They would store at least twenty pounds of 
iodized table salt and twenty pounds of pickling and canning salt. 
NOTE: As you consider the various food items for inclusion in your 
plan, you will want to refer to the listings in Chapter 9 for detailed 
information on the individual foods. It would also be helpful to know 
your family's preferences for each, particularly in relation to similar 
foods. Whoever buys and cooks for the family most likely knows this 
already but, if you don't, simply keep track for a few weeks. For items 
used a bit at a time, you can mark the date you open it on the label and 
note when it's empty. Don't forget seasonal preferences. 
STEP 3- Milk and Milk Products 
Dairy products provide over 60% of the calcium in the average 
American diet. Milk contributes by far the greatest portion as well as 

YOUR FOOD STORAGE PLAN 79 
supplying large quantities of high quality protein and some riboflavin. 
Fortified milk is also the major source of vitamin D. Therefore, you 
must either store substantial amounts of fortified milk or other sources 
and supplements for calcium and vitamin D. 
Assuming the storage of milk and milk products, you must first 
determine your calcium requirement. Referring to table 8-2 shows 
calcium requirements from 500 to 1,300 mg (milligrams) per day. The 
survival diet normally is fairly high in wheat and other grains 
containing phytic acid, which binds and makes somewhat unavailable 
the calcium in the grains. Therefore, I recommend a minimum of 85% 
of total calcium needs comes from milk and milk products. Using nonfat 
powdered milk as the base, this means 5V4 pounds per year are needed 
for each 100 mg. Look at the table and calculate this number for your 
family. It is the minimum amount of milk and equivalent milk products 
you need to supply your calcium requirement. Some sources recommend 
an absolute minimum of 16 pounds per person, but that is very low and 
would not provide adequate calcium. 
Now you need to know how much will be milk. This figure is based 
on your normal drinking pattern and will usually be a large proportion 
of the total milk and milk products. For some it may actually exceed 
that necessary to provide calcium and, in that case, the other milk 
products are just for enjoyment. Calculate the approximate number of 
glasses each person drinks per day and multiply the total by 18.25 to 
find the pounds of powdered milk per year. You'll probably want to add 
another 10% for use in cooking. If the total is less than the amount you 
found above to supply your calcium requirement, you will need 
additional milk products to at least equal the difference. 
EXAMPLE FAMILY: The couple (she is neither pregnant nor nursing) 
needs 1,000 mg each while the teenagers require 1,300. The amount 
needed for calcium requirements is the equivalent of 240 lbs of 
powdered milk. Using two glasses per day for each adult and three 
for the teenagers totals ten glasses. Multiplying by 18.25 gives 182.5 
and adding 10% for cooking totals two hundred pounds (rounded). 
They decide to store two hundred twenty-five pounds of powdered 
milk and enough other milk products to equal the calcium in twenty 
more pounds of powdered milk. 
Buttermilk. Useful in cooking and baking, you may want one or two 
pounds per person. It can be substituted pound for pound for the 
powdered milk added for that purpose. 

80 
FOOD AND WATER STOCKPILING 
Evaporated milk. It takes six thirteen-fluid ounce cans to equal the 
calcium in one pound of powdered milk. If desired, six to twelve cans or 
more are suggested per person. 
Cheese. The average American uses about twenty-two pounds of 
cheese while some Europeans use a lot more. You can store it in its 
various forms or even make it from powdered milk for less than the 
regular store price. The calcium in cheese will cost double or more that 
from milk, but the added enjoyment will most likely be worth it. 
Amounts you might consider for the various types are: one pound or so 
of Parmesan (one pound equals one pound of milk), one to two pounds 
of processed cheese spread (21/3 pounds equal one pound of milk) and 
from one to ten pounds—depending on your budget and love for 
cheese—of dehydrated (two pounds of cheddar or one and a half pounds 
of Swiss equals one pound of milk). Freeze dried cottage cheese is 
reserved as a treat for the affluent! 
EXAMPLE FAMILY: They choose six pounds of powdered buttermilk, 
twenty-four cans of evaporated milk, five pounds Parmesan and 
nine pounds dehydrated cheese (6 cheddar, 3 Swiss). This totals the 
equivalent of twenty pounds of powdered milk and, added to the two 
hundred twenty-five pounds of powdered milk, gives the calcium 
equivalent of 245 lbs of powdered milk (remember, they need 240 lbs 
minimum). 
STEP 4- Fats and Oils 
The American diet is high in fat, averaging 40% of all calories 
consumed. Recommendations are that it be reduced (pun not intended) 
to about 30% for better health. At the opposite extreme are survival 
diets containing none or minimal fats. That too is unhealthy. A fat 
content below 10% is actually dangerous. I recommend 10-12V2% of 
total calories come from the fats and oils group (additional fats come 
from other foods as well). Decide on your percentage and find the 
calories that should be from the fats and oils group. Dividing this 
number by eleven gives you the amount of fats and oils in pounds for a 
year. 
Vegetable oils. Liquid oils and shortening should comprise about 8% 
of total calories with probably at least some in shortening due to its 
long shelf life. Some people may choose to store less shortening because 
of the hydrogenated oils, but they will have to rotate other oils more 
frequently. Calculate for your plan. Since both are 100% fat, they will 

YOUR FOOD STORAGE PLAN 81 
be used as the base for the remaining items in the group. It takes 1.4 
pounds of powdered shortening to equal one pound of fat. 
Butter and margarine. Normally making up 25% of the added diet 
fat, you may want to consider less if using dehydrated because of the 
substantial expense. It takes one and a quarter pounds of regular 
butter or margarine to equal one pound of fat and approximately the 
same for dehydrated. You can also consider the butter-flavored 
shortening to give butter flavoring to baked and fried foods. 
Mayonnaise. Mayonnaise and similar dressings have a high fat 
content and are, therefore, included with this group. You may want two 
to four quarts per person (1 quart mayonnaise equals 1.6 pounds of fat 
while one quart Miracle Whip equals one pound of fat). 
Bacon. Nice to flavor eggs and other dishes, you might consider one 
to three pounds per person. It takes 1.4 pounds to equal one pound of 
fat. 
Peanut butter. Although not normally thought of as fats, nuts and 
nut butters are unusually high in it. A suggested amount is ten pounds 
of regular or six pounds of dehydrated—more if you have children who 
crave it, or less if you can't stand it. It takes two pounds of regular or 
three pounds of dehydrated to equal one pound of fat. 
Nuts and seeds. You will want to consider storing cans of peanuts, 
mixed nuts, almonds or cashews and unshelled nuts such as almonds, 
and walnuts. It takes one and a half pounds of shelled nuts (two pounds 
of peanuts, cashews and seeds) or three pounds of unshelled nuts (eight 
pounds of black walnuts) to equal one pound of fat. 
EXAMPLE FAMILY: Assuming approximately 10% of their total 
calories from the fats and oils group gives 113 total pounds of fat 
(12,450 x 10% -r 11 = 113) with 90 pounds of liquid oil and shorten-
ing (12,450 x 8% -r 11 = 90). They divide the latter up between 45 
pounds of shortening and six gallons liquid oil (approximately forty-
six pounds). The remaining twenty-three pounds of fat (113-90=23) 
comes from four pounds of canned bacon, fifteen pounds of peanut 
butter, four quarts of mayonnaise and eight pounds of dehydrated 
margarine. 
STEP 5-Fruits and Vegetables 
Fruits and vegetables are the primary source for vitamins A and C 
in the regular diet. Although they can be largely replaced by a good 
multi-vitamin, most would prefer the appeal of their flavor, texture and 

82 
FOOD AND WATER STOCKPILING 
color variety if at all possible. Some may wish to replace up to one 
serving with ten to twelve pounds of sprouting seeds to add crispness 
to salads, sandwiches, etc. (see Chapter 12). Table 8-3 lists the amount 
of fruits and vegetables needed to provide one serving per day for one 
year. Serving sizes are generally based on a half cup serving, and are 
not necessarily directly equal to other commonly accepted serving sizes. 
Fruits. The malnutrition in war-ravaged Europe after World War II 
was probably due more to the lack of fruit than any other one thing. 
Two servings of fruit per person per day are recommended. If you 
expect to get much vitamin C, you'll need a half serving from either 
oranges or grapefruit (canned segments, juice or dehydrated). Tang 
would work and tomatoes contribute as well. Calculate the dried and 
dehydrated servings first, then the canned. Splurge foods could include 
blueberries and freeze dried strawberries. 
EXAMPLE FAMILY: They need eight total servings of fruit, including 
two for vitamin C. Because of the expense of dehydrated orange or 
grapefruit juice, they decide on twenty-two pounds of Tang (equals 
two four-ounce servings daily) for the vitamin C requirement. They 
also choose sixteen pounds of dried prunes (.89 serving), twenty 
pounds of dried raisins (1.43 servings), four pounds dehydrated 
apple slices (.38 servings) and four pounds of dehydrated banana 
flakes (.32 servings). This totals approximately five servings, leaving 
three more, which they fill with #303 cans: seventy-two unsweet-
ened applesauce, sixty peaches in heavy syrup, sixty fruit cocktail 
in juice pack, forty-eight pears in heavy syrup and twenty-seven #2 
cans of pineapple in heavy syrup. 
Vegetables. I recommended three and a half servings per person per 
day. As most of your vitamin A will come from vegetables, you should 
have either a one-third serving of carrots or a one-quarter serving of 
carrots together with a one-quarter serving of spinach and sweet 
potatoes combined. Further, you should consider a three-quarter 
serving of tomatoes and one serving of white potatoes (perhaps half 
that for a young child, more for a male teenager). The potato servings 
are almost double the size of the others used. Remaining servings 
should be divided up among a good selection of other vegetables. 
EXAMPLE FAMILY: They need fourteen total daily servings. Potatoes 
will make up four servings (eighty-eight pounds of dehydrated 
powder and sliced) and tomatoes will be another three servings (96 

YOUR FOOD STORAGE PLAN 
83 
TABLE 8-3. 
AMOUNT OF FRUITS AND VEGETABLES FOR 
1 SERVING PER DAY FOR 1 YEAR 
FOOD 
FRUITS 
Apples 
Applesauce, unsweetened 
Apricots 
Bananas, flakes 
Cherries, sweet 
sour 
FRESH 
68 lbs 
Fruit cocktail, blend or mix 
Grapefruit juice, crystals 
Orange juice, crystals 
Peaches 
Pears 
Pineapple 
Plums or prunes 
Raisins 
Strawberries 
VEGETABLES 
Beans, green 
Beets 
Cabbage 
Carrots 
Corn, sweet 
Peas, garden 
Potatoes 
121 lbs 
Spinach 
Sweet potatoes 
Tomatoes, powder 
18 lbs (dried) 
14 lbs (dried) 
76 lbs 
74 lbs 
46 lbs 
DEHYDRATED 
10.6 lbs 
10.6 lbs 
10.4 lbs 
12.4 lbs 
12.6 lbs 
11.3 lbs 
9.7 lbs 
10.5 lbs 
12.0 lbs 
8.3 lbs 
8.3 lbs 
9.1 lbs 
11.5 lbs 
12.7 lbs 
6.0 lbs 
5.3 lbs 
9.3 lbs 
5.4 lbs 
7.5 lbs 
15.8 lbs 
15.3 lbs 
22.0 lbs 
6.2 lbs 
11.2 lbs 
6.3 lbs 
CANNED: 91 #303, 73 #2, 56 #2V6, 313/4 #3, or 14 #10 cans 
HOME CANNED: 91 pints or 46 quarts 

84 
FOOD AND WATER STOCKPILING 
#303 cans whole, ninety-six eight-ounce cans sauce, thirty-two 
six-ounce cans paste and sixteen #3 cans juice). They add the 
remainder in #303 cans: ninety-six carrots, forty-eight spinach, forty 
sweet potatoes, 144 corn (half whole, half creamed), 120 green 
beans, ninety-six peas and forty- eight sauerkraut. 
STEP 6- Sugars 
Sugars are an important energy source and greatly increase 
palatability. The normal American diet gets 24% of its total calories 
from sugars. Approximately 6% is naturally occurring sugars in fruits, 
vegetables and dairy products with the remaining 18% added in the 
form of refined and processed sugars. It is recommended this 18% be 
lowered to 10% for a more healthful diet, a reduction of one-third in 
total sugars. Use this 10% as a base, adding 1-2% if including children 
to help them meet their relatively high energy needs. Add an additional 
ten pounds per person if most of the fruits are either dehydrated or 
canned in water or juice pack. Divide by 4.75 to find pounds. 
EXAMPLE FAMILY: The family includes children so they decide on 
11% sugar. This equals 288 pounds of sugars (12,450 x 11% -r 4.75 
= 288). They plan on mostly canned fruit in regular sugar syrups so 
do not add additional sugar. (However, they may want to add ten 
pounds of sugar per person for canning fruit later). 
Sugar is used as the base with all other substitutions calculated by 
how many pounds of sugar they will replace. The amounts needed to 
replace one pound of sugar are: VA pounds of honey, 1% pounds of 
molasses, one pint table syrup, jam, jelly, preserves, marmalade, or 
apple and fruit butters, one pound of Jello or similar gelatin dessert, 
sweetened drink mix (e.g. TANG), tapioca and hard candy, and lVb 
pounds of pudding mix. 
EXAMPLE FAMILY: Because they already included twenty-two pounds 
of Tang, they only need 266 pounds more of sugars. They decide on 
twenty pounds of honey, twenty pints jams and jellies, twenty-four 
pounds of Jello, twelve pounds of pudding mixes and four pounds 
tapioca. That totals seventy-three pounds of sugars, leaving 193 
pounds for twenty pounds of brown, eighteen pounds of confection-
er's (powdered) and 155 pounds white granulated sugar. 

YOUR FOOD STORAGE PLAN 
85 
STEP 7- Animal Protein 
Approximately 60% of the total protein in a normal American diet 
comes from meat and eggs. Because of its expense and difficulty in 
storing, however, your plan will most likely include much less. The 
recommendations given here provide from 10-30% and, with the milk 
products, supply sufficient animal protein for a high-quality diet. 
Eggs. The survival diet is not the place to worry over the cholesterol 
controversy and eggs are the absolute best protein available. You'll 
want them for scrambling, omelets and use in baking. My recommenda-
tion is for a minimum of three eggs per week (five pounds of whole egg 
powder) with seven the best (eleven pounds of whole egg powder). You'll 
need almost double that if you use scrambling egg mix—or you could 
get some of each. Custards also fit into this category. 
EXAMPLE FAMILY: They decide on five eggs each per week for a total 
of twenty eggs per week. They can get that from 33 pounds of whole 
egg powder or about sixty pounds of scrambling egg mix. They want 
both and settle on twenty-one pounds of whole egg powder and 
twenty-one pounds of scrambling egg mix. 
Meat, fish and poultry. The average American eats two to three 
servings of meat daily, but the survival diet can make do with 
substantially less. Even adding just 5% meat to a bean dish gives 
approximately the same quality of protein as all meat—at much less 
cost. I recommend a minimum of a hundred up to 365 servings per 
person for one year. Decide the number of servings you want per person 
and then get the total. Now, using table 8-4, you can apportion the total 
number of servings among the various meats you want to store. The 
"serving" used in the table has been standardized so that, no matter 
what the meat, the same number of servings contains the same total 
amount of protein. Any meat not listed may be included by simply 
determining its protein content—usually stated on the container. It 
takes three hundred grams of protein to equal seventeen of the table 
servings. 
Canned meats—commercial or home canned—provide the most for 
the money and will probably be the bulk of your storage. Dried, smoked, 
retort (MRE) and freeze dried meats can also be considered. Although 
costing four to eight times the protein of canned, you may want to store 
small amounts of freeze dried beef patties, steak, etc. as "splurge" foods 
if your budget allows. 

86 
FOOD AND WATER STOCKPILING 
Combinations (i.e. beef stew, chili con carne, tamales, etc.) can also 
be used but, since only a portion of their protein comes from meat, you 
will have to use your judgement. If meat is listed among the first few 
ingredients on the label and appears to make up a substantial portion, 
you may want to count half the total listed protein. If listed lower or not 
a large portion, you can still include it in your plan but I wouldn't count 
its protein in your servings. Another item, soups, are included here 
because they don't fit better elsewhere. However, they are low or 
contain no animal protein, and I wouldn't count them in your servings, 
either. If you want to use them, protein concentrates and TVP would be 
included in this group. 
EXAMPLE FAMILY: They decide on a serving of meat every other day. 
That totals 730 servings for the four of them. Using table 8-4, they 
choose one hundred 6-ounce cans of tuna, twenty-four 12-ounce cans 
of corned beef, twenty-four 12-ounces cans of roast beef, twenty-four 
6%-ounce cans of chicken, twenty-four 6%-ounce cans of turkey, 
twenty-four 6%-ounce cans of ham, forty-eight 5-ounce cans of 
Vienna sausage and six lôVà-ounce cans of salmon. This actually 
gives approximately 742 servings. They also include 288 cans 
(seventy-two each) of condensed soups (IOV2-II oz): ninety-six 
tomato, ninety-six mushroom, twenty-four chicken noodle, twenty-
four cream of chicken, twenty-four vegetable beef, twelve beef noodle 
and twelve clam chowder. 
STEP 8- Calculating Remainder 
Before continuing, it is necessary to calculate the total calories (on 
a per day basis) included in the plan to this point. This tells how many 
calories remain to be provided by the last major group, the vegetable 
proteins. Using the list of items included so far in your plan and table 
9-1 at the end of Chapter 9, calculate the calories for each item and 
then total. For items not in the table, you can find the calories from the 
label and divide by 365 to prorate over one year. The "total calo-
ries"figure is then subtracted from the "total calories" found in STEP 1 
to find the remainder. 
EXAMPLE FAMILY: They have two hundred twenty-five pounds of 
powdered milk in their plan. Table 9-1 shows that fifty pounds of milk 
prorated over one year gives 266 calories per day. So they have 960 
calories per day (4.25 x 226 = 960). Their next item is six pounds of 

YOUR FOOD STORAGE PLAN 
87 
TABLE 8-4. ANIMAL PROTEIN SERVING EQUIVALENTS 
The calculations are based on the approximate amount of protein contained in each 
particular meat item compared to the protein contained in a three-ounce serving of fresh lean 
ground beef. This allows for standardization. 
Amount for 
Food and Amount 
Servings 
100 servings 
CANNED MEAT, POULTRY AND FISH 
Tuna, 48 6-oz cans 
Potted meat, 48 3V4-oz cans 
Roast beef, 2 4 12-oz cans 
Corned beef, 2 4 12-oz cans 
Chicken, 24 634-oz cans 
Turkey, 2 4 6%-oz cans 
Vienna sausage, 48 5-oz cans 
Ham, 24 634-oz cans 
Salmon, 2 4 lôVâ-oz cans 
Treet, 24 12-oz cans 
Spam, 24 12-oz cans 
Prem, 24 12-oz cans 
122 
44 
116 
117 
57 
55 
54 
48 
122 
60 
70 
54 
Servings Per lb 
FREEZE DRIED MEAT, POULTRY AND FISH 
Beef, ground patties, raw 
Beef, diced, pre-cooked 
Beef, ribeye steak, raw 
Fish, cod fillets 
Chicken, diced, pre-cooked 
Ham, diced, pre-cooked 
Pork, sausage patties, pre-cooked 
Pork, chops or slices, raw 
Shrimp, raw 
Tuna, pre-cooked 
Turkey, diced, pre-cooked 
DRIED MEAT 
Beefjerkey 
12 
18 
20 
23 
17 
11 
11 
15 
22 
24 
19 
11 
15.4 lbs 
22.2 lbs 
15.6 lbs 
15.3 lbs 
17.9 lbs 
18.6 lbs 
27.7 lbs 
21.2 lbs 
19.0 lbs 
30.0 lbs 
25.9 lbs 
33.4 lbs 
100 servings 
8.3 lbs 
5.6 lbs 
5.0 lbs 
4.4 lbs 
5.9 lbs 
9.3 lbs 
9.0 lbs 
6.9 lbs 
4.6 lbs 
4.1 lbs 
5.3 lbs 
8.8 lbs 
Individual items are listed within each group roughly in order of their cost per protein unit with the least 
expensive at the top and the most expensive at the bottom. The actual cost depends greatly on where and 
when the item is purchased and, in practice, you will have to compare the prices you pay for each. You 
can make exact cost comparisons at any time by simply multiplying the current cost per pound for an item 
by the amount listed for 100 servings and comparing this total with the total for any other item. 

88 
FOOD AND WATER STOCKPILING 
powdered buttermilk. Table 9-1 gives forty-eight calories for ten 
pounds so they have twenty-nine calories from buttermilk (six 
pounds is 60% of ten pounds and .6 x 48 = 29). This procedure is 
continued until the entire list of stored items is completed, showing 
a total of 5,850 calories. Subtracting this from the 12,450 calories 
needed gives 6600 remaining. 
STEP 9- Vegetable Proteins 
The vegetable proteins make up the balance of your plan's calories 
and consist of the grains and legumes. 
First, you must decide upon a ratio between the grains and legumes. 
Ideally, to provide the highest protein quality, this ratio should be 1.8 
pounds of grains per pound of legumes (1.8:1). However, this is usually 
more beans than desired and not necessary. A ratio of 4 toi works well 
for everyone while even an 8 toi ratio is sufficient for healthy adults. 
If you have provided the recommended servings of milk, eggs and meat, 
this ratio is not critical and most would then choose an 8:1 ratio. 
Otherwise, you're better off choosing 4 toi. 
After choosing your ratio, take the number of calories remaining and 
divide by 4.25 to find the total pounds of vegetable proteins needed. 
Now add the two sides of your chosen ratio together (4 toi = 5, 8 toi = 
9) and divide this into the number of pounds you just calculated to find 
the pounds of legumes. Subtracting that figure from the total pounds 
of vegetable proteins gives you the pounds of grains. Then apportion the 
amounts between the various items of each type. 
Grains. This includes the whole grains, flours, pastas, breakfast 
cereals, crackers and mixes.. Current grain consumption is 150 pounds 
per person but in 1910 it was double that. Regardless of what else you 
have in your plan, you should have at least two hundred fifty pounds 
of grains and the majority should be whole grains with the rest 
processed (flour). Unless rice is your basic, you'll probably want 60-80% 
of the total in wheat and wheat products. Don't store more than fifty 
pounds per person as flour. Suggestions are: ten to twenty-five pounds 
of pasta, ten to fifteen pounds of cornmeal, ten to fifteen pounds of 
oatmeal, fifteen to twenty-five pounds of rice, one to two pounds of 
popcorn and two to five pounds each of barley, buckwheat, millet and 
rye. Combinations such as macaroni and cheese can be included here 
as well as the various cereals, crackers and mixes. Just subtract their 
total pounds from that needed for grains. 

YOUR FOOD STORAGE PLAN 
89 
Legumes. Get a good selection for a variety of uses. Soybeans are 
very versatile if you know how to use them. 
EXAMPLE FAMILY: They choose an 8:1 ratio. The 6,600 calories 
remaining divided by 4.25 gives 1,553 pounds of vegetable proteins. 
Dividing now by nine (from their ratio) shows 173 pounds should be 
legumes. Subtracting the 173 from the 1,553 tells them 1,380 
pounds should be grains. They plan on making their own cereals, 
crackers, etc., but do want to include two dozen cake mixes for 
convenience. The mixes equal about twenty-eight pounds so they 
need an additional 1,352 pounds of grains. They select: eighty 
pounds of pasta, one hundred pounds of rice, fifty pounds of corn, 
twelve pounds of popcorn, fifty pounds of oatmeal, fifteen pounds of 
rye, fifteen pounds of buckwheat, twenty pounds of barley, ten 
pounds of millet and fifty pounds of triticale. 
This leaves 950 pounds for 750 pounds of wheat and two hundred 
pounds of all-purpose flour. The 173 pounds of legumes are divided 
up: fifty pounds of pinto, forty pounds of red kidney, twenty pounds 
of white Navy, ten pounds of Great Northern, ten pounds of lima, 
fifteen pounds of soybeans, twenty-five pounds of dried peas and five 
pounds of lentils. 
STEP 10- Adjuncts 
Adjuncts complete your plan. Go through the list of adjuncts in 
Chapter 9 and decide the amounts you want of each. Your normal 
usage—see what you use in a month—can be your guide. Whatever you 
decide, don't skimp on herbs, spices and other seasonings. They are 
relatively cheap and a little goes a long way towards enlivening 
otherwise dull meals. Again, variety is important. This is where a few 
cans of this and a can of that will really enhance your plan with added 
flavor, color and texture. Finally, include any desired vitamin and 
mineral supplements. 
Since tastes and desires differ so widely, there can be no "recommen-
ded" amounts but, as a possible help, here are suggestions for some 
items: two to six pounds of bouillon (half or more beef, rest chicken); one 
to two pounds each of cornstarch, baking powder, baking soda, 
dehydrated onions and dehydrated sweet and sour cream; one half to 
one pound of yeast and dehydrated celery; one quarter to one half 
pound of dehydrated green bell peppers; one to two gallons of vinegar. 
You also might want relishes, pickles and a selection of beverage mixes. 

90 
FOOD AND WATER STOCKPILING 
Some "treat" foods would be nice (olives, mushrooms, coconut, manda-
rin oranges, etc.) and a few specials for the holidays (cranberry sauce, 
mincemeat, maraschino cherries, pumpkin). And chocolate chips for 
cookies! 
How and Where to Buy 
Assuming you have followed the guidelines fairly closely and accur-
ately, you have now designed a plan adequate for your needs. Before 
rushing out and accumulating your list of items, however, there are a 
few additional considerations. 
Choose the Right Sizes 
As you know, foods don't keep forever once their container is opened, 
especially without refrigeration. Some foods, such as canned meats, 
may have to be used within hours after opening and the sizes must be 
chosen accordingly. Others, such as the dehydrated foods, can be used 
over a period of months if cared for properly. For these, the appropriate 
container size is one where the contents will be used up before the open 
shelf life is exceeded. For example, if an item has an open shelf life of 
three months (see Chapter 9 for shelf lives) and you need twenty 
pounds for one year, then the maximum amount per container would 
be five pounds (twenty pounds divided by the four three-month periods 
in the year). Check your list of food items and determine the appropri-
ate container sizes for each. 
EXAMPLE FAMILY: In checking their list, they find that dehydrated 
cheese has an open shelf life of four-plus months. Their plan 
includes 6 pounds of cheddar and 3 pounds of Swiss. Dividing both 
amounts by three (for the three four-month periods in a year) gives 
2 pounds and 1 pound as the maximum amount of each per con-
tainer. Referring to price lists, they find the average #10 can of 
dehydrated cheese contains 3Vâ pounds while a #2^ can has about 
one pound. Thus, they would store both the cheddar and the Swiss 
in #2MJ cans. If they had double the amount of cheddar they could 
have stored it in #10 cans. They then continue checking the rest of 
their list. 
Use a System 
Unless you've procrastinated too long, there is no need to buy it all 
overnight. Hurrying can cause costly mistakes while adding even 

YOUR FOOD STORAGE PLAN 91 
relatively small amounts on a regular basis can soon complete the plan. 
Use your Master Shopping List of Chapter 3. Try to keep your buying 
in balance as much as practical, getting a month's supply of everything 
before increasing the amount of any one individual item. And, guided 
by shelf lives in determining desired rotation, make out your replenish-
ment schedule. 
Shop For Quality and Price 
Seldom will you find a single source that offers a complete selection 
of the highest quality items at the best price. It pays to shop around. 
Local sources can be located by looking in your "Yellow Pages" under 
bakers, feed dealers, flour, food brokers, foods-dehydrated, food 
products, grain brokers or dealers, grocery wholesalers and millers. 
Don't hesitate to ask for quantity prices. Then compare the sources. 
Don't overlook freight costs because they can substantially increase the 
total price. You can save 20-50% of normal prices by becoming a dealer 
or distributor for a nominal fee with some dehydrated food companies 
and a few allow "wholesale" purchasing. Restaurant supply, warehouse 
clubs and similar outlets often offer "institutional" sizes of dehydrated 
and other foods that are the same as sold by the dehydrated companies 
but under an original label at lower prices. 
For additional savings, use the tips under Budget Basics in Chapter 
2. Often the most economical time to buy food is at harvest time when 
supply is at its peak, but you must always be aware of close outs 
offering old goods. 
Using Your Food Storage 
Working from your replenishment schedule, start to work storage 
foods into your regular menu. As mentioned earlier, do this gradually. 
There is no need to create resistance, particularly from children, by 
attempting to alter cooking and eating habits drastically at once. 
Introduce the more normal items first so the changes don't draw 
attention. Embellishing some foods with "extras" can help their accep-
tance (e.g. bacon and green pepper with powdered scrambled eggs or 
slivers of almonds or walnuts when using powdered butter on green 
beans). Develop a good stock of recipes for the items, especially for those 
you're not familiar with One of the biggest challenges in using storage 
food is to present interesting meals with eye-appeal and you may need 
to work at that. Buy any specialized cookbooks as you buy the items. 

92 
FOOD AND WATER STOCKPILING 
If called upon to depend entirely on your storage, you may discover 
another problem. Because a plan doesn't always match normal usage, 
there is a tendency to use some items at a different rate than projected. 
This is especially true of "treat" items or others stored in less than 
normal quantities. 
For example, if you've chosen to store only 
one-quarter the butter you normally use—yet your family uses it at the 
normal rate—it will be entirely gone after just three months! You can 
solve this problem by apportioning the food carefully and accurately 
over the time period. Divide the total amounts of each food into weekly 
"allowances" and then plan your menu from that allotment. You will 
find it easiest if you transfer the weekly inventory on a regular basis to 
a different location than the rest of your storage. During actual 
sustained use you will also want to take a physical inventory much 
more frequently to assure your control is adequate. 
Test Your Plan 
Okay, now you've got a plan adequate for your needs. At least you 
think it is. Obviously, the only way to really know is by surviving 
whatever crisis happens to appear but, short of that, you can put it to 
a trial test. Have amounts of each storage item on hand to last for at 
least a week—enough time to see results—and go to it. This means 
living solely off the storage items—sack lunches rather than 
restaurants and cafeterias, please! And buon appetito! 
SPECIAL DIETARY NEEDS 
Some individuals, because of their age or condition, have special 
dietary needs that must be taken into account when designing a 
suitable plan. The basic and advanced plans outlined in this chapter 
can still be used simply by making the necessary modifications. For 
example, a diabetic may want to cut back even further on the sugar 
sources, perhaps learn to make bread with malt in place of sugar and 
preserve with fruit juices in canning. Individual concerns covered here 
include: infants and young children, pregnant or nursing women and 
those allergic to any of the basic storage foods. 
Infants and Young Children 
Babies are seldom surprise visitors, usually giving nearly nine 
months warning. My recommendation is that you prepare for their 
arrival as soon as you know you are expecting. Buy whatever they will 

YOUR FOOD STORAGE PLAN 
93 
need to make it through their first year and don't count it in your 
regular program. 
The best and most practical food for new babies is nature's own 
—mother's milk. Unless special problems prevent it, you should plan on 
breast feeding to assure the baby an adequate diet as well as to pass on 
natural immunities. The nutrients in breast milk most closely match 
the infants needs and tend to be digested and absorbed more easily 
than from other sources. With vitamin supplements, breast milk is 
sufficient for the first four to six months by itself. (Women nursing 
infants have increased nutritional requirements covered in a later 
section you should also read.) 
If you can't or don't want to breast feed, you must either store 
formula or make your own from storage foods. You'll also want a supply 
of baby bottles and nipples. To estimate your needs, it might be helpful 
to know that the average infant is fed milk-based formula for five-plus 
months and consumes around 170 quarts of ready-to-feed or fifty-two 
quarts of concentrate. Coinciding figures for soy-based formulas are 
eight months and 192 quarts ready-to-feed or sixty quarts concentrate. 
Similar amounts of homemade would require approximately 180 cans 
of evaporated milk—or thirty-two pounds of powdered milk and VA 
gallons of vegetable oil—combined with eleven pounds of sugar. 
With adequate breast milk or formula, solid foods can be delayed 
until about six months of age. Then you can feed foods made from 
common storage items, such as rice and corn, or from a stock of 
commercially-packed food. Again, as a guide, the average baby in its 
first year will go through six pounds of dry baby cereal and 720 jars of 
baby food. Much of this could readily be made from normal storage 
foods less expensively by including a baby food grinder. I'd store more 
dry cereal than the average and applesauce, banana flakes, custards 
and mashed potatoes are particularly useful. 
By the time an infant is one year old, he should be eating nearly the 
same foods as the other family members. Young children, however, 
have high energy and protein requirements for their size. They need a 
diet with at least 10-20% fat and sufficient complete protein to meet 
their needs for proper growth and development. They also continue to 
need vitamins A, C, and D as well as calcium, fluoride and iron. 
Vitamins 
Breast fed infants need a vitamin D supplement and also one for 
vitamin A if the mother's diet lacks it. Commercial formulas are nearly 

94 
FOOD AND WATER STOCKPILING 
all fortified but, if fed homemade formulas, infants require a 
supplement containing vitamin C plus vitamins A and D if made from 
unfortified 
powdered milk. As they get older—three to six 
months—they also need an iron supplement unless supplied by properly 
fortified foods. You may want to store a fluoride supplement for all 
children if the water isn't naturally fluoridated. 
A standard daily vitamin pill providing approximately 5000 IU 
(1500 RE) of vitamin A, 400 IU (10 g) of vitamin D and 50-100 mg of 
vitamin C can be used. Other vitamins in normal doses are harmless. 
The infant should receive one-quarter to one-half pill each day, crushed 
to a fine powder between two spoons and dissolved in a small amount 
of fluid that he can easily swallow. Emergency sources would be 
sprouted grains or legumes for vitamin C and cod liver oil for A and D. 
Exposing the infant's skin to sunlight for a few hours daily will produce 
some vitamin D. Initial exposure should be short, no more than ten 
minutes. 
Pregnant and Nursing Women 
If you are pregnant or nursing, your diet should reflect your 
increased nutritional needs. To retain your health and raise normal, 
healthy infants requires increased energy, protein, iron, calcium and 
vitamins. Increased nutritional needs are the most critical during the 
third trimester of pregnancy. Additional requirements for both 
conditions are listed in table 8-2 and, as soon as you know you are 
expecting, you should include the increased needs in your plan. 
Allergies 
If any are allergic to wheat, corn, milk, eggs, peanut butter, or other 
particular foods, the plan can be developed using substitutes. 
Gluten-free baking can be done, for example, with rice, soya, oats and 
cornstarch flour. The calcium from milk can be replaced by 
supplements or other sources such as canned fish with edible bones, 
soybean cake, sesame seeds, brewer's yeast, carob flour, egg yolk, nuts, 
or fresh dark green vegetables. You could also simply store a special 
supplement preparation containing the enzyme lactase that would 
allow the use of milk. If you have any problems in this area you might 
want a specialized cookbook : 

YOUR FOOD STORAGE PLAN 
95 
Allergy Cooking with Ease: The No Wheat, Milk, Eggs, Corn, Soy, 
Yeast, Sugar, Grain & Gluten Cookbook by Dumke and Crook 
The Allergy Baker by Carol Rudoff (out of print, buy used) 
HOUSEHOLD ANIMALS 
If you expect to use guard dogs for security or keep other pets, you 
must plan ahead for their food and other needs. 
For dogs, you can store a year's supply of their regular food. Both the 
wet and dry will keep two to more than five years, and you can rotate 
within that period. Sacks can be protected from moisture and insects by 
coating with paraffin or the food can be packed in plastic buckets with 
dry ice. If you want to save storage space and weight as well as have a 
lower stool volume, you might want to consider a specially-formulated 
brand like Science Diet. Although costing more per pound, it contains 
all needed vitamins and the total cost is about the same. 
You could make your own dog food from common storage foods in an 
emergency. It'll cost a bit less than ready-made but the bother might 
not be worth it. 


9 
INDIVIDUAL STORAGE FOODS 
This chapter presents specific information on the individual food 
items, in generally the same order as the prior chapter. Table 9-1 at the 
end of the chapter lists basic nutritional data for the major foods when 
a specified amount is prorated over a one year period. Frozen foods are 
not included because of their vulnerability. AD and FD are used for 
air-dried and freeze-dried dehydrated foods respectively. 
Salt 
Besides being essential for body processes, salt is used for many 
other purposes. It is a flavor enhancer, controls fermentation in baking 
and cheeses, preserves food by retarding bacteria growth and is used in 
making butter and in tanning. It can also be used as a gargle and 
dentifrice for brushing teeth. 
Table salt is used for normal cooking and eating, and contains an 
anti-caking agent to improve its pouring qualities in high humidity. 
Iodized salt is required wherever produce is grown in iodine deficient 
soil. Aging may cause the iodine to separate and produce a yellow 
discoloring, but the salt is still good. Pickling and canning salt does not 
contain an anti-caking agent and will not cloud water as table salt may 
if used in pickling and canning. Rock salt comes in blocks, large pieces 
or coarsely-crushed, and is used to feed domestic animals, to attract 
wild animals or to preserve meats, make ice cream or tan hides. 
Salt is not affected by air, light or heat, and will store indefinitely if 
protected from moisture in a tightly-covered container. In low-humidity 
areas it can be left in the original cardboard, cloth or paper container, 
but in high-humidity areas it should be transferred to a plastic or glass 
container. It corrodes most metals. 
Milk 
Milk is used for drinking, pouring over fruits and cereal, in baking 
and in making white sauces, ice cream and puddings. Milk can be made 
into custards and cheeses with rennet tablets, and yogurt and butter-
milk can be made with the proper bacteria cultures. 

98 
FOOD AND WATER STOCKPILING 
Powdered Milk 
Some people object to the "chalky" taste of powdered milk and think 
they don't like it, when their objection is really to the taste of skim 
milk. Powdered nonfat milk that has been mixed and then allowed to 
cool for a few hours—overnight is best—is impossible to tell from 
regular skim milk. It all depends on what you're used to. You can 
gradually become accustomed to powdered milk by combining it with 
whole fluid milk in increasing ratios. A1:1 ratio approximates 2% milk, 
and our family uses a 2:1 ratio (two parts powdered to one part regular 
fluid). Either will save you one-fourth to one-third of your normal milk 
bill while also rotating your storage in one and a half to two years. 
Attempts to "improve" the taste by adding coconut oil, saccharin, sugar, 
evaporated milk, powdered cream, fruit juice or vanilla flavoring seem 
troublesome compared with just getting used to it. 
Moisture is powdered milk's worst enemy, causing caking, darken-
ing, stale flavors and rapid deterioration of nutritional values. 
Temperature is the next priority concern because of its substantial 
effects. Ultraviolet and fluorescent light turn the fat content rancid and 
destroy some vitamins. If you plan on re-packing the milk, do it as soon 
after buying as practical. Fill containers as full as possible and vibrate 
to compact. Be sure to clean the container lip of any milk powder before 
placing the lid on to insure a good seal. Fumigation is unnecessary, but 
store away from strong odors. 
A pound of powdered milk makes five quarts (1V4 gallons) when 
reconstituted. Milk that has developed off-flavors can often still be used 
in cooking. Because you will probably be using the same containers over 
and over to reconstitute the milk in, you should be extra careful to keep 
them clean. Wash them after each use, being sure no milk residue 
builds up. At least monthly clean them with detergent, rinse with a 
chlorine bleach and let air dry to avoid bacteria problems. 
Regular Non-fat Dry Milk. The preferred form for storage, it is 
available from bakery supply stores, wholesale outlets and sometimes 
grocery stores in twenty-five, fifty and hundred pound bags. Left in the 
plastic-lined laminated paper in a cool, dry location without rodent 
problems, it will keep three-plus years. Re-packing in metal, glass or 
plastic containers or buying it in #10 cans may increase the shelf life to 
five to seven-plus years. In fifty-pound bags, it costs about half the price 
of regular liquid milk. Commercially packed in plastic buckets nearly 
doubles its cost, while #10 cans almost triples the price. Buy the 
spray-dried Extra grade because it has a lower moisture content and 

INDIVIDUAL STORAGE FOODS 
99 
fewer bacteria than the Standard grade. It should also be fortified with 
vitamins A and D. 
If you re-pack it, you'll find it pours and splashes similarly to water 
and creates dust, so it's best to do it outside on a windless day. Open 
shelf life is about three to four months if you take care to keep tightly 
covered except when quickly removing some for use. Long-term storage 
containers should be appropriately sized so that open shelf life will not 
be exceeded. To minimize exposure to atmospheric moisture you'll 
probably want to transfer a two to four-week supply to a smaller 
container (about one half to one gallon per person) for everyday use. 
Normal strength is 3A cup powder per quart, but some like it stronger. 
Mixing is easiest by far with a blender, but a wire whisk, egg beater or 
shaker can be used when electricity is unavailable. You can also make 
a paste with a small amount of very warm—not hot—water, and then 
add additional water as you would in making gravy. 
Instant Non-fat Dry Milk. The "instantizing" process results in a 
larger, more porous particle that mixes more readily than regular. 
However, it costs about 25% more, requires one-third more space, is 
more prone to flavor changes and doesn't have quite the same shelf life. 
Also, because the process requires heating twice, it has slightly lower 
nutritional values. It requires lVb cup powder per quart. With few 
exceptions, it is fortified with vitamins A and D, and comes in metal 
cans, small boxes and twenty-five pound bags. Open shelf life is about 
two to three months. 
Regular Whole Dry Milk. Because of its high butterfat content, it 
keeps only about one to two years. Packing in an inert atmosphere in 
metal cans may prolong this up to three years. Its flavor compares with 
fresh fluid milk, it costs about 25-50% more than regular non-fat dry 
milk and is used chiefly for infant formulas. Open shelf life is only 
about three to six weeks or so. It is available from some health food 
stores and warehouse outlets. 
Buttermilk Powder. Saco Foods makes a powder from real sweet-
cream cultured buttermilk. While not recommended for drinking, it is 
great in batters for biscuits, cakes, muffins and pancakes. It comes in 
a one-pound cardboard can that makes five quarts and keeps for over 
a year. In better containers its shelf life would approximate that of 
regular non-fat dry milk. Because of settling, it takes only % cup per 
quart. Other sources also have buttermilk powder in metal cans at 
about twice the price per pound. 

100 
FOOD AND WATER STOCKPILING 
Canned Milk 
With time the fats and other solids in canned milk tend to separate 
and settle out. This can be prevented by turning or agitating the cans 
every few months. Shaking cans vigorously before opening also helps. 
If lumps do form the milk is still usable. Also, the darkening and strong 
stale taste it may develop with age is not harmful. 
Whole Milk. Shelf life is one-plus year, and it costs seven to ten 
times the cost of bulk powdered milk and about three times that of 
powdered milk in #10 cans. 
Evaporated Milk. Available in skim or whole, it can be used for 
whipped toppings, as a cream substitute in sauces, soups and chowders 
or mixed with equal amounts of water to replace regular milk. Shelf life 
is two to three years, but a yearly rotation is recommended. Cost is 
about double that of bulk powdered milk but only two-thirds that in #10 
cans. 
Condensed Milk. Similar to evaporated but sweetened with approxi-
mately 40% sugar. Used almost exclusively for making candy, cookies 
and desserts. Shelf life is about the same as evaporated. 
SAP Milk 
Sterilized Aseptically Packaged (SAP) milk stores for eight-plus 
months without refrigeration. Some say it tastes "cooked" and "chalky", 
while others feel it is undistinguishable from regular fluid milk. 
Cheese 
Cheese can be stored fresh, canned or dehydrated. 
Fresh. Hard brick cheese will keep several years if tightly wrapped 
in heavy plastic or foil to exclude air. It will also keep six to eight 
months by wrapping in a cloth which is first soaked in vinegar and then 
allowed to dry. After that period of time has elapsed, it can be re-wrap-
ped. The storage life can be extended further by placing the wrapped 
cheese in a plastic bag with a twist tie. Also, a paraffin coating will keep 
the cheese from drying out. Mold gives cheese a musty taste but is not 
harmful to eat and can be cut off. 
Parmesan cheese may be purchased grated in half-pound, pound and 
two and a half pound containers. It is especially good with pasta, soups 
and vegetables, and will keep more than a year in the original container 
if kept cool and dry. Open shelf life is two to three months if kept closed 
when not being used. 

INDIVIDUAL STORAGE FOODS 
101 
Canned. Pasteurized cheese spreads—such as Cheez Whiz—come in 
jars and cans. The glass jars will keep about one to three years if kept 
cool, while the canned cheese may keep as long as six to seven years. 
Open shelf life is about two months. 
Dehydrated. Air-dried cheese comes in cheddar, Swiss and Ameri-
can, and can be reconstituted with either water or oil. It can be used 
directly with macaroni and casseroles, reconstituted as a cheese spread 
or formed into a block resembling processed cheese. A pound makes 
about one and a half to two pounds reconstituted. However, although 
tasty, it is not like fresh cheese. Shelf life is five-plus years, and it keeps 
about four-plus months after opening. Most use BHA or BHT as 
preservatives. 
Freeze-dried cottage cheese. FD cottage cheese can be used for salads, 
in cheese cake, Jello, lasagna and stroganoff. It is very expensive with 
the calcium costing over fifty times as much as that from bulk pow-
dered milk. Shelf life is three to five years; open shelf life is two-plus 
weeks. It makes about five times the original weight when reconsti-
tuted. 
Making Your Own Cheese 
You can make fresh soft, hard and cottage cheese from bulk 
powdered milk for about one-third the price of dehydrated. You'll need 
to store rennet, Junket tablets, buttermilk powder or freeze-dried 
yogurt or cheese culture. Lemon juice or vinegar will also start the 
curd-making process. One pound of powdered milk makes about one 
pound of cheese. The same culture that makes cheeses can be used to 
make buttermilk or sour cream, too. A different culture is used for 
yogurt. Both cultures keep for a couple of years, and are available from 
health food stores and mail order sources (see Chapter 32). 
Fats and Oils 
Necessary for baking, frying and cooking, fats and oils should be 
kept as cool as possible, preferably below 60° F (16° C). Containers must 
be airtight and exclude light. Dark brown or green glass is better than 
clear, but neither is as good as opaque. 
Liquid Vegetable Oils. Used for pan and deep-fat frying, greasing 
pans for cooking and in making mayonnaise and salad dressings, 
nothing contains more calories in less weight or space. Oil is one of the 
most over-looked but most valuable items in food storage plans. 
Unopened opaque plastic containers will keep two to three-plus years 

102 
FOOD AND WATER STOCKPILING 
at 70° F (21° C) or lower. Open shelf life is four to six months. In metal 
containers kept cooler, oil will keep ten-plus years. However, metal 
containers increase the price often four to five times and they are quite 
prone to leaking. 
Shortening. Shortening is used extensively in baking and frying. 
Regular shortening comes in three or six-pound #5 cans with a 
fifteen-plus year shelf life. Open shelf life is about six to nine months. 
You can tell when shortening is no longer good by its color and taste; it 
should be bland tasting and not pink, light brown or yellow in color, 
unless it's the butter-flavored shortening. Powdered shortening is 
available and can be used in recipes not requiring creaming, but why 
would you want to store it. The powdered shortening's oil content costs 
five to eight times as much as regular oil or shortening, and you can't 
fry or grease with it even if reconstituted with oil rather than water 
because it leaves a residue that curdles. Shelf life is about five-plus 
years. Shortening is a hydrogenated oil as is margarine. 
Margarine. Canned regular margarine will store for three to four 
years. A spray-dried margarine powder, containing dry milk, whey 
solids and sodium caseinate, is also available. Its shelf life is three-plus 
years, and its costs about three to seven times the price of regular 
margarine. Like the powdered shortening, it will not melt and can't be 
used for greasing or frying. Reconstituting with water gives a creamy, 
whipped texture lacking the characteristic oily taste. Using oil rather 
than water makes a grainy product. The best proportion seems to be 
one part oil and one part water to five parts powder. Color is light 
yellow, and the flavor, although not exactly like margarine, is good. 
Butter. Again, available canned or as a spray-dried powder that 
doesn't melt and contains milk solids. The powder reconstitutes 
similarly to margarine powder, and can't be used for frying or greasing 
even if made with oil. Shelf life is about three-plus years, and open shelf 
life is four to six months. Costs are about two to five times regular 
butter and 75% more than powdered margarine. There are dehydrated 
butter flavor granules that can make a liquid butter sauce or be used 
directly on eggs and vegetables. A half-ounce packet equals the flavor 
in a quarter-pound of butter. Costs are slightly more than regular 
margarine, but one-third the cost of regular butter and only one-eighth 
that of dehydrated margarine. It keeps for years although it must be 
refrigerated after reconstitution. It also does not melt and curdles and 
browns when subjected to high heat due to its carbohydrate contents. 
A packet can be mixed with four teaspoons of water and eight teaspoons 
of shortening to get about two and a quarter ounces of a "butter" with 

INDIVIDUAL STORAGE FOODS 
103 
good taste and color. However, that doubles the cost (but its still about 
half the cost of dehydrated margarine). 
Mayonnaise and Miracle Whip 
Both have a high fat content, a shelf life of one-plus years, and keep 
two to three months after opening if refrigerated. 
Bacon 
Excellent as a flavoring with eggs and in casseroles. Canned bacon 
will keep five to seven-plus years. 
Nuts and Seeds 
Nuts, seeds and nut butters are high in fat and also contain large 
amounts of protein. 
Peanut Butter. A versatile high-energy protein food with wide accep-
tance, it comes in jars or cans. The creamy homogenized types have a 
three-plus years shelf life, and keep two to four months after opening. 
The crunchy types keep about half that long, and the old-fashioned, 
containing no anti-oxidants, keep only six to nine-plus months. The oil 
may separate out, and age may affect texture somewhat, but it is still 
edible. A dehydrated peanut butter powder is available, but many find 
it too grainy and not very edible. Try it before buying. It keeps about 
five-plus years, can be used directly in baking and costs two to six times 
the price of regular peanut butter. It can be reconstituted with water, 
but most people prefer it with oil and a small amount of salt and sugar 
or honey for added flavor. 
Nuts and Seeds. Nuts and seeds need protection from oxygen and 
high temperatures to prevent rancidity because they are over 50% fat. 
Excess moisture results in mold. Hard shelled nuts—almonds, Brazil, 
filberts, pecans and walnuts—are somewhat protected by their shells, 
and can be stored unshelled in metal or plastic containers for a number 
of years. Raw, unshelled peanuts can be kept five-plus years. Unshelled 
almonds don't keep as well. Shelled nuts can be dried in the oven on low 
heat—below 110° F (43° C) for an hour or so, fumigated with dry ice and 
stored in suitable containers for one to two years. Hermetically-sealed 
vacuum packed cans keep somewhat longer. Sunflower and sesame 
seeds can be stored the same way as shelled nuts. 

104 
FOOD AND WATER STOCKPILING 
Fruits 
Canned fruits come in a great variety and keep best at 35-40° F (2-5° 
C). Shelf life is two to four-plus years with fruit juices and highly-
colored fruits such as berries, cherries and plums on the lower end. 
Some people suggest inverting the cans regularly to redistribute the 
contents. 
Dehydrated fruits keep three to five-plus years. Open shelf life for 
AD is about six months to one-plus years, but FD absorb air moisture 
quickly and only keep two to four weeks after opening. Shelf life for 
home dehydrated is more variable. Many dehydrated fruits can be 
eaten "as is" for a snack or reconstituted with cold or hot water for use 
as cooked fruit in side dishes, salads, baking or cooking. Freeze dried 
have a tendency to over-re-hydrate and become mushy. 
Apples. Store fresh up to six-plus months, canned slices or 
applesauce for three years, or as dehydrated diced, sliced or applesauce. 
Good for snack, apple pie, salads, cakes, muffins and breads. Some AD 
granules are flavored for desserts, and applesauce is often half sugar. 
The dehydrated slices are described by many as "cardboardy" when 
reconstituted. 
Bananas. The most popular fresh fruit, you probably won't be 
storing any that way! Dehydrated flakes or powder can be used as 
puree and in cakes and pies. The slices or chips coated with coconut oil 
and sugar or honey are difficult to re-hydrated, but are delicious as a 
snack. 
Fruit Mix. Consisting of many different fruit combinations, it comes 
canned, AD and FD as fruit blend, cocktail, galaxy, mix or salad. With 
a bit of sugar and some cold water, the dehydrated varieties are 
suitable for filling a pie or cobbler, but don't expect them to match fruit 
cocktail from a can. They often are cardboardy and quite flavorless. 
Also, some brands may consist mainly of apples, even though other 
items may be listed first on the label. 
Citrus Juices. Grapefruit, lemon, lime and orange juices are some-
times available as dehydrated crystals, but you may have to hunt a bit 
for a source. They are also available canned or in bottles. 
Pineapple. Pineapple comes sliced, crushed or as a juice in cans, and 
as dehydrated chunks and juice. The FD is like fresh in that the 
enzymes remain active and won't allow Jello to set. 
Raisins. Regular raisins will keep two to three-plus years. They are 
also available as AD with lower moisture than regular and as FD in 
cereals and snacks. 

INDIVIDUAL STORAGE FOODS 
105 
Vegetables 
Canned vegetables have a three to five-plus year shelf life. Inverting 
the cans on a regular basis may help. 
Dehydrated vegetables last three to eight-plus years (home 
dehydrated keep anywhere from one year up). Open shelf life is 
one-plus year for AD but only four to eight-plus weeks for FD. Some are 
pre-seasoned to average taste, and others may need some seasonings to 
make them palatable. 
Potatoes. This South American native is fourth in world production 
behind wheat, corn and rice, and yields more food more quickly on less 
land than the other major crops. It is 99.9% fat free, and is so nutri-
tious—vitamin C, many B vitamins, iron—that a Scandinavian man 
lived healthily for three hundred days on them plus some margarine. 
Annual consumption in the United States is currently 116 pounds per 
person, but was 198 pounds in 1910 and the people of Boliva average 
310 pounds. 
Sweet Potatoes. Unrelated to the white potatoes, they are also 
all-star performers in nutrition. The canned keep four to five-plus 
years. 
Tomatoes. Technically a fruit, tomatoes are used as a vegetable, and 
are a good source of vitamins A and C. Necessary in many Italian and 
Mexican dishes and for meat dishes, stews, casseroles and in ketchup. 
Tomatoes keep two to four-plus years in specially-enameled cans. 
Dehydrated tomato powder doesn't make great tomato juice, but it can 
be mixed to almost any consistency for sauce or paste. 
Sugars 
Sugars are simple carbohydrates and come in more than a hundred 
forms with at least twenty-one kinds occurring naturally in foods. The 
most commonly used as sweeteners are sucrose, glucose and fructose. 
Sucrose, the most abundant, is known to us as ordinary white table 
sugar that is refined from sugar cane or beets. It is also found naturally 
in fruits, vegetables and grains. Glucose, also called dextrose, is the 
blood sugar that fuels the body. It is the least sweet of the sugars and 
is often called corn sugar because it is found in corn and other vegeta-
bles. Fructose, or lévulose, is the sweetest sugar of all when used in cold 
beverages, but is much less sweet when used in hot beverages and for 
baking. It is found naturally in fruits and honey. Sucrose is a double 
sugar composed of half fructose and half glucose. 

106 
FOOD AND WATER STOCKPILING 
Unfortunately, many myths and half-truths surround sugar and its 
use. It is frequently referred to as an "empty calorie" because it 
contributes nothing beyond taste and calories while requiring addi-
tional nutritive factors for digestion. This viewpoint may have some 
validity for the average diet, where nearly one-fourth of all calories 
come from sugar, but the argument is suspect for the survival diet with 
a much lower probable intake. Also children have high caloric needs for 
their weight and may be unable to obtain sufficient energy if restricted 
from concentrated sources. Sugars are a partial substitute for fats in 
that regard. 
Contrary to popular opinion that a high intake of sugar causes 
diabetes, hypoglycemia, cardiovascular diseases, etc., the predominance 
of scientific evidence provides no proven cause and effect relationships. 
In fact, considerable evidence indicates that diets high in carbohy-
drates, whether from starches or sugars, result in improved glucose 
tolerance for diabetics. Obesity is certainly a factor in diabetes, but 
obesity is a result of excess calories regardless of the source. Claims of 
health problems from sugar are often based on erroneously interpreted, 
selective data. For example, Cuba, Colombia, Costa Rica and Venezuela 
all have high sugar consumption, but are usually ignored by "scientific" 
studies because they also have a low incidence of coronary heart 
disease. Finland and Sweden have similar sugar consumption, but 
Finland has much more heart disease. Recent scientific pronounce-
ments have tended to absolve sugar for diabetes and similar diseases. 
It is true that sugars feed the mouth bacteria, forming an acid that 
eats tooth enamel and causes cavities. However, this is true of all 
fermentable carbohydrates, including fruits, and depends not as much 
on the amount eaten as how often and how long they stay in contact 
with the teeth. Sticky substances—like honey and molasses—tend to 
cling to the teeth, staying longer in the mouth, and are therefore more 
likely to cause cavities than white sugar. 
White Sugar. White sugar is the juice squeezed from cane or sugar 
beets that has been physically cleaned of impurities—dirt and insect 
fragments—had the molasses removed and then been concentrated. It 
is not chemically altered in any way and is as natural as any other 
sugar. It is a basic food and not the "deadly poison" claimed by health 
food faddists. The fact is the body handles all sugars the same way. 
It comes as granulated table sugar and confectioner's or powdered 
sugar. It is a very stable food and will keep indefinitely if protected 
from moisture and contamination. High heat turns it yellow but doesn't 
harm it—that's what appears as browning during baking! The original 

INDIVIDUAL STORAGE FOODS 
107 
bags are sufficient in low-humidity areas, but plastic or metal buckets 
and cans are best otherwise. Hard lumped sugar can be pulverized with 
a hammer or placed in water and made into a syrup. 
Turbinado Sugar. Often erroneously called raw sugar—the FDA 
prohibits raw sugar sales unless impurities are removed—it undergoes 
the same refining as white sugar, but not all of the molasses is 
removed. It has a slight molasses taste and a higher tendency to 
harden. 
Brown Sugar. Approximately 95% sucrose, brown sugar is normally 
made from white sugar by simply mixing in a small amount of 
molasses. The more molasses, the darker and stronger the flavor. You 
can make your own by adding four tablespoons of molasses per cup of 
white sugar. Brown sugar's higher moisture content needs to be 
retained or it will harden. It can be softened by placing a slice of apple, 
fresh bread, lemon or potato in the container for a period of time, or by 
sprinkling water over it and placing in an oven at 250° F for a few 
minutes. It keeps indefinitely if protected from too much moisture. 
Honey. Honey is a sugar formed by an enzyme from the dilute 
sucrose found in nectar. Its exact composition depends on the particular 
nectar sources, but its chief sugars are fructose, glucose and sucrose. 
Despite exaggerated claims by enthusiasts, it is not nutritionally 
superior to white sugar in any meaningful way. Both are easily and 
quickly digested and absorbed into the blood. Even the minute 
quantities of additional nutrients found in honey are insignificant when 
eaten in normal amounts. For example, it would require a cup of honey 
per day to get just 10% of the RDA for iron, four to five cups for 10% of 
the phosphorus and calcium, and ten cups for 10% of the thiamine! 
There is some inconclusive evidence that it may be slightly safer for 
diabetes or hypoglycemia. On the other hand, some people may be 
allergic to the pollen in honey. 
Honey is not recommended for infants under one year of age because 
it is a possible source of infant botulism. Improper handling may 
contaminate honey with botulism spores which, although it resists 
bacterial growth, it does not kill. The belief is that the spores remain 
dormant in the honey. Adults and children regularly ingest the spores, 
and they are customarily harmless. However, infants may not have 
developed the antibacterial activity in their digestive tracts to prevent 
the spores from germinating and producing the toxin. Most susceptible 
are those between one and eight months of age. 
Honey is somewhat sweeter than sugar and has 367 fewer calories 
per pound. However, because it is denser, a tablespoon of honey has 

108 
FOOD AND WATER STOCKPILING 
one-third more calories than one of sugar. It is also much more expen-
sive, usually costing roughly three times as much per pound. In many 
cases it can be substituted for sugar if desired. It gives baked goods a 
distinctive flavor and aroma, and may improve the texture and 
browning in some. Honey also attracts water, and baked goods made 
from it tend to remain moist and stay fresh longer. 
The nectar source determines the flavor, aroma and color, and there 
is a wide variety. Usually the lighter the color, the milder the flavor. 
Most honey comes from clover in the northeastern United States, from 
alfalfa in the western United States and from heather in Europe. Other 
sources—stronger flavored—include citrus blossoms, tupelo and tulip 
trees, wild sage, horsemint, basswood, sourwood and cultivated buck-
wheat. Sometimes blends are offered but, whatever you choose, make 
sure you like it before stocking up. 
Water content is critical for long-term storage. Honey may legally 
contain up to 20% added water to prevent crystallization, but this 
allows fermentation and mold within a short time unless kept refriger-
ated. Pure undiluted honey, still containing 15-18% water, tends to 
crystallize with time and cold, but will keep indefinitely. It attracts 
moisture and must be kept tightly closed. Re-packing is messy, so buy 
it in the containers you want for storage. Honey stored in the large five-
gallon metal cans that has crystallized can easily be re-liquified by 
placing the can in the sun for a few days or on a rack in a water-filled 
pan over a burner on low heat. The metal can will cause a slight black 
discoloration around the edge after many years, but it is harmless. 
Glass jars let light in and that also causes color and flavor changes. If 
re-packing, remember to leave space for expansion as the honey 
crystallizes. 
Honey naturally becomes darker and stronger flavored with age, but 
it isn't harmed in any way, and the process is reversed by re-liquefying. 
Use temperatures of 160° F (70° C) or less to avoid changing the color 
and flavor. Small amounts can be placed in a pan of hot water, and 
larger containers may be placed near—not on—a heater or set on a low 
rack in the oven (a gas pilot light may be enough). 
Fructose. Pure fructose—96-100% fructose—comes in tablet, liquid, 
granular crystal and powder forms. It is manufactured commercially 
from regular sugar because extracting it from fruit or honey is impracti-
cal for mass production and would be prohibitively expensive. Still, it 
costs three to more than ten times as much as regular white sugar. It 
also attracts moisture more readily and has a strong tendency to lump 
and cake, even in a low-humidity environment. Its perceived sweetness 

INDIVIDUAL STORAGE FOODS 
109 
is considered to be up to twice that of white sugar when used in high 
acid, cool or cold foods and beverages, but about the same sweetness in 
room temperature, hot or baked products. Some believe that pure 
fructose may be slightly better for diabetics because it uses less insulin 
and is more slowly absorbed, reducing blood sugar fluctuations. It also 
may reduce dental decay 25%, and it has a "cleaner, fresher" taste, 
allowing the distinctive tastes of fruit flavors to come through more in 
drinks and jams. 
Pure fructose should not be confused with the High Fructose Corn 
Syrups, which are derived from corn and are used commercially to 
sweeten everything from mayonnaise and baked products to soft drinks, 
ice cream and frozen yogurt. This liquid syrup is actually a mix of 
glucose and fructose, and costs less than regular white sugar, which is 
exactly why it is so prevalent. 
Syrups. Corn syrup consists mainly of dextrose and is produced from 
corn. It is a major ingredient of most table syrups, and keeps two-plus 
years in an air-tight container. Maple syrup comes from the sugar 
maple tree sap, is primarily sucrose, is expensive and will keep from 
five to ten-plus years in it pure, undiluted form. Sorghum syrup comes 
from the sorghum grain, a large coarse grass, and looks much like 
molasses. 
Molasses. Most molasses is a by-product of making white sugar. It 
is largely sucrose and keeps four to ten-plus years. Blackstrap 
molasses, the third extraction or final by-product, is the most concen-
trated source of vitamins and minerals, but still with insignificant 
amounts. Even a tablespoon per day would barely provide 10% of the 
RDA for calcium and iron. Four tablespoons per day would provide only 
10% of the RDA for vitamin B2, five tablespoons would be needed for 
10% of the RDA for niacin, and seven and a half tablespoons for 10% of 
the RDA for vitamin Bv Molasses is useful to add flavor and variety to 
baking. 
Jams and Jellies. Jams, jellies, marmalades and preserves are high 
in sugar content. Keep them cool and dark to preserve their flavors and 
colors. Mold that may form on top can be scraped off if you make sure 
and get it all. They keep two to three-plus years. 
Gelatin Desserts. Often referred to by the brand name Jello, they are 
almost straight sugar. If kept dry and dark they will keep five to 
ten-plus years before losing their color, flavor and "setting" ability. 
Pre-sweetened Drink Mixes. Under brand names like Tang, Kool-Aid, 
Wylers, and Hawaiian Punch, they come in many flavors and are nearly 
all sugar. Although convenient, they cost roughly 25% more than the 

110 
FOOD AND WATER STOCKPILING 
unsweetened packages sweetened with your own bulk sugar. Breakfast 
drinks like Tang usually provide 100% of the RDA for vitamin C in each 
four-ounce serving, but other drinks often have only one-tenth as much. 
Hot cocoa and chocolate drink mixes also contain lots of sugar. 
Tapioca. Prepared from the cassava plant, it has a high sugar 
content. It is used to make puddings and to thicken soups. 
Puddings. Puddings are also high in sugars and are, therefore, 
considered in this grouping. 
Animal Proteins 
Animal proteins include milk, cheese and other dairy products listed 
previously. Costs per gram of meat protein are easily compared using 
table 8-4. 
Eggs 
Eggs are commonly regarded as the best quality protein available. 
They are the basis for many dishes and perform vital functions in many 
recipes. 
Powdered Eggs. Although fresh eggs can be stored for some time 
using waterglass, paraffin and varnish solutions, by far the predomi-
nant method is by dehydrating them. AD powdered eggs come in four 
forms: whole, whites, yolks and a scrambling mix containing powdered 
milk and oil. Whole egg powder has the equivalent of 32-33 eggs per 
pound and, while costing two to three times as much as fresh eggs, is 
fairly inexpensive compared to other storable animal proteins. The mix 
seems cheaper, but only because it has about half the egg protein with 
the rest from milk. Shelf life is two to four-plus years and three to four 
months after opening. Treat as fresh egg after reconstituting. Unpas-
teurized egg mixes should only be used for thoroughly-cooked or baked 
dishes. Egg powder readily absorbs moisture, making it lumpy and 
stronger flavored as well as decreasing vitamins Bl and C. Heat 
damages its flavor, solubility and thickening ability. 
FD Eggs. Available in a number of variations, they are approximate-
ly the same to as much as double the cost of AD egg. Shelf life is about 
the same, but they keep only four weeks or so after opening. Some are 
ready to eat with the addition of boiling water. 
Meats, Poultry and Fish 
Some consider meat a definite luxury items in a storage plan, while 
others look on it as a necessity. Without a doubt, unless you are a 

INDIVIDUAL STORAGE FOODS 
111 
confirmed vegetarian, it can definitely add to a plan's palatability and 
make it seem much more like "normal" eating. Even the addition of 
small amounts of animal protein to vegetable proteins raises the 
protein quality substantially for little cost. 
Dried. Dried and smoked meat and fish can be kept up to several 
years in appropriate containers. Some of the more common dried meats 
are chipped beef, jerky and pemmican. Commercial jerky is usually 
highly spiced, but if you eat much jerky you'll prefer little or no 
seasonings added. 
Canned. Canned meats, poultry and fish have shelf lives of three to 
five-plus years if kept at 70° F (21° C) or cooler. The protein content of 
water-packed tuna is higher than that of oil-packed according to Table 
8-4, but that is simply because of the differences in the analyses results 
used. Figures given in the table are based on averages and, in reality, 
the protein content of both types of tuna would be the same. Obviously, 
the oil-packed would contain more calories due to the oil. Whole 
chicken—with the bone—is available, as well as just the meat. 
Combinations with meat vary widely in meat protein content and cost 
more for what you get. 
MREs (Meals Ready to Eat) /Retort. MREs are mostly combination 
meals with only a few all-meat such as chicken patties. They can be 
eaten directly from the retort pouch or heated five minutes in boiling 
water. Some are self-heating. Shelf lives are five-plus years. 
Freeze Dried. Beef, chicken, pork, and turkey are available. Some 
are already cooked and ready to eat after adding boiling water, and 
others are raw and must be cooked after reconstituting. Both types 
should be treated as fresh meat after the water is added. There are also 
many combination meals. Shelf lives are five-plus years but, due to 
moisture attraction, open shelf life is only four to eight weeks with 
prudent precautions. The meat is quite expensive, averaging about five 
to eight times the cost of comparable canned meat. In most storage 
plans FD meats are "splurge" foods, but they would be nice on occasion. 
Beef comes as pre-cooked diced at about $12-15 per reconstituted 
pound in #10 cans, as pre-cooked or raw ground beef patties at about 
the same cost, or as raw ribeye steaks. The diced and ground can be 
used in many ways to enhance meals. You can fry or barbecue the 
steaks, but they are too expensive to be considered anything other than 
the occasional treat. 
Chicken, turkey and pork all come as pre-cooked diced meat. Their 
taste can be improved by lightly heating in a frying pan for a minute or 
two after re-hydrating. The pork is good added to egg and other dishes. 

112 
FOOD AND WATER STOCKPILING 
There used to be a wider selection of FD meats and, who knows, 
maybe public demand will make a larger selection available again in 
the future. 
A large selection of combination entrees that include FD meat is 
available. Although combinations save you from opening half a dozen 
cans to prepare a single dish, they cost about the same per gram of 
protein as all meat, which they aren't. After some time in storage, foods 
that are canned together tend to also blend their flavors until they 
pretty much taste the same. Combination FD foods also have shorter 
shelf lives. Separate ingredients do take a bit more effort, but cost 
substantially less and look and taste better. Be aware that stated 
serving sizes are often rather small, and you could need two or three 
per person! 
Meat Substitutes 
Certain food items are offered as substitutes for meat protein and 
should be considered here. 
Protein Concentrates 
Powdered protein concentrates are normally made from milk or soy 
proteins—or a combination—with lesser amounts of other ingredients 
and sweeteners. They come in a variety of flavors, can be dissolved in 
milk or fruit juice, or mixed directly with other foods to supplement the 
protein content. Price varies considerably. Shelf life is three to seven 
years, and open shelf life is one-plus year. 
Some have quite poor protein quality and others are fairly good, but 
even the best don't claim to be equal or superior to egg protein. The 
better quality concentrates cost about the same per gram of protein as 
powdered egg and one and a half to two times the cost of many canned 
meats. Personally, I prefer the powdered egg and canned meats. Protein 
concentrates would save one-third the space and about half the weight 
if concealment and portability are major concerns, but they're pretty 
hard to eat straight from a can! If you decide to store some protein 
concentrate as a supplement, be sure to get a high quality one that 
dissolves readily—even the best coat drinking glasses—and tastes good 
to you. 
TVP 
Textured vegetable protein (TVP)—also known as TSP and some 
other names—is made from soybean protein that has been spun into 

INDIVIDUAL STORAGE FOODS 113 
fibers and then fashioned into various forms to imitate different meats. 
These "pseudo-meats" are claimed to duplicate the look, texture and 
taste of the real thing at reduced prices. They come plain and flavored 
and, except for the bacon bits, are reconstituted and then cooked as real 
meat would be. Shelf life is three to five-plus years. 
Cost is its major selling point, but palatability is its biggest problem. 
Few who have tried it straight would put it in the same class with real 
meat. Its protein quality, even though made from soybeans and 
normally fortified with extra methionine, is still inferior to nearly all 
animal sources. Some people are also concerned with the effect the 
large quantities of additives may have on the digestive tract. It can be 
used as an extender with some success— many cafeterias, schools and 
some fast food outlets use it—but studies have shown that levels of 
20-30% TVP significantly decrease the flavor, juiciness and palatability 
of the meat as well as leave an aftertaste. Try before buying it. 
Gluten 
Like TVP, gluten is a vegetable protein that—because of its very low 
cost—is suggested by some as a replacement for meat protein. It is a 
stretchy, elastic substance contained in all cereal grains except rice and 
corn, but found in its most complete form in wheat. It can be made to 
look and taste something like various meats with flavorings, or sweet-
ened for desserts. Gluten is made from wheat by washing out the starch 
granules from developed dough. The wheat germ, most of the water-sol-
uble vitamins and minerals, and a small percentage of the protein ends 
up in the wash water. The water can be used in breads and soups, and 
the starch can be dried for baby powder or thickening in place of 
cornstarch. The whole wheat kernel isn't a high quality protein to begin 
with and the resulting gluten is much inferior to meat, being only half 
as good at sustaining growing children. Gluten can add variety to your 
diet, but I don't recommend that you use it to replace animal protein. 
Gelatin 
Unsweetened gelatin is an almost tasteless, odorless powder 
obtained by boiling bones, hides, hoofs and other animal tissues. A 
gluey substance, it is 100% protein, but lacks essential amino acids and 
is very low quality and incomplete. It is used in the preparation of 
many foods because of its "setting" qualities. Because it is readily 
available, stores well and is very cheap, it is used extensively in some 
low-quality commercial units. Use it only as an adjunct in your plan. 

114 
FOOD AND WATER STOCKPILING 
Soups 
Vegetable soups, sometimes with added meat, have a shelf life of two 
to three-plus years. They are convenient and add variety. A few—mush-
room, chicken, onion and tomato—are often used as seasoning in other 
dishes. 
Vegetable Proteins 
Bulk vegetable proteins provide more nutrition for the money than 
any other food. Processing, such as milling, rolling or being formed into 
pasta, raises the price, and mixes, casseroles and breakfast cereals are 
even more expensive. Although they are partial proteins, grains and 
legumes can be combined to greatly increase their quality, and both are 
improved when added to small quantities of animal proteins. Try before 
buying in quantity for storage. Moisture is by far their main storage 
enemy. 
Cereal Grains 
Cereal grains are excellent sources of protein, the vitamin B complex 
and E, essential fatty acids, minerals and fiber. Each kernel consists of 
three parts: 1) the germ that sprouts and contains nearly all the oils 
and many other important nutrients, 2) the starch which is the food 
supply for the germ as it grows after sprouting and is the largest part 
of the kernel, and 3) the hull or bran layer that surrounds, seals and 
protects the kernel. Whole grains are much more nutritive and keep 
much longer without going rancid than milled grains. The bran and 
germ are normally removed during milling to give flour its lighter color 
and to prevent rapid rancidity. 
Amaranth. A staple food in ancient America, it is making a come-
back. Its tiny white seeds are nearly 15% protein with a high lysine 
content unusual for grains. It makes a complete protein when mixed 
with wheat. The toasted seeds can be boiled for gruel or porridge, or 
milled into flour for flat breads and mixing with other flours. It can also 
be popped and stuck together with honey or molasses for a Mexican 
version of popcorn balls. Amaranth is easily grown from seed and is 
heat and drought resistant 
Barley. One of the oldest known cereal grains, it is a short, stubby 
kernel with a hard outer shell. Low in gluten, it can be mixed with flour 
containing gluten to get sweet, cake-like breads with nutty flavors. The 
hulled has a brown appearance, and the pearled has been polished to 

INDIVIDUAL STORAGE FOODS 
115 
remove the bran for a white, translucent look. It is used for breakfast 
cereal, in soups and casseroles and to make hot drinks. Shelf life is 
ten-plus years. 
Buckwheat. Not a true cereal grain, buckwheat is nevertheless a 
superior protein because of its high lysine content, and it was a favorite 
flour in pilgrim times. It has a strong, distinctive taste mellowed by 
other flours and is commonly used for pancakes. Those allergic to 
certain grains may find they can eat buckwheat. Whole roasted 
buckwheat mush—"kasha"—is a staple for East Europeans and 
Ukrainians, and in the Far East it is made into the "soba" noodle dish. 
Corn. Corn was first grown by the American Indian and called 
"maize" by them. It was eaten by nearly everyone in some form for 
breakfast and dinner almost every day during the earlier "pioneer" 
period. Dried field corn can be made into hominy and corn grits, or 
ground into meal and flour for flat cakes, mush and quick breads. The 
flour can be mixed with other flours to give a crunchy, crumbly texture 
and sweet taste to yeast breads. All commercial cornmeal is required to 
be enriched because it is de-germed during milling, but you can grind 
your own and have better flavor with higher nutrition. Whole dried 
field corn keeps five to ten-plus years, while cornmeal keeps three-plus 
years. Fumigation is normally not necessary. Moisture should be 12% 
or less. 
Popcorn is a special strain of corn with a very hard hull. It will keep 
five to ten-plus years, but it must be kept tightly covered to retain its 
moisture content so it will pop when heated. It makes a very inexpen-
sive and nourishing treat that could add variety, lift spirits and ease 
hard times. You can also use it to decorate Christmas trees, feeding it 
to the birds after use. Get a hot air popper if you plan on doing the 
popping over a fire. 
Millet. The primary grain in China before rice, it is one of the most 
ancient and still a staple in Ethiopia, India and North China. The 
kernels look like very tiny, round pale golden seeds. They have a sweet, 
nutty flavor when lightly toasted before milling, and swell greatly when 
cooked, providing more servings per pound than other grains. It cooks 
fast with a tender yet chewy texture, and its rather bland, egg-like 
taste readily takes a variety of seasonings. It is ideal baby food because 
of its low acid content, making it easy to digest. Millet can be used as 
a breakfast cereal, in soups, stews, casseroles and desserts, and as a 
main dish. It gives a crunchier texture to wheat bread. It is high in iron 
and essential amino acids, and is less allergic than some grains. 

116 
FOOD AND WATER STOCKPILING 
Oats. Native to Central Asia, oats are a favorite breakfast cereal 
throughout northern Europe and the British Isles. The kernel is a long, 
light brown grain with a bland, sweet taste. They can't be readily 
processed at home, so buy them already in the form you want. Whole 
oat groats are the whole grain after removing the hull. Steel-cut groats 
have been cut into several pieces (sometimes called Scotch oats) which 
can then be rolled into flakes. They are steamed (pre-cooked) lightly, 
and the thinness of the flake determines whether they are regular or 
quick-cooking oats. Shelf life is four to five-plus years. Soaking oatmeal 
overnight in a warm place will help reduce the phytic acid when cooked 
that would otherwise inhibit calcium absorption from the oats. 
Rice. Half the world considers rice the "staff of life" rather than 
wheat, and it is the most widely consumed cereal grain. It comes as 
long, medium or short kernels covered with a green-brown husk. Brown 
rice has the husk removed, while white rice has been polished to also 
remove the germ and several bran layers. White rice is preferred for 
storage because of its ten-plus years shelf life. Brown rice has a much 
higher fat content, goes rancid more quickly and only keeps two-plus 
years. Almost all white rice is enriched and the nutritional differences 
are minimal. Long grains cook up fluffy and separate, medium grains 
are tender, moist and clingy, and short grains are very clingy and cook 
to a creamier texture. Rice is one of the first infant foods and is helpful 
for people suffering from diarrhea. It can be used in a gluten-free diet. 
White rice should have less than 14% moisture, while brown rice should 
contain less than 12%. 
Rye. An important bread grain in Scandinavia and Russia, it is a 
wholesome, high-stamina favorite with a sweet, nutty flavor. Gluten 
content is low, and it is best mixed with wheat for breads. A good source 
of potassium, phosphorus and iron. It stores five-plus years. 
Sorghum. The major cereal grain in Africa, sorghum has roundish 
brown seeds with yellow and red mixed in. The lighter varieties taste 
best and can be boiled, ground into meal or milled into flour. It has a 
strong flavor and is best mixed with other flours. Moisture content 
should be 12% or less. 
Triticale. Pronounced trit-uh-CAY-lee, it is a relatively new hybrid 
with the amino acids and sweet, nutty taste of rye combined with the 
general baking qualities of wheat. It is higher in protein than either 
and is especially high in lysine. The kernels are larger than wheat and 
plumper than rye. It has a low gluten content and should be mixed with 
wheat for bread. Many commercial mills refuse to grind it because it 
gums up their mills. 

INDIVIDUAL STORAGE FOODS 
117 
Wheat. Known as the "staff of life", wheat is a nutritious, versatile 
grain without peer for storage. It is the least expensive food per calorie, 
and will easily store twenty-plus years if properly protected from 
moisture. It is rich in B vitamins, vitamin E and the essential fatty 
acids, iron and fiber. 
Get hard #1 winter or #2 or better spring wheat. Many varieties 
grown in different areas are suitable, and actual protein content and 
other characteristics depend not only on the variety, but also to a large 
extent on the environmental and soil conditions that particular growing 
year. Spring wheat tends to be larger and plumper with a higher 
protein and moisture content. Protein content should be at least 12%, 
but extremely high protein content can be undesirable. Kernels 
shriveled by frost or drought may have abnormally high protein, but 
they are also low in starch and make poor bread due to low gluten 
content. 
Moisture content should be 10% or less. Freshly-threshed "field 
grade" wheat contains 14-16% and must be dried. You can get an idea 
of the moisture content just by looking at the kernel; a shiny kernel 
contains low moisture while a quite plump one has high moisture. 
Exact moisture content can be determined by carefully weighing out 
twenty ounces of grain from the middle of the container and placing it 
in a pan or tray to a depth of a half inch or so. Place it in an oven for 
two hours at 180° F (80° C), and then re-weigh. Each ounce lost shows 
approximately 5% moisture content. For 10% or less moisture it should 
have lost two ounces or less. 
It should be clean and insect-free—dockage below V&%—cereal grade 
for human consumption. Normally it is cleaned at least twice in "air 
washes" and also screened two or three times, but it will still contain 
some contaminants you'll want to cull prior to milling. Don't buy any 
grain that has been washed with water or pre-treated for use as seed. 
You might save one-third to one-half by buying directly from the farmer 
and cleaning your own, but you'll probably have to dry it, too. Drop the 
wheat slowly through the air from a fan into a high-sided clean 
container. Fan it several times. Then run it through a screen—like on 
screen doors. You may also want to pick through by hand after sieving. 
The wheat should be relatively free of cracked kernels and should be 
of uniform size and shape, not too plump nor shriveled. There shouldn't 
be a large percentage of yellow berry—chalky, yellow kernels or 
portions in a normally flinty wheat—because they lower protein 
content. A small amount isn't too objectionable. 

118 
FOOD AND WATER STOCKPILING 
Wheat can be purchased in bulk from flour mills and grain dealers. 
Preparing your own for storage is easy and inexpensive, while buying 
it already packed in plastic buckets will cost 50-100% more. Getting it 
in #10 cans will cost three to four times as much and isn't worth the 
extra expense. Turning or aeration, as some recommend, is not 
necessary as long as the moisture content is kept below 10%. Wheat 
stored in sacks without a moisture barrier will draw moisture from 
humid air. Germination slowly declines over time, but 50% of some 
wheat kept for twenty years in a garage at 12° to 117° F sprouted. 
Finally, don't forget to store a grain mill (see Chapter 10). There are 
expedient methods to grind whole grains without a mill, but you won't 
want to use them unless absolutely necessary. 
Flour 
Flour costs one-fourth to one-third more than whole grains, doesn't 
store anywhere near as long and is more sensitive to heat. It is conve-
nient, but don't store more than you normally use in a year's time. 
Moisture can drastically reduce its shelf life, so store it in sacks in very 
dry areas or in airtight plastic or metal containers. Fumigation is 
useless because of its density. 
Enriched all-purpose white flour contains less protein, fiber, vitamin 
E and essential fatty acids and calcium than the whole wheat it came 
from. It is convenient and desirable for some uses. It is milled at about 
13Vè% moisture and keeps two to three years at 70° F (21° C) with a 
12-13% moisture content but only one to two years at 14V6%. Even 
lower moisture can prolong shelf life to five to seven years. 
Real whole wheat flour has a high fat content, tends to become 
rancid and keeps for much less time than white. Much of the "whole 
wheat flour" sold commercially is simply white flour that has had some 
bran and a little wheat germ added. Just make your own from whole 
wheat as needed. Breads made from whole wheat flour tend to be 
heavier and crumblier, but with good recipes and practice they needn't 
be that way at all. They also don't need to be sweet like those made 
with all that honey some cooks seem so fond of. Properly done, whole 
wheat bread will make most commercial bread loose its appeal forever. 
Pasta 
Pasta comes in a wide variety of shapes and sizes, and is made from 
semolina, the starch portion of the durum wheat—the hardest wheat 
grown. The quality of the pasta changes with the quality of the durum 

INDIVIDUAL STORAGE FOODS 
119 
wheat available each particular year. Low-quality pasta is often made 
from blends or even other wheats. The best pastas give the best results, 
and you're better off finding a brand you like and staying with it. 
Low-quality ones are starchier, cook up gluey and are less tasty. Pasta 
doesn't deserve the "empty calorie" label, but contains the basic 
wholesomeness of wheat and provides essential carbohydrates as well 
as useful amounts of B vitamins, iron and calcium. It is easy to store, 
quick to prepare in a wide variety of dishes, high in protein, low in fat 
and readily digestible. Italians eat sixty pounds yearly per person, and 
the average American about ten pounds. 
Pasta is very inexpensive in large ten or twenty-pound boxes that 
store three to five-plus years if kept sealed in a dry place at 70° F or 
less. It can be fumigated like grain and will keep even longer in better 
containers. Pasta sluffs off layers and becomes stale with age. 
Mixes 
There are many mixes that are both convenient and less costly than 
the individual ingredients. Most can be kept in the original containers 
in a dry area for a short period of time, but should be re-packed in 
better containers for long-term storage in humid areas. Shelf life is at 
least a year or two in most all cases. 
Baby Foods 
You can make simple cereals from home-milled whole grains, partic-
ularly rice and rolled oats, or store ready-made baby cereals. They come 
in half and one-pound boxes, and normally keep about two years before 
becoming rancid. Canned baby food in various combinations also keep 
one to two-plus years. Powdered formula keeps longer than the 
ready-mixed. 
Beans, Peas and Lentils 
Dried legumes are the richest source of vegetable protein and are 
important as supplements to the grains. They are high in vitamin B1} 
iron, calcium, phosphorus, potassium and fiber and, with the exception 
of soybeans, are low in fat. They are not usually fumigated and will 
store five-plus years in airtight containers. 
Dry beans should be cooked before eating to destroy the growth-
inhibiting substances which prevent much of the bean protein from 
being digested and absorbed. This is also true after sprouting. Beans 

120 
FOOD AND WATER STOCKPILING 
cause flatulence in most people due to the presence of certain indigest-
ible carbohydrates that ferment in the colon, producing gas. The best 
way to reduce this problem is to pre-soak the beans, discarding the 
water a number of times. Sprouting also reduces the tendency. 
Packers use many brand names but the quality of the beans depends 
on their selection from that year's crop, good or bad. Select beans with 
as few defects as possible, uniform in size for uniform cooking and a 
bright, even color. A dull or low-color bean is usually old. Even the best 
seed cleaner occasionally passes bean-size rocks and dirt clods, so you 
should always hand-sort before using. Don't buy beans treated for 
planting. 
The proper storage of beans begins with moisture control. Too much 
moisture rots the beans and too little causes "hard shell" where the 
beans become very tough with a papery skin. They don't absorb water 
during soaking and become nearly uncookable. This condition can be 
overcome somewhat by blanching with steam or boiling for one to two 
minutes prior to soaking, but it is better prevented by storing beans in 
an airtight, moisture-proof container. Properly stored, they will keep 
five to ten-plus years but, allowed to dry out, they may develop hard 
shell in two to three years. Moisture content is best in the 8-10% range. 
Canned beans are substantially more expensive than dry, but may 
be convenient enough to have a small supply on hand. 
There are hundreds of varieties of beans depending on the locale and 
local preferences. Some of the more widely available ones are: 
Black. Related to turtle beans, they look like small, dark ovals and 
are a major food source in Mexico, the Caribbean and the American 
Southwest. Used in casseroles, salads, soups and stews. 
Blackeye. Also known as blackeye peas or cowpeas, they originated 
in Asia and are small, oval-shaped creamy white with a distinctive 
black spot or "eye" on one side. Used mostly in Southern cooking, they 
combine particularly well with pork and chicken. 
Garbanzo. Also called chickpea or ceci, this bean is popular along the 
Mediterranean and throughout the Middle East to India. A pale round 
nut-shaped and flavored bean, excellent over tossed salads, in soups, 
stews and casseroles and for sprouting. Can be roasted and ground for 
a hot beverage. 
Fava. Sometimes called broad beans, they are large and flat, 
resemble lima beans and often substitute for lima or garbanzo beans. 
Great Northern. A large white, kidney-shaped bean with distinctive 
flavor. An outstanding baked bean also good in soups, salads and 
casseroles. 

INDIVIDUAL STORAGE FOODS 
121 
Kidney. Named for its shape, it comes in light and dark red varieties 
and is the favorite of Latin America. The dark red are sold almost 
exclusively canned. An all-purpose bean, both are great in chili and 
many Mexican dishes as well as in salads, casseroles, soups and meat 
dishes. 
Lima. A pale, broad flat bean commonly available as large—butter 
beans—or baby beans. The unique, delicate flavor goes well with many 
dishes. 
Mung. Mung beans are small, round pale drab green to black beans 
normally used as sprouts in oriental and other dishes. Also good in 
salads, on sandwiches or lightly stir-fried. More expensive than most 
other beans. 
Navy. Also known as small white beans, this classic is a must for 
Boston Baked Beans and with ham. Holds shape well if cooked slowly. 
Pea. A small, oval white bean excellent baked. 
Pink. Much like the pinto, it has a milder flavor than the red bean 
and is often featured in Mexican-American dishes. 
Pinto. Also called red Mexican or calico bean because of distinctive 
speckled brown and white coloring, they become all brown during 
cooking. A staple of Mexican cooking, their succulent flavor is found in 
chili, burritos, tostadas, and as refried beans. Can be substituted for red 
and kidney in most recipes. Less tiresome over long periods of time 
than many other beans. Especially good as a meat extender. 
Red. A small bright red pea bean popular in chili and bean salads. 
Soy. A round bean of various color, it contains the most complete and 
highest percentage of protein of any vegetable. Its mild taste readily 
takes on other flavorings. Many oriental dishes are made from it as well 
as a soy milk and ice cream. Soybeans must be cooked first to destroy 
the trypsin-inhibiting substances that prevent full utilization of the 
protein. This destruction is best accomplished when wet. The phytic 
acid in the beans also decreases the absorption of zinc. Other beans are 
50-60% starch, but soybeans contain no starch, are higher in fat and 
don't cook the same. They don't become soft nearly as quickly. Orientals 
consider fermented soybeans and products more readily digested and 
more palatable. A good soybean cookbook is recommended if you store 
them in quantity. 
Store clean, whole dry beans with a moisture content of 11% or less. 
Because of high fat content, they do not keep as well as some others but 
will still keep four to five-plus years. 
Peas. Dried yellow peas have mild flavor while green are more dis-
tinctive. Whole peas can be sprouted, used whole, or ground up for soup 

122 
FOOD AND WATER STOCKPILING 
and other dishes. Split usually cost more, are less nutritious due to 
oxidation and won't keep as long. Both are rich in vitamins A and B, 
iron, calcium, potassium and phosphorus. They are made from field 
peas. 
Lentils. The most nutritious legume next to soybeans, they are 
small, flat and disc-shaped with a mild flavor that blends well with 
other foods. 
Adjuncts 
Beverages. Unsweetened soft drink mixes, usually making two 
quarts per package, suffer some flavor loss after two-plus years. 
Electrolytically balanced drinks such as Gatorade are excellent for 
shelter storage and for persons suffering from burns and diarrhea. 
Cocoa and chocolate drink mixes keep three to four-plus years if kept 
dry. Coffee and tea store two to five years with airtight containers best. 
Pero (made in Germany from cereal grains), Postum (from bran, wheat 
and molasses) and Ovaltine are other possibilities. Root beer extract 
could be nice for special occasions. 
Bouillon. Comes in beef, chicken and other flavors in cube and 
granular form. Keeps two to five-plus years with granular keeping the 
longest. Probably want one to two pounds minimum up to ten to twelve 
pounds per person if used heavily for gluten and other meatless dishes. 
Good seasonings for soup broths, rice and other dishes. 
Chocolate, Cocoa, Carob and Butterscotch Chips What's life without 
chocolate?! Perhaps two to ten pounds per person for making treats. 
Keep the chips dry and cool. Heat causes a white-grey film on chocolate 
called "bloom", but it doesn't affect flavor. All store two to three-plus 
years if protected. Carob is a low fat, no caffeine, chocolate substitute 
that is sweeter than chocolate, has a high calcium content and contains 
no oxalic acid like chocolate does, making the calcium more absorbable. 
Other candy, particularly hard candy, could be stored. 
Cornstarch. One to four pounds per person for thickening gravies, 
sauces, soups, stews, pie fillings and puddings. Stores five to ten-plus 
years. 
Corn syrup. Karo is used for numerous purposes, including most 
candy making. 
Crackers. If you didn't include them under grains, consider some 
now. Graham, saltine and soda crackers keep two to five-plus years if 
protected from moisture. 

INDIVIDUAL STORAGE FOODS 
123 
Cream. Powdered sweet and sour cream could add a lot to a survival 
diet. Store one to two pounds of each per person. They keep two to four 
years and have open shelf lives of four to six months. Powdered sour 
cream makes about four cups per pound and can be used for cream 
cheese as well. Powdered sweet cream makes about nine cups per 
pound and makes top or whipping cream. Non-dairy creamers are also 
available and keep two-plus years. Dream Whip powdered whipped 
topping keeps similarly. 
Flavorings and Extracts. Most store two-plus years and one year 
after opening but, because of alcohol bases, they need to be kept tightly 
closed to avoid evaporation and additional concentration. Almond, 
lemon, maple, peppermint, rum and vanilla should be considered. 
Lemon and lime juice keep well until opened, then need refrigeration. 
Lemon and orange peel granules are also available. 
Food Colorings. Store a variety of colors to add appeal to food. 
Frostings and Toppings. Dry and canned frosting mixes, marsh-
mallows and toppings—butterscotch, caramel, chocolate and straw 
berry—could help add variety and interest. Cake and cookie decorations 
can also be stored. Most keep one year or more. 
Fruits and Fillings. You might store a couple pounds of coconut, a 
few cans of mandarin oranges, cranberry sauce, and pie and fruit filling 
for special occasions. Others include maraschino cherries, blackberries, 
blueberries, dates, figs and mincemeat. All keep a year or longer. 
Gelatin. Unflavored gelatin (Knox) keeps for years if kept dry. 
Gum. Chewing gum could be a nice treat for children. It will keep for 
years, but may become quite hard and stale. 
Herbs and Spices. Herbs and spices are essential to avoid monotony. 
They should be stored in a cool, dark and dry place in airtight contain-
ers to prevent evaporation of oils and aromas. Most will keep for 
two-plus years with whole keeping better than ground. Herbs keep less 
well. Buy fresh—bright, not faded, colors and strong characteristic 
aromas—and not in too large quantities that will loose potency prior to 
use. Use this list so you won't overlook any you feel necessary: 
• Allspice: ground 
• Mace: ground 
• Anise seed 
• Marjoram: sweet dried leaf, 
• Basil: sweet dried leaf, 
ground 
flakes 
• Ming: dried chopped 
• Bay leaves 
• Mustard: dry powder, seed 
• Borage: leaf, seed 
• Nutmeg: ground 
• Caraway seed 
• Onion salt 

124 
FOOD AND WATER STOCKPILING 
• Cardamon seed 
• Celery salt 
• Chili pepper and powder 
• Chives 
• Cinnamon: sticks, ground 
• Cloves: ground, whole 
• Coriander: ground 
• Cumin: ground, seed 
• Curry powder 
• Dill: dried weed, seed 
• Fennel seed 
• Oregano: dried leaf, ground 
• Paprika 
• Parsley flakes 
• Pepper: black and white, 
whole and £ 
• Pickling, poultry and 
pumpkin pie 
• Red (cayenne) pepper 
• Rosemary: whole, ground 
• Saffron 
• Sage: ground rubbed 
• Garlic: minced, powder, salt 
• Savory: ground 
• Ginger: ground 
• Italian seasoning 
• Horseradish 
• Hot pepper sauce 
• Lemon balm 
• Sesame seed 
• Tarragon: dried whole leaf 
• Thyme: dried leaf, ground 
• Turmeric: ground 
Ice Cream. Freeze-dried ice cream doesn't resemble regular frozen 
ice cream, but it does make an interesting and tasty snack. There are 
even ice cream sandwiches available. Talk about "roughing it"! 
Mushrooms. Some cans of mushrooms could spice up salads, meats 
and pizza. Also available freeze-dried; one pound FD equals 10 pounds 
of fresh. 
Leavenings. Powdered dry yeast in unopened cans will keep two to 
three-plus years if kept cool. You may want one-half to one and a half 
pounds per person. It turns brown, slimy and develops a strong odor 
with age. Yeast should bubble within twenty minutes or it's probably 
dead. You can also make your own everlasting yeast sponge at home or 
store freeze-dried sourdough starter. Have two starts in case you 
accidentally lose one. If they ever turn orange, throw them out. Baking 
powder stores in the original cans for four to five-plus years. You can 
test a small amount by adding water to see if it still fizzes. About one 
to three pounds per person of baking powder is needed. You can make 
your own baking powder from baking soda and cream of tartar or 
calcium phosphate. Baking soda keeps many years and is useful for 
many things—with salt as a toothpaste, deodorant, cleaner, first aid, 
fire extinguisher—and you may want to store two to five pounds per 
person. Re-pack in glass or metal, or wrap box in plastic. 
Pectin. For jams and jellies, the liquid in brown bottles should be 
kept in the dark. The powder must be kept dry and protected from 

INDIVIDUAL STORAGE FOODS 
125 
insects. Both will keep two-plus years if kept cool. 
Relishes. Most keep two-plus years. Green and ripe black olives, dill, 
sweet, bread and butter pickles, and relishes are the basic choices. 
Rennet. Rennet is used to curdle milk for cheese and desserts. 
Twelve Hansen's tablets will make about ten pounds of cheese. Junket 
tablets come with directions for making cheeses, custards and ice 
cream, and are sold in the pudding and gelatin section of many 
supermarkets. 
Sauces, Gravies and Dressings. Beef and chicken gravy mixes, 
canned sauces and gravies, salad dressing mixes, etc. can be considered. 
Other items are Soy, Tabasco, Worcestershire, A-l, cocktail, salsa, hot, 
barbecue and meat sauces. 
Seafood. Anchovies, clams, crab, kipper snacks, oysters, sardines 
and shrimp can certainly add variety. 
Seasoning Mixes. Beef stew, chili, enchilada, meatloaf, sloppy joe, 
spaghetti, taco seasoning and other mixes would be helpful at times. 
Like all spices they loose their potency over time. 
Spreads. Ketchup keeps three to four years if kept cool and dark. 
Prepared yellow mustard keeps two-plus years. Sandwich spreads are 
also options. 
Vegetables. You may want to store a quarter to a half pound of 
dehydrated green bell peppers, one to two pounds of onions of dehydrat-
ed (powder, chopped and sliced) and a quarter to a half pound of 
dehydrated celery. Other vegetables that can be stored include pimento, 
water chestnuts, pumpkin, asparagus, bamboo shoots and green chilis. 
Vinegar. Store one to two gallons per person. Distilled keeps longer 
than cider, but both keep two-plus years or longer. Vinegar can 
evaporate if left open, and a slight cloudy appearance doesn't affect 
quality at all. 
Vitamin and Mineral Supplements 
Vitamin shelf life depends on ingredients and form. Hard-pressed 
tablets and soft gelatin capsules keep the longest, while chewable 
tablets don't keep as long because they readily absorb moisture (shows 
as speckled appearance). Some brands store longer than others—ask 
your pharmacist which keeps best—and many include expiration dates, 
usually conservative. Kept cool, dark, dry and in airtight containers, 
most store one and a half to five-plus years. Moisture destroys potency, 
particularly of vitamin C. Dark brown bottles help keep out light, or 
you can store in the original cartons. Foil seals under caps help keep air 

126 
FOOD AND WATER STOCKPILING 
out. All supplements with iron should be kept out of the reach of 
children. 
Concentrated Food 
A number of food powders, tablets and bars are sold as compact, 
light-weight survival foods. Most are made from soy protein with 
basically the same quality protein. Some are sold as high energy 
sources low in calories—a contradiction of claims. Whatever their true 
values, remember this: no matter how concentrated or light-weight, no 
truly balanced food can contain more than 2600 calories per pound, and 
that's an average day's need. Buyer beware. 
Miracle Foods 
Some foods are advertised as the "perfect storage food", so let's look 
at the facts. 
Vegetable Protein Combinations. This product is a blend of vegetable 
proteins—most notably beans and grains—and is normally formed into 
pasta and other shapes. The manufacturer of one brand claims that his 
"discovery" of the age-old principle of combining grains with legumes to 
improve protein quality is revolutionary! As balanced as their amino 
acid profile may be, their protein quality does not exceed that obtained 
by simply eating the combinations of grains and beans in the same 
meal. And, no matter how cheap the price, the mixing and forming of 
the ingredients makes them cost more than the grains and beans they 
are made from. On top of that, they are often sold through multi-level 
distribution programs, which substantially increases the cost further. 
Spirulina. Dried spirulina plankton is touted by some as the 
"wonder food of the future" and the "ultimate survival food". It is a 
variety of blue-green algae similar to the familiar slimy green seaweed 
at the beach, and is sold to be mixed with water or juice—to disguise 
the taste—to make a drink that is a "complete" food with "balanced 
nutrients". One ad claims it is "far superior to soy beans, cheese, fish, 
meat, eggs or milk". The raw truth flatly refutes that claim. 
While very high in protein content, the quality of the protein is less 
than that of either soy or peanut protein and no where near the quality 
of meat or milk, let alone eggs. It is the highest known source of 
vitamin B12 but is low in B1 and B6. It is also low in bulk, and not 
having enough bulk causes the body to loose muscle tone to where the 
digestive tract won't move food through normally. And it is very low in 

INDIVIDUAL STORAGE FOODS 
127 
calories, and calories are what ultimately keep us alive. It is definitely 
not the "high energy" food often claimed. There is also some evidence 
that in substantial quantities it greatly increased the amount of uric 
acid in the blood, which may lead to arthritic and kidney problems. 
Then there is its high cost. It retails for about twice the cost of 
freeze-dried steak and about ten times the cost of soy meal. Both are 
better quality protein. A year's supply—anywhere from five to 
twenty-plus pounds depending on the advertising source—will only 
supply 1-4% of the average calorie needs. You'd still need lots of other 
food to survive. Spirulina is not recommended at all as a storage food. 

TABLE 9-1A 
Proximate Value of Food When Prorated 
Over 1 Year on a Daily Basis 
iFood 
II Milk Products 
Milk, regular nonfat, dry 
Milk, instant nonfat, dry 
Milk, evaporated 
13-fl oz., #1 tall can 
Buttermilk, dry 
Cheese, cheddar, dehydrated 
Cheese, Swiss, dehydrated 
Cheese, cottage, freeze dried 
Cheese, Parmesan 
|Cheez Whiz 
Fats 
Oil, 3 gallons 
Shortening, 6 3-lb cans 
Shortening, dehydrated 
Butter, dehydrated 
Margarine, canned 
Margarine, dehydrated 
Mayonnaise, 5 quarts 
Miracle Whip, 4 quarts 
1 Bacon, canned 
iNuts and Seeds 
Almonds, unshelled 
shelled 
Brazil, unshelled 
Filberts, unshelled 
shelled 
Pecans, unshelled 
shelled 
Walnuts, English, unshelled 
shelled 
Walnuts, black, unshelled 
Peanuts, unshelled raw 
shelled raw 
Peanut butter, regular 
Peanut butter, dehydrated 
Sesame seeds 
II Sunflower seeds, hulled 
| Fruits, fresh 
|| Apples 
Amount 
pro-
rated 
50 lbs 
50 lbs 
48 cans 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
23 lbs 
18 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
9 lbs 
10 lbs 
50 lbs 
50 lbs 
50 lbs 
50 lbs 
50 lbs 
50 lbs 
50 lbs 
50 lbs 
50 lbs 
50 lbs 
50 lbs 
50 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
501bs 
Energ 
kcal/ 
day 
226 
223 
73 
48 
77 
71 
82 
49 
36 
253 
198 
94 
92 
89 
92 
89 
49 
85 
189 
372 
195 
181 
394 
226 
427 
182 
405 
86 
256 
350 
73 
65 
70 
70 
U*J 
Protei 
gm/ 
day 
22.3 
22.2 
3.7 
4.3 
3.4 
3.7 
9.5 
4.5 
2.0 
0 
0 
1.2 
1.2 
0.1 
1.2 
0.1 
0.1 
1.1 
5.9 
11.6 
4.3 
3.6 
7.8 
3.0 
5.7 
4.1 
9.2 
2.8 
11.8 
16.2 
3.1 
5.5 
2.3 
3.0 
LJLLJ 
Fat 
gm/ 
day 
0.5 
0.4 
4.2 
0.7 
6.4 
5.5 
3.4 
3.2 
2.7 
28.6 
22.4 
8.8 
9.1 
10.1 
9.1 
9.9 
4.7 
8.9 
17.2 
33.7 
19.9 
17.8 
38.8 
23.5 
44.2 
17.9 
39.8 
8.1 
21.5 
29.5 
6.3 
4.0 
6.1 
6.9 
0,4 
Carbo-
hydrate 
gm/day 
32.5 
32.1 
5.2 
6.2 
1.2 
1.0 
2.7 
0.4 
1.0 
0 
0 
1.8 
1.6 
trace 
1.6 
0.3 
1.6 
0.1 
6.2 
12.1 
3.2 
4.8 
10.4 
4.8 
9.1 
4.4 
9.8 
2.0 
8.4 
11.6 
2.3 
1.9 
2.7 
2.5 
8.5 1 

TABLE 9-l.B 
1 Proximate Value of Food When Prorated 
Over 1 Year on a Daily Basis 
iFood 
1 Fruits, home canned 
Applesauce, sweetened 
unsweetened 
Apricots, heavy syrup 
light syrup 
Cherries, sweet with pits 
heavy syrup 
light syrup 
Peaches, heavy syrup 
light syrup 
Pears, heavy syrup 
light syrup 
Plums, purple, heavy syrup 
|| light syrup 
1 Fruits, canned 
Applesauce 
sweetened, 16-oz #303 
unsweetened, 16-oz #303 
Apricots 
heavy syrup, 16-oz #303 
juice pack, 16-oz #303 
Cherries, sweet with pits 
heavy syrup, 16-oz #303 
Fruit cocktail 
heavy syrup, 16-oz #303 
juice pack, 16-oz #303 
Grapefruit, juice 
unsweetened, 46-oz #3 
Grapefruit, segments 
light syrup, 16-oz #303 
Orange juice 
sweetened, 46-oz #3 
unsweetened, 46-oz #3 
Peaches 
heavy syrup, 16-oz #303 
juice pack, 16-oz #303 
Pears 
heavy syrup, 16-oz #303 
|| juice pack, 16-oz #303 
Amount 
pro-
rated 
lOqts 
lOqts 
lOqts 
lOqts 
lOqts 
lOqts 
lOqts 
lOqts 
lOqts 
lOqts 
lOqts 
lOqts 
24 cans 
24 cans 
24 cans 
24 cans 
24 cans 
24 cans 
24 cans 
12 cans 
24 cans 
12 cans 
12 cans 
24 cans 
24 cans 
24 cans 
24 cans 
Energ 
kcaV 
day 
23 
10 
21 
16 
19 
15 
19 
14 
19 
15 
20 
15 
27 
12 
26 
16 
23 
23 
14 
19 
21 
25 
22 
23 
13 
23 
14 
Protei 
gm/ 
day 
trace 
trace 
0.1 
0.2 
0.2 
0.2 
0.1 
0.1 
trace 
trace 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.2 
0.3 
0.3 
0.1 
0.1 
0.2 
0.2 
0.3 
0.4 
0.1 
0.2 
0.1 
0.1 
Fat 
gm/ 
day 
trace 
trace 
trace 
trace 
trace 
trace 
trace 
trace 
trace 
trace 
trace 
trace 
trace 
trace 
trace 
0.1 
0.1 
trace 
trace 
0.1 
trace 
0.1 
0.1 
trace 
trace 
0.1 
0.1 
Carbo-
hydrate 
gm/day 
5-9 
2.7 
5.5 
4.2 
4.8 
3.9 
5.0 
3.8 
4.9 
3.9 
5.2 
4.0 
7.1 
3.2 
6.6 
4.1 
5.8 
5.9 
4.4 
4.6 
5.3 
5.8 
5.2 
6.0 
3.5 
5.9 
3.5 
I 

TABLE 9-l.C 
1 Proximate Value of Food When Prorated 
Over 1 Year on a Daily Basis 
|Food 
Pineapple 
heavy syrup, 20-oz #2 
|| juice pack, 20-oz #2 
Fruits, dried 
Apples, 24% water 
Apricots, 25% water 
Figs, 23% water 
Peaches, 25% water 
Pears, 26% water 
Prunes, 28% water 
1 Raisins, 18% water 
[Fruits, dehydrated 
Apples, 2V6% water 
Applesauce, unsweetened 
Apricots, 3V£% water 
Banana flakes, 3% water 
chips (with honey and oil) 
Fruit blend or mix 
Grapefruit juice 
crystals, 1% water 
Orange juice 
crystals, 1% water 
Peaches, 3% water 
Pears 
Pineapple, freeze dried 
Plums, freeze dried 
Prunes, 2%% water 
Raisins, low moisture 
I Strawberries, freeze dried 
1 Vegetables, fresh 
Beets, without tops 
Cabbage, trimmed 
Carrots, without tops 
Onions 
Potatoes, white 
Pumpkin 
Squash, winter 
Acorn 
Butternut 
|| Hubbard 
Amount 
pro-
rated 
24 cans 
24 cans 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
25 lbs 
25 lbs 
25 lbs 
25 lbs 
100 lbs 
100 lbs 
100 lbs 
100 lbs 
100 lbs 
Energ 
kcal/ 
day 
28 
22 
34 
32 
34 
33 
33 
27 
36 
44 
44 
41 
42 
68 
45 
47 
47 
42 
44 
49 
44 
43 
42 
42 
9 
7 
11 
11 
76 
23 
42 
47 
32 
Protei 
gm/ 
day 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.6 
0.5 
0.4 
0.4 
0.2 
0.3 
0.2 
0.2 
0.7 
0.5 
0.4 
0.6 
0.6 
0.6 
0.6 
0.5 
0.4 
0.4 
0.4 
0.4 
0.7 
0.3 
0.4 
0.3 
0.4 
2.1 
0.9 
1.4 
1.2 
1.2 
Fat 
gm/ 
day 
trace 
trace 
0.2 
0.1 
0.2 
0.1 
0.2 
0.1 
trace 
0.2 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
4.2 
0.1 
0.1 
0.2 
0.1 
0.2 
0.2 
0.1 
0.1 
trace 
0.2 
trace 
0.1 
trace 
trace 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.2 
Carbo-
hydrate 
gm/day 
7.2 
5.6 
8.9 
8.3 
8.6 
8.4 
9.8 
7.1 
9.6 
11.4 
11.4 
10.5 
11.0 
7.9 
10.6 
11.2 
11.0 
10.9 
9.8 
12.1 
11.5 
11.3 
11.4 
10.7 
2.2 
1.5 
2.5 
2.5 
17.2 
5.6 
10.6 
12.2 
7.7 

TABLE 9-l.D 
Proximate Value of Food When Prorated 
Over 1 Year on a Daily Basis 
iFood 
Sweet potatoes 
Taros, raw 
corms and tubers 
1 leaves and stems 
1 Vegetables, home canned 
Green beans 
Beets 
Corn, whole 
Peas 
Tomatoes, whole or juice 
|| Sauerkraut 
1 Vegetables, canned 
Green beans, 16-oz #303 
Beets, 16-oz #303 
Carrots, 16-oz #303 
Corn, whole wet, 17-oz #303 
whole vacuum, 17-oz #303 
cream style, 17-oz #303 
Peas, Alaska (Early or 
June), 16-oz #303 
Sweet (Sugar), 16-oz #303 
Potatoes, white, whole 
15-oz #303 
Pumpkin, 16-oz #303 
Sauerkraut, 16-oz #303 
Spinach, 15-oz #303 
Sweet Potatoes 
syrup pack, 16-oz #303 
vacuum (solid), 16-oz #303 
Tomatoes 
whole, 15-oz #303 
sauce, 8-oz can 
paste, 6-oz can 
I juice, 46-oz #3 
[Vegetables, dehydrated 
Green beans 
Beets 
Cabbage, 4% water 
Carrots, 4% water 
| Celery 
Amount 
pro-
rated 
100 lbs 
100 lbs 
100 lbs 
20pts 
20pts 
20pts 
20pts 
lOqts 
lOqts 
24 cans 
24 cans 
24 cans 
24 cans 
24 cans 
24 cans 
24 cans 
24 cans 
24 cans 
24 cans 
24 cans 
24 cans 
24 cans 
24 cans 
24 cans 
24 cans 
24 cans 
12 cans 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
Energ 
kcal/ 
day 
115 
102 
50 
4 
8 
17 
15 
5 
4 
5 
10 
8 
21 
26 
26 
20 
17 
12 
10 
5 
5 
34 
32 
6 
6 
9 
8 
38 
41 
38 
42 
39 
Protei 
gm/ 
day 
1.7 
2.0 
3.7 
0.2 
0.2 
0.5 
0.9 
0.2 
0.2 
0.3 
0.3 
0.2 
0.6 
0.8 
0.7 
1.0 
1.0 
0.3 
0.3 
0.3 
0.6 
0.3 
0.6 
0.3 
0.3 
0.4 
0.4 
2.3 
1.5 
1.5 
0.8 
1.6 
Fat 
gm/ 
day 
0.4 
0.2 
1.0 
trace 
trace 
0.2 
0.1 
trace 
trace 
trace 
trace 
0.1 
0.2 
0.2 
0.2 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
trace 
trace 
trace 
0.1 
0.1 
0.2 
0.2 
0.1 
Carbo-
hydrate 
gm/day 
26.5 
24.7 
9.2 
^ 2.0 
4.1 
2.7 
1.0 
1.0 
1^3 
2.4 
1.9 
5.0 
6.5 
6.3 
3.7 
3.1 
2.7 
2.4 
1.2 
0.8 
8.2 
7.4 
1.2 
1.3 
2.1 
1.9 
^ 
8.8 
9.2 
10.1 
7.8 
|| 

TABLE 9-l.E 
1 Proximate Value of Food When Prorated 
Over 1 Year on a Daily Basi 
Food 
Corn, whole sweet 
Mushrooms, freeze dried 
Onions, 4% water 
Peas 
Potatoes 
granules with milk 
granules without milk 
flakes without milk 
diced 
hashed browns 
sliced 
Peppers, green bell 
Spinach 
Squash, freeze dried 
Sweet potatoes, 2.8% water 
|| Tomato, crystals, 1% water 
II Sugars 
Sugar, white granulated 
or powder 
brown 
Honey 
Jams and preserves, 7 pts 
Jellies, 7 pts 
Gelatin dessert 
Cane syrup 
Corn syrup, light or dark 
Maple syrup 
Sorghum syrup 
Molasses, blackstrap, 2 gal 
Powdered drink mix 
Tang, 2 #10 cans 
Pudding mixes (average) 
Tapioca 
Egg custard mix, bake 
|| no-bake 
|Eggs, dehydrated 
Whole 
Scrambling mix, with milk 
and oil 
|| Whites, powder 
s 
Amount 
pro-
rated 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
50 lbs 
50 lbs 
50 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
9 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
23 lbs 
11 lbs 
11 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
Energ 
kcal/ 
day 
47 
37 
44 
42 
44 
44 
45 
44 
46 
44 
29 
37 
44 
47 
38 
239 
232 
189 
34 
34 
41 
33 
36 
31 
32 
61 
53 
53 
46 
44 
53 
52 
74 
70 
46 
Protei 
gm/ 
day 
1.5 
3.2 
1.1 
3.2 
1.4 
1.0 
0.9 
0.9 
0.5 
1.0 
1.4 
3.9 
1.1 
0.5 
1.4 
0 
0 
0.2 
0.1 
trace 
1.1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0.1 
0.1 
2.6 
0.9 
5.8 
3.3 
10.0 
Fat 
gm/ 
day 
0.4 
0.2 
0.2 
0.2 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0 
0.2 
0.1 
0.1 
0.3 
0 
0 
0 
trace 
trace 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0.1 
trace 
0.9 
0 
5.1 
4.9 
trace 
Carbo-
hydrate 
gm/day 
9.5 
5.8 
10.2 
7.0 
9.7 
10.0 
10.4 
10.1 
10.2 
9.9 
7.7 
4.8 
11.0 
11.2 
8.5 
61.8 
59.9 
51.1 
8.7 
8.8 
9.8 
8.4 
9.3 
8.1 
8.4 
15.7 
13.4 
13.4 
11.8 
10.7 
8.3 
11.3 
0.5 
38.4 
0.7 
|| 

TABLE 9-l.F 
Proximate Value of Food When Prorated 
Over 1 Year on a Daily Basis 
IFood 
Yolks 
Scrambled, with butter 
freeze dried 
Scrambled, pre-cooked 
II freeze dried 
Amount 
pro-
rated 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
iMeat, poultry and fish, canned 
Chicken, 6%-oz can 
Corn beef, 12-oz can 
Ham, cured 
deviled, 6%-oz can 
Potted meat, beef, chicken 
or turkey, 3V4-OZ can 
Prem, 12-oz can 
Salmon, pink, 16-oz can 
red, 16-oz can 
Roast beef, 12-oz can 
Spam, 12-oz can 
Treet, 12-oz can 
Tuna, oil pack, 6-oz can 
undrained 
drained solids 
water pack, 6-oz can 
Turkey, 6%-oz can 
|| Vienna sausage, 5-oz can 
|Meat, poultry and fish, free 
Beef, diced, pre-cooked 
Beef, patties, raw 
Beef, ribeye steak, raw 
Chicken, diced, pre-cooked 
Cod, fillet steaks 
Ham, diced, pre-cooked 
Pork chops, raw 
Sausage, patties, raw 
Shrimp, Pacific 
Tuna, pre-cooked 
|| Turkey, diced, pre-cooked 
|Meat, dry 
| Beef jerky 
24 cans 
24 cans 
10 lbs 
24 cans 
24 cans 
24 cans 
24 cans 
24 cans 
24 cans 
24 cans 
24 cans 
48 cans 
48 cans 
48 cans 
24 cans 
48 cans 
ze dried 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
Energ 
kcaV 
day 
83 
63 
81 
25 
48 
24 
44 
15 
79 
42 
51 
50 
66 
82 
64 
37 
29 
25 
45 
67 
78 
71 
64 
58 
87 
64 
73 
55 
83 
66 
46 
Protei 
gm/ 
day 
4.1 
4.8 
5.8 
2.7 
5.7 
2.3 
1.8 
1.1 
2.6 
6.1 
6.1 
5.6 
3.4 
2.9 
5.5 
5.5 
6.2 
2.6 
2.6 
8.8 
5.8 
9.6 
8.2 
11.1 
5.2 
7.1 
5.4 
10.4 
11.7 
9.1 
5.5 
Fat 
gm/ 
day 
7.0 
3.2 
4.6 
1.5 
2.7 
1.5 
4.1 
1.2 
7.1 
1.8 
2.8 
2.9 
5.6 
7.1 
4.6 
1.5 
0.2 
1.6 
3.7 
2.8 
5.8 
2.5 
3.0 
0 
7.0 
3.5 
4.9 
0 
5.8 
2.2 
rnj 
Carbo-
hydrate 
gm/day 
0.3 
3.2 
1.2 
ô 
0 
0.1 
0 
0 
0.8 
0 
0 
0 
0.3 
1.1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0.1 
ô 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0.5 
0 
0 
0 
o 
1 

TABLE 9-l.G 
Proximate Value of Food When Prorated 
Over 1 Year on a Dailv Basis 
Food 
iMeat Substitutes 
Textured soy protein 
unflavored 
T.V.P. chunks 
beef flavored 
chicken flavored 
ham flavored 
|| bacon flavored bits 
II Grains, dry 
Barley, pearled 
Buckwheat 
Corn, field 
Corn grits 
Cornmeal 
Flour, all-purpose 
Millet 
Oatmeal, rolled oats 
Popcorn 
Rice, brown 
white 
Rye 
Sorghum 
Triticale 
Wheat, whole-grain, hard 
red winter, 12.3% protein 
red spring, 14% protein 
Wheat, rolled 
| flakes 
1 Pastas 
Macaroni 
Noodles, egg 
|| Spaghetti 
1 Legumes, dry 
Beans, white (Navy, 
Great Northern) 
Beans, red (Kidney) 
Beans, pinto 
Beans, black and brown 
|| Beans, lima 
Amount 
pro-
rated 
50 lbs 
50 lbs 
50 lbs 
50 lbs 
10 lbs 
100 lbs 
100 lbs 
100 lbs 
100 lbs 
100 lbs 
100 lbs 
100 lbs 
100 lbs 
100 lbs 
100 lbs 
100 lbs 
100 lbs 
100 lbs 
100 lbs 
100 lbs 
100 lbs 
100 lbs 
100 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
50 lbs 
50 lbs 
50 lbs 
50 lbs 
50 lbs 
Energ 
kcal/ 
day 
218 
263 
211 
281 
49 
434 
416 
433 
450 
441 
452 
406 
485 
450 
447 
451 
415 
413 
410 
410 
410 
422 
440 
46 
48 
46 
211 
213 
217 
211 
214 
Protei 
gm/ 
day 
34.2 
47.6 
32.3 
24.0 
5.5 
10.2 
14.5 
11.1 
10.8 
11.4 
13.0 
12.3 
17.6 
14.8 
9.3 
8.3 
15.0 
13.7 
21.4 
15.3 
17.4 
12.3 
12.7 
1.6 
1.6 
1.6 
13.9 
14.0 
14.2 
13.9 
12.7 
Fat 
gm/ 
day 
trace 
0.9 
1.8 
15.5 
2.6 
1.2 
3.0 
4.8 
1.0 
4.8 
1.2 
3.6 
9.2 
5.8 
2.4 
0.5 
2.1 
4.1 
1.3 
2.2 
2.7 
2.5 
2.0 
0.1 
0.6 
0.1 
1.0 
0.9 
0.7 
0.9 
1.0 
Carbo-
hydrate 
gm/day 
19.9 
28.6 
16.5 
11.7 
3.0 
97.9 
90.6 
89.7 
97.1 
91.6 
94.6 
90.6 
84.8 
89.6 
96.2 
99.9 
91.2 
90.7 
71.2 
89.1 
85.9 
94.7 
99.9 
9.3 
8.9 
9.3 
38.1 
38.5 
39.6 
38.0 
39.8 | 

TABLE 9-l.H 
Proximate Value of Food When Prorated 
Over 1 Year on a Dailv Basis 
II 
iFood 
Beans, garbanzo (chickpea) 
Lentils, whole 
Peas, blackeye (cowpea) 
Peas, green or yellow 
split 
whole 
JSoybeans 
1 Soups, condensed 
Beef noodle, 10%-oz can 
Chicken, cream, lOM-oz can 
Chicken gumbo, 10%-oz can 
Chicken noodle, 103/4-oz can 
Clam chowder, 10%-oz can 
Minestrone, lOVà-oz can 
Mushroom, cream, 103/4-oz 
Tomato, 10%-oz can 
| Vegetable beef, 10Vâ-oz can 
Amount 
pro-
rated 
50 lbs 
50 lbs 
50 lbs 
50 lbs 
50 lbs 
50 lbs 
48 cans 
48 cans 
48 cans 
48 cans 
48 cans 
48 cans 
48 cans 
48 cans 
48 cans 
Energ 
kcal/ 
day 
224 
211 
213 
216 
211 
250 
23 
32 
18 
21 
35 
34 
44 
29 
25 
Protei 
gm/ 
day 
12.7 
15.3 
14.2 
15.0 
15.0 
21.2 
1.3 
1.0 
1.0 
1.1 
1.6 
1.6 
0.8 
0.6 
1.6 
Fat 
gm/ 
day 
3.0 
0.7 
0.9 
0,6 
0.8 
11.0 
0.9 
1.9 
0.5 
0.6 
1.1 
1.1 
3.2 
0.8 
0.7 
Carbo-
hydrate 
gm/day 
37.9 
37.3 
38.3 
39.0 
37.5 
20.8 
2.3 
2.7 
2.4 
2.6 
4.6 
4.5 
3.4 
5.1 
3.1 
|| 
I Soups, dehydrated 
|| 
Beef noodle 
Chicken noodle 
Chicken rice 
Onion 
Pea, green 
Tomato vegetable 
| with noodles 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
48 
48 
44 
43 
45 
43 
1.7 
1.8 
1.1 
1.7 
2.8 
1.1 
0.9 
1.2 
0.8 
1.3 
0.5 
1.0 
8.1 
1 
7.2 
7.8 
6.7 
7.7 
7.8 
I 
{Miscellaneous 
I 
Beef and vegetable stew 
15-oz #303 can 
Spaghetti in tomato and 
cheese, 143/4-oz can 
Spaghetti with meatballs 
1434-oz can 
Bouillon 
Carbo flour 
Crackers, graham 
saltine 
soda 
Cream, sour, powder 
II sweet, powder 
24 cans 
24 cans 
24 cans 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
22 
21 
28 
15 
22 
48 
54 
55 
83 
93 
1.6 
0.6 
1.3 
2.5 
0.6 
1.0 
1.1 
1.1 
1.9 
1.7 
0.9 
0.2 
1.1 
0.4 
0.2 
1.2 
1.5 
1.6 
7.0 
9.0 
2.0 
4.2 
3.1 
0.6 
10.0 
9.1 
8.9 
8.8 
2.9 
1.2 
| 

TABLE 9-1.1 
1 Proximate Value of Food When Prorated 
Over 1 Year on a Dailv Basis 
Food 
Chocolate, baking 
milk 
semisweet 
Cocoa 
Hot chocolate mix 
Geletin, dry 
[Marshmallow 
Amount 
pro-
rated 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
10 lbs 
Energ 
kcal/ 
day 
63 
65 
63 
37 
49 
42 
40 
Protei 
gm/ 
day 
1.3 
1.0 
0.5 
2.1 
1.2 
10.6 
0.2 
Fat 
gm/ 
day 
6.6 
4.0 
4.4 
2.9 
1.3 
trace 
trace 
Carbo-
hydrate 
gm/day 
3.6 
7.1 
7.1 
6.0 
9.2 
0 
10.0 | 

10 
FOOD PREPARATION 
EQUIPMENT AND SUPPLIES 
Equipment and supplies are needed to properly prepare storage 
food. Some may differ from those normally used, and their selection 
criteria should be appropriately modified to meet crisis situations. 
Electric power may be nonexistent or only available on an intermit-
tent basis during crises. You won't want to depend exclusively on the 
electric appliances found in most kitchens. For those you consider indis-
pensable, you should have a non-electric alternative. Small twelve-volt 
power converters are also available that allow most appliances to be 
powered by a car's alternator—assuming the car has gas! Secondly, 
most electric appliances are more difficult to maintain and repair 
without the right spare parts, and replacement may be impossible. 
Many of the "finer things in life" are also breakable. So plan head now 
by selecting equipment based on durability, simplicity and ease of 
repair. 
Processing Tools 
Using storage foods often means doing your own processing and can 
require an assortment of tools. Some you may already have, while 
others you'll need to buy after carefully considering your requirements. 
Grain Mills 
A grain mill is the single most important tool for those using whole 
grains and should be bought carefully. Whatever type or brand you 
choose, be sure it is a quality mill. A poor one will be inconvenient, give 
poor results and probably never be used until absolutely necessary. 
When looking at the alternatives you need to have first made some 
basic decisions and understand your particular needs. Do you want it 
to grind fine flour for baking, crack wheat for cereals, or both? Are you 
going to need it for hard, dry grains like wheat or will you also be using 
it for soybeans and making peanut butter? Will you use it regularly and 
will it be convenient where it will be stored? Now you can examine each 
mill. Does it perform as advertised? Does it adjust to the variety of 

138 
FOOD AND WATER STOCKPILING 
settings you need and produce flour texture suitable to you? Is it quick 
enough, not messy during use, and easy to clean? Is the general design 
efficient and safe? Is it built to last or wear a long time, and is it simple 
and easy to repair? Now, consider the alternatives. 
Basically mills come in electric or manual models and grind with a 
stone, a metal burr plate or some combination of the two. 
Metal plates are more versatile, being able to handle many oily or 
wet substances without clogging or absorbing the oil. They usually will 
do soybeans, some will take peanuts, and a few will even grind dry 
bones into bonemeal. If they do gum up, they can be washed and they 
can be sharpened when they become dull. Get quality, however, since 
the cheaper plated metals often flake off into the product. 
Stones are more temperamental. Grinding grains or legumes 
containing more than 10-12% moisture creates a gluey substance that 
glazes the stone—reducing the grinding action—and can clog the 
machine. It may burn on fast-turning stones in electric mills, ruining 
the stone. Oily legumes like soybeans and peanuts will gum up the 
stone and make it useless. And although you can clean it somewhat by 
running a handful of popcorn through on a coarse setting, you should 
never wash the stone. Stones also produce more powder when cracking 
grain or splitting peas. They do have their advantages, though. 
Generally they make finer flour, wear considerably longer, and create 
less heat at finer settings. The grind also improves with age as the 
stones grind themselves to a perfect fit. 
Electric Mills 
For effortless convenience you can't beat an electric mill. They run 
all the way from coffee mills with special pulverising blades for coarse 
flour for under $50 to those $275 and up that often produce fine cake 
and pastry flour. Housings may be metal, plastic, formica or wood. Be 
aware that wood is harder to clean and weevil can burrow into it and 
make themselves at home eating the leftover flour. Untreated wood also 
absorbs moisture that helps attract weevil. 
Grinding high-moisture grain in an electric stone mill can crack the 
stone. The heat turns the moisture into steam with the expansion 
causing the cracking. If you see steam coming from the mill during use, 
turn it off and dry the grain before trying it again. Faster grinds with 
either type create hotter temperatures, but both run considerably 
cooler than commercial milling and neither affects the nutritional 
value appreciably because of the short time involved. 

FOOD PREPARATION EQUIPMENT AND SUPPLIES 
139 
Among the best is the K-Tec 
Kitchen Mill ($250). Also check out the 
mills offered 
through 
the 
major 
preparedness suppliers (see Chapter 
32). Lehman's has mills from $275 all 
the way to $1500 for a commercial size! 
You might consider Retsel's Mill Rite 
at $420. Often used mills can be found 
at a fraction of their original cost, and 
many will perform satisfactorily. 
Converting 
Electric Mills 
K-Tec Kitchen mill 
Lehman electric mill 
Many electrics had conversion kits for hand 
or bicycle operation at additional cost; maybe 
some still do. Supposedly if the electricity is 
out you simply power the mill with one of the 
conversions. In reality it is usually not 
advisable. Electrics mills are made to turn at 
1500-2000 RPM and being turned by hand at 
sixty RPM gives a minimal to non-existent 
output. One individual reported less than a 
cup of flour after twenty minutes of arduous hand cranking. And 
arduous it is. The motor may spin the stone effortlessly but turning it 
by hand is quite difficult. 
An even more serious problem rarely mentioned is that, with the 
exception of the Retsel—the best for hand conversion, when you turn 
the stone by hand you also turn the motor. That not only takes 
additional effort but, because you can't turn the shaft as smoothly as 
the motor, you'll probably wear out the bearings and ruin the motor 
altogether. Bicycle conversions are a bit easier on the muscle power 
requirement and won't ruin the bearings as quickly. However, they still 
require a bicycle, take up a lot of space and cost more. Often the price 
of a conversion kit would pay for a hand mill and then some. 
Hand Mills 
Hand mills are generally much cheaper than electric mills, and some 
can be adapted for bicycles and motors. They are usually slower 

140 
FOOD AND WATER STOCKPILING 
grinding—taking from four to more than twenty minutes for a pound 
of fine flour—and require effort. Most will demand heavy work that will 
be hot, tiring, and really strain the biceps. And don't be fooled by tests 
with soft grains such as buckwheat, millet, or oats—try the harder 
wheat! Some hand mills require re-grinding wheat before it's fine 
enough for flour, and they often wobble on coarse settings, producing 
flour with uneven texture. Check the quality of the flour, the amount 
produced for the effort, and the ease and comfort of the grinding 
operation before deciding. 
Most preparedness dealers sell a selection 
of hand mills, both with stone and metal burrs. 
Lehman's has a hand mill ($159) and a roller 
mill for cereal that has an attachment for flour 
($134 for both). Retsel offers the Little Ark 
($111) and the Uni-Ark ($121). The Corona 
grain mill is $50 from Atlan Formularies. It 
would be good to actually try before you buy to 
see how easy it is to turn and what kind of 
flour it produces. Avoid cheap pot-metal mills 
of any kind. 
Lehman grain mill 
Best of Both Worlds 
So buy an electric mill for normal use and a manual one for when 
the power is out. Or buy a hand mill that just about combines the best 
of both. There are two mills that fit that description: 
The Country Living Grain Mill is made in the USA, costs $366 or so 
(depending on source), is an almond color and 
is available from Walton, Yellowstone Trading 
and Homestead Products among others. 
The Diamant Mill from Denmark is made 
from cast iron (making it very heavy), has a 
green finish and costs $599 from Lehman's. 
Both use iron/steel burrs and will quickly 
mill everything from very fine pastry flour to 
beans, nuts, and cracking grain for cereal and 
even animal feed. Either would be a good 
choice. Both could be converted to motorized 
operation if desired—all you need is a v-belt, 
pulley and motor. 
Ideally, get an electric mill and one of the 
Country Living mill 

FOOD PREPARATION EQUIPMENT AND SUPPLIES 141 
above mills. If you can't afford both, I recommend an electric with a less 
expensive hand mill, or the Country Living or Diamant by itself. 
Bread Mixers 
If you plan on making much bread you'll want a 
good mixer capable of handling dough. Again, you 
may want a manual dough mixer for "no power" 
situations and an electric for the rest. 
There are any number of good mixers on the 
market, but be sure to get one with enough power 
to regularly mix bread. KitchenAid and the heavier 
Sunbeam Mixmasters are adequate with the K-Tec 
Champ ($330), Bosch and the Magic Mill DLX 2000 
Assistent among the best. 
Other Tools 
Magic Mill mixer 
You should consider a good ball-bearing rotary egg beater, a meat 
grinder, a potato masher, and a manual heavy-duty can opener. Have 
a good set of kitchen knives—Forschner, Gerber, Henckel, and 
Wusthof- Trident are all good brands—with a French chefs, slicer, 
paring, boning, and serrated bread knives at a minimum. Fillet and 
chopping knives would also be handy as would 
butchering 
knives—Dexter-Russell are good—and skinning knives. Get a 
butchering set of four, six, eight, and ten-inch drop point blades of high 
carbon steel with the tang and blade forged from a single piece of stock. 
A six-inch full-curved blade makes the best skinner. Kyocera makes 
some very good and sharp knives of ceramic zirconia you might 
consider, also. Expensive but nice and sharp. 
Whatever knives you have, it is important for safe and easy use to 
keep them sharp. That means a sharpening steel or ceramic rod to 
straighten the blade edges each time used and a whetstone, 
diamond-impregnated rod, or other abrasive for occasional sharpening. 
A blender would be good for mixing powdered milk, but wire whisks 
can be use. Also you may want to have: 
• food and meat 
slicer 
• hand ice cream 
freezer 
• kitchen shears 
• manual pasta 
maker 
• food grater 
• poultry shears 
• flour sifter 
• juicers 
• wire whisks 

142 
FOOD AND WATER STOCKPILING 
• potato peeler 
• chopping block 
• bread board 
• bottle opener 
Cooking Equipment 
If you plan on cooking on wood stoves, in fireplaces or over camp-
fires, you'd better have a set of pots and pans equal to the task. The 
light-weight, sophisticated steel or aluminum ones with the non-stick 
coatings will develop hot spots and quickly burn through if used directly 
on or over a fire. You'd be wise to get a good set of heavy cast iron pots, 
kettles, skillets, griddles and dutch ovens. Cast iron works best for long, 
slow cooking over all heats, is easy to clean and lasts forever if properly 
seasoned. It also can be buried under coals and conserves heat. 
Fireplaces must also have an iron rod or swinging arm crane if you 
expect to suspend kettles in them. 
A pressure cooker will cut the cooking time for beans and 
dehydrated foods. Whatever you cook in, never cook in galvanized items 
because they can give you zinc poisoning. And remember that many 
kitchen wares are glass or otherwise breakable, and you should have 
some more durable alternatives. 
Also: 
• fireplace corn 
popper 
• measuring cups 
• candy 
• reflector oven 
• wooden utensils 
• meat 
thermometer 
thermometer 
• cookie sheets 
• hand toaster 
• roasting pans 
• spatulas 
• dipper 
• meat mallets 
• timer 
• muffin tins 
• colander 
• rolling pin 
• scales 
• baker's scraper 
• ice crusher 
• cake/pie pans 
• bread pans 
• shredders 
• strainers 
• waffle iron 
• grills 
• spoons 
• ladles 
• hot pads 
• measuring spoons 
Cookbooks 
Although you may need to make some substitutions, many of your 
regular recipes will be usable. However, you may want some specialized 
cookbooks for recipes covering particular foods you plan on storing such 
as whole grains, legumes, powdered milk and dehydrated foods. Also, 
because they are so different from what most people are used to, a book 

FOOD PREPARATION EQUIPMENT AND SUPPLIES 
143 
or two on wood stove and fireplace cooking may be real helps if you plan 
on using either as an alternative cooking method. Some books are listed 
in Chapter 31. 
Eating, Cleaning and Kitchen Supplies 
Stainless steel utensils and dishes could solve the breakage problem. 
Also consider disposable utensils and paper napkins, plates, and cups 
for use when water is in low supply. Store all paper products in a dry 
and somewhat cool area and protect from rodents. 
Also: 
• dish drain & 
rack 
• dish detergent 
• wax paper 
• garbage bags 
• plastic wrap 
Ddish pan 
• scouring pads 
• plastic bags 
• grocery bags 
• mouse traps 
• steel wool 
• cheesecloth 
• aluminum foil 
• paper towels 
• rat poison 
• extra lids to re-close dehydrated food cans (both #2Vè and #10) 
Special Needs 
Butter-making. A hand or electric butter churn. A plain glass jar can 
do the same thing, but it's slower. Butter molds would be nice. 
Cheese-making. Instructions, cheesecloth, dairy thermometer and 
a large enamel or stainless steel double boiler. A cheese press would be 
good, but you can make your own from various materials. 
Yogurt-making. A yogurt maker—or make your own, again. 


11 
EMERGENCY WATER SUPPLY 
Without water a person will soon suffer exhaustion, dehydration, 
cramps, heat stroke and illness. Death will occur within four to ten 
days. Water is also necessary for food preparation and minimal 
sanitation needs. And you never know when your normal sources of 
supply might become polluted with disease, contaminated with 
chemicals, or poisoned by terrorists. Further, your supply may be shut 
off completely due to drought, power outages, labor disputes, floods, 
landslides, earthquakes or nuclear war. The only viable solution is to 
have your own water reserves and be able to purify additional water if 
required. 
Water Storage 
The average person in the United States uses about 6,500 gallons of 
water a year. Obviously much less would be needed under crisis 
conditions. But, because it is bulky, heavy and hard to contain, it is 
impractical for most people to store even an emergency supply for an 
entire year. However, assuming only temporary disruptions of an 
ongoing source of supply, you should store at least a two or three week 
supply (the latter allows a week to repair waterlines, etc. after a 
two-week disruption). The amount needed for that period will vary 
depending on a person's age, physical condition and activity level, the 
type of food consumed, the environment, the climate and the season. 
Minimum needs, for drinking and cooking only, are a half gallon 
(two liters) per person per day. Hot environments—weather, climates, 
or hot and humid fallout shelters—can double that amount. Infants, 
children, nursing mothers, the ill (particularly those with diarrhea) and 
those doing heavy physical labor may require more. I recommend 
storing twenty to thirty gallons per person for the two to three-week 
period. That amount allows a half gallon per day for drinking, a half 
gallon per day for hygiene (brushing teeth, bathing, cleaning dishes and 
clothing), two gallons per week for cooking and a gallon per week 
reserve. If you store much dehydrated food, store an additional two to 
five gallons per person. 

146 
FOOD AND WATER STOCKPILING 
How to store 
Water can be stored in both portable and permanent containers 
made from plastic, glass, fiberglass, or enamel-lined metal. Never use 
any container that has previously contained fuel, poisons, or other toxic 
chemicals or materials because minute amounts may remain in the 
pores of the container material. All containers of water should be 
clearly labeled and dated. 
Used milk cartons, bleach jugs and empty canning jars can be used. 
Be sure to wash them thoroughly prior to use. Or you can purchase 
food-grade plastic buckets, drums, or barrels up to 55-gallon size. Some 
of the best storage containers are the heavy-duty five-gallon polypropy-
lene buckets with very tight-fitting gasketed lids, handles and pop-up 
pouring spouts. They are also stackable. Water beds shouldn't be used 
because their materials contain pesticidal chemicals, and they also 
often use inorganic chemical compounds as conditioners that leave 
unsafe residues in the water that can't be entirely removed by many 
purifiers. 
Larger amounts of water can be stored in swimming pools, large 
underground tanks, cistern/reservoirs, or by connecting a tank directly 
into the main water main to ensure always-fresh water. The tank 
should have a secondary outlet with a hand pump and anti-syphon 
valves on its main outlet and inlet. 
Large containers are more usable with a hand pump; a larger rotary 
pump would be better for larger tanks, fire fighting, etc. and a high 
volume high pressure pump might also be considered. Store spare 
parts, particularly pump cylinder leathers and rope gaskets. 
Water stored in containers for any appreciable length of time should 
be "conditioned", using either of the following methods, to prevent the 
growth of organisms in it: 
Bleach: use eight drops per gallon of clear water or half teaspoon 
per five gallon container and let stand about twenty minutes. Then if 
you can still smell chlorine it can be stored; if not, retreat. Bleach loses 
potency with age and should be rotated yearly and kept tightly-capped 
in a cool location. 
Heat: can the water by filling clean jars or cans to within a half to 
one inch of the top and then placing them in a pressure cooker for five 
minutes at ten psi or boiling in a water bath (twenty minutes for quart, 
twenty-five minutes for a half gallon). The water will keep for years. 

EMERGENCY WATER SUPPLY 
147 
Water must be stored where it will not freeze and break the 
container nor be accidentally contaminated. It should be sampled on a 
regular basis, perhaps every three to six months. If the water smells or 
looks dark, cloudy, or tastes bad, it should be changed. Water that has 
lost the air normally trapped in it tastes flat, but that can be reversed 
by shaking the container vigorously or by pouring the water back and 
forth between containers. A kitchen blender will also work. 
Purification 
Contaminated water can carry bacteria, viruses and amoebae 
causing diseases such as dysentery, cholera, typhoid and infectious 
hepatitis. It can also contain harmful parasites, chemicals, pesticides, 
heavy metals and radioactivity as well as be filled with algae, sediment 
and silt particles, and have a bad odor and taste. Since many of these 
pollutants can't be readily detected, all water from unknown sources or 
of uncertain purity should be purified prior to using for drinking, 
cooking, preparing food and drinks, or brushing teeth. 
Although there are many methods of "purifying" water, they work 
with varying degrees of effectiveness on possible pollutants and none 
is absolutely perfect. Examine the methods carefully and choose those 
that will best fit the expected problems. Perhaps some combination of 
methods would be best. My recommendation would be to store iodine 
crystals or tablets along with one of the better filters. 
Prior to purifying any water containing suspended particles it is 
always best to remove the particles by allowing them to settle to the 
bottom or by straining through several layers of a paper towel or clean 
cloth. Use ground water if at all possible but if you are forced to use 
surface water avoid sources containing floating material or with a dark 
color or odor. 
The methods of purifying water are: 
Boiling 
Vigorously boiling water for one full minute will kill all bacteria, but 
other harmful microorganisms may require up to three minutes. The 
time should be doubled for each 5,000 feet of altitude and if the water 
is dirty. Complete sterility may take boiling up to twenty minutes at 
fifteen pounds in a pressure cooker. Boiling also removes some volatile 
chemicals but doesn't get rid of other chemicals or particulate contami-
nants. The flat taste of boiled water can be improved with the same 
methods used for stored water. 

148 
FOOD AND WATER STOCKPILING 
Chemical Disinfection 
Iodine and chlorine are the principle chemicals used for disinfection 
of water. Either, with care, will make water safe from most harmful 
bacteria and other organisms, but neither kills sheep liver flukes nor 
removes 
sediment, 
radioactivity, 
or 
any possible chemical 
contaminants. They give the water a chemical odor and taste which can 
be concealed by punch powder or removed with a carbon filter. 
The exact amount of either required for complete disinfection 
depends on the temperature of the water, its alkalinity, amount of 
suspended solids, and the quantity and type of dissolved organic com-
pounds. This "guessing game" can largely be solved by adding obviously 
excessive amounts, necessary only with highly polluted water, which 
are then removed with an activated carbon filter. A chlorine comparator 
test kit can be purchased from a swimming pool supply or discount 
store to test for chlorine residual. If water contains too much chlorine 
to taste good, it can be made more palatable by letting it stand exposed 
to the air for a few hours or by aerating several times. 
Iodine is the most dependable of the two because it is less affected 
by heavy organic pollution and alkalinity and is effective over a wider 
temperature range. However, a few people are sensitive to it, 
particularly those being treated for hyperthyroidism. It is also not 
recommended for pregnant women, and may lead to goiter problems in 
some if used for long periods of time. 
Chlorine, on the other hand, is not very effective in cold, alkaline 
water and may be useless against bacteria in water with high organic 
pollution. It also combines with the organic matter to form THMs 
(trihalomethanes), suspected of causing cancer. 
The following suggested doses should be doubled if the water is cold 
(below 47° F or 8° C) or cloudy, colored or muddy. 
Iodine 
1. Iodine Crystals: USP grade resublimed iodine. It kills the 
hardiest organisms including algae, bacteria and their spores, 
viruses, amoebae and their infective cysts. The crystals have an 
unlimited shelf life and are not affected by temperature; they 
must however be kept tightly sealed to prevent vaporization. 
They are available from chemical supply stores and some 
pharmacies. 
For treating small quantities of water, place four to eight grams 
in a one-ounce wide-mouth clear glass bottle with a leak-proof 
hard plastic bakélite cap. The bottle can be pre-marked in ten 

EMERGENCY WATER SUPPLY 
149 
milliliter segments for easier measuring; the cap holds about 2V& 
ml. This bottle can be repeatedly used by filling it with water, 
shaking vigorously for thirty to sixty seconds, letting the crystals 
settle out and then pouring the saturated solution into the water 
to be treated. Use 12V6 ml per quart (liter) at 77° F (25° C) for 
fifteen minutes. At 40° F (4° C) use twenty ml. Use half the dose 
for twice the time for a milder taste. 
POLAR PURE is a brand name of iodine crystals in a bottle 
with a built-in thermometer; you simply fill the bottle with water, 
wait the prescribed time (colder water takes longer) and then use 
the solution to disinfect the water. One bottle will treat up to 
2,000 quarts of water. 
Don't swallow any crystals because they are poisonous and can 
make you severally ill. They can also create toxic fumes if 
exposed to the air in a small enclosed space. 
2. Iodine Tablets : tetraglycine hydroperiodide, sold under the brand 
names Potable Aqua, Globaline and Coghlan's. Some contain a 
buffer to increase effectiveness in alkaline water. Shelf life may 
be up to four years in an amber wax-sealed bottle at room 
temperatures. A temperature of 120° F (49° C) reduces shelf life 
to only six months, and exposure to air for four days reduces 
effectiveness by one third. Tablets change from gray to yellow as 
they lose potency. Use one tablet per quart for thirty minutes. 
3. 2% Tincture of Iodine: household iodine commonly found in 
medicine cabinets and first aid kits. Has a short shelf life and 
should be stored in dark glass bottles. Palatability is not the best. 
Use five drops per quart for thirty minutes. 
Chlorine 
1. Bleach: ordinary household bleach, liquid or powder, containing 
sodium hypochlorite (be sure it's the only active ingredient). 
Some have blueing chemical added that may give a bad taste. 
Chlorine evaporates from open bottles and even into the air space 
within bottles as the liquid level drops. Expect a two-year shelf 
life at best and double the dose if over a year old. Use eight drops 
per gallon (one scant teaspoon per ten gallons), stir or agitate and 
then wait thirty minutes. If there isn't a slight chlorine odor, 
repeat and wait an additional fifteen minutes. 
2. High-test granular calcium hypochlorite: roughly 70% available 
chlorine. Dissolve heaping teaspoon (about one-quarter ounce) 
per two gallons water to make a stock solution. One pint of this 

150 
FOOD AND WATER STOCKPILING 
stock solution will treat 12V2 gallons of water. 
3. Halazone Tablets. May be useless in water containing heavy 
organic pollution and against resistant forms of viruses and 
amoebic cysts. Shelf life is two years at room temperatures if 
sealed. Exposure to air for forty-eight hours decreases potency 
75% and shelf life is only five months at 89° F (32° C). One tablet 
per quart for thirty minutes. 
Mechanical Filtering 
Columns of sand, clay, or other porous material can physically strain 
some impurities from water. Commercial filters, available in sizes from 
small portable units to large central systems, generally use two 
methods, sometimes combined: activated carbon and microfiltration. 
Both types remove most suspended particles and, therefore, clog easily 
in water containing lots of sediment or algae. Although slow, 
pre-filtering the water through a basket-type paper coffee filter will 
greatly reduce this problem. 
Activated carbon has a honey-combed internal structure that is 
highly adsorptive. It improves the taste and odor of water and removes 
any chlorine, chloroform, hydrogen sulfide, THMs and other 
hydrocarbons. It also removes or reduces the concentration of many 
organic chemicals, including pesticides and herbicides, industrial 
chemicals and compounds like PCB, PBB and TCE, dissolved organics, 
heavy metals and some trace minerals. Bacteria and viruses are only 
partially removed and fluoride, nitrates, salts and asbestos fibers are 
unaffected. Minute pieces of carbon sometimes break off into the water. 
Carbon filters are more effective the fresher they are and the more 
carbon they contain. 
Microfilters are basically of two types: ceramic and fiber. Ceramic 
filters with a 250-350 micron pore size are used as permanent in-line 
sediment filters cleaned periodically by backflushing. Other ceramic 
filters, often with submicron pore size, are used to filter out cysts, 
bacteria and even viruses. Recommended effective pore sizes are two 
microns or less for amoebic cysts, .2 micron for bacteria and .01 micron 
for viruses. They remove parasites, fungi, radioactive solids, asbestos 
and fiberglass fibers. Dissolved minerals, many toxic chemicals and 
salts are not affected nor will the filters purify brackish or salt water. 
Fiber filters have five to sixty micron pore sizes and are not as 
effective as ceramic. They are used mainly for removing sediment and, 
depending on the water quality, may require frequent replacement. 

EMERGENCY WATER SUPPLY 
151 
Silver in trace amounts is often infused in the filter material. This 
supposedly inhibits bacteria trapped by the filter from multiplying on 
its surface, resulting in a "bacteriostatic" filter. Its effectiveness is 
debatable and its use allows minute amounts of silver to enter the 
filtered water. 
An ion-exchange resin bed is sometimes used in combination with 
a filter. Because most bacterial and collodial contaminants are charged, 
the oppositely-charged resin materials help remove them. The resins 
also remove fluoride, calcium, magnesium, soluble iron, nitrates, silica 
and silicates, sodium, sulfate, dissolved solids, copper, arsenic, heavy 
metals and selenium. They do not remove organic chemicals nor all 
microorganisms. 
NOTE ON EPA REGISTRATION: Many filters are sold under the 
mistaken notion that an EPA registration number proves their 
effectiveness as a water purifier. Not so. The EPA classifies water 
treatment units into one of three categories: 
1. Units that simply filter with no other claims need not be registered 
with the EPA. 
2. Filters that use silver, because it is considered a pesticide, must be 
registered with the EPA. A registration number is given if it is 
proven indeed bacteriostatic, if it does not allow more than fifty ppb 
(parts per billion) of silver into the water and if all other claims are 
proved. 
3. A unit is considered a purification device and receives an establish-
ment number if it removes a specified minimum of the cysts, 
bacteria and viruses from reasonable clear, microbiologically suspect 
water. 
With that understanding, there are a number of filters and purifiers 
that will meet your needs. The following filters and purifiers are 
available at most sporting goods stores and major preparedness dealers 
are currently recommended (and where not generally available an 
address is given in Chapter 32): 
Katadyn Pocket Filter ($200, replacement 
filter $165): Small portable twenty ounce unit 
with a .2 micron clay candle that can be 
cleaned periodically with a nylon brush 
supplied. A built-in hydraulic pump produces 
the necessary fifty psi pressure and delivers a K a t a ^ n water filters 

152 
FOOD AND WATER STOCKPILING 
r\ 
M-
Katadyn Pocket 
quart 
(liter) 
per Katadyn Siphon filter 
minute. Infinite shelf 
Katadyn Expedition 
life. Also available are the Mini ($90), the 
Combi, the TRK Drip, a much slower (quart per hour) Siphon Filter and 
the large Expedition that delivers one gallon (four liters) per minute. 
First-Need (General Ecology) Deluxe ($86, $39 replacement 
canister), Trav-L-Pure ($144) and Base Camp ($507) chemical-free 
purifiers. They also have the Microlite water 
X 
filter 
($35). General Ecology makes the First-
Need and Seagull purifiers using the same 
I 
basic filter technology. 
Seagull (General Ecology) IV X-1P ($465, 
$68 replacement cartridge) "structured matrix" 
chemical-free purifier with a manual pump. 
One of the best, filters to . 1 micron nominal 
Seagull IV X-IP LTF 
a nd -4 micron absolute. Removes pesticides, 
herbicides and some chemicals. 
PUR Voyageur ($75, $40 .3 micron replacement cartridge, up to 100 
gallons per cartridge, quart per minute, 11 ounces), Scout ($90, 14 
ounces) and Explorer ($130, 1.5 quarts per minute) purifiers, and the 
Guide ($80) and Hiker ($60, quart per minute) microfilters. 
MSR Miniworks filter ($70, .6 quart minute, 14 ounces). 
Other Methods 
Reverse osmosis filters are actually mechanical filters using a 
porous membrane. They require relatively high water pressure (fifty 
pounds) to force the water through the membrane and most use 
electricity. These filters remove most possible contaminants from water 
but leave mercury, chlorine and simple compounds like chloroform and 
phenol. They have a membrane life of one to four years and are slow. 

EMERGENCY WATER SUPPLY 
153 
Because they remove salts they can be used to purify brackish or sea 
water. 
Distillers also remove most contaminants but, because chemicals 
like chlorinated hydrocarbons and other organic chemicals have a 
boiling point lower than water, a fractional type is needed. They are 
very slow (quart per hour is typical) and most use electricity to heat the 
water. Some clog quickly in hard water and require frequent cleaning 
that is difficult to do and that uses a strong acid. 
Ultraviolet light units sterilize the water quickly and cheaply but 
require electricity. Certain spores and viruses are also fairly resistant 
to UV, and it is not fully effective in water containing large amounts of 
suspended particles, dissolved iron, or certain organic pollutants. Other 
pollutants aren't removed at all. Most units also need frequent 
maintenance. 
Ozone is used throughout Europe and Canada to sterilize water 
rather than the chlorine used in the U.S.A. As effective as it is, 
however, it does not remove any particulate material nor chemicals and 
needs electricity to operate. 
Backup Sources 
In addition to storing water and being capable of purifying it, you 
should also consider the possibility of having backup sources. This is 
especially vital if you intend to keep livestock. These sources could 
include springs, streams, lakes, ponds and wells. Wells should be 
equipped with manual pumps and artesian wells should be capped and 
controlled. Be advised, too, that shallow wells are dependent on nearby 
surface water. 
Emergency Reserves 
Prior to deciding how to store all that water, it's nice to know that 
you probably already have some stored right in your house in the hot 
water heater, toilet tanks (not bowls, that's contaminated) and water 
pipes. The total amount depends on the size of the water heater, the 
type and number of toilet tanks, and the volume of the pipes. 
There are some things you should know and do to make this water 
available when needed. 
First, install an anti-siphon valve on the water inlet to keep the 
water from flowing back out of your house if the water pressure drops 
substantially. Also, have a wrench or valve shut-off tool in a handy 
location to use to close the main valve whenever you have any warning 

154 
FOOD AND WATER STOCKPILING 
or notice a large drop in water pressure. This will prevent contamina-
tion of the water contained in your water system. 
The water in the pipes can be drained by opening the highest faucet 
to vent the system and then draining the water from the lowest faucet. 
The water in the toilet tanks should be kept free of scale, rust and 
organic growth by occasionally cleaning with bleach. The water in the 
hot water heater can be used if its inlet valve is closed before any 
contamination enters and if the water is regularly drained to prevent 
an accumulation of rust and sediment in the tank bottom. When the 
water pressure drops drastically, the inlet valve should be closed and 
the gas and electricity turned off. The tank water can be drained from 
a self- vented tank by simply opening the bottom valve. If the tank is 
not self vented, then air must be let into the system from the top valve 
as with the pipe system. 
Some believe they can use the liquids contained in canned fruits, 
vegetables and their juices. To some extent this is true, but the less 
water you have the less you should eat because eating food increases 
the need for water. You can melt ice cubes for water. Solar stills can 
also be used to obtain water from ground moisture and edible plant 
matter. Rain can be captured in barrels. 
Conservation 
Realizing just how valuable pure water is, you don't want to waste 
it. Now is the time to practice conserving it by cutting down your use of 
it, replacing shower heads with the low-flow type and learning how to 
recycle gray water. 

12 
SPROUTING 
Fresh vegetables can be hard to come by during a prolonged crisis, 
particularly if it's not harvest time. Storing a supply of seeds to sprout 
can help fill that void. Sprouting is easy, can be done year round and 
provides tasty sprouts in a few days even in complete darkness. It can 
add needed vitamins and some variety to a sparse survival diet. 
Sprouts are the germinated seeds of vegetables, grains, legumes and 
nuts. Almost any whole seed can be used with the notable exceptions of 
tomato and potato, which are poisonous. Many can be sprouted in 
combinations. Grasses can also be grown by sprouting wheat, rye, or 
triticale in one inch of soil and then cutting it when it grows to seven or 
eight inches. 
Food Value of Sprouts 
Sprouts are fairly nutritious, although they do not live up to the 
exaggerated claims often made for them. Generally, sprouts can be a 
reliable source of vitamin C and the B vitamins, particularly riboflavin 
and niacin. Wheat and alfalfa are very marginal sources of vitamin A, 
but even then only if they are exposed to light for at least a few hours 
prior to harvesting. 
Claims made that sprouts have increased protein and minerals are 
simply untrue. The ratio of proteins and minerals may well have 
increased, but the total amount remaining is always less than in the 
original seed. Increased amounts would require a source for the 
minerals and nitrogen for the protein and, even then, the sprouts don't 
yet have the root hairs needed to absorb them. Research by major 
universities and the United Nations also shows the quality of the 
protein is generally decreased during sprouting. 
Bean sprouts also still contain the protein-binding substances 
common to all legumes. Cooking the sprouts for at least two minutes 
will inactivate these substances and make the protein available. This 
can be by blanching in boiling water or by stir-frying. Sprouts do 
produce less intestinal gas because the soaking and rinsing leach out 
the complex sugars (trisaccharides) that produce gas. 

156 
FOOD PRODUCTION 
Sprouting Procedure 
All kinds of equipment and gadgets are sold for sprouting, some 
convenient, but none necessary. Seeds need moisture, warmth and 
ventilation to sprout, and there are lots of ways to do it. The most 
common, and often easiest, method follows: 
1. Place a small amount of whole seeds into a wide-mouth jar (see 
Table 12-1 for recommended amounts or use one to two table-
spoons per quart the first time). Add about two to four times that 
amount of lukewarm water and soak overnight or for the 
specified time. 
2. Cover the jar with any material having small enough holes the 
seeds can't go through. This could be nylon mesh, net or stocking, 
gauze, cheesecloth or, more permanently, plastic or stainless steel 
screens. Even canning lids with small holes punched in them will 
work. Secure the covering with a canning ring, strong rubber 
band, or string. 
3. Pour off the water, rinse thoroughly and then drain completely. 
Shake the jar to evenly distribute the seeds, and lay it on its side 
in a location out of direct sunlight. A 65-80° F (18-27° C) tempera-
ture is best, except seeds like cress, pea and rye like it cooler. 
Keeping the jar in the dark will increase the vitamin B and make 
white sprouts, while light will increase the vitamin C and make 
the sprouts greener. 
4. Rinse and drain thoroughly with lukewarm water two to six 
times each day to keep the seeds moist and prevent mold. 
Soybeans need lots of rinsing, and all seeds need more rinsing 
when the environment is hot and dry. Too much chlorine in the 
water may harm the seeds, but letting the water sit for a day or 
two will allow most of the chlorine to evaporate. Most prefer to 
rinse away the hulls on seeds which have them. Lay the jar on its 
side between rinsings. The last rinse can be with cold water to 
crisp the sprouts. 
5. Harvest by sprout length. Although Table 12-1 suggests some 
sizes, don't be afraid to experiment and find out what sizes your 
family prefers of each variety. Wheat and alfalfa generally have 
their highest vitamin A content after three days in the dark, but 
with the last few hours spent in light. 
Use sprouts within a few days. Raw or cooked, they add crispness to 
salads, soups, sandwiches and vegetables or can be eaten by them-

SPROUTING 157 
selves. They also can be added to scrambled eggs and omelets, stews, 
breads, casseroles and meat dishes and liquified by blending for use in 
beverages, sauces and spreads. 
Other sprouting methods use pans, trays, bowls, strainers, colan-
ders, racks, screen frames, and damp towels. Some seeds, like chia, 
cress and buckwheat, turn into a jelly-like mass with too much water 
and do better placed on a flat surface, kept moist by sprinkling. 
Amount to Store 
The recommended amount to add variety to the diet is ten pounds 
per person, providing about an half cup serving per day. You could store 
anywhere from five to forty pounds; twenty-five pounds would provide 
sufficient vitamin C if no other source were available to prevent scurvy. 
Ignore their calorie contribution to your storage plan because they are 
very low in calories. 
Seeds can be bought from local health food stores, mail order, or 
other sources (see listing in Chapter 32). They should be raw, clean of 
foreign matter and sorted to insure few broken ones. Be sure not to buy 
seeds that have been treated for planting with fungicides or pesticides, 
but only those that are certified edible. Treated seeds are required to be 
so labeled by law and are usually dyed to contrast with their normal 
color to identify them. 
Store them where its dry, cool and dark. The older they are, the 
fewer will sprout, but most still have shelf lives of three-plus years. 
More than half of some twenty year old wheat sprouted. 
By following these simple directions you'll probably do all right 
without any special books on sprouting. There are a number available, 
though, if you want more complete directions or desire some special 
recipes that use sprouts. 

TABLE 13-1. SPROUTING GUIDE 
Seed 
Alfalfa and 
Clover 
Barley and 
Millet 
Buckwheat 
Cabbage and 
Fenugreek 
Chia 
Corn 
Cress 
Quart Jar 
Time 
2T 
VA cups 
Beans not listed 
VA cup 
elsewhere 
NA 
Va cup 
NA 
VA cups 
NA 
Garbanzo beans 
1 cup 
Lentil 
% cup 
Soaking 
Time 
2-6 hrs 
10-14 hrs 
12-16 hrs 
NA 
8-12 hrs 
NA 
12-20 hrs 
NA 
12-16 hrs 
8-12 hrs 
Harvest 
Length 
1-2" 
length of 
seed 
1-VA" 
5-7" 
%-VA" 
1-2" 
V6-1" 
%-VA" 
lA-l" 
VA-1A" 
Growing 
Time 
3-6 days 
3-5 days 
3-4 days 
8-12 days 
3-6 days 
3-6 days 
3-8 days 
3-5 days 
3-5 days 
2-4 days 
Sprouting Tips 
Place in light before 
harvest to green 
Best when less than VA" 
Don't over-sprout 
Simple to sprout. Use 
raw, un-hulled groats 
Place in light to develop 
chlorophyll 
Becomes gelatiny mass 
when wet 
Try different varieties 
Becomes gelatiny mass 
when wet 
Combine with wheat for 
nutritious mix 
Very easy to sprout 
Comments 
Eat raw in salads or sandwiches, cooked 
in baked goods, soups 
Toasting enhances flavor. Use in salads, 
breads and casseroles. 
Casseroles, soups, steamed, base for dips. 
Best cooked first. 
Good as lettuce substitute in salads 
Use alone or with alfalfa in salads, steamed, 
stir-fried 
Salads, garnish, in baked goods 
Sweet and chewy. Hard to find untreated 
Strong, hot peppery taste. Use as spice. 
Nutty flavor good in salads, steamed, base 
for dip. Cook first. 
Delicious in soups, steamed, in sauces 
and dips 

TABLE 13-1. SPROUTING GUIDE (Continued) 
Seed 
Mung beans 
Oat 
Pea 
Peanut 
Pumpkin and 
Sunflower seeds 
Radish 
Rye 
Soybean 
Wheat and 
Triticale 
Amount for 
Quart Jar 
V3-V2 cup 
IV2 cups 
IV2 cups 
IV2 cups 
IV2 cups 
Vi cup 
lcup 
1 cup 
% cup 
Soaking 
Time 
10-14 hrs 
1-2 hrs 
8-12 hrs 
12-16 hrs 
8-12 hrs 
8-12 hrs 
10-14 hrs 
12-16 hrs 
8-12 hrs 
Harvest 
Length 
1-3" 
length of 
seed 
V4-W 
VA-1" 
VA" 
V&-1V4" 
length of 
seed 
V2-I" 
length of 
seed 
V2-I" 
Growing 
Time 
3-5 days 
3 days 
3-4 days 
3-4 days 
2-3 days 
3-5 days 
2-3 days 
3-5 days 
2-3 days 
4-7 days 
Sprouting Tips 
Use hot water for first 
rinse, grow in dark 
Only un-hulled will 
sprout, water sparingly 
Become tough if sprout 
too long 
Use raw, unshelled nuts 
Sprout becomes bitter if 
develops leaves 
Place in light to develop 
chlorophyll 
Sprouts easily 
Grow alone. Don't use 
soak or rinse water 
Simple to sprout 
Comments 
Oriental dishes, stir-fried, omelets, salads 
soups, sandwiches 
Salads, cereals, baked goods 
Soups, salads, casseroles. Like fresh peas 
As snack, in desserts, salads, casseroles, 
stir-fried, steamed 
Delicious as is, in salads, sauces, dips, 
baked goods 
Salads, sandwiches, dips. Nippy flavor. 
Milder than wheat for salads, cereals, bread 
Cook before eating, use in salads, 
casseroles, base for cheese 
Short: salad, soups, baked goods 
Long: desserts, juices 


13 
GROWING YOUR OWN 
No matter how much food you store, it would eventually run out if 
the crisis lasted long enough. Being able to grow your own will allow 
you to not only replace the storage food, but to supplement it and make 
it last longer. However, as important as growing your own is, it in no 
way takes the place of your food storage. Like all living sources it is too 
vulnerable to be your only food source. It requires a lengthy period of 
suitable weather before producing, and it is quite vulnerable to drought, 
diseases, pests, and vandals. 
Growing fruits and vegetables is an involved process, covering many 
subjects, and the details will not be covered here. What will be 
presented are the vital items you should stockpile now, suggested 
resources for further guidance, and general considerations. Many fine 
books are available on the details, but you can also get some of the best 
information for your particular area free or at low cost from your local 
county extension agent or university. 
Gardening 
Successful gardening comes from learning skills and gaining exper-
ience with your unique combination of climate, seasons, soil, water, 
insects, disease conditions and preferences. It can't all be learned 
overnight, nor can some of the techniques be done quickly. So no matter 
what your circumstances, it is best if you begin now to acquire the 
necessary knowledge, even if that means just reading about it and 
planting some vegetables in a window box or pots. You should also 
stockpile the few necessities mentioned. 
Seeds 
Priority I. No one can grow a garden without seeds and, during a 
prolonged food shortage, they would be worth their weight in gold. A 
small amount of them represent a large amount of potential food. 
Get the best seed you can for the best results. If you expect to save 
any seed for the next year's crops, they should be of the standard 
variety (non-hybrid). Hybrids produce seed that is unreliable and often 

162 FOOD PRODUCTION 
TABLE 13-1. 
SEEDS NEEDED FOR ONE YEAR BY FAMILY OF FOUR 
Bush beans- 8 oz 
Cucumber- 1 oz 
Radish- V% oz 
Beets- Vi oz 
Lettuce- VA OZ 
Spinach- 1 oz 
Cabbage- VA OZ 
Onion- VA OZ 
Squash- VA OZ 
Carrots- Vi oz 
Peas- 12 oz 
Tomato- VA OZ 
Corn, sweet- 8 oz 
Pepper- VA OZ 
Turnips- Va oz 
produces plants greatly inferior to the parent. Also, some plants, hybrid 
or not, cross-breed and may not produce seed suitable for saving. Store 
at least a year's supply, more would be better, and perhaps some for 
barter. The amount a particular family needs for one year can vary 
widely, but Table 13-1 lists the amounts of fifteen different vegetables 
needed by the average family of four for a year. 
Which varieties? Get a good selection of those that grow well in your 
soil and climate. Choose those that your family likes and that will 
provide balanced nutrition particularly vitamins A and C. Also take 
into account how quickly they grow, how much they yield for the space, 
how well they can be stored or canned, and how resistant they are to 
temperature, drought and disease. I'd certainly consider the following: 
tomatoes, cabbage, carrots, squash, onions, spinach, peas, green beans, 
corn and peppers. It won't hurt to add radishes, cucumbers and some 
melons. Nutritious but less common varieties are kale, collards, chard, 
broccoli, sweet potatoes and parsnips. Seeds for an herb garden would 
be a nice addition, too. 
Store the seeds where it's dry and cool, the nearer freezing the 
better. Shelf life varies with the type of seed and the exact conditions. 
Table 13-2 gives a general idea of the shelf life of various seeds. 
Seeds remaining in the small packets can 
be saved by placing them in an airtight jar. 
Although limited in choices and amounts, the 
best way to store your long-term seeds is by 
getting the selections specially prepared and 
sealed in cans. The above shelf lives will be 
increased substantially. Even with the cans 
you should rotate the seeds regularly, using 
them for planting, to keep as fresh as possible. 
Canned seeds are available from some of the 
sources listed in Chapter 32. 
Canned seeds 

GROWING YOUR OWN 163 
TABLE 13-2. 
PROXIMATE STORAGE LIFE FOR VARIOUS SEEDS 
2 Years: field corn, onions, parsnips, soybeans 
3 Years: asparagus, green beans, carrots, sweet corn, kale, leeks, lettuce, 
parsley, peas, peppers, hybrid tomatoes 
4 Years: beets, cabbage, cauliflower, chard, okra, pumpkin, radish, spinach, 
squash 
5+ Years: broccoli, Brussel sprouts, celery, collard, cress, cucumbers, endive, 
kohlrabi, melons, non-hybrid tomatoes, turnips 
Fertilizer 
Plants need food to grow, and the first step is to find out what is 
lacking in the soil. You can buy a soil test kit and do it yourself, or have 
samples tested by the county extension agent, university, or commercial 
testing service. Once you know what and how much is needed, buy and 
store enough fertilizer for a year or more. You can also start a compost 
pile, pit, or barrel to provide organic fertilizer. Animal manure is good 
fertilizer and you can grow "green manure" crops like the legumes, 
ryegrass and buckwheat to increase the nitrogen and organic material 
in your soil. 
Pesticides 
Vegetables destroyed by pests and diseases can be easily replaced 
now, but that may not always be true. A selection of pesticides in your 
storage can help. The EPA-approved list of pesticides is always 
changing (diazinon will be totally banned by the end of 2003) so heck 
with your county agent to see which ones you should store. Be sure to 
store them locked up in a ventilated area away from your house 
because they are poisonous and, if made with petroleum solvent, a fire 
hazard. 
You can also grow your own organic pesticide by storing seeds for 
the chrysanthemum cinerariifolium flower. The dried flower, containing 
the botanical poison phrethrin, is ground up and used as a dust. Sprays 
made from garlic, onions and other pungent plants also work. 
Learn about the beneficial insects and how you can cultivate them. 
Cut down on your garden's need for pesticides by keeping the area 
clean, removing places for pests to breed and live, and by promptly and 
properly disposing of garden refuse. Proper crop rotation will not only 

164 
FOOD PRODUCTION 
TABLE 13-3. BASIC GARDENING TOOLS 
• shovel 
• rake 
• hoe 
• trowel 
• spading fork 
• hand sprayer (2-gal) 
• weeder 
• gloves 
• string or twine 
• hand fork 
• watering can 
• hoses and sprinkler 
• wheelbarrow 
• extra handles 
• wheeled cultivator 
keep down the buildup of damaging insects and diseases but also 
balance the use the different soil nutrients. 
Weeds can be your biggest pest because they crowd out the desired 
plants and steal nutrients. Weed early, while they're small, and keep 
at it. 
Mulching will help keep weeds down, maintain more even soil tempera-
tures, retain moisture and build the soil. 
Also protect your garden with fencing and other precautions. An 
entire year's harvest can easily be destroyed in a few minutes by 
animals or vandals. 
Tools and Supplies 
Acquire the basic gardening tools listed in Table 13-3. Buy good 
quality tools that will last, and maintain them properly so they will. 
Clean them after use, and store where they won't rust or warp. 
Rotary tillers are handy for larger gardens, but they'll only run if 
they have fuel. 
Location 
The garden site must receive at least four to six hours daily of direct 
sunlight. Fruit-bearing vegetables need the most, while leaf vegetables 
can use less. The afternoon sun is better than the morning sun. The soil 
should be well-draining, and the top six to eight inches should have a 
loose, crumbly texture. Poor soil can be gradually improved by adding 
humus, but it can take years. Obviously, you'll need a source of water. 
The amount of space you'll need will depend greatly on the methods 
you use, your skills and your resources in way of climate, soil and seed 
varieties. In general, however, you can provide a year's supply of 
vegetables from a couple of hundred square feet per person with good 
gardening techniques. Some sources offer tables of projected yields but, 
although they can be helpful, they are very approximate and your 
experience will be a much better guide. 

GROWING YOUR OWN 
165 
Planning 
The first step in planning a garden is to plan it on paper. Place taller 
crops on the north side, and have rows running north and south to cut 
down on shading of other plants. Perennials and fall-bearing crops 
should be located in separate plots or on the edges so that they won't be 
disturbed when the rest is turned under. Make the most of your space 
by allowing climbing vegetables like tomatoes and beans to grow 
upward on stakes and trellises. 
Methods have been developed that produce up to five times as much 
while using less water and allowing better weed control. You should be 
aware of and consider them: 
1. Wide row or plot method. Uses three to four foot wide rows or 
plots, either indented or raised with a six inch dike around and 
one to two foot paths between. 
2. Biodynamic/French intensive method. Uses bed well prepared by 
deep double digging. Method is outlined in the book How to Grow 
More Vegetables and Fruits, Nuts, Raising Grains... by John 
Je avons. 
3. Raised bed or grow box method. Outlined in the book More Food 
from Grow-Box Gardens by Jacob R. Mittleider. 
4. Square foot gardening method. Uses small grow boxes divided 
into one-foot squares. Square Foot Gardening and Ca$h from 
Square Foot Gardening by Mel Bartholomew. 
Planting various plants together, called companion planting, can 
increase yields, better utilize nutrients and ease care requirements. 
Certain plants also help others repel insects. 
Watering deeply two to three times per week helps the plants 
develop a healthy root system that makes them more drought resistant. 
Certain varieties are naturally more resistant to drought and, as 
mentioned, mulching also helps. A drip irrigation system can also cut 
down drastically on the amount of water needed. 
Extending the Season 
Your garden can produce more if you use various techniques to 
lengthen the season. Succession planting, where an early-maturing 
crop is replaced with a later one, can double your yield. Growing 
seedlings inside for later transplanting, using hardy varieties and 
warding off frost with hot caps, hot beds and cold frames gives the 
plants more growing time. Tomatoes can be started about two months 

166 
FOOD PRODUCTION 
earlier by placing them inside a Tomato Tepee (much better built than 
a similar Wall O' Water). Row covers can be used to not only extend the 
season by keeping the plants warmer, but they can also keep insects 
and other predators off. Greenhouses allow year-around gardening no 
matter what the weather is outside. 
Hydroponics allows gardening all year in a completely enclosed 
spaces without soil. It does require a suitable light source, though. 
Keep Records 
No matter how or where you garden, you should keep good records. 
Write down how much of what was planted, when planted, how it was 
cared for (weeding, water and fertilizer), insect and disease problems, 
time of harvest and the yield. These records will become a valuable 
planning tool for following years. 
Fruits, Nuts, Berries And Grapes 
Cultivating orchards, vineyards and berries are a long-term invest-
ment well worth considering. 
You should store the necessary fertilizers and pesticides, particu-
larly for fruit trees. You'll want some spray oil, diazinon (or whatever 
replaces it), lindane, malathion and thiodan. Tools to store include 
pruning shears, lopping shears with long handles for trees and a 
pruning saw. 
When choosing nut and fruit trees, consider the different varieties, 
their hardiness and pollination requirements. Dwarf or semi-dwarf 
trees can be a good choice and will often bear fruit in two to three years. 
To get the most from your trees and vines you'll need to learn how to 
prune them properly. Trees are also useful for fuel, windbreaks and 
shade. Books that may be of interest are: 
Backyard Fruits and Berries by Miranda Smith 
The Backyard Berry Book by Gene Logson 
The Farmer's Wife Guide to Fabulous Fruits and Berries by Doyen 
The Backyard Berry Book by Stella Otto 
Planning and Planting Your Dwarf Fruit Trees by L. Southwick 
Pruning Simplified by Lewis Hill 

GROWING YOUR OWN 
167 
TABLE 13-4. NEEDED SEED AND CROP YIELDS 
Pounds seed per acre 
Yield per acre 
Alfalfa 
3-4 tons 
Barley 
100 
40-50 bushels 
Buckwheat 
50 
25-35 bushels 
Field corn 
8 
65-90 bushels 
Grain sorghum 
6 
55-80 bushels 
Oats 
80 
35-50 bushels 
Rye 
85 
25-35 bushels 
Wheat 
90 
15-35 bushels 
Field Crops 
Often overlooked in preparation, you should consider growing your 
own grains and grasses. If you do, you'd better store some scythes to 
harvest them with ( grain cradle is handy for anything over an acre). 
Using Table 13-4 will help determine the area needed for a particular 
yield and how much seed must be stored. \ 
Some corn matures within weeks while fall-planted wheat takes 
almost eight months. Potatoes are a good food crop and yield ten to 
twelve tons per acre. You could consider some unusual varieties like 
amaranth, too. A book that may be of help but currently has limited 
availability is: 
The Scythe Book by David Tresemer 
Remember that you'll have to grow field and forage crops for any 
livestock you plan on raising, too. 


14 
RAISING YOUR OWN 
Raising your own domestic animals is a good way to provide an 
on-going supply of fresh meat, eggs, milk, fertilizer and even leather. 
However, before you start buying a lot of animals, you should be aware 
that it takes a lot of time and effort. Daily attention is usually neces-
sary, often two to three times per day with dairy animals. It requires a 
long-term commitment for success. Animals are also vulnerable to 
disease, starvation and being killed or stolen. I certainly am not trying 
to discourage you from raising animals, but I do think you need to know 
the negative side, too. If you really want to do it, then start with a few 
animals, experiment a bit and work your way up. 
Successful animal husbandry requires a good deal of experience and 
knowledge. You should either learn it first-hand from someone who 
does it or get a number of good books and read about it in depth. This 
chapter will discuss the basic considerations to get you pointed in the 
right direction. 
The best animals for you will depend on your situation. The first 
thing you should consider are the zoning laws. And, no matter what the 
laws, you'll be better off if you don't annoy any neighbors and keep the 
area sanitary so that you won't have any problems with the local 
Department of Health. In a really bad crisis zoning laws won't mean 
much anyway. 
If you're just starting out or have a limited space, you're probably 
better off with smaller animals like rabbits, chickens and perhaps 
goats. They require not only less space, food and care, but they 
generally produce less odor. Most backyards can support some rabbits 
and chickens; in postwar Germany they were even kept by people living 
in large cities. They are relatively easy to care for, require minimal 
protection and can be kept in pens or allowed to run free in fenced 
yards. More space and more commitment will allow you to consider the 
larger animals like sheep, pigs and cows. 
Whatever animals you choose to raise, you'll need to know their food 
requirements and store enough to last you through a crisis. You'll need 
to provide them with adequate shelter and learn how to keep them 
healthy and free from disease. You should also know how to protect 
them from predators and fallout. If you want them to reproduce, you'll 

170 
FOOD PRODUCTION 
need both sexes. Keeping records for each animal will allow you to know 
which are the best so that you can cull out the others. Finally, you'll 
need to know how to slaughter, butcher and carve them for use. 
Equipment 
Each animal requires its own particular tools, equipment and 
supplies that you will need to store. There are other items that will be 
needed for accomplishing certain chores, no matter what the animal. 
Milk animals need milk pails or other containers, pasteurization 
equipment if desired, a cream separator, butter churn and butter 
molds. Meat saws, cleavers, knives and scrapers are used in slaughter-
ing and butchering animals. 
Veterinary Supplies 
Medicines for animals could be impossible to get during a crisis, so 
you should store some now. To find out which might be needed for each 
animal, you'll have to learn about the diseases they are likely to get. If 
you can't find the supplies locally, you can order from the sources listed 
in Chapter 32. Be sure to store the necessary instruments as well as the 
serums, ointments, sprays and antibiotics. Most medicines have an 
expiration date on the bottle. 
Books 
There are a number of books, some covering raising animals in 
general with others for one specific animal. Some you might consider 
are: 
Backyard Livestock by Steven Thomas 
Chickens in Your Backyard by Luttmann and Luttmann 
Try the Rabbit by S.O. Adajre 
The New Goat Handbook by Jaudas and Vriends 
Animal Husbandry by Laura Zigman 
Merck Veterinary Manual by Susan Aiello 
Veterinary Guide for Animal Owners by Spaulding and Clay 
Specific Animals 
Here is a capsule review of the more popular animals so that you can 
make some informed decisions: 

RAISING YOUR OWN 171 
Rabbits 
Comments: Rabbits produce more meat for the amount of feed than any 
other domestic animal. It is a high-protein meat tasting similar to 
chicken. Rabbits can be taken care of in a few minutes a day, are 
relatively odorless if properly cared for and are quiet and unobtru-
sive. They require only a small money investment, take less space 
than chickens, can be kept indoors and are easy to keep in good 
health. 
Production: Ten does and two bucks will provide about one and a half 
to two pounds of meat per day. Their productive life is two to four 
years. They also produce fur and the best natural fertilizer (about 
40% of the total weight of their food). 
Space and shelter requirements: Hutches should have eighteen inches 
headroom and allow eight square feet for each doe with liter. Bucks 
need four to five square feet. They are best made of mesh wire that 
allows droppings to fall through. 
Equipment: Feeders, water bottles, nest boxes. 
Food requirements: Feed should be at least 15-17% protein and can be 
homemade from corn, grain sorghum, hay, oats, soybeans and 
wheat. A dozen rabbits and their young require about three and half 
tons of commercial pellets in a year. They also need a salt lick. 
Varieties: New Zealand White and Califomian for meat and fur; Rex for 
fur. 
Chickens 
Comments: Chickens require a small money investment, and will help 
keep your garden free of bugs. A rooster is noisy but needed to 
reproduce. 
Production: A dozen hens will provide nearly four dozen eggs a week. 
They start laying at four and a half months and their productive life 
is two to three years. Brown eggs are as nutritious and tasty as 
white. They also provide meat, feathers and an excellent fertilizer. 
Space and shelter requirements: A dozen chickens need a fifty square 
foot coop with nesting boxes, feeders and roosts plus a pen at least 
as big. The coop should be water and predator proof and a concrete 
floor is easier to keep clean. The pen should have a five or six foot 
poultry wire fence and be covered to keep out hawks. Chickens need 
fourteen hours of light per day and, in the winter, a lightbulb will 
help and also provide some heat. 
Equipment: Waterers, feeders, incubator, brooder. 

172 
FOOD PRODUCTION 
Food requirements: Feed should be at least 15% protein. A homemade 
mash from grains and soybean meal should contain well-ground 
eggshell or bone meal to provide enough calcium. Milk and scraps of 
fish and meat can also be added. Commercial mash becomes stale 
within a few months. A dozen laying hens would require about 1,200 
pounds of mash a year. Garden greens shouldn't exceed one-third by 
weight of the diet. Strong-flavored food will result in strong-flavored 
eggs. 
Varieties: Rhode Island or New Hampshire Reds and Plymouth Rocks 
for both eggs and meat; White Leghorns are highest egg producers. 
Make sure they have been vaccinated and are free from pullorum 
and typhoid diseases. 
Other Poultry 
Turkeys: Larger than chickens, they are nervous and must be protected 
from their own stupidity. They are also smelly and produce virtually 
worthless manure. You should provide a shelter with five to ten 
square feet per bird that is well-ventilated and shades them from 
the sun. 
Ducks and Geese: both are extremely hardy, will forage for most of the 
food they need, and will provide feathers and down as well as meat 
and even eggs. Geese make excellent watchdogs, will weed for you, 
and are exceptionally healthy and disease resistant. An acre can 
support about twenty birds. Obviously they would like a pond but its 
not absolutely necessary. They should be protected from predators 
and their nests particularly from skunks. Muscovy ducks and 
Emden geese are good for meat while the Khaki Campbell duck is 
a good egg producer. 
Goats 
Comments: Goats are excellent foragers and ideal for a smaller area. 
Their milk is used by more people in the world than cow milk and is 
easily digested. It's simply a matter of getting used to its taste. 
Production: Two nannies will produce from one to two and a half 
gallons of milk per day year around. That means cream, butter and 
cheese. Average productive life is ten to twelve years. Kids can be 
killed when three months old and will provide twenty to twenty-five 
pounds of meat. 
Space and shelter requirements: They require a twenty to twenty-five 
square foot shed with a two to three hundred square foot fenced area 

RAISING YOUR OWN 
173 
per goat. A larger area is needed for grazing. 
Equipment: Milking stand with stanchion. 
Food requirements: Goats need two to four pounds of a high-grain dairy 
ration and five pounds of hay per day. That means two would 
require about one and a half tons of the ration and almost two tons 
of hay in a year. A ration can be homemade from grains and soybean 
meal, and root crops can also be fed. Rock salt is also needed. 
Varieties: Saanen for milk and Nubian for milk and meat. Make sure 
they are free of brucellosis and tuberculosis. 
Sheep 
Comments: Sheep are easy to handle, have gentle dispositions and 
subsist on a wide variety of forage. They need protection from 
predators and sometimes from themselves. 
Production: A hundred pound lamb yields thirty-five pounds of meat 
and a shearling skin. Sheep must be sheared every year and provide 
about eight pounds of wool each time. 
Space and shelter requirements: Only minimal shelter is needed in the 
most extreme weather and when lambing. About twelve to fifteen 
square feet per sheep will do. 
Equipment: Hand shears, hoof trimmers. 
Food requirements: An acre will graze two to four sheep. A pregnant or 
nursing ewe needs a grain and hay supplement. Figure on two 
hundred pounds of grain and eight hundred pounds of hay per year 
each. Need salt blocks. 
Varieties: Merino for wool, Corriedale and Columbia for meat and 
wool. Should be vaccinated for tetanus. 
Pigs 
Comments: Pigs are foragers, intelligent and cleaner than commonly 
believed although they do produce offensive odors. 
Production: A good sow will raise two liters a year of five to twelve plus 
pigs each. A two hundred pound hog dresses out to about one 
hundred forty pounds of bacon, ham, sausage, chops and roasts as 
well as valuable lard. Their hide is some of the toughest yet softest 
leather around. Their productive lives average eight to nine years. 
Space and shelter requirements: Pigs need a shed for shade within a 
one hundred square foot minimum per pig pen surrounded with a 
strong fence. A wallow is necessary to cool them in the summer. 
Food requirements: An acre will support five to six pigs if they are 

174 
FOOD PRODUCTION 
supplemented with two to four pounds of coarsely-ground grains 
daily. Figuring three pounds of grains per pound gained shows you'll 
need six to seven hundred pounds of grain per hog slaughtered. 
Excess milk, eggs, vegetables and table scraps can also be used. 
Varieties: Duroc, Chester White, Hampshire and Yorkshire. All should 
be inoculated against hog cholera. 
Cows 
Comments: Cows are a large animal requiring daily care. They also 
produce three to four times as much milk as a goat. 
Production: A good dairy cow will average two to three gallons of milk 
daily for ten months of each year. A six hundred pound beef cow will 
yield about three hundred pounds of meat. 
Space and shelter requirements: A shed open on one side with one 
hundred square feet per cow is best. Calves need at least thirty 
square feet each. About forty to fifty bails of straw are used yearly 
for bedding. 
Equipment: Stanchion, manger, water trough. 
Food requirements: One to three acres are needed to graze each cow 
unless supplemented with hay. With adequate summer pasture you 
will need to have about a ton of grain and two to four tons of hay per 
cow for winter. Raising a beef will take about five hundred pounds 
of grain and a like amount of hay. 
Varieties: Jersey, Guernsey and other smaller breeds best for milking; 
Hereford and other varieties for meat. All should be free from 
brucellosis and tuberculosis. 
Bees 
Bees require minimal attention and, after the first year, will produce 
thirty to one hundred pounds of surplus honey per hive. You start them 
in the spring when blossoms appear. It's best to have at least two hives 
and you should have ample supers for the bees to store the honey in. 
The hives need to be placed where they will get adequate sunlight and 
be protected from winter winds. You'll want bee gloves, veil, smoker, 
hive tool, uncapping knife and a honey extractor. Italian bees are best 
for beginners. 

RAISING YOUR OWN 
175 
Aquaculture 
Raising fish or other aquatic life in ponds or holding tanks can be an 
excellent source of high-quality protein. Varieties of fish you might 
want to grow depend largely on the amount of fresh water you have 
available, its quality and oxygen content, and its temperature. Popular 
varieties include trout, bluegill, carp, largemouth bass, channel catfish 
and tilapia. 
A solar-powered twelve foot diameter by three foot deep vinyl-lined 
above ground swimming pool with a dome cover and a filter-aerator can 
produce forty to one hundred pounds of fish per year. Ponds will 
produce from one hundred pounds per year naturally to ten to twenty 
times that if supplemented. Figure on two pounds of high-protein 
supplementary ration per pound of fish harvested. 
There are a number of books on aquaculture and you should read 
about it before you plan anything. For more information on fish ponds, 
contact your state wildlife department or a local fish hatchery. A pond 
will also attract migratory waterfowl, especially if you plant wild rice 
and other food for them. 


15 
FINDING YOUR OWN 
Some people question the need for storing food, saying if they ever 
had to they could just gather all their food from the wilds. They see 
themselves digging a few wild onions, picking a handful of berries, 
perhaps catching and eating a fish, and lying back under a tree, full 
and contented. This notion is mostly an illusion, however, and you 
should not base your survival planning on it. 
In reality, foraging food from the wilds would provide bare subsis-
tence at best. 
First, consider the amount of wild food that would probably be 
available. In any major crisis hordes of unprepared people, having the 
same idea, would converge on the areas, quickly killing, gathering and 
eating nearly everything edible. It would be dangerous just to be there. 
If the crisis were nuclear war, fallout would kill many of the animals. 
In any event, the natural resources would soon be depleted. And that 
doesn't even take into account herd migration or winter when game is 
scarce and edible plant life is negligible. Even in the real back country 
with minimal human population, it would be a desperate struggle to 
keep from starving to death. 
Nevertheless, foraging could be used to stretch and add some variety 
to the survival diet or to keep you alive temporarily. But keep in mind 
that the first rule of obtaining food from the wilds is that you mustn't 
expend more energy getting it than it will give you in return. 
Wild Edible Plants 
There are a large variety of plants that humans can eat but they 
have their limitations. The problems are in two areas: 1) most are very 
low in calories and it would take large quantities to survive, and 2) 
many are not exactly what you've been used to and are not considered 
by most to be great delicacies for either your taste buds or your 
stomach. And that all assumes you didn't choose some that are 
poisonous! 
Edible greens are simply wild vegetables and most contain fewer 
than one hundred calories per pound. You would need to eat from 
fifteen to more than fifty pounds per day to meet your energy needs! 
Even berries only average about 250 calories per pound and nuts aren't 

178 
FOOD PRODUCTION 
always available. Although you can acquire a taste for wild greens and 
they can be tasty if properly prepared, they contain a lot of indigestible 
roughage. The adjustment period would commonly bring bouts with 
diarrhea. 
Then there is the problem of not eating the poisonous plants. Some 
poisonous plants look quite similar to good ones, and often some parts 
of the same plant are safe while other parts are not. Although some 
edible plants are easily distinguished by nearly anyone, others take 
great skill to tell. The best way to develop this skill is by learning in the 
field from someone already knowledgeable. If that isn't possible, books 
can help. Each area of the country has its own indigenous edible plants, 
and you will need a guide to the plants common to your local area. 
Many of the books are worthless, but following these guidelines will 
help you choose a good one: 
1. Look for numerous clear illustrations of the plants and their 
edible parts at harvest time. Color pictures are best. 
2. Descriptions should include the plant's range, habitat, when and 
how to collect, and how to use it. Poisonous species that might be 
confused with it should also be mentioned with details on how to 
tell them apart. 
3. There should be enough species for your locale to make it a 
valuable reference source. Recipes telling you how to prepare the 
plants to make them palatable are also very helpful. 
Books you might consider are: 
Plants of the Rocky Mountains by Kershaw, Pojar and Alaback 
Feasting Free on Wild Edibles by Bradford Angier 
Field Guide to Edible Wild Plants by Bradford Angier 
Tom Brown's Guide to Wild Edible and Medicinal Plants 
Guide to Wild Foods and Useful Plants by Christopher Nyerges 
Field Guide to Edible Wild Plants by Peterson and Peterson 
There are also decks of cards you can carry in your pocket. Each has 
fifty-two cards with color pictures, descriptions, habitats and uses. Both 
are available from Knowledge Brokers International, 340 Rogers Lane, 
Calimesa, CA 92320, 909-795-8287, info@freeoutdoors.com: 
Edible and Poisonous Plants of the Western United States 
Edible and Poisonous Plants of the Eastern United States 

FINDING YOUR OWN 179 
Most green plants are not poisonous but there are some general 
guidelines that may be helpful. First, just because an animal safely eats 
a plant doesn't prove it's safe for humans. White berries are almost 
always poisonous while red ones are sometimes. Avoid plants resem-
bling cucumbers, melons, or parsnips unless you are positive they are 
safe. And mushrooms should be left alone unless you are an expert on 
them. It's often most difficult to distinguish between the safe and toxic 
varieties. 
If your very life depends on eating some unknown plants or not, 
there is a test you can perform. Follow these steps in sequence: 
1. Smell. Check for any odor and discard if found. 
2. Look. See if any milky substance comes from the plant when it is 
cut, squeezed, or crushed. Don't continue if there is. 
3. Taste. Bite off a very small piece. If it doesn't taste bitter, 
stinging, or soapy, place inside lower lip for five minutes. If it still 
doesn't have a foul taste or burn, you can continue. 
4. Wait. Swallow a small piece of the plant and wait for three to five 
hours. If no stomach cramps, headache, or general achiness or 
sickness occurs during that time, the plant is probably safe to eat. 
Never eat great quantities of any new plant. 
Hunting, Fishing and Trapping 
Normally hunting and fishing are "sports" with accepted methods 
and are governed by laws and regulations. In time of dire need, 
however, that will quickly change. Sporting methods and regulations 
are mostly to give the wild animals a chance. Poaching methods are 
designed to provide food. Mostly unknown now, you can learn about 
some of these methods from the following books: 
Modern Hunting with Indian Secrets by Allan A. Macfarlan (used) 
Live Off the Land in the City and Country by Ragnor Benson 
Survival Poaching by Ragnor Benson 
Fishing 
Fish are also low-calorie food, averaging 150 to 400 calories per 
pound as caught. You'd need five to more than fifteen pounds per day 
to survive. And, unless you fish in the ocean, much of what you can 
catch today came from a hatchery that probably won't be stocking fish 
then. While it would be nice to have a stockpile of line, leaders, sinkers, 
lures and especially hooks, the best way to catch the most fish quickly 

180 FOOD PRODUCTION 
is with nets and, particularly, traps. You can also stun them by 
throwing the crushed leaves, seeds and stems from mullet into a 
dammed-off stream or kill them with bleach. A fillet knife is handy for 
preparing fish. 
Ocean shorelines can supply various kinds of shellfish like mussels, 
clams and oysters. 
Small animals 
Survival courses show you how to live off of rodents, lizards, snakes, 
frogs, turtles ,and bird eggs. Indians often ate beetles and grasshoppers. 
Obviously there are rabbits, porcupines, birds and other small animals. 
Sling shots with #9 buck shot will work if you practice a lot and pellet 
guns are quiet, accurate at short ranges and cheap to shoot. Shotguns 
are very useful, with #6 shot being an all-around selection. Store wire 
of different sizes for snares. And traps are the most efficient way of 
obtaining small animals. They work quietly twenty-four hours a day 
with little attention. 
Again, like most wild things, small animals are low in calories and 
you would need quite a few to stay alive. Most are also very low in fat 
content, too. Rabbit meat, for instance, is only 610 calories per pound 
and has so little fat that if it were all you ate, you would eventually die 
of fat starvation. 
Game animals 
Venison has 570 calories per pound and is still only 4% fat. I'd 
definitely prefer a rifle to the ancient bow and arrow. Store plenty of 
ammunition, a hunting knife and a skinning knife. It's best to learn the 
basic skills now from an experienced hunter. Using a red filter over a 
light will allow you to see the game at night without them seeing you. 
Close observation of their feeding and watering habits will help you 
have success. A guide to animal tracks will help you identify what it is 
you're following and what it is doing. 
Fur animals 
If you will want to trap fur animals like muskrat, beaver, otter and 
mink, store six to twelve steel traps. Sizes #1 and #1V£ are the best 
all-around with #4 for beaver. Get a book or two on trapping to tell you 
about the animals' habits, how to trap them and how to properly 
prepare the traps to get rid of human scent. 

FINDING YOUR OWN 181 
Wild Game Recipes 
After you've caught whatever game you were after, it will help if you 
know how to take care of it and to prepare it for the table. Some books 
that could help: 
Wild About Game by Jane Hibler and Janie Hibler 
Wild Game Cooking Made Easy by John Schumacher 
Wild Game Cookbook by Judity Bosley 
Wild Game Cookery by J. Carol Vance, et al 
America's Favorite Wild Game Recipes (Hunting & Fishing) 
Native Indian Wild Game, Fish & Wild Food Cookbook 
500 Wild Game and Fish Recipes by Galen Winter 
A Guide to Canning, Freezing, Curing and Smoking of Meat, Fish 
and Game by Wilbur F. Eastman, Jr. 
Getting the Most from Your Game and Fish by Robert Candy 
Home Book of Cooking Venison and Other Natural Meats by 
Bradford Angier (used) 


16 
COLD STORAGE 
Many fresh, unprocessed fruits and vegetables can be preserved 
without refrigeration by using cold storage methods. These methods 
were used long before refrigeration and are the easiest and least 
expensive ways of prolonging the harvest where there isn't a 
year-around growing season. This allows more variety in the survival 
diet. Some fruits and vegetables are also more suited to cold storage 
than other methods of preservation. 
Fruits and vegetables can be either home-grown or purchased 
during the harvest season. Cold storage will allow many to be kept up 
to eight or more months with the right conditions. 
Storage Conditions 
Optimum shelf lives are achieved by maintaining the proper 
temperatures and humidity. Basically, fruits and vegetables can be 
divided into two groups: 1) those needing cool and dry (45-60° F, 70% or 
less humidity) conditions, and 2) those needing cold and moist (32-45° 
F, 80% or above humidity) conditions. Adequate ventilation is needed 
to properly control the temperatures and moisture levels and to remove 
the gases given off by ripening fruit. Table 16-1 lists the ideal 
temperature and humidity ranges for the more common fruits and 
vegetables. Whether the temperature or humidity is more critical 
depends on the produce. The shelf life of onions, for instance, is more 
dependent on the humidity. 
Higher temperatures cause sprouting, ripening and deterioration of 
the produce. Wide fluctuations in temperature should be avoided, and 
alternating freezing and thawing cycles are particularly damaging. 
Keep a record of temperatures both inside the storage area and 
outdoors with daily monitoring recommended during the coldest periods 
of winter. That allows adjustments to be made to correct for 
temperature extremes. Two thermometers are handy for the two 
different locations, and the minimum-maximum type of thermometer 
are the most useful. When the temperature approaches freezing inside, 
a low-wattage light bulb or a small kerosene lantern can be used to 
keep the space above freezing. Heaters may produce too much heat. 

184 
FOOD PRESERVATION 
Too much moisture allows the produce to rot, while too little makes 
it shrivel and dry out. Moisture levels can be accurately checked with 
a hygrometer. High humidity can be maintained by placing large pans 
of water near the air-intake vents and by sprinkling water directly on 
the produce or the floor. A three-inch layer of clean sand, sawdust, or 
coarse, well-washed gravel covering on the floor will help retain 
moisture. Normally this will not be enough for root crops which are best 
kept in perforated polyethylene bags or box liners. 
Windows or other vents help regulate the temperature and 
humidity. Outside air that is colder or warmer can be allowed in or shut 
out to cool or warm the space. Excess moisture can be vented, or high 
outside humidity can be used as needed. Two vents are needed for each 
separate space to allow flow. Daily adjustments frequently will be 
necessary. 
Normally the ideal conditions are not always available. Try to come 
as close as you can with the space and temperature ranges you have. 
The shelf lives listed in table 16-1 are estimates for the various 
varieties of fruits and vegetables. Exact shelf lives will depend on the 
facilities you have, the temperature and moisture fluctuations and the 
variety of the produce. Late-maturing varieties usually store best but 
check with growers in your area. Some apples, like Jonathan for 
example, may last only a few months, while varieties like Winesap will 
keep for six months or longer under the same conditions. Selecting the 
best keeper varieties for growing at home and buying produce to store 
in late fall and early winter will help. 
Preparation and Storage 
Shelf lives are also dependent on the condition of the produce prior 
to storage. The better the quality to begin with, the longer the shelf life. 
With the exception of tomatoes, all produce should be picked when it is 
mature. Pears should be fully mature but still hard and light green. 
Harvest produce when it is cool and dry. Pick in the morning or 
allow it to sit overnight after picking to cool. Cut off all leafy tops right 
after digging. Cut root crop tops off one inch above the crown. Leave 
stems on squash and pumpkin. Don't trim roots because it may cause 
spoilage. Root crops should also not be exposed to the sun or wind. 
Don't wash dirt off prior to storage unless there is an excess. Then 
brush it off gently with a soft, dry cloth. The produce should be handled 

COLD STORAGE 185 
TABLE 16-1. COLD STORAGE OF FRUITS AND VEGETABLES 
Fruit 
Apples 
Grapefruit 
Grapes 
Oranges 
Pears 
Vegetables 
Beets 
Broccoli 
Brussel sprouts 
Cabbage 
Carrots 
Cauliflower 
Celeriac 
Celery 
Chinese cabbage 
Collard greens 
Eggplant 
Endive/Escarole 
Garlic 
Horseradish 
Jerusalem artichoke 
Kale 
Kohlrabi 
Leeks 
Onions 
Parsnips 
Peppers, green 
hot chili 
Potatoes, sweet 
white 
Pumpkins 
Radish, winter 
Rutabagas 
Salsify 
Squash, winter 
Tomotoes, green 
Turnips 
Where to 
Store 
RC-F 
RC-F 
RC-F 
RC-F 
RC-F 
BSR,M/B,RC 
BSR,RC 
BSR,IG,RC 
M/B,RC,T 
BSR,IG,M/B,RC 
BSR,RC 
BSR,MB,RC 
Storage Conditions 
Temperature 
32-40° F 
32-40° F 
32-40° F 
32-40° F 
32-40° F 
32-40° F 
32-40° F 
32-40° F 
32-40° F 
32-40° F 
32-40° F 
32-40° F 
BSR,IG,M/B,RC,T 32-40° F 
BSR,RC 
BSR,RC 
BSR,RC 
BSR,IG,RC 
A,BSR,DS 
BSR,IG,M/B,RC 
BSR,IG,M/B,RC 
IG 
BSR,M/B,RC 
BSR,IG,M/B,RC 
A,BSR,DS 
BSR,IG,M/B,RC 
BSR,DS,RC 
BSR.DS 
BSR,DS 
BSR,M/B,RC 
A,BSR 
BSR,IG,M/B,RC 
BSR,M/B,RC 
BSR,IG,M/B,RC 
A,BSR 
BSR,DS 
M/B,RC 
32-40° F 
32-40° F 
40-50° F 
32-40° F 
32-40° F 
32-40° F 
32-40° F 
32-40° F 
32-40° F 
32-40° F 
32-40° F 
32-40° F 
45-50° F 
50-55° F 
55-60° F 
35-40° F 
55-60° F 
32-40° F 
32-40° F 
32-40° F 
50-60° F 
55-60° F 
32-40° F 
Humidity 
80-90% 
80-90% 
80-90% 
80-90% 
85-90% 
90-95% 
90-95% 
90-95% 
85-90% 
90-95% 
80-90% 
90-95% 
85-90% 
95-98% 
90-95% 
90-95% 
85-90% 
60-70% 
90-95% 
90-95% 
95-98% 
90-95% 
80-90% 
60-70% 
90-95% 
80-90% 
60-65% 
60-70% 
80-90% 
60-70% 
90-95% 
90-95% 
90-95% 
60-70% 
60-70% 
90-95% 
Storage Life 
(in months) 
4-6+ 
1-2 
1-2 
1-3 
2-5 
4-6+ 
1-2 
1-2 
3-6+ 
4-6+ 
1-2 
3-6+ 
1-5+ 
2-4 
1-2 
1-2 
2-3 
6-8+ 
4-6+ 
4-6+ 
1-2 
2-3 
2-5 
5-6+ 
4-6+ 
1-2 
4-6+ 
4-6+ 
4-6+ 
4-6+ 
2-5 
3-6+ 
4-6+ 
4-6+ 
1-3+ 
3-6+ 
KEY: A = attic, BSR = basement storage room, DS = dry shed, IG = mulched in ground, M/B 
= outdoor mound or buried barrel, RC = root cellar, RC-F = root cellar for fruit, T = covered 
trench or pit. 

186 
FOOD PRESERVATION 
as little as possible and carefully to prevent cutting and bruising. Any 
that is bruised or shows any signs of disease or spoilage should be 
culled out. You must also inspect on a regular basis once it is stored 
because spoilage will quickly affect adjacent produce unless removed. 
Mold on squash can be removed by rubbing softly with a cloth with a 
little vegetable oil on it. 
Garlic, onions, potatoes, pumpkins and squash should be cured prior 
to storing to harden their skins and prolong their shelf life. Cure 
pumpkins and squash by leaving them in the field for two weeks after 
picking to be exposed to the sun and air. If it is rainy weather they can 
be placed in a room at 80-85° F for ten days (near the furnace may be 
good). Acorn squash doesn't need curing and will store at 45-50° F for 
one to one and a half months. Sweet potatoes are cured by placing them 
in a humid room at 80-85° F for ten days to two weeks. White potatoes 
should be cured for seven to fourteen days at 60-75° F, and onions and 
garlic should be placed in the sun for five to seven days. 
Produce will last longer if properly packaged for storage. Tomatoes 
are best individually wrapped in wax paper. Apples can be wrapped in 
oiled or shredded paper. Cabbage, pears, pumpkins, squash and sweet 
potatoes can be individually wrapped in newspapers or dry burlap. 
Layers of produce can be separated from each other by layers of 
newspaper, straw, dry leaves, moss, or grass. This may all seem like a 
lot of effort, but it may extend the time you have food available. 
Containers can often be recycled, but be sure they have smooth inner 
surfaces without protruding staples to puncture the produce. For dry 
areas open containers are best to promote air circulation. Crates and 
similar containers can be stacked by placing wooden burring strips 
between them. There should also be about 4 inches of space beneath the 
containers. Containers for humid storage should be relatively closed 
and can be covered with moist burlap or old rugs. 
Produce you might consider for cold storage include apples, pears, 
beets, cabbage, carrots, garlic, horseradish, Jerusalem artichokes, 
onions, parsnips, white potatoes, pumpkins, rutabagas, squash, sweet 
potatoes and turnips. 
Storage Facilities 
The local climate will determine what facilities will be adequate for 
cold storage in your area. A cool and dry area can readily be found in 
most homes but an outside root cellar or other special structure must 
often be constructed to provide a suitable cold and moist area. All 

COLD STORAGE 187 
storage areas must be dark and windows should be screened. Large 
slatted louvers over windows will shade them while allowing air 
circulation. 
The two common storage areas are simple and effective: 
Basement storage rooms. Work best located in coolest part of un-
heated basement, usually the northeast or northwest corner. 
Should be away from furnace, chimneys, heating ducts and hot 
water pipes. Ceilings should be insulated and the door should be 
tight and secure. The room must be rodent proof. In heated 
basements, the room can be used for ripening tomatoes and for 
short-term storage of onions and potatoes, or it can be insulated. 
Concrete outside walls should not be insulated. The room can be 
partitioned into the two areas necessary. Removable heavy-duty 
slatted shelving and flooring is preferred to make air circulation 
and cleaning easier. Shelving three feet deep allows storing squash 
and pumpkins without them touching. Average needs can be 
handled by fifteen to twenty square feet per person. 
Outside root cellar. Root cellars take more time and money to build 
but, once built, require minimal upkeep and work well keeping 
fairly large amounts of produce. They can be built entirely 
underground, into a slightly sloping hillside, or bermed on three 
sides. Like the basement storage areas, they can do double duty as 
a storm or fallout shelter if planned for ahead of time. The best 
root cellars are from reinforced concrete but they can also be made 
from cinder blocks, bricks, stones, or even wood. A firmly tamped 
dirt floor helps maintain the proper humidity levels and the roof 
and walls should be waterproof. Doors are best when located on 
the northerly sides. 
Cheaper but less effective methods abound: 
Buried barrels, crates, boxes, garbage cans, discarded refrigerators 
or freezers. The container is filled with alternating layers of straw, 
leaves, or similar packing and produce. When filled to the top, the 
container is covered with straw and then earth. 
Outdoor mounds. Cabbage and root crops are often stored in these 
where it isn't too cold. A bottom layer of straw or leaves is covered 
with a cone-shaped pile of produce which is then covered with 
more straw. About three to four inches of soil is then placed over 
the straw, allowing the straw to protrude in the center to act as a 
ventilation flue. A cap of boards, sheet metal, or plastic is placed 
on top to keep the water out. The mound can be covered with a 

188 
FOOD PRESERVATION 
one-inch mesh chicken wire or hardware cloth to keep out rodents. 
If the area is not well-draining, a shallow drainage ditch can be 
dug around the perimeter. Because the entire mound should be 
used upon opening, it is preferable to make a number of smaller 
mounds rather than one large one. A variety of vegetables is stored 
in each. 
Covered pits or trenches. These can be handier than the mounds 
because you need only use the portion uncovered at one time. They 
are about two feet deep and as wide as necessary to store the 
produce without crowding. As for any buried container, it is best 
to line the hole or trench with rocks to aid in proper drainage. This 
is then covered with alternating layers of straw or similar material 
and produce. The top can be covered with bales of straw or hay for 
easy access. A slanted roof helps prevent rain and snow from 
getting inside. Cabbage is normally stored roots up while celery is 
replanted in the bottom dirt. 
All mounds, pits and trenches should be made in a different location 
the next year because the area used is usually contaminated by the 
leftovers. 
Other areas that can be used for storage include insulated 
crawlspaces under porches, covered window wells, outside basement 
entry steps, enclosed porches, balconies, fire escapes and unheated 
pantries, halls, attics, garages or spare rooms. 
Hardy root crops like carrots, horseradish, Jerusalem artichokes, 
kale, parsnips and salsify can often be left right in the ground. They can 
be covered with an eighteen inch to two foot blanket of mulch topped 
with chicken wire and weighted down with a rock or covered with bales 
of hay or straw. They can then be dug until the ground is too frozen, 
and the remainder dug in the spring. 
Fruits give off gases and are best stored away from vegetables. 
Vegetables like cabbage, rutabagas ,and turnips have strong odors and 
should not be stored with potatoes or fruits. Most people also prefer 
those vegetables stored outside the house. 
Whatever the storage facility, like all storage areas, it must be kept 
clean. Each summer it should also receive a thorough cleaning. All 
containers, bins and shelves should be removed, and the entire area 
disinfected, aired out and repainted if needed to eliminate mold and 
disease. Any necessary repairs can be made at this time. Packing 
materials and cardboard boxes should not be reused because they 
become contaminated. 

COLD STORAGE 189 
For more detailed information on particular produce or for plans and 
ideas on building storage facilities, consult these books: 
Root Cellaring by Mike Bubel, Nancy Bubel and Pam Art 
Keeping the Harvest by Nancy Chioffi, et al 
Keeping Other Items Cool 
Dairy products and other produce can be kept cool for short periods 
of time by using methods like ice boxes, evaporative coolers, spring 
houses and cooling cabinets. Ice for the iceboxes can be harvested 
during the winter from ponds and streams and then stored for summer 
use. 


17 
HOME CANNING 
The best method of home food preservation is determined by the 
nature of the particular food, the climate and storage conditions and the 
space and equipment available. No single method solves all storage 
problems and a combination of methods is often best. To help you decide 
which methods you will use, Table 17-1 gives comparisons of the 
relative costs, energy needs, work necessary, time it takes and the 
vulnerability to damage by crises. 
TABLE 17-1. 
COMPARISON OF HOME FOOD PRESERVATION METHODS 
Method 
Cold storage 
Canning 
Drying 
Freezing 
Pickling 
Cost 
Low 
Moderate 
Moderate 
Very high 
Varies 
Energy 
Low 
Moderate 
Moderate 
High 
Low 
Effort 
Moderate 
High 
Moderate 
Low to 
Moderate 
Moderate 
Time 
Low to 
Moderate 
Moderate 
High 
Low 
High 
Vulnerability 
Moderate 
Moderate 
Low 
High 
Moderate 
Canning 
Canning is very inexpensive and is the most prevalent way to 
preserve produce at home. It does involve a moderate amount of labor 
and is likely to be done during the summer, when it is already hot. It is 
an excellent method for foods that are normally thoroughly cooked, and 
it works best with fruits, tomatoes, asparagus, green beans, lima beans, 
beets, carrots, corn, peas, potatoes, pumpkin, spinach and squash. 
Some people fear doing their own canning because of its safety. 
Perhaps they have heard the horror stories of botulism poisoning. In 
actuality, home canning is safe if the proper steps are carefully 
followed. This chapter is too short to give you anything other than an 
overview and list the equipment and supplies you'll need, so be sure you 
have one of the books listed. Any one of them will give all the detailed 
information necessary to safely can a large variety of produce. 

192 
FOOD PRESERVATION 
Processing equipment 
Even if you aren't presently canning, or even planning to, it would 
be best to have the necessary equipment and supplies stored. It could 
come in very handy some day and, at the worst, would be valuable for 
barter. 
The most important canning tool is a pressure cooker/canner. There 
are a variety of brands and all should work safely. Store extra pressure 
release valves and gaskets for those that use them. Whichever brand 
you have, make sure the pressure gage is checked regularly to verify its 
accuracy. If it uses fixed weights instead of a gage, have it properly 
adjusted to the correct altitude. One which uses fixed weights (e.g. 
Mirro) may be better for long-term survival use because it does not 
require periodic calibration like the gage type does. And, to work as 
they should, clean the petcock and safety valve openings at the 
beginning of and throughout each canning season. 
Another tool is a boiling water bath canner. It should include a rack 
to hold the jars and keep them off the bottom and be deep enough to 
allow two to four inches of space over the jars. A pressure cooker 
/canner can also be used as a bath canner but it's much heavier. 
The steam canner processes fruits and tomatoes with steam rather 
than boiling water. This allows it to use about 
i 
half the energy and take half the time. It also 
|jp uses much less water, keeps the kitchen cooler 
and eliminates most boil-over mess. Best of all, 
the product quality is superior. It can also be 
used to blanch vegetables for drying and 
Steam canner 
freezing. 
Get a strainer; you 11 never regret it. They 
make processing apples and tomatoes easy. Two well-known brands are 
Victorio and Squeeze Buy the berry and pumpkin screens, too. 
Finally, you will want a steam juicer, in either aluminum or 
stainless steel. It will effortlessly extract the juice from grapes, apples, 
etc. with no straining at all. 
Other inexpensive equipment you should have: 
• food grinder 
• food chopper 
• colander 
• dipper or ladle 
• canning funnel 
• jar wrench 
• canning tongs 
• jar lifter 
• slotted spoon 
• measuring spoons • measuring cups 
• cutting board 
• thermometer 
• cooling racks 
• timer 
• pot holders 
• knives 
• kitchen scale 

HOME CANNING 193 
• kitchen shears 
• manual food mill/press 
Some canning equipment is also useful for other preservation 
methods as well: 
• apple corer 
• apple parer 
• bean slicer 
• cabbage shredder • cherry pitter 
• corn cutter 
• pea sheller 
• pear corer 
• potato peelers 
If you want to do any canning with tin cans, you will also need a 
hand-operated can sealer. The sealer will also allow you to seal seeds, 
ammunition and other things in tin cans. They normally handle can 
sizes #1 through #3. Tin cans also require a glass food thermometer. A 
capper is needed if you anticipate capping bottles. 
Doing jellies without a steamer will require a muslin or canvas 
jelly-bag strainer—or you can make your own from cheesecloth. For 
jellies, jams and other preserves, a jelmeter will give you a rough 
estimate of the amount of pectin in the fruit (or you can use an alcohol 
test but, if you use denatured alcohol, remember it is poisonous). A 
large (eight to ten quart) flat-bottomed kettle works fine and a double 
boiler and a thermometer come in handy. Some way to mash the fruit 
(food press, mill, grinder, or chopper) helps. 
Pickles require utensils of unchipped enamelware, stainless steel, 
aluminum, or glass to avoid reactions with acids or salts. Fermenting 
(brining) is done in a crock or stone jar, plastic food storage bucket, 
unchipped enamel-lined pan, large glass jar, bowl, or casserole. All need 
covers and a weight to hold it down and keep the produce below the 
brine's surface. A simple cover is to use a plastic bag filled with water. 
A fruit press may come in handy if you anticipate making a lot of 
fruit juices. Juices can be strained through the same bag used for jelly. 
Supplies 
Stockpile all the glass jars you'll need for your family. The informa-
tion in Chapter 8 combined with Table 17-2 might be useful here. Store 
extras to replace any that might get broken. You'll want a selection of 
sizes, mostly pint and quart, but foods should be canned in sizes your 
family can eat at one meal. Wide-mouths are more expensive but best 
for larger fruits and easier to clean, while the narrow-mouths are fine 
for smaller produce and purees. Mayonnaise and similar jars can often 
be re-cycled if their lips are not chipped. They are not as sturdy as 
regular jars and are best for products requiring short processing times. 
Obviously, you'll want to store extra sugar for canning. 

194 
FOOD PRESERVATION 
Store at least two seasons worth of lids and enough rings for your 
jars; more if you use a freezer. They could be in extremely short supply 
when most needed. Kept cool and dry, they will keep five years or 
longer. 
I have found that the normal lids can also be reused a time or two 
if they are carefully removed without bending, have the rubber sealing 
compound intact, have not been corroded by an acidic food like tomatoes 
and are carefully cleaned; Ball is the best brand for this. 
There are also jars that come with their own attached reusable lid. 
They are the Luminarc wide-mouth glass storage jars imported from 
France. They are heavy glass with a hinged glass lid containing a red 
rubber "o-ring" seal and are more expensive than regular jars. 
Obviously, if you want to do tin canning, you will need some cans 
and lids. The most handy sizes are normally the #303, #2 and #2Vâ ones. 
They come in different qualities, too, with the better lasting much 
longer in storage. There are three varieties of cans and you'll probably 
want some of each. The enamel prevents discoloration of the food. The 
types and their uses are: 
C-enamel (corn enamel): corn, hominy 
R-enamel (sanitary or standard enamel): beets, red berries, red or 
black cherries, plums, pumpkin, rhubarb, winter squash 
Plain tin: everything else including meat 
For making jams, jellies and other preserves, store pectin (powder 
or liquid), ascorbic or citric acid crystals, paraffin wax and sugar. You 
can make your own pectin from tart apples if necessary. Powdered 
ascorbic acid compounds should be stored in a cool place where they 
won't absorb moisture and cake. They will keep at least two years. 
Pickles and relishes take vinegar with forty to sixty grain acidity 
(4-6% acid), pickling or canning salt, sugar and spices. Salt is also used 
as a flavoring in canned meat. 
Canning Methods 
Water bath canning is suitable for high-acid (4.6 pH or below) 
produce. That includes all fruits, tomatoes (you can add two tablespoons 
of lemon juice or a half teaspoon of citric acid per quart to increase the 
acidity of low-acid tomatoes) and pickled vegetables. The two ways to 
do water bath canning are raw pack and hot pack. In raw pack the 
uncooked produce is placed in the container and then processed in the 
canner. In hot pack the produce is first heated and then placed in the 

HOME CANNING 195 
container and processed. Some produce can be done either way while 
others are best done with a particular one (see Table 17-3). Times given 
in the tables should be increased at altitudes over one thousand feet 
according to Table 17-5. Fruits are normally canned with a sugar syrup 
(see Table 17-4). 
Pressure canning is required for all low-acid vegetables and meat 
(4.5 pH or higher). This is because dangerous bacteria in low-acid foods 
are only killed completely at 240° F (116° C). That temperature can be 
attained only under pressure. As altitude increases, so must the 
pressure necessary to attain the correct temperature. If you are canning 
at altitudes above one thousand feet see Table 17-5 for the adjustment 
you should make. Pressure canning can be done with either glass jars 
or tin cans. Using pressure canning rather than water bath for 
high-acid produce will result in a lower quality product due to the 
longer total time spent at high temperatures. 
Tin cans are more durable than glass jars and can be stored in the 
light, but they can't be reused and involve the extra step of sealing. 
Because the tin cans are sealed prior to processing in the canner, the 
air must be exhausted before sealing. To achieve the necessary vacuum, 
the food in the can must be at 170° F (77° C) or higher. The can is then 
sealed, processed in the canner and then cooled in cold water. The 
quicker cooling allowed by the tin can results in slightly better produce 
texture and less heat damage to the food's vitamins. 
With all methods, some fruits and vegetables are scalded prior to 
packing to loosen their skins so they can be removed. The normal head 
space left in the containers before processing is one-half inch for jars 
and one-quarter inch for tin cans. Corn, lima beans ,and peas expand 
on cooking and should not be packed too tightly. 
Jams, Jellies and Preserves 
Fruit that is too large, too small, or irregularly shaped can be made 
into jams, jellies, conserves, marmalades, or preserves. All will add 
variety to your meals. 
The proper amounts of pectin and acid are necessary to make jellied 
fruit products. Some fruits are high in natural pectin but you will have 
to add it to others. Lemon juice or citric acid is added for flavor and for 
gel formation; there is more natural acid in under-ripe fruit. Sealing the 
jar with paraffin is only recommended for jellies; the others should all 
be canned normally. Processing five minutes in a water bath is the 
usual time suggested. 

196 
FOOD PRESERVATION 
Juices 
Juices are the best way to use bruised and overripe fruits and 
vegetables. Obviously, the bruised or spoiled portions are removed first. 
Juices can be stored as concentrates or made into ciders, vinegars and 
wines. 
Pickles & Relishes 
Pickles and relishes can be made from many different fruits and 
vegetables and may be real treats in the survival diet. Pickling can be 
by fermentation or by fresh-pack. Both use brine and vinegar as 
preservatives with sugar, herbs and spices added for flavor. Pickles 
must be canned by the water bath method unless they will be eaten 
soon after being made. 
Meat, Poultry and Fish 
All types of meat, poultry and fish can be preserved at home by 
canning in a pressure cooker/canner. Combinations like stews, soups, 
chili sauce, etc. may also be canned. Either glass jars or tin cans will 
work. Use the C-enamel tins when canning smoked salmon in tin cans. 
Further Information 
There are many books on canning, and often they go into some of the 
other preservation methods as well. The best books I've found are: 
Stocking Up by Carol Hupping 
Putting Food By by Janet C. Greene, et al 
A Guide to Canning, Freezing, Curing and Smoking of Meat, Fish 
and Game by Wilbur F. Eastman, Jr. 
Ball Blue Book 
Kerr Home Canning Guide 
The Complete Guide to Home Canning, Preserving and Freezing, 
Bulletin #539 by the USDA is also available from Dover Publications 
and on the Internet at http://extension.usu.edu/publica/foodpub2.htm. 

HOME CANNING 197 
TABLE 17-2. YIELD OF CANNED FROM FRESH PRODUCE 
The actual number of quarts will depend on the variety, size, maturity and quality of the 
produce and the way it is prepared. The standard weight of the fresh produce quantities is 
not the same in all states. Multiplying the quarts by two will give you the number of pints. 
The number of #2 and #2V£ cans can be found by adding 60% and 14% respectively to the 
given numbers. 
Fruit 
Apples, whole or sliced 
juice 
applesauce 
Apricots 
Berries (except strawberries) 
Cherries (un-pitted) 
Peaches 
Pears 
Plums 
Rhubarb 
Vegetables 
Asparagus 
Beans, green and wax 
lima (in pods) 
Beets (without tops) 
Cabbage (sauerkraut) 
Carrots (without tops) 
Corn, sweet (in husks) 
Greens, chard, collard and 
mustard 
beet 
kale and spinach 
Okra 
Peas, green (in pod) 
Potatoes, white 
Pumpkin 
Squash, summer 
Sweet potatoes 
Tomatoes, whole 
juice 
sauce 
paste 
Fresh quantity 
1 bushel (48 lbs) 
1 bushel (48 lbs) 
1 bushel (48 lbs) 
1 bushel (50 lbs) 
1 lug or crate (22 lbs) 
1 crate (24 qts) 
1 bushel (56 lbs) 
16 qt crate (22 lbs) 
1 bushel (48 lbs) 
1 lug (20 lbs) 
1 bushel (50 lbs) 
1 western box (46 lbs) 
1 peck (14 lbs) 
1 bushel (56 lbs) 
1 lug or crate (20 lbs) 
15 lbs 
1 crate (12 lbs) 
1 bushel (30 lbs) 
1 bushel (32 lbs) 
1 bushel (52 lbs) 
50 lbs 
1 bushel (50 lbs) 
1 bushel (35 lbs) 
1 bushel (12 lbs) 
1 bushel (15 lbs) 
1 bushel (18 lbs) 
1 bushel (26 lbs) 
1 bushel (30 lbs) 
1 bushel (50 lbs) 
50 lbs 
1 bushel (40 lbs) 
1 bushel (50 lbs) 
1 bushel (53 lbs) 
1 bushel (53 lbs) 
1 bushel (53 lbs) 
1 bushel (53 lbs) 
Quarts 
16-20 
10 
14-18 
20-24 
9-11 
12-18 
22-28 
8-11 
18-25 
8-10 
20-25 
18-23 
5-7 
24-30 
9-11 
7-11 
3-4 
14-18 
6-9 
16-20 
16-18 
16-20 
7-9 
4-6 
5-8 
6-9 
16-18 
6-8 
18-22 
14-16 
16-20 
18-20 
15-20 
14-17 
8-11 
4-6 

198 
FOOD PRESERVATION 
TABLE 17-3. PROCESSING METHODS AND TIMES 
Boiling Water Bath 
Fruit 
Apples 
Applesauce 
Apricots 
Berries (except strawberries) 
Cherries 
Fruit juices 
Fruit purees 
Peaches 
Pears 
Plums 
Rhubarb 
Vegetables 
Pickled beets 
Sauerkraut 
Tomatoes, whole or juice 
Pressure Cooker (normally 10 lbs 
Vegetables 
Asparagus 
Beans, kidney and navy 
baked 
lima 
snap 
Beets 
Carrots 
Corn, cream style 
whole kernel 
Hominy 
Mushrooms 
Peas, blackeye 
green 
Potatoes, cubed 
whole 
Pumpkin, cubed 
Spinach and other greens 
Squash, summer 
winter, cubed 
Sweet potatoes, dry pack 
wet pack 
Method 
hot 
hot 
raw 
hot 
raw, 
raw 
hot 
hot 
hot 
raw 
hot 
raw 
hot 
raw, 
hot 
raw 
raw, 
hot 
pressure 
raw, 
hot 
hot 
raw, 
raw, 
hot 
raw 
hot 
raw 
hot 
raw, 
hot 
hot 
raw 
hot 
raw, 
hot 
hot 
hot 
hot 
raw 
hot 
hot 
hot 
hot 
hot 
hot 
hot 
Processing Time 
Jars 
Pint 
15 
20 
25 
20 
10 
20 
10 
5 
20 
25 
20 
25 
20 
20 
10 
30 
15 
40 
at sea level) 
hot 
hot 
hot 
hot 
hot 
25 
65 
80 
40 
20 
30 
25 
25 
95 
85 
55 
60 
30 
35 
35 
40 
35 
30 
35 
70 
25 
30 
55 
65 
55 
Quart 
20 
20 
30 
25 
15 
25 
15 
5 
20 
30 
25 
30 
25 
25 
10 
30 
20 
45 
30 
75 
100 
50 
25 
35 
30 
30 
— 
— 
85 
70 
— 
40 
40 
40 
40 
40 
90 
90 
30 
40 
90 
95 
90 
in Minutes 
Cans 
#2 
10 
20 
30 
25 
10 
20 
10 
5 
20 
30 
25 
30 
25 
15 
10 
— 
20 
45 
20 
65 
95 
40 
25 
30 
25 
20 
105 
105 
60 
60 
30 
35 
30 
30 
35 
35 
50 
65 
20 
20 
50 
80 
70 
#2% 
10 
20 
35 
30 
15 
25 
20 
5 
20 
35 
30 
35 
30 
20 
10 
— 
20 
45 
20 
75 
115 
40 
30 
30 
30 
25 
— 
— 
60 
70 
— 
40 
35 
35 
40 
40 
75 
75 
20 
20 
75 
95 
90 

HOME CANNING 199 
TABLE 17-3. (Continued) 
Pressure Cooker (continued) 
Meat, Poultry and Fish 
Beef, lamb and pork 
Sausage 
Corned beef 
Stew 
Soup stock 
Poultry and rabbit 
with bone 
without bone 
giblets 
Fish 
Processing Time in Minutes 
Jars 
Cans 
Method 
Pint 
Quart 
#2 
#2% 
raw, hot 
hot 
hot 
raw 
hot 
raw, hot 
raw, hot 
hot 
raw, hot 
110 
75 
75 
60 
20 
65 
75 
75 
110 
120 
90 
90 
75 
25 
75 
90 
— 
120 
100 
65 
65 
40 
20 
55 
65 
65 
100 
110 
90 
90 
45 
25 
75 
90 
— 
110 
TABLE 17-4. SUGAR SYRUPS 
Light: 
2 cups sugar in 4 cups water 
= 
Medium: 3 cups sugar in 4 cups water 
= 
Heavy: 
4% cups sugar in 4 cups water = 
5 cups syrup 
5V6 cups syrup 
6M* cups syrup 
TABLE 17-5. ADJUSTMENTS FOR HIGH ALTITUDE CANNING 
Altitude 
above sea level 
1,000 feet 
2,000 feet 
3,000 feet 
4,000 feet 
5,000 feet 
6,000 feet 
7,000 feet 
8,000 feet 
9,000 feet 
10,000 feet 
For Boiling 
of 20 min or 
less, add: 
1 minute 
2 minutes 
3 minutes 
4 minutes 
5 minutes 
6 minutes 
7 minutes 
8 minutes 
9 minutes 
10 minutes 
Water Bath: 
of more than 
20 min, add: 
2 minutes 
4 minutes 
6 minutes 
8 minutes 
10 minutes 
12 minutes 
14 minutes 
16 minutes 
18 minutes 
20 minutes 
For pressure 
canning, add: 
y2ib 
lib 
m lb 
2 lbs 
2V6 lbs 
3 lbs 
&A lbs 
4 lbs 
4V4 lbs 
5 lbs 


18 
HOME DEHYDRATING 
Drying food is the oldest method of food preservation and is easy to 
do. It is inexpensive, particularly if done with a solar dryer, but takes 
a fair amount of time and is not well suited to some produce. Most 
fruits are easily and satisfactorily dried, while dried corn, onions, peas, 
peppers and herbs are particularly good. 
Equipment 
Basically, you'll need some type of dehydrator. An electric dehydra-
tor is easiest and does the best job, but a solar drier would be a good 
backup. There are many brands available and most do a credible job. 
The best have a thermostat heat control and keep dehydrating heats 
low. A fan is normally used to force air across the food and carry off the 
moisture. Solar driers need an insect-proof cover and don't work too 
well on rainy days or in high-humid climates. Oven drying is expensive 
and relatively hard to control. 
If you expect to do purees for leathers, teflon sheets the size of the 
dehydrator trays are great. There are also heavy plastic sheets you 
could use. Otherwise, you're stuck with oiling the trays or lining them 
with plastic wrap. A manual food sheer can help, as can a plastic bag 
sealer. It is assumed you have stored the items needed for basic 
canning. Otherwise you will also need a blancher. A wire basket is 
useful for scalding and blanching produce. If you have the vacuum 
packing equipment and/or oxygen absorbers mentioned in Chapter 6, 
you'll be able to use it to provide an oxygen-free storage environment. 
Supplies 
Store ascorbic acid and sulfuring products (flowers of sulfur, sodium 
sulfite, or sodium bisulfite) for use in retarding oxidation. A pound of 
sulfur will do about sixty-four pounds of fruit. Be sure to keep the 
products cool and especially dry. You'll need plastic bags for the bag 
sealer, and you can reuse #10 cans if you have extra lids for them. 
Cheesecloth can be used to cover trays to prevent sticking, scorching, 
or falling through. Plastic wrap or wax paper is used to roll leathers in 
to keep the layers separated. 

202 
FOOD PRESERVATION 
How to Dehydrate 
After larger produce has been initially prepared and sliced, it is 
ready for pre-treatment. Oxidation and darkening of the fruit can be 
prevented by dipping it in an ascorbic acid or sulfite mixture or by 
burning flowers of sulfur in an enclosed space (sulfuring). Tough 
skinned fruits like grapes, plums, cherries and some berries can be 
water blanched to speed up drying. Sulfuring, because the fumes are 
smelly and dangerous, should be done outside. Vegetables should be 
water or steam blanched with the steam method preferred to retain 
more nutrients. The blanching deactivates enzymes, speeds up drying 
by relaxing the tissue, preserves vitamins, and flavors and sets colors. 
Recommended blanching and sulfuring times are listed in Table 
18-1. 
The best temperature for dehydrating most produce is 135-140° F 
(57-60° C), but drying times will vary widely according to the individual 
item, the size of the pieces and the dehydrator used. Drying in the sun 
takes considerably longer than drying in a dehydrator. Fruit is dry 
when it is leathery and pliable and retains its characteristic color. 
Vegetables should be brittle, and leathers should no longer be sticky in 
the center. Produce should be allowed to cool prior to testing. It's also 
better to over-dry than to under-dry and long-term storage requires 
drier produce. 
The most accurate test for dryness is to compare the weight of the 
dried product with its pre-dried weight. Some of the best sources have 
used this idea, but they didn't understand it and got the numbers all 
mixed up. They thought if produce should have only 15-20% water 
when it is dry, then one could calculate the water that must be removed 
by taking 80-85% of the original water. However, that figure leaves way 
too much water in the dried product. Table 18-2 helps you avoid this 
problem by giving you ratios. For example, if you start with twenty-five 
pounds of apricots and want to dry them to the 25% listed for dry 
produce, you would multiple the twenty-five pounds times the ratio of 
.196 and find 4.9 pounds. This means that twenty-five pounds of 
apricots dried to 25% moisture content will weigh 4.9 pounds. Doing the 
same for 3.5% dehydrated (ratio .152) gives only 3.8 pounds. 
Produce should be cooled after dehydrating. Then it can be sealed in 
a plastic bag and placed in a #10 can with a plastic lid or in a glass jar. 
Store all dehydrated products in a cool and dry location. Jars should be 
kept in the dark. 

HOME DEHYDRATING 203 
TABLE 18-1. SULFURING AND BLANCHING TIMES 
Produce 
Fruits 
Apples 
Apricots 
Nectarines 
Peaches 
Pears 
Plums 
Rhubarb 
Vegetables 
Asparagus 
Beans 
Beets 
Broccoli 
Brussel sprouts 
Cabbage 
Carrots 
Cauliflower 
Celery 
Corn 
Eggplant 
Parsnips 
Peas, green 
Potatoes, white 
Pumpkin 
Rutabagas 
Spinach 
Squash, summer 
Sweet potatoes 
Tomatoes 
Turnips 
Sulfuring Time 
45 min 
2hrs 
8 min 
8 min 
5 hrs 
l h r 
Steam 
5 min 
3-4 min 
8 min 
8 min 
6 min 
— 
2-3 min 
3-5 min 
2-2*4 min 
6-8 min 
3-31/2 min 
6-7 min 
2V2-3 min 
3-3Vi min 
4-5 min 
2 min 
2-21/2 min 
3V£min 
3-5 min 
3 min 
6-8 min 
2-3 min 
3-5 min 
2-2V2 min 
2x/2-3 min 
2-3 min 
3 min 
3-5 min 
Boil 
2 min 
4-5 min 
8 min 
8 min 
— 
— 
— 
2-3 min 
2 min 
— 
2 min 
— 
1V2-2 min 
3V2min 
3-4 min 
2 min 
lVfcmin 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
IV2 min 
IV2 min 
— 
1 min 
— 
Dried Meat 
Lean beef and similar meats can be cut into thin strips and dried 
into jerky. Pork should not be used because the low heats of dehydra-
tion will not kill the trichinosis bacteria. Unless you live in a hot and 
dry climate, you risk losing a lot of the meat to spoilage by drying it in 
the sun. Meat for jerky should be parboiled for fifteen to thirty seconds 
prior to drying. Jerky will keep a year or so if properly protected. It can 
also be pounded into a powder and mixed with dried powdered berries, 
nuts and suet to make pemmican. 
Fish containing less than 5% fat can also be dried if done quickly. It 
should keep at least three to four months if made without salt and even 
longer with it. 

TABLE 18-2. WATER CONTENT OF PRODUCE 
AND DEHYDRATION RATIOS 
This table gives the percentage of water contained in fresh, dry and dehydrated produce 
according to the USDA Handbook #8. The ratios for dry and dehydrated have been calculated 
from the given water content. Where no content was listed, the ratios were calculated using 
20% for dried fruits and 4% for all dehydrated items. The ratios can be used to accurately 
estimate when the produce is dried or dehydrated to the listed percentage. For example, if 
you wanted to dehydrate 10 pounds of sweet cherries to the 20% moisture content, 
multiplying 10 by the given ratio of .245 would tell you that the 10 pounds of cherries would 
weigh only 2.45 pounds when they are dehydrated to that percentage. The ratio means that 
one pound of sweet cherries would only weigh .245 pound (less than V* pound) when dried to 
a 20% water content. 
it 
Apples 
Apricots 
Bananas 
Cherries, sour 
sweet 
Cranberries 
Currants 
Figs 
Grapes and raisins 
Nectarines 
Peaches 
Pears 
Pineapples 
Plums 
Prune plums 
Rhubarb 
Strawberries 
Fresh % 
84.8 
85.3 
75.7 
83.7 
80.4 
87.9 
84.2-85.7 
77.5 
81.5 
81.8 
89.1 
83.2 
85.3 
81.1-86.6 
78.7 
94.8 
89.9 
Dry% 
24 
25 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
23 
18 
18 
25 
26 
— 
— 
28 
— 
— 
Ratio 
.200 
.196 
.304 
.204 
.245 
.151 
.188 
.292 
.226 
.226 
.145 
.227 
.184 
.202 
.296 
— 
.126 
Dehydrated % 
2.5 
3.5 
3.0 
— 
— 
4.9 
— 
— 
— 
— 
3.0 
— 
— 
— 
2.5 
— 
— 
.156 
.152 
.251 
.170 
.204 
.127 
.157 
.234 
.193 
.190 
.112 
.175 
.153 
.168 
.218 
.054 
.105 
Vegetables 
Beans, green 
Beets 
Cabbage, regular 
Chinese 
Carrots 
Corn, sweet 
Eggplant 
Horseradish 
Mushrooms, domestic 
Onions 
Parsnips 
Peas 
Peppers, red & green 
chili 
Potatoes 
Pumpkin 
Rutabagas 
Squash, summer 
Tomatoes 
Turnips 
90.1 
87.3 
92.4 
95.0 
88.2 
72.7 
92.4 
74.6 
90.4 
89.1 
79.1 
78.0 
90.7-93.4 
74.3-88.8 
79.8 
91.6 
87.0 
94.0 
93.5 
91.5 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
4.0 
— 
4.0 
— 
— 
— 
— 
4.0 
— 
— 
— 
— 
5.2-7.1 
— 
— 
— 
1.0 
— 
.103 
.132 
.079 
.052 
.123 
.284 
.079 
.265 
.100 
.114 
.218 
.229 
.083 
.197 
.215 
.088 
.135 
.063 
.066 
.089 

HOME DEHYDRATING 
205 
More Information 
There are a number of books on just dehydrating with the following 
being among the best: 
How to Dry Foods by Deanna DeLong and Lara Gates 
The ABC's of Home Food Dehydration by Barbara Densley 
Dry It, You '11 Like It by Gen MacManiman 


19 
OTHER FOOD 
PRESERVATION METHODS 
The food preservation methods covered in this chapter should not be 
your main ways of preserving food but they can be used to supplement 
other methods. 
Freezing 
Freezing is an excellent and easy way to preserve many fruits, 
vegetables and meats, but it is very expensive compared to canning and 
dehydrating. However, from a survival standpoint, its major disadvan-
tage is vulnerability. Even with an alternate source of power, the 
freezer can malfunction and put your frozen food storage in immediate 
peril. If that happens, you can prolong its frozen life with the tech-
niques outlined in Chapter 7. You'll still have only a few days to 
preserve the food by another method or loose it. 
Besides meats and seafood, the produce preserved well by freezing 
includes applesauce, asparagus, green beans, lima beans, broccoli, 
carrots, cauliflower, corn, peas, peppers, potatoes, spinach, strawberries 
,and summer squash. Approximate yields of frozen foods from fresh is 
listed in table 19-1. Recommended storage times are given in table 19-2. 
Obviously, a freezer is necessary. A chest freezer is better at 
retaining cold when opened, and a lock will prevent accidental opening. 
About six cubic feet per person is often recommended. A cooler or ice 
chest may come in handy if the power goes off, and you'll need a 
blancher to prepare produce for freezing. Freezer bags with a bag 
sealer, plastic containers, freezer wrap with twists and freezer tape, 
and heavy- duty aluminum foil will provide adequate protection for the 
food. Proper wrapping prevents freezer burn. Ascorbic acid is used as 
an anti-oxidant and to prevent discoloring of fruits and fish. Sugar is 
used to wet-pack fruits for added flavor. 
Flash-freezing will prevent the formation of large ice crystals which 
rupture the cells and harm texture and flavor. You can do this at home 
if your freezer will get to -20° F (-29° C) or below. A single layer of 

208 
FOOD PRESERVATION 
TABLE 19-1. YIELD OF FROZEN FROM FRESH PRODUCE 
The actual number of quarts will depend on the variety, size, maturity and quality of the 
produce and the way it is prepared. The standard weight of the fresh produce quantities is 
not the same in all states. 
Fruits 
Apples 
Apricots 
Berries (unless listed) 
Cantaloupe 
Cherries (un-pitted) 
Cranberries 
Currants 
Peaches 
Pears 
Pineapple 
Plums 
Raspberries 
Rhubarb 
Strawberries 
Vegetables 
Asparagus 
Beans, green and wax 
lima (in pods) 
Beet greens 
Beets (without tops) 
Broccoli 
Brussel sprouts 
Carrots (without tops) 
Cauliflower 
Corn, sweet (in husks) 
Peas, gren (in pod) 
Peppers 
Pumpkin 
Squash, summer 
Sweet potatoes 
Tomatoes, whole 
Fresh quantity 
1 bushel (48 lbs) 
1 bushel (50 lbs) 
1 lug or crate (22 lbs) 
1 crate (24 qt) 
1 dozen (28 lbs) 
1 bushel (56 lbs) 
16 qt crate (22 lbs) 
1 box (25 lbs) 
2 qt (3 lbs) 
1 bushel (48 lbs) 
1 lug (20 lbs) 
1 bushel (50 lbs) 
1 western box (46 lbs) 
1 peck (14 lbs) 
5 lbs 
1 bushel (56 lbs) 
1 lug or crate (20 lbs) 
1 crate (24 pt) 
15 lbs 
1 crate (24 qt) 
1 crate (12 lbs) 
1 bushel (30 lbs) 
1 bushel (32 lbs) 
1 bushel (15 lbs) 
1 bushel (52 lbs) 
1 crate (25 lbs) 
1 box (4 qt) 
1 bushel (50 lbs) 
2 medium heads 
1 bushel (35 lbs) 
1 bushel (30 lbs) 
3 peppers (% lb) 
50 lbs 
1 bushel (40 lbs) 
1 bushel (50 lbs) 
1 bushel (53 lbs) 
Pints 
32-40 
58-70 
28-33 
32-36 
20-24 
36-44 
14-17 
46-54 
3-5 
32-48 
13-20 
40-50 
37-46 
11-14 
3-5 
38-56 
13-20 
22-26 
15-22 
36-40 
15-22 
30-45 
30-45 
30-45 
35-42 
22-26 
5-7 
32-40 
3 
14-17 
12-15 
1 
30-34 
32-40 
33-44 
15-20 

OTHER FOOD PRESERVATION METHODS 
209 
produce is placed on a tray and then put in the coldest part of the 
freezer for twenty-four hours. After that the freezer can be turned back 
up to the normal -10 to 0° F (-23 to -18° C). 
Salt Curing 
Small amounts of salt can be used to ferment and pickle various 
fruits and vegetables. Eggs, olives and fish may even be pickled. 
However, none will keep more than a few months unless canned. 
Larger amounts of salt will permit storage for longer periods of time. 
Pickling salt can be used for brine and dry curing of meat. Brine 
curing results in a more consistent and milder flavor, but dry curing is 
faster. A strong brine is necessary to preserve the meat for very long. 
A brine pump is commonly used on hams and other large pieces of meat 
to inject the brine throughout the meat and speed the process. Both 
methods result in extremely salty meat. Excess salt can be washed 
off or soaked out before eating. Saltpeter (potassium nitrate or 
TABLE 19-2. STORAGE PERIODS FOR FROZEN FOODS 
Maximum storage in months at 0° F (-18° C) or below 
Meat 
Beef, ground and stew 
roasts and steaks 
Fish, fat 
lean 
Lamb, chops 
ground and stew 
roasts 
Pork, chops 
ham and sausage 
roasts 
Veal, cutlets or chops 
ground 
roasts 
Organ meats 
Miscellaneous 
Baked goods 
Butter and lard 
Cheese 
Coconut, shredded 
Cookies 
Cream 
Eggs (not in shell) 
Fruit cake 
Fruit pies 
Nuts 
2-3 
8-12 
2-3 
6-9 
3-4 
2-3 
8-12 
3-4 
1-2 
4-8 
3-4 
2-3 
4-8 
3-4 
2-3 
6-8 
6-8 
8-12 
8-12 
3-4 
8-12 
8-12 
6-8 
6-12 
Vegetables 
Asparagus 
Beans 
Beets 
Broccoli 
Brussel sprouts 
Carrots 
Cauliflower 
Corn 
Eggplant 
Kohlrabi 
Okra 
Parsnips 
Peas 
Peppers 
Pumpkin and winter squash 
Rutabagas 
Spinach and other greens 
Summer squash 
Turnips 
Fruits 
Citrus fruits and juices 
Juices (except citrus) 
Mixed fruits 
Other fruits and berries 
6-8 
8-12 
12 
12 
8-12 
12 
12 
8-12 
8-12 
8-12 
12 
12 
12 
8-12 
12 
12 
12 
8-12 
12 
4-6 
8-12 
6-8 
12 

210 
FOOD PRESERVATION 
sodium nitrate) can be used to preserve color. Sugar can be used as a 
tenderizer and to improve flavor. There are also commercially-prepared 
cures you could store. After curing, the meats are usually smoked. 
Lean fish that have been salted and properly dried will keep for a 
year or longer. Fat fish pickled in a strong brine may keep up to three 
months or longer. 
Smoke Curing 
Smoking is a type of drying and greatly changes the original flavors 
of the product. The meat is salt cured before it is smoked. Hams, bacon, 
meat and fish can be kept by preserving this way. Cold smoking (70-90° 
F) preserves the best, while hot smoking (170-210° F) is used solely to 
flavor and slow-cook the meat. The smokehouse must be built with the 
proper distance between the fire and the smoke chamber for the type 
of smoking preferred. 
Cold smoking is best done in the late fall and early spring when 
daytime temperatures are cold enough to keep the meat from spoiling 
and nighttime temperatures are above freezing. Don't use resinous 
woods for the fire because they impart unpleasant flavors to the meat. 
Cold smoked hams will keep longer than a year. All meat that has been 
salted and cold smoked is still raw and should be cooked prior to eating. 
Sausage Making 
Meat, poultry and game scraps can be ground up and made into 
sausage. All you need is a manual cast-iron meat grinder with cutter 
plates and an attachment for stuffing sausages. A funnel will work in 
an emergency. Artificial casings may be stored, or you can use the small 
intestine from a hog or sheep. Light-weight muslin is normally used for 
sausages over one and a half inches in diameter. A selection of spices 
will help make sausage to your taste preferences. Good sausage has a 
balance of fat and lean meat in it. Sausage will keep for six months to 
more than a year if smoked. Otherwise, it must be canned or frozen for 
long-term storage. 
Further Information 
Detailed information on freezing, salt curing, etc. is contained in 
some of the books listed in Chapter 17. Other books on making sausage, 
jerky and smoking meats are listed in Chapter 32. 

20 
EMERGENCY EVACUATION 
Without warning, a local disaster like an earthquake, flood, or a 
chemical or nuclear accident may force you and your family to quickly 
leave your home. Temporarily relocated, you may find you must rely on 
yourselves for some period of time until the civil authorities can 
effectively respond. If you are prepared with an Emergency Evacuation 
Kit (EEK, sometimes referred to as a "72-Hour Kit"), you will be ready 
to provide the bare necessities and a minimal level of comfort during 
that period. Being so prepared will also leave you more in control of the 
situation and help keep up your morale. 
What about national disasters, like a nuclear, biological, or chemical 
attack? In a major crises the civil government might be totally unable 
to effectively help you at all. You might be on your own for substantial 
periods of time. 
The Emergency Evacuation Kit (EEK) 
When thinking about an emergency evacuation kit, some individuals 
want to play mountain man and only want "the basics" they can carry 
in a pocket or two. Others consider basic survival to require a 
fully-equipped, self-sufficient RV! I don't think either view fits the bill 
for an EEK. 
To function adequately, the EEK must fulfill some well-chosen 
criteria. The first is to match the anticipated crises. Ideally we would 
like to be prepared for all possible crises, but that is seldom possible 
due to cost, space and weight limitations. The EEK should be prepared 
to handle the high-probability, high-risk crises. 
To determine these you are going to have to evaluate your particular 
situation. It doesn't make much sense to prepare for a possible nuclear 
accident if the closest reactor is five hundred miles away, but it 
certainly does make sense for the family living only miles downwind 
from one. Nearly everyone lives fairly close to a chemical plant or an 
interstate highway or railroad where chemical spills could occur. 
Flooding can occur in most areas, and I wouldn't rule out earthquakes 
whether I lived in an "active" zone or not. You probably have a good 
idea whether you live where volcanoes could be a problem. Fires, 

212 
CRISIS SURVIVAL 
hurricanes, typhoons and tidal waves (more accurately called tsunamis) 
happen, too. 
Once the kinds of probable crises are determined, the criteria of 
portability comes up. There is an endless list of items that "would be 
good to have", but you'll have to make some tough compromises. The 
EEK must be kept handy and ready to go at a moment's notice to be 
useful. And it needs to be the right size. If it's too large, you will 
probably find it stored somewhere out of the way and perhaps not 
complete when needed. Too little, on the other hand, will mean it 
doesn't contain enough to be effective. 
How are you going to transport it? You would need a truck for all the 
equipment I've seen on some lists. Perhaps you will be able to use a 
vehicle, but earthquakes can quickly make roads worthless, and 
automobiles also need fuel to run. But carrying everything on your back 
can severely limit what you can take. The best alternatives seem to be 
a decent sized backpack or some container that can be mounted on a 
pack frame. Then it can be transported either by vehicle or by foot. A 
person in average shape can carry about one-fourth to one-third his 
body weight fairly comfortably, and you should try not to exceed that in 
your planning. The large duffle bags so often seen used for these type 
kits are just fine for carrying in a vehicle but are hard to carry for any 
appreciable distance on foot. 
Now you can start planning the specific makeup of your EEK. I 
recommend you put your own together rather than simply purchasing 
a commercial kit. I've seen a number of them running from under $100 
to more than $1,000, but chances are none of them will fit your 
particular needs. Buying one of them also means making do with their 
selection and quality. 
There is no magic list of the "23 items guaranteed to get you through 
any situation" so you'll just have to make up your own. To help you, 
suggested items have been divided into the following ten categories. Go 
through and choose those that best fit your specific needs. 
1. 
Container. The container should be sturdy and large enough to 
hold everything. It also helps if it is waterproof and items can be 
organized and are easily accessible. While a backpack will work 
fine, one container you might consider is the plastic bucket with 
a handle and tight-fitting lid. The bucket can do triple duty: it 
can not only hold the EEK items, but will also serve to carry and 
hold water and works fine as an expedient toilet and waste 
holder. Buckets can be strapped on pack frames to be carried. 

EMERGENCY EVACUATION 
213 
A large fishing tackle box can help organize items but is 
awkward to carry far by hand. Improvised containers might be 
suitcases, ice chests, garbage cans, etc., but remember it must be 
small enough to fit into a vehicle if you will use one. 
One idea I recommend is to have one container per person for 
individual gear and perhaps some food and water with the 
remaining items stored in a communal, group, or family 
container. This will lessen the impact in case of separation. 
Water. Unfortunately, water is bulky and heavy, weighing over 
eight pounds per gallon. Have a one to two-quart canteen in each 
individual's container and some purification tablets and/or a filter 
in the communal one. A two and a half or five-gallon collapsible 
bucket or jug with spigot would be a good idea if you aren't using 
buckets for your EEK containers. In the desert you might want 
a solar still. Store a five-gallon container of water near the 
vehicle you would likely use. 
Food. It's best to store foods that do not need refrigeration and 
can be eaten without cooking. Don't worry about having it 
nutritionally balanced; for the short-term just have enough 
palatable calories (see Chapter 8 to find amount of calories for 
your family; enough for three days is usually recommended). 
Store foods like canned meats (Vienna sausage, tuna, etc.), stew, 
jerky, pork and beans, peanut butter, cheese, soda and graham 
crackers, canned and dehydrated fruits, hot chocolate, powdered 
milk, fruit juices, chocolate bars, nuts, hard candy, soup, bouillon 
cubes, protein bars and sugar. Many are available in pull-tab 
cans or small packets. If you have babies, remember some baby 
food, formula and baby bottles with nipples. Also store some salt 
tablets. 
Each individual container should have a spoon, fork and a 
sharp knife. A plate and a stainless steel camping cup would also 
be excellent. And each container should have a P-38 G.I. can 
opener in it; they're exceptionally inexpensive and very handy. 
Keep some detergent and a dishpan to clean the utensils after 
use. 
Clothing and Bedding. Have a change of warm, durable work 
or outdoor clothing suitable to the coldest weather you can 
expect. Don't forget outerwear like a coat and rain wear. Extra 
socks and underwear help along with work gloves, a good hat for 

CRISIS SURVIVAL 
shade and a wool cap for warmth. Keep a pair of well-fitting work 
shoes or hiking boots near your bed for instant access. 
The lightest bedding would be one "emergency" blanket per 
person. It is a reflectorized metallic blanket that reflects back 
90% of the body heat. More substantial bedding could be a 
sleeping bag or a wool blanket with blanket pins. 
Shelter. To protect from exposure to the elements, it can range 
all the way from a plastic drop cloth or "space" blanket up 
through a nylon tarp or tube tent all the way to a full-fledged 
backpacking tent. A space blanket is similar to the "emergency" 
blanket but thicker, and it is the recommended minimum. Get 
the heavy-duty kind with grommets in the corners so you can 
improvise a shelter with a piece of rope. 
Sanitation. If your EEK uses plastic buckets as containers, 
you're all set. Use one for a toilet and another for waste storage. 
Otherwise, get a portable camping toilet with plastic bags. Hand 
soap, facial tissue, packets of wet towelettes, feminine hygiene 
and shaving needs might be considered. Babies will need 
disposable diapers. Don't forget toilet paper! 
First Aid Kit. Have a good basic first aid kit with a good 
instruction booklet and plenty of large sterile bandages, pads, 
gauze and adhesive tape. Include a supply of special medications 
with prescriptions anyone in your group or family would need 
and some moleskin or Spenco Second Skin to protect feet from 
blisters. 
General. You'll definitely want a transistor radio so you can tell 
what's going on as far as the weather, your rescue, or relief, etc. 
is concerned. Get either an AC/DC radio with fresh and 
regularly- checked batteries or a solar-powered radio with 
rechargeable batteries. You should also have fifty to one hundred 
feet of nylon rope, parachute cord, or climbing rope for making 
shelters and other things. Other items to consider are a Swiss 
army knife or survival knife, a cable saw, insect repellant, duct 
or electrical tape, folding shovel with serrated edge and maps 
covering the anticipated evacuation routes. 
A pocket survival kit could be useful. It should contain fishing 
line, hooks, sinkers, lures, snare wire, compass, razor blades and 
matches. 
A GPS (Global Positioning System) can locate your exact 

EMERGENCY EVACUATION 
215 
position on a map or, with a compass, help plan a travel route. 
But a GPS relies on satellites and only works if they do. 
9. 
Light-Heat-Cooking. A flashlight is a must. Some are available 
that generate electricity by squeezing a lever or turning a crank. 
Otherwise store fresh batteries and check them regularly. A good 
survival candle will burn a long time and even provide a small 
amount of heat. Other light sources are signal flares (good fire 
starter, too) and a cyalume light stick that creates a bright 
fluorescent light chemically for about thirty minutes by simply 
bending it. 
A hot meal might be nice but, if you choose the right foods, it 
isn't be absolutely necessary. A small backpacking stove and fuel 
won't add a whole lot of weight, though, and you can use the 
stainless steel camping cup to cook in. For moderate amounts of 
heat you could store a catalytic heater with fuel, but they take up 
substantial space and weigh quite a bit. Have plenty of 
waterproof and windproof matches stored in a waterproof match 
safe. You may also want a metal match and a magnesium fire 
starter. A disposable lighter may come in handy, too, and is small 
and cheap.. 
10. 
Personal. Things like a toothbrush, toothpaste, comb, brush, 
mirror and personal toiletry items can add a lot of comfort to a 
bad situation. A watch will help coordinate and paper and pens 
may be needed for notes and messages. A small amount of cash 
and change may be useful. Some may want to safeguard personal 
documents and valuables such as credit cards, securities, deeds, 
contracts and insurance policies. The best thing for protecting 
these items is a military ammo can. It is made from heavy-duty 
metal and is watertight when closed. 
You may also desire to have some weapons for protection. A small 
.22 pistol may serve well but a Charter AR-7 .22 survival rifle or other 
takedown rifle would be better. Some may prefer a larger caliber 
weapon. Have a decent supply of ammunition. 
Obviously, any vehicle you plan on using should contain a small kit 
with common repair parts and tools (see Table 27-1 in Chapter 28for a 
list of the basic on-board tool kit). Also keep it at least half fueled at all 
times. 
If you think you may need to evacuate for a nuclear attack, then 
plan on taking the items listed in Table 27-1. Also take along 

216 
CRISIS SURVIVAL 
instructions for building an expedient shelter, plans for a KAP, a fallout 
meter or plans and materials for a KFM and potassium iodide. The 
KAP, KFM and potassium iodide are covered in Chapter 27. 
TABLE 20-1. BASIC EMERGENCY EVACUATION KIT (EEK) 
Communal Container: 
• purifying tablets 
• solar still 
• G.I. can opener 
• toilet bags/ties 
• wet towelettes 
• first aid booklet 
• nylon rope/cord 
D tape 
D fresh batteries 
• mirror 
• plastic drop cloth 
for solar still 
D survival manual 
D nail clippers 
• water filter 
• dish pan 
• tarp or tent 
• toilet paper 
• facial tissues 
• moleskin 
• cable saw 
• folding shovel 
• matches/lighter 
• documents/valuables 
• plastic/paper bags 
• towels 
• sewing/repair kit 
• tweezers 
• collapsible bucket 
• detergent 
• portable toilet 
• hand soap 
• first aid kit 
• transistor radio 
• route maps 
• flashlight 
• fire starter 
• extra food 
• paper plates/cups 
• folding stove/fuel 
• scissors 
Communal Water Container: (one for every 2-4 people) 
D 5 gallons of water in poly bucket with handle, lid and spigot 
Individual Containers: 
• 1 to 2-qt canteen 
D salt tablets 
D plate 
• coat 
• extra underwear 
• hat/cap 
• hand soap 
D diapers* 
D insect repellant 
D matches 
• paper/pens 
• survival knife 
(each person) 
• purifying tablets 
• knife, spoon, fork 
• G.I. can opener 
• rain wear 
• work gloves 
• emergency blanket 
D sanitary napkins* 
• toilet paper 
• survival kit 
• toothbrush/paste 
• watch 
• sharpening stone 
*where applicable 
• food for 3 days 
• steel camping cup 
• change of clothing 
• extra socks 
• boots/shoes 
• sleeping bag 
D shaving items* 
• medications 
• candle 
• comb/brush 
• washcloth/kerchiefs 
• Chapstick/lotion 

21 
GENERAL SURVIVAL TOOLS 
A number of tools serve a variety of survival purposes. These 
include firearms, knives, multi-tools, axes and saws. 
Firearms 
"A well regulated Militia, being necessary to the security of a free State, the right of the 
people to keep and bear Arms, shall not be infringed." 
Second Amendment, The Constitution of the United States of America 
We, as individuals, have an inalienable right and the responsibility 
to defend our lives, our families and our property with whatever force 
is necessary. The Second Amendment of the U.S. Constitution simply 
recognizes that right. If a government doesn't trust its citizens with 
firearms and tries to disarm them, its motives should be questioned. 
If the conditions expected by many actually develop, firearms will be 
vital. Even now, in many instances, you are the only one who can 
guarantee your safety. Having a defensive firearm and knowing how to 
use it effectively to protect your family may be of even greater 
importance in coming times. 
The "ideal survival gun" doesn't exist because the answer depends 
on the specific tasks required. Likewise, an untrained person won't 
accomplish much with the best gun, while an expert can do a lot with 
a mediocre firearm. In spite of that, some guns are better than others. 
First, choose the caliber. It will be easier to obtain ammunition for 
the most popular calibers and those used by the military and police. 
Following those guidelines generally limits you to these calibers: 
.22 Long Rifle 
.223 (5.56 NATO) 
.308 (7.62 NATO) 
.30-06 
.270 
.30-30 
9mm Parabellum 
.45 ACP 
12 gauge 
.357 Magnum 
.38 Special 
.44 Magnum 
A .357 magnum also shoots .38 special while the .44 magnum would be 
a good choice for reloaders. The fewer calibers you choose, the easier it 
will be to stock and use ammunition without confusion. Limiting the 
number of firearm models will also make it easier to stockpile spare 
parts, and non-working guns can be scavenged for parts if necessary. 

218 
CRISIS SURVIVAL 
Survival Battery 
Firearms can be divided into two general categories for survival use: 
defensive and working guns. Defensive means self-defense while 
working guns are used to provide food, to control predators and pests, 
and to protect you from dangerous animals like wild dogs and snakes. 
Pistols and revolvers are limited to about fifty yards or less, while 
shotguns can be very good defensive weapons at ranges under forty 
yards (with a rifled slug best over twenty-five yards). A .223 rifle is best 
used under 250 yards. 
The number and type of firearms to stock in your survival battery 
depends on your budget and the circumstances you anticipate. The 
Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994 banned the 
manufacture and importation of so-called "assault" rifles, pistols and 
large capacity ammo clips. Although the existing "pre-ban" firearms are 
still available, this curtailed their supply and dramatically increased 
their cost. Because of this, the following recommendations only list 
"non-ban" firearms: 
Defensive-
rifle: 
and/or 
.308 
.223 
Ruger Mini-14 
pistol: 
9mm 
SIG, Glock, Beretta, Ruger, H&K, 
or 
.45 
Browning, Colt 
shotgun: 
12 ga 
Remington 870, Winchester 
Defender, Ithica 37 
Working-
rifle: 
.22 LR Ruger 10/22, Winchester 9422, 
Marlin 39, Remington 
and/or 
.308 
revolver: 
.44 Mag Ruger, Colt 
.357/38 Smith & Wesson 
and/or 
.22 LR Ruger Mark II, Colt 
If you have the money and want an "assault" rifle, you can find them 
for sale at gun shows, on the Internet or from a local firearms dealer. 
Have two to six extra magazines for any defensive weapon, and have 
good holsters for all handguns. Hunting rifles could be scoped, and all 
rifles should have shooting slings. An extra ventilated-rib barrel with 

GENERAL SURVIVAL TOOLS 219 
Ruger Mini-14 .223 
Browning Hi-Power 9mm 
Ruger .22 Bull Barrel 
AR-7 .22 
a variable choke or interchangeable choke tubes would modify the 
shotgun for hunting. The AR-7 makes an 
excellent EEK or cache weapons and the 
Savage 24F is a combination gun—a rifle 
caliber over a shotgun—you might consider. 
All firearms would be good barter items with a 
.22 perhaps the best. 
Guns can be stored for the long-term by wrapping them in plastic 
and storing in a waterproof container, perhaps including a desiccant, 
or by packing all moving parts in a grease like Cosmoline or petroleum 
jelly and wrapping in a heavy waxed or oiled paper bound with twine. 
Put a heavy coat of furniture wax on all wood and leave an excess of oil 
in the bore and on all outside metal. Any guns stored around the house 
should be locked up for safety and to prevent unauthorized use. 
Guns can be hidden either on or off-site in lengths of PVC pipe. Use 
an auger to dig a deep enough hole, place the pipe vertically in the hole, 
fill with the guns, keeping all parts together, and cover with at least 
one foot of soil. Use a rust-preventative on all metal parts prior to 
placing them in the pipe. Have a method for locating your cache when 

220 
CRISIS SURVIVAL 
needed. Additional information on caching of weapons can be found in 
Modern Weapons Caching by Ragnar Benson. 
Ammunition 
Store at least two hundred rounds per firearm; depending on your 
budget, one thousand per firearm would be better. Ammunition will 
make great barter items. Military surplus ball ammunition should be 
boxer-primed so it can be reloaded. Buy high-base #4 buckshot and 
rifled slugs for defense and #6 shotgun shells for hunting. Stored in a 
cool and dry location away from ammonia and oil-based products, 
cartridges will be useable for decades. Shotshells are more susceptible 
to moisture and may not last as long; wrap them in plastic and store in 
airtight containers. About the best container of all is the military ammo 
can, and you can go that one better by sealing the rounds in plastic 
before putting them in the can. 
Care and Repair 
You must take care of your guns if you want them to last. Clean 
them after every use. Store cleaning kits with rods, tips and brushes 
appropriate to your caliber choices. Also store plenty of cleaning 
patches, bore cleaner (solvent) and gun oil. Break Free can be used as 
a bore cleaner, solvent, gun oil and protective coating. Silicone or teflon 
lubricants work best in cold weather. 
Have a supply of spare parts for each gun to keep it operating. These 
normally include a spare firing pin, extractor and assorted springs, but 
get the advice of a competent gunsmith if in doubt. Store the parts 
wrapped in an oily cloth. 
You'll also want a gunsmithing tool kit. Brownells (see Chapter 32) 
carries a selection of tool kits along with a tremendous parts inventory. 
Gunsmithing books worth considering include: 
Gun Digest Book of Firearms: Centerfire Rifles by J.B. Wood 
Gunsmithing (3 volumes) by Patrick Sweeney 
Gunsmithing at Home by John Traister 
Reloading 
The capability to reload could become important. If you plan on 
doing a lot of practice and/or hunting, it can also save you considerable 
expense. Many experts recommend that handloads not be used for 

GENERAL SURVIVAL TOOLS 221 
defense because they may not be as reliable as factory-loaded. But, if 
you are careful, that shouldn't really be a concern. Handloads also are 
said to have shorter shelf lives than factoryloads, but this can be 
overcome by sealing the cartridge around the lead and primer after 
loading with a small amount of finger nail polish. Cartridges do have 
longer shelf lives than the individual primers and powders do. 
The least expensive way to reload is with a 
Lee Loader (about $20 per caliber), but it uses 
different size dies than full-size bench presses 
do. The HDS Compac Tool, available from 
Huntington for $80, uses the regular dies and 
weighs only thirty-seven ounces. The standard 
of bench presses, the RCBS Rock Chucker, can 
be bought with a 
complete reloading kit 
(powder measure, scale, funnel, deburring tool, 
case lube kit, reloading guide, etc.) for about 
$400. You need one set of dies per caliber at 
about $30 or so per set. 
" 
Bullets can be cast from scrap lead (e.g. tire weights) with a simple 
melting pot (even a cast iron skillet will work), a dipper or ladle, a 
sizer/lubricator, top punches and sizer dies, lube cutters, lubricants and 
bullet molds. However, solid lead bullets will result in barrel leading, 
rifling fouling and less reliable automatic feeding. 
Swaging (forming bullets inside die and punch sets under pressure 
rather than casting) allows making jacketed bullets as good as factory-
made. Normal bench reloading presses can be used for calibers up to 
.357 pistol and .243 rifle with larger calibers requiring a swaging press. 
Also needed are swaging dies, punches, lubricant, a core cutter or a core 
mold and the lead and jacket material. Lead is handy stored as lead 
wire. You can buy the commercial gilding metal jackets to store or 
swage your own from copper and brass tubing. You can even make .223 
and .243 jackets from used .22 LR cases. Swaging equipment and 
supplies are available from Corbin Manufacturing & Supply. 
Primers are relatively inexpensive but vital. Store more than you 
think you need. A selection of basic powders can handle all of your 
survival reloading needs; choices of one expert are twenty pounds of 
IMR-4895, eight pounds of Herco and three pounds of Red Dot. That 
should load around 8,000 average rounds. Unique is another versatile 
powder. 

222 
CRISIS SURVIVAL 
Reloading components should be stored where it's cool and dry. Lead 
bullets, brass cases and paper shotshell cases and wadding can corrode 
and deteriorate from moisture. Primers and powder must be protected 
from moisture and heat if you want them to last more than a few 
months. Like ammunition, don't store them around ammonia and 
oil-based products or flammable materials. They should be left in the 
original factory containers, wrapped or sealed in plastic and stored in 
an airtight container for long shelf life. Deteriorating powder forms a 
fine, brown dust on its granules and develops an irritating acidic odor. 
Again, the ammo can is hard to beat and desiccants can be used. Rust 
won't affect the aluminum bullet molds but the more durable iron ones 
can be stored in a can filled with motor oil. 
Other Weapons 
Black powder guns compare poorly with modern guns and use 
dangerous black powder. Muzzle loaders also are extremely slow to load 
and are single shot. If all the smokeless powder runs out, and you are 
forced to make your own black powder from saltpeter, sulfur and 
charcoal, you can still use it in any centerfire gun. Either way primers 
will still be necessary unless it's a flintlock. 
Air guns, on the other hand, have a definite place in survival. The 
adult spring-piston type is the only type to consider. It is capable of 
propelling pellets at seven hundred plus feet per second in rifles and 
over four hundred feet per second in pistols. They seem expensive, 
ranging into the hundreds of dollars, but are very accurate and 
powerful enough to quickly and quietly dispatch small game and pests 
without advertising the fact. They also can be ordered unrestricted by 
mail. They are recoilless and provide inexpensive practice at about a 
penny each for .177 pellets, the preferred caliber. That's less than 
one-third the cost of a similar number of .22 rounds, and they weigh 
one-fourth as much and take up one-tenth the space. Buy only 
high-quality pellets for reliability. 
Effective air rifle range is mostly in the twenty to fifty yard range 
but can be up to about sixty-five yards; pistols are limited to the fifteen 
to thirty-five yard range. Air guns will easily last a lifetime. Stock an 
oiling needle with some silicone chamber and spring oil. Also have a 
spare parts kit containing replacement mainsprings, "O" rings, piston 
seals and breech seals if used for that model. 
Bows and arrows could be useful in certain situations, but they are 
not high on the priority list. You'll need a fair amount of regular 

GENERAL SURVIVAL TOOLS 223 
practice with either a compound or long bow to hit anything 
consistently. Crossbows are easy to master and provide high accuracy 
and power at ranges of fifty-plus yards. For either, store extra strings 
and quality arrows or bolts. 
Slingshots are another item some may want to consider for small 
game. Store spare sets of surgical tubing bands. 
Further Information 
This is only a very basic overview of survival weapons. More detailed 
data can be found in the books listed below. Tappan's is the original 
classic and contains a vast amount of specific if sometimes outdated 
information. Cobb's contains some good advice for those on a limited 
budget. 
Survival Guns by Mel Tappan (reprinted 2002 by Delta Press) 
The Survival Armory by Duncan Long (Delta Press) 
Bad Times Primer by C. G. Cobb 
Gun Digest 
Shooter's Bible 
You might also want to subscribe to The Shotgun News (see Chapter 
32) to find mail order sources for guns, ammunition and reloading 
components at excellent prices. 
Knives 
Knives are valuable survival tools, and they come in a wide variety 
of styles for many uses beyond the kitchen, butchering, filleting and 
skinning mentioned in Chapter 10. Most likely you will want a general 
hunting and survival knife. A fixed-blade sheath knife is preferred, but 
a locking-blade folding knife can be handy, too. 
The Wyoming field dressing knife is unusual 
in design, but is small, works very efficiently 
and has replaceable blades. A Swiss army 
knife can put a miniature tool box in your 
pocket. There are many other types you might 
want to consider including pocket, boot and 
survival belt-buckle knives. Machetes serve 
Wvomina 
useful purposes for some. 

224 
CRISIS SURVIVAL 
There are many good brands to choose from, but be sure to always 
get quality. Swiss knives should be either Victorinox or Wenger, not 
some cheap imitation. Custom knives sometimes offer special advantag-
es, but you could get five to ten high-quality factory knives for the same 
price. 
Knives would be excellent barter items. The best buy for the money 
now is probably Schrade Old Timer knives. 
Multi-tools 
Multi-tools are a basic tool kit in a pocket-sized 
package. They usually offer at least one knife blade, 
pliers, screwdriver blades, can opener, files and other 
useful tools. 
There are many brands and models to choose from, 
each with its own strengths and weaknesses. Consider 
the size you desire (make sure they're strong enough), 
the tools you want, and then compare those models that 
fit your criteria. Locking blades are a "must have" 
feature and I would want wire cutters. Brands to 
consider are the original Leatherman, SOG, Gerber and 
Victorinox. Again, avoid cheap imitations. 
Leatherman 
Wave 
Axes 
Axes and hatchets are basic survival tools. A long-handled axe with 
five pound head (either single or double-bit) is good for felling trees to 
build a cabin. Shorter-handled axes with lighter heads, such as the 
single-bit Hudson Bay or the double-bit Cruiser styles, are excellent for 
homestead chores and general survival. A belt axe or hatchet is also 
handy. 
Saws 
Saws can be used for felling and pruning trees, cutting lumber and 
butchering animals. A good bone saw can make butchering a large 
animal a lot quicker and easier. Have extra blades. Quality folding 
saws fit in small spaces and are light-weight. One or two-man crosscut, 
bow and buck saws are useful for cutting logs. 

GENERAL SURVIVAL TOOLS 
225 
Sharpening Tools 
Knives, axes and saws must be kept sharp if they are to serve you 
well. Store the needed sharpening accessories and learn how to properly 
use them. Always use oil or at least water with all sharpening stones 
unless directions state otherwise. 
Get soft and hard whetstones with honing oil for use with knives, 
axes and other edged tools. A file is used to take out nicks and for rough 
sharpening. You'll need a saw set tool and a saw gauge for 
straightening and sharpening saw teeth. As noted in Chapter 10, 
sharpening steels, ceramic sticks and strop straps are used to 
straighten the edges on knives. 
A useful device to help you get the right angles for correct knife 
sharpening is the Buck Honemaster, but it is no longer made. There are 
some rod-guided systems such as the EdgePro Apex Sharpening System 
and those made by Lansky, Gatco and DMT. EZ Sharp makes a small 
$13 sharpener many professional chefs like, while the Butterfly and 
Super Sharpener are handy pocket sharpeners. 
Other Tools 
This chapter is not meant to be an exhaustive list of all the tools 
that might be useful for survival but to simply point out some of the 
more common and necessary. Other tools certainly worth considering 
are: 
• rope, cord, twine 
• pick axe 
• mattock 
• binoculars 
• backpack 
• compass 
• woodchopper maul 
• splitting wedges 
• adze hoe 
• sledge hammer 
• pry-bar 
• crowbar 


22 
CLOTHING AND BEDDING 
Clothing and bedding are necessary to shelter and protect the body 
from the environment: cold, heat, wind, rain, sun and injury. Surviving 
without all the civilized comforts we depend on so much will place a 
larger burden on the clothes we wear and the bedding we sleep in. 
Clothing 
I recommend that you have enough ready-to-wear clothing or the 
fabric and other materials necessary to make them on hand to last at 
least a year. The advantage of storing ready-to-wear is that they can be 
used immediately. The advantages of storing fabric and materials is 
that it costs one-third to one-half as much (but takes time to make) and 
can be made up as necessary into the items and sizes needed. That can 
be an advantage especially to those families with growing children. 
Materials might also be traded for the services of a seamstress. While 
it is a good idea to always have an extra supply of the clothing you 
normally wear, we are concerned here with basic survival clothing. 
Survival clothing should be durable, warm and comfortable work 
clothing of various kinds to suit your situation, climate and seasons. 
Don't worry about the style and appearance but about how well it will 
function and hold up. Good-quality outdoor clothing is often the best 
choice (Filson, Pendleton and Woolrich are quality brands). Tightly 
woven fabric is more snag and tear resistant and wears longer but 
loosely woven is warmer. Natural fabrics like wool and cotton are more 
absorbent, and wool retains its insulating properties even when wet. 
Synthetics, on the other hand, tend to have higher strength, resist 
abrasion and mildew better, and dry more quickly. Waterproof but 
breathable Gore-Tex and similar fabrics as well as fleece should be 
considered for pertinent items. 
Table 22-1 is a list of the minimum suggested amounts for various 
clothing items. Adapt it for your particular situation. Normally, you will 
have some of the necessary items already on hand. Items used on a 
regular basis can be stored by projecting needs ahead and purchasing 
for them on a replenishment basis, rotating just like you do with food. 
Others you may not normally use can just be stored for the future. 
Although you usually get what you pay for, the best buys can be the 

228 
OTHER PREPARATIONS 
medium-priced, medium-quality items. 
A critical item is footwear. Shoes are almost always in short supply 
during crisis times, and you can't do much without them. Buy only 
well-fitting shoes and boots with quality leather uppers and heavy 
nylon hand stitching (not glued). Other features to look for are full 
bellows tongue to keep dirt out, steel shanks to protect the foot and 
Vibram soles for long wear. Danner, Chippewa, Red Wing (Vasque), 
White, Sorel and Timberland are among the better brands. Alternating 
pairs allows drying out and prolongs shoe life. If you expect to do much 
work in the cold and snow, you'll probably want some insulated boots 
or rubber-bottomed boots with spare felt liners. Foam rubber insoles 
cushion the foot, and thick felt insoles help insulate from cold. 
It's difficult to store enough sizes to properly match growing 
children, but by loosely-fitting them you should be able to get by with 
two or three different-sized pairs per year. Leather shoes are more 
protective but not really necessary for children. 
You can purchase ready-made shoelaces or purchase nylon or 
leather shoelace material and cut to fit. The length of shoelace needed 
for a pair of shoes can be estimated by counting the number of eyelets 
or hooks on one side and multiplying by six inches. Store plenty of good 
socks with thin ones next to the skin to avoid blisters and heavy ones 
on the outside to insulate. Wigwam makes excellent socks but there are 
other good brands, too. Also store foot powder and moleskin. 
TABLE 22-1. BASIC CLOTHING PER PERSON FOR ONE YEAR 
Adapt to age, sex, climate and lifestyle 
• 8 sets underwear (2 long) 
• 1 pajamas or nightgown 
• 1 warm robe 
• 2 t-shirts 
• 2 cotton turtle-neck shirts 
• 1 straw hat 
• 1 knit cap or balaclava 
• 1 heavy-duty work belt 
• 1 pr suspenders 
• 1-2 sweaters 
• 2 pr leather work gloves 
• 1 pr winter gloves or 
mittens, inserts 
• 2 pr work shoes or boots 
• 1 pr waterproof boots/overshoes 
• 2 pr shoelaces/pr footwear 
• 12 pr socks (8 light, 4 heavy) 
• 4 pr jeans, pants, overalls 
• 1 pr heavy wool pants 
• 2-4 work shirts (chambray, etc.) 
• 2 cotton flannel shirts 
(chamois, etc.) 
• 2 heavy wool shirts 
• 1 water-repellant windbreaker 
• 1 winter work coat 
• 1 heavy-duty winter parka 

CLOTHING AND BEDDING 
229 
Don't overlook gloves. Have a good supply of leather work gloves to 
protect your hands, gloves and mittens to keep them warm and 
reusable rubber gloves to protect you when using caustic chemicals or 
skinning and dressing animals that may be infected with disease. 
Cold Weather Wear 
For cold climates, you will most likely want more warm clothing 
added to the list. You can have heavy-insulated garments or use the 
principle of layering to keep warm. Down is an excellent insulator when 
dry but fairly expensive. Thinsulate and similar synthetic insulations 
retain warmth when wet and are cheaper. Fleece also retains warmth, 
is light in weight and fairly inexpensive. There are a number of hi-tech 
underwear fabrics that wick moisture away from your body while 
providing excellent warmth. Your head lets a lot of heat escape and 
should be protected by a good hat; a balaclava is a knit hat that can also 
be used to cover the face and neck in extreme cold. Winter clothing can 
be improvised from newspapers and other things, but I think I'd prefer 
to store what I could. 
Infants 
For an infant, store sixteen to twenty-four plastic pants in assorted 
sizes through toddler. You can store cloth diapers or make three dozen 
from twenty-five yards of twenty-seven-inch diaper flannel. Don't forget 
diaper pins. Disposable diapers would be good for the EEK and water 
shortages besides being usable as bandages and for the ill. A minimum 
often yards of cotton flannel will make an adequate supply of blankets 
and baby clothes. You might want to store heavy blankets, blanket 
sleepers and a snow suit for cold climates and sleeping in unheated 
homes. Booties, sweaters and caps can be knit from yarn and other 
clothes can be made from stored cloth. 
Cleaning and Care of Clothing 
If the power is out, your electric and gas washers and dryers won't 
do you much good. The dryer can always be replaced by clothes pins on 
a clothesline or outdoor dryer, but pounding rocks in a stream doesn't 
seem to be a terrific washing method. If you don't want to use a 
washboard in wash tubs get a James Washer. It looks like a half-barrel 
with an attached handle, costs about $500 and is available from 
Lehman's (see Chapter 32). 

230 
OTHER PREPARATIONS 
Estimate the amount of laundry detergent needed from current 
usage. You will also want to store bleach and perhaps some blueing. 
Add a cast-iron flatiron and you can even have pressed clothes! There 
are also irons that use either gas or propane available from Lehman's. 
Footwear will last for years if kept clean and dry. Store leather 
preservatives and water proofing as well as paste wax for polish. Most 
footwear is made from chrome-tanned leather and needs a wax or 
silicone-based treatment like Sno-Seal, Biwell and Leathe-R-Seal. 
Oil-based compounds are for oil-tanned leather and will weaken the 
glue on footwear with cemented soles. NeatsFoot Oil and Mink Oil keep 
leather soft and pliable. Saddle soap cleans and softens leather. 
Clothing and Fabric Storage 
Clothing, fabrics, boots and bedding should be stored clean in a cool, 
dry and dark environment. Heat will crack leather, too much moisture 
may cause mildew, and light deteriorates some materials and fades 
colors. Moth balls or crystals can be used to protect woolens from moths 
and other insects and desiccants can be used to reduce moisture. Oiling 
leather will help it remain pliable, and shoe trees help footwear retain 
their shape. Acid-free tissue paper should be used for wrapping. Plastic 
bags can be sealed to keep dust out, and a cedar chest with a 
tight-fitting top is among the very best storage containers. Label 
containers with contents. Sleeping bags and down clothing should be 
stored loose and not all wadded up in a stuff sack. 
Making Your Own Clothing 
Storing fabric will allow you to make clothing items as needed in the 
proper sizes. Table 22-2 tells how much is needed to make various items 
and suggested types of fabrics (check patterns for exact amounts); 
depending on the pattern it takes two-thirds to seven-eighths as much 
in sixty-inch widths. Normally woven wools come in fifty-four to 
sixty-inch widths and cotton and polyester knits are usually sixty 
inches wide. Patterns can often be arranged with less waste on wider 
widths of cloth. 
Bolts of denim, cotton and wool flannel, broadcloth, corduroy, 
unbleached muslin and various pants weight cottons could be stored. A 
supply of leather would also be useful. Babies' sleeper sets take about 
one yard of sixty-inch stretch terry or cotton knit. Terry is also good for 
bath towels while muslin is used for dish towels and bandages. 
Kits are available from Frostline to make jackets, coats, comforters, 

CLOTHING AND BEDDING 
231 
sleeping bags and other items. They come complete with all notions and 
materials including the thread. The fabric and insulation is pre-cut. 
Fabrics may be bought locally or from mail-order sources (see Chapter 
32). 
Sewing Equipment and Supplies 
Sewing by hand is pretty time consuming and less durable than 
machine stitching. So, if you are going to sew, you will want to have a 
sewing machine. An electric one is fine for now, but a treadle sewing 
machine works when the electricity is off. You might be able to find an 
old one locally for about $50. Or you can adapt your powered machine 
with a pulley or even turn it by hand (slowly)! 
For heavy-duty sewing with canvas and leather you might want an 
electric commercial or upholstery sewing machine. Store extra parts, 
machine oil and a brush. 
Store a variety of machine needle sizes (9, 11, 11 ballpoint, 14, 16, 
16 jeans, 18,19 and 21 for heavy canvas and coarse cloths). You'll want 
some sharps hand needles in various sizes, too. Store thread in various 
colors and sizes; size 50 general-purpose polyester-core cotton or nylon 
thread is the best, but you will also want some button cord and heavier 
thread for denim. Thread is available in inexpensive, large quantities 
on commercial-sized spools. Have a good supply of sharp colored-ball 
pins, safety pins, bobbins and some tailor's chalk. 
Get a good pair of dressmaker's shears, sewing scissors, pinking 
shears and a pair of embroidery scissors. Also get a tape measure, 
sewing gauge, seam ripper, thimbles, pin cushion, darning spool and a 
tracing wheel with carbon. 
You can always make your own patterns by taking apart old clothes, 
but it would be better to store assorted basic patterns in various sizes. 
You will also need a good supply of notions to make most items: zippers 
in a variety of lengths and weights (heavy-duty for jeans and pants, 
separating for jackets and coats), buttons, snaps, hooks and eyes, rivets, 
bar tacks, nylon tape fasteners (Velcro), grommets, interfacing, linings, 
trims and various widths of twill tape, bias tape, seam tape, hem tape, 
nylon tape, mending tape, bindings, iron-on patches, elastic and t-shirt 
ribbing. 
If you store yarn and the proper needles, you will be able to knit 
mittens and sweaters. There are also manual knitting machines. Hats, 
gloves and scarves take about four ounces of a three-ply sport weight 

TABLE 22-2. FABRIC NEEDED FOR BASIC CLOTHING 
(Approximate yards of 45" width fabric; depending on pattern, 60" requires % or more as much) 
Items of 
Clothing 
Underpants 
Nightgown 
(long) 
or nightshirt 
Pajamas 
Robe (long) 
II T-shirt 
(short-
sleeve) 
Shirt 
(long-sleeve) 
Pants 
Overalls 
Jacket 
ICoat 
Infants 
Size 0-
2 
1 
*4 
% 
1*4 
1 
1 
Children 
Size 2-
3 
*4 
2 
VA 
1*4 
*4 
1V6 
1 
1*4 
VA 
VA 
Size 4-
6 
*4 
2*4 
2 
VA 
% 
1% 
VA 
VA 
VA 
VA 
Size 8-
10 
*4 
3 
2% 
2 
% 
2 
1*4 
2 
VA 
2*4 
Youth 
Size 12-
16 
V4 
3% 
3*4 
3*4 
1 
2*4 
2*4 
2% 
2*4 
3 
Women 
Small 
*4 
3% 
3% 
4 
1 
2 
2*6 
3*4 
2*4 
3*4 
Medium 
% 
4 
4*4 
4*4 
1*4 
2*4 
2% 
3*4 
2V4 
3% 
Large 
1 
4*4 
4% 
4 3/4 
1*4 
2*4 
2% 
3*4 
2*4 
4 
Men 
Small 
y2 
3% 
4*4 
4 
1*4 
2*4 
2% 
3*4 
2% 
3 
Medium 
% 
4 
4% 
4 
1*4 
2*4 
2% 
3*4 
2% 
3*4 
Large 
1 
4*4 
5 
4*4 
2 
2% 
3 
4 
3 
3*4 
Suggested Fabrics 
cotton knit, tricot 
flannel 
flannel, cotton blends, prints 
flannel, terry, quilted fabrics 
cotton blend knits 
cotton and wool flannels, 
broadcloth, chambray 
| 
denim, corduroy, cotton 
duck, poplin, sailcloth 
denim, corduroy, cotton 
duck, poplin, sailcloth 
denim, corduroy, wool, poplin 
wool, corduroy 

CLOTHING AND BEDDING 233 
yarn while socks take eight ounces and sweaters use four to twelve 
ounces depending on size. 
To put all your tools and fabric to best use, you might want to have 
the following books: 
Complete Guide to Sewing by Reader's Digest 
The Complete Photo Guide to Sewing (Singer) 
Making and Repairing Shoes 
It's much easier to store quality footwear than make it. However, 
you may want the capability of doing so if the need arises and the same 
equipment will allow you to repair worn shoes. Table 22-3 lists the 
necessary tools, supplies and materials for making and repairing shoes 
and boots. There used to be a couple of books available back from the 
1960's but I don't know of any currently. With those tools and supplies 
you can also make many other leather items like belts, gloves, pouches 
and jackets. To do these you may want to add the appropriate patterns, 
leather, lacing of various widths, hardware and a wooden mallet. 
Making your own fabric and leather 
Although beyond the scope of this book, you can make your own 
homespun wool with a hand spindle or spinning wheel and wool cards 
for carding the wool. A loom will make cloth from wool yarn. Plants and 
minerals can be used to make dyes. Rugs may be woven from cloth 
TABLE 22-3. COBBLER EQUIPMENT AND SUPPLIES 
Tools 
Ordinary hardware-type utility knife with blades, sharp small curved paring 
knife, eight-inch upholstery shears, revolving leather punch, stitching awl with 
Speedy Stitcher #8 needles, two-inch #00 or #1 harness needles, glue rougher or 
heavy-grit sandpaper. Handy-to-have: cobbler's or tack hammer, ball-peen 
hammer, stitching spacer, leather rasp, calipers, pliers. 
Supplies 
Heavy-duty waxed nylon thread (Nyltex; dental floss or fishing line will do in 
emergencies), barge contact cement and thinner, shoemaking or clinching nails 
(%" and 1"), eyelets, rivets, buckles and Sam Browne buttons. 
Materials 
Four to seven-ounce chrome-tanned moccasin cowhide (2-3 square feet per pair 
shoes), rubber or leather sole blanks, pre-cut heels, one-inch foam rubber for 
padding. 

234 
OTHER PREPARATIONS 
scraps with no equipment at all. Rope and twine can be easily twisted 
with the help of a rope machine. 
Animal skins and furs may be tanned the old way with the animal's 
brains, with a commercial tanning solution, or a home-made solution 
of one and a half pounds of alum, one and a half pounds of salt and five 
gallons water. Books that may be of interest: 
Tan Your Hide! by Phyllis Hobson and Steven Edwards 
Home Tanning and Leather Making Guide by A.B. Farnham 
Home Manufacture of Furs and Skins by A.B. Farnham 
Bedding 
Have enough bedding on hand to keep each person warm if there 
were no other heating. That may be three to four good blankets per bed 
or more. Bedding includes the following items: 
• blankets 
• quilts 
• comforters 
• mattress pads 
• sheets 
• rubber sheets 
• pillows 
• pillow cases 
Sleeping bags make excellent emergency bedding for family or 
unexpected guests. You can keep them cleaner, and they will last 
longer, with liners. Down is warm but expensive and loses its warmth 
when wet. PolarGuard and Quallofil don't compact as well but are 
nearly as good, are not bothered by mildew and are easily machine 
washed. 
Quilts and comforters can be made from cloth scraps, recycled 
clothing and blankets as well as from flannel, cotton and muslin. It 
takes about three and a third yards for an infant's crib quilt, ten yards 
for a twin quilt and eleven yards for a double quilt. Store half-inch batts 
for quilts, one to one and a half inch for comforters. A quilting frame 
will make the work much quicker and easier. You will also want #5 to 
#8 quilting and darning needles and thread. Receiving blankets can be 
made from two yards of forty-five inch flannel. You can also make 
sheets, but only certain materials come in wide enough widths to make 
them without seams. 
Newspaper can be used for emergency insulation if need be. It's not 
great but works better than nothing. Spare blankets could be used for 
warm robes or to line jackets and coats. 

23 
ENERGY 
HEAT, COOKING AND LIGHT 
Energy is a critical concern for survival under crisis conditions. If 
you live in a cold climate, how would you heat your home without 
natural gas, fuel oil or electricity? Wherever you live, how would you 
cook your food? How would you see at night? How would you use many 
of the other things that require energy, like refrigerators, hot water 
heaters and radios? 
Contingency planning for energy shortages or complete unavailabil-
ity can be very complex depending on perceived needs, circumstances 
and desires. While some people may feel it is adequate to store a 
camping stove with a small supply of fuel for short-term emergencies, 
others may feel it is wise to build an energy-sufficient home complete 
with solar cells and wind-powered generator. This chapter will point out 
the possibilities. You will have to decide how far you are willing and 
able to go. At least one method for each (heating, cooking and light) is 
recommended but two or three would be preferred. It might be of 
benefit at this point to refer to Table 23-1 for a comparison of the 
alternative fuels and see which ones might be best for you. 
Heat 
First, assess your situation if your normal heating system failed. 
Realize that most modern systems require electricity to operate thermo-
stats, fans, blowers, fuel injectors and ignition. And, with little or no 
heat, how would you keep your home's water pipes from freezing? 
The best long-term crisis solution for heating a home is an airtight 
wood/coal stove or furnace for larger areas. Multi-fuel furnaces that use 
a fossil fuel like gas, oil, or propane combined with a wood/coal capacity 
allow use of the regular fuel until forced to switch over. A wood/coal 
forced-air furnace could be used all the time if that is desired, or a 
wood/coal furnace or stove could be connected up to the normal ducts to 
serve as a back-up when needed. The same can be done with boiler 
furnaces for hot water or steam heating. A good wood or coal stove 
burns with 50-75% efficiency. A Franklin stove burns at only 35-45%. 

TABLE 23-1. FUELS 
BTU ratings are approximate and variable. Usable energy produced can be found by 
multiplying the BTU rating by the system efficiency. The normal system efficiency range is 
given in percentages inside the parentheses. One kilowatt-hour equals 3,412 BTU. 
Wood 
6500 BTU/lb with 25% moisture content (50-65%). Abundant in some locations, it is 
scarce in others and may become more so during a crisis. Renewable wherever it grows 
naturally. A standard cord is 8x4x4 feet of tightly stacked wood; the 128 cubic feet only 
contains about 80-90 cubic feet of wood. A cord of air-dried softwood weighs about VA tons, 
while hardwood can weigh over 2 tons. A face cord is 8x4x whatever length it is cut in, 
making it typically V3-V2 a standard cord. Softwoods like pine burn quickly and hot and make 
the best kindling. Hardwoods like oak burn more slowly. Store wood outside, shielded from 
the weather so it will stay dry. It takes about twelve months to well-season wood. Burning 
green wood can cut efficiencies by up to 25%. Estimated time needed to chop and split a cord 
of wood is eight hours. Use a chain saw (Stihl is the best brand), cross cut saw, buck saw or 
axe to cut and a splitting maul or sledge hammer with wedges to split. 
Coal 
8,500-15,500 BTU/lb (55-65%). There is more energy stored in the coal reserves of the 
U.S. than in all the world's known reserves of oil. Coal is mined in 26 states and definitely 
should be considered the basis crisis fuel in those areas. Anthracite, or hard coal, burns with 
less soot and smoke than the softer bituminous coal, but is harder to burn and is found 
almost exclusively in Pennsylvania. Coal burns dirtier than wood, but three to five times as 
much energy can be stored in a comparable space. A ton of anthracite takes about 35 cubic 
feet while a ton of bituminous takes about 43 cubic feet. Get the recommended size for your 
stove or furnace for best results. Store coal in a dark, dry place (e.g. lined pit, coal bin, shed) 
away from air as much as possible. Use paper and wood to kindle coal. 
Kerosene 
135,000 BTU/gal, 6.8 lb/gal. Readily available now, like all liquid hydrocarbon fuels, it 
could be hard to find during a prolonged crisis. It is the most stable liquid hydrocarbon and 
stores longer without deterioration. It is also reliable and burns hot, clean,"silently and 
odorlessly in modern, efficiently-designed burners. It's flashpoint is much higher than 
gasoline, but spilled fuel does not evaporate quickly. Inexpensive when bought in five-gallon 
or larger quantities. Buy pure "water-clear" 1-K grade white kerosene and store in an opaque 
container. The 2-K grade has a much higher sulfur content and is for use only in vented 
appliances. 
Gasoline 
125,000 BTU/gal (6.1 lb/gal). Used widely in automobiles, generators, chain saws, etc., 
it will probably be scarce during a serious crisis. Highly volatile, it burns quick and hot. It 
deteriorates over time unless a stabilizer is added. Spilled fuel evaporates readily. White gas 
contains 119,000 BTU/gallon. Naptha, sold under the Coleman and Blaze labels, contains 
121,000 BTU/gallon, burns a bit cleaner, is less likely to clog burners ,and contains a rust 
inhibitor, bit it is quite expensive in the small cans. Leaded gas fouls burners. 
Diesel 
138,000 BTU/gal (6.9 lb/gal). Could be hard to find during a prolonged crisis. Less volatile 
than gasoline, it is safer to store and deteriorates more slowly. Stabilizers can be added to 
extend normal storage life. Most automobile manufacturers recommended #2-D diesel fuel 
with a minimum 40 cetane rating. For improved operation in cold weather and altitudes 
above 5,000 feet, #1-D diesel fuel can be used. It has added kerosene to make it more viscous 
and volatile, but it lacks the engine lubricants of the #2-D. Add one quart of lubricating oil 
per 100 gallons. 

Fuel Oil 
140,000 BTU/gal, 7.2 lb/gal (70%). Normally #2 domestic heating oil, it may be in short 
supply during a prolonged crisis. Used in furnaces and heaters, it can also be used as an 
emergency diesel fuel. Deteriorates over time unless a stabilizer is added. 
Liquid Petroleum Gas (LPG) 
91,500 BTU/gal propane (4.2 lb/gal), 103,000 BTU/gal butane (4.8 lb/gal) (80%). LPG 
(propane and butane) is readily available now but would be hard to find during a prolonged 
crisis. However, methane would work in most LPG equipment. LPG is reliable, easy and 
clean to use, odorless and fairly inexpensive when used in the 11, 20 and 30 pound or larger 
refillable tanks. It stores for many years without deterioration. The liquid is stored under 
pressure and is vaporized to burn. Propane is best for winter use as butane loses its pressure 
below freezing. 
Natural Gas 
100,000 BTU/hundred cubic feet (CCF) (80%). Although it may be in short supply during 
a crisis, it is made up largely of methane gas (850-1,100 BTU/cubic foot) which could be made 
and used instead. Naturally odorless, gas companies add smell to make leaking more 
detectable. 
Alcohol 
65,000 BTU/gal, 6.9 lb/gal. Can be produced at home. Produces little heat and is very 
expensive for its heat value. Fumes are irritating to some people. Flame can be extinguished 
with water and spilled fuel evaporates quickly. 
Sterno 
High probability will be unavailable during crisis. Easy to light, use and reuse, but 
produces strong fumes and has low heat value, especially considering cost. 
Charcoal 
12,600 BTU/lb. Readily available now and can be made at home. More heat per cubic foot 
than wood, but harder to start, especially without starting fluid (needs one quart per five to 
ten pounds of charcoal). Can spontaneously catch fire if stored wet. Must not be used indoors 
because produces large volume of odorless but deadly carbon monoxide. 
Coal burns about twice as hot as wood and stoves made for it are 
built with refractory linings and different draft designs and stove pipe 
installation. Combination stoves for wood and coal are not quite as 
efficient at burning either one. They should have an interchangeable 
grate, a removable liner, an ash pan and a larger draft opening than 
found on wood stoves. Wood may be burned in a stove made for coal, but 
burning coal in a wood stove will soon burn out the bottom. A wood 
grate also allows the smaller coal to fall through, and many will not 
stand up to the heats of coal-burning. If you plan on using much coal, 
perhaps the best compromise would be to get a coal stove and burn 
wood in it when you wanted to. 
Some wood/coal stoves made basically for cooking also heat up to 
1500 square feet of area. A rudimentary wood stove can be made from 
a 55-gallon steel drum or a used water heater. 
Whatever stove you get, be sure to install it properly so it won't burn 
your house down. Shield it well to prevent children from accidentally 
burning themselves. Get a poker, an ash pan, a shovel and a metal 

238 
OTHER PREPARATIONS 
bucket for ashes and clinkers. Also have a stiff brush to clean soot and 
a wire chimney brush with extension rods or ropes and scrapers to 
prevent creosote fires in the chimney. 
To preview a wide selection of wood/coal stoves as well as other 
back-to-basics items, get a copy of Lehman's Non-Electric Catalog. 
Multi-fuel furnaces are made by Yukon-Eagle. If you plan on heating 
primarily with wood, you might want a book to learn the tricks of the 
trade. 
Fireplaces are more esthetic than anything else, with typical 
efficiencies from less than 10% up to about 20%. Heat exchangers help 
somewhat. Using an insert can raise the efficiency to the 30-60% range, 
but it now looks much like a stove. 
You can also store a large quantity of fuel oil for an oil furnace or 
space heater but, once used up, you will be dependent on finding a new 
source. 
If you live in a centrally-heated apartment building or only need 
moderate heating for short-term periods, consider the highly-efficient 
pressurized kerosene heaters made by KeroSun and Toyostove among 
others. If they have a flat top you can even do minimal cooking on them. 
Get one that is UL-approved and use the proper grade of kerosene, or 
you'll get more than a slight kerosene odor. There are similar propane 
and natural gas heaters by Rinnai and Suburban. White gas and 
propane can also be used in flameless catalytic heaters. 
Burning any fuel uses up oxygen and gives off poisonous carbon 
monoxide. To prevent a dangerous buildup of gases or a depletion of 
oxygen, many believe heaters should only be used in well-ventilated 
areas or be vented and have a built-in oxygen sensor. 
A final option would be a sheepherder stove with pipe. Made from 
sheet metal, it is heavy but portable, gives off a good quantity of heat 
and could be used to heat a tent, cabin or similar structure. Cooking 
can be done on its top. 
Cooking 
Although some heating options allow limited 
cooking, most don't have ovens. For cooking and 
baking, the wood/coal stove with oven offers the 
most. Lehman's has a cooking stove comparison 
chart that shows gives details on the heating 
Pioneer Maid 

ENERGY: HEAT, COOKING AND LIGHT 
239 
Baker's Choice 
capacities 
and 
cooking surfaces. 
L e h m a n ' s 
currently 
offers 
t h e 
O v a l , 
S w e e t h e a r t , 
W a t e r f o r d 
S t a n l e y , 
E n t e r p r i s e 
Monarch, 
King, 
Savoy, Heartland, 
and some Amish-
made 
stoves. 
Many offer 
water reservoirs or jackets (they call it a 
waterfront) to heat water as they cook. 
You can connect them directly to your 
house plumbing. A double-wall construction will help keep the kitchen 
cooler in summer. 
Cooking and baking with wood or coal is very different from gas or 
electric. Heat is much harder to regulate. You will need a couple of 
trivets to raise pans off a too-hot stove, a lid lifter and an oven cleaning 
rod. Cast iron pots and pans with metal handles that won't burn or melt 
and some long-handled wooden spoons and forks are necessities. And 
practice this way of cooking prior to the crisis. If you aren't already 
proficient at it, it might also be a good idea to get Woodstove Cookery by 
Jane Cooper. 
A fireplace can always be used to cook in, but it may leave a lot to be 
desired. The best way is to have a swinging arm crane or fixed bar and 
chains to hang cast iron pots from. Tongs and a long ladle will help. A 
dutch oven can be used for baking, cast iron pans and griddle for frying, 
and a grill will work if there's nothing else. 
Less permanent alternatives are the portable camping stoves that 
use propane, butane, white gas, alcohol or kerosene. The two or three-
burners are adequate for an average family. Coleman also makes a 
small oven that fits on top of a burner for baking. The obvious 
disadvantage to these stoves is that they depend entirely on a stored 
fuel supply. 
Stoves using canned heat (e.g. Sterno), heat tabs or fuel bars are 
strictly for short-term emergency use because of their severely limited 
cooking ability. A charcoal burner or barbecue grill has the same 

240 
OTHER PREPARATIONS 
limitations. Both types should only be used inside when there is 
sufficient ventilation The Sierra Zip Stove model burns about anything, 
is portable and would make a good outdoor survival stove. Even better 
but much more expensive is the folding Pyromid system that uses any 
solid combustible for cooking, baking and providing hot water. Solar 
cookers, limited to midday cooking on sunny days, are not adequate. 
The final possibility is cooking on an open fire, but be sure you have 
cast iron cookware. A dutch oven and a reflector oven would help. 
Light 
A light source can be critical at times, 
especially when caring for the ill and calming 
frightened children. 
For the long-term without electricity, the 
Aladdin kerosene lamps seem optimum. They 
give off a white light equivalent to a sixty-watt 
light bulb and burn silently with minimal odor 
for forty-eight hours ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ 
on 
a 
gallon 
of; 
kerosene. They also 
give 
off 
a 
small 
amount of heat, and 
there is a conversion 
kit that allows the use 
of electric light bulbs 
during normal times. 
Store extra chimneys, 
mantles, wicks and a 
selection 
of spare 
parts. 
Second 
choices 
would 
be 
propane 
lamps and white gas lanterns. Both are 
brighter than kerosene lamps, hiss and glare 
when burning and give off light approximately 
equivalent to 100-120 watts for the single 
mantle and 150-200 watts for the double 
mantle. A gallon of propane or white gas will 
burn about forty hours in a single, thirty hours 
in a double. White gas is the most dangerous. 
A | a d d j n G e n j e 
| a m p 
Aladdin brass lamp 

ENERGY: HEAT, COOKING AND LIGHT 241 
Store spare mantles. Cheaper wick lamps and hurricane lamps are 
much less desirable because they give off an amber light about 10% as 
bright as the Aladdin, but only burn two to four times as long. 
Flashlights and battery-powered lanterns are obvious choices for 
quick, always-ready portable lighting. Their also obvious limitation is 
their battery life. Nicad rechargeable batteries only hold about half the 
energy of regular ones, but they can be charged up to a thousand times. 
You can store them for long periods of time prior to ever charging them; 
once they are charged they will develop a "memory" and fail to hold a 
full charge unless you totally discharge and recharge them three times. 
Then discharge them varying amounts and recharge on a regular basis. 
A multi-volt solar array can be used to charge the batteries or run small 
calculators, radios, etc. directly. Some lights, radios and calculators 
come with built-in chargers and solar cells. Store spare bulbs and 
batteries for flashlights and lanterns. 
Candles are basically for short-term emergency use only. Although 
they do give off enough light for some activities and a small amount of 
heat, their open flame can be dangerous. Keep a supply of them on 
hand, but don't count on them as your main light source. You may also 
want to store candle holders or lanterns. Tables supposedly giving the 
burn times for candles of various sizes are useless because the burn 
time also depends heavily on the characteristics of the particular wax 
used, the wick size and the number of wicks. 
It's easier to store candles, but if you want to make them later you 
should store paraffin, wicking and perhaps some molds (you can always 
make your own molds). 
Also store a supply of regular light bulbs for when your normal 
electric power is on. Nothing seems to truly replace Edison's invention. 
Hot Water 
Hot water is needed for bathing, cleaning clothes and washing 
dishes. Water may be heated by your wood/coal stove or even over an 
open fire but there are better ways if you plan for them now. Solar 
water heaters work very well on sunny days and can be added to homes 
without too much effort. There used to be wood-fired hot water heaters 
imported from Mexico, but they apparently aren't even being made 
there now. You can make a wood-fired hot water heater out of an old 
gas one by welding a fire box to its bottom. Be sure to install a 
temperature and pressure relief valve (available at a hardware or 
building supply store) on it. 

242 
OTHER PREPARATIONS 
For portable hot water, there are the SunShowers that you simply 
fill with water and place in the sun. Zodi also offers the Extreme 
portable propane showers that you can hook to a bulk tank. 
Refrigeration 
Most people would miss the convenience of refrigeration even more 
than lighting. What can you do about it? Well, there are refrigerators 
and freezers that use power sources other than electricity. Dometic 
offers the 
Servel Americana series dual electric-LP gas (can be 
converted to butane or natural gas) or kerosene refrigerator-freezers. 
Lehman's also sells the Frostek freezer that uses LP gas, kerosene or 
propane. There are other refrigerator/freezers made for the RV and 
marine markets (usually 12-24vdc) that operate on electricity or LP gas, 
including the Explorer, Novakool and Norcold brands. SunFrost, 
Solarfridge and Polartech refrigerators use one-fourth the usual 
electricity. 
Stockpiling Fuel 
The best fuels are those that presumably could always be 
replenished locally like wood and coal. However, since some choices 
require liquid hydrocarbon fuels, the only solution is to stockpile a large 
quantity of it and hope for an alternate source by the time it runs out. 
Stockpiling liquid fuel can be dangerous if not done correctly, and 
storing more than five to twenty-five gallons of gasoline is illegal in 
most urban areas (check with the local fire department) and will void 
fire insurance. Nevertheless, it can be done safely (any cars exploding 
in their garages regularly and they store ten to more than forty gallons 
of gasoline on a regular basis?) Unless you absolutely have to, though, 
do not store gasoline in or near your home or attached structures. 
The best way to store fuel is underground in properly vented tanks 
covered with at least four feet of earth. This not only prolongs the life 
of the fuel, but also reduces evaporation and helps protect it from theft, 
fires, accidents and gunshots. You can use anything from 55-gallon 
steel drums to large tanks that hold thousands of gallons. Steel tanks 
will last more than ten years underground when protected from 
corrosion with two coats of Rust Not (one gallon per two hundred 
square feet) or a well-tarred protective wrapping (not simply 
asphalt-coated). Fiberglass tanks last at least thirty years, tend to be 
cheaper in sizes larger than 2,000 gallons and can't be located by metal 

ENERGY: HEAT, COOKING AND LIGHT 243 
detectors, if that worries you. Be aware that EPA regulations on 
underground tanks are extremely strict now. 
Before burying and filling the tank, check for leaks using air 
pressure (five pounds) or water, and install and test all fittings. Losing 
stored fuel could be disastrous, and getting water into it could also be 
a problem. Avoid copper pipe and fittings. Unless you use gravity feed, 
have at least one hand pump available (not the same one for water). 
For above-ground gasoline storage, the safest method is with 
ExploSafe cans if you can still find them. Other UL-approved gas cans, 
five-gallon Jerrycans and drums may be used but are more hazardous. 
Any fuel container that can't be easily lifted when full should have a 
hand pump or manual syphon. Never syphon with your mouth because 
ingested gasoline can cause fatal chemical pneumonia. The vapors can 
be extremely explosive. To minimize vapor formation keep containers 
nearly full with only a few inches for expansion (gas expands .06%/° F). 
Volatile fuels like gasoline, propane and butane have heavy vapors that 
settle in lower areas and can puddle, possibly causing suffocation or an 
explosion. Do not store them in basements, shelters or near heat, flame 
or motors. 
Fuels stored above-ground are much more subject to temperature 
variations, with alternating expansion and contraction, and this must 
be taken into account in container size and venting. Containers that 
must be stored directly in the sun can be wrapped with insulation or 
painted with reflective silver paints to keep variations to a minimum. 
Long-Term Storage 
All liquid hydrocarbon fuels deteriorate over time (kerosene is by far 
the most stable). Components of gasoline oxidize to form gums, lacquers 
and peroxides that reduce performance, cause stalling, clog fuel filters, 
foul carburetors and spark plugs, and can even damage pistons and 
valves if extensive enough. Anti-knock compounds in high grades of 
gasoline decompose. Diesel fuel separates into its various constituents, 
little streamers of paraffin form in it and bacteria and fungi may 
pollute it. The resulting sludge and slime plugs filters and strainers, 
fouls fuel probes and lines, gums up injectors and combustion 
chambers, and breaks down tank sealants and coatings. Heat is the 
main enemy of stored fuels, greatly increasing the oxidation rate. 
Gasoline is presently formulated to be used within six months under 
normal conditions and may deteriorate in less than two months in a hot 
garage. Diesel fuel and heating oil deteriorates within a year or so. 

244 
OTHER PREPARATIONS 
Kerosene is more stable. 
Fortunately there are stabilizer additives that will retard the 
chemical breakdown and preserve the fuels for much longer periods for 
small added expense. Many preparedness sources sell Power Research's 
PRI-G (for gasoline) or PRI-D (for diesel or kerosene) fuel preservative; 
a quart will treat 512 gallons of fuel. Fifteen ounces of B.H.T. 
(butylated hydroxytoluene or 2,6-ditertiary butyl p-cresol) or one gallon 
of Fuel Mate Plus will treat 1,200 gallons of gasoline. Diesel Plus is 
used one gallon per 600 gallons of diesel fuel, and contains an anti-gel 
for winter use and a biocide to prevent algae and bacteria 
contamination. Two pounds of Ethyl's EDA-2 is recommended to treat 
1,000 gallons of kerosene. Storage tanks of all fuels can also be treated 
every six months with one-third ounce of Angus Chemical Company's 
Bioban P-1487 per 1,000 gallons to keep fungi and bacteria down. 
Treated gasoline will keep about six months in direct sunlight and 
two to five years underground. Diesel fuel and heating oil keeps about 
five to ten years when treated. Larger amounts extend the storage life 
further, and you can re-treat. For even longer fuel storage, use ten 
grams of disodium EDTA, a chelating agent, per hundred gallons for 
added protection from metal ions. The anti-oxidants will store 
indefinitely in an airtight container. 
Butane is added to gasoline to ease starting. The loss of this butane 
is called high-end burn-off and can make starting impossible. This loss 
is prevented by underground storage or by using expensive vapor 
recovery systems. Also, try to buy gasoline during the winter months 
when it has been winterized with extra butane. 
Filter any fuel that has been stored for long periods of time through 
a fine filtering agent like chamois before using. If gasoline smells like 
varnish, the gums have already formed. It is still usable mixed with two 
to three times as much fresh fuel. Acetone in a 1:20 ratio can also be 
added twenty-four hours prior to use to dissolve the gum deposits. 
How Much to Store 
The amount to store depends on intended uses and expected time 
period. Some figures are listed throughout this chapter to help you 
estimate usage. Calculate all usage of a fuel in BTU's and then divide 
the total by the BTU's given in Table 23-1 to find the needed amount. 
Remember to take system efficiencies into account. 
Other information that may be of help: artificial light is needed 
about 1,400 hours a year, freezers must operate a minimum of four 

ENERGY: HEAT, COOKING AND LIGHT 245 
hours per day to keep food frozen, and a family of four uses about six 
million BTU's of gas or nineteen million BTU's of wood or coal to cook 
meals for a year. 
You can also estimate heat needs if you know the amount of heating 
day degrees for your location (a local utility company or architect will 
probably know; for example, the average is 8200 in Minneapolis, 7383 
in Concord, NH, 6052 in Salt Lake City, 4711 in Kansas City and 2773 
in Sacramento). An average 1500 square foot two-story home built on 
a concrete slab with R-30 ceiling, R-20 wall and R-5 foundation 
insulation, with weatherstripping, caulking, storm windows and doors 
(.7 air changes/hour) uses 13,300 times the heating day degrees in 
BTU's per year for heat. A less insulated home could require more than 
double that amount while a home using passive solar techniques could 
require a lot less. Estimates can also be made by comparing winter and 
summer utility bills. 
Improvised Fuel 
When you run out of stockpiled fuels, or if you simply want to make 
them last longer, there are a number of fuels you can make from items 
commonly found around many homes. 
Newspapers that are folded, soaked in water containing detergent, 
rolled and then dried burn as clean and hot as normal wood. 
Homemade charcoal can be made by cooking pieces of hardwood, black 
walnuts and fruit pits. Fire starters and fuel can be made by pouring 
a paraffin and sawdust mixture into paper egg cartons, cupcake papers 
or tuna cans filled with rolled cardboard. Although they give off a 
strong smoke and are difficult to control, rubber tires cut into small 
pieces will burn in stoves. Other things that burn include peat, 
corncobs, straw, grains, manure and old motor oil. 
Producing Your Own Electricity 
Electricity is a terrific convenience and you may not want to do 
without it completely. There are a number of ways you can produce 
your own. 
The most basic methods use your own power. One of the simplest is 
a bicycle with a small bicycle generator attached to the wheel for 
powering small lights and recharging batteries. 
Gasoline, diesel, LP, natural gas and combination AC generators are 
excellent for immediate backup power. They will provide large amounts 

246 
OTHER PREPARATIONS 
of power but are not really designed for continuous operation. You can 
greatly prolong their lives as well as cut fuel usage in half and reduce 
maintenance by running them once a week. During the time they are 
running, you can do chores such as washing and vacuuming that take 
substantial power and charge storage batteries at the same time. 
Expect to use about eight to sixteen gallons of gasoline per hundred 
kilowatt-hours of power; diesels use about 25% less. Smaller generators 
tend to use less fuel, but it depends on the particular model and the 
operating load. 
The proper generator size can be determined by adding up the total 
wattage of all the appliances, tools and lights that will be used at any 
one time, then adding in the wattage needed to start any motors, 
compressors and blowers, and finally adding a 25% margin. A battery 
charger uses about fifteen amps at 110-120 volts. Choose the smallest 
adequate size. All generators located in enclosed areas should have 
their exhaust vented to the outside. Store motor oil to keep the 
generator lubricated. 
For planning purposes, the average 1500 square foot home uses 
about twenty kilowatt-hours per day normally. That's the equivalent of 
174 amp-hours at 115 volts. Under survival conditions you could 
probably get by on half that amount or less. 
One of the best ways of providing electricity without reliance on 
fuels is by photovoltaics (pv). This method uses a photovoltaic cell 
("solar cell") array to convert sunlight directly to electricity. Storage 
batteries are used to store excess power for use during nighttime and 
other times when sunlight is unavailable. Because of the uncertainty 
of sunlight, you should not rely exclusively on photovoltaics but have a 
reliable backup system using another method. 
An excellent book on using photovoltaics for your home is Solar 
Electric Independent Home Book by Paul Jeffrey Fowler. You can wire 
a home with a twelve-volt system that runs off of storage batteries 
charged by any electricity-generating system. It can also be powered 
temporarily with your car battery, charging the car battery while 
driving. A twelve- volt system can utilize the wide variety of equipment 
and accessories made for use in campers, motor homes and vans. 
Invertors that convert twelve-volt DC to 110-120 volt DC can be used 
to power appliances, tools and equipment using induction, capacitor or 
split-phase motors such as normal refrigerators, air conditioning, 
electric stoves, appliances and power tools. 
You can buy prepackaged pv kits from various sources (see Chapter 
32) if you don't want to design your own. They offer intertie systems 

ENERGY: HEAT, COOKING AND LIGHT 247 
(you interconnect with the commercial power grid and don't need 
storage batteries) or stand-alone systems. Other solar devices recharge 
batteries or power cell phones and laptop computers. 
If you have an independent, continuing source of water with enough 
flow and head (vertical drop), you can use a water turbine and 
generator to produce electricity. The amount of potential power in 
kilowatt-hours per month can be estimated by multiplying the average 
flow in cubic feet per minute (CFM) times the head in feet and then 
multiplying by the system efficiency factor (.5-.8 is about the range). 
For example, a four CFM flow with a fifty foot head flowing twenty-four 
hours per day through a 60% efficiency system could provide about 120 
kilowatt- hours each month. You probably wouldn't be interested in 
producing a whole lot less than that. Hydroelectric power can be the 
best and cheapest, if you have the water potential. 
Wind generators can be used only in those relatively few locations 
where the average monthly wind speed is at least ten miles per hour or 
greater. Your local airport, weather station or National Weather 
Service can tell you. If your location appears to have enough wind, you 
should check to make sure before buying a thing. Do this by renting an 
anemometer, placing it on a temporary tower thirty to fifty feet high 
and recording the wind velocities for a calendar month. Then find a 
local weather station that records the wind velocities daily and 
extrapolate to find the wind speed probability. Wind power might be 
used to compliment solar power. 
If you decide you can live without electricity, get a copy of How to 
Live Without Electricity—and Like It by Anita Evangelista or Living 
Without Electricity by Scott and Pellman. 
Storing Electrical Energy 
You won't want to use all the electricity as it is produced, so you'll 
need some type of DC storage battery facility. Not only will it provide 
power at nights and on sunless or windless days, but also it will smooth 
out power variations. You don't need batteries with intertie systems, 
but will probably want them in case of grid power failure. 
Standard automobile, golf cart or forklift batteries can be used, but 
stationary service deep-cycle storage batteries are much better as they 
have a much longer life when deeply discharged repeatedly (can exceed 
twenty years). Maximum battery life is achieved when prolonged 
charging and discharging doesn't exceed 15% of the amp-hour rating. 
This means you should have a minimum of seven times the amp- hours 

248 
OTHER PREPARATIONS 
(you may want two to three times that amount) you expect to use in a 
day. For a minimal five kilowatt-hours per day that would take about 
2900 amp-hours of twelve-volt battery capacity. You'll want spare 
batteries in case of failures. A special high-powered battery charger is 
necessary and plugs into any AC generator. Invertors are notoriously 
inefficient, but they will allow you to run AC-powered items from DC 
battery storage. 
Making Your Own Fuel 
Stored fuel will eventually run out but there are ways to make your 
own on an on-going basis. Digesters can make methane that can be 
used in place of propane and natural gas in lanterns, heaters, water 
heaters, ranges, refrigerators and furnaces. Alcohol stills can be made 
and fed with wood products, excess grains and agricultural wastes. 
Conserve What You Have 
Not to be overlooked in the search for energy sources is the 
conservation of what you have. Obviously an earth-sheltered home 
utilizing passive and active solar techniques would be nice, but there 
are many other things nearly anyone can do around his home to reduce 
the need for energy. 
Begin by making your home as thermally efficient as possible. Be 
sure you have enough insulation in the ceilings and walls. Insulate 
heating ducts, electrical outlets, hot water tank and pipes. Have double 
and triple pane windows or storm windows and doors. Use 
weatherstripping and caulking to seal leaks and around doors and 
windows. Cut energy use by cooking with waterless cookwear and using 
ovens for more than one thing at a time. 
If a prolonged crisis comes, you can conserve energy by heating only 
a portion of your home. The best place is near the heat source and on 
the south side to get as much solar energy as possible. 
Spare Parts 
While you're stockpiling fuel and the equipment to use that fuel to 
provide you all the comforts of civilization, be aware that the equipment 
can break down at the least opportune time. Store a supply of spare 
parts to fix at least the most common repairs needed. 

ENERGY: HEAT, COOKING AND LIGHT 
249 
Fire Starters 
Many of the items mentioned in this chapter utilize a flame of some 
type. Obviously, to light them you will need matches or other lighter. 
Store wood friction matches, not the paper safety ones. You could also 
store other means, such as disposable lighters. 


24 
MEDICAL AND DENTAL 
Being ill or injured is bad enough under normal circumstances, but 
it could be catastrophic during a crisis when medical assistance may be 
severely limited or not available at all. You must be ready to help 
yourself as much as possible. 
MEDICAL 
Improper nutrition weakens the body's defenses against disease. In 
addition, during an extensive crisis there almost certainly will be 
inadequate sanitation and medical care. Taken together, the conditions 
will be optimum for deadly epidemics of a wide variety of diseases. 
Dysentery, hepatitis, typhoid fever, typhus, tularemia, rabies, plague, 
tetanus, diphtheria, cholera and anthrax are diseases that might be 
expected to proliferate. 
Medical Preparation 
The easiest and best way to prepare for many possible diseases is to 
keep immunizations for them current. Children should be routinely 
vaccinated for diphtheria, pertussis, tetanus, polio, measles, rubella 
and mumps, and tested for tuberculosis. Adults who where fully 
immunized in childhood should have a tetanus/diphtheria booster every 
five to ten years. You may also want vaccinations and boosters as 
needed for typhoid and paratyphoid, typhus, cholera, yellow fever and 
plague. Vaccines are also available for influenza, tularemia, tick fever, 
rabies, type B hepatitis, and types A and C meningococcal meningitis. 
Smallpox is supposedly eradicated but could make a comeback via 
terrorism. Consult your physician on the timing for vaccinations and 
booster shots. 
Have regular medical checkups and get preventative or corrective 
work done as suggested in Chapter 3. Regular eye exams are also 
important. If needed, store spare eyeglasses in practical frames with a 
record of the prescription, and have an eyeglass repair kit with nose 
pads, hinge rings, universal hinge screws and screwdriver. Keep your 
old eyeglasses; someday they may be better than nothing. Hearing 
should also be checked with necessary items stored. 

252 
OTHER PREPARATIONS 
It would be wise to take training in basic first aid, advanced first aid 
and CPR. Definitely consider home nursing, EMT (Emergency Medical 
Technician) and paramedic courses. Medical instruction is offered 
through the local Red Cross as well as many colleges and other schools. 
Your tools will only be as good as your skills make them. 
Ignoring modern medicine for home remedies and medicinal plants 
and herbs is foolhardy. However, there is a place for both when 
judiciously done, and that may be particularly true in a prolonged crisis 
with a shortage of modern medicines and personnel. It can't hurt to 
know what plants and herbs may be used to alleviate common ailments 
in the absence of more developed medicines. 
Medical Kit 
Because the circumstances could be much more acute than normally 
expected in every day life, you will want a much more complete medical 
kit. Whether you make up your own or buy a commercial kit, it should 
be adequate for anticipated situations. Even the best commercial kits 
will likely need augmenting and tailoring to your needs. Store the 
suggested items even if you don't know how to use them. When the time 
comes there may be a skilled physician available but a lack of the 
necessary supplies. 
Table 24-1 lists the suggested equipment to store, and Table 24-2 
gives the necessary supplies. If the lists look quite long, remember they 
are capable of doing much more than simple first aid. The amounts 
should adequately serve up to eight people for a year. Quickly replenish 
any supplies you may use. A plastic fishing tackle box is an excellent 
container for your medical kit because it allows instant access, keeps 
the contents organized and is non-corrosive. 
To prepare for emergency childbirth, in addition to the listed items 
you should store obstetrical pads, sterile cord ties, cord clamps, sanitary 
napkins, an eight-ounce Peri squeeze bottle, diapers, diaper pins and 
a receiving blanket. If you don't already have instructions in another 
good text, get a copy of Emergency Childbirth by George J. White, MD. 
You should stockpile a good selection and quantity of medicines to 
meet the anticipated problems. Table 24-3 lists suggested medicines to 
store, both OTC (over-the-counter) and prescription. Current medicines 
change over time so get a physician to update those listed with the best 
and latest available. It's awfully hard to treat many of the 
life-threatening diseases without prescription medicines, so also try to 
find an understanding physician that will give you the needed 

MEDICAL AND DENTAL 253 
prescriptions. You may also want to store cough syrup and throat 
lozenges. 
Another thing you should be aware of is that many veterinary medi-
cines come from the same drug batches as those sold for human use at 
much higher prices. They are just as pure and safe but have different 
labels on them. And they normally can be bought without a 
prescription, too. Veterinary medicines can be bought from veterinary 
supply outlets, pet and feed stores, and from the mail order sources 
listed in Chapter 32. If you decide to cut costs for your medicine storage 
by buying veterinary medicines, you should also get a copy of 
SurvivalisVs Medicine Chest by Ragnar Benson. He briefly discusses 
using veterinary medicines and suggests specific medicines for the 
treatment of diseases. 
If you suffer from a chronic illness or disease, consult with your 
physician about 
storing 
an emergency supply of any special 
medications. Diabetics should store a two to three month supply of 
insulin along with instant glucose and syringes. 
TABLE 24-1. MEDICAL AND DENTAL EQUIPMENT 
• 2-3 oral-rectal thermometers 
• 1 forehead thermometer 
• angular bandage scissors 
• operating scissors 
• suture scissors 
• splinter forceps (tweezers) 
• tissue forceps (thumb dressing) 
• 2 medium hemostats 
(1 straight, 1 curved) 
• Mayo-Hegar needle holder 
• urethral catheterization kit 
• #14 Foley catheter 
• 1-qt Kelly bottle with tubing 
and #18 needle 
• #18x4-inch spinal needle 
• adult/child airway tubes 
• #16 French stomach tube 
• #12 French stomach tube 
• medicine dropper 
• bulb aspirator 
• bed pan 
• graduated plastic cylinder 
• inflatable leg splint 
• inflatable arm splint 
• fingernail clippers 
D 2-gal plastic garden sprayer 
• 4 5-cc disposable syringes 
with #22xlVâ-inch needles 
• 4 10-cc disposable syringes 
with #18x3-inch needles 
• 2 3V6-cc syringes with 
#25x5/s-inch needles 
• 10-cc glass or metal syringe 
• 2 #21-22xiy2-inch metal-hub needles 
• 2 #18x3-inch metal-hub needles 
• scalpel 
• 3 #10 surgical blades 
• 3 #11 surgical blades 
• 4 single-edged razor blades 
• exam light (or penlight) 
• otoscope (ear light) 
• pocket magnifier 
• stethoscope 
• sphygmomanometer 
(blood pressure cuff) 
• rubber sheeting 
• enema kit 
D adult rib belt 
• stretcher and blanket 
• snake bit kit 
• dental kit 

254 
OTHER PREPARATIONS 
TABLE 24-2. MEDICAL AND DENTAL SUPPLIES 
• 10 tongue depressors 
• 1-lb roll absorbent cotton 
• 6 Povidone surgical scrubs 
• 20 Povidone prep pads 
• 4 surgical sponges 
• 1 pt hydrogen peroxide 
• 16-oz Hibiclens cleanser 
• 2 bars/person Fels Naptha soap 
• 8-oz iodine shampoo 
• Seven insecticide 
• Rotenone insecticide 
• 2/person household dust masks 
• assorted Ziploc bags 
• 3 large garbage bags 
• mentholatum 
• petroleum jelly 
• hand lotion 
• olive oil 
• calamine or Caladryl lotion 
• cornstarch 
• 100 grams activated charcoal 
• epsom salts 
• sanitary napkins 
• assorted plastic bandages 
• 10 assorted Telfa gauze bandages 
• 6 5x9 surgipad bandages 
• 2 8x10 surgipad bandages 
• 15 Coverlet fingertip bandages 
• 10 Coverlet elbow/knee bandages 
• 5 Coverlet knuckle bandages 
• 18x22 trauma dressing 
• 2 triangular bandages 
• 12 3x36 Vaseline gauze 
• 2 rolls Kerlix bandages 
• 3 or 4-inch Doma-Paste bandage 
• Spenco Second Skin 
• 60x92 burn sheet or towels 
• roll resin plaster bandage 
• 2 3-inch rolls cast liner 
• 3 elastic bandages 
(1 ea. 2, 4 and 6-inch) 
• Q-tips 
• 20 sterile swabs 
• disposable exam gloves 
D4-oz tube K-Y Jelly 
• 10 ammonia ampules 
• 1 gal 70% isopropyl alcohol 
• 1 gal concentrated multipurpose 
sanitizer/germicide 
D 2 lb high-test granular 
calcium hypochloride 
• Gatorade or ERG powder 
• assorted safety pins 
• dental floss 
• 2 cold compresses or 
instant ice packs 
• talcum powder 
• baby oil 
• Desitin 
• zinc oxide 
• PABA 15 sunscreens 
D table salt 
• baking soda 
• 4 adhesive eye pads 
• 20 2x2 gauze pads 
• 20 3x3 gauze pads 
• 60 4x4 gauze pads 
• 16 rolls gauze 
(4 each 1, 2, 3 and 4-inch) 
• 4 rolls Gauze tape (2 ea. 1 and 2-inch) 
• 4 BandNet Tapeless Bandages 
(2 hand/foot, 1 ea. finger, head) 
• 4 rolls adhesive tape 
(2 ea. 1 and 2-inch) 
• 10 butterfly enclosures and/or 
• 12 Steri-Strips 
(6 ea. 1/2x4 and V4x3) 
• 10 packs nylon sutures with needles 
(2 ea.2-0, 5-0; 3 ea. 3-0, 4-0) 
• 2 packs 3-0 plain gut suture 
(absorbable) with needles 
• rubberized tourniquet 

MEDICAL AND DENTAL 255 
TABLE 24-3. MEDICINES 
D A & D Ointment, 1-2 4-gm tubes 
• Acetamine, 100 tablets 
D *Ampicillin, 200 500-mg tablets 
D 
10 500-mg powder vials plus diluent 
D Aspirin, Datril, Panadol, Percogesic, or Tylenol, 100 tablets 
D *Atropine sulfate, 4 1-cc ampules (grs 1/150) 
D *Azo Gantrisin, 100 .5-mg (7.5 gr) tablets 
D *Benzoin Compound Tincture, 2-oz bottle 
D Camalox, 2000 tablets 
D 
12-fl oz bottle 
D Chloramphenicol, 200 250-mg capsules 
D *Compazine, 100 25-mg tablets 
D 
12 25-mg suppositories 
D 
10 2-cc (10-mg) ampules 
D *Cortisporin Ophthalmic Ointment, Vs-oz tube 
D Decadron, 1-cc (4-mg) ampules plus diluent 
D *Demerol, 2 30-cc (50-mg/cc) vials 
D 
4 2-cc (100-mg) ampules 
D 
100 100-mg tablets 
D *E.E.S. 400, 250 400-mg tablets 
D *Epinephrine USP 1:1000, 10-cc bottle 
D *Furacin Soluble Dressing, 454-gm tub 
D Hydrocortisone Cream V£%, 2 1-oz tubes 
D Ipecac Syrup, 1-fl oz bottle 
D Kaopectate, 12-fl oz bottle 
D *Lomotil, 100 21/2-mg tablets 
D Neosporin Ointment, 2 1-oz tubes 
D *Penicillin VK, 200 250-mg (400,000 units) tablets 
D *Phenergan, 200 25-mg tablets 
D *Pitocin, 2-4 1-cc ampules (for females) 
D *Pontocaine HCL Eye Ointment %%, 1/a-oz tube 
D *Pyribenzamine, 50 50-mg tablets 
D *Silver Sulfadiazine Cream 1%, 400-gm jar 
or mafenide acetate cream, 3 4-oz tubes 
• * Sulfadiazine, 500 .5-mg tablets 
• *Sumycin, 200 250-mg tablets 
• Tinactin Cream Ointment, 4 V^-oz tubes and/or 4 Vè-fl oz 
• Triaminic Syrup, 8-fl oz bottle 
D *Tylenol #3, 100 tablets 
D *Valium, 2 2-cc (5-mg/cc) disposable syringes 
• 
50 5-mg tablets 
• *Xylocaine 1%, 2 50-cc vials 
D *Zomepirac Sodium, 100 100-mg tablets 
^Usually requires prescription 

256 
OTHER PREPARATIONS 
Proper Storage of Medicines 
Most medicines decompose when exposed to heat, light, moisture 
and air. Store them in the original labeled container in a cool, dry and 
dark location. Medicines are required by law to have an expiration date 
stamped on them, but pharmacists may not put it on a prescription 
container unless you ask them. The expiration date is important 
because drugs lose their potency, and some like tetracycline even 
become toxic with age. A few let you know when they are no good 
(aspirin smells like vinegar, for instance) but others give no clues. 
Rotate all drugs before their date is up to assure effectiveness. A 
pharmacist will be able to help you with shelf life and storage condition 
needs for particular medicines or you can check with the manufacturer. 
Medical Library 
A medical library is critical for getting the most from your stockpiled 
medical supplies. See Chapter 32 for a list of books generally in priority 
order. 
DENTAL 
Use good oral hygiene to prevent dental problems and visit your 
dentist regularly to correct any that may develop. Have all preventative 
and corrective work done. Store soft-bristle toothbrushes, dental floss, 
toothpaste or powder and tongue scrapers. If you wear false teeth, keep 
an extra set if possible. Store fluoride tablets for children. 
For the dental emergencies that may arise during a crisis, buy an 
emergency dental kit. There are a number of kits on the market (Stahl, 
Atwater Carey and Searles) but all of them are pretty sparse and are 
meant mainly for getting you through a weekend. You could start with 
one of these and add a few other necessities to it. 
A complete kit should contain detailed instructions with at least the 
following items: a temporary filling kit of a half ounce of zinc oxide 
powder USP and a one quarter ounce tube Eugenol oil of cloves, a five 
to fifteen gram tube of Orabase with Benzocaine, a bottle of cotton 
pellets, a bottle of benzocaine .5% and benzalkonium chloride toothache 
gel or drops, a bottle of dental wax, dental cement, cotton rolls, a mixing 
block with spatula and a dental mirror. You might also want Where 
There Is No Dentist by Murray Dickson. 

25 
SANITATION AND 
PERSONAL CARE 
Inadequate sanitation and hygiene following major disasters is often 
deadlier than the disaster itself, rapidly producing disease and virulent 
epidemics. But providing proper sanitation and hygiene without 
running water, functioning sewer hookups and periodic garbage service 
can be quite difficult without considerable forethought and preparation. 
SANITATION 
The sanitation needs during a crisis consist of adequate means of 
disposing of human wastes and garbage as well as keeping people and 
living accommodations clean. 
Waste Management 
Without the three to six gallons of water for each flush and a sewer 
system to accept it, disposing of human waste can quickly become a 
considerable problem. A satisfactory solution must not only remove the 
waste from sight and smell, but must also prevent water contamination 
and the spreading of disease by insects and rodents. 
A short-term solution could be a simple portable toilet using plastic 
bags or a portable flush toilet with a built-in holding tank. Even a 
five-gallon plastic pail, bucket, or paint can with a tight-fitting lid could 
be fitted with a seat of some sort (perhaps an old toilet seat) and used 
as a toilet. Then you'll need some larger containers to empty the 
smaller toilets into. You don't want ones too large or heavy to move, so 
about ten-gallon seems the right size. They should be water-tight and 
have attached tight-fitting lids. An emergency solution can be made by 
placing a grocery sack inside one the same size and filling the space 
between sacks with shredded newspaper or a plastic bag liner. One 
person will need about five to ten gallons of space per two-week period 
for waste storage. 
Store deodorizer/bowl cleaner chemicals and disintegrating toilet 
paper for the portable flush toilets or extra bags for the non-flushing 
type. Store heavy-duty plastic liners, deodorizers and a gallon of bleach 

258 
OTHER PREPARATIONS 
or other disinfectant for the cans. A small quantity of the bleach or 
disinfectant should be added after each use to control the germs and 
odors. Also store at least a quart of fly and insect spray to control insect 
problems. 
Without better facilities, you will eventually be forced to bury the 
accumulated wastes. Dig the hole deep enough that you can cover it 
with at least one foot of earth to prevent insects from breeding and 
discourage animals from digging it up. The hole should be located at 
least fifty feet downhill from any water source and where it will be 
unaffected by flooding or surface runoff. Store a bag of lime and 
sprinkle some over the waste prior to covering it. 
More extended use can be satisfied with a shallow pit or trench 
latrine. A straddle trench is dug one foot wide, about two feet deep, and 
two to four feet long with a makeshift toilet seat or a regular wooden 
chair with a hole cut in it placed over the trench. A larger hole two feet 
wide, six feet deep, and seven to eight feet long covered with an 
insect-proof toilet box will provide the average-size family with facilities 
for a couple of months. Urine soakage pits can also be built to reduce 
the use of the trenches. As with all toilet facilities, reasonable privacy 
should be provided for by screening the area from view. As the latrine 
becomes full it can be covered over and a new one dug. 
More permanent solutions could be an outdoor privy or even 
installing water-less composting toilets in the home. Composting toilets 
have an aerobic chamber where the waste is turned to safe humus over 
a period of time. However, they are fairly expensive, the chamber must 
be almost directly underneath and they do not always function well and 
without odor. Fans and heating elements are sometimes necessary. A 
combination composting toilet/outhouse would be a workable backup 
solution. 
Perhaps the best long-term solution is to have a septic tank with 
leech field to backup the regular sewer system. A properly designed 
system, given minimal care, will serve for decades. A valve could be 
installed that could easily switch from the sewer system to the septic 
system. Another option would be a holding tank, but it would have to 
be emptied regularly. 
Garbage Disposal 
Piles of litter and garbage soon attract insects and rodents. Separate 
garbage into edible garbage that can be feed to animals (pigs, etc.), that 
suitable for compost piles, garbage that can be burned and the 

SANITATION AND PERSONAL CARE 
259 
remaining plastic, metal, etc. that must be stored and then periodically 
hauled away or buried in a deep pit. Have one or more twenty to thirty 
gallon cans with tight-fitting lids for this storage. Cans can be flattened 
to reduce bulk. Again, when burying garbage, cover with at least one 
foot of earth. Garbage that must be stored indoors for some time (such 
as in a fallout shelter) will keep better if first drained and then 
wrapped with newspaper and grocery sacks. The can should also be 
lined with paper. Do not store garbage in airtight plastic bags because 
the decomposing garbage produces gas that could make the bag 
explode. Store rat traps and poisons to keep the rodent population 
under control. Cats would also help. 
Wash water containing soap, grease and food particles should be run 
through a grease trap placed over a soakage pit. The trap can be made 
from a large box or barrel with adequate filtering. Burlap, straw, grass, 
or similar material can be used to strain out the grease and particles 
and should be changed frequently. Wood ashes, sand and gravel can be 
used to further filter the water. The trap will need periodic cleaning 
with the accumulated grease either burned or buried. 
Personal Hygiene 
Personal cleanliness is important to prevent disease and fungus 
infections. Obvious health practices should be scrupulously observed. 
Wash hands well before preparing food, eating and after going to the 
toilet, assisting an ill person, or handling any material that may be 
contaminated. When running water is not available, baths may be 
taken by pouring a small amount of heated water into the tub. A sponge 
bath can be taken with as little as a cup of water and showers can be 
taken with a SunShower or Zodi propane shower. 
Stockpiling 
In a crisis it is possible to make many of the items you might need 
for sanitation, but storing them is a lot easier. Estimate storage needs 
from current usage or store twenty-six rolls of toilet paper and twelve 
to eighteen bars of bath/hand soap per person for one year. Bars of soap 
that are unwrapped so air can get to them will dry out and harden, 
tending to last longer when used. For women, store sanitary napkins 
and belts, reusable cloth pads, tampons, or a menstrual cup. Babies 
need diapers, both disposable and cloth, and towelettes for clean-up. 

260 
OTHER PREPARATIONS 
For the home, store toilet bowl cleaner, drain cleaner, ammonia, 
detergent cleaners and scouring powders, oven cleaners, cleaning fluids, 
floor and furniture wax, carpet shampoo, bleach and paper towels. Have 
floor mops, mop buckets, dustpan, scrub brushes, brooms, sponges, 
rags, a toilet plunger and a flexible cable clean out (plumber's "snake"). 
Carpeting could become a tremendous breeding ground for insects if left 
uncleaned so at least have a manual carpet sweeper or consider 
replacing your carpeting now with wooden floors and area rugs. Store 
all cleaning supplies in a dry location away from food stuffs. Liquids 
should be tightly capped to prevent evaporation. 
PERSONAL CARE 
Most of these things aren't absolutely necessary but they might be 
a real help to morale during a crisis: 
• wash basin 
• combs 
• hair brushes 
• towels 
• wash cloths 
• hair cutting items 
• facial tissue 
• shampoo 
• hair conditioner 
• razor blades 
• shaving cream 
• inspect repellant 
• deodorant 
• lipstick 
• cologne 
• nail clippers 
• nail 
files 
• other beauty aids 
A straight razor with strop, stone, brush and shaving soap could replace 
the razor blades. An average can of shaving cream lasts for about sixty 
shaves. Having a supply of medicated shampoo with lindane or pyrethrin 
as the active ingredient will help solve any head lice problem that might 
develop. 

26 
PREPARING YOUR HOME 
There are many things you can do to better prepare your home for 
times of crisis. Budget limitations may preclude you from doing all of 
them, but the more you do the better off you may be. 
Repair and Upkeep 
There may be extended periods of time when you are the only repair-
man available when something breaks down. Replacement parts and 
supplies may not be easy to come by. 
The first thing you can do is to keep what you now have in good 
repair. Do preventative maintenance on all items possible and that 
especially includes your home. Paint it when needed and have any 
roofing, plumbing, heating, electrical, or structural problems corrected 
immediately. Replace worn out appliances with those easiest to repair 
and requiring the lowest maintenance. 
Secondly, you should store tools, spare parts, supplies and repair 
manuals. 
Hand tools are a priority. That doesn't mean you shouldn't have any 
power tools—they can save a lot of labor—but get the necessary hand 
tools first so that you can work even without electricity. Buy quality 
tools that will last. Proto and Snap-On are especially reliable brands. 
Table 26-1 lists the tools for a basic tool kit that will allow you to 
handle basic maintenance, minor repairs and modest building projects. 
It is assumed that you already have axes, picks, general shovels, wood 
mauls and wedges. Tables 26-3 through 26-6 lists basic tools that could 
be added in specialized fields. Other areas you might want to consider 
include welding and cutting, small motor repair, electronics testing and 
well-drilling. The lists are by no means exhaustive. There are literally 
thousands of tools, most with a purpose, and some you may find useful 
as you get more involved. It's also easy to go overboard in buying "just 
one more". List your priorities, and buy as you can. Buy tools for the 
particular skills you have or want to develop that will be useful during 
crisis times. Avoid any unnecessary redundancy. 
Tools that are stored must be properly prepared to prevent rust and 
other problems that could destroy their usefulness. Coat wood and 
metal parts with a coat of linseed oil and let it dry for a few days prior 

262 
OTHER PREPARATIONS 
to storing. Corrosion Control Grease from Lubrimatic can be used to 
preserve metal parts that are used more often. Store tools in a dark, dry 
location where they can remain straight. Hanging them by the handle 
is best. 
Purchase spare parts when you purchase the items. Get any special 
tools at the same time. Appliances aren't hard to repair if you have the 
spare belts, bulbs, cords, switches, etc. that they require. Table 26-2 
gives a basic supply list while Table 26-7 offers additional items to 
stock. You may think of others. 
Unless you're already expert with all tools and situations, you'll 
want to have a number of how-to books. Two of general interest are: 
Reader's Digest New Fix-It-Yourself Manual 
Reader's Digest New Complete Do-lt-Your self Manual 
You may also want some other volumes on basic plumbing, electrical 
work, carpentry, auto repair, small engine repair, blacksmithing, 
masonry work and construction. Home Depot and Lowe's have their 
own repair manuals and specialized instructions, many free. 
Home Security 
It makes no sense to stockpile large amounts of items to insure your 
physical well-being only to loose them to fire or theft. It makes even less 
sense to loose your life or those of your family in the process. Prepare 
to maintain the security of your home. 
Fire Protection 
First, make your home as fireproof as possible. Then install a 
number of smoke alarms, both electric-powered photoelectric and 
battery-powered ionization. The key to proper location of smoke alarms 
is to place them between the hazards and people. That usually means 
in central hallways outside bedrooms. Test all units after installation 
and at regular intervals thereafter. Carbon monoxide detectors are also 
worthwhile. 
Next get some firefighting equipment. Start with some ABC 
multi-purpose, rechargeable fire extinguishers with the highest ratings 
for the heaviest size you can handle (probably ten to twenty pounds of 
agent). Put one near the kitchen, one in a major hallway, one in the 
garage and perhaps a smaller one in your automobiles. A 
home-chargeable water unit would be a good backup. A garden hose 
and nozzle hooked up ready for use could come in handy. Have fire 

PREPARING YOUR HOME 263 
ladders available for all locations higher than the ground floor. 
Emergency escape masks and Water Jel Fire Blankets are other 
precautions. The blanket protects much longer than a regular one 
soaked with water and is available from Alliance Medical, 8624 Rt. C, 
PO Box 147, Russelville, MO 65074, 888-633-6908, www.allmed.net. 
Without ready access to the services of a functioning fire 
department, you would need more extensive firefighting capabilities to 
handle larger fires, accidental and set. In rural areas or even on large 
suburban lots there is also the danger of forest and grass fires. 
Hardening Your Home 
Sadly, through necessity our homes are becoming more like 
fortresses. 
Although it's impossible to make your home totally impregnable, you 
can make it a lot harder to get into. All exterior doors should be of 
heavy-gauge steel with no glass, mounted tightly in a steel frame with 
inside or pinned hinges. Install wide-angle door viewers and forged, 
hardened steel pin, tumbler deadbolt locks with pick-resistant cylinders 
and at least a one-inch throw on all exterior doors. Mortise and vertical 
deadbolts are preferred, and Schlage Primus, Medeco and Kaba locks 
are among the best. Pay particular attention to securing sliding glass 
doors, outside basement doors and weak garage doors. 
All windows should have quarter-inch, case-hardened pins or 
five-sixteenths-inch eye bolts through both frames. You may want to 
protect them further with decorative wrought iron, iron rods, or 
heavy-gauge sliding steel shutters. Regular glass can be replaced with 
shatterproof glass or unbreakable Lexan. Put heavy wire screen over 
garage windows and skylights. 
Install burglar alarms and other intruder detection devices. Discour-
age intruders by properly locating and trimming trees and shrubs, 
using blinds on windows and providing nighttime illumination of your 
entrances and yard. Engrave or otherwise mark all valuables for 
identification. 
Guard Dogs 
A good guard dog provides a substantial deterrent against intruders. 
Larger dogs are usually more intimidating with German Shepherds, 
Dobermans, Rottweilers, Airedales, Bullmastiffs, Boxers, Rhodesian 
Ridgebacks and Bouvier des Flandres among the better breeds. If you 
spend the money to get one, make sure it is adequately trained and 

264 
OTHER PREPARATIONS 
poison-proofed. Also get it vaccinated for rabies, distemper and 
parvovirus, and store food and medicines for it. 
Hiding Valuables 
There is nothing like an ostentatious display of goods others may not 
have to make you the target of the wrong crowd. The old cliche "out of 
sight, out of mind" is a good watchword for protecting your stockpile 
and other valuables. You can use hidden rooms, disguised closets, safes 
and vaults. Safes are rated ABCD for fire resistance and EFGH for 
burglar resistance with the last rating of each type the best. There are 
entire books written on how to hide items safely and, if you have a lot 
to hide, get one of them. Burying things in PVC pipe "safes" works well 
and, buried about six feet deep or so, even metal detectors have a hard 
time locating them. 
Personal Protection 
Besides weapons, there are other things you can do to protect your-
self. Modern concealable body armor, made from Kevlar, Zylon and 
other hi-tech materials, is lighter, thinner and more flexible than ever. 
It can be worn comfortably for long periods of time in almost any 
climate. It comes in different thicknesses for different levels of 
protection, with the heaviest capable of stopping bullets from .357 
Magnum and 9mm pistols. Check your local laws to see if you are 
allowed to purchase and use body armor. Some companies also may 
only sell to law enforcement agencies. 
CS and CN tear gas canisters can be carried in many locations 
(others restrict them to permit holders or ban them altogether). Pepper 
sprays come in different sizes and strengths. 
Evasive driving tactics can be learned at Bill Scott's BSR driver 
schools in Summit Point, West Virginia, or Bob Bondurant's School of 
High Performance Driving near Phoenix, Arizona. There are also 
armored cars, but they're anything but cheap. Finally, you can learn 
self-defense skills like karate and take gun training at places like Jeff 
Cooper's Gunsite Ranch in Paulden, Arizona, or at BSR. 
Disaster Preparation 
There are also many things you can do to better prepare your home 
from the physical effects of natural and manmade disasters. 

PREPARING YOUR HOME 265 
One of the first things to do in preparing for any disaster is to learn 
how to shut off the utilities. Locate a shut-off tool where everyone in the 
family can always find it quickly. Ruptured gas lines can explode and 
burn, severed power lines can electrocute and start fires, and broken 
water mains can flood. Store sand bags and pumps for floods and sheets 
of plywood and heavy-duty plastic for tornadoes, hurricanes and 
nuclear war. Some other preparations you should make for nuclear war 
are discussed in the next chapter. 
Earthquake Preparation 
Very few people, even in earthquake prone areas, are prepared for 
earthquakes. When the inevitable happens, many will suffer. Yet there 
are a number of simple, low-cost measures that can be taken now that 
would considerably decrease the possibility of major earthquake 
damage and injury. 
First, learn what to do in an earthquake to best protect yourself. If 
indoors, don't run outside but get under a doorway or a sturdy piece of 
furniture, against an inside wall in a central hallway or bathroom, or 
in a corner. Stay away from windows that may shatter or heavy pieces 
of furniture that could fall on you. 
Think about and discuss the effects of an earthquake with family 
and friends. Consider how you would react and what you should do to 
minimize the risk at home, at work and while driving in an automobile. 
Make your home and its contents as resistant to earthquakes as 
practical. 
What type structure do you live in? A carefully engineered and 
properly constructed wood frame home is among the very safest due to 
its built-in give. An unreinforced masonry home can suffer much 
greater damage. Windows shatter from bending unless the frames have 
been braced with plywood sheathing. Gas meters are especially 
dangerous because they rupture, but there are earthquake-proof gas 
valves (see Chapter 32). Hot water heaters should be bolted down or 
secured to wall studs with steel bands. This may prevent their tumbling 
over, breaking water and gas lines (which may be ignited by the pilot 
light). Do the same with gas furnaces, and use flexible connections on 
all gas appliances. Bolt homes to their foundations with steel sill 
anchors. Brace masonry chimneys by tying them to the frame with steel 
straps and nails. 
Use camper-type latches on cupboard doors, store heavy items on 
lower shelves and secure top-heavy furniture to wall studs. Properly 

266 
OTHER PREPARATIONS 
hang heavy mirrors, paintings and light fixtures. Locate beds away 
from windows and heavy furniture. 
The above are but some of the things you can do to prepare for 
earthquakes. For more information I recommend the following book: 
Peace of Mind in Earthquake Country by Peter I. Yanev 
Emergency Shelter 
In the event that your home is destroyed or made uninhabitable by 
disaster, you should have an alternate shelter. This could be a trailer, 
mobile home, camper, tent, or even just a canvas or nylon tarp. One 
item most never consider but that would make a fairly suitable 
temporary lodging is a tipi like the Plains Indians used. Even in the 
dead of winter in a cold climate it can be kept tolerable inside with a 
small fire. If you are forced to live for any length of time in a tent you 
will appreciate cots or ground cloths with air mattresses or pads. 
Survival Home 
As is now obvious, preparing your home for crisis can be quite invol-
ved. Space has limited the detail and breadth of preparation covered 
here. Get a copy of the The Secure Home by Joel M. Skousen. It covers 
not only how to remodel your present home to make it suitable for 
survival, but also how to build a survival home from scratch. Sections 
cover planning, integration of security and self-sufficiency systems, 
construction and implementation, and recommended equipment and 
suppliers. He also wrote How to Implement a High Security Shelter in 
the Home with a more limited scope. 
For thought, extensive research by Brigham Young University has 
shown that a family of six can be almost completely self-sufficient on 
two an one half acres of decent farm land with a dozen chickens, a 
similar number of rabbits and two milk goats. 
Retreating 
Obviously, some locations will be better than others during any 
particular crisis. Yet, determining the best areas is not as cut and dried 
as some seem to believe with their maps of population density, earth-
quake zones and fallout patterns. Certainly large population centers 
must be among the worst under any scenario. Small towns away from 
large urban areas seem to offer the most in all but the worst cases. 

PREPARING YOUR HOME 267 
However, the vast majority of people desiring to prepare for crisis can 
not or do not want to move from their present location. From this fact 
stems the idea of having a retreat located at a substantial distance from 
the normal habitation as a safe place to go for sanctuary. 
The subject of having a retreat is a controversial one. Some feel it is 
the only viable alternative while others question its value. I find myself 
among the latter. 
If the retreat is located in a small rural community far enough away 
from your present home to do some good, what is the probability that 
you will reach it safely in a time of crisis? Will you be able to drive 
through the roads clogged with frightened, angry and most likely 
violent people? Is your vehicle capable of making it without any roads? 
Will there be enough fuel to get to your destination? And will you find 
someone else already there, willing to fight for what they have found? 
Face it, getting to a distant retreat in a time of crisis could be difficult 
at best and depend on a great deal of luck. And making the decision to 
leave for the retreat would be a most difficult one. On top of that, a 
working retreat takes years to develop adequately. 
What about storing all your stuff in your current home, planning on 
packing it all up and taking it with you when the crisis develops? I'm 
afraid that has even less chance of succeeding. The amount of gear you 
would need to survive when you got somewhere safe is enormous. 
Thinking that you will have the time to pack it up and the capability to 
move it ahead of the panicked masses is wishful thinking. 
The only safe and sane solution for those living in major metropoli-
tan areas is to decide now, no matter what the resulting difficulties, to 
relocate to a suitable location as soon as possible. True, it could mean 
substantial changes in lifestyle. But not anywhere near as drastic as 
staying put might mean one day. Everything done now will greatly 
lessen the impact latter. 
If you want to learn more about the retreat option, get the book The 
Survival Retreat by Ragnar Benson. He has also written The Modern 
Survival Retreat from a different perspective. 

268 
OTHER PREPARATIONS 
TABLE 26-1. BASIC TOOL KIT 
• 16-oz claw hammer 
• 24-oz ball-peen hammer 
• 6" slip-joint pliers 
• 7" linesman's pliers 
• 10" groove-joint pliers 
• 6" needle-nose pliers 
• 8" and 12" adjustable wrenches 
• combination wrenches, 3/a"-VA" 
• 10" and 14" pipe wrenches 
D 15" chain reversing pipe wrench 
• 7" and 10" straight and curved 
Vise Grips 
• socket wrenches, %"-lV4" 
• hex key sets 
• hand or breast drill with bits 
• heavy-duty brace and bits, V4"-l" 
• wood boring bits, z/a"-VA" 
D expansive bit set, 7/8M-3" 
• steel drill bits, 1/16"-%" 
• masonry drill bits, 3/16-%" 
• 12" combination square 
• 16x24 framing square 
D 4' spirit level 
• 9" torpedo level 
• 12* to 20' steel measuring tape 
D 50' to 100' steel measuring tape 
D 8" sliding T bevel 
D 5" Vernier caliper 
D 100' chalk line with chalk 
D plumb bob 
D feeler gauges 
• angle or stair gauge 
D 2 pr 4" and 10" 'C clamps 
D 3" corner clamp 
• manual staple gun 
D non-electric soldering iron 
• propane torch 
• 4" bench vise 
D 7" woodworking vise 
D 30" wrecking bar 
• joining and pointing trowels 
• contractor's wheelbarrow 
• sawhorse brackets 
• manual winch with pulley block 
• 5 assorted slotted screwdrivers 
• 4 assorted Phillips screwdrivers 
• 8-10 pt. 26" crosscut saw 
• 5-6 pt. 26" rip saw 
• hacksaw with 12+ assorted blades 
• keyhole saw with assorted blades 
• coping saw with assorted blades 
• close-quarter saw 
• back saw with miter box 
• 3-5' two-handled crosscut log saw 
• 
x/4" and V6" wood chisels 
• Vi" and V2" cold chisels 
• %" center punch 
• aviation-type metal snips 
• utility knife with spare blades 
• stockman's knife 
• putty knife 
• 6" wall scraper 
• bolt cutters 
• glass cutter 
• heavy-duty tubing cutter 
• tubing flaring tool set 
• auger-bit file 
• dual-sided wood rasp 
• 12" half-rounded wood file 
• 6" slim taper file 
• 10" round bastard file 
• 10" round mill bastard file 
• 10" flat bastard file 
• warding file 
• cross-cut file 
• needle file set 
• file brush 
• 7" block plane 
• 14" bench plane 
• combination sharpening stone 
• hand grinder with extra wheels 
• grinding wheel dresser 
• saw sharpening & setting tools 
• wire brush 
• assorted paint brushes 
• work apron 
• protective goggles 

PREPARING YOUR HOME 
269 
TABLE 26-2. BASIC SUPPLIES 
• Assorted fasteners: common and 
finishing nails, screws, nuts, bolts, 
washers, anchors, brads, staples, 
tacks, cotter pins 
• carpenter's wood glue 
• epoxy glue 
• plastic wood filler 
• solder with flux core 
• silicone sealant 
• tube silicone instant gasket 
• gasket material 
• faucet washers 
• 17-gauge galvanized wire 
• electrician's tape 
• duct tape 
• filament packing tape 
• rope, cord, string 
• lightweight machine oil 
• WD-40 or LPS25 spray lubricant 
• Liquid Wrench 
• additional oils and lubricants 
• honing oil 
• assorted fuses 
• sandpaper assortment 
TABLE 26-3. ADDITIONAL WOODWORKING TOOLS 
• 14-oz shingle hammer 
• wooden mallet 
• V4" and 1" wood chisels 
• mortise and marking gauge 
• 6" dividers (inside, outside, etc.) 
• adze 
• 10" to 12" drawing knife 
• 6" extra-slim taper file 
• 10" round wood file 
• 12" miter/try square 
Dfroe 
• peavy (cant-hook) 
TABLE 26-4. ADDITIONAL BLACKSMITHING-METAL 
WORKING TOOLS 
• bellows or hand-crank forge 
• 100+ lb anvil on fire base 
• anvil hardie 
• hot chisels, cleavers 
• 32-oz ball-peen hammer 
• 12-oz ball-peen hammer 
• 2V6 -lb cross-peen hammer 
• 4-lb sledge hammer 
• 20" bolt forging tongs 
• 20" straight forging tongs 
• welder's gloves 
• assorted pin and drift punches 
• W and 1" dia. tapered reamers 
• quench tube 
• 7" machinist's vise 
• 20" adjustable wrench 
• riveting set 
D %-% NC and NF taps and dies 
• screw extractor set 
D tin snips 
• leather apron 
TABLE 26-5. ADDITIONAL MASONRY TOOLS 
• additional trowels 
• cement edger 
• cement joiner 
D assorted star drills 
• 18-oz bricklayer's hammer 
• manual mortar mixer 
• tamper 
• wood float 
• sand screen 
• square-point shovel 

270 
OTHER PREPARATIONS 
TABLE 26-6. ADDITIONAL AUTOMOTIVE TOOLS 
• lever grease gun 
• oil filter wrench 
• oil spout 
• timing light 
• compression tester 
• vacuum gauge 
• automotive analyzer 
• hydrometer (with numbers) 
D battery post and clamp brush 
• batter cable puller 
• cable clamp spreader 
• battery terminal lifter 
• battery charger 
• antifreeze tester 
D battery-operated trouble light 
• hydraulic floor jack and/or 
• 2 5-ton hydraulic hand jacks 
D jack stands 
• ft-lb beam-type torque wrench 
• bead breaker 
• 2 pry bars 
D bubble balancer 
• ball joint separator 
• Pitman arm puller 
• general-purpose gear puller 
• transmission tools 
TABLE 26-7. ADDITIONAL SUPPLIES 
• additional fasteners: glazier's points 
masonry nails, hooks & eyes, 
hinges, locks 
• PVC plumbing tape, glue 
• rubber cement 
• J-B welding compound 
• powdered graphite 
• grease 
• flux • dimensional and construction 
• brazing and welding rods 
• Naval Jelly 
• tie wire 
• fencing wire 
• chain 
• caulking 
• putty, wood and glazier 
• cement and plaster patch 
• paint, varnish, stains 
• paint thinner 
• roofing cement 
• tar paper 
• plastic, rolls of black and clear 
lumber 
• plywood 
• #14 electrical wire 
• aluminum and brass solid stock 
• assorted metal rod stock 
• sheet metal 

27 
TERRORISM AND 
NUCLEAR-BIOLOGICAL-CHEMICAL 
(NBC) WARFARE 
Terrorism is a method of waging war used by those who are 
militarily weak or wish to hide their real agendas. The goal of terrorism 
is to make everyone feel vulnerable every moment and, therefore, 
capitulate to the terrorists in order to have "peace" or safety. 
Because terrorism can be carried out in many ways, it is relatively 
easy to do and extremely hard to totally prevent. Excellent intelligence 
is the key to stopping it before it happens. This may or may not be 
possible given the limitations of an open society. Terrorism has been 
growing world-wide for some time, and you can expect terrorist acts to 
increase in the years ahead. This chapter will help you prepare for 
those potential threats. For much more detailed information see my 
book Surviving Terrorism: A Comprehensive Guide to Preparing for and 
Surviving Biological, Chemical and Nuclear Attacks (available from 
www.Cross-Current.com). 
Surviving Terrorism 
There are three things you can do to increase your chances of 
surviving terrorism: 
1. Limit exposure to potential terrorist targets. Don't be in 
the wrong place at the wrong time. Terrorists like to cause as much 
havoc as they can with as little effort on their parts as possible. To 
accomplish this they seek out high-profile government or private 
facilities, events or infrastructure targets. Airports, bridges, 
subways, harbors, dams, power plants (particularly nuclear) and 
water reservoirs are likely targets. You can decrease your risk by 
not living by or going near these kinds of sites. 
Obviously, its not practical nor desirable to always stay away 
from every potential target. You can't let fear rule. Your life should 
go on as close to normal as possible. The vast majority of the time no 
terrorist acts take place at even the most likely targets. You will 
have to weigh the risks and make choices. 

272 
OTHER PREPARATIONS 
2. Prepare ahead of time. Store items that would be useful in 
responding to terrorist situations and their aftermaths. A list of 
these items will be discussed later in this chapter. Stay as healthy 
as possible, keep your immunities up with vaccinations and perhaps 
take some preventative medications. 
3. Know how to react to terrorist incidences properly. If 
you know how to respond to a situation as best you can, you can 
minimize its affects on you. Know how to best treat the potential 
diseases, chemicals and radiation sickness. How you should respond 
will be explained in this chapter. 
Assess the Risks 
On January 29, 2002, President George W. Bush stated: "We have 
found diagrams of American nuclear power plants and public water 
facilities, detailed instructions for making chemical weapons, 
surveillance maps of American cities, and thorough descriptions of 
landmarks in America and throughout the world." The threat from 
terrorism is real as we have become painfully aware. And their targets 
are not limited to America. 
Terrorists can cause extensive destruction. Many of their prime 
targets are substantially unguarded and easily damaged. For example, 
all of the electric power in the United States goes through three 
interconnected power grids and attacks at a few key switching points 
could entirely shut them down. Over two and a half million trucks in 
the United States have licenses to carry hazardous materials, and every 
one of them is a potential disaster. Many uncovered reservoirs provide 
major cities with water and could be readily contaminated. Things as 
simple as a small crop duster plane could become the instruments to 
sow disease and death over wide areas. 
Biological Terrorism 
There is quite a list of potential germ warfare agents: anthrax, 
smallpox, bubonic or pneumonic plague, botulism, tularemia, 
hemorrhagic fever (ebola and Marburg), yellow fever, E. coli, 
salmonella, foot-and-mouth disease, listeria,, brucellosis and perhaps 
others. Each differs in how it is contracted, if it is contagious or not, 
how it affects the body, what its symptoms are, if there are vaccines or 
other preventative measures that can be taken, how it can be treated 
and how effective the treatment may be. Some have a mortality rate 
over 90% if not treated. 

TERRORISM AND NBC WARFARE 273 
Chemical Attacks 
The list here too is long: VX , GA, GB (sarin), GD and other nerve 
gases, cyanide, phosgene, mustard, lewisite, chlorine and many others. 
Chemical weapons usually act much more quickly than biological 
weapons and, often colorless and odorless, can be as difficult to detect. 
Again the effects can be different as can the treatments. Some are 
designed to only disable, while others can be almost instantaneously 
lethal. Many work by inhalation, and others attack through the skin. 
Nuclear Warfare 
Nuclear weapons have proliferated around the world, and nuclear 
contraband has been smuggled across borders and into unsuspecting 
countries for years. Not only do the major powers like Russia and China 
have thermonuclear weapons, but rogue nations and some terrorist 
groups potentially have access to radioactive materials and even 
suitcase nuclear bombs. They don't need to be smart enough to actually 
design and build a real nuclear bomb—all they have to do is pack some 
high-explosives with a bunch of spent nuclear waste and blow it all over 
a population center. The resulting radiation could contaminate the 
entire area for centuries and bring about many deaths. 
Other Terrorism 
Truck and bus bombs have become a regular fact of life for years in 
the Middle East. The Oklahoma City bombing showed just how deadly 
these can be. A cyberattack through the Internet could cripple vital 
infrastructure such as the 9-1-1 system, the air traffic system and 
major utilities, disrupting the economy. 
Prepare Now 
There are a number of things that you can do ahead of time to 
prepare and lessen the potential harm. 
First, keep a low profile. As previously mentioned, avoid high-risk 
targets and areas or at least weigh the risks versus the benefits. If you 
live in such an area, you might even consider relocating. 
Second, make a family crisis plan covering what you would do if you 
were forced to evacuate, how you would contact and stay in touch with 
each other, and where you will meet. Pick both a local gathering site a 
few miles from your home and one further away that would most likely 

274 
OTHER PREPARATIONS 
be unaffected by the crisis. Print out cards for everyone with phone 
numbers and locations on them; tape 50 cents to the back to be used if 
pay phones are working when cell phones aren't. If you have children, 
know what the school's emergency plans are. 
Decide under what conditions it would be a good idea to evacuate if 
asked to and when it might not be best. Consider how well-prepared 
and knowledgeable local authorities really are. Are you willing to trust 
their advice in a crisis? 
Third, put together supplies and equipment that would prepare you 
for potential terrorist attacks, a terrorist survival kit. 
Terrorist Survival Kit 
Although some of the things are items you should already be storing 
as part of your other preparedness storage, they will be listed here 
again. Many of the items could just be part of your Emergency 
Evacuation Kit (EEK). 
Water. Store at least a two-week supply of water, a water filter or 
purifier, and a method of water purification (tablets or liquid bleach). 
Water filters don't filter out all dissolved chemicals, but the better ones 
do remove bacteria, many viruses and even some chemical agents. 
Filters need to be 0.2 micron to filter out bacteria and 0.01 micron to 
totally remove viruses. Charcoal filters can remove some chemicals. 
Food. Store enough nonperishable food to last at least three days. 
Two weeks would be better while there is the possibility you could be 
quarantined and forced to remain in your house for up to two months. 
Portable radio. You need to know what the authorities are saying, 
where and what the dangers are, and what to do about them. If you 
want to know what is going on outside the country, you will need a 
shortwave radio. Store extra fresh batteries. 
First Aid kit. Every home should have one. Make sure you keep it 
stocked and the items fresh and useable. 
Communications. Have cell phones, walkie-talkies, CB radios or 
other ways of communicating with your family and others that don't 
depend solely on a traditional phone. Consider using more than one 
method. 
Goggles. These might be necessary to protect your eyes from some 
biological and chemical agents. 
Flashlights and batteries. Potential attacks don't all happen 
during daylight hours. Keep a couple of flashlights with fresh batteries 
handy. Store extra batteries and spare bulbs. 

TERRORISM AND NBC WARFARE 
275 
Gas masks. Adequate gas masks can protect you from some 
biological and chemical attacks. The problem stems from the fact that 
many biochemical agents are odorless and colorless—you wouldn't 
know you were being attacked—and you would have to be wearing the 
gas mask when the attack occurred to do you any good. They can filter 
most radioactive particles out of the air you breathe. 
Be careful which gas masks you buy. Some are old with cracked and 
brittle rubber, don't seal properly, are uncomfortable to wear, and their 
eyepieces quickly fog up. Gas masks must be individually fit for the 
correct size to fit snugly and be effective. You also need to have some 
training so that you will know how to use them properly. Old filters 
may have soaked up enough moisture and airborne particles to be 
virtually useless. Low-cost disposable N95-style or HEPA masks can be 
adequate alternatives to regular gas masks for the short-term. 
Available from stores like WalMart for less than $2.00 each, they filter 
down to 0.1 micron and would remove around 99% of biological agents. 
Paint, dust and surgical masks are not adequate. 
Protective clothing. Full haz-mat (hazardous materials) 
protective suits would be nice, but really effective level A suits aren't 
sold to the general public and less effective level B suits still cost $50-
250 each. You can improvise protective clothing for biological, chemical 
and nuclear attacks from disposable Tyvek coveralls, rubber, latex or 
synthetic gloves, rubber over-boots and even rain ponchos. 
Cleaners and disinfectants. Store a supply of chlorine bleach to 
purify water and to make disinfectant solutions. Also store a supply of 
anti-bacterial soaps, cleaners and detergent with bleach. 
Antibiotics and painkillers. You might want to stock up on some 
antibiotics like Cipro, Doxycycline (fewer side effects than Cipro), 
Amoxicillin or tetracycline for treating anthrax and tularemia, and 
streptomycin or gentamicin for plague. Antibiotics are not preventive. 
Even a 3-day supply would make it more likely you would survive until 
the authorities could get additional antibiotics to your area. Atropine, 
an antidote to many nerve gases, is stored at hospitals and carried in 
ambulances but not available to the general public because it has 
serious side effects. Botulism antitoxin halts, but does not reverse, the 
paralytic effects. Painkillers might also be desirable. 
Potassium Iodide (KI). Fallout contains radioactive iodine 131. 
Accidentally inhaled or swallowed, it concentrates in the thyroid gland, 
destroying its functioning and causing delayed abnormalities and 
cancer. This is most serious for young children, especially babies. 
However, you can prevent this problem by storing a supply of stable 

276 
OTHER PREPARATIONS 
potassium iodide for use as a blocking agent. You'll need 30-170 130-mg 
tablets or one ounce of reagent grade crystalline or granular potassium 
iodide per person. Tablets can be bought from a number of 
preparedness sources, and the powder can be bought in bulk from a 
local chemical supply house without a prescription. Directions for 
making a solution from the powder are in my book Surviving Terrorism 
and in Nuclear War Survival Skills. 
Realize that potassium iodide can't protect you from the immediate 
effects of the high-level radiation of a nuclear blast, but only protects 
one part of the body from long-term effects. 
L-Cysteine and Vitamin C may be helpful in preventing radiation 
damage. L-Cysteine tablets can be bought without a prescription at 
pharmacies, health food stores and chemical supply companies. Another 
drug that might be useful in protecting from radiation, but not yet 
approved by the FDA, is 5-androstenediol, an immune-system booster. 
Amifostine is also a medication that is currently used to protect the 
salivary glands of cancer patients during radiation treatment and 
might be helpful. 
Radiation meter or KFM. If you seek shelter from a nuclear 
attack you need to know when it is safe to go out again. A radiation 
meter can tell you. You can buy a new one from Ludlum for $1,000 or 
so, a recalibrated CD V-715 meter for $225-275 from KI4U (see Chapter 
32 for addresses), or make your own, the Kearny Fallout Meter or KFM 
discussed later in this chapter, from common supplies or from a kit for 
about $20-25. It measures up to 43 R/hour. You might also consider 
storing rechargeable high-range dosimeters along with a charger so you 
can tell how much total radiation you have been exposed to. Dosimeters 
cost about $45-125 with $65-195 for the charger. 
Flu and other vaccinations. Beyond these preparations you will 
want to keep your vaccinations and immunizations up to date. Get flu 
shots because many of the diseases that terrorists might spread have 
early flu-like symptoms that might mask their prompt detection. 
Although not generally available until the summer of 2002, smallpox 
vaccinations are highly effective. However, about two out of a million 
people will suffer brain infection and death from the vaccine itself. If 
you were vaccinated prior to 1972 when the vaccinations ended, you 
still most likely have some lingering immunity. Research has shown 
that the disease only kills about 10% of those who have been vaccinated 
as much as 50 years earlier. 

TERRORISM AND NBC WARFARE 
277 
Safe Rooms and Shelters 
If your home is in the midst of a biochemical attack you can make an 
improvised shelter if you have stored a few items before hand. If 
possible, select an upstairs room to be your safe room because many 
nerve gases and other toxic gases are heavier than air and settle at 
ground level. Try to include a bathroom or even a kitchen in your safe 
area if you can. Store a couple of rolls of plastic sealing (packaging) tape 
or duct tape and some sheets of clear plastic sheeting or even trash 
bags. Use these to seal around the doors and windows and to close off 
heating and air conditioning ducts. Use wet rolled-up towels pushed 
against the bottom of doors to seal them. 
Nuclear Preparations 
First, decide if you live in or near a likely target. Targets would 
include large population and economic centers, military and political 
command and control centers, major military or missile installations, 
communication facilities, major ports and transportation hubs, large 
power stations and distribution points, oil refineries and storage, and 
certain chemical industries. 
If you live near a probable target you can either move somewhere 
else, attempt to protect yourself against possible blast effects (you can 
if you are not right at ground zero and are willing to build an adequate 
blast shelter) or hope you will have enough warning to evacuate the 
area. 
Get a copy of Nuclear War Survival Skills by Cresson H. Kearny. It 
was written by civil defense experts at the Oak Ridge National 
Laboratories and is available from the Oregon Institute of Science and 
Medicine, PO Box 1279, Cave Junction, OR 97523 (order at 
www.oism.org/oism/s32p903.htm or download the free on-line version 
at www.oism.org/nwss). The book tells you how to survive as best one 
can when not really prepared. If you do plan on evacuating take the 
book with you because it contains plans for six expedient shelters. You 
should also have the necessary tools and supplies to build and equip one 
of those shelters. The bare minimums are listed in Table 27-1. 
If not located in close proximity to a probable target, you could 
construct a better, permanent shelter. The more shielding between you 
and the radioactive fallout the better with the suggested absolute 
minimum a Protection Factor (PF) of forty. That's not very high and my 
recommendation is a PF of 1,000. This means that only one-thousandth 

278 OTHER PREPARATIONS 
TABLE 27-1. EXPEDIENT SHELTER TOOLS AND SUPPLIES 
• 1 or more shovels 
D bow saw with extra blade 
• hammer 
• nails, wire, rope, etc. 
• 4-mil polyethylene film 
• 4 20-gal poly trash bags 
and 2 burlap bags or 
pillow cases per person 
(or other method to carry 
large quantities of water) 
• pick (for hard-soil areas) 
• axe or hatchet 
• file 
• pliers 
• work gloves 
• siphon or pliable garden hose 
DKAP 
• fallout meter or KFM 
• potassium iodide (KI) 
• bleach 
of the outside radiation will penetrate inside. The 1,000 PF only 
requires about double the thickness of a forty PF and yet keeps out 
twenty-five times as much radiation. A 1,000 PF can be provided by two 
feet of concrete, three feet of dirt or almost anything else with about 
three hundred pounds of material per square foot of the shelter walls 
and ceiling. It would be best to build the shelter now. 
TheKAP 
Without adequate ventilation, in warm or hot weather, shelters can 
get so dangerously hot and humid within a few hours that people will 
collapse and die from the heat. The Kearny Air Pump (KAP), a 
homemade shelter-ventilating pump designed by Cresson Kearny when 
he was at Oak Ridge, can be easily made with a few inexpensive 
materials. Plans are contained in Nuclear War Survival Skills. 
The KFM 
Once the fallout has arrived, you must stay inside your shelter. But 
how will you know when it's safe to come out? 
What you need to tell you is a fallout dose-rate 
meter. It should be able to measure up to at 
least twenty-five to fifty roentgens per hour 
(R/hr) with a five hundred R/hr range even 
better. This means you can either buy a 
commercial fallout meter for hundreds of 
dollars or more, or you can make your own 
reliable one from common materials. It's called 
the Kearny Fallout Meter (KFM), and it was Kearny Fallout Meter 

TERRORISM AND NBC WARFARE 
279 
also designed and tested by Mr. Kearny at Oak Ridge. Again, plans for 
it are in Nuclear War Survival Skills. Be sure you have an original copy 
from OISM because in many other printings the necessary patterns 
have been reduced to fit the page size, and therefore will not result in 
an accurate meter. Emergency Essentials sells a KFM kit for $20 while 
KI4U's version is $25 postpaid (see Chapter 32). You can also download 
a set of plans free from www.Cross-Current.com and a few other sites 
such as OISM's listed earlier. 
Other Provisions 
You must also make provisions for water, food, sanitation, light and 
a few other needs in the shelter. 
Store at least fourteen gallons of water in the shelter per person 
and enough food for two weeks. The same types of foods used in the 
Emergency Evacuation Kit (EEK) discussed in Chapter 20 would be 
appropriate. In fact, plan on taking your EEK with you into the shelter. 
A portable toilet or hose-vented five-gallon can with heavy-duty plastic 
bag liners, toilet paper and additional smaller bags, plastic buckets or 
garbage cans can provide for sanitation. A total waste storage capacity 
of at least five to ten gallons per person is required. A supply of small 
long-burning candles, matches and flashlights with extra batteries are 
good, but additional sustained light is a real advantage. This can be 
provided with a one-tenth to one-quarter amp twelve-volt light bulb 
hooked up to a large dry cell or car battery or by making a lamp from 
a pint glass jar with a cotton wick and cooking oil for fuel. 
Also provide a first aid kit with a tube of antibiotic ointment, 
blankets or sleeping bags for sleeping and a radio with extra batteries. 
You will want to protect the radio by shielding it from the EMP 
(Electromagnetic Pulse) that is caused by nuclear explosions and can 
destroy communications and equipment. Like a lot of the other 
preparations discussed here, there is not sufficient space to go into any 
detail about EMP or protecting from it in this short chapter. It is 
covered in my book Surviving Terrorism and there are some sources of 
EMP protection listed in Chapter 32. 
If you evacuate, take the KAP, KFM, potassium iodide and other 
supplies with you. Otherwise, keep them in the shelter. 
Responding to an Attack 
Regardless of whether the attack is biological, chemical or nuclear, 
the first thing to do is to limit your exposure. Get uphill, downwind, or 

280 
OTHER PREPARATIONS 
as far away from the problem as possible or seek shelter immediately. 
Close off air entryways for biological and chemical attacks, and put as 
much mass as possible between you and a nuclear attack. 
A slight "overpressure" can be created in a safe room (not an entire 
house) by sticking the sucking wand of a regular vacuum cleaner out a 
window, closing the window on the middle of the wand and sealing 
around it. When the vacuum is turned on it will pull air through the 
vacuum into the room, causing some of the air in the room to be pushed 
out by the pressure. This brings air into the room through the vacuum 
and pushes contaminated air out. It will only work if the vacuum has 
a HEPA filter or a very dirty filter bag to trap the contaminated 
particles. It is also a short-term solution and can burn out the vacuum 
motor fairly quickly. The air coming in also is at whatever temperature 
it was outside, and could be too hot or cold for comfort. 
Decontaminate yourself and your surroundings as much and as 
soon as possible. People and animals can be wiped with bleach solutions 
and then washed and showered with anti-bacterial soaps and cleaners. 
Mix regular bleach in a 10:1 ratio or the "ultra" at 12:1 for cleaning 
skin. Wash off within five minutes and then rinse with soap and water. 
Use the bleach at full strength for wiping off surfaces. Clothes can be 
sanitized by washing in detergent with bleach or, if too contaminated, 
should be put in plastic bags and safely discarded. Radioactive dust 
(fallout) should be washed off and as far away as you can get it. 
If you absolutely must leave the safe room or shelter into a still-
contaminated environment, wear whatever protective clothing is 
available. Then, when you come back in, decontaminate yourself and 
your clothing again. 
Any person injured by the attack should receive expert medical 
attention immediately. If this is not possible, use whatever supplies and 
knowledge you have at hand to treat the injuries as best you can. You 
may not know exactly what the agents used were so focus on treating 
the symptoms and trying to make the victim as comfortable as you can. 
Seek professional help as soon as it is practical. 

28 
TRANSPORTATION 
Maintaining mobility and the potential to travel relatively long 
distances could be important in a crisis. This is especially true if you 
plan on escaping to a distant retreat, but it is also helpful just for doing 
work and hauling things around the homestead. 
Various options for transportation are covered here. In considering 
them, keep in mind what you will want them to do. What kind of 
surfaces will they be expected to operate on? During what kind of 
weather? How many passengers must they carry? And for how far? 
What type of cargo and what is it's size, shape and weight? You can't 
expect any mode to be ideal under all conditions, so you need to have a 
good idea what you will expect it to do. 
Vehicles 
Rather than try to recommend the ideal survival vehicle for your use 
in circumstances I couldn't possibly know, I can only give you some 
general guidelines to follow. 
If you are concerned about getting to a retreat, you will want every 
advantage you can get. The vehicle should be the toughest and most 
dependable you can find that is capable of carrying the expected load of 
passengers and gear. It must be capable of traveling off-road in the 
worst weather imaginable with plenty of ground clearance for rocks and 
other obstacles. It must also have the needed range under full load with 
expected road conditions (test to make sure). These criteria virtually 
eliminate all passenger cars and suggest a sturdy truck-type vehicle. 
Around the homestead a vehicle is used basically to haul load and do 
other work, again pointing to some type of truck. The vehicle should 
still be tough, but fuel economy becomes more important than it is for 
just getting to a retreat. And, because you may have to service and 
maintain the vehicle in either case, it should be as simple as possible 
and easy to maintain and repair with plenty of spare parts available 
such as would be the case with a fairly common model. 
Typically the vehicles that best fit the above criteria are SUVs, 
full-size pickups and vans. Pick the one that best fits the combination 
of passengers and cargo you anticipate. A 3/4 ton pickup or van is built 

282 
OTHER PREPARATIONS 
much stronger than a 1/2 ton, and the 1-ton is perhaps heavier-duty 
than necessary. 
Although newer models have the advantage of newer parts, they 
also usually have computer chips that increase complexity and might 
be hard to diagnose and fix in a survival context. One option might be 
to rebuild an older model. To rebuild doesn't mean to make cosmetically 
appealing, but to effectively bring all the components like the engine, 
transmission, differential, drive line, wiring, suspension, braking and 
cooling systems to like-new condition. If you have the time to do it 
yourself you will also become intimately knowledgeable of your vehicle 
and probably do it for less than half the cost of a new machine. 
Options 
The engine should be a stock gas six-cylinder or small-block V-8. 
Why not a diesel? Because their faults outweigh the better mileage and 
lack of tuneups. They cost more, clatter, stink, are heavier for the 
power, have poorer acceleration and can be difficult to start on cold 
mornings. They also require special tools and training for maintenance 
and repair. But the biggest disadvantage is the fact that they burn 
diesel. Not only are there a lot fewer diesel outlets now, but during the 
early stages of a major crisis the probability is high that diesel will be 
rationed and available only to the truckers that transport vital food 
supplies and other necessities. Many truck-stop pumps also lack 
filters—the big trucks have their own—and unfiltered diesel fuel can 
be destructive to smaller diesels. 
What about four-wheel-drive? It would certainly be nice to have in 
some situations. It also costs more, uses more fuel and is more compli-
cated and therefore more likely to break down. Careful driving can 
often extricate a vehicle without 4WD when those with 4WD, but less 
care, get stuck. On balance, though, I'd rather have it. 
Standard 4-speed transmissions are suggested because they are 
fairly simple to fix with a few tools. They are also cheaper to begin with 
and get better mileage. Automatics, on the other hand, require 
specialized tools and training but are generally more reliable. If you do 
get an automatic also get a locking-differential and an optional 
factory-installed transmission oil cooler. 
Get the heaviest-duty alternator, cooling system (radiator, water 
pump, fan), trailering suspension package and gearing, and the 
highest-rated battery available. A dual battery is recommended to 
provide backup and to power CB's and scanners without endangering 

TRANSPORTATION 
283 
re-starting. You will want a heavy-duty rear bumper, a front brush 
guard, skid plates, roll bars, cigarette lighter, the standard heater, a 
trailer hitch and the cold weather package or extra insulation if offered. 
Also get an oversize fuel tank or have an auxiliary fuel tank installed. 
Tires should be load-bearing all-terrain type mounted on steel rims. 
Interiors should be light-colored and the exterior should be a 
non-conspicuous color. A power-takeoff (PTO) winch is preferred, but 
an electric one is better than nothing. A steering shock damper can also 
be added to decrease wear on the steering components. 
Avoid all unnecessary power options. With power brakes and 
steering you must decide whether less fatigue in a heavy loaded vehicle 
outweighs the additional complexity and failure probability. Obviously 
fancy paint, heavy chrome and huge tires don't belong on a survival 
vehicle. 
Basic Tools and Spare Parts 
The tools and supplies listed in Table 28-1 should be stored on-board 
your main survival vehicle at all times if you expect to use it to get to 
a retreat. Table 28-1 suggests the spare parts that should also be stored 
in the vehicle along with two spare tires. Some of these tools, supplies 
and parts could be a portion of those stored in accordance with other 
lists in Chapter 26 if you make sure to keep them in the vehicle at all 
times. Most of the items would be good to keep in the vehicle even 
when around home. 
At the retreat or at home, you will want to have a larger selection of 
tools, supplies and parts. The additional tools recommended are listed 
in Table 28-6. A list of spare parts and supplies is given in Table 28-3. 
However, to be sure you store the spare parts that commonly break 
down for your particular vehicle, consult a good mechanic and check the 
evaluations from off-road magazines. Then make a list of parts that 
might wear out and any special tools needed. Having two vehicles of the 
same model and year could simplify parts storage because of common 
of parts. Old parts that are at all serviceable should also be saved as 
possible emergency replacements. 
Also, get a genuine factory shop manual for each vehicle. The repair 
manuals by Chilton and Motor are also good. Chances are you'll be 
doing your own maintenance and repair and you'll want the best 
instructions possible. 

284 
OTHER PREPARATIONS 
TABLE 28-1. BASIC ON-BOARD TOOL KIT 
• V2" drive socket set, 7/16-1" 
with T handle, 6" extension 
• spark plug socket 
• combination wrenches, %-l" 
• 6" adjustable wrench 
• 10" groove-joint pliers 
• linesman's pliers 
• Hex key set 
• Torx key set (if needed) 
• 4-way lug wrench with breaker bar 
• tire and tube repair kit 
• quality air pressure gauge 
• inflation pump 
• jumper cables, 4 gauge 
• can starting fluid 
• ice scraper/snow brush 
• siphon 
• regular gas adaptor (if needed) 
• can radiator stop-leak 
• 2-gal water container 
• duct tape 
• electrician's tape 
• safety flares 
• first aid kit 
• fire extinguisher 
D assorted screwdrivers, regular 
and Phillips 
D ball-peen hammer 
D 2+ lb short-handled hammer 
D %" cold chisel 
• mini-hacksaw with extra blades 
D continuity tester 
D stockman's knife 
• can WD-40 or LPS25 
D 5-ton hydraulic hand jack 
Dliigh-lift'jack 
• foot-square %" plywood 
• 'come-along5 hand winch 
• nylon tow strap, cable or rope 
• 60" crowbar 
• tire chains 
• shovel 
• axe 
• bow saw 
• bolt cutters 
• nails, spikes 
• bailing wire 
• flashlight, spare batteries 
• hand spotlight 
• extra motor oil 
TABLE 28-2 BASIC ON-BOARD SPARE PARTS 
• 2 complete sets of belts 
• set of radiator and heater hoses 
• thermostat 
• radiator cap 
• water pump 
• assorted fuses 
• set spark plugs 
• distributor cap (if needed) 
• point and condenser set (if needed) 
• voltage regulator 
• fuel filter 
• fuel pump 
TABLE 28-3. SPARE PARTS AND SUPPLIES STORAGE 
• complete set of belts 
• complete set of hoses 
• thermostat 
• radiator cap 
• water pump 
• fuel pump 
• 4 fuel filters 
• spare carburetor 
• 4 air cleaner elements 
• 2 sets windshield wipers 
• 5 oil filters 
• 60 qt motor oil 
• 4 sets spark plugs 
• distributor cap (if needed) 
• 2 sets points and condensers 
(if used) 
• voltage regulator 
• generator or alternator with 
spare set of brushes 
• spare diode bridge for 
alternator (if used) 
• spare coil 
• spare starter brushes 
• set solid ignition cables 

TRANSPORTATION 
285 
• wheel-bearing grease 
• 2-4 batteries 
• set battery cables, 4 gauge 
• spare fuses 
• power-steering fluid (if needed) 
• 4-6 gal coolant 
• 2 sets shock absorbers 
• 2 sets of front wheel bearings, 
seals, cotter pins 
• spare headlights 
• other spare lights, bulbs 
D 2-4 sets of tires 
• tire and tube patching supplies 
• clutch plate, pressure plate and 
release bearings (manual) 
• friction plates, steel plate, rings, 
front and rear seals, complete 
gasket and rubber set 
(automatic transmission) 
• transmission fluid 
• spare brake master cylinder 
• wheel cylinder rebuilding kits 
• brake pads and linings 
• gal brake fluid 
Dgal 10% denatured alcohol 
Since batteries are responsible for more "no-go" situations than any 
other component and nearly all are almost impossible to repair or 
rebuild, store at least two to four spares. They should be stored as cool 
as possible and recharged once a month with an automatic battery 
charger with slow-charging capabilities. 
Store at least two to four complete sets of tires. They should be a 
standard mud/snow design in the largest size suggested by the factory 
for your particular vehicle with the highest load range rating possible 
(usually C or D on light trucks). Huge over-sized tires shouldn't be used 
because they greatly increase the stress on wheel bearings, front 
spindles and rear axles, increasing the chance of failure. Tires should 
be stored on their side to prevent flat spotting in a clean, dark, cool and 
dry location, preferably wrapped in heavy paper or burlap. They should 
not be stored near petroleum products nor around electrical equipment; 
electrical equipment produces ozone when operating that attacks and 
cracks the rubber. Ideally, tires should be mounted, inflated to 
operating pressure, spun balanced, deflated to about 10 psi, and then 
have new valve stems (or valve cores in tubes) installed and capped 
prior to storage. 
A 3/4-ton or larger vehicle usually has split rims that require 
tube-type tires. Installing tubes even in tubeless tires on survival 
vehicles would make them that much more dependable. 
If you desire to store a vehicle for the long-term, use a dark, dry and 
cool but not freezing location. Siphon out as much fuel as possible and 
run until completely dry, then remove the battery, drain all the coolant 
from the radiator, flush the cooling system and refill with fresh coolant. 
Change the oil and oil filter, loosen all belts and place the vehicle on 
blocks to prevent the tires from flat spotting. 

286 
OTHER PREPARATIONS 
Obviously you will want to store a fuel supply for the vehicles. See 
Chapter 23 for details. Jerrycans and other portable fuel cans should 
have adequate spouts. 
Trailers can be used to increase the load capacity, but be aware that 
under even the best of circumstances they can be most difficult to 
maneuver and turn. Also, their ground clearance is usually poor. If you 
want a real tough utility trailer for use around a remote retreat, check 
into the Pack Mule trailers from Helder Manufacturing. 
Other Motorized Vehicles 
Mopeds, all-terrain vehicles (ATVs) and light scrambler dirt bikes 
can also be used. Mopeds range in price from $1000 to over $2,000, 
weigh about an hundred pounds or so, and usually use a one to two 
horsepower 50cc engine to travel eighteen to forty miles per hour while 
getting eighty to two hundred miles per gallon. They are no where near 
as easy to pedal as a decent bicycle. Get one with full suspension, a 
multi-speed or variable speed transmission and some way to carry 
items. ATVs cost $1,500 and up, weigh 160 to three hundred pounds, 
use fifty to 700cc engines, get around fifty miles per gallon and can hit 
speeds over seventy miles per hour. They go in sand, mud, ice, or snow 
and can haul loads over fairly rough terrain. Scrambler dirt bikes 
should be under 250cc so that they won't be too heavy and hard to 
control in off-road use. 
Ultra light planes cruise at thirty to eighty miles per hour with one 
or two passengers, weigh two hundred plus pounds with a twenty-five 
to a hundred horse power engine and get about twenty to thirty miles 
per gallon. They can take off from any reasonably smooth strip a couple 
of hundred feet long, land at twenty miles per hour in as little as thirty 
feet and still don't require a pilot's license to operate. Most come in kit 
form for $3-17,000. There are also autogyros, small helicopters and the 
larger helicopters and planes. 
Motorboats, snowmobiles ,and tracked all-terrain vehicles are other 
possibilities for transportation in certain situations. 
Non-Motorized Transportation 
Although it's obvious that transportation modes independent of 
stored fuel supplies could become very valuable when the stored 
supplies are all used, they are also valuable before that time as backup 
systems. There are a number of options to consider. 

TRANSPORTATION 
287 
Bicycles 
Bicycles are the most efficient mode of self-powered transportation 
and would be excellent during a pro-longed crisis if chosen wisely. Get 
an all-terrain mountain bike. They are wide-ratio, multi-geared and 
have over-sized brakes, heavy-duty steel frames and usually shocks. 
Get a luggage carrier rack, folding side baskets, or saddlebags for 
carrying loads. Mount a generator with light and store spare brake 
pads, spokes, rear gear sprockets, chains, tire rims, tires and tubes 
along with a patching kit and air pump. You'll also want a good bicycle 
repair manual and a tool kit. For hauling loads up to more than one 
hundred pounds you can buy or build a two-wheel bike trailer. 
Horses and Mules 
Horses and mules can be used for riding, packing loads ,or doing 
work around a homestead like plowing and pulling wagons. A good 
horse can cover forty miles a day over rough terrain for many days and 
more than twice that in an emergency. A pack horse or mule can carry 
one-fifth its weight in gear or supplies, and a team will allow you to 
farm fifty to hundred acres. Stallions are much more difficult to control 
than geldings but are more desirable to breed with mares. 
A mule has more endurance than a horse, makes a better pack 
animal and are good choices for draft work. Along with burros, they are 
more adaptable than horses to drier, less-vegetated areas. 
Stalls are usually twelve feet square. Horses also need a minimum 
of eight hundred square feet of corral and two to four acres for grazing 
unless supplemented. Plan on two tons of grains, three tons of hay and 
salt for each horse per year. 
For riding, you'll want a sturdy Western roping saddle, a thick 
saddle blanket, a bridle, halter, ropes and perhaps hobbles. Also get a 
hoof pick, nail trimmers and grooming equipment. If you expect to shoe 
your own animals, you'll need horseshoes and nails plus a forge, 
hammers, tongs and files. If you will want to haul much, you'll need a 
wagon or cart with harnesses and hitches. 
Store worming supplies and other medications to keep your animals 
healthy and have them properly vaccinated. Daily exercise is important 
to keep them in shape, too. 
Sled Dogs 
In areas with lots of winter snow, sled dogs might be a good form of 
transportation. A good dog is capable of pulling about two to three times 

288 
OTHER PREPARATIONS 
his own weight at ten to twelve miles per hour for extended periods of 
time. You'll need a freight sled, tow lines and harnesses. They can also 
be used to pull carts when there is no snow and can carry approxi-
mately one-third their own weight with a backpack. Real sled dogs eat 
about 750 pounds of dried fish each per year! 
Skis and Snowshoes 
Skis and snowshoes can be effective winter transportation. 
Although regular cross-country skis can be used, the heavier mountain 
skis allow the use of heavy boots and are preferred. Ski skins give 
additional traction for mountaineering use. Snowshoes are better in 
hilly terrain and not as dependent on the snow condition. Have snow 
goggles or glasses to prevent snowblindness. 
Handcarts 
Carts can be useful around the homestead for hauling heavy loads 
of dirt, compost and firewood. They can also be used as a last resort for 
carrying a sizeable amount of belongings over long distances. Large 
tires help in rough terrain and a suitable cart can be homemade using 
twenty-six-inch bicycle tires or the plastic moto-cross bike wheels. A 
waterproof tarp or other top is a needed addition. 

29 
COMMUNICATIONS 
Having communications before, during and after a crisis can be 
vital. Before a crisis it can warn of dangerous situations as they 
develop, keep family and friends appraised, and inform about events 
either suppressed or ignored by government officials or the media. 
During a crisis it may be the only way to stay in contact, coordinate 
activities, know what the present situation is and even call for help. 
After a crisis has passed, it allows quick assessment and reorientation. 
Three types of communications you should consider are radios, cell 
phones and the Internet. 
Radios 
The absolute minimum is a battery-operated AM radio. This will 
allow you to keep abreast of local news and emergency broadcasts 
Radios using solar cells to power the radio and recharge the batteries 
for night or overcast daytime operation would save having to rely solely 
on stored batteries. There are also some radios that use a hand-crank 
to power the radio, often along with solar cells. All major preparedness 
vendors listed in Chapter 32 offer these types of radios. 
Store both rechargeable batteries and regular ones which you must 
rotate to keep fresh. Rechargeable batteries generally only have about 
half the total power of regular and often a slightly lower voltage. 
General-Coverage Receivers 
If you want to know what is going on outside the country or others' 
perspectives and interpretations of current events, you should have a 
quality general-coverage receiver capable of picking up the basic 
shortwave (World Band) spectrum to 30 mHz (megahertz). This gives 
access to more than 70 nations and thousands of shortwave broadcasts 
from around the world, many in English. 
The receiver should be AC/DC and have jacks for an external 
antenna and earphone or headphone, an illuminated display and a good 
signal-strength indicator. Make sure the radio has a digital frequency 
readout because it makes locating desired frequencies much easier. 
Multiple or double conversion is almost a necessity, and synchronous 

290 
OTHER PREPARATIONS 
selectable sideband increases adjacent-channel rejection while reducing 
fading distortion. Direct-access tuning via keypad and preset memories 
are very convenient. Single side band (SSB) capabilities will also 
expand your listening options. 
The further you are from the places you want to listen to the better 
your radio should be; if you choose a radio a bit above your perceived 
needs it has a better chance of being satisfactory in the long run. You'll 
also want to take into account whether you want a really small radio for 
travel, a larger and more pleasant to use radio for a fixed base, or both. 
There are also some in-dash car radios that receive shortwave (i.e. the 
Becker Mexico 2340 for $460), and other radios can be adapted to run 
off of the car battery via the cigarette lighter. 
Models change and specific recommendations soon become dated; it's 
well worth the $20 to get the latest edition of Passport to World Band 
Radio and read their reviews before you buy. They also sell in-depth 
evaluations on their Web site at www.passband.com. Radios in the $150 
to $500 range are usually adequate for all but the weakest of stations. 
Current recommendations are (from good to best) the Grundig Yachtboy 
400PE ($150), Sony ICF-7600GR ($170), Sony ICF-SW07 ($420), Sony 
ICF-2010 ($350) and Grundig Satellit 800 ($500). If you want the very 
best in sensitivity, selectivity and stability, get the Drake R8B ($1380) 
or the AOR AR7030 ($2,000) tabletops. 
Grundig Satellit 800 Millennium Shortwave Radio 

COMMUNICATIONS 291 
Almost all receivers built since 1980 are solid state and work well even 
decades after they are built. On the other hand, tube radios tend to 
loose efficiency with age so buying an old tube set is not highly 
recommended. 
The antenna is even more important than the radio. The built-in 
antenna portables come with may not be adequate. Outdoor antennas 
work much better, but if you can't set one up, Sony's AN-LP1 loop 
antenna (the Sony ICF-SW07 comes with the equivalent AN-LP2) will 
help. Effective outdoor antennas can be made from fifty to a hundred 
feet of sixteen to eighteen-gauge insulated copper wire placed between 
the highest points possible with insulators at each end. Directional 
dipole antennas and active antennas are other possibilities. Details on 
building more complex antennas are in sources listed in Chapter 31. 
Among the best antennas under $100 are the Eavesdropper by Antenna 
Supermarket and those by Alpha Delta Communications. 
Develop the habit of listening to shortwave broadcasts now so 
you'll know how and where to find them when needed. To find out what 
programs are broadcast when, consult the shortwave web sites listed in 
Chapter 32. Long-distance reception is best at night and in the winter 
when radio waves travel much better. Higher frequencies work better 
than lower ones during the day and in the summer, but they are also 
most affected by sunspot activity. 
Stored radios should have all batteries removed, and protect all 
radios from moisture, sunlight and freezing temperatures. You should 
also protect them from the EMP (electromagnetic pulse) likely at the 
beginning of a major nuclear attack. An EMP with tremendous energy 
is created by the detonation of a nuclear warhead in space. The EMP 
induces large currents in conductors, destroying communications 
components and equipment. Vacuum tube equipment isn't particularly 
affected by it, but transistorized solid state equipment is highly 
susceptible. Radios can be protected by leaving them disconnected from 
electrical outlets, not attached to antennas over ten inches in length 
and by shielding them inside metal, aluminum foil, or metal window 
screen-covered boxes that have been electrically grounded. Small 
battery-operated radios using only built-in short-loop antennas 
probably won't be affected much by EMP. 
Scanners 
If you want to listen to local police, fire, ambulance, public safety, 
aviation, marine, and local, state 
and federal government 

292 
OTHER PREPARATIONS 
transmissions, get a multi-channel programmable AC/DC scanner. To 
listen in on the many agencies that use trunk tracking (frequency 
hopping), you'll need a scanner with that capability. My current choices 
would be the Uniden BC 780XLT ($335) for a base/mobile scanner or 
the Uniden BC 245XLT ($205) for a handheld. AOR also makes good 
scanners. Again you can use sources listed in Chapters 32 to help you 
find your local frequencies. 
CB Radios 
The most prevalent and most useful two-way radios are those opera-
ting on the eleven-meter citizen's band (CB). They operate on forty 
different channels (channel 9 is the emergency channel) and have a 
legal maximum four-watt output. Within their normal range limit of a 
few miles, they are excellent for learning about road and traffic 
conditions, pileups, road blocks, washouts and other possible problems. 
They can also function as alternatives to the telephone system if need 
be. 
Cobra makes excellent equipment as do Uniden and Midland. Small 
100-milliwatt hand-held CB units with up to one-mile line-of-sight 
range can be purchased for $40-60. A mobile CB unit is the most 
versatile choice with a decent one costing $100 or more. Base stations 
usually cost more than mobile ones, have increased range, but are not 
normally portable. Single side band (SSB) units are more static free, 
have half the usual interference and effectively two to three times the 
power and range of the normal four-watt output. 
Although currently illegal, with the proper know-how the power of 
CB radios can be boosted up to 400 times through the use of linear 
amplifiers. Illegal frequency "sliders" also allow operating outside 
normal CB frequencies. While these modifications are illegal to make 
now, under an extreme crisis they may come in very handy. You might 
want to locate possible plans for them now. 
Other Two-Way Radios 
General Mobile Radio Service (GMRS) requires an FCC license 
(easily obtained) and allows immediate family members to discuss 
personal or commercial business. GMRS radios operate with two to five 
watts power, have a range of one to five miles and cost around $150 or 
so. Family Radio Service (FRS) radios operate on the same frequencies. 
Strictly non-commercial, they do not require a license, have up to one-
half watt power with a range up to two miles and cost as little as $40. 

COMMUNICATIONS 293 
Amateur Radio 
The best long-distance two-way communications equipment is the 
amateur or "ham" radios. To operate ham radios legally you have to be 
licensed, but with the "no-code" Technician license it's fairly easy to get 
started. You will have to take a 35-question test on basic electronics 
and communications rules and are limited to frequencies above 30 
MHz. If you want access to all the ham bands then you will need to 
know how to send messages in Morse code and have the additional 
knowledge required for the General or Extra class licenses. 
The American Radio Relay League (ARRL) is the amateur 
organization in the United States and annually publishes The Radio 
Amateur's Handbook, the recognized reference work for amateurs, 
along with other publications of interest (see Chapter 31). Either the 
No-Code License Manual by Gordon West or Now You're Talking by 
Larry Wolfgang (both available at Radio Shack) can prepare you for 
getting the Technician license. 
Ham equipment is again available in hand-held, mobile and base 
units. Equipment runs from a couple hundred dollars to transceivers 
costing thousands of dollars, with quality producers including ICOM, 
Kenwood and Yaesu. Often used equipment can be located through ham 
organizations or ham retailers (see Chapter 32). This isn't the type of 
equipment where a few "best buys" can be listed; you'll have to become 
knowledgeable about it for yourself and the best place to start is talking 
with other hams. 
Emergency Alert Radios 
Weather alert radios receive continuous weather reports, forecasts, 
advisories and warnings from the National Weather Service (NWS). 
This service also originates the Emergency Alert System warnings 
heard on the AM/FM public radio frequencies. The NWS broadcasts 
twenty-four hours per day throughout the United States. Maximum 
range from a station is forty to fifty miles line-of-sight and reception 
can be poor in mountainous country. Costs start as low as $20 for a 
portable, but be sure to get the kind that automatically turns on when 
a warning is issued and gets your attention with an audible alarm. 
You'll not only get more current and accurate weather information than 
possible from the standard radio and TV stations, but you'll be among 
the first to know of a nuclear attack warning. You might want one 
where you work, too. 

294 
OTHER PREPARATIONS 
Radios that automatically alert you to emergency warnings on the 
regular AM/FM dial are fine but not as timely as those using the NWS 
frequencies. 
Cell Phones 
Cell phones are extremely convenient and can be used almost 
anywhere to communicate with anyone connected to the world-wide 
telephone system. There are even cell phones that use satellites and can 
place calls from the most remote parts of the world. However, during 
major crises the telephone system, including cell phones, can become 
overloaded and make it nearly impossible to get through in a timely 
manner. Cell phones are basically two-way radios that use local 
repeaters (or "cells") to function, so they can likewise be disrupted by 
nearby problems. 
Regardless of their shortcomings, cell phones would be helpful in 
many crises. They can also dramatically increase your safety in 
situations where you can call for immediate help when needed. Digital 
cell phones are the preferred option because they offer many additional 
features over the analog variety. 
The Internet 
The Internet is the communication medium of choice for sending 
messages (e-mails and instant messaging) and getting the latest news 
from just about anywhere in the world. It was designed to work in 
times of major disaster by routing traffic around malfunctioning 
sections. You access it with a computer or other Internet device (even 
some cell phones) and a phone line, cable, or wireless connection. 
However, it can be quickly overloaded during emergencies, is subject 
to hackers and cyber-terrorists, and can be critically damaged by 
destroying only a few key locations. In spite of that, access to the 
Internet would be very valuable during and after any major crisis. 
For secure messages you will want a good encryption program such 
as PGP. Download it free at: web.mit.edu/network/pgp.html.With these 
programs you give your "public" key to whomever you want to send a 
message to and then encode your message with your "private" key prior 
to sending it. 

30 
HOME MANAGEMENT 
During or after a crisis there are still basic activities that can or 
must be done. Not only are the activities useful in themselves, but they 
also keep minds and bodies occupied and give structure and direction, 
decreasing the possibility that depression or other psychological 
problems will develop. 
GENERAL FUNCTIONS 
Calculations are much easier with a solar-powered calculator. 
Messages can be produced with a manual typewriter (what's that?) and 
a duplicating machine or hand-operated press. The typewriter and 
adding machine will need ribbons and tapes. A wind-up clock will 
continue to function without batteries or electricity and provide 
coordination. Knowing the time and keeping track of the days with a 
calendar will help keep you oriented, too. Other items that could prove 
useful: 
• paper 
• notebooks 
• note pads 
• pens 
• pen refills 
• pencils 
• erasers 
• manual sharpener • markers 
• ink 
• crayons 
• stapler 
• staples 
• transparent tape 
• masking tape 
• paper clips 
• scissors 
• glue and paste 
• posterboard 
• paints and watercolors 
RECREATION AND ENTERTAINMENT 
Crises bring tension, apprehension and fear. Normally mature 
individuals become irritable, loose their tempers and worsen al-
ready-bad situations. Young children can become very difficult and 
unruly. And all these problems are greatly magnified when, for 
example, you are confined for many days in a shelter. However, some 
forethought and planning can help avoid many of these problems by 
providing diversionary activities that help all to relax, release tension, 
laugh a bit and perhaps temporarily forget their troubles. 

296 
OTHER PREPARATIONS 
Provide a wide variety of board and card games and activities 
suitable for different ages and social groupings. Small children can be 
kept occupied with coloring books, puzzles, jacks, marbles, tops and 
jump ropes. Adults can use arts and crafts materials to build useful 
items and work on their hobbies. Particularly in confined situations, 
active games like charades can help. 
You can store musical instruments and toys, but both can also be 
made from odds and ends. Dolls can be made from scraps of wood and 
bits of cloth and yarn. 
Battery-operated tape recorders and CD players can be used with a 
library of tapes and CDs. When electricity is available, even stereos, 
televisions, camcorders, DVD players and electronic video games are 
nice. Sports equipment can provide hours of enjoyment and outdoor 
"games" can be used to teach about wild plants, trees, birds and other 
survival skills. Digital or film cameras can be very useful and can 
provide memories, but you may have to develop the film yourself. 
Journals for keeping a daily diary may help. 
Finally, reading material can take on a whole new light in a crisis. 
Not only will you want to store plenty of general fiction for escape 
reading but also a fair amount of educational non-fiction books. The 
next chapter discusses a survival library in detail. Old magazines and 
catalogs can be saved and song books can help develop unity. 
HOME EDUCATION 
A prolonged crisis may mean that children will have to be taught at 
home. Adults, too, need to exercise their intellectual capacities and 
develop additional skills. Learning should be a life-long pursuit for all, 
and a severe crisis may make it even more essential. 
Children need to learn basic reading, writing and arithmetic, but 
there are many other subjects that could be valuable to them like 
spelling, English, advanced mathematics and geometry, biology, 
chemistry, physics, history, health, foreign languages and music. 
Obviously there is a great body of knowledge to learn and storing all the 
necessary books would be a large undertaking. Keep current textbooks, 
seek out books thrown out by schools, or buy them inexpensively at a 
thrift store. Add a good set of encyclopedias, a world atlas and a 
dictionary. There are also computer versions of these. Pictures, flannel 
boards and characters, charts, tables and other materials can also be 
helpful. A selection of decent literature is good, too. See Chapter 32 for 
a list of books that might be appropriate for you. 

31 
SURVIVAL LIBRARY 
Information can be extremely valuable in times of crises and you 
should have a good reference library. It's impossible to learn everything 
now that you may need to know some time in the future, but you can 
store that knowledge in printed form. Collect all the how-to books, 
newsletters and magazine articles you can on survival and self-
sufficiency. CDs would be a good way to store lots of information if you 
can guarantee you'll have access to a computer (perhaps a PDA or other 
hand-held computer?) It can be scanned in or taken directly off the 
Internet. Read some of it on a regular basis. You probably won't have 
the time to absorb it all, but know what's in it. 
Because of the vast amount of information that might possibly be 
useful in a crisis situation, this chapter can only point out a small part 
of the available material. As time passes there will be new books that 
could be added to these lists. You can find out which books are still 
available or about new ones on the Internet by searching Amazon or 
Barnes and Noble. You can also find an updated list of preparedness 
books at www.Cross-Current.com/bookshelf.html. 
Don't think that you absolutely must have all the items listed. Also, 
in a number of cases, items not listed could readily be substituted for 
listed ones. You must be selective in your choices so that your survival 
library is tailored to your individual needs without too much 
duplication. 
The lists of books that follow are generally categorized by topic in 
the order covered in this handbook. 
Sources 
You can buy most of the books from the major book sellers such as 
Amazon and Barnes & Noble or even directly thru www.Cross-
Curr ent. com/bookshelf .html. Others are available from the general 
preparedness sources listed in Chapter 32. However, some of the books 
you might want can be more easily obtained or are only available from 
specialized sources. Be aware that some of these sources also sell books 
on subjects that might be considered offensive. Just ignore those that 
are distasteful to you. Most have on-line catalogs or order a hard copy. 

298 
RESOURCES 
Loompanics, PO Box 1197, Port Townsend, WA 98368, 800-380-
2230, 
360-385-2230, www.loompanics.com. 
Print catalog 
available for $5 or free with order. 
Paladin Press, 7077 Winchester Circle, Boulder, CO 80301,800-466-
6868, 303-443-7250, www.paladin-press.com. Free printed 
catalog. 
Delta Press, 215 S. Washington Ave., El Dorado, AR 71730,800-852-
4445, 870-862-4984, www.deltapress.com. Free printed catalog. 
Another source for unusual publications on old-time skills, how-to 
articles and primitive chemistry are the Survivor series, Granddad's 
Wonderful Book of Chemistry and CD-ROMs from Kurt Saxon: 
Atlan Formularies, PO Box 95, Alpena, AR 72611, 870-437-2999, 
www.survivalplus.com. 
Fiction 
If you want to increase your awareness about what could happen 
you can read speculative descriptions of what conditions might be like 
under various speculative scenarios: 
Lucifer's Hammer by Larry Niven and Jerry Pournelle 
Pulling Through by Dean Ing (1987, hard to find) 
Alas, Babylon by Pat Frank (1993 reprint) 
General References 
Besides the books listed, you might want a current world almanac, 
an authoritative dictionary and a good encyclopedia set (perhaps even 
a CD-ROM set). Also consider "how-to" books on trapping, tool making, 
blacksmithing, small appliance repair, motor and small engine repair, 
water pump repair, plumbing, wiring, carpentry, masonry and small 
building construction. You should have a good shop manual for each 
vehicle and a trouble-shooting guide for each piece of electronic gear or 
appliance. Additional books might be: 
Encyclopedia of Country Living by Carla Emery 
Back to Basics by Reader's Digest 
Foxfire books (first six volumes) 
Modern Homestead Manual by Skip Thomson, et al 

SURVIVAL LIBRARY 
299 
Cooking and Recipes 
Ultimate Food Storage Cookbook by Arlene Michelsen 
Catastrophic Cooking by Carol Reid 
Woodstove Cookery: At Home on the Range by Jane Cooper 
Y2K Survival Guide and Cookbook by Dorothy Bates 
The New Cookin' with Home Storage by Vicki Tate 
Cookin' with... (series of three) by Peggy Layton 
Country Beans by Rita Bingham, et al 
The Amazing Wheat Book by LeArta Moulton 
Making the Best of Basics by James Talmage Stevens 
New Passport to Survival by Rita Bingham 
Making Great Cheese at Home by Barbara Ciletti 
Growing Food 
How to Grow More Vegetables and Fruits, Nuts, Raising Grains... 
by John Jeavons 
Mittleider Grow-Box Gardens by Jacob R. Mittleider 
Square Foot Gardening and Ca$h from Square Foot Gardening by 
Mel Bartholomew. 
Backyard Fruits and Berries by Miranda Smith 
The Farmer's Wife Guide to Fabulous Fruits and Berries by Doyen 
The Backyard Berry Book by Stella Otto 
Planning and Planting Your Dwarf Fruit Trees by L. Southwick 
Pruning Simplified by Lewis Hill 
The Scythe Book by David Tresemer 
Seed to Seed: Seed Saving Techniques by Suzanne Ashworth 
Seed Sowing and Saving by Carole B. Turner 
Five Acres & Independence by Maurice Grenville Kains, et al 
Raising Animals 
Backyard Livestock by Steven Thomas 
Chickens in Your Backyard by Luttmann and Luttmann 
Try the Rabbit by S.O. Adajre 
The New Goat Handbook by Jaudas and Vriends 
Animal Husbandry by Laura Zigman 
Merck Veterinary Manual by Susan Aiello 
Veterinary Guide for Animal Owners by Spaulding and Clay 
Basic Butchering of Livestock & Game by John T. Mettlar Jr. 

300 
RESOURCES 
Wild Foods 
Plants of the Rocky Mountains by Kershaw, Pojar and Alaback 
Feasting Free on Wild Edibles by Bradford Angier 
Field Guide to Edible Wild Plants by Bradford Angier 
Tom Brown's Guide to Wild Edible and Medicinal Plants 
Guide to Wild Foods and Useful Plants by Christopher Nyerges 
Field Guide to Edible Wild Plants by Peterson and Peterson 
God's Free Harvest by Ken Larson 
Edible and Poisonous Plants of the Western United States 
Edible and Poisonous Plants of the Eastern United States 
Live Off the Land in the City and Country by Ragnor Benson 
Survival Poaching by Ragnor Benson 
Cookin' Wild Game by Teresa Marrone 
Wild About Game by Jane Hibler and Janie Hibler 
Wild Game Cooking Made Easy by John Schumacher 
Wild Game Cookbook by Judity Bosley 
Wild Game Cookery by J. Carol Vance, et al 
America's Favorite Wild Game Recipes (Hunting & Fishing) 
Native Indian Wild Game, Fish & Wild Food Cookbook 
500 Wild Game and Fish Recipes by Galen Winter 
Preserving Food 
Root Cellaring by Mike Bubel, Nancy Bubel and Pam Art 
Keeping the Harvest by Nancy Chioffi, et al 
Stocking Up by Carol Hupping 
Putting Food By by Janet C. Greene, et al 
The Busy Person's Guide to Preserving Food by Janet B. Chadwick 
Ball Blue Book 
Kerr Home Canning Guide 
The Complete Guide to Home Canning, Preserving and Freezing, 
Bulletin #539 by the USDA is also available from Dover and on 
the Internet at http://extension.usu.edu/publica/foodpub2.htm. 
How to Dry Foods by Deanna DeLong and Lara Gates 
The ABC's of Home Food Dehydration by Barbara Densley 
Dry It, You xll Like It by Gen MacManiman 
A Guide to Canning, Freezing, Curing and Smoking of Meat, Fish 
and Game by Wilbur F. Eastman, Jr. 
Home Book of Smoke Cooking Meat, Fish and Game by Jack Sleight 
and Raymond Hall 

SURVIVAL LIBRARY 
301 
Sausage & Jerky Handbook by Eldon R. Cutlip 
Great Sausage Recipes and Meat Curing by Rytek Kutas 
Making Great Sausage at Home by Chris Kobler 
Home Sausage Making by Charles G. Reavis 
Outdoor Survival 
Worst-Case Scenario Survival Handbook by Piven and Borgenicht 
US Army Survival Handbook 
US Army Survival Manual by Dept. of Defense 
Collins GEM SAS Survival Guide by John Wiseman 
NOLS Wilderness Guide by Mark Harvey 
Mountainman Crafts and Skills by David Montgomery 
Survival: A Manual That Could Save Your Life by Chris Janowsky 
Outdoor Survival Skills by Larry Dean Olsen 
Tom Brown's Field Guide to Wilderness Survival 
FM-200 200 Military Manuals on CD-ROM by Dept. of Defense 
Firearms 
Modern Weapons Caching by Ragnar Benson 
Gun Digest Book of Firearms: Centerfire Rifles by J.B. Wood 
Gun Digest Book of Firearms: Revolvers by J.B. Wood 
Gun Digest Book of Firearms: Auto Pistols by J.B. Wood 
Gunsmithing : Rifles by Patrick Sweeney 
Gunsmithing: Pistols and Revolvers by Patrick Sweeney 
Gunsmithing: Shotguns by Patrick Sweeney 
Gunsmithing at Home by John Traister 
Survival Guns by Mel Tappan (2002 reprint by Delta Press) 
The Survival Armory by Duncan Long (Delta Press) 
Bad Times Primer by C. G. Cobb 
Gun Digest by Ken Ramage 
Gun Digest Book of Assault Weapons by Lewis and Steele 
Clothing and Bedding 
Complete Guide to Sewing by Reader's Digest 
The Complete Photo Guide to Sewing (Singer) 
Tan Your Hide! by Phyllis Hobson 
Home Tanning and Leather Making Guide by A.B. Farnham 
Home Manufacture of Furs and Skins by A.B. Farnham 

302 
RESOURCES 
Heat, Cooking and Light 
Solar Electric Independent Home Book by Paul Jeffrey Fowler 
Solar Living Source Book by John Schaeffer and Doug Pratt 
Practical Photovoltaics by Richard Komp 
How to Live Without Electricity—and Like It by Anita Evangelista 
Living Without Electricity by Scott and Pellman. 
Medical and Dental 
Emergency Childbirth by George J. White, MD. 
Survivalist's Medicine Chest by Ragnar Benson 
Do-It-Yourself Medicine by Ragnar Benson 
Current Medical Diagnosis and Treatment by Lawrence M. Tierney 
Handbook of Current Diagnosis & Treatment by James O. 
Woolliscroft. 
New American Medical Dictionary & Health Manual by Rothenberg 
Wilderness Medicine, Beyond First Aid by William W. Forgey 
Field Guide to Wilderness Medicine by Paul S. Auerbach 
Advanced First Aid Afloat by Peter Eastman & John Levinson 
The Merck Manual of Diagnosis and Therapy by Mark H. Beers 
Where There is No Doctor by David Werner, et al 
Ditch Medicine by Hugh L. Coffee 
PDR: Physician's Desk Reference 
The Essential Guide to Prescription Drugs by Long and Rybacki 
International Medical Guide for Ships: The Ship's Medicine Chest 
US Army Special Forces Medical Handbook-Department of Army 
Emergency War Surgery-2nd U.S. Revision of NATO Handbook 
Where There Is No Dentist by Murray Dickson. 
Terrorism and NBC Warfare 
Nuclear War Survival Skills by Cresson H.Kearny (OISM) 
Life After Doomsday by Bruce D. Clayton 
Fighting Chance by Arthur Robinson and Gary North 
Survival Home 
New Fix-It-Yourself Manual by Reader's Digest 
New Complete Do-It-Yourself Manual by Reader's Digest 
Peace of Mind in Earthquake Country by Peter I. Yanev 
Earthquake Prepared: Securing Your Home by Joel Leach 

SURVIVAL LIBRARY 
303 
The Secure Home by Joel Skousen 
How to Implement a High Security Shelter by Joel Skousen 
Strategic Relocation by Joel Skousen 
The Survival Retreat by Ragnar Benson 
The Modern Survival Retreat by Ragnar Benson 
Communications 
Passport to World Band Radio by Larry Magne 
Radio Monitoring: the How to Guide by TJ Skip Arey 
The World ofCB Radio by Mark Long, et al 
Guide to Emergency Survival Communications by Dave Ingram 
The Radio Amateur's Handbook by ARRL 
No-Code License Manual by Gordon West 
Now You're Talking by Larry Wolfgang 
Home Education 
700 Science Experiments for Everyone (UN) 
Everyday Science: Fun and Easy Projects for Making Practical 
Things by Shar Levine and Leslie Johnstone. 
Home Learning Year by Year by Rebecca Rupp 
Complete Home Learning Resource Book by Rebecca Rupp 
Homeschooling Handbook by Mary Griffith 
Homeschooling Almanac by Mary Leppert, et al 
Saxon math and physics books are available from Saxon Publishers, 
2450 John Saxon Blvd., Norman, OK 73701, 800-284-7019, 405-
329-7071, www.saxonpublishers.com. Excellent home study 
series. 
Periodicals 
The following magazines may be of interest to you. They all have 
websites where you can take a look at their latest issues. Sometimes 
they will send you a sample issue or you can pick one up at the store. 
Countryside (modern homesteading) www.countrysidemag.com 
Home Power (home-made power) www.homepower.com 
Backwoods Home (self-reliant living) www.backwoodshome.com 
Mother Earth News www.motherearthnews.com 

304 
RESOURCES 
A more specialized bi-monthly covering civil defense is: 
The Journal of Civil Defense www.tacda.org 
Currently there are no preparedness-specific magazines or 
newsletters generally being published that I am aware of. 
The Internet 
The Internet can also be a valuable source of information. Use 
search engines like Google or Yahoo and look under preparedness, 
survival, crisis and similar subjects. Be advised that all information 
found on the Internet is not true so you must use caution and common 
sense. 
Another good way to find useful information on the Internet is to go 
to www.Cross-Current.com/links.html and try the many links posted 
there to other preparedness and survival sites. If you come across a 
book or other publication, as well as Internet sites, that you think 
might be of interest to readers of Crisis Preparedness Handbook, please 
send it to me at Cross-Current Publications or e-mail me at 
ispigarelli@Cross-Current.com. 

32 
SOURCES DIRECTORY 
This chapter contains sources for preparedness information, 
products and training. It lists the major national sources as well as 
some less-known. You can contact them by mail, phone, or, in most 
cases today, over the Internet. 
The preparedness business is cyclical. Because of this, over time 
some sources may change names, locations, products, or even go out of 
business. This list is as current as possible at the time of printing. For 
an up-to-date list of sources available see www.Cross-Current.com. If 
you know of any sources that you think should be included or have 
comments about any of the concerns listed, please email me at 
ispigarelli@Cross-Current.com. 
Just because a particular concern is listed here it is not an 
endorsement of them or their products. This list is also not exhaustive. 
You can find other sources, particular items or additional information 
through the Internet by simply using search engines. 
Preparedness Information 
CROSS-CURRENT PUBLISHING (publishers of this book), 333 N 425 
E, Alpine, UT 84004, 801-756-2786, www.Cross-Current.com. 
Preparedness books, information, resources, updated sources, web 
links and free downloads. 
General Preparedness Products 
EMERGENCY ESSENTIALS, 165 S Mountain Way Dr., Orem, UT 
84058, 800-999-1863, 801-222-9667, www.BePrepared.com. 
NITRO-PAK PREPAREDNESS CENTER, 475 West 910 South, Heber 
City, UT 84032, 800-866-4876, www.nitro-pak.com. 
MAJOR SURPLUS & SURVIVAL, 435 W Alondra Blvd., Gardena, CA 
90248, 800-441-8855, www.maiorsurplusnsurvival.com. 
CF. RESOURCES, POB 405, Kit Carson, CO 80825, 719-962-3228, 
www.cfamilyresources.com. 
EPICENTER SUPPLIES, 384 Wallis St. #2, Eugene, OR 97402, 541-
684-0717, www.theepicenter.com. 
CAPTAIN DAVE'S SURVIVAL CENTER, PO Box 1903, Cranberry 
Twp., PA 16066, www.survival-center.com. 

306 
RESOURCES 
USA EMERGENCY SUPPLY, 238 E State Rd, Pleasant Grove, UT 
84062, 796-1501, www.usaemergencvsupplv.com. 
VERMONT COUNTRY STORE, PO Box 3000, Manchester Ctr., VT 
05255, (802) 362-8460, www.vermontcountrystore.com. 
Homesteading Equipment 
LEHMAN'S NON-ELECTRIC CATALOG, Lehman Hardware, One 
Lehman Circle, PO Box 41, Kidron, OH 44636, 888-438-5346, 330-
857-5757, www.Lehmans.com. James hand washers, wood/coal cook 
& heating stoves, Aladdin lamps, non-electric refrigerator/freezers, 
old-time tools and more. Catalog $3. 
CUMBERLAND GENERAL STORE, #1 Highway 68, Crossville, TN 
38555, 800-334-4640, www.cumberlandgeneral.com. Thousands of 
old-time products and how-to books. Catalog $4. 
Storage Food & Supplies 
WALTON FEED, 135 N 10th St., PO Box 307, Montpelier, ID 83254, 
800-847-0465, www.waltonfeed.com. Major supplier. 
HONEYVILLE GRAINS, 3750 W 7200 N, HoneyviUe, UT 84314, (435) 
279-8197, 11600 Dayton Dr., Rancho Cucamonga, CA 91730, (909) 
980-9500, www.honewillegrain.com. 
READY RESERVE, 800-453-2202, www.readvreservefoodsinc.com. 
GRANDMA'S COUNTRY FOODS, 391S Orange St. Suite C, Salt Lake 
City, 
UT 
84104, 
800-216-6466, 
801-886-1110, 
www. gr andmascountrv. com. 
LONG LIFE FOOD, PO Box 8081, Richmond, IN 47374, 800-601-2833, 
www.longlifefood.com. Good selection of MREs. 
PREPAREDNESS MART, 800-773-0437, www.preparednessmart.com. 
Oxygen Absorbers 
SORBENT SYSTEMS, online presence of IMPAKCorp., 2460 E 57th St, 
Los Angeles, CA 90058, 323-277-4700, www.sorbentsvstems.com. 
Oxygen absorbers, mylar bags, desiccants, heat and vacuum sealers. 
DESSICARE, Santa Fa Springs, CA & Jackson, MS, 3400 Pomona 
Blvd., 
Pomona, 
CA 
91768, 
800-446-6650, 
909-444-8272, 
www.desiccare.com. Oxygen Buster oxygen absorbers, desiccants. 

SOURCES DIRECTORY 
307 
Diatomaceous Earth 
DIATECT INTERNATIONAL, 875 S Industrial Parkway, Heber City, 
UT 84032, 800-227-6616, www.diatect.com. Grain protectant. 
WHOLEWHEAT ENTERPRISES, 6598 Bethany Lane, Louisville, KY 
40272, 800-813-9641, 502-935-8692, www.wholewheat.com. Sells 
PermaGuard D-10 grain protectant. 
Silica Gel & Dessicants 
HYDROSORBENT, PO Box 437,25 School St., Ashley Falls, MA 01222, 
800-448-7903, 413, 229-2967, www.dehumidifv.com. 
Grain Mills & Mixers 
COUNTRY LIVING PRODUCTS, 14727 56th Ave. NW, Standwood, WA 
98292, 360-652-0671, www.countrvlivinggrainmills.com. 
K-TEC, 1206 S 1680 W, Orem, UT 84058,800-748-5400,801-222-0888, 
www.k-tecusa.com. K-Tex mills and Champ mixers. 
MAGIC MILL, 382 Rt. 59 section 338, Monsey, NY 10952, 845-368-
2532, www.magicmillusa.com. 
RETSEL CORP., PO Box 37, McCammon, ID 83250, 208-254-3737, 
www.retsel.com. 
COUNTRY BAKER, 8751N 850 E, Syracuse, IN 46567, 866-843-2253, 
219-834-2134, www.countrvbaker.com. Bosch mixers, GrainMaster 
Whisper, Ultra and Family Grain mills. 
ATLAN FORMULARIES, PO Box 95, Alpena, AR 72611,870-437-2999, 
www.survivalplus.com. The Corona mill. 
Cheese Making & Cultures 
NEW ENGLAND CHEESEMAKING SUPPLIES, P.O. Box 85CC, 
Ashfield, MA 01330, 413-628-3808, www.cheesemaking.com. . 
DAIRY CONNECTION, 8616 Fairway Place, #101, Middleton, WI 
53562, 608-836-0464, www.dairvconnection.com. 
Water Purification 
GENERAL ECOLOGY, Inc., 151 Sheree Blvd., Exton, PA 19341, 
800-441-8166,610-363-7900.www.generalecology.com. First-Need 
and Seagull purifiers. Among the best purifiers. 
Other water filters are generally available at sporting goods stores. 

308 
RESOURCES 
Garden & Farm Supplies 
MOUNTAIN VALLEY SEED, 1800 S West Temple #600, Salt Lake 
City, UT 84115, 801-486-0480, www.mvseeds.com. Canned seeds.. 
TERRITORIAL SEED, PO Box 158, Cottage Grove, OR 97424, Fax 888-
657-3131, 541-942-9547, www.territorial-seed.com. 
HARRIS SEEDS, 355 Paul Rd., PO Box 24966, Rochester, NY, 800-
514-4441, www.harrisseeds.com. . 
HEIRLOOM SEEDS, PO Box 245, West Elizabeth, PA 15088,412-384-
0852, www.heirloomseeds.com. Non-hybrid seeds. 
MELLINGERS, 2310 W South Range Rd., North Lima, OH 44452,800-
321-7444, 330-549-9861, www.mellingers.com. Non-hybrid seeds. 
BURPEE, Warminster, PA 18974, 800-888-1447, www.burpee.com. 
JOHNNY'S, 184 Foss Hill Rd., Albion, ME 04910, Fax 800-437-4290, 
207-437-4301, www.iohnnvseeds.com. 
GURNETS, 110 Capital St., Yankton, SD 57079, 800-824-6400, 
www.mvseasons.com. 
GARDNER'S SUPPLY, 128 Intervale Rd., Burlington, VA 05401, 800-
427-3363, www.gardners.com. 
INDIANA BERRY & PLANT, 5218 W 500 S, Huntingburg, IN 47542, 
800-295-2226, www.inberry.com. 
MILLER NURSERIES, 5060 W Lake Rd., Canandaigua, NY 14424, 
800-836-9630, www.millernurseries.com. 
STARK BRO'S, PO Box 1800, Louisiana, MO 63353, 800-325-4180, 
www.starkbros.com. 
RAINTREE NURSERY, 391 Butts Rd., Morton, WA 98356, Fax 888-
770-8358, 360-496-6400, www.raintreenursery.com. 
SUBMATIC, PO Box 3965, 321 82nd St., Lubbock, TX 79452, 800-692-
4100, 806-748-7659, www.submatic.com. 
DRIPWORKS, 190 Sanhédrin Circle, Willits, CA 95490,800-522-3747, 
707-459-6323, www.dripworksusa.com. 
HIGH COUNTRY GARDENS, 2902 Rufina St., Santa Fe, NM 87507, 
800-925-9387, www.highcountrygardens.com. 
HIGH ALTITUDE GARDENS, 4150 B Black Oak Dr, Hailey, ID 83333, 
208-788-4363, www.seedsave.org. 
PLANTS OF SOUTHWEST, 6680 4th St. NW, Albuquerque, NM 87107, 
800-788-7333,505-344-8830,505-4, www.plantsofthesouthwest.com. 
WORM'S WAY, 7850 N Highway 37, Bloomington, IN 47404, 800-274-
9676, www.wormswav.com. 
A.M. LEONARD, 241 Fox Dr., PO Box 816, Piqua, OH 45356, 800-543-
8955, www.amleo.com. 

SOURCES DIRECTORY 
309 
LEE VALLEY TOOLS, PO Box 1780, Ogdensburg, NY13669, 800-871-
8158, www.leevalley.com. 
CHARLEY'S GREENHOUSE SUPPLY, 800-322-4707, 360-395-3001, 
www. charle vsgreenhouse. com. 
Animal & Veterinarian Supplies 
HOEGGER SUPPLY, PO Box 331, Fayetteville, GA 30214, 800-221-
4628, 770-461-5398, hoeggergoatsupply.com. Goat supplies. 
CAPRINE SUPPLY, PO Box Y, DeSoto, KS 66018, 913-585-1191, 
www.caprinesupplv.com. Goat supplies. 
NASCO FARM & RANCH, 800-558-9595, www.enasco.com. 
OMAHA VACCINE, PO Box 7228, Omaha, NE 68107, 800-367-4444, 
www. ohahavaccine. com. 
PETCO ANIMAL SUPPLIES, 9125 Rehco Rd., San Diego, CA 92121, 
877-738-6742, www.petco.com. Rabbits and other small animals. 
SHEEPMAN SUPPLY, PO Box A, Frederick, MD 21702,800-331-9122, 
301-662-4197, www.sheepman.com. Sheep, goats, llamas, horses. 
UPCO (UNITED PHARMACAL), 3705 Pear St., PO Box 969, St. 
Joseph, MO 64502, 800-254-8726, www.upco.com. 
Canning Supplies 
HOME CANNING & SUPPLY, PO Box 1158, Ramona, CA 92065, 619-
788-0520, www.home-canning.com. 
Firearms & Ammo 
BROWNELLS, 200 S Front St., Montezuma, IA 50171, 641-623-4000, 
www.brownells.com. Gun parts, tools and accessories. Catalog $5. 
CORBIN, PO Box 2659, 600 Industrial Circle, White City, OR 97503, 
541-826-5211, www.corbins.com. Bullet swaging equipment. 
FIREQUEST, PO Box 315, El Dorado, AR 71731, 870-881-8688, 
www.firequest.com. Specialized ammo and shooting equipment. 
HUNTINGTON, P.O. Box 991,601 Oro Dam Blvd., Oroville, CA 95965, 
530-1210, www.huntingtons.com. HDS compact reloading tool. 
MIDWAY USA, 5875 W Van Horn Tavern Rd., Columbia, MO 65203, 
800-243-3220, 573-447-5117, www.midwavusa.com. 
EAGLE OPTICS, 2120 W Greenview Dr. #4, Middleton, WI53562,800-
289-1132, www.eagleoptics.com. Binoculars, rifle scopes, spotting 
scopes, telescopes. 
SWF A, 972-223-0500, www.riflescopes.com. Rifle scopes, binoculars. 

310 
RESOURCES 
SHOTGUN NEWS, Box 1790, Peoria, IL 61656, 800-521-2885, 
www.shotgunnews.com. Ads for guns, ammo, reloading components 
RELOADING BENCH, www.reloadbench.com. Reloading powders info. 
Airguns 
IAR, 33171 Camino Capistrano, San Juan Capistrano, CA 92675, 949-
443-3642, www.iar-arms.com. Chinese imports. 
Knives, Axes & Saws 
CUTLERY SHOPPE, 357 Steelhead Way, Boise, ID 83704, 800-231-
1272, 208-672-8488, www.cutleryshoppe.com. 
KNIFE PROFESSIONAL, 2527 S White Oak Dr., Shelby, NC 28150, 
Fax 434-8225, www.knifepro.com. Knives, multi-tools, axes, saws. 
BAILEY'S, 44650 Highway 101, PO Box 550, Laytonville, CA 95454, 
800-322-4539, 707-984-6133, www.bailevs-online.com. Mail order 
woodsman supplies. 
Military Gear 
BRIGADE QUARTERMASTERS, 1025 Cobb International Dr. NW 
Suite 100, PO Box 100001, Kennesaw, GA 30156, 800-338-4327, 
770-428-1248, www.brigadeqm.com. 
PHOENIX SYSTEMS, 6517 S Kings Ranch Rd. #185, Gold Canyon, AZ 
85219, 800-272-2346, 480-474-1226, www.phxsystems.com. 
SHOMER-TEC, Box 28070, Bellingham, WA 98228, 360-733-6214, 
www.shomertec.com. 
US CAVALRY, 2855 Centennial Ave., Radcliff, KY 40160, 888-888-
7228, 800-777-7172, 270-351-1164, www.uscav.com. 
KEN NOLAN, 16901 Milliken, PO Box C-19555, Irvine, CA 92623, 
800-972-9280, www.kennolan.com. 
SIERRA SUPPLY, P.O. Box 1390, Durango, CO 81302, 970-259-1822, 
www, sierra-supply, com. 
Outdoor Clothing & Equipment 
CABELAS, Inc., 812 13th Ave., Sidney, NE 69160, 800-237-4444, 
308-254-5505 in Nebraska, www.cabelas.com. Great selection. 
CAMPMOR, Box 700-H, Saddle River, NJ 07458, 800-226-7667, 
www.campmor.com. Wide selection. 
CHEAPER THAN DIRT, 2520 NE Loop 820, Fort Worth, TX 76106, 
800-421-8047, www.cheaperthandirt.com. Sporting goods. 

SOURCES DIRECTORY 
311 
DON GLEASON'S, 9 Pearl St., PO Box 87, Northampton, MA 01060, 
800-257-0019, 413-584-4895, www.gleasoncamping.com. 
EARLY WINTERS,PO Box 4333, Portland, OR 97208, 800-458-4438, 
www.earlvwinters.com. Mostly clothes but some unique products. 
L.L.BEAN, Freeport, ME 04033, 800-229-9179, www.llbean.com. 
REI, 1700 45th Street East, Sumner, WA 98390, 800-426-4840, 
www.rei.com. Offers "dividend" on purchases during year for $15 
lifetime membership. Good selection and quality, decent prices. 
C.C.FILSON, PO Box 34020, Seattle, WA 98124, 800-624-0201, 
www.filson.com. Some of the best outdoor clothing available. 
PENDLETON, PO Box 3030, Portland, OR 97208, 877-796-4663, 503-
535-5222, www.pendleton-usa.com. Well-made woolen clothing. 
WOOLRICH, One Mill St., Woolrich, PA 17779, 877-512-7305, 
www.woolrich.com. Sturdy woolen clothing. 
Clothing & Bedding Kits 
FROSTLINE KITS, PO Box 3419, Grand Junction, CO 81502,800-548-
7872,970-242-0240, www.frostlinekitsllc.com. Down and other kits. 
Leather Goods 
TANDY LEATHER, 5882 E Berry St., Fort Worth, TX 76119, 888-890-
1611, www.tandvleather.com. Catalog $5 or free with order. 
Bullet-Proof Vests & Body Armor 
AMERICAN BODY ARMOR, www.americanbodvarmor.com 
BULLDOG DIRECT, PO Box 8561, Cincinnati, OH 45208, 513-281-
6700, www.bulldogdirect.com. 
FIRST CHOICE, www.firstchoicearmor.com. 
PACA BODY ARMOR, www.paca-vest.com. 
POINT BLANK BODY ARMOR, www.pointblankarmor.com. 
SAFARILAND, www.safariland.com. 
SECOND CHANCE BODY ARMOR, www.secondchance.com. 
US ARMOR, www.usarmor.com. 
ZERO G, www.bodvarmor.com. 
James Washer 
S & H METAL PRODUCTS, PO Box 35, 122 Redman Dr., Topeka, IN 
46571, 219-593-2565. 

312 
RESOURCES 
LAKE CITY INDUSTRIES, PO Box 423, Lake City, PA 16423,814-774-
9616 for local source of wringer, www.lakecitvindustries.com 
Wood/Coal Heating 
ALPHA AMERICAN, 10 Industrial Blvd., PO Box 20, Palisade, MN 
56469, 800-358-0060, www.vukon-eagle.com. YUKON-EAGLE 
multi-fuel (wood with gas, oil or electric) furnace. 
CHARMASTER PRODUCTS, 2307 N 2 West Grand Rapids, MN 55744, 
218-326-6768. Combination wood/oil or gas furnaces. 
Fuel Preservatives 
YELLOWSTONE RIVER TRADING COMPANY, 800-585-5077, 
www.vellowstonetrading.com. PRI-G and PRI-D fuel additives. 
Non-Electric Refrigerators/Freezers 
DOMETIC, 2320 Industrial Parkway, Elkhart, IN 46515,800-544-4881, 
574-294-2611, www.dometic.com. 
NORTHWEST ENERGY SYSTEMS, 6791 S Main, Ste. C, Bonners 
Ferry, ID 83805, 800-718-8816, 208-267-6409, www.nwes.com. 
EXPLORER, PO Box 928049, San Diego, CA 92192, 858-587-9766, 
www.explorerfridges.com. Explorer propane refrigerators. 
Alternative Energy 
REAL GOODS and JADE MOUNTAIN (Gaiam, Inc., 360 Interlocken 
Blvd., Ste. 300, Broomfield, CO 80021), 800-762-7325,800-442-1972, 
www.realgoods.com. Alternative and renewable energy products. 
ABRAHAM SOLAR, 124 Creekside Place, Pagosa Springs, CO 81147, 
800-222-7242, Fax 970-731-4675. 
ALTERNATIVE ENERGY ENGINEERING, PO Box 339, Redway, CA 
95560, 800-777-6609, www.solarelectric.com. 
ALTERNATIVE POWER, po Box 351, Ridgway, CO 81432, 800-590-
5830, 970-626-9842, www.alternative-DQwer.com. 
INTERMOUNTAIN SOLAR, 10288 S Jordan Gateway #D, South 
Jordan, UT 84095, 800-671-0169, www.intermountainsolar.com. 
ZODI OUTBACK GEAR, PO Box 4687, Park City, UT 84060, 800-589-
2849,801-255-6418, www.zodi.com. Zodi Super Shower and Extreme 
portable propane showers. 

SOURCES DIRECTORY 313 
Medical 
MERCK MANUAL, home edition: www.merckhomeedition.com. 
MERCK MANUAL OF DIAGNOSIS & THERAPY, on-line edition, 
www. merck.com/pubs/mmanual/. 
Earthquake Protection 
QUAKE PRO, 1073 Hyland Lake Dr., Salt Lake City, 84121, 877-261-
3897, 801-263-9600, www.quakepro.com. Water heater braces, gas 
shut-off valves, quake alarms, shut-off tool, other preparedness 
products.. 
QUAKE KARE, PO Box 3152, Thousand Oaks, CA 91359, 800-277-
3727, 805-553-0688, www.quakekare.com. Earthquake tie-downs, 
emergency preparedness products. 
SAFE-T-PROOF, 800-377-8888, 818-865-3125, www.safetyproof.com. 
Commercial earthquake and disaster preparedness. 
Nuclear Protection 
UTAH SHELTER SYSTEMS, PO Box 638, Heber City, UT 84032,801-
942-5638, www.netoriginal.com/uss. Swiss bomb shelters and filters. 
KLEEN AIR TECHNOLOGIES, PO Box 4145, Frisco, CO 80443, 866-
528-6537, 970-668-0219, www.undergroundshelter.com. 
Build 
underground concrete shelter systems. 
RADIUS DEFENSE & ENGINEERING, 222 Blakes Hill Road, 
Northwood, NH 03261, 603-942-5040, www.radius-defense.com. 
NBC underground shelters. 
ZERO SURGE, 944 State Route 12, Frenchtown, NJ 08825, 800-996-
6696, www.zerosurge.com. EMP protection surge protectors. 
POLYPHASER, PO Box 9000, Minden, NV 89423, 800-325-7170, 775-
782-2511, www.polvphaser.com. Military-grade EMP protection. 
KI4U, 212 Oil Patch Lane, Gonzales, TX 78629, 830-672-8734, 
www.ki4u.com. Sells potassium iodide tablets and radiation meters. 
LUDLUM , 501 Oak St., PO Box 810, Sweetwater, TX, 800-622-0828, 
915-235-5494, www.ludlums.com. Radiation meters. 
Off-Road Trailer 
HELDER, 11043 St. Highway 70, Marysville, CA 95901,530-742-5257. 
Pack Mule heavy-duty off-road trailer. 

314 
RESOURCES 
Radio Equipment & Supplies 
UNIVERSAL RADIO, 6830 Americana Pkwy., Reynoldsburg, OH 
43068, 800-431-3939, 614-866-4267, www.universal-radio.com. . 
C CRANE, 1001 Main St., Fortuna, CA 95540, 800-522-8863, 707-725-
9000, www.ccrane.com. 
AMATEUR ELECTRONIC (AES), 800-558-0411, www.aesham.com. 
HAM RADIO OUTLET, 800-444-9476, www.hamradio.com. 
RADIO SHACK, www.radioshack.com. Stores nationwide. 
PASSBAND.COM, Box 300, Penn's Park, PA 18943, 215-598-9018, 
www.passband.com. Passport to World Band Radio, evaluations. 
Shortwave Listening Web Sites 
Shortwave Listening Guide: www.anarc.org/naswa/swlguide/ 
Broadcasts to North America: www.triwest.net/~dsampson/shortwave/ 
Art Bell's Shortwave Radio Guide: www.artbell.com/shortwave.html 
Glenn Hauser's World of Radio: www.angelfire.com/ok/worldofradio/ 
Dxing.com radio resources: www.dxing.com. 
DXZone radio guide: www.dxzone.com. 
Training Courses 
GUNSITE ACADEMY (Jeff Cooper), 2900 West Gunsite Rd., Paulden, 
AZ 86334, 928-636-4565, www.gunsite.com. 
BSR (Bill Scott's driving schools and firearms courses), PO Box 190, 
Summit Point, WV 25446, 304-725-6512, www.bsr-inc.com 
BOB BONDURANT SCHOOL OF HIGH PERFORMANCE DRIVING, 
Phoenix, AZ , 800-842-7223, www.bondurant.com. 
NATIONAL OUTDOOR LEADERSHIP SCHOOL (NOLS), 228 Main, 
Lander, WY 82520,307-332-5300, www.nols.edu/NOLSHome.html. 
Outdoor and survival courses. 
OUTWARD BOUND, 888-882-6863, www.outwardbound.com. Five 
schools across the USA with courses in wilderness skills and 
leadership. 
BOULDER OUTDOOR SURVIVAL SCHOOL (BOSS), PO Box 1590, 
Boulder, CO 80306, 301-444-9779, www.boss-inc.com. 

INDEX 
7-PLUS Basic plan: 73-77 
72-hour kit: 211 
Adjuncts: 122 
Air guns: 222 
Air-dried vs freeze-dried: 55 
Alcohol for fuel: 233 
All-terrain vehicles (ATVs): 286 
Allergies: 26, 94 
Ammunition: 220 
Aquaculture: 175 
Axes: 224 
Baby foods: 119 
Beans: 119 
Bedding: 234 
Bees, raising: 174 
Berries, growing: 166 
Bicycles: 287 
Biological terrorism: 272 
Black powder guns: 222 
Bows and arrows: 222 
Bread mixers: 141 
Calcium chloride: 43 
Canned milk: 100 
Canned foods: 51 
Canning: 191 
methods: 194, 198-199 
supplies: 193 
equipment: 192 
CB radios: 292 
Cell phones: 294 
Cereal grains: 114 
Charcoal for fuel: 233 
Cheese: 100 
Chemical attacks: 273 
Chickens, raising: 171 
Clothing: 227 
Coal: 232 
Cold storage 
conditions: 183 
facilities: 186 
Commercial food plans: 70
Concentrated food: 126 
Containers, storage: 34 
Converting electric mills: 139 
Cook stoves: 231 
Cookbooks: 142, 181, 299 
Cooking: 231 
equipment: 142 
Cows, raising: 174 
Custom Advanced plan: 77 
Decontaminating 
food: 44 
people: 280 
Dehydrated food: 54 
Dehydrating 
equipment: 201 
how to do: 202 
supplies: 201 
water content: 204 
Dental: 256 
Desicants: 42 
Diesel: 232 
Distiller water purifiers: 153 
Dog food: 95 
Dry ice: 39 
Dry foods: 54 
Drying meat: 203 
Ducks, raising: 172 
Dusts: 41 
Earthquake 
minimizing food storage 
damage: 47 
protection: 265 
Edible plants eating test: 179 
Education, home: 296 
EEK: 211 
Eggs: 110 
Electrical energy, storing: 247 
Electricity, producing own: 245 
Emergency evacuation kit: 211 
EMP: 279 
Fats and oils: 101 

316 CRISIS PREPAREDNESS HANDBOOK 
Fertilizer: 163 
Field crops: 167 
Filters, water: 150 
Firearms: 217 
Fireplaces: 238 
Fish 
as food: 110,175 
raising: 175 
Fishing: 179 
Flour: 118 
Food 
canned: 51 
dehydrated: 54 
dry: 54 
fresh: 65 
frozen: 63 
MREs: 52 
"no good": 27 
retort: 52 
SAP: 53 
Food infestations: 44 
Food plan 
designing own: 72 
test: 92 
Food storage 
areas: 45 
plans: 67 
using: 91 
Franklin stove: 231 
Freeze-dried meat: 111 
Freezer, when power goes off: 63 
Freezing: 207 
storage lives: 209 
Fresh food: 65 
Frozen food: 63 
Fruits 
as food: 104 
growing: 166 
Fuel oil: 233 
Fuels: 236-237 
stockpiling: 242 
storage, long-term: 243 
Fumigation: 39, 41 
Fur, trapping: 180 
Gardening: 161 
extending season: 165 
seeds: 161 
tools: 164 
Gas masks: 275 
Gasoline: 232 
Geese, raising: 172 
Gelatin: 113 
Global Positioning System: 214 
Gluten: 113 
Goats, raising: 172 
GPS: 214 
Grain mills: 137 
Grains: 114, 167 
Grapes, growing: 166 
Guard dogs: 263 
Guns: 217 
air: 222 
black powder: 222 
Ham radios: 291 
Handcarts: 288 
Heat: 235 
Heating stoves: 235 
Herbs and spices: 123 
Home, fire protection: 262 
Home 
repair and upkeep: 261 
security: 262 
Honey: 107 
Horses: 287 
Hot water: 239, 241 
Household animals: 95 
Hunting: 180 
Inert atmospheres: 38 
Infant & young children food 
needs: 92 
Internet: 294 
Inventory control: 30 
Inventory Planning Checklist 
(IPC): 18, 31 

INDEX 317 
Jams and jellies: 109, 195 
Kearny fallout meter (KFM): 276 
Kearny air pump (KAP): 276 
Kerosene: 232 
Kitchen supplies: 143 
Knives: 223 
sharpening tools: 225 
Lamps: 240 
Leavenings: 124 
Legumes: 119 
Lentils: 119 
Light: 240 
Liquid petroleum gas (LPG): 233 
List method: 67 
Master Shopping List (MSL) 19 
Master Action Plan (MAP): 18 
Meals Ready to Eat (MRE): 52 
Meat: 110 
dried: 203 
freeze-dried: 111 
substitutes: 112 
Medical: 251 
kits: 252 
Medicines: 255 
storing: 256 
Milk: 97 
Mills 
electric: 138 
grain: 137 
hand: 139 
Miracle foods: 126 
Mixers, bread: 141 
Mopeds: 286 
MREs: 111 
Mules: 287 
Multi-tools: 224 
Natural gas: 233 
Normal eating method: 68 
Nuclear warfare: 273, 277 
Nuts 
and seeds as food: 103 
growing: 166 
Oats: 116 
Oils and fats: 101 
Ozone water purifiers: 153 
Pasta: 118 
Peas: 119 
Personal hygiene: 259 
Pest control: 49 
Pesticides: 163 
Photovoltaic energy: 246 
Pigs, raising: 173 
Plans, food storage: 67 
Potassium iodide (KI): 275 
Poultry: 110 
Powdered milk: 98 
Pregnant and nursing women 
food needs: 94 
Preparation 
health: 15 
material: 13 
personal: 14 
priorities: 18 
Preparedness skills: 16 
Preparing food for cold storage: 
184 
Protein 
animal: 110 
concentrates: 112 
vegetable: 114 
Purifiers, water: 147 
Rabbits, raising: 171 
Radiation meters: 276 
Radios 
amateur: 291 
CB: 292 
shortwave: 289 
two-way: 292 
Raising grains: 167 
Re-freeze, when to: 64 
Recipe books: 142, 181, 299 
Refrigeration: 242 
Reloading ammunition: 220 
Retort foods: 52

318 CRISIS PREPAREDNESS HANDBOOK 
Retreating: 266 
Reverse osmosis purifiers: 152 
Rice: 116 
Rotating 
menu method: 69 
your storage: 30 
Rust prevention: 36 
Safe rooms: 277 
Salt: 97 
curing: 209 
Sanitation: 257 
SAP foods: 53 
milk: 100 
Sausage making: 210 
Saws: 224 
Scanners: 291 
Seed storage lives: 163 
Serving equivalents: 87 
Seven-PLUS Basic plan: 73-77 
Seventy-two hour kit: 211 
Sewing equipment & supplies: 
231 
Sharpening tools: 225 
Sheep, raising: 173 
Shelters: 277 
Shoes, making & repairing: 233 
Shortwave radios: 289 
Silica gel: 43 
Skis: 288 
Sled dogs: 287 
Smoke curing: 210 
Snowshoes: 288 
Solar energy: 246 
Soups: 114 
Special dietary needs: 92 
Spices and herbs: 123 
Spoilage, recognizing: 29 
Sprouting 
guide: 158-159 
procedures: 156 
Sprouts 
amount to store: 157 
food value: 155 
Sterno: 233 
Storage 
environment: 33 
life, of food: 27 
seeds: 161 
Store what you eat—eat what 
you store: 25 
Storing 
diesel fuel: 243 
gasoline: 243 
kerosene: 243 
Stoves: 235 
Sugars: 105 
Sulfuring and blanching times: 
203 
Survival home: 266 
Terrorist Survival Kit: 274 
Terrorist attack response: 279 
Textured vegetable protein 
(TVP): 112 
Trapping: 179 
Trial by fire: 19 
Triticale: 116 
Turkeys, raising: 172 
Ultra-light planes: 286 
Vacuum packing food: 38 
Vegetables: 105 
Vehicles: 281 
Vitamins and mineral 
supplements: 125 
Waste management: 258 
Water 
filters and purifiers: 150 
purification: 147 
reserves, emergency: 153 
storage: 145 
What I did method: 68 
Wheat: 117 
Wild game recipe books: 181 
Wild edible plants: 178 
Wood for fuel: 232 

Preparing for and 
ir\King Biological 
Chemical and 
Nuclear Attacks 
The Age of Terrorism 
RED ALERT! America under attack! 
It could be biological, chemical or nuclear. How 
will you protect yourself and your family? 
Surviving Terrorism tells you what to do 
before, during and after a terrorist attack: 
jack A. Sptgarelli 
: Awjfoor a* Cos's Ptware&iess Handbook 
X Who the terrorists are and how their weapons 
affect you 
X How to identify the most likely targets and 
maximize your changes of surviving 
X Why the government can't keep you safe 
X Simple but vital steps you should take now 
X What lifesaving supplies to stock while they are still available 
X How to select and where to buy gas masks, protective clothing, antibiotics, 
antidotes, shelters, etc. 
X Step-by-step instructions for creating a "safe room" in your home 
X How to make food and water safe after an attack 
X Decontaminating yourself and your home from deadly germs and gases 
X The indispensable guide for dangerous times 
"There will be another terrorist attack (in the United States)...We will not be 
able to stop it...It's inevitable." 
Robert Mueller, FBI Director 
"Our war against terror is only beginning...Thousands of dangerous killers, 
schooled in methods of murder, often supported by outlaw regimes, are now 
spread throughout the world like ticking time bombs, set to go off without 
warning." 
President George W. Bush 
"America remains dangerously unprepared to prevent and respond to a 
catastrophic terrorist attack on U.S. soil...In all likelihood, the next attack 
will result in even greater casualties and widespread disruption to our lives 
and economy." 
Report of task force chaired by former Sens. Gary Hart, D-Colo., 
and Warren Rudman, R-New Hampshire 
"There is a likelihood almost to the point of certainty...that there will be 
another terrorist attack inside the U.S." 
Sen. Bob Graham, D-Florida, Chairman, Senate Intelligence Committee 
Order your copy now at special 20% off - form on next page 
Be Sure to check out our Web site at www.Cross-Current.com 

W l U ^ l 
i > U W 
Special for Crisis Preparedness Handbook readers! 
2 0 % off Surviving 
Terrorism! 
Also order additional copies of Crisis Preparedness Handbook.. 
Surviving Terrorism (reg. 19.95 - 20%) 
@ $15.96 ea. 
Crisis Preparedness Handbook 
@ $19.95 ea. 
Free Shipping with this form (or code CS4)! 
TOTAL ENCLOSED $ 
Name 
Address 
City, State, Zip 
Telephone 
Email 
• Visa 
• Mastercard # 
Exp. date: 
/ 
Signature 
Big Discounts on Bulk Orders! 
Quantity 
Discount 
S&H 
(Off regular price) 
5-9 
20% 
$1.00 per book 
10-19 
30% 
$50 maximum 
20-39 
40% 
up to 80 books 
40 or more 
50% 
80 or more 
50% 
Free Shipping 
To order with credit card by email: orders@Cross-Current.com 
at our Web site: www.Cross-Current.com (code CS4) 
or telephone: 801-756-2786 (code CS4) 
Make check payable to: 
Cross-Current Publishing, 333 N 425 E, Alpine, UT 84004 
CS4 

