
Crisis Cinema in the Middle East

ii

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
Creativity and Constraint in Iran and  
the Arab World
Shohini Chaudhuri

BLOOMSBURY ACADEMIC
Bloomsbury Publishing Plc
50 Bedford Square, London, WC1B 3DP, UK
1385 Broadway, New York, NY 10018, USA
29 Earlsfort Terrace, Dublin 2, Ireland
BLOOMSBURY, BLOOMSBURY ACADEMIC and the Diana logo are  
trademarks of Bloomsbury Publishing Plc
First published in Great Britain 2022
Copyright © Shohini Chaudhuri, 2022
Shohini Chaudhuri has asserted her right under the Copyright,  
Designs and Patents Act, 1988, to be identified as Author of this work.
For legal purposes the Acknowledgements on pp. ix–x constitute an  
extension of this copyright page.
Cover design: Ben Anslow
Cover image: Tehran: City of Love © Here and There Productions 2018. All Rights Reserved.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted  
in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying,  
recording, or any information storage or retrieval system, without prior permission  
in writing from the publishers.
Bloomsbury Publishing Plc does not have any control over, or responsibility for, any  
third-party websites referred to or in this book. All internet addresses given in this 
book were correct at the time of going to press. The author and publisher regret any 
inconvenience caused if addresses have changed or sites have ceased to exist,  
but can accept no responsibility for any such changes.
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
­Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Chaudhuri, Shohini, author. 
Title: Crisis Cinema in the Middle East : Creativity and Constraint in Iran  
and the Arab World / Shohini Chaudhuri.
Description: London, UK ; New York, NY : Bloomsbury Academic, 2022. |  
Includes bibliographical references and index. |  
Identifiers: LCCN 2021057273 (print) | LCCN 2021057274 (ebook) |  
ISBN 9781350190511 (hardback) | ISBN 9781350190559 (paperback) |  
ISBN 9781350190528 (epub) | ISBN 9781350190535 (pdf) 
Subjects: LCSH: Motion pictures–Iran. | Motion pictures–Middle East.  
Classification: LCC PN1993.5.I846 C48 2022 (print) | LCC PN1993.5.I846 
(ebook) | DDC 791.430955–dc23/eng/20211222  
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2021057273
LC ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2021057274
	
ISBN:	
HB:	
978-1-3501-9051-1
	
	
ePDF:	
978-1-3501-9053-5
	
	
eBook:	
978-1-3501-9052-8
Typeset by Integra Software Services Pvt. Ltd.
To find out more about our authors and books visit www.bloomsbury.com  
and sign up for our newsletters.

List of figures
vi
Acknowledgements
ix 
A note on transliteration
xi
Introduction
1 
1	
Witnessing
27
2	
Child protagonists
57
3	
Animation
81
4	
Psychogeography
101
5	
Road movies
125
6	
Humour
147
7	
Stories within stories
171
8	
Archival strategies
191
9	
Sci-fi dystopia
213
Conclusion
235 
Notes
238
Bibliography
282 
Index
302 
Contents

1.1	 For Sama’s first-person, female witness account of the Syrian conflict 
is shaped by Waad al-Kateab’s experience of ‘being there’. For Sama 
directed by Waad al-Kateab and Edward Watts © Channel 4 2019. All 
Rights Reserved.
41
1.2	 Car headlights become a creative solution to power cuts when the 
women’s football team train at night, captured by Naziha Arebi’s 
equally inventive cinematography. Freedom Fields directed by Naziha 
Arebi © HuNa Productions 2018. All Rights Reserved.
55
2.1	 Zain exemplifies the child as a creative agent, improvizing a buggy 
from a stockpot and skateboard with which he tows Yonas around the 
city. Capernaum directed by Nadine Labaki © Mooz Films 2018.  
All Rights Reserved.
65
2.2	 Child protagonists serve as a means of creatively overcoming barriers 
of gender segregation. Wadjda directed by Haifaa al-Mansour © Razor 
Film Produktion 2012. All Rights Reserved.
71
3.1	 Claymation cows become a source of empathy, ‘wanted’ by the Israeli 
army. The Wanted 18 directed by Amer Shomali and Paul Cowan, 
2014 © Bellota Films, Dar Films and Intuitive Pictures. All Rights 
Reserved.
95
3.2	 Animation protects identities at risk in this story of an anonymous 
Syrian opposition activist. Suleima directed by Jalal Maghout © 
Estayqazat 2014. All Rights Reserved.
97
4.1	 Burj El Murr, a former sniper hideout in the Lebanese Civil War, 
looms over Beirut like the many-eyed mythological giant Panoptes, 
surveying current citizens and signposting a traumatic past. 
Panoptic directed by Rana Eid © Abbout Productions 2017. All 
Rights Reserved.
113
4.2	 Khalid’s magnifying glass reflects a fragile, microcosmic image of the 
city, encapsulating the mood of déjà disparu. In the Last Days of the 
City directed by Tamer el-Said © Zero Production 2016. All Rights 
Reserved.
118
­Figures

­Figure
vii
5.1	 Roadblocks become creative obstacles for the Speed Sisters, an all-
female Palestinian motor-racing team. Speed Sisters directed by  
Amber Fares © SocDoc Studios 2015. All Rights Reserved.
129
5.2	 Jafar Panahi’s role as the taxi driver in Taxi Tehran is not just a self-
reflexive gesture but results from the constraints under which he is 
working. Taxi Tehran directed by Jafar Panahi © Jafar Panahi Film 
Productions 2015. All Rights Reserved.
136
6.1	 The episode ‘Who Wants to Kill a Million?’ satirizes Syrian President 
Bashar al-Assad with its macabre parody of the television game show 
Who Wants to Be a Millionaire. Top Goon: Diaries of a Little Dictator 
directed by Jamil al-Abyad © Masasit Mati 2011–12. All Rights 
Reserved.
152
6.2	 Romantic comedy’s boy-meets-girl format is transformed into a 
vehicle for exploring gender segregation and other restrictions on 
interacting in public space in Saudi society. Barakah Meets Barakah 
directed by Mahmoud Sabbagh © El Housh Productions 2016. All 
Rights Reserved.
166
7.1	 Shirin’s voice-over lays the nuances of her lived experience over a 
videogame of US soldiers invading Iran, deploying a story-within-
a-story strategy. Profession: Documentarist directed by Shirin 
Barghnavard, Firouzeh Khosrovani, Farahnaz Sharifi, Mina  
Keshavarz, Sepideh Abtahi, Sahar Salahshoor, Nahid Rezaei © 
Profession: Documentarist collective 2014. All Rights Reserved.
182
7.2	 A group of Syrian refugee women rehearse their version of The 
Trojan Women with their hands covering their mouths, pointing to 
constraints upon their free expression. The same constraints impacted 
upon the film. Queens of Syria directed by Yasmin Fedda © Refuge 
Productions 2014. All Rights Reserved.
188
8.1	 A mosaic composition of YouTube clips presents stories of the  
multitude during the early years of the Syrian revolution and war, 
including a video by the first Syrian army defector, Walid Qashami. 
Silvered Water, Syria Self-Portrait directed by Ossama Mohammed and 
Wiam Simav Bedirxan © Les Films d’ici and Proaction Film 2014.  
All Rights Reserved.
203
8.2	 Bassel and Noura’s personal archives tell their story through their 
perspective to foster a more intimate understanding of forcible 

­Figure
viii
disappearance. Ayouni directed by Yasmin Fedda © Banyak Films and 
Hakawati 2020. All Rights Reserved.
207
9.1	 A large, inflatable black monkey, found within the absurd sci-fi-like world 
of Sharm el-Sheik, became a playful tactic of free expression, encouraging 
the characters to speak about their dreams and longings as they follow 
him in his truck. Dreamaway directed by Johanna Domke and Marouan 
Omara © Monokel, WDR Westdeutscher Rundfunk, Fruitmarket Kultur 
und Medien, Fig Leaf 2018. All Rights Reserved.
224
9.2	 The protagonist Hala walks past a real garbage dump in a dystopic 
sci-fi extrapolation of Lebanon’s trash crisis. Submarine directed by 
Mounia Akl © Columbia University School of Arts 2016. All Rights 
Reserved.
232

Ideas for this book emerged through film screenings and talks that I curated 
over the years, starting with Crisis & Creativity: A Season of Contemporary 
Films from and about the Arab World at The Mosaic Rooms, London, in 2016, 
and later followed by The Paradox of Creative Constraints symposium in 2019, 
co-partnered with Index on Censorship. Inspiring dialogue with both these 
organizations helped to steer my research and for this I would especially like 
to thank Rachael Jarvis, Angelina Radakovic and Mend Mariwany from The 
Mosaic Rooms and Julia Farrington from Index on Censorship. In 2016, I also 
collaborated with Jess Twyman, director of Art Exchange, the University of Essex 
gallery, on screenings of Syrian films and talks for the Movement of the People 
exhibition, and I’d like to thank Jess for her wonderful energy and for being on 
that journey with me. In 2017, I developed The Mosaic Rooms season into an 
undergraduate course with accompanying public screenings and talks at NYU 
Abu Dhabi. I am grateful to NYU Abu Dhabi for supporting these events and 
to students in my Crisis and Creativity class for stimulating discussions from 
which I learned so much.
This book would not have been possible without the filmmakers who 
generously gave their time to be interviewed and/or participated in talks I 
organized on this topic: Khalid Abdalla, Sara Afshar, Ali Ahmadzadeh, Yahya 
al-Allaq, Mania Akbari, Mounia Akl, Philippe Aractingi, Naziha Arebi, Shirin 
Barghnavard, Claire Belhassine, Slimane Bounia, Emad Burnat, Sabine El 
Chamaa, Rana Eid, Johanna Domke, Roy Dib, Hisham Fageeh, Amber Fares, 
Yasmin Fedda, Sadaf Foroughi, Mani Haghighi, Ali Jaberansari, Sam Kadi, 
Ahd Kamel, Keywan Karimi, Waad al-Kateab, Mazen Khaled, Basil Khalil, 
Jalal Maghout, Ossama Mohammed, Ali Mostafa, Marouan Omara, Zaher 
Omareen, Maysoon Pachachi, Tamer el-Said, Larissa Sansour, Leila Sansour, 
Mohamed Siam, Ali Soozandeh, Rania Stephan, Georgina Van Welie, Edward 
Watts and Lara Zeidan. Most interviews were conducted in English. However, 
the ones with Yahya al-Allaq, Ossama Mohammed, Orwa al-Mokdad and Ali 
Ahmadzadeh were partly carried out in their own languages. My thanks to 
Farshid Kazemi, Katya al-Khateeb and Mohamad Tarek Majdoub who helped 
with translation.
­Acknowledgements

­Acknowledgement
x
Michele Aaron, Maren Hobein, Sheyma Buali, Daniel Gorman, Jane Hindley, 
Fatima El Issawi, Viola Shafik, Elhum Shakerifar and Sharon Willis kindly 
advised and supported in early stages when I was curating film events or 
applying for grants. An early draft of the Introduction was written as a keynote 
for the 2019 MeCCSA annual conference and I shared ideas for Chapter 2 in 
a workshop with the Iranian Studies Network at the University of New South 
Wales (UNSW) in 2020. Debates with colleagues at these events honed my 
approach. I am also grateful to those who gave critical feedback on chapters: Kay 
Dickinson, Yael Friedman, Maryam Ghorbankarimi, Farshid Kazemi, Michelle 
Langford, Michael Lawrence, Persheng Sadegh-Vaziri, Mahsa Salamati, Leshu 
Torchin and Stefanie Van de Peer. Thank you also to the three anonymous peer 
reviewers whose valuable comments helped me prepare the manuscript for 
final submission. Parts of the section on Silvered Water, Syria Self-Portrait in 
Chapter 8 were previously published in my article, ‘The Alterity of the Image’ 
in Transnational Cinemas 9.1 (2018) but appear here substantially revised. My 
Arabic and Farsi teachers were a great source of help throughout, particularly 
Mahmoud Darraj, Najwa Kadhim, Sara Jafri, Abdi Rafiee and staff at Saifi 
Institute for Arabic Language and at the Center for Arab and Middle Eastern 
Studies, American University of Beirut. Also thank you to Antonia Jenkins for 
helping me brush up my French.
I am incredibly grateful to the Leverhulme Trust for supporting this work with 
a one-year Fellowship in 2019–20. I also appreciatively acknowledge UNSW for 
hosting me as a Visiting Professorial Fellow for three months during this period. 
For keeping us supplied with digital books when libraries physically closed 
during COVID-19 lockdowns, I will also be ever thankful to staff at the Albert 
Sloman Library, University of Essex, and Internet Archive. I must thank Maddy 
Hamey-Thomas at I.B. Tauris who first saw promise in the idea for this book 
and coaxed the proposal out of me, and Rebecca Barden and staff at Bloomsbury 
who oversaw its completion. Finally, I couldn’t have finished this project without 
Oliver Craske who picked me up with his love and encouragement in dark 
moments; his writing talents have endlessly improved my drafts.

For Arabic and Persian words that appear in the book, the transliteration scheme 
I have followed is based on the American Library Association–Library of 
Congress romanization system. I have not changed transliterations in personal 
names, film titles or bibliographic references.
­A note on transliteration

xii

The World Free Press Index, compiled annually by Reporters Without Borders, 
maps the world to indicate the extent of free expression that countries permit.1 
The map’s colour coding ranges from ‘good’ countries represented in white 
to ‘very bad’ ones in black. The Middle East is regularly swathed in black, 
marked as the world’s worst region for freedom of expression due to prevalent 
conflict and censorship. Despite this, filmmakers from the region have found 
creative ways of telling their stories that attest to their imagination, courage 
and resilience. Their work points to more nuanced perspectives than either 
standard news images of crisis or black-and-white ideas of what is permissible 
or not.
This book is a study of freedom of expression, focusing on the dynamic 
between creativity and constraint in independent filmmaking from Iran 
and the Arab world. While cinematic freedom of expression is usually 
understood through the lens of state censorship, I investigate the numerous 
obstacles facing filmmakers and then, in the main body of the book, I present 
nine creative solutions that they apply to these constraints, drawing on my 
interviews with both established and newer filmmakers from the region. 
I explore independent filmmaking of various types, from fictional and 
documentary feature films designed for theatrical release to made-for-TV 
documentaries and short films uploaded onto the Internet. My purpose is to 
help readers understand the constraints of production and distribution in the 
region by learning from filmmakers’ first-hand experiences. The book builds 
a theoretical framework around the constraints of filmmaking in the Middle 
East and creative strategies employed in response to those constraints; it offers 
a comparative approach – not a nation-by-nation survey – with transferable 
insights to other contexts, and seeks to reach a range of stakeholder audiences 
both within academia and beyond.
Introduction

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
2
In the UN International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (1966), 
freedom of expression is defined as ‘Freedom to seek, receive and impart 
information and ideas of all kinds, either orally, in writing or in print, in the 
form of art, or through any other media.’2 While the framework of human rights 
law enshrines this right as an abstract, universal value, for filmmakers working 
in contexts of crisis, freedom of expression is a lived, embodied experience. As 
Marwan Kraidy says, freedom is not ‘a mere word’ distanced from its ‘actual 
consequences’; it is a material practice, carried out in public where bodies are 
literally imperilled.3
While this book gives credence to the idea that art flourishes in crisis, aided 
by the boundaries that artists are constantly pushing against, it complicates it 
in several respects. Claims that state censorship and other harmful constraints 
are helpful for creativity are problematic because they appear to condone these 
rights violations. They also ignore developments in art and society that led to 
the present moment, laying the foundations for the upsurge of creativity. In my 
research, I have found that creativity often flourishes at periods when restrictions 
are slightly loosened, or in the transition between one regime and another, like 
the brief ‘window of freedom’4 created by the so-called ‘Arab Spring’ in 2010–11 
when people were emboldened to speak out after decades of discontent. As Syrian 
filmmaker Orwa al-Mokdad recalls about the situation in his country, ‘When the 
revolution began people were able to express themselves more openly and more 
freely – at least they had the courage to do so – and it allowed the creative process 
to manifest itself within the population’.5 Despite the loosening of restrictions 
in many parts of the region, the risks remained and indeed became greater as 
people were arrested, tortured and disappeared in large numbers, forcing many 
filmmakers into exile abroad; additionally, in Syria and Yemen, civilian areas were 
bombed by the government and foreign powers. The lack of full rights and the 
security risks are clearly negative and harmful constraints, while other types of 
constraints can be more productive. Therefore, this book explores how filmmakers 
exploit productive constraints and find ways of tackling harmful ones.
In this introduction, I clarify the book’s interlocking arguments about crisis, 
constraints and creativity: its critical engagement with notions of the Middle 
East as a crisis hotspot, its emphasis on a broad array of constraints that 
filmmakers typically face, rather than an exclusive focus on state censorship and 
its understanding of creativity as shaped by material constraints. I explain the 
key concepts that underlie my approach and methodologies, and then provide an 
outline of the chapters which are focused on creative strategies that filmmakers 
are using to overcome constraints.

Introduction
3
­Why crisis?
More than any other region in the world, the Middle East is susceptible to being 
formulated as a crisis ‘hotspot’. As Nat Muller writes, the ‘generic image of the 
Middle East’ is ‘known to the West from “bad news”’, full of stories of conflict, 
failed states, fundamentalism, terrorism and violence.6 Furthermore, the term 
‘The Middle East’, along with labels such as ‘MENA’ (‘Middle East and North 
Africa’) and ‘Arab world’ can give the impression that the region is a monolith, 
which belies its complexity and diversity, and is problematically associated with 
Orientalism: a Western mode of describing the Other.
Nonetheless, during this book’s 2009–20 timeframe, the Middle East has been 
rocked by multiple crises, starting with the disputed 2009 presidential election 
in Iran that led to the Green Movement protests, a predecessor to the ‘Arab 
Spring’. Non-violent protests in many countries across the region shared similar 
aspirations for sociopolitical change and helped to pioneer the use of social 
media to disseminate independent accounts of events. State crackdowns followed 
similar patterns, as rulers tenaciously clung to power, often with regional and 
international support, restoring authoritarian rule in many places. In 2019, a 
fresh wave of protests was launched, including in Lebanon, Iraq and Iran. Iraq 
(and the region as a whole) is still dealing with the long-term repercussions of the 
2003 US-led invasion and occupation which created a security void that birthed 
extremist groups such as ISIS. Iran continues to undergo the highs and lows 
of its 2015 nuclear deal, economic sanctions and international isolation. Egypt 
has ‘come full circle’ after the 2011 overthrow of President Hosni Mubarak was 
followed by President Mohammed Morsi’s Islamist rule and a return to military 
dictatorship since 2013 under General Abdel Fattah el-Sisi.7 Libya descended 
into Civil War following its 2011 revolution, as did Yemen and Syria. Lebanon, 
where the Civil War (1975–90) casts a long shadow, has been ‘sent reeling by 
repeated crisis’ as a testing ground for neoliberal economics and host to over 
a million Syrian refugees (a quarter of its own population).8 In Palestine, Israel 
continues to expand its occupation in East Jerusalem, the West Bank and Gaza, 
with restrictions on freedom of movement, goods and services that have stifled 
the economy and made everyday life extremely difficult. Meanwhile, the Gulf 
monarchies have become keenly aware that their oil resources will one day run 
out and therefore of the need for economic diversification that implies risks of 
sociopolitical change; liberal initiatives, like the reopening of cinemas and lifting 
of the ban on women driving in Saudi Arabia in 2018, have occurred at the same 
time as repressive acts such as journalist Jamal Khashoggi’s murder.

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
4
Adopting the word ‘crisis’ to link these upheavals risks reinforcing 
stereotypes of the Middle East as a crisis hotspot in Western news media. 
Mediated as a humanitarian emergency, a crisis typically means a threat to life, 
property, security, physical and psychological health, marked by uncertainty 
and necessitating ‘immediate response’.9 Reporting of incrementally worsening 
conditions is minimal, as if incidents have sprung ‘almost from nowhere’ when 
they finally do break into the headlines.10 International news media often elide 
political contexts of crisis and struggles for justice, treating people as victims 
to be helped by international aid rather than agents. However, ‘crisis’ can also 
be an accurate description of one’s lived experience and diagnosis of present 
conditions.11 Independent filmmakers from the region tend to undercut 
standard ways of thinking and behaving about crisis by making visible what is 
often invisible in both official state and international media depictions. Instead 
of the view from above, that of international players and the regime, they present 
the view from below, that of ordinary people’s lives. In this way, they explore the 
fault lines of those generic images and offer something more specific.
In 2020, the coronavirus pandemic struck the world, giving us a common 
experience of crisis. Even citizens of so-called stable societies had to adapt to the 
reduction of security and freedom and daily confrontation with untimely death. 
The pandemic has enhanced effects of existing crises and global inequalities but, 
as Egyptian filmmaker Marouan Omara declares, ‘Corona is now our constraint 
internationally.’12 With lockdowns and social-distancing measures, COVID-19 
has imposed curbs on everyday freedoms as well as unprecedented challenges to 
film production and distribution globally, resulting in suspended movie shoots, 
cinema closures and cancelled festivals, although filmmakers and exhibitors 
soon found creative ways of working within these restrictions. This book does 
not focus on the obstacles thrown up by the pandemic; that would merit another 
study. However, its research phase, including some filmmaker interviews, and 
writing up coincided with these developments which threw its themes of crisis, 
creativity and constraints into relief.
Why constraints?
Middle Eastern cinema is typically framed by state censorship, so much so that 
many filmmakers are tired of being asked about it at international film festival 
Q&As. As Mani Haghighi attests, ‘The Western audience’s exclusive focus on 
censorship in Iran has been a source of constant annoyance for me over the years. 

Introduction
5
I find it above all to be a passive-aggressive strategy of self-congratulation: “Ah, 
poor you, we are so much freer than you!”’13 The assumption that censorship is 
geographically and temporally distant and ‘other’ harks back to Cold War14 and 
colonial ideologies that divided the world into the ‘free’ and ‘unfree’ according 
to East-West binaries. Although this view persists today, censorship studies now 
acknowledge censorship as a broad phenomenon emanating from disparate 
forces. Michel Foucault’s work has been a major influence, orientating scholars 
towards an emphasis on censorship as a type of social discipline instead of 
merely an imposition from institutions.15 Nonetheless, Foucault’s abstract model 
of power collapses distinctions between different types of control, some of which 
may not be appropriate to call censorship. For this reason, ‘constraints’, rather 
than censorship, is my preferred term for generic limitations to freedom of 
expression. It has the advantage of highlighting the variety of obstacles facing 
filmmakers and shifts debates beyond state censorship, which is only one form 
of control and by no means filmmakers’ only challenge.
In film terms, a constraint can be defined as a limitation of choices or an 
obstacle in the process of producing, distributing or exhibiting a movie. Exploring 
why artists in general might want to restrict their choices, the philosopher Jon 
Elster has distinguished between pre-existing constraints (such as technological, 
economic, institutional and societal factors) and self-imposed constraints, chosen 
or invented by the artist (such as decisions of style or genre).16 Among invented 
constraints, freely adopted for an expected artistic benefit, Elster mentions the 
avant-garde Oulipo writer Georges Perec, who wrote his novel A Void (1969) 
without the letter ‘e’. It is commonsensical to think that more options are better 
than fewer. Nonetheless, Elster suggests, some constraints have benefits. It can 
actually be freeing to have fewer options; it is what we do with those options 
that matters. Less can be more. Such restrictions challenge filmmakers to find 
inventive solutions.
For Elster, creativity is a two-stage process: firstly, the choice or endorsement 
of constraints and, secondly, choice within these constraints. Importantly, the 
constraints must not be too tight, leaving room for manoeuvre within them. 
Indeed, Elster reminds us to steer clear of overly praising constraints.17 One 
of his examples is the Production Code, a form of censorship in Hollywood 
(1934–66) that placed numerous political, religious and cultural restrictions on 
what could be shown. It challenged directors to use indirect means, leading, he 
argues, to greater artistic sophistication that left more to viewers’ imaginations. 
Yet, he notes, the Code was also a harmful and paralyzing constraint; many films 
were never made because of their incompatibility with its rules and ideologies.

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
6
Building on Elster’s work, my conceptual premises in this book are: (1) every 
film is a product of its constraints, (2) constraints vary geographically and 
temporally, (3) they leave material traces on creative strategies and (4) creative 
evolution occurs as a result of changes in constraints. In the following section, 
I lay out my own typology of constraints, expanding and modifying Elster’s in 
a way that is applicable to filmmaking conditions in Iran and the Arab world. 
This approach, rather than country-by-country overviews, enables us to identify 
similarities and differences in constraints that may otherwise not have been 
noticed, as well as ways in which constraints interact. Some constraints are 
faced by filmmakers around the world, while others arise from circumstances 
particular to these countries.
1. Political constraints
The state, with its security apparatus (army, police, intelligence agencies), 
judiciary and embassies, plays a key role determining what types of cinematic 
expression are allowed within a country through its legislation and forms of 
patronage. It can impose restrictions, and exert pressure upon filmmakers, 
exhibitors and critics alike – actions that signal the range of free expression in 
the country and the regard that the state has for it. Aside from the state, political 
factions have the power to make things difficult for filmmakers and civil society 
lobby groups can launch a campaign against a film.
In many countries, filmmakers must present a synopsis and/or script and list 
of cast and crew for shooting approval to state authorities, then later submit the 
film for a screening permit. However, as the actor and producer Khalid Abdalla 
says, ‘shooting with permits doesn’t mean that you’ll be left alone.’18 In Egypt, he 
observes, ‘the police know that the constraints of filming create opportunities 
to be paid off so they come and look at your permits and start to quibble over 
details’.19 Influential connections, known in Arabic as wastat, are important in 
filmmaking anywhere, but having powerful contacts to intercede on your behalf 
is common practice in this region. In Iran, government patronage of cinema both 
‘enables and limits’ filmmakers’ work.20 It also promotes a culture of favouritism 
towards ‘insiders’, filmmakers trusted by the government who are not required 
to submit scripts for approval, and hostility towards ‘outsiders’, who find their 
work excluded.21
Within the region, there are certain taboo topics that ‘you can’t talk frontally 
about’.22 Mainly, these are politics, religion and sex and, within the category of 

Introduction
7
sex, queer sexuality is more policed. Additionally, criticisms of political and 
religious leaders are considered red lines not to be crossed. One major pressure 
is to portray the nation favourably. Iranian media use the phrase siāh-namāyi 
(depicting the negative aspects) to express their disapproval of filmmakers.23 
Ali Soozandeh, whose film Tehran Taboo (2017) was reported as anti-Iran or 
anti-Islamic in the Iranian press, explains, ‘The picture we show to the outside 
[audience] must be a very clean, beautiful image, independent of what is behind 
it’.24 Filmmakers sometimes get around state censorship by presenting a different 
version of their script from the one they intend to film. Moreover, in cinema, red 
lines are more open to negotiation (including through dialogue with censors) 
than in the press and state broadcasting: ‘as long as you’re not stridently explicit 
about your opposition to the regime as such in your film, then all kinds of 
avenues open up for you’, says Haghighi.25
Neither are Middle Eastern filmmakers immune from political censorship 
in the West. In Britain, where colonialism has long been an unspoken past, 
airing that issue is not always welcomed. Several filmmakers in this book have 
been censored for appearing to criticize Israel (although this often arises from 
a misunderstanding of their work), one of the other grounds on which subject 
matter is judged sensitive in the West.
2. Infrastructural constraints
As Egyptian filmmaker Tamer el-Said states, ‘Every film needs a machine behind 
it’, relying on an industrial infrastructure,26 such as film schools, production and 
distribution companies, cinema theatres, film festivals, galleries and television 
networks that produce, fund, distribute and exhibit films and provide skills 
training. This starts from access to films and film education, learning film 
language as well as filmmaking’s technical craft. Iranian-Kurdish director 
Keywan Karimi describes growing up in Kurdistan without any cinemas; until 
1995, even the VHS player was illegal. He was only able to watch serials and 
films on state television. ‘If someone asks me, how you learn cinema in these 
conditions, I say that it came from one thing. I have an imagination and I do 
what they didn’t do’, by ‘thinking what is a better way to tell these stories?’27 When 
he went to university in Tehran, he finally had access to the cinema. Shortage 
of screens is a persistent problem despite the growth of regional festivals and 
art-house distributors. As elsewhere in the world, viewers have gravitated from 
theatrical screenings to (often pirated) DVD, satellite and online streaming. 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
8
Many movie theatres have closed for these reasons, but they have also been 
casualties of crises, destroyed during Iran’s Islamic Revolution (1978–9) and the 
Syrian war (2011–) among other conflicts. Due to these and other difficulties, 
independent films are often screened abroad but not in the countries where they 
are set or that their filmmakers are from.
In parts of the Arab world, state support for cinema has been non-existent, 
inadequate or dismantled in favour of a market-led system. Despite having 
an established commercial film industry, Egypt had no infrastructure for 
independent cinema, so el-Said decided the only way to make his film In the 
Last Days of the City (2016) was to create it himself.28 He started by founding his 
own production company, Zero Production, which built the infrastructure that 
gave birth to both Cimatheque and the video collective Mosireen. Cimatheque 
opened in 2015, a multipurpose space containing ‘everything you want to 
practice in cinema’, including equipment hire, workshops, a library, an archive 
and a screening venue that the authorities consider too small to be a theatre so it 
does not have to send its films to the censors.29
3. Economic constraints
‘Cinema is fundamentally (ontologically, even) tied to capital, unlike most other 
art forms’, Haghighi declares, pointing to money as a material constraint which, 
the philosopher Gilles Deleuze has said, is ‘the obverse of all the images that 
the cinema shows and sets in place’.30 While it would be ideal to make films 
that are both cheap and successful, this rarely occurs. Properly realizing ideas 
onscreen entails significant amounts of money and, usually, a paying audience 
to return the investment. Compared to mainstream, international standards, the 
budgets of films in this book are modest. Yet, investment in filmmaking is a risky 
venture – especially when combined with numerous other constraints – making 
fund-raising a major challenge for filmmakers.
Due to limited possibilities for distribution in their country of origin, 
filmmakers in the region often rely on foreign funders, co-producers, distributors, 
film festivals and television networks. This brings some freedom from local 
constraints, such as state censorship, but, at the same time, external funders 
and markets impose other rules and expectations. For any funding, filmmakers 
must meet eligibility criteria that often depend on their place of residence and 
nationality. Co-production arrangements may also stipulate the nationality 
of crew members, usually from the country providing funds. In written and 

Introduction
9
unwritten selection criteria for funding applications, development labs, festivals 
and television sales and commissions, filmmakers’ work is expected to comply 
with a challenging list of requirements: to be urgent or timely, implying that it 
has cultural value only for that moment; to be universal rather than merely ‘local’ 
(with the assumption that ‘we’re only talking about our own problems’, which is 
‘condescending’31 to many filmmakers); and to be ‘authentic’ to the filmmaker’s 
country of origin, placing upon them the burden of ‘explaining’ their part of the 
world. At the same time, stories are often expected to fit pre-existing narratives 
of exoticism, oppressed Muslim women and Islamic terrorism. These criteria 
hold Middle Eastern films to standards to which Western films are not usually 
held, reflecting gatekeepers’ preferences and fashions for subjects they want 
to hear about and Orientalist stereotypes inherited from other films and news 
media. While scholars often criticize the adoption of particular ‘filmmaking 
formulas’ in order to target festivals and be ‘commercially viable’ for international 
markets,32 they are less sensitive to how filmmakers experience these pressures 
as a constraint on their free speech just as harmful as state censorship. Lebanese 
director Philippe Aractingi vents, ‘I’m a filmmaker from the Middle East. Am I 
allowed to do a normal film? You know it’s not allowed. Because the Europeans 
who read your work don’t see you like that; they see you as Third World . . . We’re 
put in one niche, which is drama where women are beaten.’33 A related problem 
is that Middle Eastern filmmakers’ dependency on European grants and markets 
divorces them from audiences at home.
Filmmakers feel expected to endanger themselves since films deemed risk-
taking are appealing to international festivals and TV channels.34 We can see 
this in the championing of Iranian director Jafar Panahi at the Cannes Film 
Festival. Panahi was arrested and imprisoned for several months for clandestine 
filmmaking during the 2009 protests. At Cannes 2010, he was honoured as an 
absent jury member, with an empty chair left on stage displaying his name. That 
year, Panahi was sentenced to a twenty-year ban from filmmaking, travelling 
abroad and giving interviews, as well as a six-year prison term (which he has 
not yet served). Despite this, he has continued to make films, including This Is 
Not a Film (2011), reportedly smuggled to Cannes in a USB stick hidden in a 
cake. While criticizing festivals for their ‘interference’, Iranian authorities have 
effectively condoned the films Panahi has made since his ban; in some respects, it 
suits them, since it ostensibly demonstrates that he is a ‘free’ citizen in his country,35 
just as his censorship makes his work of interest to international festivals.
Several films in this book are made with support from Arab cultural 
organizations such as the Doha Film Institute, Arab Fund for Arts and Culture and 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
10
Bidayyat, which claim to be looking for something different in the projects they 
fund. For example, the Lebanon-based Bidayyat was founded during the Syrian 
revolution specifically to ‘protect’ emerging Syrian documentary filmmakers 
from rules imposed by film and TV markets and let them develop their ideas 
‘more freely . . . with small budgets and alternative artistic practices’.36 Because 
Western and Arab NGO grants tend to be small, they rely on filmmakers finding 
additional sources to finance projects. Filmmakers piece together funding from 
multiple sources or shoulder substantial costs themselves. For his film 300 Miles 
(2016), al-Mokdad won funding from Bidayyat and the British Council but, in 
the four years it took to make, the film cost $50,000 and he had to personally 
finance half of it.37
To avoid political and economic constraints, some filmmakers adopt an 
artisanal mode, performing most production roles themselves, and often display 
their work in galleries as well as cinemas.38 One such figure is Iranian filmmaker 
Mania Akbari, now living in exile in the UK: ‘I make my films with very little 
money and this low-budget cinema is not tied to the film industry’s rules and 
concerns over revenue as it has its own special audience.’39 Even so, ‘I face 
countless financial obstacles that slow down the project, delay it and sometimes 
permanently abort its progress.’ Due to budget constraints, many filmmakers 
resort to donated labour although this is not a sustainable strategy, especially 
during economic crisis. As Iranian filmmaker Shirin Barghnavard states, ‘Living 
in Tehran is super-expensive now. Today, it is very difficult to work in the 
film industry with a low wage. You have to pay your rent and bills, which are 
expensive compared to income’.40 The need to earn a living is another constraint 
underlying filmmaking, which is affected by the wider economic situation, as in 
Iran, where sanctions and inflation have made life several times costlier.
4. Technological constraints
Since the late 1990s, the rise of cheaper and portable digital video cameras 
and editing software, combined with the Internet, has facilitated independent 
filmmaking everywhere. In countries such as Iran and Syria where filmmakers 
were hitherto reliant on state support for hiring equipment, it has enabled 
filmmakers to bypass these infrastructural constraints.41 It has also fostered 
underground filmmaking throughout the region. By ‘underground films’, I 
mean films shot illegally, without official permits and distributed secretly 
in the home country, at festivals abroad or on the Internet. Produced on the 

Introduction
11
run, with a limited budget and small crew, underground filmmaking entails 
numerous personal, professional and legal risks, so many films lack credits to 
protect participants’ identities. Their subject matter is often taboo or sensitive, 
dealing with subjects thought ‘inappropriate by the state and its restrictions on 
expression and free speech’.42
These technological changes have empowered more people (including 
women and other marginalized groups) to tell their stories, and to tell them 
more directly; they have also enabled identities and experiences not often 
filmed before to find representation in cinema. In particular, the Internet has 
provided an alternative virtual public sphere where films can be made accessible 
to audiences within the country and abroad in ways that bypass state censors 
and other gatekeepers. However, putting works online for free does not allow 
filmmakers to recoup their costs. Moreover, authorities can block websites, filter 
content and switch the Internet on and off, resulting in blackouts, as has often 
occurred during mass protests across the region. Far from a free, uncensored 
domain, the Internet increases possibilities for tracking dissidence by our 
electronic footprints. Additionally, as Chapter 8 explores, online posts can be 
removed by the platforms themselves, who retain ownership of the material and 
whose ‘terms of service . . . count for more than freedom of speech’.43
As video becomes the dominant means of production and streaming the 
prevalent mode of spectatorship, older definitions of film as generated on celluloid 
and designed for theatrical exhibition become increasingly untenable – cinema 
itself is said to be in ‘crisis’ as a result of these new media offering alternative 
models to both ‘the capital-heavy motion picture industry that employs 
dozens of specialists in the production of a single work’ and ‘commercialized 
distribution networks’ that determined public accessibility of films in theatres 
or on television.44 Yet, as we will see in the chapters, film is a mixed medium, 
always incorporating newer media; hence, my definition of ‘film’ remains open, 
applying to different forms of moving images.
­5. Societal and religious constraints
Filmmakers must comply with social and religious customs of Arab-Muslim 
society if they want to distribute their films within the region. What directors 
might ask actors (especially women) to do and wear is often constrained by 
Islamic codes of honour and modesty (hejāb). Iran’s Islamic Republic has strict 
regulations governing onscreen depiction of female characters, who must always 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
12
be veiled, even in scenes at home with their families when this would not be 
realistic. As we will see in subsequent chapters, filmmakers creatively work 
around these constraints to explore characters’ private lives and intimacy.
Partly due to religious rules about public space and gender segregation, 
filmmakers can encounter interference from citizens on set.45 While 
directing outdoor scenes for Wadjda (2012) in Saudi Arabia, Haifa al-
Mansour communicated via walkie-talkie from a van so as not to be seen 
publicly interacting with male crew members. Despite these struggles, a 
greater proportion of female directors exists in the region’s independent 
filmmaking sector – up to 50 per cent in Palestine and Lebanon – than in the 
West, where the figure stands at around 12 per cent in Europe and 5 per cent 
in the United States.46 Palestinian filmmaker Annemarie Jacir surmises that 
this may be due to the absence of the entrenched prejudices against women 
present in more established film industries.47 For her debut feature Salt of 
This Sea (2018), her French producers expressed concern whether her Arab 
crew members would respect her as a young, female director; yet, during 
the production, it was the French crew members that gave her trouble. 
These examples demonstrate the problems of assuming that Arab-Muslim 
societies are the sole source of women’s oppression, as Lila Abu-Lughod has 
highlighted in another context.48 As Egyptian filmmaker Mohamed Siam 
puts it, Westerners tend to have ‘a very medieval idea about Islam’.49 These 
negative views also underlie social prejudices against filmmakers from the 
region when they emigrate to the West. Palestinian filmmaker Basil Khalil 
believes unconscious bias against foreign names has counted against his 
career progression in the British film industry, making it harder to jump 
through hurdles.50
Filmmakers from the region frequently report that self-censorship plays 
an inhibitive role during the creative process before any state censorship. Self-
censorship, however, is not always a matter of making conscious choices to 
exclude politically contentious elements. Social and religious norms can also be 
internalized in ways that make it difficult to combat or even be aware of them. 
As a form of voluntary and involuntary self-control, self-censorship might be 
regarded as an internalized social and/or political constraint. We can see this in, 
practices of public dissimulation prevalent in authoritarian states, as Lisa Wedeen 
has analysed in Syria under Hafiz al-Assad: ‘citizens acted “as if” they revered 
the leader’, manifesting compliance to the regime in their outward behaviour, 
while differing from it in their actual beliefs and values.51 Dissimulation fosters 
separate private and public worlds, recalling the precautionary practice of hiding 
one’s religious belief to avoid persecution, known as taqiya, in Shi‘a Islam. 

Introduction
13
Filmmakers who grew up in these cultures of dissimulation are accustomed to 
speaking indirectly: saying one thing and meaning another. Iranian filmmaker 
Sadaf Foroughi believes this occurs so instinctively in her creative process that 
she does not even think of it as self-censorship.52 Yet, self-censorship is not 
confined to the Middle East. As Saudi producer and comedian Hisham Fageeh 
states, ‘If I said what I wanted to say I’d be in trouble all the time. I’ve lived in 
the States and you self-censor there sometimes; there’s always a sense of self-
censorship.’53
6. Security risks and ethics
Security risks are a major challenge to filmmaking in the region, many of 
them exceeding ‘inevitable risks’ that generally occur when a film is made.54 
Filmmakers sometimes venture into extreme situations, such as the conflict in 
Syria where they face kidnapping and killings by the regime and assorted militias. 
For security reasons, anonymity or pseudonyms are often essential while inside 
the country while those who have left have greater freedom to sign their work 
in their own name.55 Under these conditions, it is not always possible to film in 
person. US-based Syrian filmmaker Sam Kadi directed his documentary Little 
Gandhi (2016) over Skype from Turkey, relying on activists on the ground in 
war-torn Syria to operate camera and sound equipment, and to smuggle footage 
across the border.56
Although both filmmakers and their subjects are vulnerable, risk is unevenly 
distributed, often disadvantaging whoever remains in the danger zones and faces 
long-term consequences. Filmmakers sometimes highlight these discrepancies. 
In Those Who Remain (2016), Lebanese filmmaker Eliane Raheb’s documentary 
about the Akkar region on the Lebanese border, feared to be the doorway for a 
potential ISIS invasion from Syria, the protagonist Haykal points out to her, ‘you 
are doing your interview and you will leave. . . . We will remain here!’ Documentary 
filmmaking sharply demonstrates these ethical dimensions because it deals with 
real people whom filmmakers are obliged not to put in harm’s way. Yet ethical 
responsibility applies more broadly to how filmmakers treat actors and crew, 
in either documentary or fiction, including ‘at risk’ or vulnerable groups such 
as child actors, many of whom play versions of themselves as we will see in 
Chapter 2. When dealing with people at risk, filmmakers sometimes exercise 
self-censorship for ethical reasons, even if it means losing an opportunity to tell 
a good story. Risks attached to a film extend to its afterlife in distribution, as it 
can become more dangerous through national and international visibility. As 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
14
explored in Chapter 8, Yasmin Fedda took these responsibilities very seriously 
for her documentary Queens of Syria (2014), measuring risks to her participants 
over time.
7. Travel restrictions
When attending festivals abroad, cast and crew often encounter obstacles to 
travel such as bureaucratic processes for visa applications and even visa refusals, 
depending on what passports they have. Barghnavard made her documentary 
Invisible (2019) partly to express these frustrations about limitations imposed by 
your passport which defines your nationality and how others see and treat you. 
Additionally, many filmmakers experience restricted mobility within their own 
country, as in occupied Palestine, or country of residence, which hampers their 
ability to make films and accompany them on their journey through distribution. 
As a Syrian refugee in Lebanon, al-Mokdad was confined to a specific geographical 
area in Beirut and could not travel with his films; his brother Eyas al-Mokdad, a 
Belgian national, attended festival screenings and Q&As on his behalf. In some 
cases, filmmakers classified as ‘dissidents’ in their home country are banned from 
international travel, as has happened to Jafar Panahi in Iran; their passports can 
also be confiscated upon their return after travelling abroad. Travel restrictions, and 
filmmakers’ creative solutions to them, are explored in Chapter 5 on Road Movies.
8. Temporal constraints
Deadlines are examples of temporal constraints that some people find 
concentrate their creative powers.57 For independent filmmakers, dependent on 
prestigious festivals for premiering their films and thereby gaining recognition 
that leads to distribution opportunities, the festival network is a source of 
time pressures, imposing schedules for completion.58 Aside from these routine 
factors, further deadlines are enforced by the state of crisis in which filmmakers 
live and work. Karimi obtained a seventeen-day shooting permit for his film 
Drum (2016) while he was awaiting trial for posting a trailer of his previous 
film on YouTube. Knowing that he had to shoot whatever he could in case he 
was unable to continue shaped his decision to shoot each scene without cuts.59 
Filmed in black and white with long takes in decaying buildings in the older, 
historic part of Tehran, Drum recalls Hungarian auteur Bela Tarr’s style, as critics 

Introduction
15
noted, yet it is as much a product of temporal constraints as artistic influences.60 
Furthermore, because film production (including lengthy editing processes) 
often takes significant time, films that began under one set of circumstances may 
be released under a completely different one, such as another political regime 
with different limitations upon free expression. Several filmmakers in this book 
have run into these temporal obstacles.
9. Environmental constraints
In A Room of One’s Own (1929), Virginia Woolf wrote that ‘a woman must have 
money and a room of her own if she is to write fiction.’61 A physical environment 
can affect creativity, particularly in unstable places where it is difficult to 
concentrate and basic services are not reliable for reasons of conflict, sanctions, 
official corruption and incompetence, interfering with even simple tasks such 
as charging cameras and uploading films, let alone more complex aspects of 
production. According to Rania Stephan, ‘All filmmakers face external factors 
that hamper their work but in Lebanon you have more’, such as slow Internet or 
not having electricity or a quiet space. There are ‘a lot of little annoyances that take 
your energy’ so ‘you have to be really focused and resilient’.62 As film scholarship is 
increasingly recognizing, filmmaking practices have an environmental impact.63 
But environmental factors also impact filmmaking practices. ‘I live in Cairo, one 
of the most polluted cities in the world’ with ‘all the variation of constraints you 
could imagine’, Omara told me. ‘In other places, maybe making a great film is a 
big achievement; in Egypt, making a film is a big achievement.’64
Aside from political constraints that force some filmmakers into exile abroad 
or internally within their country, environmental limitations prompt many to 
emigrate for more stable working conditions. However, when they emigrate 
they risk separation from their sources of inspiration in the people and places 
with which they share a history, language and culture. When their environment 
changes, it can be a dislocating experience, throwing up new challenges such as 
redefining themselves and gaining fluency in another language.
10. Linguistic constraints
Not only is language the medium of dialogue, voice-over and titles, it is essential to 
all aspects of filmmaking, from writing funding applications through to pitching, 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
16
scriptwriting, directing and communicating with audiences. In the Arab world, 
many dialects are spoken, an ‘obstacle hampering the inter-Arab exchange of 
movies’ since people from different parts can find it difficult to understand each 
other.65 While the Modern Standard Arabic used by newscasters, politicians 
and poets is familiar to most educated Arabic speakers, it is not the language of 
everyday expression. Most of the films in this book are in Arabic or Farsi, in a 
variety of dialects. The region has a history of languages being imposed as a result 
of colonial conquest, which marginalizes other spoken languages and dialects. 
Depending on funding stipulations and market considerations, filmmakers can 
find choice of language foisted upon them. Through the hegemony of English 
and French, language continues to operate as a neo-colonial tool as some 
gatekeepers deem subtitled movies a barrier to commercial appeal.
11. Formal constraints
Elster uses the term ‘formal constraints’ to refer to an artist’s anticipation of 
audience expectations and how this formally shapes a work; he classifies them, 
along with ‘material, technical or financial restrictions’, as ‘hard’ constraints, 
as opposed to ‘soft’ constraints such as conventions.66 ‘Hard’ constraints come 
from external sources; all constraints discussed so far come under this category. 
However, that is not to say that they are fixed and unchanging. Maybe, one day, 
filmmakers will no longer encounter Orientalist stereotyping, as audiences, 
funders, festivals and broadcasters change their habits of thought and practices.
Formal constraints include classical Hollywood narrative which favours 
clear, coherent storytelling in three (or five) acts with believable characters: a 
globally dominant form. Most films in this book abide by these constraints, 
although they also challenge or deploy them towards other ends in experimental 
practices, as shown in Chapters 5, 6, 7 and 8. Film length is another constraint. 
Running times have historically been determined by commercial reasons, 
such as exhibitors’ or broadcasters’ programming schedules, resulting in the 
standard ninety-minute theatrical feature or forty-eight-and-a-half-minute 
television documentary (the latter allowing for advertisement breaks). In 
television documentary particularly, ‘you’re literally counting every second’, 
entailing ruthless compromises for anything that doesn’t fit clear storytelling.67 
Because they rarely have theatrical releases, short films are less attractive than 
features to investors, who want to ensure returns on their investment. Lebanese 
filmmaker Mounia Akl found a creative way of overcoming this constraint by 

Introduction
17
convincing funders that her graduation short Submarine (2016) (discussed 
in Chapter 9) was an investment for her future feature, Costa Brava Lebanon 
(2021).68 For Lara Zeidan, director of Three Centimetres (2018) (in Chapter 5), 
graduation shorts and film schools, whether in Lebanon or abroad, offer spaces 
of free expression: ‘In Lebanon there are a lot of LGBT films that come out of 
film school because there is this safety there where you can use film as a way 
of self-expression instead of thinking of the audience and how it’s going to be 
received’.69 Furthermore, as we will see in Chapter 7, because short films are held 
less tightly to screening permit requirements, even more established directors 
are using them to circumvent rules by creating features from strings of shorts.
12. Self-imposed constraints
Self-imposed constraints are chosen by artists and consist of two types: pre-
existing conventions and invented constraints.70 Like metre and rhyme in poetry, 
conventions can stimulate play and innovation. Genre falls into this category if 
it is chosen by the filmmaker as their expressive medium rather than imposed 
by their production company or exhibition platform. The science-fiction 
genre is a chosen constraint in Larissa Sansour’s work in Chapter 9. Sansour’s 
premise is that life in Palestine is stranger than reality and merits not a realist or 
documentary approach but a science-fiction treatment. Therefore, any topic that 
she wants to address about the crisis, such as the politicized use of archaeology, 
she often drops into a science-fiction framework. Genre innovation is almost 
inevitable in crisis contexts that force filmmakers to twist genres beyond their 
usual parameters. In Chapter 5, for example, we will see how the road movie is 
transformed.
Invented constraints occur when artists devise the rules and limitations 
by which they will abide. For Elster, an artist has greater freedom when they 
choose their own constraints and make choices within them; consequently, 
constructing constraints is an assertion of freedom. The Dogme ’95 movement 
epitomizes this type of constraint in filmmaking. Led by Danish directors Lars 
von Trier and Thomas Vinterberg, Dogme ’95 launched a manifesto with ten 
filmmaking rules known as the ‘Vow of Chastity’, forbidding artificial props and 
sets, ‘temporal and geographical alienation’, ‘superficial’ action involving guns or 
murders and genre movies, among other restrictions.71 Dogme rules turn external 
pressures into internal ones which, it might be argued, suit Danish filmmakers 
working in relative safety and/or struggling for subject matter; Middle Eastern 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
18
filmmakers in crisis conditions have enough constraints in their external 
environment, with no shortage of stories, and therefore no need for further 
restrictions. Yet, this is complicated by the fact that Danish directors (like many 
other filmmakers elsewhere) also make use of hard, external constraints, such 
as economic limitations, as ‘opportunities for creativity’.72 Conversely, Middle 
Eastern filmmakers, too, make use of chosen constraints to hone their creative 
approach. The Iranian director Abbas Kiarostami was adept at working with 
external constraints and imposing further ones on himself, inspiring the creative 
strategies considered in Chapters 2 and 5. Some of the filmmakers I interviewed 
have appropriated Dogme and Oulipean techniques. ‘I do put constraints in my 
films, but throw them out as well’, Aractingi says.73 This is entirely in keeping 
with Dogme spirit. The rules are like a scaffold to stimulate creativity and can be 
ditched when they have served their purpose. Additionally, some filmmakers, 
especially those with an experimental bent, have invented their own constraints. 
Lebanese filmmaker Rana Eid declares, ‘If we don’t have a challenge in this film, 
let’s create one!’74 In her documentary Panoptic (2017) (in Chapter 4), which 
explores the Lebanese Civil War’s unresolved legacies, she determined only to 
use reflected sound on location in order to convey the atmosphere of detention 
centres and former torture chambers through their sound qualities.
Why creativity?
The word ‘create’, in English, is about making, originally referring to divine power; 
only after the acceptance of creation as human activity were the terms ‘creative’ 
and ‘creativity’ coined in the eighteenth and twentieth centuries, respectively.75 
These developments were anticipated in the Muslim and Arab world by Sufi 
philosophers who, by the ninth century, had intuited that human beings have 
a ‘creative element’.76 In Sufism, creativity happens in an intermediate world 
between our empirical reality and the universe of angels known as the ‘imaginal 
realm’ where ideas and dreams assume tangible forms.77 For filmmakers that I 
interviewed, creativity holds many associations, from imagination and spiritual 
yearning to problem-solving, labour, suffering, resistance, healing and necessity. 
‘Creativity is often a response to the “un-making” of the world, when the 
pavement is crumbling under your feet and you no longer recognise the people 
around you’, Iraqi filmmaker Maysoon Pachachi told me.78 Whereas crisis and 
conflict are a radical unmaking of the world, creativity is imagined as their 
antithesis, capable of putting the parts together again.

Introduction
19
Creativity is a favoured word among artists and has popular currency. As 
Kraidy observes, it was widely used by journalists, activists and academics in 
their coverage of regional protests, pairing it with words like ‘revolution’, ‘dissent’, 
‘protest’ and ‘resistance’ to describe a range of activism and art.79 Yet, with the 
exception of Gilles Deleuze (whose ideas seep into this book), creativity has 
generally been neglected in film theory, perhaps due to the way it seems to elevate 
the artist over other forces and ignore the material base of production, conjuring 
up mystical and Romantic notions of ‘inspiration’ and ‘self-expression’.80 
However, even in mystical and Romantic thought, ‘inspiration’ is not necessarily 
something that just happens; frequently, the impetus for creativity is believed 
to come from elsewhere: the artist moved by larger forces, such as a Muse who 
dictates their thoughts. For Sufis, ‘spontaneous creativity is impossible’; it needs 
pre-existing conditions, namely self-perfection and mystical ecstasy. Sufism, 
therefore, lays claim to being the first philosophy to consider questions of 
‘stimulating creativity’.81
This book proposes a model of creativity as shaped by constraints. The 
twelve-part typology above shows how creativity is always constrained. 
Constraints also complicate ideas of authorship – not only Romantic notions 
of artists as solitary geniuses but also the abstract philosophizing that often 
goes under the name of auteur theory that ‘has less to do with the way movies 
are made than with the way they are elucidated and evaluated’.82 In this book, I 
adopt Mette Hjort’s notion of ‘practitioner’s agency’: a more grounded approach 
that emphasizes how filmmakers’ choices are shaped by constraints but also 
how their choices transform those constraints into creative opportunities.83 I 
cover several categories of filmmakers, each constrained in different ways that 
affect their creative approaches: filmmakers based in the region, exiles who have 
permanently left their country, voluntarily or involuntarily, émigré and second-
generation filmmakers of dual nationality who travel to the region to make 
films and filmmakers from the West, who collaborate with filmmakers from 
the Middle East. Those predominantly based abroad trade positions of relative 
safety for riskier ones when they work in the region. However, constraints are 
usually greater for filmmakers based in the country. In my analysis, I try to take 
account of these different ‘life worlds’ and ‘safety-nets’.84
Allegory has formed the dominant framework for interpreting Middle Eastern 
cinema, a mode of interpretation that goes hand in hand with the emphasis 
on state censorship, its impetus being to study how filmmakers ‘defy’ censors 
through this particular creative strategy. In its most basic form, allegory is a mode 
of expression that says one thing while meaning another, creating a literal layer 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
20
and an allegorical one. It is often deemed a means of political resistance against 
authoritarian regimes, since it disguises core meanings through symbolism and 
metaphor, capable of ‘smuggling’ in contentious ideas. The Cold War paradigm 
of the dissident artist is a key influence; as Angus Fletcher states, ‘In times of 
political oppression we may get “Aesop language” to avoid the censorship of 
dissident thought.’85 Historically, allegory has suited filmmakers working in state-
sponsored cinema, as Rasha Salti shows in films developed under the auspices 
of Syria’s National Film Organization, founded by the Ba‘ath Party. One of the 
paradoxes of Syrian cinema, Salti observes, is that it managed to create a space 
for subversion and critique under one-party state sponsorship that suppresses 
dissent and imposes official dogma. Filmmakers were aware of red lines, so they 
came to ‘operate through guises, stratagems, allegory and metaphor’ to avoid 
detection and slip under the censors’ radar.86 For example, Ossama Mohammed’s 
Stars in Broad Daylight (1988) subverts the regime’s own symbols and alludes to 
state oppression through a character resembling President Hafez al-Assad.
Negar Mottahedeh interprets the cinema of Iran’s Islamic Republic as 
‘displaced allegories’ of ‘the national situation and constraints on the industry’.87 
However, as I argue in this book, films simply are products of their constraints; 
there is no need to interpret this allegorically. Along with allegorical readings, 
there is a tendency to interpret filmmakers’ choices as techniques that draw 
attention to limits of representation, emphasizing ‘that which cannot be shown’ 
and asking viewers to seek out hidden meanings beyond what appears onscreen.88 
In contrast to these approaches, which stress state censorship at the expense of 
other constraints, I focus on filmmakers’ creative use of a variety of limitations, 
their ability to get around or work within them. As Saudi filmmaker Ahd Kamel 
says, it’s about ‘harnessing the constraints to do what you can’t do.’89
Another problem with allegorical interpretation is the inclination to see 
each film as a coded message seeking to overthrow a government, which 
reduces filmmakers’ creativity to political messaging.90 Films from non-Western 
countries are also often taken as national allegories in the manner proposed by 
Fredric Jameson: every third-world text is an allegory of ‘the embattled situation’ 
facing that society, so an individual’s story is always that of the public, even when 
not presented as such, because of ‘a different ratio of the personal to the political’ 
from ‘western habits of reading’.91 Jameson’s argument has been criticized for its 
generalization of ‘third-world’ cultural production. However, it finds a certain 
confirmation in the tensions between personal stories and collective struggles 
and the battles between filmmakers and their Western(ized) collaborators, as we 
will see with 5 Broken Cameras (2011) and For Sama (2019) in Chapter 1.

Introduction
21
Moreover, practices of dissimulation have fostered a habit of saying things 
indirectly in Middle Eastern societies, as much due to cultural customs as living 
under dictatorships. This tendency, which prefers allegory and other cloaked 
expressive forms, will not disappear overnight. In her work on Iranian cinema, 
Michelle Langford has persuasively argued that allegory is not merely a response 
to state censorship; instead, it is sustained by enduring poetic traditions.92 She 
regards allegory as expressing images’ potential to open up to other dimensions 
of meaning – to shift from the immediate, concrete and particular to the broader, 
abstract and universal. In this book, I am not arguing that allegory has been 
entirely replaced; indeed, all films remain open to allegorical interpretation. 
However, we are witnessing a shift away from the allegories that characterized the 
region’s cinema in the past towards more direct and multiple creative strategies.
In moving beyond allegory, this book is anticipated by the work of Viola 
Shafik and Laura Marks. Shafik has discussed various creative strategies for 
articulating dissent in Tunisian, Egyptian, Syrian and Palestinian films before 
the Arab uprisings through the performativity of actors’ bodies and address to 
the spectator’s body.93 Using Deleuze’s writing on the fold and classical Islamic 
philosophy, Marks has proposed an aesthetics of unfolding/enfolding, referring 
to how both funding and censorship selectively make experience perceptible.94 
Since experience is difficult to depict directly, she identifies creative strategies 
that dwell on filters of information such as surveillance and self-censorship, or 
unfurl hidden aspects of experience.95
Today, the range of creative strategies emanating from independent Iranian 
and Arab filmmaking is much wider than previous scholarship in this area has 
acknowledged. Elster suggests that the number of possible creative strategies 
is unlimited because of how artistic evolution occurs: ‘Whereas constraints 
arise by necessity or choice, conventions [or creative strategies] evolve’.96 As the 
constraints change, so do creative strategies for getting around them, as shown 
by the uprisings that, at least temporarily, broke the ‘wall of fear’ that kept 
populations in states of dissimulation. While government crackdowns ushered 
in a more repressive climate in many places, landing filmmakers in trouble 
and forcing great numbers to leave their countries, many of them became 
emboldened to tell their stories more directly, no longer considering allegorical 
expression and poetic indirectness as obligatory although, as we will see, their 
directness depends on the degree of risk and range of free expression in contexts 
in which they work.
The films produced in this period arise from a state of crisis, registering 
the pressures under which they were made: they are crisis-images related to, 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
22
yet distinct from, previous eras. For my notion of the crisis-image, I draw on 
Deleuze who characterizes the breakdown of action in the movement-image and 
transition to the time-image as a crisis within cinema that resulted from the 
crisis of the Second World War.97 Emerging in the war’s aftermath, the time-
image captures the landscape’s physical and mental scars through motifs such as 
circuitous journeys and child protagonists who see rather than act. In Chapter 2, 
I engage more fully with Deleuze’s arguments, and also critique his view of 
child protagonists as passive seers. If the time-image was a new way of thinking 
about crisis for post-war European cinema, the creative strategies elaborated 
in this book are filmmakers’ techniques for understanding their contemporary 
circumstances and coping with their constraints. The term ‘strategy’, however, 
may sound too deliberate for the creative process. In this respect, filmmakers’ 
choices may be better understood as ‘tactics’ or ruses. Michel de Certeau 
distinguishes between ‘strategy’, a term that he reserves for institutional power, 
and ‘tactics’, that describes how ordinary people watch for opportunities in 
their path as they walk about the city, using the space differently from the ways 
intended by urban planners. His idea of tactical play – inspired by an anthology 
whose title translates as The Book of Tricks: The Political Strategy of the Arabs – is 
helpful to understanding the creative strategies in this book.98
The rise of documentary, previously often regarded as ‘a subordinate cinematic 
form’,99 but now gaining greater visibility and market appeal, plays an important 
role in the shift towards more direct creative strategies. Documentaries contain 
direct relationships with lived realities, since they record real people and places. 
As Khalid Abdalla remarks about filmmaking from the region, ‘The palette of 
documentary on the whole is often more interesting and wider than a lot of 
the fiction films because the circumstances are pretty extraordinary. What you 
can capture is often more cinematic than what you might be able to recreate.’100 
In crisis conditions, reality presents filmmakers with ‘found’ stories that rival 
fiction’s inventive powers. On the other hand, when shooting documentary is 
considered too politically charged, fiction serves as a shield. Moreover, as we will 
see in the chapters, blending documentary and fiction can open new spaces that 
challenge restrictions.
The concept of indexicality captures well what I mean by directness in 
creative strategies. Charles Sanders Peirce defined the index as part of his 
classification of signs: unlike icons that resemble their objects, and symbols 
that gain meanings through usage, indices are ‘physically connected’ to what 
they represent, taking the form of a trace (such as a footprint or photograph) 
or a pointing signifier (like a weathervane or deictic pronouns such as ‘this’).101 

Introduction
23
Film itself is an indexical medium as it captures space and time. In film theory, 
indexicality has tended to be associated with realism, as in the work of André 
Bazin or Siegfried Kracauer, who remarked on film’s ability to ‘record and reveal 
physical reality’.102 However, indexicality is available to a variety of styles, as 
well as different media.103 Indexicality elucidates the political dimensions of the 
creative strategies I discuss, as many of them stem from their filmmakers’ direct 
engagement with political events. Made in the midst of upheavals, their films 
bear an indexical relationship to crisis: not merely representations of crises, they 
are products of crises. Creative strategies bear traces of the circumstances under 
which films were made so that each film is ‘a record of its working constraints’.104 
These constraints may be foregrounded to varying degrees, but contextualizing 
them is essential to understanding the creative strategies adopted. In such 
conditions, the very act of making films is a political gesture. This is distinct from 
the ways in which political cinema has been defined in the past, as politically 
and formally radical like dissident allegory or collectivist films from the 1960s 
and 1970s known as ‘Third Cinema’. Constraint forms a large part of a work’s 
meaning, which is located not merely in its story of resistance or its political 
‘message’.
Methodology of filmmaker interviews
This book is partly based on forty-two semi-structured depth interviews with 
directors and producers that I carried out between 2015 and 2021. On average, 
each of the interviews, which were mostly face-to-face or via video link or 
telephone, lasted about two hours. As the book originated from a series of events 
in which I participated and curated, the interviews came out of those events 
and, as I began researching the book, I selected other filmmakers on the basis of 
their regional production contexts. I have also drawn on published interviews, 
including with some filmmakers whom I did not interview.
Film scholarship tends to study finished films; the journey towards their 
creation, the difficulties that filmmakers must overcome and their inventive 
tactics for doing so rarely receive attention as alternative sites of meaning. In 
contrast to the view from ‘in front’ of the film, my interviews with filmmakers 
provided me with the view from ‘behind’, consisting of their first-hand accounts 
of constraints in crisis contexts.105 For many filmmakers, the finished film is 
not the end point but the start of conversations with audiences, considered as 
‘part of the making process’.106 My interviews focused on the circumstances 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
24
in which they were working, their creative processes, how external and self-
imposed constraints shaped their films’ development and their journey through 
distribution. Where filmmakers or their collaborators might be exposed to 
harm, interview contributions have been anonymized and sensitive details have 
been removed.
Much has been made recently about raising the voices of those outside the 
global north in academic debate. In this book, I use practitioner perspectives 
as voices of authority and treat them as theorists in their own right in their 
reflections on their practice. Some filmmakers referred to theorists themselves, 
citing Western thinkers such as Deleuze and Lacan as well as Sufi philosophy. In 
their films made in crisis conditions, we can recognize elements of critical theory 
which they lived ‘in a very embodied way’.107 Conversely, talking to them led me 
to reflect on how critical theory takes shape in situated contexts; as mentioned 
in Chapter 4, much twentieth-century French critical thought was formed in 
Algeria with the help of native ‘informants’ whose intellectual contribution 
was barely acknowledged. The major ideas and interviews in this book are 
constructed through situated encounters between myself and the filmmakers, 
co-produced with them as interlocutors rather than informants.
Organization of the book
This book’s goal is not a comprehensive study of filmmaking in the region but, 
rather, a theoretical framework for analysing cinematic freedom of expression 
that may be useful beyond this corpus of films and filmmakers. Despite the 
Middle East’s interconnectedness as a cultural sphere, there is a tendency to treat 
these cinemas hermetically in national cinema or area studies; there are even 
few comparative studies of Arab and Iranian cinemas. This book’s comparative 
approach illuminates transnational similarities and differences within the region 
and beyond. As we will see, Iranian cinema is an exemplary model of inspiration 
and practice for many Arab filmmakers.
Each of my nine chapters focuses on a creative strategy that filmmakers have 
adopted in response to constraints. The nine creative strategies studied here are 
not exhaustive but rather indicative of the many possibilities. These strategies 
do not exist in isolation, but often intersect with each other and a given film 
could potentially use several. Each chapter shows how the creative strategies 
have emerged out of earlier world cinema practices, gesturing to the cinematic 
histories of these crisis-images, and explores case-study films in close analysis 

Introduction
25
through attention to their material production circumstances. The case-study 
films have been chosen to illustrate the possibilities of the creative strategy 
with which the chapter deals, with the purpose of fleshing out my theoretical 
framework. The choices are inevitably shaped by my own physical and cinematic 
journeys through the region and what I had access to. Many other examples 
could be offered, both from those countries that I have discussed and others, so 
I hope that my analysis will provoke debates about other films in the region and 
elsewhere in relation to their constraints and creative strategies.
Chapter 1 introduces my argument that films bear an indexical relationship 
to their constraints and crisis conditions through the creative strategy of 
witnessing. My first two case studies, 5 Broken Cameras (2011) and For Sama 
(2019), are constructed from conflict footage filmed in situ in Palestine and Syria, 
respectively, by filmmakers identifying as citizen journalists and retrospectively 
shaped into cinematic narratives through collaboration with foreign co-directors; 
I explore the constraints and possibilities of these relationships in what Tamur 
Ashuri and Amit Pinchevski call the field of media witnessing. In the second set 
of case studies, Whose Country (2016), and Freedom Fields (2018), set in Egypt 
and Libya, respectively, I show how these documentaries witness unexpected 
turbulent changes in both their content and style.
In Chapter 2, I explore the use of child protagonists to overcome societal, 
political and infrastructural constraints, identifying a shift from their earlier 
allegorical deployment to a more direct, experiential one that emphasizes their 
responses to crises that they witness (War Canister (2013), Capernaum (2018), 
300 Miles (2016)). I argue that children’s license to say the unsayable and do what 
cannot be done becomes even more direct and politicized in a shift towards teen 
protagonists (Wadjda (2012), Ava (2017) and Amal (2017)).
Animation creates its own world by hand or computer; Chapter 3 investigates 
how it offers a creative solution to constraints such as missing footage, restricted 
access and the need for anonymity as well as censorship, in the case studies The 
Green Wave (2010), Tehran Taboo (2017), The Wanted 18 (2014) and Suleima 
(2014). Chapter 4 focuses on psychogeography, a tactic that explores psychological 
and historical layers beneath official narratives of places by travelling around 
them and recording their ambiance. It discusses psychogeography as a way of 
‘witnessing’ cities undergoing crisis that is more direct than allegory although 
less direct than the reportage-style witnessing in Chapter 1, as exemplified by 
Writing on the City (2012), Tehran: City of Love (2018), Panoptic (2017), In the 
Last Days of the City (2016) and A Day and a Button (2015). Continuing the 
theme of travel, Chapter 5 turns to tactical insights that filmmakers have drawn 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
26
from the road movie genre, used to overcome various obstacles to freedom 
of speech and movement in Speed Sisters (2015), Taxi Tehran (2015), Three 
Centimetres (2018), From A to B (2014) and Mondial 2010 (2013).
While witnessing is a thread that runs through the book, Chapters  6–9 
place greater emphasis on storytelling constraints and strategies. Chapter  6 
describes humour as a tactic deployed in different comic modes matched to 
filmmakers’ purposes and extent of free expression in their working contexts: 
from direct satire that mocks the powerful and punctures spectacles of power 
(Top Goon: Diaries of a Little Dictator (2011–12)) to surrealist humour that 
exposes situational absurdity (It Must Be Heaven (2019), Ave Maria (2015) 
and Pig (2018)) and indirect modes of deadpan humour and romantic comedy 
(Tehran: City of Love (2018) and Barakah Meets Barakah (2016)). Chapter  7 
turns to stories within stories as a versatile storytelling tactic in crisis conditions, 
capable of being shuffled in any order, sharing multiple perspectives and 
dodging censorship (Profession: Documentarist (2014), Queens of Syria (2014), 
Tales (2014)). Archival strategies create films from existing footage; Chapter 8 
explores storytelling from electronic archives as a means of accessing alternative 
microhistories of contested events and bypassing production constraints, 
as shown in The Three Disappearances of Soad Hosni (2011), Silvered Water, 
Syria Self-Portrait (2014) and Ayouni (2020). Finally, Chapter 9 examines sci-
fi dystopia: when reality becomes stranger than fiction, filmmakers can make 
creative use of ‘found’ dystopias for commentary upon present-day crises, as we 
will see in Atomic Heart Mother (2015), Dreamaway (2018), Nation Estate (2013) 
and Submarine (2016).

In the documentary Syria’s Disappeared (2017), Mansour Omari, a Syrian 
detention centre survivor, relates how he smuggled out a garment sewn from his 
fellow prisoners’ rags bearing their names that they had inscribed in their own 
blood and rust from their cells. The regime kept records of its tens of thousands 
of detainees but denied their families knowledge of arrests. By carrying this 
evidence into the outside world and living to tell the story himself, Omari is 
a powerful witness of activists’ enforced disappearance in post-uprising Syria. 
Syria’s Disappeared juxtaposes such survivor testimony with the story of an 
international war crimes investigation into abandoned intelligence documents 
found during the war that are matched with thousands of photographs 
documenting tortured corpses taken by a regime defector codenamed Caesar. 
With this insider evidence, the film bears witness to regime crimes and appeals 
to the international community for release of remaining detainees and justice for 
them and their families.
Both documentary filmmaking and journalism frequently engage in 
witnessing practices. As Barbie Zelizer claims, the phrase ‘they were there’ 
bears ‘special resonance for journalists’, indicating ‘a physical presence that 
enables reporters to accomplish newswork.’1 In the web 2.0 era, moreover, 
anyone possessing a portable camera or mobile phone can document crisis and 
instantaneously share images online. The term ‘citizen journalist’ conjures up an 
ordinary person ‘unexpectedly caught up’ in moments of crisis and compelled 
to bear witness, contributing insider, ‘bottom up’ perspectives in contrast to the 
top/down, outsider views of professional news corporations.2 Witnessing has 
been taken up with particular urgency in the Middle East, where state media are 
not trusted to cover events truthfully. In Palestine, filming and uploading citizen 
videos with eyewitness testimony of atrocities by Israeli soldiers and settlers has 
become an established practice for combating Israeli media hegemony. Since the 
2009 Iranian protests, videos documenting demonstrations and state repression 
­1
Witnessing

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
28
have proliferated, including footage of the death of Neda Agha-Soltan, a young 
woman shot by security forces in Iran in 2009, of the 2011 Maspero Massacre in 
Egypt, uploaded to YouTube by the video collective Mosireen and of a woman, 
Malak Alawiye, kicking a ministerial bodyguard brandishing an assault rifle 
during the 2019 Lebanese protests. These captured moments had transformative 
effects on narratives of those events.
Witnessing is one of the most prevalent creative strategies emerging from 
filmmakers in the region and the closest to journalism, especially citizen 
journalism, although some scholars have disputed the validity of this label for 
diverse output produced by assorted parties in these conflicts.3 While there are 
important differences between short videos that witness on the spot, reacting 
to events as they happen, and feature-length films made over a longer duration 
that retrospectively shape the rushes into a story, this chapter emphasizes links 
between them, as footage from the former inspires and forms the raw material 
of the latter and several filmmakers have been involved in both stages. My first 
set of case studies is works by two filmmakers who can be considered ‘citizen 
journalists’: the Palestinian director Emad Burnat, who worked as a volunteer 
for Reuters news agency as he documented protests against the Israeli Separation 
Wall being built in Bil‘in, his West Bank village, footage that he subsequently 
turned into the film 5 Broken Cameras (2011) with his Israeli co-director Guy 
Davidi, and the Syrian filmmaker Waad al-Kateab, who sent her footage of the 
siege in the Syrian city of Aleppo to the UK’s Channel 4 and later co-directed 
the documentary For Sama (2019) with British filmmaker Edward Watts. Al-
Kateab has publicly embraced the identity of citizen journalist, describing 
herself as such in her biography on her ‘Action for Sama’ website and in award 
acceptance speeches.4 The chapter’s second set of case studies are documentaries 
that witness countries in transition: Whose Country? (2016) and Freedom Fields 
(2018), filmed by the Egyptian director Mohamed Siam and British-Libyan 
director Naziha Arebi in post-uprising Egypt and Libya, respectively. Siam 
and Arebi see themselves as filmmakers rather than journalists, while Sara 
Afshar, the British-Iranian director of Syria’s Disappeared, positions her work 
as investigative journalism, evoking the professional rigour and neutrality 
associated with that field. As we will see, tensions between filmmaking, activism 
and (citizen) journalism are intrinsic to cinematic witnessing, registered in each 
of these films and their production conditions.
My approach to witnessing differs from the idea of ‘representational limits’ 
in Holocaust studies influential in scholarly literature on other conflicts since 
the Second World War, which posits that certain overwhelming experiences are 

Witnessing
29
beyond the realms of representation and make bearing witness an impossibility.5 
This Western, modernist framework is not suited to all types of witnessing and 
cannot account for the specific challenges and conditions of filming in crisis 
zones. In my conceptualization, witnessing is a direct strategy intended to 
capture the onslaught of conflict and other crises. Traditionally, a witness is a 
first-hand observer who recounts what they have experienced with their own 
eyes. However, in the enlarged understanding of who or what can be a witness 
generated by new technologies, a camera or other device can fulfil the role, 
capable of bearing witness even without human presence.6 As a photographic 
medium, film automatically registers traces of events it captures; in the digital 
era, this indexical relationship with the object photographed, far from being lost, 
is retained in the camera’s digital file. Moreover, films do not just bear traces 
of what they represent; their production circumstances leave material residues 
on them. Just as the garment that Mansour Omari smuggled out of the Syrian 
detention centre contains remnants not only of those people and events, but also 
the limited technology available to record them, so films act as witnesses to their 
constraints, which they register in their content and style.
The constraints of witnessing in protests and conflict zones can be likened 
to another form of street-based witnessing: political graffiti. Both graffiti and 
cinematic witnessing are forms of underground culture, produced without 
official permission, circumventing state censorship and monopoly of official 
media. Like graffiti art, witnessing deploys basic equipment (a small digital 
camera or mobile phone) because of economic exigencies and security risks. 
Working in public spaces under dangerous conditions, graffiti artists and video-
makers also operate under time constraints, necessitating speed and secrecy to 
avoid lethal violence. During Iran’s 2009 protests, filming furtively from windows 
and balconies of homes and offices was a way of testing the waters before being 
emboldened to capture events from the ground.7 On the streets, protesters raised 
their hands to film with their phones, or videoed clandestinely from devices 
hidden in their shirt pockets, as Syrian activist Bassel Safadi demonstrates in the 
documentary Ayouni (2020). These constraints leave their imprint on witnessing 
styles, resulting in characteristics such as blurriness, unstable framing and 
variable sound.
Being there and risking their lives was part of the mission on which many of 
these filmmakers embarked. Their witnessing approaches martyrdom, a radical 
act of self-sacrifice; notably, in Arabic and Persian, the word ‘martyr’ (shahīd) 
derives from ‘witness’ (shāhid).8 Across the region, ‘martyr’ commonly refers to 
anyone ‘who puts his or her body on the line of defence against brutal repression’.9 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
30
The uprisings broke protesters’ barriers of fear from decades of authoritarian 
rule and censorship, although risks and penalties intensified. Being caught 
while documenting protests and regime atrocities could result in imprisonment, 
confiscation of one’s cameras and hard drives and even death. Under such 
extreme repression, anonymity is often necessary. As Joshka Wessels remarks, 
writing of Syria, while earlier creative resistance was ‘an indirect and coded 
protest against the authoritarian regime’, witnessing was a direct protest: rather 
than coding their work, video-makers ‘coded themselves’ with pseudonyms, as 
using real names would imperil them.10 However, filmmakers manage risks not 
only to themselves but also to those they film, as we will see in the case studies.
The style of witnessing videos has been compared to the filmmaking 
movements cinéma vérité, Third Cinema (with its aesthetics of imperfection) 
and Dogme ‘95. The documentary movement cinéma vérité, distinguished from 
observational ‘fly-on-the-wall’ Direct Cinema by filmmakers’ interactions with 
their subjects, arose in the wake of 1960s leftist political struggles and the advent 
of handheld 16 mm cameras that facilitated a similar immediacy in low-budget, 
street-level shooting that small digital cameras are renowned for today. As Kari 
Andén-Papadopoulos writes, the ‘verité aesthetic’ of citizen videos ‘heightens the 
effect of “realness” and “closeness” already so powerfully signified by the sense of 
viewing events from the involved perspective of those who lived or experienced 
a crisis as it was actually happening’.11 Sixteen-millimetre technology was also 
adopted for capturing revolutionary struggles against colonialism in 1960s and 
1970s Third Cinema. In his manifesto ‘For an Imperfect Cinema’ (1969), Cuban 
filmmaker Julio García Espinosa called for a politically committed cinema 
that no longer abides by mainstream cinema’s rules of technical perfection nor 
standards of taste and artistic quality needed for endorsement by elite culture.12 
Drawing parallels with Third Cinema, Hamid Naficy claims that Green 
Movement videos’ ‘aesthetics of imperfection’ heightened their witnessing 
power, while Chad Elias and Zaher Omareen have adopted the term ‘Imperfect 
Cinema’ for amateur videos from the Syrian Revolution which, they say, express 
‘a new audiovisual language . . . tied to the technological and aesthetic properties 
of the mobile phone’.13 Meanwhile, in his performance/lecture The Pixelated 
Revolution, Lebanese artist Rabih Mroué has linked Syrian videos to Dogme ‘95 
whose rules, as we saw in this book’s Introduction, stipulate various technical 
restrictions as a provocation to filmmakers to renew their art.
Several critics have objected to such comparisons, arguing that witnessing 
videos are determined merely by ‘necessity’ and ‘limitations’, ruling out 
‘voluntary and premeditated stylistic choices’ that usually accompany a film’s 

Witnessing
31
making: ‘The luxury of cinema is not allowed to those who record in the fatal 
conditions of a war’, they claim.14 The objections raise questions of the videos 
such as ‘Is this cinema or not?’ and ‘Are the producers filmmakers or not?’ There 
are terminological shifts: for example, Naficy describes practitioners as ‘filmers’ 
or ‘videographers’ rather than ‘filmmakers’, while retaining the word ‘cinema’ for 
the overall phenomenon.15 On the other hand, Mohammed Ali Atassi asserts 
a stronger view that such videos ‘belong to a world far different from that of 
cinema . . . Their producers usually do not term their productions “films”, and 
they do not identify as filmmakers.’16
So is this cinema or not? The exclusions we make when we deem something 
isn’t cinema relate to the ideological standards that García Espinosa critiqued 
in his manifesto and what William Brown has more recently called ‘non-
cinema’; Brown argues that the latter’s marginality serves capitalist imperatives, 
although ‘there is much that is cinematic in non-cinema as there are non-
cinematic aspects in cinema’.17 Instead of opting for one or the other, I want 
to emphasize the tensions between cinema and non-cinema, filmmakers 
and non-filmmakers. As García Espinosa remarked back in 1969, ‘we are 
filmmakers because we have been part of a minority which has had the time 
and the circumstances needed to develop, within itself, an artistic culture; and 
because the material resources of film technology are limited and therefore 
available to some, not to all.’18 Even then, he speculated that the evolution of 
film technology might lead to it no longer being ‘the privilege of a small few’. As 
economic and technological constraints have changed, so have possibilities of 
cinematic creativity for everyone, no longer restricted to specialists. The body 
of witnessing videos is produced by diverse actors, who are not merely recording 
events but sharing their dreams of a better future during demonstrations and 
their ordeals during times of bodily injury, funerals, gunfire and air attacks: 
a form of creative agency. While many of them have not been educated in 
filmmaking, some were already professional filmmakers. Others are self-
trained, and some of these, such as Syrian director Orwa al-Mokdad, identify 
as filmmakers and see themselves as making conscious artistic decisions.19 
Moreover, partnerships form between these groups; for example, Little Gandhi 
(2016) was directed by émigré Syrian director Sam Kadi over Skype supported 
by video activists on the ground during the Syrian conflict.20 Further, as we will 
see in 5 Broken Cameras and For Sama, filmmakers from the region and foreign 
co-producers and co-directors collaborate, although not without tensions and 
controversy about how their witnessing footage is shaped into a cinematic 
narrative for wider audiences.

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
32
As Georgina Van Welie, co-writer of Whose Country?, states, ‘In work like 
this, it is not always about choices; it’s about opportunities – you go in and you 
get footage that you can and you can’t get more than that, as opposed to choosing 
settings freely’.21 Yet even when the filmmaking context is dictated by conflict 
and changing political circumstances, it still presents choices, as Naziha Arebi, 
director of Freedom Fields, recalls, ‘When you’re up against those constraints, 
you have to make quick decisions from a smaller range of options.’22 Like graffiti, 
which few would argue is not creative despite its often hasty execution, witnessing 
has both artistic and constricting possibilities; these are not mutually exclusive. 
Comparisons with Dogme 95 are pertinent, because they remind us that the 
work of image-makers of all kinds is shaped by constraints, some chosen and 
some externally imposed. In the words of British-Palestinian director Yasmin 
Fedda who led the 2015 workshops for Syria’s Mobile Phone Film Festival, these 
witnessing videos testify to a ‘will to create’ despite these constraints.23 Further, 
as we will see in the case studies, when witnessing footage is incorporated into 
professionally produced films, with its markers of uncertainty, haste and lack of 
technical polish indicating circumstances under which it was shot, this itself is a 
stylistic choice and can present creative opportunities.
Despite proliferating more than ever before thanks to new technologies, 
acts of witnessing are mediated in their journey from crisis zones to audiences. 
Tamur Ashuri and Amit Pinchevski’s concept of witnessing as a ‘field’ of 
unevenly distributed resources and power struggles between different agents, 
each with their own goals and agendas, helps to illuminate ‘the possibilities 
and constraints’ in this media landscape although, as my case studies show, 
practitioner interviews add nuance to this theoretical framework.24 Eyewitnesses 
strive to gain access to mediators – here, TV networks and other news outlets, 
NGOs and film festivals – in order to mobilize international solidarity and action, 
and mediators seek compelling images from eyewitnesses. In these asymmetric 
relations, mediators wield more power, yet mediators and eyewitnesses are 
mutually dependent. Eyewitnesses are uniquely advantaged by having ‘been 
there’, although entering the field and getting heard is a struggle. For their part, 
mediators rely on eyewitnesses to relay events on the ground.25
Mediators act as gatekeepers, who select, commission, edit, upload, 
broadcast and archive testimonies, and train and equip citizen witnesses. It is 
mostly they who shape a narrative from ‘otherwise chaotic event[s]’, providing 
a platform for it to be witnessed by others.26 Witness videos uploaded by 
broadcasters and other media organizations appear far higher in search 
results than those uploaded by witnesses themselves.27 Such is the power of 
the platform. Television networks also incorporate footage into standard 

Witnessing
33
news reporting format or can issue directives about filming and choice of 
subject matter when commissioning. News and current affairs programmes, 
in particular, are driven by what is new. For Sara Afshar, this made it harder 
to pitch her documentary Syria’s Disappeared, since it was about an ongoing 
issue, even though it presented new evidence. It also coincided with a time 
when fascination with ISIS was dominating mainstream media and young 
Britons were travelling to Syria as ISIS recruits. Afshar’s documentary lacked 
this British ‘angle’ that national broadcasters were looking for. Nonetheless, 
almost all the broadcasters she approached understood the wider significance 
of her story and were willing, in the end, to commission it.28
The crisis of witnessing
In al-Mokdad’s documentary 300 Miles (2016), an activist, Adnan, bemoans 
worldwide apathy to Syrians’ plight: ‘If only someone in Japan cared!’ Yet, 
he confesses that he has never cared about distant wars and crises. Syrian 
activists have found that their witnessing videos have not become ‘the agents 
of change’ that they believed they would at the revolution’s start.29 Their 
feelings are shared by other filmmakers and activists in the region, aware of 
the energy and risk it takes ‘to capture a story that might not make a difference 
anyway’.30 Paradoxically, while the visibility of suffering via circulation 
of documentaries, NGO and news images has gone up, actual conditions 
have worsened around the region. For Gil Hochberg, this casts doubts on 
witnessing’s political efficacy; the problem is no longer that the world doesn’t 
see – the crisis of witnessing associated with the Holocaust – but that ‘the 
world spends too much time seeing, and that this seeing serves no political 
intervention’.31
However, lack of political intervention cannot be solely blamed on the 
inefficacy of witnessing. Framing by mediators often makes it difficult for 
audiences to grasp what is happening in conflict zones. Lilie Chouliaraki’s study 
of UK newspapers’ reporting of the August 2013 chemical weapons attack in 
the Damascus suburb of Ghouta, Syria, shows that only half of them placed the 
story on their front pages. Their coverage, moreover, did not ‘personalize those 
dead: we know nothing about them, their lives and histories. As a consequence, 
we may be appalled by these mass killings, but we are not invited to relate to the 
victims as human beings’.32 The people who died just became statistics. Outrage 
‘compellingly registered’ in video footage by Syrian activists serving as the story’s 
source was half-heartedly taken up, pointing to a ‘selective humanization’ at the 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
34
core of Western journalistic practices: some deaths are viewed with indifference, 
if not satisfaction, some are fully mourned and commemorated, and others are 
mentioned but ultimately forgotten.33
Moreover, in the social media era, images tend to become detached from 
their context; they ‘circulate rather than communicate’.34 Although suspicion of 
images predates the digital, dating back to earlier debates about photographic 
authenticity, doubts about their veracity have spiralled, marking the rise of 
what Adi Kuntsman and Rebecca Stein call ‘digital suspicion’, expressed in 
allegations of doctoring and Photoshop manipulation.35 Kuntsman and Stein 
are interested not in whether images are actually true or fake, but rather in ‘the 
political framework’ in which digital suspicion is mobilized, as states exploit 
doubt regarding digital images in order to neutralize oppositional voices. For 
example, in Israeli social media, hoax pictures of dead and injured Palestinians 
circulating on the Internet have been taken as evidence that all such images are 
fakes – part of a longer history of Zionist suspicion of Palestinian narratives 
that holds Palestinian eyewitnesses to be ‘unreliable’ in order to deny their 
claims of indigeneity, land rights and Israeli aggression. Similarly, the Syrian 
government and its supporters have used video hoaxes purporting to come from 
Syria as proof that all such footage is fake, thus supporting the state’s official 
perspective that there is no revolution, just a ‘media conspiracy’, and that it is 
fighting terrorism: the choice is Assad or Islamic extremists. Established before 
the rise of ISIS, this narrative has been amplified through international media by 
foreign journalists embedded with the regime. As Chouliaraki’s analysis shows, a 
range of Western media tends to doubt the credibility of Syrian activists’ footage, 
responding lukewarmly to its moral demands. Even though the Ghouta chemical 
attack videos were verified by British journalist Eliot Higgins (who later founded 
the investigative journalism website Bellingcat), that technical proof was not 
sufficient to authenticate them for everyone.36 Paradoxically, questions of whom 
we trust are subjective and are not settled by verification (although that work 
is important and necessary). As we will see in For Sama, establishing trust is 
crucial to successful witnessing.
The relative lack of international response to the Syrian crisis can be better 
explained by a lack of political will to hold the regime accountable, vetoes 
by Assad’s powerful ally Russia on the UN Security Council and fiascos of 
preceding wars in Afghanistan, Iraq and Libya. According to Marc Lynch, 
Libya was ‘a decisive turning point’ in the region showing, first, that protests 
could lead to external action and, second, that intervention could descend into 
civil war; it also ‘led Russia to block further such United Nations resolutions’.37 

Witnessing
35
Despite scepticism surrounding witnessing, images from the uprisings have 
spurred action and intervention, as protests across the region inspired each 
other. As Libyan filmmaker Mohammed Maklouf declares, ‘if we didn’t see 
these images, which changed people’s minds around the world, nothing would 
have happened’.38 Witnessing does work. For Leshu Torchin, claims about the 
crisis of witnessing are short-sighted ‘in the face of longstanding history of the 
use of film in the formation of public opinion and witnessing publics’.39 Mere 
exposure of suffering is not sufficient; there is, she emphasizes, a need for 
practical strategies – shaping images into powerful stories to make testimony 
compelling and targeting it strategically to mobilize specific audiences in desired 
ways. Aside from the usual festival, theatrical and community screenings, TV 
broadcast and Internet streaming, this may involve private screenings for policy 
and decision-makers. Moreover, witnessing is most effective when it is part of 
a wider campaign: ‘material practices that accompany watching’ are crucial to a 
film’s efficacy, not merely the act of watching itself.40
Due to a pessimism about witnessing, several scholars have posited a shift 
away from first-hand witnessing of crisis towards more self-reflexive, hybrid and 
experimental engagements later on.41 The argument often implies that witnessing 
is somehow superseded by more sophisticated modes of expression. However, 
changing circumstances often demand a return to a position of witnessing, as 
I learnt from Khalid Abdalla, who performed in and co-produced In the Last 
Days of the City (2016), a hybrid of fiction and documentary produced just 
before the Egyptian Revolution when direct witnessing was not possible except 
under immediate threat of imprisonment, so the filmmakers had to adopt a 
different way of ‘making things visible’.42 After the revolution started, he and 
others switched to witnessing as part of the Mosireen collective, stepping from ‘a 
moment of fiction’ to ‘a moment of documentary, where the camera’s role was to 
do its best to capture first of all the moment that was being lived’:
Actors who were in our film were imprisoned. And you had to film testimonies 
to make sure that they could be released. From very simple things like that 
to working to dismantle narratives upon which authority is claimed. For 
example, the military taking the moral high ground to dispel accusations of 
torture, saying they could never do such a thing. But then you go and interview 
someone who has been tortured and it’s clear that they’re lying. Likewise, 
the streets became a place where things you could only dream of filming are 
suddenly being said, right there, or have become possible to capture as images. 
All you need to do is go out, film it, then put it out into the world to mean 
everything that you want to say.43

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
36
Witnessing arises from an urgent sense of political and ethical responsibility; 
it captures what reality is offering then and there, when conditions permit. 
According to Abdalla, although fiction and documentary are always capable 
of combining in hybrid forms, witnessing as a direct form of expression takes 
precedence at those opportune moments, contrasting with fiction, which is 
suited to when reality is not expressing what you want to say and you need to 
(re)create it.
Citizen journalist filmmaking: 5 Broken Cameras  
and For Sama
For me it is not a film, it’s my story.
Emad Burnat44
Witnessing as an urgent calling pervades 5 Broken Cameras (2011), Emad 
Burnat’s first-person eyewitness account of protests against the Israeli separation 
barrier (also known as ‘the Wall’) in the Palestinian West Bank village of Bil‘in. 
Here the Wall was routed to separate Bil‘in from an Israeli settlement, cutting off 
the villagers from half of their agricultural land. ‘Whenever anything happens 
in the village, my instinct is to film it’, Burnat, an olive farmer by trade, explains 
in the movie. Using his personal cameras to record the footage, his testimony 
of the protest movement and confrontations with the Israeli military takes us 
into the conflict’s frontline. Burnat had a press permit as he had worked as a 
volunteer for Reuters for two years, sending them footage of the protests. He 
learnt filmmaking that way, but otherwise had no formal training. As Bil‘in 
protests attracted attention from Israeli and international activists, some came to 
participate and make films, and Burnat lent them parts of his footage. Eventually, 
he decided to transform the 700 hours of footage he had shot over a five-year 
period into his own documentary: ‘The media only give you one part of the 
truth. I wanted to tell my own story and work more freely.’45 He sought to use the 
camera as a ‘witness and for change’, to open the world’s eyes to the injustice of 
Palestinian land being stolen to build Israeli settlements and the Israeli army’s 
use of teargas and live ammunition against non-violent protesters.
The film opens with pixelated images, by which we realize we are seeing 
through the aperture of a damaged camera, hit by Israeli bullets. During the 
demonstrations, Burnat’s cameras are broken, one after another. The third 
camera saves his life when a soldier shoots at him and the bullet gets lodged 
inside. His other cameras are struck by teargas canisters or smashed by soldiers 

Witnessing
37
or settlers. Divided into segments, each corresponding to footage captured by 
successive broken cameras, the film closes with intertitles that inform us of 
their fate. While filming with the sixth, Burnat was hit by a stun grenade, but 
the camera was unharmed and carried on filming. At first, he believed that the 
camera could be ‘a strong witness’ for use in court and serve as a shield against 
violations: ‘When I film, I feel like the camera protects me. But it’s an illusion’, 
he says in his voice-over, as neither the camera nor presence of international 
and Israeli activists creates immunity from soldiers’ violence. The camera itself 
is a fragile, material object. As a witness, it not only captures events, but also 
bears the material wear and tear of the battle. When Burnat’s friend Adeeb is 
shot in the leg, it focuses on his wounds, in testimony to his bodily suffering. 
The tragic death of Bassem Abu Rahma (nicknamed El Fil, ‘the elephant’), a 
well-known protester and Burnat’s friend, is also caught on camera: the Bil‘in 
protests’ first ‘martyr’.
Within the film we can see some of the challenges Burnat faced. He is 
shot at, arrested and at risk of being killed. Under house arrest, he keeps the 
camera running. At other times, he is forbidden from filming, as Israeli soldiers 
declare that the area is under ‘military closure’ and shut down the camera or 
confiscate it, all forms of pre-emptive censorship. Burnat reported to me that 
he had been beaten up several times by both soldiers and settlers who tried to 
stop him filming and seized his camera; nonetheless, he endured these dangers 
in order to witness: ‘You risk your life. I accept that.’46 In addition, there were 
political pressures from the Palestinian Authority, which would not sponsor 
him; as Burnat says in voice-over within the film, ‘If you don’t fit the resistance 
image, you’re on your own’. He filmed for five years without any funding, while 
supporting his family under harsh economic circumstances. ‘How do you get 
new cameras when you have no money?’ he asked me.47
While the news tends to focus exclusively on violent events, 5 Broken 
Cameras also gives us a sense of what everyday family life is like under these 
pressures. Burnat bought his first camera to film his youngest son Gibreel, born 
just as protests began in 2005. Gibreel’s early years coincide with the five years of 
protest documented in the film; footage of him growing up marks the passage of 
time and culminates in his fifth birthday. As he gets older, he joins the protests, 
sees people he knows getting arrested and shot at, and starts asking questions 
about soldiers, learning about life’s injustices. Despite the bleak reality, the film 
avoids reducing its characters to the singular identity of victims by emphasizing 
their agency and creative resistance. In order to claim Palestinian land, settlers 
lay down trailers, a strategy that the protesters adopt and turn against their 
oppressors, graffitiing the words ‘Welcome to Bil‘in’ on their own trailers. For 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
38
Burnat, it was important to show this creativity as it was one of the reasons why 
Bil‘in became an inspiring symbol of non-violent resistance. The film itself is 
part of a wider campaign created by Bil‘in’s Committee of Popular Resistance 
against the Wall and Settlements, which organizes weekly protests and embraces 
non-violent, creative ways to further its cause.
It was Burnat’s co-director Guy Davidi who suggested structuring the 
footage through the broken cameras.48 Davidi was an Israeli video activist who 
had participated in the protests. Burnat approached him because he needed a 
producer (following a meeting with the Israeli-owned production company 
Greenhouse) and he thought Davidi could help to screen the film in Israel and 
change the mentality there. Davidi therefore came on board after Burnat’s five-
year shoot. They completed the first edit together at Burnat’s house. The script, 
including the voice-over, was written after the edit. Davidi claims he wrote it, 
then Burnat reviewed it.49 However, Burnat stresses its collaborative nature, 
arguing that Davidi could not have written the script on his own because it 
expresses inner feelings, ‘telling our story from the inside’ in a way that would be 
impossible for outsiders. He accepts that Davidi did offer ideas to make the film 
‘more powerful’ by recommending that Burnat should be at its centre: ‘He told 
me it is my story, my experience, so he gave me the idea to show more footage 
of myself, like my accident’.50 In this episode, Burnat crashes a tractor into the 
separation barrier. Paradoxically, this saves his life because it entitles him to 
be treated at an Israeli hospital; if he had been taken to an ‘average Palestinian 
hospital’, he probably would not have survived. Initially, Burnat was resistant: ‘I 
didn’t want to focus on this side of the story. It’s not easy to show myself bleeding 
at the hospital’.51 He was concerned that fellow Palestinians, for whom this is a 
collective struggle, might wonder why he had made it a story about himself.
Yael Friedman has argued that, despite Davidi’s pro-Palestinian politics and 
his belief that he empowered Burnat’s voice, the duo’s collaboration reflects 
colonial power dynamics: a collective, Third World struggle has been shaped into 
a Westernized personal story, the fault lines of which appear in the disjunction 
between the film’s activist images and its audio track with its contemplative 
voice-over and message of healing and reconciliation.52 My conversations with 
Burnat corroborate his difficult relationship with Davidi, although he insists that 
his family was always going to be the through-line, especially Gibreel growing 
up. In the film’s production and distribution, Burnat also faced linguistic 
challenges related to colonial dynamics. When he and Davidi worked together, 
they communicated in Hebrew, a language Burnat learnt while employed as a 
landscape gardener in Israel. Later, when they began doing Q&As internationally, 

Witnessing
39
Burnat felt disadvantaged because Davidi’s English was better and therefore, 
initially, he had less control of how the film was presented. When I met him, 
several years on, Burnat was still tirelessly touring the film, now on his own (and 
with excellent command of English).
Although funders were initially reluctant to finance a film about Palestine 
until convinced of the story’s strength by a trailer, neither they nor Greenhouse 
pressured the filmmakers to change the storyline – Burnat was adamant that 
he would never accept such an imposition. With no Palestinian film funds that 
he could feasibly draw upon, he decided to take Israeli funding (along with 
European funding) in order to facilitate screenings for Israeli audiences, one of 
the most important witnessing publics for this film. One major drawback of this, 
however, was the film’s subsequent classification as Israeli, preventing it from 
being screened in Arab countries.
In Israel, 5 Broken Cameras was shown on television and in cinemas. While 
its reception in Israel was mixed, the film was very successful internationally. In 
2013, it was Oscar-nominated for Best Documentary Feature and the directors 
jointly won numerous other awards, including the 2013 International Emmy. 
It was even screened at the European Parliament. Burnat recognizes that the 
creative choices that he and Davidi took have strengthened the film’s power to 
move international audiences. According to him, the film has changed some 
people’s minds, but not the reality on the ground: ‘The situation is getting worse 
every day.’53 The villagers still face Israeli occupation, together with expansion of 
settlements and confiscation of their land. As regional crises have proliferated, 
Burnat believes that international attention has shifted from Palestine to other 
countries; now the challenge is to keep it in the spotlight. For him, the villagers’ 
protests in Bil‘in were the inspiration for the ‘Arab Spring’ which came several 
years after their non-violent struggle started: ‘I think this way of resistance 
affected them in these Arab countries. It was effective and they started their own 
revolutions.’54
In 2019, For Sama was released into a media landscape which, by that time, 
had already been ‘saturated’ with images from Syria; the conflict had dropped 
in the news agenda and the global public was reportedly tired of hearing 
about it. The film’s creative choices were shaped with this crisis of witnessing 
in mind. It begins with its protagonist and co-director Waad al-Kateab talking 
affectionately to her baby daughter Sama in their bedroom. Suddenly an aerial 
attack is imminent, and she hands Sama to someone else as she grabs her camera, 
and they all make their way to a basement shelter underneath the hospital they 
have made their home, as al-Kateab’s husband, Hamza, is a doctor. The film 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
40
establishes trust in al-Kateab as a witness through her voice-over, which narrates 
her personal account in the present tense, tethered to her thoughts and feelings 
of ‘being there’, while her handheld camera’s blurry, unsteady style registers the 
fear, danger and uncertainty of the impending attack. These techniques confer 
a sense of immediacy that invites us into besieged Eastern Aleppo in ‘a shared 
witnessing perspective’.55
Contrasting with dominant male viewpoints on conflict, For Sama’s 
female, first-person account stands out, especially as a mother’s perspective. 
It is structured as a letter from a mother to her daughter, an epistolary format 
that the Arabic title īlà Sama (‘To Sama’) captures more than the English title 
does. Epistolary devices are not new to crisis cinema; indeed, they are often 
used to bring together protagonists separated in space and time.56 For Sama 
draws its particular power from a mother’s act of telling her child the story 
of her fight for freedom and justice for her country’s future generations. This 
‘very personal and yet, at the same time, universal story’ is ‘key’ to the film’s 
success, as Donatella Della Ratta notes.57 Such a structure was possible because 
al-Kateab had already chosen to record more light-hearted personal moments, 
alongside the bloodshed and destruction, to save them for her daughter and 
give her a more rounded picture of life during these times. Her camera remains 
switched on, even in private moments such as when she discovers from her 
home pregnancy-testing kit that she is pregnant with Sama. The non-linear 
storytelling gives us flashbacks to the Revolution’s early days and up to 2015, 
when the opposition were still hopeful of winning, before returning us to the 
siege in 2016. These tonal shifts transport us from moments of joy and levity 
to moments of mortal danger and gravity and back. The flashbacks reveal the 
beauty of those early experiences despite the pain and hardship. Filmed in 
home interiors, the private moments lend audiences insights into the effects of 
conflict on ordinary lives and contrast with protest footage, which is largely of 
public places.
Al-Kateab’s perspective as a mother is reflected in her choices of what to 
film and the stories she tells. In one scene, a pregnant woman is rushed into the 
hospital in a critical condition. Her baby is apparently stillborn but is repeatedly 
turned upside down and patted until its deathly pale body chokes into life. Al-
Kateab captures the miracle birth and against-odds survival of both mother and 
child. When she films her friend Afraa’s young son, he starts to weep as he voices 
his desire to stay in Aleppo when many of his friends have left. Al-Kateab’s 
hand slips into the frame and gently touches the boy to console him, a gesture 
expressing the film’s care and sincerity towards these testimonies. The crying 

Witnessing
41
mothers and children are not simply victims; they are people whose stories and 
presence demand acknowledgement and sympathetic hearing.
When protests broke out, al-Kateab was in her graduation year at Aleppo 
University and she began filming them on her phone, deciding to put aside 
her studies in order to focus on the revolution. As she told me, ‘This wasn’t 
an individual decision, something that I decided to do for myself’ – thousands 
of people were flocking to the streets to do the same thing, realizing this was 
a ‘unique and important’ period that could alter Syria and the entire region 
following decades of silencing and denial of rights by the regime. ‘We were all 
hearing our voices for the first time and taking the camera was a very simple 
response to what I was seeing in front of my eyes.’58 She tried to capture events 
as they unfurled, uploading her footage to YouTube and sending it to Arab 
television channels. Her cousin, a protest coordinator, warned that she should 
not chant along with protestors if she wanted her footage to be used, since a 
reporter simply observes and also security forces could identify her directly. Yet 
she found she could not separate herself as a filmmaker or journalist. In her 
view, this shaped For Sama’s approach, as it ‘was also relying on the experience 
of that situation, not just being an observer.’59
In 2016, al-Kateab began working as a freelance reporter for Channel 4’s 
series Inside Aleppo. By that time, Russian forces were involved in the bombing. 
Channel 4 was seeking locals who could capture news stories for them, a common 
method of outsourcing when areas are inaccessible to their own correspondents. 
Figure 1.1  For Sama’s first-person, female witness account of the Syrian conflict is 
shaped by Waad al-Kateab’s experience of ‘being there’. For Sama directed by Waad 
al-Kateab and Edward Watts © Channel 4 2019. All Rights Reserved.

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
42
Hearing about Channel 4’s search from a friend, al-Kateab emailed them with 
her details and links to her previous work. They were immediately interested and 
asked her to do more filming for them, which she did. On her part, she could tell 
the relationship was different from her previous experiences with news channels 
which usually ‘talk to you once, take the story, that’s it’.60 Instead, a week later, she 
received an email from Channel 4 news editor Ben de Pear congratulating her on 
her report which had gained one million views. ‘One million people seeing this 
in just week!’ Al-Kateab is still staggered by this.61 Some scenes in For Sama first 
appeared in Inside Aleppo, such as the miracle birth and a hazardous journey 
back to Aleppo from Turkey where al-Kateab and her husband were visiting his 
parents, travelling the last stage by foot and singing a lullaby to Sama to calm 
her during those tense moments. In Inside Aleppo the channel’s own voice-over 
commentary is laid over the footage, as often happens when international media 
incorporate citizen videos, a suppression of their own soundtrack that reduces 
their ‘affective power’.62 However, removing al-Kateab’s voice was necessary at 
that time to protect her identity as she was still in Syria.
Al-Kateab describes her collaboration with Channel 4 as one of mutual 
benefit: there was no other reporter there who could deliver that material for 
them and she was able to amplify her story on their platform. She already had her 
camera kit and all they supplied her with was one lens before the siege occurred. 
They did not tell her what to film but would ask her to follow a particular person 
or to know more about certain matters, and they gave feedback, helping her to 
understand how to structure a story. In contrast to her experiences with other 
channels, they urged her not to take risks in order to film and made efforts to 
get her out of Aleppo by petitioning the UK Parliament and Red Crescent. Yet 
despite their exhortations, danger was everywhere in those circumstances. Even 
the basement shelter was not entirely safe due to the regime’s use of ground-to-
ground rockets to deliver chemical attacks.
During the war, Syria became divided into areas controlled by the regime, the 
Free Syrian Army (FSA) and other opposition groups, Kurdish forces and (from 
2013) ISIS.63 These corresponded to different zones of freedom of expression. In 
Eastern Aleppo, which was partly controlled by the FSA, al-Kateab maintains 
that it was much better than under Assad’s dictatorship: ‘Even for the camera, no 
one can stop you in the street if he has a gun and asks you what you are doing. 
Even if that happens, and it happened a few times’, people would challenge the 
gunmen’s authority to do this, ‘whereas if you were in the regime area filming 
something not permitted, you’d be arrested and no one would know where you 
are.’64 Her view correlates with a poll of Syrian video activists which found that 

Witnessing
43
‘areas where film-makers are most free to film inside Syria are FSA-controlled 
areas’, where filming is permitted everywhere apart from military positions, 
although that freedom is diminished by risks of kidnapping when extremist 
groups are nearby.65
Al-Kateab feels that the war’s challenges were heightened for her as a 
filmmaker and as a woman, especially as a mother. Filming in the hospital, she 
was always encountering the dead and injured from the bombings: ‘Every time 
you see the scenario in front of your eyes, you realize this could be my daughter, 
this could be me’.66 Even when she turned the camera off, she had no escape 
from the situation, unlike filmmakers who come, film and leave. Moreover, as a 
filmmaker, she could not simply forget these scenes: ‘everything you have seen 
with your eyes is recorded and saved and you have it on your laptop and your 
hard drive’ and editing the footage made her relive the trauma.67 Whenever she 
closed her eyes, she knew that was not the end of it; she revisited it every day. It 
was challenging to work in a conservative community where she had to convince 
people that what she was doing was important and ‘I have the right to do this, 
like any male filmmaker.’68 Despite the fact that women had a strong presence 
both as protestors and video activists in the uprisings in Syria and elsewhere in 
the region, some of al-Kateab’s male colleagues in Aleppo preferred her to edit 
their material, although she insisted on capturing and editing her own: ‘They 
said, “We can go outside, risk ourselves and bring you whatever you want – you 
just edit”’.69 These prejudices against women associate them with indoor work: 
editing is an indoor activity, whereas filming entails going outside. When al-
Kateab left Aleppo she discovered that these inequalities extended beyond Syria. 
In 2017, she collected her Royal Television Society (RTS) award for Camera 
Operator of the Year in the UK, the first time that any woman had won the prize: 
‘I was shocked – oh my God, I thought it was just our community. You realize 
this is not a struggle limited to one geography; it’s a life struggle for everyone.’70
What added to the difficulties was that Syrian society was not camera-
friendly. Previously, the camera was an entity controlled by the regime that 
would instruct people what to say and cause trouble if they said anything 
‘wrong’. In building her relationship with the community, al-Kateab had to 
generate understanding that ‘this is something for our use, not for our harm.’71 
A product of many years of dictatorship, this suspicion of cameras is pervasive: 
other Syrian activists have reported that it exists in both regime-controlled and 
liberated areas.72 Al-Kateab explains that the regime targets filmmakers and 
journalists ‘because they didn’t want this story to be saved. But also, if under any 
circumstances, I was arrested with this archive, everyone who appeared in any 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
44
clip would be dead. And that’s a very big responsibility’ for which no assurances 
can be given to anyone.73 Nevertheless, if she did not film what they have been 
through, the story would never be saved ‘not just for today or tomorrow but for 
the next generation’. In one scene in For Sama, a mother arrives at the hospital 
to find her young son is already dead. ‘Wake up, wake up, I’ve brought milk for 
you!’ she cries. She notices al-Kateab. ‘Are you filming?’ she asks, then defies 
expectation by insisting, ‘Carry on!’ Al-Kateab respected the wishes of those 
who did not want to be filmed, either by turning her camera off or labelling the 
footage accordingly. There were many stories that she had to omit due to these 
ethical constraints. During one fateful night when she and her family were away, 
the hospital was bombed, witnessed in the film through the hospital’s security 
cameras. In contrast to restless, choppy handheld footage, a security camera’s 
gaze implies a neutral position, legitimating the act of witnessing in a different 
way during the filmmaker’s absence. The film switches between different security 
cameras on the premises as they capture the unfolding chaos and destruction. 
This material, too, al-Kateab had the presence of mind to store in her archive, 
which consists of over 500 hours of footage. As she only possessed one hard 
drive, it was difficult to keep all the footage secure. On the other hand, making 
backups would have increased risks of the archive falling into the wrong hands. 
When she and her family were evacuated from Aleppo, she thought of burying 
it in the ground and finding a way of retrieving it later. In the end, she gambled 
on taking it with her, despite the perils if she was captured.74
When al-Kateab left Aleppo, she initially felt that her sacrifices had been for 
nothing. Her videos for Inside Aleppo had received half a billion views altogether. 
So many individuals and countries had known what was happening, yet they did 
nothing. What motivated al-Kateab to turn her footage into a larger story was 
realizing the power in her archive. While Inside Aleppo focused on the siege, 
she felt it was important for audiences to know the whole journey from the 
Syrian Revolution, when it all started, in order to grasp why she and Hamza 
took the decisions they did, including their return to Aleppo with their daughter 
(for which she had received some criticism when Inside Aleppo was released).75 
The genesis of For Sama began when she came to the UK for the RTS award 
ceremony and revealed her archive’s existence to Channel 4. Previously, they had 
not known what else she had been filming, since she had only sent them news 
footage of besieged Aleppo. She and the news-team jointly agreed the idea of 
producing a longer piece, initially fifteen or thirty minutes long. However, when 
al-Kateab showed them her material, it became clear that it would need to be 
of feature length. At that point, other organizations became involved, including 

Witnessing
45
ITN and the US channel Frontline PBS, and al-Kateab was introduced to her 
co-director Watts with whom she then worked for two years. As her voice-over 
states in the film, ‘Millions of people see my reports. But no one does anything 
to stop the regime.’ Inside Aleppo made her realize that the situation could not 
be changed in the naïve way that she had hoped – that more was needed to keep 
attention on the story and to apply pressure on politicians. Both she and Watts 
were frequently told ‘there have been enough films about Syria’, warning them 
not to expect much from For Sama. As Watts recollects, ‘It was a travesty to hear 
that because it’s so important for Waad and all of us to witness this story.’76 The 
film’s ‘whole creative approach’, he says, was designed ‘to counter that apathy’.
Some commentators have criticized Watts’s involvement as a white, male, 
British co-director. Della Ratta interprets his role as ‘a guardian, rather than that 
of a peer or co-author’, belonging to a type of ‘neo-orientalism exploiting Syrian 
image-makers who have access to the “field” yet, in the eyes of western media 
industries, are probably not powerful enough to produce a storytelling that would 
be considered compelling and marketable to global audiences.’77 It is true that 
one reason why Channel 4 invited Watts was to ‘translate’ al-Kateab’s story into ‘a 
form that a Western audience could understand’.78 Another was his commitment 
to Syria and his conviction that Western media reporting of the Syrian crisis had 
been obfuscated by Russian and Syrian regime ‘war on terrorism’ propaganda. 
He believed that the public should know that at its core the conflict was about 
‘people like you and me’ fighting for democratic values ‘and we did nothing’.79 As 
we saw with the collaboration between Burnat and Davidi in 5 Broken Cameras, 
shared values do not prevent (neo-)colonial dynamics but although this kind of 
viewpoint has some truth, it lacks nuance as it does not consider the agency of all 
parties involved, the terms on which mediation in the field of witnessing occurs 
for them and the constraints and possibilities.
Al-Kateab and Watts began working together remotely while she was in 
Turkey following her evacuation, and then in person when she claimed asylum 
in the UK.80 Their relationship was adversarial at times. ‘Part of the great fight 
between Ed and me’, al-Kateab says, was turning the film into her personal 
story, which had not been her intention.81 Like Burnat in 5 Broken Cameras, 
al-Kateab wanted it to represent collective struggle, while Watts argued that this 
was best expressed through her own story, which acts as a conduit to collective 
experience. As part of the research process, Watts built up a picture of al-Kateab’s 
life by going through the footage and interviewing her to understand the key 
emotional points for her as well as factual details. One of the earliest ideas was 
to include these interviews to camera in a chronological telling of the story. That 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
46
changed when the ‘For Sama’ idea arrived, after the co-directors had already 
been working together for a year – Watts describes it as ‘a kind of epiphany’ as 
they were immersed in al-Kateab’s footage, the story of Syria and problem of 
how to tell her story.82 As we have seen, her style of filming was already personal 
and became even more so when she became pregnant, imparting a sense of 
dialogue with her unborn child.83 Their decision to structure the film as a letter 
to Sama melded with the way her life was dedicated both to Sama and the future 
of Syria and its children. Watts believed it ‘would help an audience to understand 
the day-to-day dilemmas that Waad was facing: do you run to protect your 
baby or do you stay and fight for their future but risk losing everything? That 
extreme tension was important to convey to the audience and the letter format 
could transmit it.’84 In his words, this approach ‘freed’ them from the country 
and chronology of events, becoming ‘much more about the human dilemma’; 
it enabled them to structure the film as an engaging narrative in five acts, with 
flashbacks: ‘1. Falling in love, 2. Being pregnant, 3. The moment of ultimate 
choice in the siege, 4. The catastrophe, 5. The aftermath.’85
The voice-over idea came later, and they worked on it last. Initially, Watts 
sketched it out, drawing on his interviews that contained al-Kateab’s distinctive 
language and conceptualization of her own thoughts and actions. His script 
flagged what the audience needed to know at particular points and how scene 
transitions could take place. Then, al-Kateab made it hers, offering alternative 
suggestions. Sometimes they had to work harder to find a meeting-point 
between what each of them wanted. When they had finished what they thought 
was the final cut, Watts sent it to an acquaintance whose views he valued as a 
documentary editor, receiving the feedback that the voice-over’s emotional truth 
and intensity could be pushed further. Despite already working on the film for 
two years, an incredibly draining process, al-Kateab agreed to redo the voice-
over, working on it by herself first ‘to dig out the truth of her feelings’, then both 
directors distilled those emotions into the narration.86 As Ashuri and Pinchevski 
note, enunciation of emotional states is crucial to eyewitnesses’ performative 
claims about what they saw when they were there, bringing together witness 
and audience in an ‘experiential closeness’.87 Honing the voice-over made the 
expression of al-Kateab’s feelings more specific, original and intensely personal 
and enhanced her testimony’s credibility.
While the handheld camera weds us to al-Kateab’s perspective much of the 
time, the five acts are punctuated by drone footage revealing the city’s large-scale 
destruction. These drone shots have attracted attention because of a perceived 
contradiction between their grand cinematic quality and the raw immediacy of 

Witnessing
47
warzone witnessing which, some critics believe, excludes creative choices – a 
false dichotomy, as I argued earlier. According to Della Ratta, ‘This drone view 
adds the spectacular to the film and makes it look like a proper mainstream 
documentary made for the consumption of Netflix and other similarly global 
palates.’88 Al-Kateab obtained her drone shots from a friend in Aleppo.89 There, 
activists were using drone technology to document the scale of devastation 
wrought by Russian-aided Syrian regime bombing of the city, and uploading 
their footage to YouTube.90 With the ability to see events from above and from a 
wider angle than possible for a person on the ground, drones ‘send eyes where 
our bodies can’t easily go unencumbered’91 and have extraordinary witnessing 
potential. For Sama’s drone footage was filmed on location while al-Kateab 
was in Aleppo (she and her child even appear in one shot). The drone shots 
have a structuring role, marking transitions between chapters and revealing a 
macro perspective, in contrast to the micro perspective of al-Kateab’s footage, 
‘conveying in a subliminal way that these personal moments are happening 
across the city.’92 Watts also saw them as offering audiences ‘a breathing space’, 
confirming one of Della Ratta’s reservations.93 However, both directors were 
concerned about overwhelming the audience, especially with graphic footage.
Some of their discussions revolved around the witnessing value of graphic 
footage versus engaging the audience with the story. Even with the final 
version, they were convinced, having repeatedly heard about ‘Syria fatigue’, that 
audiences would find it unbearable; they never expected its worldwide release 
and acclaim. Al-Kateab recalls sitting in the audience at the South by Southwest 
Film Festival première in Austin, Texas, waiting to see how many people would 
walk out. Instead, people came to her, moved, asking what they could do: ‘Every 
time I heard this question from someone in the audience I was just, like, I did it, 
I gained what I wanted.’94 It gave her a feeling opposite to her despondency about 
effecting change when she left Aleppo. From the Prix d’oeil at the Cannes Film 
Festival to a BAFTA and Oscar nomination for Best Documentary, For Sama’s 
profile has been raised by multiple awards, attracting more viewers who perhaps 
otherwise would not watch a documentary on Syria.
For Della Ratta, For Sama’s emphasis on motherhood erases the political 
context of the Syrian revolution, ensuring that we see al-Kateab as an individual, 
but not the wider struggle. Her critique highlights how highly charged this 
territory is, when few Syrian films galvanize such attention and many witnesses 
struggle to get heard. It evokes the general pressures on Middle Eastern cinema 
to fit within Western models, which limits what filmmakers are allowed to say 
and how they say it. However, For Sama was Oscar-nominated in the same year 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
48
as another Syrian film, The Cave (2019), which witnesses in a different way, 
despite sharing a hospital setting.95 Moreover, it has moved many people around 
the world and made them want to act. This is why, al-Kateab explains, she set 
up the campaign Action for Sama, consisting of small actions that audiences 
can take.96 Linked to this impact campaign, the film is not just a harrowing 
vision that people can promptly forget when they have finished watching, since 
it encourages them to do something practical – from sharing what they have 
witnessed on social media to donating to humanitarian workers, asking their 
MP to watch the film, uploading their own creative response and organizing 
community screenings. As Torchin says of material practices that accompany 
witnessing more generally, this strategy ‘enables an audience to channel their 
emotions into action rather than allow them to dissipate or get transformed into 
frustrated outrage’.97 Changing people has value in itself, but people can also 
put pressure on governments. The filmmakers have specific goals for pressuring 
decision-makers, having screened the film at the United Nations, and prompted 
a UN enquiry regarding the bombing of hospitals. Their use of the film as an 
impact tool insists that the fight goes on even if Assad regains controls of Syria.98 
When the film screened at Cannes, al-Kateab, Watts and Hamza al-Kateab held 
the sign ‘STOP BOMBING HOSPITALS’. At Q&As for the film’s 2019 theatrical 
release, the trio emphasized ‘what you see in the film is still happening now’ 
in rebel-held Idlib, where the Syrian regime aided by the Russian military has 
continued targeting hospitals. When I interviewed her, al-Kateab was working 
on a legal case against the regime for its attacks on hospitals, albeit without 
expecting any results, having been disappointed, like many people in Syria, so 
many times in the past. Ultimately, the film is a tool in this ongoing struggle: ‘to 
keep the story being told day by day’.99
Witnessing countries in transition: Whose Country?  
and Freedom Fields
In the next two case studies, the filmmakers were forced to adapt creatively to 
changing political circumstances, an experience shared by many productions 
across the region during this turbulent period. Both are documentaries shot on 
location, in which the stories took an unexpected turn and the footage changed 
meaning and status. Whose Country? (2016) witnesses Egypt as it transitioned 
from revolution to counter-revolution. Its director Mohamed Siam participated 
in the Egyptian revolution while he made two documentaries Whose Country? 

Witnessing
49
and Amal (2017) simultaneously. In Whose Country? his interest was less in ‘my 
side’, the activists, and more in ‘the other side’, plain-clothed police.100 The murder 
of Khaled Said, a young man beaten to death by police in June 2010, had been 
a rallying point for the revolution. More fundamentally, the police demanded 
Siam’s attention because they belong to the security apparatus that forms Egypt’s 
‘deep state’. Alongside the intelligence community and state ‘thugs’, a vast, far-
reaching police force works ‘to guard the regime, monitor the opposition and 
stifle dissent’, generating a continually fearful atmosphere.101 Whose Country? 
consists of first-person accounts, both by Siam, whose late father was a criminal 
investigator, and a policeman nicknamed ‘Abu Habiba’. What makes the film 
unprecedented is that in Egypt it is not usually feasible to film police. Asking 
them questions is illegal and can lead to arrest; even accredited journalists 
must seek permission for interviews, thereafter being redirected to a media 
spokesperson adept at presenting the official line.102 As Siam explains, ‘Egypt has 
always been a hard place to film and express yourself.’103 But after the revolution, 
Abu Habiba was emboldened to speak out as he would not have done previously.
With its testimony from a policeman, speaking to camera about details 
of police brutality and corruption, Whose Country? is more direct than any 
previous depictions of the subject in Egyptian cinema, in which its sensitivity 
was mitigated by the shield of fiction and use of actors.104 It was challenging to 
obtain these interviews even during the more open political climate immediately 
after the revolution. As we see in the film, Siam met Abu Habiba at a protest 
outside a Cairo police station where low-ranking officers were demonstrating 
against their fifty-dollar-a-month salary for which they endured extensive shifts 
and long daily commutes from the Nile Delta, due to the state’s policy of not 
employing those with loyalties to areas they are policing. Siam met secretly 
with Abu Habiba for six months, building his trust, before he was willing to be 
filmed. By this time, President Mubarak was on trial and Abu Habiba felt free to 
talk. Although hardly paid enough to live on, we learn that he accepted his job 
because of its security and because he and his colleagues could supplement their 
wages through bribe income. By spending time with Abu Habiba in his family 
and work settings, we get to know him, his affectionate relationship with his 
small daughter jarring with our knowledge of his probable complicity in police 
abuses he recounts.
Shot between 2011 and 2013, Whose Country? was made within a small 
window of opportunity. During that time, the country, which had belonged to 
the military, briefly passed to the people, levelling some differences and offering 
the chance to talk to ‘the enemy’. Even within that window there were at least 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
50
three different regimes in place, each with a different calibration of freedom of 
expression. In the film’s narration of this history, the revolution was ‘hijacked’ by 
the Muslim Brotherhood, whose leader Mohammed Morsi was elected president 
in 2012 and within a year became the ‘new oppressor’, leading to protests for 
his resignation and his removal by the army in 2013. In ironic contrast to 
confrontations between police and protesters during the revolution, people 
welcomed the police back. By the end, when military dictatorship returned, 
Egypt had revolved ‘through 360 degrees, back to square one’.105
Changing circumstances made the production highly time-sensitive. Siam’s 
relationship with Abu Habiba was inevitably affected, as he remarks in voice-
over, ‘I sensed that the window that had opened between us was about to slam 
shut’. Both men despaired about what was happening to their country. As hopes 
for change receded, so did the opportunity to ask questions. Their interviews 
began to peter out during the Muslim Brotherhood period. Abu Habiba’s motives 
for participating in the documentary also shifted. Previously, he took a moral 
stance in speaking out against injustices, claiming that was why he left the police 
force before rejoining it after the revolution. In the final interview, undertaken 
during the new military regime, he asserts that he was mistreated by another 
officer before he quit and was rehired before the revolution, as if attempting to 
overwrite the previous record.
The risks to both men are palpable, highlighted in Siam’s voice-over and in a 
scene where Abu Habiba, with his daughter on his lap, gestures to Siam who is 
filming them and bids her to repeat, ‘If my father is harmed because of you, I’ll cut 
you with a knife’. Later Siam disclosed to me, ‘The more as I was doing the film, 
and the country was changing and the revolution was declining, I understood that 
what I had in hand could be critical’.106 After the military takeover, a crackdown 
began on activists, human rights organizations, filmmakers and journalists, 
disappearing people from their homes and imprisoning them for long sentences 
without trial. Such counter-revolutionary measures led many in the region, like 
Siam himself, to leave their country for a life of exile because of their activities 
since the uprisings. In the film, the words ‘Whose Country?’, uttered first by the 
policeman and later echoed by Siam in his concluding voice-over, encapsulate 
corresponding feelings of despair and disconnection from one’s country.
Siam wanted to protect Abu Habiba as he still lives in Egypt. ‘I felt maybe 
less could be more’, he says, explaining his stylistic decisions such as avoiding 
location titles and shots that might enable viewers to track his protagonist.107 In 
the public trailer, Abu Habiba’s face is blurred. Another policeman whom Siam 
interviewed does not feature (as he had requested, if the revolution failed). The 

Witnessing
51
entire film bears subtle traces of its changing circumstances. An opening title 
declares that ‘Due to the political climate in Egypt at the time of completing 
this documentary, many of the local film production crew requested to remain 
anonymous’. Contrary to their enthusiasm at the start, some producers and Arab 
funders withdrew, as it was no longer possible to release the film in Egypt nor, 
due to similar transitions from revolution to counter-revolution, in many other 
parts of the region.
Therefore, Whose Country? had to be made more appealing to international 
audiences and distanced from Arab regimes. During the last six months of post-
production, British screenwriter Georgina Van Welie was hired as a co-writer at 
the request of the film’s Kuwaiti producer, Talal al-Muhanna. Her role was to craft 
a narrative structure and an English-language voice-over. It was al-Muhanna’s 
decision to involve Siam’s personal story, underlining the relationship between 
the filmmaker and his subject, although Siam himself wanted to focus on his 
interactions with Abu Habiba. The voice-over, which al-Muhanna had outlined 
through interviewing Siam about his childhood, included psychoanalytic 
elements that Van Welie thought were ‘too Western’, not true to the material 
of a documentary about Egypt made by Egyptians: ‘We used some of that but 
reined it back’, she says.108 Seeing her role as a mediator between the filmmaker’s 
and producer’s conceptions of the story, her input was attuned to Siam’s ‘less 
is more’ approach. Together, the team had to ‘maximize the significance’ of 
the interview footage with Abu Habiba.109 As a non-Arab voice in the creative 
process (although she has lived in Kuwait and has Arab family connections) 
Van Welie also advised on what needed to be clarified for an outside audience 
and where titles were needed for historical markers, writing them herself. Upon 
release, Siam’s team kept the publicity low-key, avoiding press interviews, social 
media advertising and promoting news of awards. All these precautions ‘hurt the 
film’s distribution because they didn’t push it’ but were felt to be necessary for 
avoiding ‘unwanted attention from certain authorities towards the participants 
of the film’.110
When Naziha Arebi began Freedom Fields (2018), she thought she was making 
a documentary about the Libyan national women’s football team playing their 
first international match. After the country’s 2011 revolution, she had gone 
to live in Libya where cinema production had been scarce under former ruler 
Muammar al-Gaddafi and few film theatres functioned. Previously an artist and 
theatre-maker, she taught herself to use a camera and co-founded the collective 
HuNa Productions to develop Libyan cinema as a tool for social change. Freedom 
Fields was made over seven years in total, with five years of filming, during which 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
52
circumstances changed dramatically. Political instability following Gaddafi’s 
overthrow led to a protracted civil war, as armed revolutionaries formed rival 
militias, financially and militarily supported by foreign powers, and Islamist 
groups entrenched themselves in the security voids of the divided territory ruled 
by three factional governments. ‘As Libya changed, the film changed, and became 
darker’, Arebi recalls.111 It could no longer be, she says, a ‘tidy film about a women’s 
football team’.112 Under deteriorating security, the women were banned from 
travelling and football disappeared from their lives. As with Whose Country?, 
uncertainty about the film’s direction worried funders who had been keen on the 
film during its early development; they questioned whether it could be finished 
and, indeed, whether there was any point, since there was no longer any football. 
At a vulnerable point in the middle of production, funding began to run out. 
Nonetheless, Arebi persisted, discovering ‘alternative routes and ways to fill in the 
gaps’.113 Since she did not know if football was ever going to return to the women’s 
lives, she decided to film its absence and found a new focus in the team’s creative 
resilience: although their dreams promised by the revolution were crushed, they 
sought other ways to experience their freedoms, despite massive hurdles.
So Freedom Fields witnesses the country in transition through the team’s 
professional and personal struggles in post-Revolution Libya. Its year-by-year 
structure makes it a record of changing circumstances. The war is captured in 
the background, as smoke plumes rise into the sky and gunfire is heard in the 
distance, while, in the foreground, ordinary life goes on. Since there had been 
few previous films about or from Libya, the documentary carried a heavy burden 
of expectation that it should be more explanatory and comprehensive. An earlier 
cut contained title cards but was discarded as ‘too didactic’.114 With the help of 
her executive producer Huda Abuzeid and co-producer Flore Cosquer, Arebi 
managed to keep those pressures at bay and ‘let the film be what it’s truly about’, 
which she felt was both ‘a blessing and a curse’, as it made the production more 
financially difficult.115 As the characters living through the crisis did not have 
the privilege of a wider perspective on events, this approach felt more truthful 
to their experiences. Much of the conflict takes place off-screen, yet its presence 
vibrates within the frame. Arebi explains, ‘When you live in a conflict zone, that’s 
often what happens – you hear things and you feel the paranoia but you don’t 
really know what’s going on. You scroll through Facebook but you don’t really 
know what’s happening down the road.’116 As one character says in the film, 
‘Even if it’s bullets, tell me it’s fireworks’.
Three personalities from the women’s team come to the fore: the exuberant 
goalkeeper Halima, Fadwa, whose outspokenness inspires a ‘we are all Fadwa’ 

Witnessing
53
moment and Nama, resilient despite the tough life she leads as a refugee from 
the forcibly-evacuated town of Tawergha. The film is filled with sensory details 
of their intimate lives that, as well as reflecting Libya’s wider situation, are shot 
through with minor pleasures that sustain these women in difficult times. The 
team faces numerous limitations: they receive threats from Islamic extremists who 
object to women playing football; the Libyan Football Federation, itself led by a 
corrupt management, cancels their participation in an international tournament 
because of security concerns; amid rising conservatism, they are suddenly not 
permitted to travel without a male guardian and the war and state failure bring 
power cuts and border closures. In their determination, and with strategic help 
from others, they invent ways around the obstacles and become what Arebi calls 
‘accidental activists’. Initially, they train in daylight, supported by armed guards, 
one of whom we see burning a hate letter from a religious extremist. After a 
long hiatus following cancellation of their international tournament, the women 
decide to compete as a private team, training secretly at night. When floodlights 
are extinguished by a power cut, locals drive their cars onto the pitch, enabling 
the women to train, illuminated by their headlights. Finally, the team get to fulfil 
their dreams and participate in an international tournament but realize they are 
not prepared and are unable to excel on the pitch. Undaunted, they set up their 
own grassroots NGO, HERA, using football as a tool for social development and 
trauma relief for girls in schools and refugee camps.
Arebi’s struggle in making the documentary shadows the women’s struggle 
and leaves imprints in its audiovisual textures. The conflict impaired freedom of 
movement and travel, resulting in closure of Libya’s airport which was limiting 
both for the women trying to participate in an international tournament and 
for Arebi’s film crew, who were not able to fly there. Therefore, for much of the 
shoot, she had to perform all the technical jobs herself, including first camera 
and sound, while Libyan cinematographer Sufian Arara assisted on second 
camera. Without a male guardian, it was difficult for Arebi to travel on the road, 
just as it was for the women. When Halima is travelling alone across the border 
and the police order her to turn around, we witness the scene in darkness with 
muffled sound. Arebi, who was filming, placed the camera under the car seat, 
which is why the sound is low, in order that the police would not know she was 
filming. Although we only see one unaccompanied woman in the car, Arebi was 
also there, finding herself (and her camera) caught in the same position.
In a country where filmmaking, like football, is seen as ‘a man’s job’, Arebi 
faced further difficulties as a female filmmaker.117 The existence of multiple 
governments in Libya necessitated seeking filming permits from assorted 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
54
authorities. Under no circumstances could she explain that the film she was 
making was about a women’s football team, so she had to find alibis. Yet being 
female was sometimes an advantage, since she could follow her protagonists 
into female-only spaces barred to male crew members, and achieve the film’s 
distinctive intimacy. As a woman, it was also occasionally ‘easier to negotiate 
with armed groups or people trying to stop filming because they didn’t see me 
as such a threat.’118
When the civil war started in 2014, it became more dangerous to film in public 
places. Having started with a small camera, Arebi had moved to a larger camera 
and now she returned to the small camera, shooting only from enclosed spaces 
or discreetly from the hip: ‘That was really important that I don’t put them [the 
women] in danger and myself in danger. Being somewhere with a camera, you’re 
not “fly on the wall”, you’re frickin’ obvious! With that comes responsibility.’119 
The small camera drew less attention, while filming from inside cars became a 
safer solution during the war. As the situation became more chaotic, so did the 
camera style, imparting ‘the chaos and energy . . . that was there in real life’, which 
was left in the edit because it captured the feeling of those moments.120 The rush 
of movement attained by shooting from inside cars, too, became part of the film’s 
kinetic style; it was also the viewpoint upon the landscape that Arebi shared 
with her protagonists. Throughout the filmmaking process, power cuts were a 
recurrent problem ‘because we couldn’t charge cameras, we’d be in the dark half 
the time, or something major was happening and we’d cut out’, so she decided 
to let them suffuse her style and they, too, ‘became a motif in the film’.121 Power 
cuts stimulated her creativity as well as that of her characters: during the team’s 
nocturnal training, their figures are silhouetted by car headlights, with striking 
chiaroscuro effects.
Despite similarities between her struggles as a filmmaker and the team’s 
struggles, Arebi was aware of the privileges of her dual Libyan-British 
nationality, even admitting that if she was ‘fully Libyan’ it would have been 
harder to make this film, since the field of independent filmmaking is so 
‘Western-centric’ and its processes, such as funding applications, are often 
conducted in English.122 The fact that she was half-Libyan affected her 
relationship with the women who, she says, initially ‘felt sorry’ for her because 
of her previous lack of access to Libyan culture; they desired to make her ‘more 
Libyan’.123 She felt this made the dynamics ‘more equal’, levelling out her power 
as a filmmaker bearing the camera and ability to edit. Moreover, when the 
women founded their own NGO, her privileges became useful to them; they 
acted as mediators for each other.

Witnessing
55
Like Siam, Arebi had to negotiate the risks of her film’s release, although in this 
instance more because of social, gender-based constraints. Out of responsibility 
to her characters living in a politically unstable, conservative society in Libya, 
she exerted self-censorship in the editing. During the shoot, she built trusting 
relationships that gave her unprecedented access to the women’s lives and she 
was able to film anything, yet this was based on tacit understanding that her 
edit would not endanger them. The country’s lawlessness and instability made 
public reactions uncertain and, since the women were already being threatened 
for playing football during the production, it was quite possible that the film 
could lead to physical attacks. Therefore, it demanded ‘tweaking’ to pass some 
conservative social norms; from Arebi’s perspective, this self-censorship was 
acceptable to allow the film to be screened for Libyan, not just international, 
audiences, provided that changes were minor and did not alter its core, namely 
women playing football.124 A further factor in these safety precautions is that 
Arebi herself wanted to continue filmmaking in Libya, just as the women 
desired to carry on their work there. She and her producer made the difficult 
choice of not striking financial deals with some broadcasters who had differing 
expectations in order to retain full control of the edit: ‘It’s not just a film. It’s their 
lives. It’s my life’, she stresses.125 Security considerations forced her to balance the 
need to promote the film and the NGO with safeguarding her protagonists. The 
Figure  1.2  Car headlights become a creative solution to power cuts when the 
women’s football team train at night, captured by Naziha Arebi’s equally inventive 
cinematography. Freedom Fields directed by Naziha Arebi © HuNa Productions 2018. 
All Rights Reserved.

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
56
trailer utilizes shots where their faces are turned away or silhouetted and they do 
not appear in social media promotion. The women have been present, however, 
at screenings in Libya where the film has been self-distributed due to lack of 
public functioning cinemas, one advantage of which is greater control over who 
attends. Some of the women have also travelled with the film internationally 
and, as a witness to their struggles, it has lent greater visibility to, and facilitated 
support for, their NGO.
Conclusion
Witnessing is a direct creative strategy, not only in terms of what it represents 
but also in its exemplary indexical relationship with production constraints. Use 
of the strategy is matched to the urgency of circumstances and desire to show 
the world what is happening in order to bring about change. In the asymmetric 
media landscape in which acts of witnessing take place, collaboration with 
mediators plays a crucial role in how stories are shaped into a form to be 
witnessed by others. My case studies display different types of witnessing and 
reveal nuances in the power dynamics through the agencies of key people 
involved. In 5 Broken Cameras and For Sama, witnessing footage produced 
by citizen journalists was powerfully restructured with the help of mediators 
which propelled the films through festival, activist and mainstream networks, 
presenting both opportunities and another set of constraints. In contrast, Whose 
Country? and Freedom Fields demonstrate another type of witnessing, that of 
filmmakers capturing countries in transition and registering changing political 
circumstances in their content and style. Instead of high impact upon witnessing 
publics, the latter take a more cautious approach precisely because of film’s 
witnessing power and worsening security in their respective countries.

In For Sama (2019), as we saw in Chapter 1, the camera is always close at hand 
to capture Sama’s early months. We see baby clothes, toys, a milk bottle; we hear 
lullabies and nursery rhymes. These universal markers of childhood encourage 
us to empathize with a story of life in besieged Eastern Aleppo. This is one 
example of a strategy increasingly common in the region’s filmmaking as well as 
in international news media. As a privileged vehicle for emotional identification, 
the child powerfully conveys local and national crises to international audiences. 
News agencies and NGOs frequently present children as innocent and blameless 
victims to highlight injustices in a manner that seems ‘apolitical’ or, at least, 
above politics.1 The cultural construction of children as pure, innocent and 
neutral, as well as spontaneous and natural, is shared by modern Middle Eastern 
societies. Elias Jamal suggests that ‘Idealized children – innocent, sweet, cute, and 
adorable – are reflections of adult concerns about their own state, bearing little 
resemblance to real children who vacillate between innocence and awareness, 
morality and immorality, cruelty and kindness, foolishness and wisdom’.2 Adults 
tend to cling to idealized views of childhood despite the fact that most children 
do not lead ‘sheltered and innocent lives’.3 As Omar al-Ghazzi observes, ‘The 
myth of childhood innocence empties the child figure of its political agency 
to fulfil the symbolic demands placed on it’.4 Among these is adults’ desire for 
children to embody ‘hope’, a ‘future orientation’ that detracts from their ‘actual 
experiences’ in the past and present.5
The belief that the child is ‘other’ to the adult lends the figure to allegorical 
usage in cinema. As Stephanie Hemelryk Donald, Emma Wilson and Sarah 
Wright claim, the child is ‘a powerful symbol for nations coming to terms with 
shifting political or social changes’ and ‘can act as a pivot between national, local 
concerns and wider, transnational identifications’.6 Filmmakers in the Middle 
East have made distinctive use of children, producing (to borrow Hamid Naficy’s 
typology) ‘Films for children, films about children, films in which children are 
­2
Child protagonists

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
58
substitutes for adults or a pretext for dealing with adult issues, and films with 
children acting in them’.7 In the period covered by this book, there has been a 
shift from allegorical uses to a greater focus on children’s actual experiences, 
including in documentaries as well as fiction films using documentary methods. 
While children’s roles remain rooted in cultural ideals of childhood and cinematic 
traditions, such as melodrama and neorealism, this chapter shows how the 
strategy is becoming more direct and politicized, as it shifts from allegorical 
modes towards experiential images of child and teenage being that indexically 
register the crises they are undergoing, as exemplified in War Canister (2013), 
Capernaum (2018), 300 Miles (2016), Wadjda (2012), Ava (2017) and Amal 
(2017). While the child often functions as an ostensibly apolitical figure, it helps 
filmmakers tackle sensitive subjects by deflecting political implications. In the 
transition to teen protagonists, we find a riskier variant of the strategy, since 
teenagers are regarded as more contentious than younger children, although 
less so than adults. As we will see, the gender of the child or teenager is also 
significant to the political and cultural sensitivity of the portrayal, indicating 
links with the depiction of women, another important topic in the region.
Neorealist forerunners
While other traditions of child performers exist, Italian neorealism is the world 
cinema practice that has impacted most on filmmaking in the region.8 The 
movement innovated by using documentary methods such as real locations and 
non-professional actors, among them children, for its fictional stories of everyday 
crisis during and immediately after the Second World War. Among the best 
known of Italian neorealist films with child protagonists are Roberto Rossellini’s 
Germany Year Zero (1948), in which twelve-year-old Edmund wanders through 
war-devastated Berlin, and Vittorio De Sica’s Bicycle Thieves (1948), where another 
young boy, Bruno, accompanies his unemployed father in a desperate search 
through Rome’s streets for a stolen bicycle upon which their livelihood depends.
For Gilles Deleuze, the child in Italian neorealism plays a key role in the 
crisis of the action-image. In his account, Italian neorealism’s use of post-war 
settings, such as demolished cities and wastelands, gave rise to a new type of 
protagonist, who sees rather than acts, producing pure optical and sound 
situations.9 This paved the way for a new kind of image – the time-image – which 
directly embodies time. According to Deleuze, the child becomes prominent in 
neorealism because its ‘motor helplessness’ renders it ‘all the more capable of 

Child Protagonists
59
seeing and hearing’.10 His notion of the child as a witness reflects a wider sense 
of disempowerment in crisis situations. Nevertheless, his attribution of passivity 
and lack of agency reinforces cultural assumptions about children, contrasting 
with how resourceful and active they often are in cinema, let alone in the real 
world. In many films featured in this chapter, the child functions as both a 
witness and resourceful agent.
Deleuze’s argument is essentially about a relationship between cinematic 
strategy and crisis. But although the time-image emerges from a situation of 
crisis, that of the Second World War, this transition is mainly registered on the 
formal level of the image for Deleuze rather than the constraints of filmmaking. 
As well as exploring post-war economic crisis, Italian neorealism’s creative 
strategies also arose from this crisis. This led its directors away from commercial 
studio conventions, such as the star system and constructed sets, and towards 
real locations and non-professional actors, including children. By demonstrating 
possibilities for filmmaking without large-scale infrastructure, they set a model 
for creativity within constraints for resource-strapped filmmakers everywhere. 
For Satyajit Ray, the founder of Indian art cinema, watching Bicycle Thieves was 
a ‘life changing experience’.11 It was partly through Ray’s Apu Trilogy (1955–9), 
which features several child actors, that Italian neorealism inspired Iranian 
cinema, but there were also direct influences. The Iranian director Jafar Panahi, 
who used child protagonists in his early films The White Balloon (1995) and 
The Mirror (1997), saw Bicycle Thieves when he was a student and stated that it 
‘affected me more than any other film’.12
Aside from Italian neorealism’s influence, there are many factors behind the 
prevalence of children in Iranian cinema. The trend began before the 1978–9 
revolution and reached its heyday in the 1980s and 1990s. One important driver 
has been the Institute for the Intellectual Development of Children and Young 
Adults (also known as Kanun), a state organization producing educational films 
for children that supported the early work of Abbas Kiarostami and Bahram 
Beyzai, among others. But filmmakers also realized that children are a means of 
overcoming the constraints of gender segregation.
Widely practised in Muslim societies, gender segregation prevents ‘interaction 
between men and women not related to each other by either marriage or blood.’13 
It ‘divides all social space into male and female spaces’ – the public realm of men, 
that of religion and power, and the private realm of women, that of domesticity 
and sexuality – through practices of seclusion and the veil (referring to various 
head, face or body coverings) known as hejāb, a code of modesty. Lowering one’s 
eyes to avoid eye contact is another technique fostered for occasions when the 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
60
sexes do meet. While these traditional norms are increasingly violated without 
social censure or legal penalties throughout the Arab and Muslim world, they 
are more strictly enforced in Iran’s Islamic Republic and institutionalized in its 
censorship processes.
Under the Islamic Republic, it became obligatory for women to wear the 
veil in public and their adherence to modesty codes is policed. Islamicization 
was extended to cinema, which the state aimed to reform. Because cinema is 
considered a public realm, women must observe hejāb onscreen at all times 
even when they are portrayed indoors with family members or in historical 
settings – situations where it would not actually be applicable. In the absence of 
detailed guidelines on depicting male-female relationships, filmmakers became 
familiar with censorship criteria through ‘trial and error’14 and developed their 
own conventions for creatively working around them such as transforming 
the desiring gaze between the sexes to an ‘averted’ gaze.15 In the early years, 
filmmakers often avoided adult female protagonists; later they turned to films 
with children. This use of children expressed an underlying belief in their 
innocence and that their interactions are ‘sexless’ and platonic.16 Children 
served to ‘purify’ the cinematic image, sometimes functioning as intermediaries 
between adult men and women.
As Hamid Reza Sadr states, ‘children were freer than adults; they could go 
anywhere and do more or less anything’.17 In terms that resonate with Deleuze’s 
account of the action-image’s break-up, Sadr describes how children liberated 
the narrative of 1980s and 90s Iranian films, which developed episodic narratives 
with minor actions, such as roaming around city streets or rural environs. 
These films presented the world through a child’s perspective as it undertook 
an everyday quest with minimal assistance from adults who were typically 
interfering or unhelpful. In The White Balloon, for example, a little girl, Razieh, 
wants to buy a goldfish for Nowruz (Persian New Year) but loses her money in 
a street grate. She enlists the help of her brother and another child, an Afghan 
balloon seller, who retrieves it for her with his stick and some chewing gum. 
Leading us through a frequently inhospitable and confusing urban maze, or 
trekking between villages in often treacherous conditions, children in Iranian 
cinema from this period display the ability to cross boundaries and navigate 
between different spaces. In so doing, they brought to light aspects of Iran’s 
sociopolitical realities, such as after-effects of the Iran-Iraq war (Bashu, the 
Little Stranger (1989)), the plight of the country’s Afghan minorities (The White 
Balloon) and Kurds’ hardships on the Iran-Iraq border (A Time for Drunken 
Horses (2000), Turtles Can Fly (2004)).

Child Protagonists
61
Films using children are less likely to offend audiences (including censors) 
because they convert political judgments into ‘the realm of personal experience 
and feeling’, Sadr surmises.18 From questions of ‘why do people feel this way?’ 
they turn to explore ‘how does it feel to have such feelings?’19 According to 
Michelle Langford, however, some Iranian films harness children to model 
ideologically ‘correct’ values and behaviours. The audience learns didactic 
lessons not by being told them, but by ‘seeing, hearing and feeling’ through 
the child’s perspective.20 The strategy of child protagonists often makes them 
vehicles of allegorical meanings beyond their control. Nonetheless, it goes 
beyond allegory when it attends to the specificity of their embodied experiences 
and idiosyncratic viewpoints. Cinematic focalization techniques, such as point-
of-view shots and shots from a child’s height, create an alignment between the 
audience and the child’s visual perspective. However, just as often, as Karen Lury 
suggests, speaking of the boy in Tarkovsky’s Mirror (1975), it is the child’s gaze 
into and away from the camera that ‘unfolds his unsaid but imagined personal 
experience’ into the ‘material evidence’ of images.21 The child’s agency and 
subjectivity are emphasized when films narrate how experiences felt: ‘warm or 
burning, fascinating or frightening, mundane or magical, sometimes all at the 
same time’.22 As a multisensory medium, film expresses itself most powerfully 
in ways other than direct speech and finds an ally in the young child whose 
communication is primarily non-verbal. Even so, several films in this chapter 
feature highly vocal older children, who articulate bold statements that evade 
the censure they would meet if spoken by adults, permitting them to say the 
unsayable.
As amateur actors, children give mesmerizing performances that appear to be 
genuine. Sadr writes, ‘Unlike film stars, children were also real people . . . Because 
children have an existence in the world independent of their film appearances, 
we can believe that they are more real than the other characters’.23 Rather than 
belief in the ‘authenticity’ of the child’s performance, Langford takes this to refer 
to a reality-effect that supports the child’s allegorical and ideological function. 
Whilst I agree with this, I read Sadr’s statement in a different way, taking it to 
mean that, since amateur (child) actors inhabit the real world, they bring its 
determinants into the film. This is not to say that movies provide unmediated 
access to children but, to use Margherita Sprio’s wording, it points to the 
‘existence of other realities beyond the diegetic world of the film’ where ‘real life’ 
and performance collide.24
In neorealist filmmaking, non-professional actors often have deprived 
backgrounds similar to the characters they portray and return to them 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
62
afterwards. The practice blurs boundaries between their real and onscreen lives 
in ways that raise ethical concerns, especially for children. Furthermore, the lack 
of health and safety regulations on film sets in many countries allows filmmakers 
to use children as much as they want, without concern for long working hours 
or effects on their welfare, as one Iranian director admitted in the course of 
my research. On the one hand, the use of child protagonists is a creative means 
of producing cinematic art under constrained conditions. On the other, it can 
be a form of exploitation.25 Moreover, neorealist filmmakers often use minimal 
crew and equipment to blend into real environments. This facilitates capture of 
unknowing performances from non-professional actors, often to great effect. Yet 
it also generates problems of consent, as Amina Maher who played the ten-year-
old boy in Kiarostami’s Ten (2002) claims, ‘My real life was filmed without me 
being aware of it and was sold out to the world as a fiction film!’26
The child as a witness to crisis
The episodic narratives of child protagonists wandering through city streets 
that are characteristic of neorealism – in both its Italian and Iranian variants – 
have inspired other filmmakers in the Middle East. Sometimes there is direct 
borrowing. At other times, filmmakers gravitate to child protagonists because 
they are working within constraints similar to those in post-war Italy or Iran’s 
Islamic Republic. The use of child protagonists was conducive to conditions in 
post-war Iraq, where the UK production company Human Film established 
the Iraqi Independent Film Centre (IIFC) with Iraqi filmmaker Mohamed al-
Daradji to support the rebirth of Iraqi cinema after the US-led invasion and 
occupation. The IIFC encourages filmmakers to tell real-life stories, especially 
about children and their daily struggles. In one IIFC-produced film, a fictional 
short called War Canister (2012) directed by Yahya Al-Allaq, a ten-year-old deaf 
boy, Hamoudi, steals an oil canister to help his struggling family in Baghdad. 
The film dramatizes the everyday experience of post-war fuel shortages through 
his point of view and that of a friendly bus conductor, also a child. When the 
canister leaks and the driver orders Hamoudi to leave the bus, the conductor 
finds a solution by sealing the puncture with his chewing gum, evoking The 
White Balloon. During the film, the canister is lost, found and shared with a little 
girl whose family is also short of fuel. Instead of regarding the child’s theft of 
the canister as a crime, we are invited to consider it as an outcome of desperate 
need. Because they live through the fuel crisis themselves, the children act 

Child Protagonists
63
both as witnesses to how it affects their lives and as active agents within that 
environment, managing to survive by helping each other.
As well as being produced in crisis conditions, War Canister was made 
under several self-imposed constraints. It arose during a workshop led by al-
Daradji, who specified the following rules: ‘all scenes had to be shot using a 
static camera, no music was allowed in the montage, and the film actors had to 
be non-professional’.27 These rules helped al-Allaq to be creative within limited 
resources, as post-war Iraqi filmmaking suffered from chronic lack of investment 
and training of film personnel. His non-professional child actors came from a 
Baghdad orphanage. Ashraf Hisham, who plays the bus conductor, added his 
own creative input by composing the song that he sings on the bus. As al-Allaq 
recalls, Ashraf asked him, ‘Is this film going to be in the cinema? Is everyone 
going to watch it?’ The child wanted al-Allaq to include the song as an appeal 
to his mother: ‘She left us here in the orphanage. I wish for her to hear my song 
wherever she is. Maybe then nostalgia will pull her back to me’.28
In neorealist style, Nadine Labaki’s Oscar-nominated fiction feature 
Capernaum (2018), from Lebanon, employs real street children.29 It follows 
a twelve-year-old, Zain, who lives in overcrowded lodgings with his family, 
working several jobs to support them. According to Labaki, ‘This is a real story 
of real people who you see every day on the streets but you don’t really look at 
them’.30 Capernaum focuses on unregistered people – street children, migrant 
workers, refugees – who lack rights, because they either cannot afford to pay 
for identity documents or are in the country illegally. Labaki regards the child 
protagonist as a ‘magnifying glass’ that gives visibility to these problems.31 
Aside from the kafala (sponsorship) system that determines migrant labour 
conditions in Lebanon, a motivating factor for the film is the Syrian refugee 
crisis. At the time of its production, Lebanon had the world’s largest number of 
Syrian refugees per capita and most street kids in Beirut were Syrian refugees. 
Capernaum’s protagonist is played by one, Zain al-Rafeea, whose family lived 
in the same conditions as his character’s family in the film. Cedra Izam, who 
portrays his eleven-year-old sister Sahar, was also a Syrian refugee street girl in 
real life. By emphasizing the universal injustices of their situation as children, 
and by making them Lebanese rather than Syrian, the story sidesteps tense 
relations between Syrian refugees and Lebanese hosts.32
Labaki preserved the integrity of her child actors’ spontaneous performances 
in situ by long takes and not calling ‘Action!’ at the start so that her performers 
were not made conscious of a difference between real life and filming. This was 
aided by the use of real locations with available lighting (without lighting cables 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
64
that impede actors’ freedom of movement) and a small crew, consisting of two 
cameramen and a boom operator, accompanying the director during shooting. 
While the real Zain’s personality is not identical to his character’s, Labaki channels 
aspects of who he is and his experiences into his role. Although sentimental 
melodrama pervades Capernaum, as it does some of its neorealist forerunners, 
she depicts her protagonist in a more complex fashion by rendering his harsh life 
through haptic film language as well as shots from a child’s height as he wanders 
through Beirut’s chaotic streets. When Rahil, an Ethiopian migrant worker 
whom he befriends disappears, Zain is left with her baby boy Yonas, without any 
parental protection. Their hunger is conveyed haptically as Zain feeds Yonas a 
diet of ice and sugar, a technique he learnt from his own mother. We can imagine 
that Zain’s precocity is due to his upbringing which has taught him to behave like 
a little grown-up. Frequently, the film focuses on his face, with its expressions 
of defiance and pain. At times violent and foul-mouthed, Zain challenges ideas 
of childhood innocence and survives on his wits. After money, water and food 
run out, he roams the city, attempting to sell tinware and bottled opiates, towing 
Yonas along in a buggy improvised from a skateboard and stockpot – an image 
of his own creativity under crisis.
Zain’s story reveals an unjust bureaucratic system in which people without ID 
cards are not entitled to any support, among them children whose parents cannot 
afford to register them. However, Labaki chose not to attack the authorities, 
which would certainly be provocative in Lebanon, especially given that she 
secured access to a military-run detention centre for her film.33 Instead, her film 
feels the anger that Zain feels. This is directed at his sister’s husband, whom he 
injures with a knife after she is denied medical treatment and dies of pregnancy 
complications, and his parents, whom he sues in court for bringing him into 
this life.34 In their efforts to improve their non-professional cast’s real lives, 
Labaki and her husband and producer Khaled Mouzanar arranged for UNHCR 
representatives to meet al-Rafeea and his family, resulting in their resettlement 
in Norway. Within the film, Zain’s triumph is more modest: through the court 
case, he gets his story heard and, finally, an ID card, although he remains jailed 
for the stabbing. Even as a victim of poverty and of the system that fails him and 
his sibling, the film shows him asserting his agency.
In the Syrian War, children became prominent witnesses of crisis, even 
producing and circulating their own images with the aid of digital technology. 
For example, during the 2016 siege and bombardment of Eastern Aleppo, seven-
year-old Bana al-Abed reported her experiences from a Twitter account managed 
by her mother. As al-Ghazzi notes, Syrian opposition activists have attempted 

Child Protagonists
65
to harness the child’s emotional power for international witnessing publics, 
appealing to ideas of children as ‘truth seers and truth tellers supposedly able 
to speak and give meaning beyond muddled geopolitics’.35 In Orwa al-Mokdad’s 
documentary 300 Miles, however, we find a child from the Syrian opposition in 
a more complex role. Al-Mokdad began filming on his phone as an opposition 
activist during the Syrian uprising, then produced two short films before 300 
Miles, his first feature. 300 Miles is structured as a cinematic letter between 
him and his seven-year-old niece Nour, forming an important predecessor to 
For Sama. The title refers to the distance that separates them – al-Mokdad is in 
Aleppo in northern Syria, while Nour is in their hometown, Deraa, in southern 
Syria. The letter format bridges this distance which would normally take a few 
hours to travel by car yet became impossible to traverse safely during the war as 
the country was divided by front lines and different armies and militia. Nour is 
a powerful character. She is creating her own film: a video diary presenting the 
war from her perspective, as she learns about life, the world and the conflict.
When he began making 300 Miles, al-Mokdad discussed with his brother 
Feras, with whom Nour lived along with other family members, the ethics of 
involving her in the film.36 They decided to let her participate since she, like 
many other Syrian children, had been living on a daily basis with the war, which 
had already shattered her childhood. So that it would not be traumatically ‘stuck’ 
inside her, they wanted her to talk freely about it. Therefore, they gave Nour a 
camera, with al-Mokdad directing her from afar. His own interest in including 
Nour was driven by ‘the representation of innocence’.37 He himself was filming 
from the frontline in Aleppo, presenting the war from an adult perspective, 
Figure 2.1  Zain exemplifies the child as a creative agent, improvizing a buggy from 
a stockpot and skateboard with which he tows Yonas around the city. Capernaum 
directed by Nadine Labaki © Mooz Films 2018. All Rights Reserved.

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
66
‘full of blood, fear and anguish’. For him, Nour functions as a ‘counterbalance’. 
He conferred with Feras about putting her in particular places, where she had 
the creative freedom to film whatever she wanted. These places are where al-
Mokdad used to play during his childhood. Nour acts as his ‘eye’ in those places 
to which he no longer has access, ‘keeping those memories alive’.38 Addressing 
her uncle, she shows him the trees he used to climb, the remains of a swing that 
he built and the olive and lemon trees he used to pluck. In part, the child figures 
as a means of recapturing the innocence that al-Mokdad and other Syrian 
opposition members have lost in the war. In his voice-over, he addresses Nour: 
‘I erase the war planes, colour the destruction, and erase the checkpoints . . . and 
look for the murdered martyrs and scattered friends around the world. I erase 
the maps and the distance and redraw the world through your eyes’. Having been 
detained himself by Syrian army intelligence during the war, al-Mokdad reflects 
that this ‘extreme violence . . . practically destroys a human being’.39 Although 
personally he survived it, he feels he is not the same person anymore.
Sequences on the frontline in Aleppo dwell upon quiet moments rather than 
combat action, in keeping with the film’s introspective feel, as al-Mokdad states: 
‘This contradiction between the noise of the war and the silence in the film 
is a representation of the actual inner struggle of the war. The war isn’t only 
happening outside; it’s happening inside, a struggle for the people going through 
it.’40 Accompanying a Free Syrian Army (FSA) commander, Abu Yarub, al-
Mokdad poses awkward questions about how the opposition has lost its bearings 
and probes an activist named Adnan about the ethical consequences of starting 
the revolution. Al-Mokdad critically interrogates the movement he is part of, 
pushing his interviewees to their limits.
Although the war has invaded her imagination, Nour explores it from a 
lighter perspective, offering relief from the film’s foreboding intimation that the 
opposition is losing its fight against the Syrian regime. Al-Mokdad says he was 
astounded by the shots that she took, because they were ‘so innocent’.41 But, like 
him, Nour asks difficult questions, revealing herself as innocent and aware. In 
one scene, she asks Feras what ‘cleansing’ means. She has overheard her father 
(a FSA commander) saying on the phone that his friend has been ‘cleansed’. The 
unfamiliar word marks the limits of her comprehension, but she demands to 
make sense of it. When Nour is unconvinced by Feras’s initial answer, he finally 
explains that cleansing means ‘assassination’. His decision to answer her plainly, 
rather than manipulating reality to make it softer for her, shows the difficulty of 
isolating children from the conflict.

Child Protagonists
67
Nour’s creative input is strikingly bold. In her video diary, she relates the 
destruction that has befallen Syria, ‘for one reason only – Bashar!’ Her words 
have a startling directness, a contrast to Western news reporting on aerial 
bombardments in Syria that often avoids attributing responsibility to al-Assad’s 
government, in the interests of ‘impartiality’. Nour’s camera zooms in on the 
bombing in the neighbouring town Busra where residents have lacked electricity 
for twenty-five days. Her creative agency is channelled into witnessing the 
war’s violence and everyday effects on civilians. However, Nour, like her uncle, 
is no mere mouthpiece for the opposition. Through the film we glimpse her 
perspective on the world, which is different from the jaded activists. ‘I wish we 
could just stay alive’, she declares. ‘Why?’ asks Feras. ‘Because!’ she exclaims, ‘It is 
just more beautiful to be alive. It might get more beautiful . . . If he [Bashar] dies 
we’d rebuild [Syria] hand-in-hand with the whole world.’ The film ends with Abu 
Yarub walking into the mist. Nour’s eye is superimposed on the landscape, then 
the scene shifts to her and her brother watching the sunrise. For al-Mokdad, 
these final shots, filmed by Nour herself, reflect a contrast between her and the 
adult protagonists who ‘went into the darkness and didn’t have a future’.42 While 
this evokes the familiar symbol of child as the future, ending the film without 
layering any interpretation on these images allows Nour to have the last word as 
a maker of her own meanings.
Coming of age: another type of crisis-image
Susan Moeller relates how news reporting constructs a ‘hierarchy of innocence’ 
that places infants at the top, ‘then, in descending order, children up to the age 
of 12, pregnant women, teenage girls, elderly women, all other women, teenage 
boys, and all other men.’43 She suggests it is harder to describe teenagers as 
‘innocent’, as their lifestyles nowadays are influenced by ‘violent video games’ 
and mobile phones.44 However, this age group’s loss of innocence has a wider 
significance for the films in this part of the chapter. Teenage years are a formative 
period in which individuals come to discover and understand social structures, 
and become politicized. They are a time of testing social and ideological 
boundaries, finding one’s sexuality and identity and discovering whether one 
fits in or stands out. For filmmakers in the region, this makes it riskier to focus 
on teen protagonists, especially teenage girls who are becoming women.
Coming-of-age films have roots in the Bildungsroman genre of novels of 
formation, which trace a protagonist’s development from youth to adulthood. 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
68
In cinema, they typically explore conflicts with parents and themes of ‘problem 
youth’, in home, school or college settings. The process of growing up offers 
another kind of crisis-image akin to Deleuze’s time-image. Firstly, adolescent 
characters are ‘inherently in a state of crisis’ in the sense of existing in a ritually 
significant threshold moment.45 Secondly, as a medium that captures time, 
cinema is uniquely placed to convey these transitional states, as the protagonists’ 
bodies are performed or filmed changing and evolving onscreen. For a teenage 
girl, becoming a woman engenders crisis when she encounters the demands 
and expectations laid down by family, school, law and religion. As Lyn Mikel 
Brown writes, adolescence ‘disposes girls to see the cultural framework, and 
girls’ and women’s subordinate place in it, for the first time. That their reaction 
to this awakening would be shock, sadness, anger and a sense of betrayal is not 
surprising’.46 Coming-of-age films reveal how young women have to stand up 
to systems of social and political power, using tools at their disposal to defy 
or navigate them. In her work on girlhood in contemporary culture, Sarah 
Projansky builds on the idea that girls have a ‘different’ voice, one of the tools 
they possess both in film and life, but which is at risk of being lost when they 
are socialized into women. Moreover, in being held up to ideals of girlhood, girls 
can easily slide from ‘fabulous’ to ‘scandalous’.47
The obsession with virginity is a specific limitation that girls encounter in 
Muslim societies, serving to regulate their bodies, although that obsession is not 
exclusive to the Middle East or even to Islam. As the Iranian filmmaker Mania 
Akbari told me, ‘staying a virgin in Islamic societies has been associated with the 
identity of a healthy woman and with healthy body. This was especially true when 
I was a teenager.’48 The Persian term pāk (‘pure’) evokes ‘both physical healthiness 
and spiritual purity, two converging concepts regarding virginity. For many men 
it is crucial to be the first owners of that body.’49 In Arab and Muslim society, 
belief persists that the hymen is the ‘most important part of the girl’s body’.50 
Failure to preserve it for her wedding night risks various punishments, from 
shame and divorce to death. Family honour is inextricable from a girl’s honour, 
and located in her premarital virginity and chastity after marriage. Honour for a 
boy does not carry this meaning and while a boy can regain honour when lost, 
a girl cannot.51 Teenage years are significant because it is usually then – or, more 
specifically, during puberty – that girls learn that their behaviour is important to 
family honour. It is at this time that modesty codes and gender segregation are 
implemented, although this varies according to class and geography.
In Iranian cinema, the turn to teenage girlhood began during Mohammad 
Khatami’s presidency (1997–2005), when there was a loosening of censorship 

Child Protagonists
69
restrictions and a shift away from child protagonists to a more direct tackling 
of ‘more adult’ and ‘risqué’ themes,52 such as delinquency, drug addiction 
and prostitution – although that more liberal climate was reversed when 
Ahmadinejad came to power in 2005. The Khatami period also witnessed the 
rise of underground digital filmmaking, including Akbari’s film 20 Fingers 
(2004), which partly explores the topic of virginity.53 In this cycle of films, we 
find a new focus on teenagers and adult women – sometimes, as in Panahi’s The 
Circle, an attempt to imagine the challenges when the girls in the earlier children’s 
films grow up. The relative freedom of Khatami’s presidency also fostered new 
subcultures: Iranian youth, discouraged from verbal forms of free expression, 
turned to ‘nonverbal, embodied protest, embedded in what they wore or did not 
wear on their hair, their bodies, and their feet’ and displays of ‘intimacy in public 
places particularly toward members of the opposite sex’.54 This, in turn, had 
effects on their onscreen representation. Just as public behaviour and looking 
relations became bolder and more direct, so too did the camera’s gaze and that 
of film characters.55
A film made in the early Khatami era, Rasoul Sadrameli’s The Girl in the 
Sneakers (1999), can be seen as an intermediary between the earlier films with 
child protagonists and later films with teen protagonists. In its opening shot, 
the film distinguishes its central character, fifteen-year-old Tadai, by her white 
sneakers and her manner of walking on the kerb rather than footpath, both 
signs of her non-conformism. Her stroll in a park with her boyfriend Aideen 
is interrupted when police arrest them for breaching gender segregation rules. 
Concerned for their respectability, Tadai’s parents file a lawsuit against Aideen 
and send her for forensic examination of her virginity. The day after, Tadai 
runs away from home, wandering the streets, selling her jewellery to obtain 
money and repeatedly trying to call Aideen so they can escape together. Adults 
to whom she turns for advice prove unhelpful or try to take advantage of her. 
After many escapades (including almost being raped) she is finally reunited 
with Aideen in the park. Disillusioned and heartbroken when he declares he no 
longer wishes to marry her, she disappears into the night. The film’s resolution, 
where the runaway is presumed to return home, might be seen as a corrective 
to her rebellion. However, we never see Tadai return to her parents – her future, 
signalled only through her disappearance into darkness, is left ambiguous.
As The Girl in the Sneakers indicates, the teenage girl protagonist disrupts 
the established narrative traits of children’s films that helped filmmakers 
overcome rules of gender segregation and censorship – here, interacting with 
boys results in arrest, and wandering the streets leads to her being taken for a 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
70
prostitute and makes her vulnerable to rape. At the same time, the restrictions 
imposed on women present further creative opportunities for filmmakers. 
They engender tensions between girls and the institutions of the family, school, 
religion and the law that are, from a scriptwriter’s perspective, dramatically 
‘interesting’. This higher level of oppression helps to explain why teenage girls 
possess a greater appeal to filmmakers than boys. Naficy suggests that both 
The Girl in the Sneakers and The Circle were internationally acclaimed ‘because 
they confirmed the erroneous grand narrative abroad of women in Islamic 
Iran as passive victims of a ruthless patriarchal system’.56 As discussed in this 
book’s introduction, stereotypes of oppressed Muslim women form part of the 
Orientalist expectations of international film festivals and script developers. 
Filmmakers from the Middle East (especially female filmmakers) are themselves 
aware of these dangers and often resist them by focusing on the everyday (rather 
than the sensational), emphasizing girls’ agency rather than victimhood and not 
portraying men one-dimensionally as oppressors. The following three films, two 
of them directed by women, are centred on eponymous teenage girl protagonists 
and render crisis through their perspectives as they negotiate threshold moments 
and deviate from prescribed behaviour.
Teen protagonists: Wadjda, Ava and Amal
With its everyday story of a ten-year-old girl who wants to ride a bicycle, Saudi 
director Haifaa al-Mansour’s debut fiction feature Wadjda (2012) is directly 
inspired by Iranian cinema. Following these conventions, the child protagonists 
Wadjda and Abdullah roam relatively freely outside compared to adult couples. 
They are even able to walk on the streets and play together, although this stretches 
the limits of plausibility for many Saudi spectators. Al-Mansour’s use of child 
protagonists was a creative strategy for overcoming the constraints of gender 
segregation which she herself faced during the film’s production. At the time the 
film was made, cinemas had been banned in Saudi Arabia for three decades due 
to the influence of clerics representing Wahhabi Islam (the conservative form 
of Sunni Islam that dominates in Saudi Arabia). Despite obtaining an official 
filming permit, al-Mansour encountered problems with cultural disapproval of 
cinema, especially in conservative areas where locals tried to halt the production. 
For this reason, she chose to respect rules of gender segregation by not working 
alongside her male crew outdoors and directing scenes remotely, using a walkie-
talkie and a monitor in a van. As Wadjda was the first feature film shot entirely 

Child Protagonists
71
within Saudi Arabia, lack of infrastructure was another constraint, necessitating 
use of a mainly foreign crew (as well as foreign funding) and a cast largely drawn 
from Saudi television and open calls for non-professionals, including children.
Since she is a child, Wadjda’s transgressive behaviour is more likely to be 
condoned than an adult’s, and it frequently provokes humour for the audience. 
Age-wise, however, she can be classified as a ‘tween’, a girl between childhood 
and teenage years.57 The first sign of Wadjda’s tween (or aspiring teen) identity 
is in the opening which differentiates her from other schoolgirls by the black 
Converse trainers she wears underneath her school uniform. She listens to 
Western pop music as a means of rebellion and wears blue nail polish to express 
her individuality. In addition, she plays a violent video game with her dad, a 
moment that shows the emotional bond between them that Wadjda later finds is 
less significant to him than his desire for a son, and she witnesses him leave her 
mother for a second wife for this reason. On the cusp between childhood and 
adolescence, she learns the lesser value that society gives women.
According to traditional customs of gender segregation in Saudi Arabia, 
women were not supposed to be seen in public, other than covered in full-
length black veils (abayahs), a practice that is changing in parts of the country. 
As Ahd Kamel, who plays Wadjda’s headmistress Ms Hussa (and is a filmmaker 
herself) told me, in this closed society it is already taboo ‘to open the door and 
see beyond the women who are dressed in black and the men who are dressed 
Figure 2.2  Child protagonists serve as a means of creatively overcoming barriers of 
gender segregation. Wadjda directed by Haifaa al-Mansour © Razor Film Produktion 
2012. All Rights Reserved.

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
72
in white in public’.58 In its intimate, interior scenes between Wadjda and her 
mother, the film opens the door to this inner world.59 The camera is constricted 
in these spaces just as mother and daughter are confined to the kitchen and 
bedrooms when Wadjda’s father entertains male guests in the living room. The 
women ‘make way’ to avoid trespassing into male spaces. When they leave trays 
of food at the living room door, the camera stops there, just as they do. When 
Kamel was growing up, she was taught she had to be modest and cover up in 
order to be a ‘good lady’.60 In Islam, these practices do not stem from a belief in 
women’s inferiority or passivity but rather from the conjecture that ‘women are 
powerful and dangerous beings’.61 As Fatima Mernissi points out, the word fitna 
(‘beautiful woman’) also means ‘chaos, disorder’.62 In Wadjda, Hussa declares, ‘A 
woman’s voice is her nakedness’ – a saying that implies that women’s voices, as 
well as their appearance, are a sexual provocation to men and therefore women 
should be both mute and covered. She admonishes Wadjda for her lack of an 
abayah and for playing hopscotch in the courtyard where workmen can see 
her. In order to go to school, girls (in the film) walk through the streets and 
courtyard, spaces of disorder because they are gender-mixed. Even inside the 
all-girls’ school, other dangers lurk; Hussa publicly shames a pair of girls for 
their lesbian desire.
Bicycle-riding is traditionally forbidden for girls in Saudi society, linked to 
anxieties about hymen loss through accidents and sporting activities. The film 
gently parodies these fears when Wadjda is learning to ride a bicycle on the 
rooftop. Upon hearing her mother approach, she falls off the bike and grazes 
her knee, crying out, ‘I’m bleeding!’ Her mother instinctively covers her eyes in 
shame, thinking that Wadjda has lost her virginity. Despite the limitations she 
faces, Wadjda has boundless ingenuity and spirit. She enters a Quran recitation 
competition to gain the cash prize to buy her bicycle. Her mercenary motivation 
has further transgressive aspects since memorizing the Quran is supposed to be 
part of a child’s religious socialization. When she wins, she is congratulated by 
Hussa for her exemplary devotion and perseverance. Wadjda rapidly transforms 
from ‘fabulous’ to ‘scandalous’ by audaciously declaring that she will use her 
prize money to buy a bicycle, one without training wheels ‘since I already know 
how to ride one’.
A subplot about Wadjda’s mother’s reliance on a chauffeur for travelling to 
work refers to Saudi Arabia’s ban on women drivers, in force at the time of the 
film’s making. In an interview, al-Mansour has suggested that the film’s concerns 
are not specifically a girl’s right to ride bicycles or women’s right to drive cars, 
but more generally about ‘denial of basic human rights to women and girls in 

Child Protagonists
73
the name of Islam and Saudi tradition’.63 Given that Saudi Arabia is a ‘religiously 
conservative place’, she is aware that she has to work within those boundaries, 
pushing them ‘bit by bit’.64 Wadjda explores these issues sensitively because it 
focuses them through the medium of a girl and a bicycle. Bicycling in a public 
space has powerful connotations of freedom, change and self-determination in 
a society with obstacles to mobility.65 Wadjda realizes her goal – her mother 
rewards her persistence by buying her a bike when Hussa withdraws the prize 
money – and races Abdullah into an open horizon, unlike the closed spaces 
shown before. Dealing with everyday restrictions rather than ultra-dramatic 
events, the film has helped to prepare the ground for social changes. The driving 
ban, which women had campaigned against since the 1990s, was finally lifted 
in 2018, as were the bans on cinemas and women riding bicycles. With changes 
afoot, al-Mansour returned to Saudi Arabia to make her fourth feature The 
Perfect Candidate (2019), about a woman who stands for local elections. For this 
film, she had no need to direct from a van.
Inspired by its Canadian-Iranian director Sadaf Foroughi’s own adolescence 
in Iran, the fiction film Ava, her debut feature, explores growing up under a 
strict, traditional society. Its sixteen-year-old protagonist, Ava, is a model student 
and talented violinist, who starts to rebel against the constraints imposed by her 
parents, school and wider society. The use of the coming-of-age genre, which 
rests on the universality of teen experience, acts as a shield against criticisms 
about its political nature. When I discussed this with Foroughi, she remarked, ‘It 
wasn’t deliberate but it’s totally true’, adding that ‘children can say things that if 
we heard an adult say, we’d go, “oh God!” With an adolescent woman, maybe it’s 
a little difficult in Iran, more difficult than a child of course, but it’s easier than an 
adult because whenever anyone asks you a question you can say, “It’s not about 
now – it’s about my adolescence”’.66 Her words evoke the Shi‘a tradition of taqiya 
which, as mentioned in this book’s Introduction, is the precautionary practice of 
dissimulating or denying one’s religious belief to avoid persecution. Yet, dealing 
with female adolescence itself posed problems for Foroughi at script approval 
stage, which took one year. Iran’s Ministry of Culture and Islamic Guidance 
told her that ‘they did not want a woman shooting a film about women’.67 So 
she altered her script: she changed her protagonist’s gender, made the narrative 
structure more straightforward and removed the subtext. With these changes, 
she obtained shooting permission, but she shot her original script, acting as her 
own producer, which gave her complete creative control over its realization.
Apart from Ava’s parents and headmistress, most roles are played by non-
professionals, including the protagonist. Like al-Mansour, Foroughi respected 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
74
laws and customs in her country of origin while making her film and believes 
they aided her creativity.68 When women are veiled, she explains, they express 
themselves more with their hands. Some shots are composed to give greater 
expressivity to characters’ hands, while the rest of their body is out of frame. 
Ava’s experimental cinematography, mise en scène and sound express its teen 
protagonist’s alienation and the generation gap between her and her parents. 
While the film uses some real locations, Ava’s family home is a constructed set, 
built specifically to emphasize characters living in the same space but in separate 
worlds. The set design was inspired by the Danish painter Vilhelm Hammershøi, 
whose paintings depict an interior world inhabited by solitary figures. Taking 
us into the private middle-class realm of Ava’s family, the film becomes like a 
chamber drama with this artificial set filled with purposefully placed objects, 
such as an antiquated rotary phone that serves themes of eavesdropping as Ava 
tiptoes around overhearing her parents talking about her and attempts private 
calls without being overheard herself. As in a chamber play, where the audience 
can hear actors whisper, sound ranges from the almost inaudible, conveying 
Ava’s auditory perspective. Scenes and characters go in and out of focus to 
highlight her increasing isolation from others.
When her mother, Bahar, discovers that Ava has secretly met Nima, a boy in 
her music lessons, she takes Ava for examination by a gynaecologist to reassure 
herself of her virginity. Of course, this would not happen if Ava were a boy. Bahar 
starts to disapprove of Ava’s music lessons, which she now believes are not just 
academically useless but also improper, leading to mixing with boys. At home, 
she puts Ava under surveillance and tighter restrictions, even threatening to 
break her violin. As in other coming-of-age narratives, Ava’s parents represent 
both parental authority and ‘a larger cultural authority’ that she is fighting 
against.69 They are also hypocritical, another genre trait, as Ava discovers when 
she stumbles on their secret: they were forced to marry when Bahar got pregnant, 
breaching the same rules against premarital sex that Ava is suspected of breaking. 
At her equally controlling all-girls high school, the headmistress Ms Dekhoda 
warns pupils over a loudspeaker that they are under constant observation and 
admonishes them with a tale about a schoolgirl in another district who disposed 
of her abortion in the school washroom, which Ava’s classmates suspect is 
concocted to lecture them on virginity. Obsessed with the school’s reputation, 
Dekhoda wears white gloves, as if protecting herself from contamination. 
Modesty is enforced by the regulation black veils worn by pupils over dark, loose 
tunics although, like her cinematic predecessors Tadai and Wadjda, Ava refuses 
to fully comply by sporting trainers: hers obtrude in bright red.

Child Protagonists
75
Through school and home life, Ava encounters the many limitations laid 
on women in a religiously conservative patriarchal society and she fights back 
with a steely determination. With a child’s naivety combined with an adult 
command of language, her voice is her tool, as she answers back to her parents’ 
and headmistress’s bullying. Significantly, Ava means ‘voice’ in Persian. Playing 
the violin is her means of creative expression which is why Bahar’s threat is so 
painful to her. As a reviewer noticed, ‘a teenage girl who presumes to challenge 
her parents and teachers is made to feel like a dissident in a police state’.70 Initially, 
Ava simply attempts to express herself, not rebel against those institutions. 
However, her actions become a rebellion against them as they try to silence her 
and she refuses to submit to their demands.71 In mounting frustration, Ava cuts 
her hand during class, an act where violence erupts suddenly as the film cuts 
from her toying with scissors to blood flicking onto the wall. With associations 
of virginity loss, the blood adds to red colours that build gradually through the 
film, expressing Ava’s rebellion and sexuality.
Ava’s attempt to assert her personhood is a huge challenge in this environment 
where external determinants overwhelm internal motives. With the full weight 
of society’s rules and laws behind them, her family and school hit back at her, 
upholding their cherished notions of honour, and their blows are harder than 
hers. In the last scene, just after she has been expelled, Ava crosses the street and 
gazes quizzically into the camera. This open ending belongs to what Foroughi 
calls the film’s ‘interactive form’, allowing the audience ‘the space to complete 
the film along with me, as the one who created it’.72 Viewers are left wondering 
how much of the story is about repression under the Islamic Republic and how 
much of it is about being a teenager. As I mention in this book’s Introduction, I 
am not arguing that allegorical modes have been entirely replaced. What I am 
emphasizing, rather, is a shift towards greater directness. The openness of Ava’s 
ending exemplifies this by leaving both possibilities – allegorical and literal 
readings – hanging in the balance.
Amal (2017) is a feature documentary that follows a teenage girl, Amal Gamel, 
from adolescence to adulthood over a six-year period against the backdrop of 
the 2011 Egyptian Revolution and its aftermath. Her coming of age mirrors the 
country’s transition during this turbulent period, interweaving the personal and 
the political. The director Mohamed Siam, who made Amal simultaneously with 
his first feature-length documentary, Whose Country? (discussed in Chapter 1), 
met her on a protest while looking for a male protagonist. Amal transformed his 
perspective and trajectory. Initially, he filmed her during the revolution when 
she was just fourteen years old, thinking just to portray her at that point in time. 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
76
However, as the revolution unexpectedly turned into counter-revolution, he 
decided to continue following her, marking anniversaries over a six-year period 
until she was twenty, and the film became an intimate coming-of-age story. Each 
year that passes after the Egyptian revolution, together with her age at the time, 
is marked by a title superimposed on a running track. Amal herself appears 
poised to run at the start position, wearing a tracksuit and Superman T-shirt. 
The passage of time is also registered by physical indicators, such as hairstyle, 
hejāb and changing figure, as Amal grows up before our eyes, her body literally 
becoming-woman onscreen.
This lends Amal a dramatic structure akin to fiction – in fact, Siam’s 
background was in fiction cinema, working as a casting director, before he 
made these two documentaries – inviting comparisons with Richard Linklater’s 
fictional coming-of-age movie Boyhood (2014), which charts a boy’s development 
from childhood to late teens.73 With a cast aging in real time during its twelve-
year shoot (including a non-professional child actor in the lead role), Boyhood 
was heralded as the first single-part movie to film its characters over such an 
extended period.74 However, several documentaries from the Middle East were 
also filmed over a prolonged time due to tumultuous circumstances after the 
uprisings, as we saw in Chapter 1. These are the conditions that gave rise to 
Amal’s structure, rather than any direct influences from Boyhood. Because Amal 
was about a girl growing up, seemingly not as controversial as Whose Country?, 
Siam considered applying for official filmmaking permits but everyone he spoke 
to about it discouraged him, intimating that the coming-of-age format offered 
no shield for a documentary on the revolutionary generation in the present 
climate.75 Therefore, like Whose Country, Amal was made underground and 
could not be shown widely in the Arab world.
The uncertainties that accompany any film produced over a long duration were 
exacerbated by changing political circumstances in Egypt. Initially enthusiastic 
about the project, Amal became more cautious as time wore on, warning Siam that 
they could no longer do everything they wanted. Furthermore, as the producer 
Myriam Sassine explains, ‘It was complex for Amal to maintain this special 
relationship with Siam’, as she was ‘constantly evolving’, growing up from a girl 
into a woman, her moods and priorities shifting as the film progressed.76 These 
constraints affected Siam’s access to her and the amount of footage he captured – 
twenty-five hours altogether, which is slim given the period that the film covers. 
However, because the film is made so artfully, nobody would be able to guess it.
Home-movie footage of Amal as a little girl, excavated from her family 
archives, is integrated into the narrative, showcasing her exuberant personality. 

Child Protagonists
77
Constantly the centre of attention, she bellows ‘Happy Birthday’ lyrics at her 
mother’s birthday celebration and blows out the candles herself. Amal has a 
star quality that demonstrates the performative nature of child and teen actors: 
she is playing a character onscreen, as well as being herself. The home-movie 
footage adds emotional dimensions to the documentary, fleshing out Amal’s 
relationship with her father, whose death a few years before the revolution 
plunged her into loneliness. In the home movies, he is always by her side or 
filming her. With characteristic flamboyance, Amal attempts to take the camera 
herself, declaring ‘I want to film!’ Her father gently reprimands her, explaining 
that he is recording her early years for posterity. As Moeller notes, parents avidly 
film their children’s early years, such as ‘first smile, first bite, first step’ but often 
lose interest when they become teenagers, except for ‘scheduled events such as 
holidays, graduations, and family reunions’.77 Amal recontextualizes childhood 
home movies within the more neglected teenage years. With their grainy, faded 
qualities, the home movies help to express the film’s themes of change and loss. 
Despite the chronological structure suggested by the racetrack device, Siam uses 
the home movie footage to cut across the linear storyline. In the voice-over, 
written in collaboration with her, Amal is introspective and downbeat, quite 
different from her high-spirited public persona. Together with the home movie 
footage layered into the narrative, this expresses her perceptions of time, not 
merely her sequential progression from childhood to womanhood.
In an early scene, we encounter the fifteen-year-old Amal at a street 
demonstration, insulting riot police. Although her small body makes her look 
vulnerable, she is fearless, expressing her anger at her first love’s death at the 
Port Said stadium riots that year. With her short hair and hoodie, she looks 
and acts like a boy, believing that finding her place on the streets beside male 
revolutionaries depends on this performance. When her friends plan to attend a 
sit-in commemorating the riot victims, they warn her, ‘Sit-ins are not for girls . . . 
Someone will harass you’. Footage of the 2011 Tahrir Square protests, when Amal 
was beaten and dragged along the ground by policemen, is shown slowed down 
with the sound cut, as if she were recalling it in a dream. Despite performing 
as a man, Amal is repeatedly held to cultural demands and expectations for 
women which identify the female body with honour. In this, her experience 
is representative of many women who participated in the Egyptian revolution 
when the army subjected women to ‘virginity tests’ and accused them of sexual 
impropriety. Their bravery in coming out to demand their rights in public was 
interpreted as ‘looseness’ and lack of respect for authority.78 Three years after 
the Revolution, Amal is pictured with her boyfriend. Her erstwhile short, curly 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
78
hair is now long and straight, and she is wearing make-up. Her boyfriend tries to 
police what she wears, complaining that she does not wear her veil consistently. 
Although Amal’s feminine appearance seems to fulfil gender expectations, she 
remains defiant, asserting, in voice-over, ‘People look at me like a woman, but 
treat me like a child’.
Central to this coming-of-age story is Amal’s politicization, forged by her 
experience of the revolution and her ideological split from her family, who 
belong to the establishment: her father was a policeman, her mother is a military 
prosecutor and her uncle is the governor of Cairo. Seen as a ‘necessary step’ of 
adolescence, ‘physical and ideological separation from parents’ is a coming-of-
age genre trope.79 These ties to genre and adolescent experience make Amal’s 
politicization particular and universal at the same time, dramatized in heated 
exchanges with her mother about the then upcoming 2012 presidential election. 
Neither of the two candidates, Chafik (who belonged to the deposed, corrupt 
Mubarak regime) and Mohammed Morsi (leader of the Muslim Brotherhood), 
speaks for the revolutionary generation. For Amal, herself too young to vote, 
the choice is between ‘two evils’, and she is certain that Chafik is the bigger evil. 
Her mother, however, favours him. Amal accuses her of continuing to support 
Mubarak, despite the brutal crackdown he ordered, with teargas, torture and 
killings, which she herself witnessed first-hand, while her mother watched state 
propaganda. But even her mother saw Amal’s bruised body after policemen 
abused her on Tahrir Square. ‘If you vote for a military candidate, I’m going to 
disown you’, Amal reproaches her, abruptly ending the conversation by removing 
her mic and walking out, slamming the door behind her – an extraordinary 
moment, not only for its frankness but also because Amal decides that she does 
not want to ‘perform’ anymore, reminding us that the film is dependent on her. 
The scene recalls the moment halfway through Panahi’s The Mirror where the 
child protagonist Mina looks directly into the camera, rips off her arm cast 
and declares that she will not act anymore. But whereas in that film, the child’s 
assertive agency is contrived by the director as a self-reflexive gesture that reveals 
the technical apparatus and crew behind the film, in Amal, the protagonist’s 
actual agency threatens the production.
Later, Amal is pondering her life options at a cafe, where she is studying with 
a friend. She looks visibly different, studious and modestly dressed with a veil. 
‘Nobody gets what they want in Egypt’, she says, resignedly. Despite her name 
which, as her friend says, means ‘hope’ in Arabic, she expresses disillusionment 
as she realizes her limited choices upon coming of age in post-revolutionary 
Egypt. Many of her friends from Tahrir Square have been killed, are in jail 

Child Protagonists
79
or have left the country. Those who remain are mired in the country’s social, 
political and economic crisis. Amal contemplates joining the police, thinking 
she might change the system from inside. In the final shot, Amal is aged twenty 
and feeling her pregnant belly on the racetrack. The electronic dance rhythms of 
Mash’rou Leila’s song ‘Ashabi’ give the film an uplifting ending which is belied by 
Amal’s voice-over and the lyrics, speaking of loneliness and a desperate attempt 
to fit in. For Siam, Amal’s personal story is representative of the revolutionary 
generation ‘who have to find their place, whether they are going to be part of the 
system or defying the system or leaving the country’.80 Now coming of age, this 
generation that underwent a utopian experience has to relinquish its dreams and 
somehow find a way of surviving with limited choices.
Conclusion
As a creative strategy inherited from neorealist practice, child protagonists offer 
filmmakers from the region a means of working within traditions of gender 
segregation and infrastructural constraints caused by crisis. Precisely because 
children are held to be uncontentious, they create safe grounds for speaking 
about difficult topics, acting as witnesses to the crises that permeate their daily 
lives. While filmmakers remain invested in children as symbols of the future 
and proxies for adult agendas, this chapter has charted a shift away from this 
allegorical usage towards a more direct and politicized approach that emphasizes 
children’s experiential perspectives: not only does this highlight their creative 
agency and idiosyncratic worldviews but also their interactions with their 
crisis environment. Along with this, there has been another shift towards teen 
protagonists whose coming of age generates another kind of crisis image as 
they evolve into adults and test the limits of their societies in their bid for self-
expression and search for identity. The use of teen protagonists throws into relief 
the licence afforded to child protagonists and shows how the strategy becomes 
riskier and more politicized in proportion to the child’s age, particularly for 
teenage girls who are becoming women.

80

Marjane Satrapi’s animated feature Persepolis (2007) narrates turbulent events in 
Iran from the perspective of its child and teen protagonist, Marji. When Marji’s 
uncle Anoosh tells her about his dissident past, the story comes to life through 
simple but striking black-and-white backgrounds and characters that move 
like puppets, almost as if the child who is hearing the story drew these images 
herself. After Anoosh’s arrest and execution, Marji appears to float in a black 
void, conveying her sense of loss and isolation, surrounded by two miniature 
swans that he sculpted for her from his prison bread. During the Iran-Iraq War 
(1980–8), a missile falls in her neighbourhood and Marji sees a disembodied 
hand in the rubble; the film focuses on her horrified expression, then fades to 
black. Through colour palette, movement, shape, texture and character design, 
the animation does not just document the brutalities but evokes a subjective 
world and feelings of what it is like to live through such events. By shifting 
attention from physical violence to Marji’s dream-like imaginings and the 
horror present in her look, its abstract style poses an alternative both to graphic 
explicitness and news images of crisis.
Like the memoir upon which it is based, Persepolis was a critical and 
commercial success, although it was temporarily banned in Lebanon and 
provoked controversy in Iran and Tunisia.1 Along with the Israeli film Waltz 
with Bashir (2008), it led a wave of animation films from and about the Middle 
East, many of them produced outside the region by émigré directors. Through 
its case studies of The Green Wave (2010), Tehran Taboo (2017), The Wanted 18 
(2014) and Suleima (2014), this chapter explores animation as a creative solution 
for overcoming some of the constraints that beset live-action production during 
crises in the region, such as difficulty of access to locations, absence of live-action 
material, need for anonymity and censorship. In animation, the filmmaker 
creates a world by hand or computer, something that can, theoretically, be 
achieved anywhere and does not require filming on location. This lends it the 
­3
Animation

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
82
ability to bring to life places, events and experiences ‘that might otherwise prove 
logistically difficult or impossible to depict onscreen using other production 
methods’.2
As we will see, in addition to overcoming constraints, animation offers 
many opportunities, one of which is that abstract, generic animated characters 
can often elicit wider audience empathy than live-action counterparts.3 This 
underlies Satrapi’s preference for animation in the movie adaptation of Persepolis. 
Live-action, she says, ‘would have turned [it] into a story of people living in a 
distant land who don’t look like us . . . The novels have been a worldwide success 
because the drawings are abstract, black-and-white’.4 Animation creates an 
aesthetic distance from reality, lending it a degree of abstraction that invites 
audiences to complete the images with their imaginations. In this respect, it 
bears an affinity with the prohibition on figurative images in some branches 
of Islam where only God holds the creative power of image-making. Laura 
Marks suggests that Islamic art has been stimulated by this constraint since 
avoidance of figurative representation liberates artists from the need for realism 
and allows new, aniconic creative forms to develop.5 This is exemplified by 
Arabic calligraphy with its lively shape-shifting letters that bounce around like 
animated characters.6 Calligraphy is among several proto-animated forms from 
the Middle East that have led writers to locate the origins of animation there.7 
However, this is not how animation evolved in the region; instead, it took shape 
through encounters with animated movies from abroad.
Animation studies scholars often assert that animation is a strategy of free 
expression, in one form or other. According to Paul Wells, anything is possible 
in animation since it is free from our world’s physical laws. Animated characters 
can stay suspended in mid-air or fly, defying gravity. With these properties, the 
medium has the potential to ‘resist the conventions of the material world and 
the “realist” representation that characterises live-action cinema’.8 Line, shape 
and colour, too, have shape-shifting properties. In his writings on Disney, 
Soviet filmmaker Sergei Eisenstein enthused about animation’s ability to adopt 
any shape and reject ‘allotted form’.9 He distinguished this protean quality 
in Disney’s early animations from technical developments and commercial 
imperatives driving it towards more realistic representations. For Nea Ehrlich, 
the ‘constructed nature of animation’ brings ‘limitless’ representational options, 
assuring ‘artistic freedom’ and the creator’s ‘omnipotence’.10 From this, there 
is only one step to arguing, as Wells does, that because animation does not 
have to refer to ‘the real world’, it can operate outside its moral and ideological 
boundaries.

Animation
83
Yet  although animation seems free from constraints, in practice it comes 
with its own limitations, which make it difficult to sustain the ideology of the 
free artist running through some of these claims. As Iranian-born filmmaker 
Ali Soozandeh told me, ‘it depends on the story you want to tell. If you want 
to tell a story about everyday life, you cannot really be abstract in animation 
because the story would be unbelievable. But if you have a fantasy story or a 
story for children, you have fewer limitations.’11 Not all forms of animation 
can embrace its freedoms, since factors of genre and intended audience often 
make filmmakers lean towards the photorealistic characteristics of live-action 
cinema rather than the abstraction of avant-garde animation or cartoons.12 The 
widespread view that animation is for children means that, despite international 
breakthroughs such as Persepolis and Waltz with Bashir, adult animation is still 
perceived as niche by funders and distributors. Soozandeh explains, ‘As live 
action, you have hundreds of examples, but for animation for adults you have 
only five, ten, twelve examples and that’s not enough for people who want to 
invest in a film.’13 For his film Tehran Taboo (2017), Soozandeh’s team had to 
create a trailer to convince funders that the adult themes and story would work 
in animation; eventually it was co-financed by German and French television 
stations ZDF and Arte.
Other limitations are time and money, as well as technological capabilities 
and the production company’s priorities. Traditionally, animation is a time-
consuming, expensive process, requiring vast amounts of human labour, 
as was the case for Persepolis which Satrapi opted to make as 2D handmade 
animation. A team of twenty artists traced character movements at a light box, 
using top drawings as a guide – a painstaking process that was costlier than 
the average French live-action film at the time.14 Digital technologies have 
increased affordability, since many arduous jobs, such as colouring and drawing 
‘in between’ movements, are achievable on computers, although showing fluid 
movement is still time-consuming.
Animation is generally thought to be non-indexical because it does not 
record objects and people before the camera in the same manner as live action. 
However, as Marks suggests, ‘Animation indexes the hand that made it, the 
labor and time that went into it.’15 The diverse materials and techniques that 
animators adopt leave indexical marks on the art itself, extending to computer-
based animation, which indexes the software and hardware that produced 
it. Animation is indexical in this broader sense, pointing to its production 
processes. For example, the reversion to traditional hand-drawn animation in 
Persepolis renders it distinctive in an era when 3D CGI animation has become 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
84
industry standard, driven by an obsession to make films more photorealistic. 
As Satrapi explains, ‘the hand can make something the machine can never do’.16 
Because of the indexical quality of animation, I argue that, just like other films 
in this book, the animated films in this chapter are documents of their working 
constraints.
There is a long history of animation providing solutions to filmmaking 
constraints during crises. An early example is The Sinking of the Lusitania 
(1918) by the US animator Windsor McCay, which portrays the sinking of a 
British passenger ship by a German submarine in 1915. Since there was no 
footage of the actual disaster, McCay aimed ‘to draw a historical record’, as the 
opening titles state. In a live-action prologue, we see him gathering testimony 
from a first-hand witness, the journalist August F. Beach, and working on the 
drawings with a team of artists. Despite purporting to be factual, the account 
is embellished with imagined details, such as startled fish fleeing from a 
torpedo. The Sinking of the Lusitania is a significant precursor of the films 
in this chapter because it uses animation to ‘witness’ crisis in the absence of 
live-action material. For Annabelle Honess Roe, it inaugurates the tradition 
of animated documentary in which animation serves as an alternative to the 
standard documentary practice of dramatic re-enactment – ‘a way of creatively 
treating actuality’, she says, invoking John Grierson’s influential definition of 
documentary.17
In former communist Eastern Europe, animation helped filmmakers to 
overcome state censorship. The conditions in which they operated were similar 
to those faced by filmmakers in the Middle East: ‘direct questioning of the 
government or society were forbidden, and vagueness of narratives or complete 
abstraction were looked upon as highly suspect. The most favoured films were 
uplifting or educational, with clearly delineated plots.’18 As in the Middle East, 
filmmakers knew which topics they should avoid, such as direct criticism of 
politicians and the state, and found ways of working around these constraints. 
According to Wells, animation was able to flourish in Eastern Europe partly 
because of its association with ‘harmless’ children’s entertainment. On the 
one hand, this marginalized animators’ work. On the other, it carved out an 
‘apparently unguarded space to create films with surface pleasures and hidden 
depths’.19 Symbols and metaphors aided in evoking these other meanings. 
For example, the Czech puppet animation The Hand (1965) by Jiri Trnka is a 
‘seemingly innocent fable’ about a sculptor tormented by a hand, a symbol for the 
state that alludes to restrictions on artistic expression.20 Many Eastern European 
animators chose to work with wooden puppets, their ‘rigid’ faces, ‘incapable of 

Animation
85
stretching to show a smile or speak’.21 Yet, as we see in Trnka’s film, the sculptor 
is remarkably expressive, by dint of subtle manipulations of movement, lighting, 
setting, camera angle and framing. For Trnka, the puppet’s inflexibility was a 
productive constraint, since it ‘forces the artist to find a narrative solution 
more creative than merely showing a smile or frown’.22 Although much Western 
literature on Eastern European animators focuses on state censorship, other 
types of constraints, including self-imposed ones, were just as important to their 
creative endeavours.
In Iran, animation has been supported by training centres and festivals since 
the 1960s. For example, the Centre for the Intellectual Development of Children 
and Young Adults (Kanun) brought animation into its remit of children’s films 
and, in 1966, launched its International Festival of Films for Children and 
Young Adults which gave prominence to Eastern European animation, inspiring 
Iranian filmmakers with this alternative tradition.23 Kanun also sent filmmakers 
to European countries, especially in Eastern Europe, in order to learn animation 
skills. One of Iran’s preeminent animators, Nourredin Zarrinkelk, himself sent 
students to train at Trnka’s workshop in Czechoslovakia. Along with festivals, 
Iranian television offered opportunities for encountering world animation. 
When the Islamic Republic was formed, the introduction of Islamic rules and 
regulations reduced the diversity of broadcast animation; however, Eastern 
European and Japanese animation remained on air.24
Before the Revolution, Iranian animation mainly consisted of experimental 
shorts – for example, Zarrinkelk’s satire Mad, Mad, Mad World (1975) in which 
a globe reveals countries shape-shifting into birds and beasts that squawk, 
consume and squabble with each other. Filmmakers such as Zarrinkelk and 
Ali Akbar Sadeghi attempted to create a distinctively Iranian style of animation 
influenced by Persian miniature paintings, folktales and black-and-white 
lithographs in illustrated books, leaving their mark on newer generations of 
animators such as Satrapi whose magic realist monochrome style in Persepolis 
recalls these works. During the Islamic Republic, state support for animation 
has continued, enabling Iran to remain one of the few countries in the Middle 
East with an animation tradition and infrastructure. However, the state uses 
animation to promulgate its Islamic and cultural values. For example, SABA 
Cultural and Artistic Incorporation, created in 1994, is the government’s major 
investor in animation and exerts a huge influence on policies for television 
animation. Studios and filmmakers blame its bureaucratic approval process and 
political and ideological criteria for the shortcomings of animation in Iran.25 
Despite this, diverse animations for the purposes of entertainment, satire and 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
86
education are made there. However, while Iranian live-action films are widely 
known abroad, regularly appearing at international film festivals, Iranian 
animation is less globally visible.
By contrast, in the Arab world, there has historically not been much support 
for animation. Apart from constraints of budget, infrastructure (including 
training schools and dedicated festivals) and state control and censorship 
of traditional media, the widely held assumption that animation is only for 
children may have been a factor.26 The Jordanian animator Tariq al-Rimawi 
reports that, for many years in the Arab world, imported animation films and 
television programmes were aimed at children; Eastern European animation, 
which could have offered an alternative model, did not tend to be screened. 
Ironically, given the relative lack of home-grown production, many animated 
films in the West and Japan have been inspired by Arabic (and Persian) stories 
and aesthetics, especially from The Thousand and One Nights.27 However, 
as al-Rimawi points out, Western animations of these sources are filled with 
Orientalist stereotypes – for example, Walt Disney’s Aladdin (1992). While 
animation’s generic representations can facilitate cross-cultural identification, 
they can, just as easily, be racist. In the absence of direct encounter with other 
people and places, the animator’s creative control over the animated world can 
reinforce existing worldviews and the invisibility of the marginalized.28 This has 
urged some Middle Eastern filmmakers to create animated characters that are 
more recognizable to them or battle this stereotyping. For instance, in Persepolis, 
Satrapi partially deracializes her characters and individualizes their facial and 
bodily features to counter the stereotyping of Middle Eastern characters that 
constructs them as inferior and ‘other’.
In 2008, the Syrian filmmaker Akram Agha made the animated short The 
General’s Boot, expressing dissent through synecdoche: army boots evoke 
the authoritarian state and its repressive apparatus, while worn shoes stand 
for ordinary people. Immediately after the Tunisian and Egyptian uprisings 
and just before the Syrian one, Agha uploaded the film to YouTube.29 As we 
saw in Chapter 1, ‘the Arab Spring’ temporarily expanded the boundaries of 
free expression by showing the power of social media and diminishing the 
grip of censorship. It also stimulated interest in animation in the region, as 
filmmakers and activists were emboldened to produce and distribute overtly 
political work online, including earlier banned animated films. As al-Rimawi 
recounts, it resulted in ‘an explosion in the exposure of Arab animation artists 
and their work to the world, in comparison to the very limited opportunities 
and freedoms of the past’.30 In addition, more affordable digital technologies 

Animation
87
have assisted animation’s rebirth in the Middle East, accompanied by new 
training opportunities through university courses offering animation and hubs 
for nurturing local talent.31
New technologies have moreover enabled the use of animation in an ever-
widening range of contexts. From cinema and television, through advertising and 
music videos to video games, visual effects, data visualization, virtual reality and 
gifs, animation is now present in a broad ‘animation spectrum’.32 One outlet has 
been human rights reporting. Amnesty International, Human Rights Watch and 
journalists for the Al Jazeera channel AJ+ have used animation, often combined 
with anonymized survivor testimony, to raise awareness of crimes such as 
mass killings in Syria’s detention centre Saydnaya, torture in Ethiopian prisons 
and genocidal rape of Rohingya women in Myanmar.33 It is also increasingly 
incorporated into human rights documentaries to tell empathetic stories 
about individuals whose rights are at risk or have been violated. Documenting 
violence raises ethical problems, such as how to represent subjects with dignity, 
that constrain what can be shown by responsible filmmakers. Since animation 
is not limited by what can be or has been filmed, and is capable of visually 
rendering what lies beyond the observable world, it lends itself to alternative 
ways of witnessing crisis. As we saw in Persepolis, this can shift the emphasis to 
subjective perspectives, such as witnesses’ emotional reactions and memories, 
rather than graphic violence. It thus helps to solve both ethical and logistical 
problems generated by crisis, such as missing, censored or inappropriate footage, 
restricted access and the need for participant anonymity. The following case 
studies provide specific examples of how animation acts as a creative solution 
to these constraints.
Storytelling in the absence of much live-action footage:  
The Green Wave
The feature documentary The Green Wave (2010), directed by Ali Samadi 
Ahadi, an Iranian based in Germany, tells the story of the Green Movement, a 
popular movement to elect the reformist Mir-Hossein Mousavi in Iran’s 2009 
presidential election. It transformed into a protest movement when the election 
result returned Mahmoud Ahmadinejad as president, leading to widespread 
speculation of fraud. The state responded to protests with torture, rape and 
killings. Providing a record that was off-limits to conventional news media, 
since foreign reporters were expelled, The Green Wave informs an international 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
88
audience about these human rights breaches, to ensure that they are not 
forgotten. It uses animation to depict what would otherwise be undepictable 
through the storylines of two fictional animated characters, Azedeh and Kaveh, 
whose words and experiences, spoken by émigré Iranian actors, are taken from 
blogs written at the time. The storylines link different types of factual material: 
YouTube footage of protests and state brutality filmed on mobile phones by 
citizen witnesses, date-stamped transcripts of blog entries and Twitter posts and 
interviews filmed later in Europe with human rights campaigners and exiled 
Green Movement supporters.
Soozandeh was The Green Wave’s art director, an émigré himself, having left 
Iran at the age of twenty-five to study filmmaking in Germany, where he began 
creating animation for documentary films. He explained to me, ‘The problem 
was we had no images for telling the story. We had a lot of YouTube clips made 
by Iranians inside Iran with cellphones, but we wanted to tell the fictive story of 
two characters.’34 Since live-action re-enactment was beyond the documentary’s 
limited budget, the production team opted for animated illustrations, which could 
visualize the textual content of blogs and tweets while still protecting the identities 
of their writers in Iran who would face certain punishment if they openly testified.
The animation was based on drawings by illustrator Alireza Darvish in the 
style of comic book panels using a predominantly green colour scheme, reflecting 
the Green Movement’s iconography. Working within the documentary’s budget 
constraints, the team chose a limited form of animation in which the characters 
are still, with movement suggested through mobile camera and backgrounds, 
offering another challenge: how to tell a story with still characters. Generally, 
2D animation moves between two extremes, full and limited animation, even 
within a given film. Exemplified by Disney films and, to a lesser degree, by 
Persepolis, full animation necessitates more images per second to generate 
fluid animated movements. Limited animation, on the other hand, uses fewer 
drawings per second with less character movement. To save time and money, 
it recycles sequences and deploys camera movement to generate impressions 
of motion, while voice-over narration avoids the complex drawings needed 
for synchronizing movement to dialogue.35 Like Waltz with Bashir, which uses 
computer-based cut-out animation, The Green Wave belongs to the pole of 
limited animation. Furthermore, it contains hybrid images that are both still 
and moving, produced by combining drawings with live-action mobile phone 
footage. In one scene, Kaveh recalls the day of his arrest, when he was travelling 
on a motorbike with his friend who was filming on his mobile. As he describes 

Animation
89
how they were attacked and beaten by plain-clothed security forces, footage 
of such an event is replayed on the wall behind the animated character, as if 
projecting his memories onto a screen. Despite lack of character movements, the 
animated images evoke a plausible dramatic story-world, drawing in viewers to 
engage with documentary content.
In order to establish documentary credibility for the film’s claims about a 
peaceful reform movement suppressed by state brutality, animated sequences 
are incorporated strategically. Attempts are made to lessen the animation’s 
fictional character by, for example, displaying the dates of the blog entry that 
form the basis for each scene’s imagery. Verbal and visual testimony reinforces 
the animated sequences, and vice versa. At the same time, animation vividly 
dramatizes events, switching from the past tense narration by interviewees in 
the audio track to a present tense visualization in the animation that enacts 
their words and experiences with a powerful immediacy. The journalist Mitra 
Khalatbari describes how the city ‘turned into a military zone’ after Supreme 
Leader Ayatollah Khameni endorsed Ahmadinejad in his 19 June Friday night 
sermon, licensing the Basji militia to violently punish protesters. Police and 
militia members were everywhere, charging on motorcycles towards a large 
group of protestors and dispersing them into side-streets. The film visualizes 
Khalatbari’s anecdote of a boy emerging onto the street. Seemingly oblivious of 
events, he enters the supermarket, buys a tub of yoghurt and walks out again. 
A police squadron approaches on motorcycles and beats him up, leaving him 
lying on the street, bleeding over the spilled yoghurt. The scene is dynamically 
presented through a variety of angles, including the reactions of two female 
witnesses – Mousavi supporters dressed in green – paralysed in shock, standing 
in for Khalatbari.
It is the animation that enables viewers to experience the motorcycle gang’s 
attack, even though it was not filmed, or the overcrowded prisons, where 
cameras are not allowed. Through animated illustrations of Kaveh’s story, 
the film evokes the inhumane conditions inside Kharizak Prison, where he is 
detained in a cell with 200 other wounded protestors. Azadeh, meanwhile, is 
shown being arrested and taken to Evin Prison, where she is interrogated for 
being on Mousavi’s election campaign team. Alternating with interviews, which 
give credence to the visuals, the animation builds subtle details about these 
places. For example, in the courtyard, Azadeh finds names of former prisoners 
etched on the wall – a detail that makes this place, unknown to those outside, 
more imaginable.

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
90
‘Thinking without censorship’: Tehran Taboo
Even more than The Green Wave, Soozandeh’s fictional feature Tehran Taboo is 
concerned with using animation to overcome censorship. It opens with snow 
falling in the beam of car headlights. When the car halts by the kerb, a sex 
worker and her young boy step inside. Animated in sultry browns and reds, the 
prostitute offers the driver a blowjob while her son sits in the backseat, gazing 
through the window. Moments later, the driver crashes the car in a fit of outrage 
when he sees his daughter holding hands with a man on the street. Tehran 
Taboo’s three storylines show characters encountering sexual restrictions and 
the double standards that accompany them, resulting in one type of behaviour in 
public and another in private. It arose from Soozandeh’s own questioning of the 
restrictions under which he had grown up; restrictions that are not specific to 
Iran but characterize Middle Eastern societies and their diasporic communities 
more generally, such as the concept of female honour, which is linked to family 
honour (as discussed in Chapter 2).
Animation has a long history of dealing with taboo subject matter, harking 
back to sixteenth-century flip books consisting of erotic drawings that 
show sexual acts when flicked, a proto-cinematic form of pornography that 
‘recognises the possibility in “animation” of expressing feelings and thoughts 
about taboo subjects without inhibition’.36 Through its title and opening scene, 
Tehran Taboo advertises itself as taboo-breaking. As an animated film made in 
the diaspora, it circumvents both the need for location shooting in Iran and 
state approval. It depicts many controversial subjects – sex acts, prostitution, 
nudity, alcohol, drug-taking, underground clubs, crowds gathering to take 
photographs at public executions, political corruption, divorce, abortion, 
premarital virginity loss, sex-trafficking and suicide – many of which have been 
tackled in Iranian cinema since the Khatami era, as mentioned in Chapter 2. As 
Soozandeh acknowledges, ‘none of these issues are taboo in Iran – everybody 
knows “it” and everybody does “it”. The taboo is, in our culture, talking about 
the problems in public.’37
What distinguishes Tehran Taboo from cinema made within Iran is that 
it can address these topics directly, ‘without thinking of censorship’, while 
filmmakers active inside Iran must find creative ways around the restrictions, 
traditionally by speaking indirectly.38 But, Soozandeh adds, ‘talking directly 
is not the usual way in our culture. I see the faces of Iranian audiences in 
the cinema when they see the film. They are shocked. They cannot really 
believe that we show a blowjob in a film about Iranian society.’39 During the 

Animation
91
film’s première at Cannes, there was a brief backlash from Iranian newspapers 
claiming that it was ‘anti-Iranian’ or ‘anti-Islamic’.40 But altogether there were 
more negative reactions from Iranians outside Iran than from Iran itself.41 
Despite often living with greater freedoms, diasporic communities can cling 
onto cultural customs and values more faithfully than those within the country 
itself. So it is not surprising that, accustomed to indirectness as an accepted 
cultural and cinematic norm, many diasporic Iranians found the film’s direct 
manner unsettling and ‘vulgar’.
The animation technique used in Tehran Taboo, rotoscoping, aids its 
directness. Soozandeh describes it as a process lying ‘between live action and 
animation’.42 Rotoscoping is recognized for its ability to create ‘animated images 
that move with a high degree of realism’, since it captures the actual movements 
of real bodies.43 This made it suitable for Tehran Taboo which aims to create a 
plausible story world for an adult audience. However, rotoscoping can make the 
actors recognizable; therefore, the animation cannot protect identities in the way 
that it does in Suleima, as analysed later in this chapter. Soozandeh told me that 
he discussed this issue with his actors, who had no problems with it. As Iranians 
living and working in Europe, appearing in the film did not pose a significant 
risk. Moreover, some actors were particularly keen to take part to highlight the 
theme of double standards. For example, Zahra Amir Ebrahimi, who plays Sara, 
used to be a famous actress in Iran, starring in the TV series Nargess (2006–7). 
After a video of her having extramarital sex circulated on the Internet, she could 
no longer work in the country and was forced to leave. In Tehran Taboo, her 
character’s story is that of a discontented housewife who finds her life destroyed 
by a prank sex phone call, which bears parallels with what happened to her.
With rotoscoping, viewers can perceive the ghostly traces of live-action figures 
beneath the animation, an ‘uncanny sense of reality haunting the animated 
image’.44 In Tehran Taboo, it endows characters with life-like appearances, 
capturing the subtleties of actors’ expressions, from their realistically animated 
eyes to their idiosyncratic gestures, and artfully renders them in striking colours: 
predominantly green, brown and red. Soozandeh says he sought to make the film 
colourful: ‘When I think back to my childhood in Iran, the images I remember 
are very colourful images . . . When I watch films from Iran, they are not really 
colourful and that’s why I wanted to go further with colour, because I miss the 
colour in Iranian films.’45 Despite this, the film has a dark mood, since it dwells 
on characters worn down by everyday pressures. The animation expresses the 
predicaments sitting heavily upon their features with shadows created by mixing 
complementary colours.

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
92
The film depicts an imaginary Tehran that evokes its distinctive look and 
atmosphere yet is not intended to be cartographically accurate. Its districts were 
recreated in CGI animation using photographs of stores, buildings and streets; 
the backgrounds and animated characters were later composited together. 
Pulsating with colour and movement, this animated Tehran is a surreal space, 
mutable and disintegrating like in a nightmare. Red and green are predominant 
in scenes involving the prostitute Pari, contrasting colours which create jarring 
effects and accentuate her scarlet headscarf. A nightclub bathes the musician 
Babak and other dancers in swathes of pink and purple. Other city scenes are 
more subdued, with buildings forming a beige background against which dark 
shadows are cast.
Rotoscoping came with its own challenges, especially of giving actors and 
crew orientation when filming on a soundstage with green screen and minimal 
props. In order to establish a connection to the scene, the entire environment 
and its sounds have to be imagined. Rotoscoping software enables separation of 
layers of the image – characters, backgrounds, colours, lights – so that animators 
can work on and ‘fix’ in place particular parts. But because there were different 
teams working separately on different layers, it was difficult for them to imagine 
the result and remain motivated during the long post-production process, which 
took thirteen months for the animation alone. Furthermore, while rotoscoping 
has the advantage of bringing ‘a bit of reality to the animation’, it imposes 
constraints upon the scope of the world that is created: filmmakers cannot turn 
it into something very abstract, as they generally have to abide by physical laws.46
Yet, despite its realism and directness, Tehran Taboo retains a degree of 
abstraction by virtue of its use of animation. As Soozandeh accepts, ‘this 
abstraction creates a distance to the story we see. It helps us, as the audience, 
to create a room in our head for self-imagination.’47 Viewers fill in the gaps of 
what isn’t being shown. This counterbalances the film’s sex and violence, which 
might be more confrontational if shown in live action. Moreover, there is one 
scene in Tehran Taboo in which the colours become unreal, which Soozandeh 
identifies as the limit of the film’s abstraction. In this scene, Sara walks across a 
bridge. Around her, figures are animated in blood red as we hear voices in her 
head echoing on the soundtrack: snippets from the prank sex phone call that 
Pari made from Sara’s phone and Sara’s conversation with her mother-in-law, 
who warns that the culprit will be found. The abstract colours express the danger 
that Sara finds herself in, knowing that the phone call will be traced to her. As 
Stanley Cavell, otherwise known as a detractor of the medium, perceptively 
notes about animation, ‘The difference between [the animated world] and the 

Animation
93
world we inhabit is not that the world of animation is governed by [different 
laws] . . . its laws are often quite similar. The difference is that [in animation] we 
are uncertain when or to what extent our laws and limits do and do not apply’.48 
This uncertainty becomes especially poignant in Sara’s story. When she finds 
herself accused, she attaches herself to a kite on the rooftop, determined to show 
she is an angel, complete with wings, and leaps off, tragically lacking gravity-
defying cartoon abilities.
Replacing the missing Palestinian archive: The Wanted 18
The feature animated documentary The Wanted 18 (2014) tells a story of civil 
disobedience in the occupied West Bank during the First Intifada (1987–93). 
Deciding to boycott Israeli goods, Palestinian residents in the town of Beit 
Sahour bought eighteen cows from a kibbutz in order to set up a cooperative 
farm and produce their own milk. The subversiveness of this backyard farming 
lay in demonstrating to the occupying power its lack of control. The Israeli army 
subsequently declared the cows a security threat, turning them into fugitives 
from the law. The Wanted 18’s co-director Amer Shomali, who has a background 
as a cartoonist, first read about the events in a comic he came across during his 
childhood in a Palestinian refugee camp in Syria, as he tells us in voice-over 
in the film’s opening. Shomali relocated to Palestine in 1997. By then, the First 
Intifada was long over, but the comic remained an inspiration for The Wanted 
18, for which he was partnered with a Canadian co-director, Paul Cowan. 
The film took five years to make, its lengthy schedule owing not only to the 
geographical distance between key collaborators but also its complex, mixed-
media composition, consisting of Claymation, comic book-style pen-and-ink 
drawings, still photographs, archival footage, interviews with witnesses and 
dramatic re-enactments with their children playing their younger selves.
The context is that of a missing Palestinian archive. Palestinian films are 
an important archive of Palestinian experience, yet historically these archives 
have been full of gaps and subject to erasure. Filmmaking units established by 
the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) in the 1960s and 1970s operated 
statelessly. In 1982, when Israel invaded Beirut (then the PLO’s base), the PLO 
archive was lost. Palestinians have also lacked control over ‘the ideological frames’ 
through which their images are circulated.49 On the one hand, they have been 
associated with terrorism through the hypervisibility of Palestinian violence on 
the news and, on the other, with victimhood, under the humanitarian gaze of 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
94
organizations such as the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine 
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) which built its own archive. As Shomali 
found when his team looked for archival footage from the First Intifada, most 
of it ‘came from news agencies and they either filmed the Palestinians as victims 
or as terrorists’.50 No camera, it seems, had recorded Palestinians engaging in 
non-violent resistance, such as teaching children at home when Israeli forces 
closed schools or milking cows to produce their own food. ‘So basically we took 
the animation as a tool to recreate an alternative archival footage as if we had the 
chance to represent ourselves in that time’, Shomali explains.51
The Wanted 18 is part of a growing trend for using animation as a substitute 
for a lost Palestinian archive: a method of accessing an otherwise inaccessible 
past.52 The lack of filmed material makes the motivation for using animation 
similar to The Green Wave. However, The Wanted 18 puts a humorous spin on 
these issues, as animated cow sequences are used as documentary evidence. 
These Claymation sequences are filmed in black and white, with backgrounds 
that minimalistically evoke the settings, and are made to blend in with other 
footage, playfully suggesting their equivalence as documentary sources. 
While the re-enactments show scenes from the Palestinians’ perspective, the 
Claymation portrays the cows’ takes on the same events. Moreover, the cartoon 
style occasionally punctures the more conventional documentary formats, as 
when pen-and-ink drawings spill into the same frame as the interviews through 
split-screen compositions.
While humour as a strategy in itself is the topic of Chapter 6, here it can be seen 
as a function within animation, for animated films frequently provoke laughter.53 
Although not all animated films are funny (nor are they intended to be), the use 
of animation can add humour which, in the case of The Wanted 18, reinforces 
the absurdity of circumstances related in the story. The cows are distinctively 
animated, with their own voices and personalities, the principal characters being 
Rivka, Ruth, Lola and Goldie. In interview, Shomali has mentioned that there are 
three language-versions of the film to date: ‘The English version, where the cows 
and I are speaking in English, another where we speak in Arabic . . . and a French 
version.’54 Animated animals who talk often derive their humour from their 
partial resemblance to human traits or, conversely, traits that defy physical laws 
such as stretching, squashing, bouncing and walking off a cliff unharmed. From 
this we can extrapolate that animations are perceived as funny to the extent that 
they transgress physical laws; when they confirm more realistic expectations, 
they tend towards the tragic, as we saw in Tehran Taboo. Human traits build 
audiences’ rapport with the cows. Shomali suggests, half-jokingly, that the cows 

Animation
95
are the main site of identification because ‘it’s easier for [the] Western audience 
to sympathize with the cow rather than a Palestinian’.55 Moreover, he says, ‘people 
get bored after 60 years with all the films and reports about Palestine.’ The 
animated cows, therefore, revitalize what has come to be seen as ‘tired’ subject 
matter; the bitter irony of this strategy is not lost on some of the film’s audiences 
and certainly not its makers.
At first, the cows object to being bought by the Palestinians, and try to escape. 
On their side, Beit Sahour residents have no experience of cow-rearing, since 
this does not belong to their traditional culture or existing skillset. In one scene, 
shot from a cow’s point of view, a clay Palestinian is pictured hopelessly trying 
to milk a cow. In another, clay-animated scene, the military governor wakes up 
in a sweat from a nightmare in which cows are parading with Palestinian flags. 
From being in opposition, the cows and Palestinians become unlikely allies in 
their joint experience of being targeted as security threats. When the military 
governor comes to take photographs of each cow with its identification number, 
the cows pose for suspect profile photos against height chart backgrounds. A 
huge military search campaign is launched after they disappear. Now they are 
‘wanted cows’ which is a ‘joke’, as one interviewee remarks, while another recalls 
soldiers carrying photos of cows. The film animates this scenario with a cow on 
a ‘WANTED’ poster in the street and cows hiding behind bushes and in people’s 
Figure  3.1  Claymation cows become a source of empathy, ‘wanted’ by the Israeli 
army. The Wanted 18 directed by Amer Shomali and Paul Cowan, 2014 © Bellota 
Films, Dar Films and Intuitive Pictures. All Rights Reserved.

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
96
houses as soldiers hunt for them. The clay puppets’ hardness and weight are 
recruited to convey the absurdity of hiding these large animals from the Israeli 
army as well as to empathize with their weariness, as they are reluctantly shunted 
from place to place, part of The Wanted 18’s ironic tactic of centring animated 
cows as sources of empathy instead of Palestinians.
Protecting anonymity: Suleima
Filmmakers have a responsibility to protect their interviewees’ anonymity when 
the topic is sensitive or when the participant’s security is at risk. A common 
convention in live-action documentary is silhouetting the interviewee; animation 
serves as a ‘more creative’ alternative for achieving the same anonymity.56 
Using an avatar, animation ‘veils’ the subject’s identity, keeping their face and 
body hidden as well as preserving their safety and dignity. Anonymity may 
also encourage participation if interviewees are reluctant to come forth. The 
promise that the animation will not resemble them gives them an opportunity 
to talk more freely. This is the premise behind the Syrian feminist collective 
Estayqazat’s project of animating Syrian women’s testimonies, which are sexually 
and politically frank in ways that would have been impossible if the women had 
appeared on camera, due to both security concerns and social customs around 
female honour. Appropriately, the collective’s name means ‘She has awoken’. The 
short films in Estayqazat’s Trilogy of Voice (2014), distributed on their YouTube 
channel, are about Syrian women gaining freedom of expression and it is through 
animation that they exercise this right.57
Since the Syrian War began, animation production has been halted in 
Syria and many animation artists have gone into exile.58 For the animated 
short documentary Suleima (2014), which forms part of Estayqazat’s trilogy 
and portrays a Syrian opposition activist, the organization commissioned the 
animator Jalal Maghout, who left Syria for Germany in 2013. Maghout worked 
from a voice-recorded testimony of the anonymous woman upon whom the 
character of Suleima is based. What drew him to her was that she was not a 
well-known opposition activist, but rather ‘an ordinary woman who can reflect 
the situation of thousands of people who are working and helping others 
anonymously’.59 As miriam cooke relates, ‘Women from all walks of life and 
from many different regions inside Syria played a crucial, if poorly covered, role’ 
during the Syrian uprising, coordinating and taking part in demonstrations.60 A 
Syrian-Palestinian woman working in a hospital in Ghouta (in the outskirts of 

Animation
97
Damascus), the witness whose story is told in Suleima attempted to rescue fellow 
protesters when they were arrested by the security forces and was twice detained 
herself in the process. She is an unsung heroine for these times, bravely defying 
both the regime and her family, who consider her active role in the opposition to 
be inappropriate because she is a woman.
As Maghout explains, although he only had ‘a voice recording of her telling the 
story . . . [i]t was enough to build an image of an ordinary, nondescript woman, 
who trusts her abilities and values’.61 The animation reconstructs the witness 
in a way that does not resemble her, substituting her physical appearance with 
an animated personality inspired by her words and manner of speaking.62 Her 
character and world are visually realized through the animator’s creativity, using 
mainly 2D paper animation with some cut-out and 3D computer animation, 
while her voice-over and dialogue are spoken by an actress. All these elements 
serve to conceal the witness’s identity for ethical reasons. As Maghout attested 
near the time of the film’s making, ‘any kind of reference to her real character 
will put her in a real dangerous situation since she is still active till now in the 
humanitarian field in Syria.’63
Honess Roe has asked whether replacing physical bodies with an aestheticized 
animated counterpart depoliticizes and disempowers people who are already 
marginalized.64 But in Suleima, the fact that we have no sense of the real 
Figure 3.2  Animation protects identities at risk in this story of an anonymous Syrian 
opposition activist. Suleima directed by Jalal Maghout © Estayqazat 2014. All Rights 
Reserved.

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
98
Suleima’s actual appearance does not rob the film of its political meaning. 
Instead, the constraints imposed on the animator by the necessary anonymity 
of the character empowered him (as well as the character) to create a stand-
in through animation, which testifies to her existence and her courageous 
acts of resistance. The animation begins with sounds of clapping at a street 
demonstration, where protestors hold placards saying, ‘Stop the killing. We want 
to build a homeland for all Syrians’. As security forces drag away Suleima under 
arrest, she reflects in voice-over about what brought her to this point: ‘If I could 
go back in time I would do more than I have already done’. This line, which is 
repeated near the end, affirms her determination, hope for change and defiance 
of state repression.65 The black-and-white animation (with occasional colour for 
artificial lights) that designates the present shifts to a sepia flashback looking 
back to her life before the revolution, including her childhood under the rule 
of Hafez al-Assad. Suleima recalls when, as a little girl, she realized the meaning 
of Mukhabarat (secret police). Even at home, one must whisper because state 
surveillance is everywhere – an idea visualized through her child’s perspective 
as giant security cameras rear up behind a wall as she strolls down a street. As in 
Persepolis, the animation’s evocation of childhood renders the images accessible 
to a wider audience, while the graffiti emblazoned on the wall, ‘We shall strive to 
restore our usurped rights and shall fight against imperialism, backwardness etc’, 
articulates revolutionary ideals. Among the events that Suleima recollects is the 
regime’s aerial bombing of Hama following an uprising there in 1982, in which 
between 10,000 and 40,000 people are estimated to have been killed, part of what 
formed her resolve to join the revolution as an activist. The film uses animation 
to embody subjective memories of this massacre, which has been suppressed 
in the official record. It underlines that this history of pre-revolution Syria is 
important to understanding the present.
For Maghout, a fascinating aspect of animated documentary is that ‘you can 
be less loyal to the documentary material you have. You are free to add and 
create from your artistic view.’66 In animated documentary, we are invited to 
accept the animated images as a means of transporting us into the witness’s 
thoughts, although they are interpreted through the animator’s third-person 
perspective.67 Maghout regards Suleima as a form of self-expression but one 
that emerges from ‘common feeling’ between him and his subject. This can be 
seen in scenes reflecting shared experiences of growing up under dictatorship 
in Syria, but also in his empathetic depiction of a female activist estranged from 
her family and treated unequally in the resistance. In animation, empathy is 
partly expressed through synaesthesia, where sense impressions belonging to 

Animation
99
one sense are experienced through other senses. When Suleima is beaten up, 
the blows are conveyed through the strokes of the drawing as well as thuds on 
the soundtrack. As a child, shouting her hatred of Hafez al-Assad, her voice’s 
loudness is comically visualized by making a security guard’s hair and clothes 
waft in the wind.
The advantages of animation for this subject matter are summed up by 
Maghout himself: ‘For me, animation is an effective medium to depict an 
unattainable situation. For example, our memories, fantasies and dreams, the 
people whom we cannot meet in person and the places we cannot visit and, of 
course, in this case, to protect the persons who are involved in the film.’68 Set 
during the early years of the revolution when Syria was largely off-limits for 
film crews, and moving back and forth in time, Suleima enables us to ‘visit’ the 
country, and its past. Like The Green Wave, it provides access to the regime’s 
detention centres by illustrating witness testimony of torture and detention. As 
in Persepolis, the focus is not the brutality itself, but the way the character feels 
about it. Sitting in her cell, Suleima would hear the beatings of fellow prisoners, 
which was worse, she says, than being beaten herself. Her testimony tells of a 
prison doctor, who would stitch up prisoners’ wounds without anaesthetic and 
force them to walk immediately. Every twelve hours, Suleima was permitted to 
go to the toilet and each time she would pass prisoners, hanging in the same 
position. We see her clasp her hands around the hands of one prisoner, although 
she is unsure if he can feel it. The animated imagery, together with voice-over 
and sound-effects, emphatically and empathetically imparts this intimate 
experience to viewers.
Conclusion
This chapter has explored animation as a creative strategy for overcoming 
some of the constraints of live-action filmmaking in the region. It has shown 
how animation serves as an alternative to live-action re-enactment when 
images and access to locations are unavailable (The Green Wave), circumvents 
censorship (Tehran Taboo), acts as a substitute for missing archives (The 
Wanted 18) and offers a means of protecting the identity of individuals at 
risk (Suleima). Moreover, its use is not confined to these functions, since 
the medium has expressive possibilities that enable it to evoke the subjective 
worlds of memory and emotion, elicit audience empathy, provoke laughter and 
imagine the unimaginable. Creating empathy is particularly important for these 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
100
filmmakers who are dealing with groups of people who are often denigrated 
in mainstream media; animation offers a way of overcoming this through its 
generic, abstract characters. Yet, while animation gives filmmakers considerable 
creative and interpretive freedom, in practice it is accompanied by many of its 
own constraints (including time, money, type of story and intended audience) 
which are registered in the form that the animation takes. It can be employed 
with startling directness, yet it is, at its core, an abstract medium that takes an 
aniconic approach to crisis-images.

Fuad Abdulaziz’s documentary Sana‘a: A Symphony (2020) brings together 
a poet, radio presenter, singer, photographer and videographer to capture 
different aspects of Yemen’s capital. When Saudi-led airstrikes began in March 
2015, Abdulaziz could no longer return to the city to complete the film as he had 
intended. So his contributors sent him footage of their wartime experiences. 
In the radio presenter’s video diary, the nightly aerial attacks are a symphony 
of fear and despair, but during daylight she climbs to her rooftop and gazes at 
the city she loves, as if relieved it is still there. One of Abdulaziz’s influences 
was the work of social theorist Michel de Certeau, who contrasted two ways 
of looking at the city: one is a totalizing perspective that reflects the panoptic 
design of urban planning; the other is from the space inhabited by residents, 
usually at street level.1 It is the inhabitants’ perspective that we find in Sana‘a: A 
Symphony and the films featured in this chapter, which map the psychological 
and historical layers of their respective cities, and the shifting social relationships 
that accompany urban transformations. Often the city functions as a character 
in its own right, a witness to its inhabitants’ lives and historical events. The 
movies archive their cities as they were when they were filmed. They offer 
complex, nuanced perspectives not usually found in either official state media 
or international reporting, which often take the view from above.
It is no coincidence that this strategy, which I am calling psychogeography, 
has emerged in contemporary Middle Eastern cinema at a time of turbulent 
change and destruction in the region. It is part of the general movement 
towards more direct forms of expression than allegory that I am tracing in this 
book but, although it is a form of witnessing in itself, it is not as direct as the 
documentary-type reportage that witnesses events as they unfold, covered in 
Chapter 1. This chapter centres on documentaries and fiction films about four 
cities in the region: Tehran (Writing on the City (2012) and Tehran: City of Love 
(2018)), Beirut (Panoptic (2017)), Cairo (In the Last Days of the City (2016)) and 
­4
Psychogeography

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
102
Damascus (A Day and a Button (2015)). These films display an acute sense of 
place that comes from a love for these cities as well as a critical take on them. 
Psychogeography helps me frame how they express sensitive aspects of urban 
realities when other strategies are unavailable due to constraints such as lack 
of infrastructure and state censorship. Like any other strategy, it is not immune 
from censorship itself. In fact, four films discussed in this chapter have been 
censored or made underground in their respective countries.
Psychogeography is associated with the writings of Guy Debord, a leading 
figure of the avant-garde group Situationist International, which was an influence 
on de Certeau. According to Debord, the term psychogeography has Middle 
Eastern origins, coined by ‘an illiterate Kabyle’, around 1953. The Kabyle, who 
belong to the Amazigh people formerly known by the colonial term ‘Berber’, 
live in northern Algeria. Debord’s interlocuter remains nameless, pointing 
to the colonial context under which much French theory from this period 
emerges. Debord goes on to define psychogeography as ‘a study of the precise 
laws and specific effects of the geographical environment . . . on the emotions 
and behaviour of individuals’.2 As a practice, psychogeography is rooted in both 
a Marxist critique of capitalist alienation and a surrealist urge to delve beneath 
everyday surfaces. Challenging official and other totalizing perspectives on the 
city, such as urban redevelopment schemes, road networks and tourist images, 
it explores different routes, taking us horizontally into marginal areas and 
vertically into the past.
One psychogeographic tactic is dérive or drift, as it is sometimes translated 
into English: an unplanned journey in which a person abandons their everyday 
routine and allows themselves to be ‘drawn by the attractions of the terrain and the 
encounters they find there’.3 The purpose of the dérive is to create an alternative 
mapping of the city with its distinctive zones and ambiences. Walking is integral 
to it, since it is on foot that one may more easily deviate from existing routes and 
discover places off the official maps, as we will see in A Day and a Button. In 
metropolises that are inhospitable to pedestrians, promoting ‘swift circulation’ 
via highways, walking is a subversive activity in itself, its street-level exploration 
capable of challenging official city planning.4 The dérive affords a different way 
of moving around the city, apprehending it not merely through one’s eyes but 
engaging all bodily senses through the corporeal experience of walking. The 
film theorist Giuilana Bruno advocates the idea of ‘embodied psychogeography’, 
drawing parallels between the Situationists’ psychogeographic mapping and 
filmic ‘site-seeing’ in which the camera wanders around a city with a haptic 
gaze.5 As Thomas Deane Tucker suggests in his study of walking in cinema, the 

Psychogeography
103
camera acts as a pedestrian, creating ‘a peripatetic point of view’ that he links to 
the concept of the flâneur (the urban stroller in the work of Charles Baudelaire 
and Walter Benjamin) as well as psychogeography.6 For the film viewer, this 
offers a virtual tour of the city, though not to the usual tourist destinations.
Precursors of this strategy are found in city symphony films such as Manhattan 
(1921), Berlin, Symphony of a City (1927) and Man with a Movie Camera 
(1929) that responded to the changing urban environment – the dynamism 
of its architecture, machinery and crowds – in order to capture its visual 
poetry and visceral sensations. Often structured as a day in a city’s life, these 
documentaries map lived urban space, tracing patterns of interactions between 
built environments and their inhabitants. While their use of location shooting 
places them in the real world as witnesses to actual events, city symphonies 
flamboyantly reimagine city topography through montage and other forms of 
image manipulation which poetically inflect the witnessed reality, an approach 
taken by In the Last Days of the City. True to their name, city symphonies are 
attuned to urban rhythms, which they hear acutely as if listening to music. 
Despite being made as silent films, the 1920s films are packed with ‘sound’, using 
movements within the frame and editing rhythms to convey the cadences of the 
city. Sound is a particularly important feature of Panoptic, which is also closely 
allied to the city symphony tradition, as is Sana‘a: A Symphony.
In cinematic styles that mix documentary and fiction, location shooting 
brings street life into the narrative. As film theorist Siegfried Kracauer noted 
about this technique in Italian neorealism, incidents from the background street 
may enter the scene and enrich the narrative with their ‘found’ stories.7 By 
filming the diverse and unpredictable ‘flow of life’ in real locations, contemporary 
movies from the region can capture elements that were not part of the approved 
treatment or script. Another psychogeographic topos inherited from Italian 
neorealism is the urban ruin, as location shooting bears witness to wartime 
destruction. This plays a key role in Gilles Deleuze’s theorization of the crisis of 
the movement-image in post-war Europe, giving rise to what he calls ‘any-space-
whatevers’ – indeterminate settings such as wastelands and derelict and disused 
sites – that transformed the landscape and heralded the cinematic time-image, 
which represents time directly.8 While derelict sites belong to specific histories 
and are far from indeterminate for locals, Deleuze’s idea of the ruin as a witness 
is highly pertinent to films in this chapter which often gravitate to destroyed 
walls and derelict buildings that leave traces of past conflicts on the urban fabric.
Budgetary and infrastructural constraints in the immediate post-1945 era 
stimulated the use of location shooting in Italian neorealism. For similar reasons, 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
104
independent films in Iran and the Arab world often rely on real locations that 
are rich in the kind of textural and historical detail that is difficult to recreate on 
set. However, this has not been uniform practice throughout the region. As Viola 
Shafik points out, ‘Egyptian realism remained a child of the studios, with all that 
this meant for faithfulness to detail and creating an appropriate atmosphere’.9 To 
achieve this with a degree of artistry requires a large budget and infrastructure, 
including highly trained specialists in art direction, costume design and casting 
as well as extras. As the British-Egyptian actor Khalid Abdalla, whose career 
spans Hollywood and Arab films, explains, such resources have
a huge effect on what you can and can’t do, in terms of the palette of what you’re 
able to express. I think the most successful kind of censorship is infrastructural, 
not the figure at the top who says cut this out, don’t do this or do that . . . How 
many films can I think of from our region that stun me in terms of their art 
direction and what that allows the camera to do? Very few. Generally, what they’re 
relying on is their locations, real locations which they might happen upon which 
have those interesting walls, those things that allow space to communicate.10
As we will see in the following films, location shooting is a practical solution to 
this constraint, laying the foundation for creative psychogeographic strategies 
that reveal the city’s material conditions and allow silent histories to speak. 
Each of these films exemplifies a different psychogeographic method, which my 
interviews with the filmmakers and the theories of Debord and other critical 
thinkers of urban space have helped me to elucidate.
Tehran
The city in Iranian cinema is often a palimpsest of social and political crises. This 
tendency can be traced to the reform period of Mohammad Khatami’s presidency, 
which created a more open climate in which filmmakers could comment on 
social, economic and political issues more or less directly through Tehran’s 
urban landscape, as Rakhshan Banietemad does in her fiction film Under the 
Skin of the City (2001). As Blake Atwood says of Banietemad’s films in general, 
‘Tehran functions as an affective surface that captures and mirrors the emotional 
responses and impulses of its inhabitants’.11 More direct and radical, Keywan 
Karimi’s documentary Writing on the City (2015) explores Tehran’s historical and 
psychological layers through graffiti on its walls, which bear witness to events 
from the 1978–9 Revolution to the 2009 Green Movement. An Iranian-Kurdish 
filmmaker, Karimi studied sociology at Tehran University. It was there that he 

Psychogeography
105
became interested in the sociologist Henri Lefebvre, whose work influenced the 
Situationists and de Certeau, and psychogeography as a tactic.12 Writing on the 
City is inspired by an anthology of Lefebvre’s essays on urban space, Writings on 
Cities.13 For Lefebvre, the space in which we live is a social space, produced by 
social relations. In municipal buildings and thoroughfares, space is in the service 
of the state or governing authority, reflecting official ideologies. In Writing on 
the City, the invisible hand of the state is apparent everywhere within the city, 
asserting its power through the organization of urban space.
Karimi claims Writing on the City is a film that changed his life, since it 
led to his arrest and imprisonment.14 He began it in 2012, when one of his 
university professors, who wrote a book named Graffiti in Iran, invited him 
to make an accompanying film. However, once Karimi started researching the 
topic, discovering graffiti from the time of Revolution and even the 1953 coup 
d’état, he realized that he could not just focus on present-day graffiti. Searching 
through the dusty archives in Iran’s National Library revealed to him ‘how 
the Revolution removed the power of the other groups’ in urban space.15 He 
completed a first edit of Writing on the City, which was not as uncompromising 
as the final version would be, before an international festival tour for his short 
film The Adventure of a Married Couple (2013). Upon his return to Iran, he 
was arrested and his computer hard drive was seized during a raid on his home 
because he had posted a trailer for Writing on the City on YouTube. The hard 
drive was returned, erased, resulting in the loss of his first edit. In 2015, Karimi 
was given a six-year prison sentence, which was later reduced to one year. He 
was finally released in 2017 after serving five months in Evin Prison, Iran’s jail 
for political prisoners.
These experiences altered Karimi’s approach to his film, which he re-edited 
while under trial: ‘Especially after the arrest, what I wanted to do is tell everything 
direct.’16 First, he removed an interview that featured in the first edit and replaced 
it with voice-over. Although this voice-over is poetic and philosophical, qualities 
associated with earlier Iranian films, it tells us directly what happened in those 
times and spaces. The arrest, moreover, led Karimi to consolidate his idea of 
the city as a character in the film: ‘we have a city like a human body that has a 
skin, and the skin is like the scars of an operation – it gives you a history of what 
happened on this body’.17 In other words, the film reads the history of Tehran 
through the writing and images on its walls, a relatively direct political and 
creative strategy. It focuses on two types of graffiti: official graffiti, consisting 
of state-commissioned murals, and unofficial graffiti produced in resistance to 
state discourses, reminding us of policies that have devastated the city and its 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
106
people. Created by city dwellers in secret, often at night, unofficial graffiti are 
images and texts that communicate in public spaces, circumventing censorship 
and denial of voice in official media. The film juxtaposes these official and 
unofficial perspectives on the city; it reads the walls in order to delve under 
the skin of those official discourses and, as the voice-over puts it, ‘discover the 
dwellers’ dreams’.
Writing on the City is composed of 60 per cent archive materials and 40 per 
cent Karimi’s own footage. Karimi remarks, ‘There is always a flâneur figure 
in my films, either he is a lawyer (in Drum) or he is the wandering ghost of 
the city (in Writing on the City). Besides, it is my own relationship to the city.’18 
In Writing on the City, the wandering camera is like the ghost of the city. It 
escorts us into its past and evokes suppressed histories that offer alternatives 
to official historiography. During the Revolution, people got their news from 
graffiti on the city’s walls, since they did not trust the Shah’s official media. 
With his editing, Karimi emulates camera pans from right to left, reading 
revolutionary slogans in Farsi written under the cover of darkness that would 
be whitewashed by government agents in the morning. After the Revolution, 
the new Islamic regime ordered the graffiti to be cleared, a systematic attempt to 
remove other voices in the public sphere: Marxist slogans faded away, replaced 
by religious sayings, attesting to Karimi’s view that a Marxist revolution was 
transformed into an Islamic one. During the Iran-Iraq war (1980–8), the 
walls no longer narrated Revolutionary ideals but rather support for the 
war, with murals honouring martyrs. Later, in the Khatami era (1997–2005), 
martyr portraits receded behind advertising billboards, reflecting the Islamic 
Republic’s turn to neoliberalism as a new way to survive in the globalizing 
era. The film reveals the layering of these images, the old hidden behind the 
new, and descends into the underground metro where, the voice-over tells us, 
‘another life is going on beneath the surface’. Here, war murals are forgotten 
in murky corners. Under Ahmadinejad’s presidency (2005–13), on the other 
hand, there was an attempt to revive revolutionary and war ideology. New, 
colourful and imposing murals display revolutionary leaders, their portraits 
no longer stern but mild and smiling. Murals of flora, fauna and rural life also 
appear among new property developments, creating a fake green environment 
in a polluted city.
Alternating between a female and male narrator, the voice-over creates 
counterpoint, part of the dialectic that the film establishes between historical 
events.19 In a reversal of traditional gender roles, the female narrator recounts 
the time of the Revolution and the Green Movement in the first and final third of 

Psychogeography
107
the film, whereas the rise of neoliberalism in the post-war era, a comparatively 
dull period of Iranian history according to Karimi, is voiced by a man in the 
middle third.20 During the Green Movement, people returned to the streets and 
walls were used for protest slogans again. The authorities unsuccessfully asked 
Karimi to cut this sequence, but the film’s radical character exceeds this by far. 
Graffiti is a short-lived artefact, routinely erased by municipal authorities. By 
capturing graffiti through archival footage and scenes shot by Karimi himself, 
Writing on the City grants greater longevity to these ephemera. It preserves traces 
of a repressed past and dredges buried layers to the surface as the city’s political 
unconscious. Night-time, time-lapse footage shows graffiti artists at work, 
operating clandestinely because of risks of getting caught by police. The film 
also enters public toilets which, the voice-over tells us, ‘for decades functioned as 
de facto political whiteboards’ outside the otherwise ubiquitous gaze of CCTV 
cameras. To date, Writing on the City has not been officially shown within Iran, 
although it has screened on BBC Persian (which can be seen, via satellite TV, 
within the country) and it has propelled its director to international fame, 
eliciting a tribute from Situationist International member Raoul Vaneigem when 
Karimi was sentenced.21
Although not a documentary but a fictional drama, Ali Jaberansari’s Tehran: 
City of Love utilizes an implicitly psychogeographic strategy because of its 
concern with character and environment. It consists of three intersecting stories, 
those of an ex-body builder, a beauty clinic receptionist and a funeral singer, 
each searching for intimacy in a city where love cannot be expressed freely. The 
film cuts back and forth from one story to another, following the characters as 
they circulate through the city, engaged in their daily activities. Sensitivity to 
the specificities of the city’s locations enables it to explore its characters’ habitus 
(a disposition produced by a particular kind of environment) and to deal with 
homosexuality, religion and dating, all of which are potentially controversial 
issues in Iran.22
Places in the film – a modern and a traditional gym (zūrkhāneh), a beauty 
clinic and a cosmopolitan-style café – are not the typical ones of internationally 
exported Iranian cinema.23 They are communal spaces of work and leisure, 
reflecting spatial practices of consumerist society; the habitual axes to which 
characters are drawn in their itineraries around the city. Furthermore, a mosque 
is shown in the context of funerals rather than just prayer. Since the film appears 
to present ‘a comfortable, modern picture of Iran’, Jaberansari has related that he 
has been accused of working on the regime’s behalf.24 However, his and his co-
writer Maryam Najafi’s unusual choice of locations lends a different perspective 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
108
on the city. Because the locations are both modern and traditional, the film 
moves across the divides created by the reconstruction project that transformed 
Tehran’s historical core and led an emerging middle class to relocate to new 
residential areas, while poorer communities remained in the old city.
Moreover, in contrast to many other city films, which offer orientating 
overviews or shots that interrelate the different spaces, there are few exterior 
shots in Tehran: City of Love – and certainly no touristic vistas of the Milad 
Tower and Alborz mountains. Characters are seen arriving at places or leaving 
them, or driving through the highway network but, other than that, they are 
always inside. Jaberansari explains that it was a self-imposed constraint not to 
show much of the city and instead focus on interiors.25 At the development 
stage, the script consultant questioned the lack of exterior shots; no changes 
were made, but the conversation allowed Jaberansari to defend his choices 
and sharpen his vision of the relationship between his characters and their 
environment.
As an émigré filmmaker who keeps close links to Iran, similarly to Sadaf 
Foroughi (whose film Ava is discussed in Chapter 2), Jaberansari feels he has 
a privileged insider-outsider position whenever he returns, affording him 
a certain distance to observe and artistically reflect on aspects of Iranian 
culture in his films. According to his own psychogeographic insight, many 
pressures tend to be internalized in Iran, an environment where citizens 
largely lead a double life, displaying oneself in public and another in private.26 
The impact on storytelling is that Iranian dramas tend to be situational with 
the impetus deriving from external forces, such as bad husbands, fathers-in-
law or the regime itself, rather than characters themselves, as in the films of 
Tahmineh Milani or Asghar Farhadi. Because these forces are so internalized, 
characters rarely exhibit outright emotions and barely know themselves. For 
Jaberansari, this lack of self-knowledge also means that Iranian Cinema tends 
not to explore characters deeply; instead, many are depicted as ‘types’.27 In 
Tehran: City of Love, he turns this constraint to his advantage for expressing 
themes of same-sex love and intimacy. His characters are informed by 
external forces – namely, the environment that they inhabit, which materially 
affects their behaviour, resonating with Lefebvre’s statement: ‘Every space is 
already in place before the appearance in it of actors . . . This pre-existence 
of space conditions the subject’s presence, action and discourse’.28 This lends 
the space psychological dimensions that materialize in the characters’ stories 
so that, in its mapping of the city, the film performs a psychosocial analysis 
of urban space.

Psychogeography
109
With regard to the story of ex-body builder Hessam, Jaberansari explains,
We knew the kind of story we wanted to tell and we specifically chose it in an 
environment which was the space of the gym . . . The gym was for me a very 
interesting environment because of the way gym culture has been adopted in 
Tehran especially. The gyms have turned into social clubs, because there is no 
nightclub or pub to hang out. But then they are segregated by sex, so [there are] 
men only and women only gyms.29
In gender-segregated societies, homosociality forms the norm, encouraging 
strong same-sex bonds, even as homosexuality remains illegal. Moreover, 
Jaberansari remarks, men-only gyms are spaces in which male bodies are 
displayed and ‘there’s this obsession with the male physique.’30 As the gyms in 
Tehran: City of Love are real locations, he did not need to embellish what can be 
found there, he jokes. The rapport between Hessam, who works as a personal 
trainer in a modern gym, and his younger client, Arshia, who seeks his coaching 
for a championship, is established in this homosocial space. Pulsating techno 
from the gym’s sound system forms a background to their ‘courtship’ as Hessam 
trains his protégé, stretches his limbs and measures his vital statistics. Arshia 
flexes his muscles as they both look at themselves in the mirror, a shot that 
draws attention to their mutual gaze and similarities of their muscled, tattooed 
bodies, evoking same-sex desire. Jaberansari underlines that Hessam was not 
written as a homosexual; rather, the character is unaware of his own same-sex 
desire.31 His desire for Arshia, barely perceptible to himself, emanates from this 
environment. Furthermore, their intimacy is readable in terms of conventions 
of dūstī (‘friendship’), ‘[a] male homosocial love, sometimes with homoerotic 
undertones, [which] played a crucial role in many fīlmfārsī plots.’32
It was very important for the filmmakers to juxtapose this modern gym with 
the traditional zūrkhāneh gym, which features as the place where the funeral 
singer Vahid trains. In this domed building, men stand in a circle and exercise 
with pairs of wooden clubs, whirling them rapidly to a drumbeat and clanging 
bell. The film focuses on old, black-and-white photographs on the walls depicting 
bare-chested men posing with their hands tucked inside each other’s shorts – 
again, these were found on location. The zūrkhāneh embodies Persian traditions 
of chivalry and sportsmanship within a homosocial community. Like the 
modern gym, its iconography and practices evoke different reactions depending 
on the cultural perspective from which they are viewed, as Jaberansari explains: 
‘from a Western point-of-view it would be very homoerotic but it might not be 
for someone inside the culture. So all of this created enough space to tell this 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
110
story’.33 The juxtaposition between modern and traditional gyms grounds the 
relationship between Hessam and Arshia in a cultural context. At the same time, 
the filmmakers sought to be, as Jaberansari puts it, ‘a bit more playful, not just to 
go for the [interpretation that] they’re just buddies. But that’s the line we could 
say to anyone who wanted to question it – what are you talking about? It’s two 
buddies. That space between these readings was the grey area where we could 
manoeuvre.’34
In contrast with Writing on the City, Tehran: City of Love was approved for 
both production and screening permits. Jaberansari explains it was always his 
intention to ‘stay within the boundaries – not to do an underground film.’35 
Since Hessam and Arshia’s relationship was in the script, he was naturally 
apprehensive when it was submitted for approval, although the censors did not 
pick up the homoerotic aspects. Of course, the script omits details such as the 
length of characters’ gazes and other bodily gestures that can suggest same-
sex desire. Despite that, the finished film was approved for exhibition after 
being submitted in a slightly re-edited version. The authorities requested some 
changes – mainly, removal of some male nudity – but not ones that affected the 
storylines, testifying that, in this case, psychogeographic tactics were successful 
at dodging censorship.
Beirut
As Lina Khatib suggests, several films about the Lebanese Civil War (1975–90) 
use psychogeographic methods: ‘The Civil War left its mark on the physical 
appearance of the city, and on the cinematic imagination of Beirut’, scars that 
were ‘both physical and social as both the buildings and people shared the 
suffering’.36 In keeping with the 1991 Ta’if Accord, which declared amnesties for 
perpetrators, the city’s redevelopment by the company Solidere sought to erase 
traces of the war, clearing the downtown areas. Several Lebanese filmmakers 
whose formative experiences are defined by the war have sought to excavate 
its hidden legacy from beneath the official version of the city imposed by 
reconstruction projects. Their work taps into feelings that the Civil War is 
ongoing. The July 2006 war with Israel revived memories of that earlier war 
and sectarian tensions resurfaced. Life has not returned to normal – violence 
still seems to lurk, capable of breaking out at any moment in full-blown conflict 
between sectarian parties. The artist-filmmaker duo Joana Hadjithomas and 
Khalil Joreige have commented that the culture of amnesty has affected freedom 

Psychogeography
111
of expression, forcing filmmakers to censor themselves in fear of reprisals.37 As 
Rana Eid, director of the documentary Panoptic, explains, ‘In Lebanon there isn’t 
a classic dictator, where you know that you’re against this person.’38 The ruling 
power is based on a sectarian system inherited from the Ta’if Accord, which 
allowed perpetrators to assume political positions. This has led to a mafiaesque 
structure of government whose corrupt and dysfunctional nature was apparent 
to citizens for decades and has been further exposed in the 2020 Beirut Port 
explosion and ongoing economic catastrophe.
During the Civil War, Beirut was divided between east and west. Most films 
on the topic focus on this division whereas, in Panoptic, Beirut is divided between 
overground and underground. This inversion of the city brings to the surface the 
Civil War’s ghostly presence. Eid’s idea for her film arose when she discovered 
an immigration detention centre underneath Tahwita Bridge.39 It prompted her 
to think of events during the war, when militias carried out kidnappings, torture 
and killings underground and civilians took refuge in subterranean shelters. As 
Eid relates in her voice-over, the generation that survived the war ‘emerged from 
the shelters but not from underground’, evoking a past that haunts the present. 
In Panoptic, we explore the city from symbolic sites used as underground 
detention centres, from the present-day immigration detention facility to past 
torture chambers in Burj El Murr, a former sniper hideout, and Hotel Beau 
Rivage, former headquarters of Syrian intelligence in Lebanon: the city’s official 
story is retold through another story of the underground.
With her background in sound design – she has worked on numerous films 
previously as a sound designer and continues working in that field – Eid also 
lends another perspective on Beirut by attention to its sounds in Panoptic, her 
directorial debut: ‘If you want to really understand a city, you have to listen 
to what it’s saying’.40 The film opens with a sound montage that immerses us 
in Beirut’s soundscape for two-and-a-half minutes. It commences with an 
ominous throb, an inexorable pulse upon which other rhythms – construction 
noises, the call to prayer and car horns – are superimposed. In voice-over, 
Eid speaks about taking ‘refuge in sound’ in underground shelters during 
her childhood when the war’s violence was concealed from sight yet heard 
continually. The film then shifts to present-day Beirut where sounds barely 
die down at night. Roads teem with cars with gleaming headlights, overlit by 
electronic billboards, accompanied by ambient traffic sounds and a percussive 
beat as if vehicles are humming on the tarmac. In the absence of visuals other 
than a black screen, this opening invites spectators to ‘open their ears’41 to the 
city and listen to its rhythms.

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
112
As well as the production of space, Lefebvre was interested in the city as 
a lived space with its own rhythms performed by everyday work and leisure 
activities: ‘The interaction of diverse, repetitive and different rhythms 
animates . . . the street and the neighbourhood’.42 Usually these sounds are mixed 
up, difficult to distinguish from each other, yet Lefebvre describes how ‘the 
attentive ear’ can separate them out, identify their sources and perceive how 
they interact as a multiplicity. Eid, like Lefebvre, is a rhythmanalyst. The sounds 
in Panoptic are all recorded on location, integrated into the film without added 
sound effects but layered to create a distinctive sound architecture. Unlike the 
conventional precedence of visuals over sound, sound acts as our primary guide 
to meaning. Most of the sound in the film is out of sync, reflecting a city out 
of sync. Non-synchronized sound produces unsettling effects. In Panoptic, 
visual and sound mismatches render the hidden past and present ‘visible’ by 
linking the overground with what remains invisible underground. From the 
surfaces of Beirut, the Middle East’s nightclub capital, the film descends into the 
detention centre beneath Tahwita Bridge, where undocumented domestic and 
manual workers (of whom Ethiopians form the largest group) are imprisoned. 
Here soldiers patrol, moving in slow motion, appearing and disappearing like 
ghosts. When Ethiopian marathon runners later pass overhead, we hear sounds 
from underground, underlining the irony that while some Ethiopians are 
celebrated as champions, their compatriots are forgotten below. As Eid explains, 
‘The challenge was to destroy the perspective – when you see the bridge, the 
sound is from under the bridge. So the idea that we’re always underground is 
communicated through sound’.43 In order to work ‘out of sync’, she captured 
visuals and sounds separately, although sound formed her primary orientation. 
During the shoot, she initially arrived at each place to hear its acoustics, closing 
her eyes and listening through her headphones.
The primacy given to sounds contrasts with the objectifying visual logic of 
the panopticon, a model observational tower from which the film takes its name. 
For Michel Foucault, the panopticon forms the paradigm for state surveillance 
and it exemplifies vision as a dominating power.44 In Panoptic, Burj El Murr and 
Hotel Beau Rivage are shot from low angles, emphasizing their commanding 
vision as they tower over the cityscape; they remind citizens that they can turn 
into observation targets at any moment. As Lefebvre writes, ‘Verticality and 
great height have ever been the special expression of potentially violent power’.45 
These buildings functioned as means of terrorizing the population during the 
Civil War and still evoke fear today. Formerly Beirut’s tallest building, Burj El 
Murr is a grey tower block with numerous square windows. Now pocked with 

Psychogeography
113
bullet holes, it is a forlorn witness to the war when its upper floors were used 
by snipers and its lower floors for torture and imprisonment by militias. In her 
voice-over, Eid describes it as ‘a giant that never closes its eyes’, ‘surveilling us’, 
comparing it to the mythological giant Panoptes with his hundred eyes of which 
he would close fifty when asleep and keep a lookout with the remainder.
The buildings that Eid films are under military jurisdiction, revealing for her 
a ‘military system beneath everything that’s governing the country’.46 Panoptic 
touches on surveillance and atrocities carried out by the Lebanese army and 
militias, and additionally by the Syrian government during the Syrian occupation 
of Lebanon (1976–2005), which are very delicate subjects. Eid is herself the 
daughter of an army general, who had died a few years previously. She initially 
made a rough cut featuring interviews with military personnel. However, 
these were discarded with creative input from her editor, Rania Stephan, who 
discerned that the film was ultimately about Eid’s relationship with her deceased 
father, her city and her otosclerosis.47 The task was then to find a corresponding 
form for these ideas. The voice-over became a requiem to Eid’s father and a trip 
into the city guided by her personal memories: ‘It was like I was walking with the 
city’, she reflects.48 On the voice-over, Eid also meditates on her otosclerosis, a 
hardening of ear tissue that threatened her with deafness and paralysis. Although 
it was successfully operated upon, her illness modified her listening; indeed, she 
believes ‘The ear problem helped me how to hear. When you have a difficulty 
you can work with it, not against it’.49 In the film, her personal history of disease 
is related to the political as she identifies her body with the city in a line that rings 
­Figure 4.1  Burj El Murr, a former sniper hideout in the Lebanese Civil War, looms 
over Beirut like the many-eyed mythological giant Panoptes, surveying current citizens 
and signposting a traumatic past. Panoptic directed by Rana Eid © Abbout Productions 
2017. All Rights Reserved.

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
114
like a refrain: ‘The city is calcified.’ As the generation who were children during 
the war and ‘discovered’ it afterwards, ‘we’re physically and psychologically not 
ok,’ she explained to me. ‘The sicknesses that we have are extremely similar to 
the sicknesses of the city’.50
Like the psyche, the city has layers: past burdens are pushed underneath. 
In one scene, we enter Burj El Murr’s interior and descend a shaft to its 
lower floors, which are heaped with rubbish. Water visibly seeps up from 
underground. ‘It’s like it’s unclean, rotten’, Eid remarked in 2018, somewhat 
prophetically, given the later Beirut Port explosion. ‘The foundations of the 
city are going to collapse . . . Beirut has been destroyed several times. So, it can 
destroy itself. Bad energy goes somewhere. It’s going to come back to us.’51 Eid 
uses reflected sound – sound that reflects off other objects – in order to convey 
the atmosphere of these former torture chambers through their acoustics. She 
remarks, ‘In those spaces, there is not much reverb because they are empty and 
rotten. So how sound moves in the space has changed completely. You cannot 
understand the dimension of the space. It’s a labyrinth. In Burj El Murr there’s 
no reverb at all because the walls are wet. It’s strange, soundwise.’52 In Beau 
Rivage, we hear a clanging door, dripping water and a dog inexplicably barking 
– reflected sounds that are like ghosts of that place. Plunging underwater off the 
city coast, the film discovers an armoured personnel carrier (APC) dumped on 
the seabed and travels across its rusty surface. Archive footage from the war is 
sonically and graphically matched to the underwater scene, as if the vehicle is 
steering through a war-devastated landscape, coming to life with these ghostly 
superimposed images.53 The abandoned APC is both an actual and symbolic 
relic of the war that has been repressed underground. Crystallization of her 
ideas into this final form helped Eid to address sensitive topics, since it made the 
film more contemplative and less accusatory: ‘During the editing process, Rania 
told me not to accuse – remember the core of your film, it’s about mapping the 
city and understanding those layers. They [the perpetrators] will be accused 
automatically at the end of the film’.54 Eid says the process taught her ‘to be in 
action mode and not reaction mode. It helps the creative process not to be angry 
while doing things. Do it with love, not with hate. I was doing it because I love 
Beirut and I love the sounds of Beirut.’
Among the locations, the crew found Beau Rivage psychologically heaviest 
to film, since it evoked unresolved traumas under Syrian occupation. To Eid’s 
knowledge, it was the first time that the hotel had been filmed. The Syrian 
occupation, a taboo subject at the time, remains difficult to comprehend. As Eid 
explains, when she was growing up, Israel was a more straightforward enemy, 

Psychogeography
115
presenting a clear set of disputes and mutual hatred (her own home was bombed 
by Israel during the war, as shown in Panoptic). By contrast, relationships with 
Syrians were more fraternal, rendering them an ambiguous ‘enemy’. At Beau 
Rivage, Eid’s voice-over tells us, ‘upper floors were used as a hotel, the lower 
ones to imprison and torture people’. Elsewhere the crew could rely on army 
presence for help, if needed. However, here they were completely alone, apart 
from a receptionist. Disorientating sounds added to the ghostly, oppressive 
atmosphere: ‘we kept hearing a ticking clock and couldn’t locate it’.55 Strewn 
in the laundry were army uniforms and other clothes, intimating the Syrians’ 
hurried departure in 2005. In the film we can see that the hotel is ‘open’ but it 
is eerily empty. Tables are laid out in the restaurant yet no guests materialize. In 
the sickly yellow lighting, old-fashioned fittings reveal the deserted rooms as a 
time capsule of their violent past. Traces of bloody hands can even be seen on the 
walls. Filmed in double-exposure, the image itself becomes ghost-like.
Despite Eid being an army general’s daughter, which gave her a certain 
leverage, obtaining shooting permits for these military-controlled locations 
was a lengthy, difficult process: one-and-a-half years for the immigration 
detention centre, six months for Burj El Murr and almost two years for Beau 
Rivage. Despite gaining shooting permits from the army, Panoptic was denied 
a screening permit by General Security, which acts as the censorship authority 
in Lebanon, just before the film’s scheduled première in Lebanon at the Beirut 
Days Festival. General Security asked Eid to remove scenes in the detention 
centre, because officers can be seen and it is illegal to film them. She refused. As 
a result, Panoptic cannot be exhibited in Lebanon (although, ironically, it is now 
available to watch within the country on Netflix). The authorities deny this is an 
act of censorship, presenting it instead as her decision not to re-edit the film. Eid 
was not surprised that the film was ‘banned’ because it deals with the military 
system, and it was released into a climate when it had become much harder to 
criticize the army and government.
Cairo
The idea that the city functions as an archive of the past and site of memory 
is implicit in films about Beirut and the Lebanese Civil War. However, while 
Panoptic explores symbolic sites that serve as monuments to a repressed, violent 
history, in Tamer el-Said’s In the Last Days of the City the entire urban space 
is ‘a sedimentation of the past’56 that evokes memories. As Geraldine Pratt 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
116
and Rose Marie San Juan argue in their study of cinema and urban space, 
documentary and fiction movies shot on location create an archive of the city by 
their inadvertent or deliberate recording of a specific time and space, sometimes 
becoming the only document of places swept away by processes of urban 
change. Films themselves produce memories, which ‘can destabilise the present 
by giving uncanny inklings of all possible worlds that have existed and can be 
made to exist in the same space’.57 The notion of film as an archive, capturing 
aspects of the city on the cusp of change or disappearance, and activating virtual 
possibilities in the past, imbues the psychogeographic strategy of In the Last 
Days of the City (henceforth referred to as In the Last Days).
In the Last Days was first conceived in 2006, at the time of the July War 
in Lebanon and the height of sectarian violence in Iraq following the US-led 
invasion, when Cairo appeared to be comparatively calm and stable. However, 
for its residents, living under economic pressures in the last years of Mubarak’s 
presidency, there was a sense of the country and wider region being on the brink 
of explosion. A planned nine-month shoot began in 2008 but, due to financial 
and production issues, filming did not finish until about six weeks before the 2011 
Egyptian Revolution. Completion of the editing took a further five years, as el-
Said and his lead actor and producer Khalid Abdalla battled with financing their 
project and negotiating editors. In parallel with this, they launched Cimatheque, 
an alternative film centre, and the video collective Mosireen, both by-products 
of the film (discussed in the Introduction and Chapter 1), as well as participating 
in other films – and indeed in the Revolution itself. Like many other films in this 
book, In the Last Days was produced in one political environment, and released 
in another. However, as Abdalla puts it, it has a ‘strong antenna’ to changes that 
gripped Egypt and the region, having been, he says, ‘made with foresight’ and 
‘edited in hindsight’.58
This sensitive tuning to reality is helped by the film’s hybrid form: although 
it is a fiction film, ‘it was filmed more like a documentary film . . . or somewhere 
between the two’.59 Abdalla explains, ‘Cairo is a city that you rarely see on film in 
the way that we shot it. It’s a very loud city and you’d have to have a big budget 
to recreate it fictionally, close off streets and fill them with extras.’60 Since the 
filmmakers did not have the capacity to do this, they shot on location in the 
midst of the bustling city. This itself was beset by problems: ‘very often we’d 
be shooting a scene and the best take would have someone looking into the 
camera’. At moments, fiction and documentary collide, raising questions of ‘Is 
this really real? Were the events staged?’ By registering elements ‘that otherwise 
remain hidden, normalized, treated as if they don’t exist’, this approach, in 

Psychogeography
117
Abdalla’s view, permits more to be seen than the documentary-type witnessing 
footage that became prevalent during the Revolution.61 A witnessing approach 
was impossible anyway. In the Last Days was made under ‘circumstances where 
the route to participate doesn’t exist, unless you’re immediately going to go to 
prison’; therefore, it necessitated a different way of filming, of ‘making things 
visible that otherwise you can’t witness’.62 Greater investment of time and money 
was needed for editing, colour-grading and so on, in comparison to the urgency 
with which Mosireen’s short videos were produced to witness crackdowns on 
street protests denied and twisted by state media narratives.
The hybridity of fiction and documentary in In the Last Days is reflected in 
its story, in which the protagonist Khalid is a filmmaker making a documentary, 
roaming the streets of Cairo armed with a camera in search of shots that will 
make sense of his reality. Along with this film-within-a-film, the narrative 
concerns his friendships, his endless search for a new flat and his break-
up with his girlfriend Laila, a translator, who is about to leave Egypt forever. 
Friends from Beirut (Bassem) and Baghdad (Hassan and Tarek, the latter now 
living in Berlin) arrange to send him footage of their respective cities, creating 
constellations between these different metropolises in relation to stories of 
loss and departure. The films that Khalid and his friends are making and the 
film that we see converge, as we fluidly pass back and forth between them. El-
Said’s own flat was used as the location for Khalid’s home, framed by a large 
window overlooking the city’s rooftops. Suspended on a string is a magnifying 
glass in which the window view is reflected upside down – a fragile microcosm 
of the city which Laila, during her last visit, gently balances on her palm. The 
magnifying glass forms what Deleuze calls a crystal image, reflecting the film’s 
mise-en-abyme structure.63
In the story, the aimlessness of Khalid’s documentary exasperates his editor 
who exclaims, ‘Beirut, Baghdad, your parents, Laila, Hanan, Maryam. What’s 
the link? We just go round in circles!’ In the Last Days, likewise, goes against 
the grain of goal-driven narrative, with an ineffectual hero who simply looks 
on instead of acting. Instead of the action-image, the film handles its subject 
‘contemplatively in terms of how you see’.64 It might frustrate us narratively 
but deserves our attention because so much is happening in the image. ‘The 
city gave us its gifts’, Abdalla says, highlighting the film’s ability to catch Cairo’s 
actual sights and sounds as characters walk or drive around. As the protagonist 
resides in el-Said’s flat, he meets the same characters that the director met in the 
street daily: an old woman selling carnations, a vagabond eating bread, watchful 
soldiers and street-children roaming through busy traffic. Often a scene starts 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
118
with something else as the focus, then Khalid enters it. The film imbibes the 
atmosphere of the city’s café culture and the faded grandeur of its downtown 
sandstone architecture. It arrests reflections in vehicle windshields, turning 
them into palettes mixed with the city’s colours.
At the heart of In the Last Days is a sense of déjà disparu (‘already 
disappeared’) – that what made the city unique is slipping away, together with 
the desire to cling to elements that one loves in it.65 The film develops this mood 
in different forms, from the personal (vanished times evoked by Khalid’s photos 
with Laila and his friends) to the changing social and political fabric of the city. 
Pious stickers in apartment blocks intimate a rising tide of Islamism, while 
mannequins’ apparel in a shop window is modestly changed to abayehs. Déjà 
disparu is also communicated through sound design. Sometimes the characters’ 
dialogue is heard over their contemplative faces before they have spoken, a 
technique that lends the moment a quality of memory just as it is being lived.
Foreboding of tumultuous change was already implicit in the story, but 
with the Revolution ‘suddenly everything that we had shot acquired a different 
meaning’.66 Most of the editing took place after the shoot, during ‘the heyday’ of the 
Revolution and ‘as the revolution turned to counterrevolution’ and it was finished 
‘when the counterrevolution became the new order.’67 There were about 300 hours 
of footage. Contrary to how a fiction film is normally made, since the costs would 
be prohibitive, In the Last Days was ‘written’ during the edit. ‘Throughout that 
Figure 4.2  Khalid’s magnifying glass reflects a fragile, microcosmic image of the city, 
encapsulating the mood of déjà disparu. In the Last Days of the City directed by Tamer 
el-Said © Zero Production 2016. All Rights Reserved.

Psychogeography
119
period, the footage kept reflecting different intensities’, Abdalla comments. The 
editing became ‘a filtration process. Rather than trying to express ourselves, it was 
more a matter of finding what the footage was trying to express.’68 The film works 
like an ‘unconscious optics’, a notion elaborated by Walter Benjamin, registering 
details that have become more significant with time.69
For example, in one scene, the four friends gather on a rooftop overlooking 
Tahrir Square, not yet the revolutionary symbol it became after 2011; the choice 
of location was fortuitous. When the friends drive around downtown Cairo in 
an open truck, with Khalid angling his camera and microphone upwards, we 
pass buildings filmed from this canted perspective, among them the art deco 
Radio Cinema with its distinctive vertical tower, later adopted as a TV studio 
by comedian Bassem Youssef before his satirical show El Bernameg (2011–14) 
was shut down and he was forced into exile. In another scene, Khalid joins 
street celebrations after Egypt wins an African Cup football match four – nil: 
fans approach his camera making a four symbol with their hands, a signal that 
later came to imply support of the Muslim Brotherhood following the 2013 
Rabea Massacre in which army and security forces killed hundreds of pro-
Morsi protestors (rabea means ‘fourth’ in Arabic). The Egyptian authorities 
subsequently criminalized the gesture.70 Additionally, the film captures the 
2010 demonstrations, when protestors called for the downfall of military rule 
prior to the Revolution, an action that now takes us by surprise because it has 
been erased from official history and collective memory. Throughout the film, 
we hear radio news broadcasts from the time. One of them refers to a military 
campaign in Yemen, which also strikes a prescient note, pointing forward to the 
Yemen Civil War (2014–).
In terms of its appeal to the international market, In the Last Days is untimely. 
When it was being made, the spotlight was on Iraq and there was a lack of 
interest in Egypt; then, after the Revolution, Egypt became a sought-after topic 
but the film’s production was so protracted that, by the time it was released, 
interest in Egypt had faded and moved elsewhere, to Syria, for example. In 
another sense, however, the film is very timely. In the light of subsequent events, 
tensions captured by its footage have become internationally readable, whereas 
previously they were readable mainly at a local level. In Abdalla’s view, this owes 
to the foresight and hindsight with which the film was made: the feelings it 
intimates that ‘this can’t go on forever’ and that the region is on the brink of 
explosion were confirmed when it exploded spectacularly on the world stage in 
2011, turning what ‘we could already see’ into ‘something that everyone can see, 
relative to their own closeness or farness to things.’71

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
120
While In the Last Days is relatively direct, pointing to specific realities in its 
mapping of the city, it remains quite elliptical. Many elements that it ‘captures 
naively’, as Abdalla says, ‘require a lot of intellectual engagement to unpack. And, 
in turn, that unpacking reveals why it’s so culturally dangerous, why it’s potent in 
dealing with uncomfortable territories.’72 There is speculation that the film did 
not receive a screening permit in Egypt because it showed the 2010 protest that 
anticipated the 2011 Revolution. While the filmmakers were always aware that 
there might be problems screening it in Egypt, the most significant fact explaining 
its controversy is that it was produced and released in different political climates. 
The film began under Mubarak, when it gained official shooting permits and, 
apart from infrastructural constraints that dogged the filmmakers throughout, 
was ‘made freely’ in terms of the strategy that it adopts.73 It was completed during 
the counterrevolutionary military regime led by Sisi, when El Said was told he 
did not have the right papers and instructed to remove a couple of references to 
the military (to which he agreed for the Egyptian release). The film was invited 
to screen at the Cairo International Film Festival, yet it was withdrawn at the last 
minute and the same happened at Sharm el-Sheikh Film Festival. Gradually, it 
became apparent that the film had been banned, albeit (like Panoptic) without 
an official stamp.
Damascus
In the documentary short A Day and a Button (2015), the director Azza Hamwi 
walks the streets of Damascus in 2014, filming with a camera hidden in her bag. 
Her hidden camera technique reflects the constraints under which independent 
Syrian filmmakers operated during the Syrian uprising and subsequent war. As 
we saw with For Sama in Chapter 1, filmmakers had greater freedom of expression 
in rebel-held Free Syrian Army areas in comparison to areas ruled by either 
Assad’s regime or ISIS, where much filming was carried out in secrecy, at peril 
of their lives. Hamwi herself uses a pseudonym to protect her anonymity. With 
her, we traverse the regime-controlled area of Damascus in the film’s first half, 
then an opposition-held area in the second, crossing different zones of freedom 
of expression. Made in a playful-critical spirit similar to that of the Situationists, 
the film intuitively adapts the practice of dérive for its risky circumstances. It not 
only shows us the divided city of Damascus from the street-level perspective of 
one of its inhabitants, but also how a seemingly mundane recording of an urban 
walk can be an act of resistance.

Psychogeography
121
City walks in European cinema, shot on streets such as those of Paris and 
Rome, are often read in terms of the flâneur, who is traditionally male and 
upper-class. As Bruno remarks on this gendering, ‘A male loiterer is a flâneur; a 
female is a “streetwalker.” Denied the space, and pleasure, of flâneurie, woman’s 
territorial horizon is phantasmatically as well as literally restricted’.74 Constraints 
imposed by gender and class are perhaps even greater when the act of walking 
is considered in Middle Eastern cities, given traditions of gender segregation 
(discussed in Chapter 2). As a woman venturing into war-torn and militarized 
public space, lacking the leisure of loitering, because of her gender as well as 
security risks, Hamwi is decidedly not a flâneur; she is, rather, a dériveur. Unlike a 
conventional stroll, her filmic walk through the city is alert to psychogeographical 
effects, making visible what is invisible in state discourses.
The film begins by showing Hamwi’s act of hiding the camera in preparation 
for filming in public space. She inserts the camera into her shoulder bag and 
sews a lace bow over it to conceal it. This takes place in a homely domestic 
interior; however, it is overshadowed by hints of threat: the sinister image of her 
cat pawing an insect caught in a net curtain while, visible and audible through 
the window, a regime helicopter hovers overhead – ‘a flying demonstration’ that, 
Hamwi remarks in voice-over, is actually ‘a flash mob protest that ends with the 
security forces firing stray bullets’.
Outside, Hamwi walks with the camera filming at thigh-level, pointing at 
her shoes and bouncing against her body, accompanied by her clothes’ rustling 
sounds. The concealed camera not only creates a peripatetic point-of-view 
but also an embodied, first-person perspective on the city. Debord describes 
the dérive as ‘a technique of rapid passage through varied ambiences’.75 As she 
walks, Hamwi’s camera registers fleeting aural and visual impressions of the 
city. Through the lace, we glimpse sunlight on railings, an old, mildewed wall 
and a corrugated iron garage door with the official Syrian flag painted on it: 
red, white and black with two green stars. ‘This place has not changed’, Hamwi 
reflects, implicitly contrasting the regime-controlled area with the rebel-held 
one. Each area is distinguished by its colours, both the symbolic ones of the flag 
and everyday colours that reflect conditions in that place.
In the regime-controlled area, Bashar al-Assad’s voice and image predominate. 
We hear his words, repeated as a refrain throughout the first half: ‘Today we 
meet at a cross-point in the history of our country!’ In the Arab world before the 
2010–11 uprisings, public space was governed by the cult of the leader.76 When 
Hamwi enters a square decorated with al-Assad’s portraits, his voice resounds 
again, affirming his continued control of public space. Even roadblocks and 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
122
vendors’ carts are painted in the official flag’s colours, and graffiti validates the 
leader: manhibak ya Bashar (‘we love you Bashar’). The film catches strains 
of a popular military song (‘I wish I were a soldier at the checkpoint beneath 
her house. I’d stay up all day and night, just to take her ID card’), prompting 
Hamwi’s voice-over to move from the identity of place to the national identity 
card, the carrying of which is compulsory in Syria, although ‘you’ll be arrested 
with or without it’. Her movement through the city reveals its structures of 
power, in which freedoms are incessantly under attack as citizens are under 
constant surveillance and the watchful gaze of their pictured leader. She 
wanders into a narrow, cobbled street in the old city with cafes serving manoushe 
(flatbread with savoury fillings). Suddenly, a man stops her and points, saying 
‘Forbidden, young lady’. The moment recalls Debord’s statement: ‘cities have 
psychogeographical contours, with constant currents, fixed points and vortexes 
that strongly discourage entry or exit from certain zones’.77 An arbitrary no-
entry point demonstrates that this part of the city is more closed than open, 
gesturing to government and military sites to which civilians are usually denied 
access except when they are arrested and disappeared.
The screen goes black and, when the picture returns, we are riding in the 
front passenger seat of a car with a bullet-smashed windshield. Hamwi has taken 
a different route, moving into the ‘liberated’, rebel-held zone, only ten minutes 
from the regime-controlled area. Amidst sounds of explosions, we enter into 
bright daylight. No longer is the camera hidden; here, one can film openly. 
The liberated zone is like ‘a different planet’ although it is part of the same city, 
Hamwi observes in her voice-over. The surrounding urban space is dishevelled. 
We pass a collapsed building where a twisted curtain rail and curtain can be 
glimpsed in its ruins: this was once someone’s house, perhaps their living room. 
Hamwi meditates on the division of land that sometimes arbitrarily throws 
people under different zones of control: ‘Maybe they chose it, maybe they didn’t’. 
Smiling children, wearing bright casual clothes, travel to school on a cart and 
queue for sparse food. Their colourfulness contrasts with the grey, dilapidated 
buildings whose facades droop to the ground, a witness to the people’s stand 
against the regime for which they were constantly bombed and besieged while 
being deserted by the outside world. At a demonstration, people clap and 
chant an anti-Assad song. They are holding flags, both a black flag indicating 
a group with an Islamic affiliation and the Syrian opposition flag with its red 
stars. Several demonstrators are openly filming, marking this as a place where 
Assad no longer rules. Yet, the sound of an aeroplane overhead reminds us of his 
control of airspace.

Psychogeography
123
Journeying back by car, we return to the regime-controlled area’s warm 
earthen colours. The camera is hidden once again, lending a restricted view on 
the landscape as it hurtles past. Assad’s billboards line the streets and buildings 
are intact; this area does not get bombed. Through the voice-over, Hamwi 
articulates her struggle with her identity, located in the city but torn apart by 
the two different Syrias existing in it: ‘I can’t figure out my identity anymore’. As 
darkness falls, the screen fades to black and helicopter sounds are heard again, 
she longs to return to her bed and her cat. Merlin Coverley states, ‘The dériveur . . . 
conduct[s] a psychogeographical investigation and is expected to return home 
having noted the ways in which the areas traversed resonate with particular 
moods and ambiences’.78 In a similar fashion, Hamwi makes psychogeographic 
observations on place and identity. Urban walking with a hidden camera, she 
records random sights and sounds, along with the different ambiances of the 
regime-controlled and liberated areas. In the spirit of the dérive, her film maps 
Damascus in a new, playful fashion, exploring the psychological rift of the two 
Syrias behind its official facade.
Conclusion
Psychogeography is a creative strategy that allows filmmakers to explore under 
the skin of official representations of the city, unearthing its hidden psychological 
and historical layers. It tells the story of the city from the space of the inhabitant, 
often a pedestrian walking on foot: an intimate, perspective ‘from below’ that 
contrasts with the view ‘from above’ characteristic of state and international 
media. Through location shooting, capturing walls, ruins and impacts of the 
urban environment upon residents, psychogeography overcomes some of the 
infrastructural and storytelling constraints that hamper filmmakers as well as 
offering opportunities for clandestine filmmaking. In the next chapter, we turn 
to the creative possibilities afforded by the road movie, featuring movement 
across diverse landscapes in a moving vehicle that is simultaneously a private 
and public space.

124

While the films in the last chapter featured travel, what distinguishes the road 
movie is the importance of the road and moving vehicles to the story and 
characters. The genre is usually identified with Hollywood films such as Easy 
Rider (1969) and Thelma & Louise (1991) which recount journeys of rebellion and 
self-discovery, often with the thrilling, forward impulse of action entertainment. 
The open road tapering to a vanishing point on the horizon bears the promise of 
freedom and mobility. When reworked in other contexts, the road movie often 
dramatizes contrasts between the genre’s mythologies and the starker realities 
of the territories in which the films are set. Kay Dickinson has observed how 
the fantasy of the open road is subverted in Palestinian ‘roadblock’ movies of 
the Second Intifada era (2000–c.2005) which confront curfews, checkpoints and 
segregated roads.1 Laura Marks finds that the resulting obstructed movement is 
not confined to road movies from Palestine but belongs to a wider Arab genre 
that occurs in other places where ‘roads are blocked off for specifically political 
reasons’.2
However, the delayed or interrupted journey is not unique to the Arab world. 
As this chapter shows, it is part of the genre’s broader connection to crisis, and it 
is not the only feature of road movies from the Middle East. While filmmakers 
from the region have adapted road movie motifs to expose restrictions on 
freedom and movement, the genre has also presented them with creative ways 
of overcoming these obstacles. The road movie, as we shall see, is not just about 
vehicular traffic; it is also about the tactics that enable films to be produced and 
to circulate both within and outside geopolitical borders. With my case-study 
films, I sketch out three tactical insights drawn from the genre. Firstly, blocked 
passage stimulates creativity, as illustrated in Amber Fares’s Speed Sisters (2015). 
Secondly, the vehicle is a simultaneously private and public space, lending itself 
to creative uses pioneered by Iranian directors Abbas Kiarostami and Mania 
Akbari and further innovatively utilized in Jafar Panahi’s Taxi Tehran (2015) 
­5
Road movies

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
126
and Lara Zeidan’s Three Centimetres (2018). Finally, the road movie’s foreground 
and background dynamics of characters and landscapes marry popular appeal 
with political consciousness, as deployed in different ways by Ali Mostafa’s From 
A to B (2014) and Roy Dib’s Mondial 2010 (2013).
The road movie often arises from, and explores, crisis. Prototypical road 
films such as The Grapes of Wrath (1940) established important motifs of the 
genre during the Great Depression, when the Dust Bowl crisis forced Americans 
to migrate westwards in pursuit of work. In the voyage form that Gilles Deleuze 
identifies as characteristic of the time-image that he claims arose in Italian 
neorealism, protagonists take unpredictable journeys through real post-war 
landscapes; the initial quest is frequently interrupted and delayed by periods 
of stasis.3 Like psychogeography, discussed in the last chapter, road movies 
permit real or staged background events to enter into, and sometimes disrupt, 
the story. In Voyage to Italy (1953), for example, a religious procession literally 
arrests a couple’s road trip through Naples. Through windscreen shots, now a 
genre staple, the car acts like a camera, capturing the surrounding landscape 
and people – paradoxically, by means of an enclosed, private capsule. As Nadia 
Yaqub notes, the road plays a central role in Palestinian literature and cinema, 
dating back to the 1948 Nakba that saw over 700,000 Palestinians expelled from 
their homeland and generated a refugee crisis leaving millions of Palestinians 
‘on the road’.4 In The Duped (1972), an early Middle Eastern road movie, three 
undocumented Palestinian refugees take a fateful journey across the Iraqi desert 
in search of work, dependent on a Palestinian driver, who has legal status, 
to smuggle them inside a water tank across the border to Kuwait. The film 
exemplifies what Rebecca Stein calls ‘discrepant mobility’, a term that she uses for 
the effects of the 1948 expulsions and limits upon free movement in occupied 
Palestine, but that has relevance to the broader Middle East and beyond.5
In this chapter, discrepant mobility is registered not only in the stories that 
road movies from the region tell, but also the circumstances under which 
they were made. Since it often involves being on the road, filmmaking rests 
precariously on the ever-shifting ground of travel permits and other obstacles 
to free movement. Palestinian filmmaker Annemarie Jacir, discussing her 
experiences of working in her homeland, remarks that, added to the usual 
constraints of independent filmmaking, there are the ‘Kafkaesque restrictions 
of military occupation  –  which are not just the obvious ones of checkpoints 
and permits  –  but come up in the most mundane and basic ways: picking up 
a crew member from the airport, speaking Arabic on set and having the police 
called on you, and renting equipment.’6 Palestinians with West Bank identity 

Road Movies
127
cards are barred from Israel unless they obtain special permits, reinforcing 
just how different Palestinian experience is from that of Israeli and foreign 
passport holders, who can move between Israel and the West Bank seamlessly.7 
Conflicts impair freedom of movement for filmmaking more generally. As we 
saw with Freedom Fields and Sana‘a: A Symphony in Chapters 1 and 4, closures 
of international airports and other restrictions on mobility during the civil wars 
in Libya and Yemen jeopardized the completion of these films and altered their 
creative approach.
Free movement is equally crucial for film distribution. When Jacir curated 
a Palestinian film festival in New York in 2003, it was a major feat to obtain 
the videotapes for the screenings, due to checkpoints around Palestinian 
towns and curfews in the West Bank and Gaza.8 Since then, technological 
advances such as digital formats and fast broadband, where this is available, 
have made it easier to submit films to festivals. Or, failing that, as the Iranian 
director Jafar Panahi says, ‘All you need to do is find a traveler, somebody 
who is going abroad, and give them your movie in a USB flash drive’.9 Even 
before the digital age, Iranian filmmakers relied on travellers to smuggle 
films in their suitcases to international festivals; Panahi recalls storing his 
films in packages bearing labels of films by other directors in order to deter 
suspicion.10 Transporting films in suitcases remains a fallback during periods 
of prolonged Internet blackout in Iran, as happened in the run-up to the 2019 
Sydney Persian Film Festival.
People, like films, have traditionally relied on roads and other routes to travel 
to festivals and screenings. Jacir flew from Palestine for the London première of 
Wajib (which is Arabic for ‘duty’), tweeting that it was her wājib to attend.11 She 
regards such attendance as part of her role as director: ‘We make films to share 
with people − and this is a way to share them, to connect to your audience, to meet 
them and speak with them’.12 Nonetheless, many Middle Eastern filmmakers, 
along with their cast and crew, are prevented from attending international 
screenings by visa denials. The difficulty of obtaining visas reinforces a system 
of differential access to mobility depending on what passport(s) one has. For 
example, when Freedom Fields (a documentary about a Libyan women’s football 
team) premiered at the Toronto International Film Festival, Fadwa was the only 
cast member whose visa application was approved. Later, the director Naziha 
Arebi was able to bring nine of the women to Amsterdam for the IDFA festival, 
where they livened up the proceedings by ululating during the screening. Due to 
President Trump’s so-called ‘Muslim’ ban, Arebi, herself a holder of both Libyan 
and British passports, was barred from attending the Blackstar Film Festival, 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
128
confirming her belief that, when travelling to the United States, being half 
Libyan cancels the benefits of her British passport.13
Further restrictions hinder filmmakers from travelling within the region. As 
artist-filmmaker Larissa Sansour explains, against the background of hostilities 
between Lebanon and Israel, ‘It’s very hard for Palestinians to go to Lebanon, 
which is just next door. I entered there on my Russian passport because my 
mother is Russian.’14 Palestinians travelling to Lebanon on a Palestinian passport 
are rarely granted visas. Similarly, the Lebanese cannot enter Israel to go to 
Palestine. In the most extreme cases, travel bans are imposed on filmmakers. Jafar 
Panahi’s sentencing by the Iranian state prohibits him from travelling abroad 
as well as from filmmaking. This excludes him from attending international 
festivals, although he can travel freely throughout Iran. For Panahi and other 
filmmakers whose work is featured in this chapter, the road movie has served 
as a creative solution to these restrictions through tactical insights such as the 
following.
Tactical insight #1: Blocked passage is a stimulus to creativity
As Marks writes, ‘blocked movement intensifies creative energy’.15 Obstacles can 
force people to be creative, in order to find a way around them; for many, this is 
a form of survival amidst absurd and harsh constraints. This is true of both the 
filmmakers and their characters in these road movies, who are shown as creative 
agents, not victims in states of dependency, even as the films highlight injustices 
of restricted movement. For example, in Amber Fares’s film, Marah, Noor, 
Mona and Betty, along with their captain Maysoon, are ‘the Speed Sisters’, an all-
female Palestinian motor-racing team. They compete against men and against 
each other for the title of fastest woman. Initially backed by the Palestinian 
Motorsport Federation as independent racers, they were formed into a team 
with funding from East Jerusalem’s British Consulate.16 Living in Palestine at 
the time, Canadian-Lebanese director Fares was first hired to film promotional 
videos for them, then realized the potential for a feature documentary when she 
saw ‘a classic racing dynamic’ in Marah and Betty’s rivalry.17 Betty hails from 
a wealthy family of racers. Striking a pose next to her car, she declares, ‘Betty 
Saadeh – I’m a brand’. In contrast, Marah lives in a refugee camp in Jenin; her 
mother is a driving instructor and her father, Khaled, is a dental technician, 
whose family was expelled from Haifa in 1948. Speed Sisters follows the team 
through two racing seasons; its first half is dedicated to the first season, which 

Road Movies
129
Betty wins, while the other half ends with Marah’s victory in the second season, 
despite the Federation’s inconsistent and arbitrary rules favouring Betty over her.
­Speed Sisters makes knowing references to the racing movie, a subgenre of 
the road movie characterized by racing car choreography, as well as racing 
rivalries such as that between Brazilian Formula One champion Ayrton Senna 
and his fellow driver Alain Frost in the documentary Senna (2010). The film’s 
sound design consists of motors and skidding tyres, as well as a medley of Arab 
heavy metal, rap and pop songs. With their mobile protagonists, race and road 
movies contain thrilling possibilities, not least of which is the thrill of high speed 
that the Speed Sisters revel in. These women are determined to embrace the 
highways, despite obstacles in their path. When Noor appears on an Aljazeera 
TV show, the irony of speed rallies taking place in Palestine is not lost on the 
presenters, because every few minutes you encounter a checkpoint. ‘Exactly’, 
she replies. ‘We don’t have open spaces where we can put cones and train 
freely’. Road and race movie fantasies of automotive speed and empowerment 
are juxtaposed with the shrinking of Palestinian space, a reality that the team 
confronts regularly when they are training. Near Ofer Israeli detention centre, 
they found a small empty lot where they train in the vicinity of a watchtower, 
soldiers and barbed wire. One day on their way to their training ground, soldiers 
signal for them to stop their car. Betty steps out and approaches the soldiers – 
Figure 5.1  Roadblocks become creative obstacles for the Speed Sisters, an all-female 
Palestinian motor-racing team. Speed Sisters directed by Amber Fares © SocDoc Studios 
2015. All Rights Reserved.

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
130
as a daring driver, she is accustomed to taking risks and assumes that a pretty, 
blonde woman like her will not be harmed. Suddenly, she is shot in the back 
though, luckily, not severely hurt. The film captures the moment. Fares recalls, 
‘We were just about to leave and then I yelled at Lucy [the cinematographer] 
to turn on the camera’, which she did, then Betty was hit within seconds.18 
The scene’s gravity is leavened with humour when Betty later recovers and 
Maysoon and Noor make light-hearted fun of her. Noor points out that, if you’re 
Palestinian, Israeli soldiers are indiscriminate: they don’t care if you’re blond, 
dark, ugly or pretty. Despite the injustices of living under occupation, neither 
the film nor the characters dramatically dwell on such moments; they move on 
with characteristic Palestinian resilience.
Early on, Marah repurposes her family’s black Volkswagen, making it 
lighter and faster by removing its glass, wipers and outer steel – an act that 
reflects her economic precarity. The family previously lived under twenty-
four-hour military curfew, when they were only allowed to leave their home 
for two hours a day to buy food and water. Khaled, who knows that curfews 
can be imposed at any time, toils long hours in his workshop, manufacturing 
dental prosthetics to support Marah financially and buy her a new car. With 
their Jerusalem IDs, Maysoon and Noor can travel to the sea at Jaffa whenever 
they want, unlike Marah, Betty and Mona whose West Bank IDs require them 
to obtain permits. For most West Bank Palestinians, visiting the sea is a form 
of freedom of movement beyond their ken, as shown when Marah gets a 
permit (with the film crew’s help, Fares explained to me). But, first, she must 
walk through the turnstiles at Qalandia checkpoint, while Noor simply drives 
through with her Israeli numberplate.19 Arriving at the sea, Marah dives 
in, fully clothed. ‘They took the most beautiful place we had’, she exclaims. 
‘Imagine if we could come here every day!’ – a politically charged statement 
that articulates a national longing for freedom of movement, open spaces 
and connection with the land and sea. It gathers emotional force from earlier 
scenes that established her limitations, which are temporarily transcended on 
the road trip.
Cinematically, Fares wanted to counterbalance the liberation of racing with 
the obstacles of living under occupation: ‘The car is an appendage for race car 
drivers . . . It’s their own private space, which gives them freedom, even with 
roadblocks. They have some degree of control where to go’.20 This freedom 
is contrasted with what can be seen outside the cars as they drive through 
checkpoints surrounded by Israel’s road signage and Separation Wall. The 
races happen in repurposed venues in different cities, taking us on a journey 

Road Movies
131
through Palestine, starting with a wholesale vegetable market in Jenin, then 
Bethlehem’s presidential airstrip and the Jericho security forces academy. The 
racecourse itself is filled with obstacles. Fares approached it as ‘a microcosm of 
the occupation’ – with its roadblocks, rules changing at a whim and an autocratic 
disdain for questioning, ‘it is very similar to what the occupation is to them 
[the Palestinians].’21 In the film each race is introduced with a map of Palestine, 
indicating the location of the city, and a diagram of the track with its obstacles. 
Gopros (action cameras) mounted on windscreens inside the cars enable us to 
experience the track from the characters’ perspectives, as they wend in and out 
of roadblocks.
Inevitably, the filming of Speed Sisters was affected by mobility restrictions. 
The Israeli army stopped the film crew on several occasions and, once, they 
were pulled over by the Palestinian police. Fares was also told to stop filming at 
military checkpoints which, she emphasizes, is a red line:
Once you live there, you understand the boundaries and how far you can push 
and how far you can’t. Until you become comfortable in that environment. As a 
foreigner you have to learn that stuff. I was able to make Speed Sisters because I’d 
been living there for years before I had even picked up a camera to film the girls, 
so I had an understanding of what the game is and who all the players are and 
how far I can push things. At a checkpoint, if a soldier comes up to me and tells 
me to stop, I’m going to stop, I’m not going to push it. But you try to get away 
with what you can.22
­Despite this, Fares believes that ‘It is easier to film in the West Bank than it is 
in a lot of places that I’ve filmed [including the US]. Gaza’s a little bit trickier.’23 
For her, this is because ‘In Palestine, people are much more used to having 
cameras around, whether it’s NGO films or the news. For a long time, it was 
such a hotbed of the news cycle that people are more open to it.’24 This cemented 
her view that ‘each place has its own constraints that you have to deal with in 
making a movie and Palestine has its set that aren’t any better or any worse’ than 
anywhere else.
Nevertheless, as Fares acknowledges, her Canadian passport lends her 
greater freedom of movement than the majority of Palestinians: ‘I don’t have 
the same constraints and, in terms of the mechanics of the occupation, none 
of that applies to me.’25 Furthermore, being a foreigner, unable to speak the 
languages well enough to understand underlying tensions, she admits that she 
may have been unaware of some of the constraints upon her: ‘In Palestine, I 
have been saved so many times by a shop owner who said “come in”, when 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
132
there’s a clash, “don’t go down that street, there’s something going on”’.26 At 
the same time, although she is not Palestinian, as an Arab Muslim woman 
living in Palestine, Fares enjoyed an insider/outsider status that gave her 
unprecedented access to the community, helping her to build relationships 
with the women and their families. She believes her gender was another factor 
that ‘allowed me to move in those spaces’, pointing out that, unlike men who 
often receive rough treatment from Israeli soldiers, as a woman, ‘there’s an 
underestimation of what you’re doing’, which means ‘you can get away with 
more’.27 However, as Betty’s experience shows, gender exceptionalism does not 
always work.
The Speed Sisters appealed to Fares precisely because of her insider/
outsider identity: ‘I’m not even sure if a Palestinian would look at those 
women and see an opportunity of making a film about them because they may 
see them as too fringe or not really telling the Palestinian story. Ultimately, 
my goal was to show women in a context where people from my hometown 
in Canada could identify with them.’28 Breaking international audiences’ 
stereotypes of Arab women was uppermost in her mind. This influenced how 
Fares handled pressure to show pushback from the community while the film 
was in development: ‘Anytime we pitched it in the West, people were like, 
where’s the tension? Obviously, these women just can’t be racing like this. 
There must be some guy or a father who didn’t like them racing’.29 In contrast 
to Western assumptions of oppressed Arab/Muslim women, Speed Sisters 
shows men being overwhelmingly supportive of the women’s ambitions, 
particularly in the story of Marah and her father but also in conversations 
with male racers. Instead of trying to manufacture or amplify the disapproval, 
which did exist, Fares decided to convey it more subtly, in the manner that 
the women experienced it. In one scene, Maysoon reads out comments from 
the Internet after Noor’s Aljazeera interview, among them complaints that 
sports and fashion are not the way to liberate Palestine and that the women 
should focus on reading the Quran instead. Fares explains, ‘You want to show 
a place in a critical light, but I also don’t want to take liberties of criticizing it 
with a viewpoint that’s just North American’.30 She believes that this approach, 
together with the fact that Speed Sisters was made and edited in Palestine 
(with a Palestinian editor and co-producer) benefitted its reception there as 
well as abroad. In Palestine, audiences could see it as a reflection of their lives, 
including the support networks that exist. Internationally, the genre enabled 
the film to appeal on different levels and attract audiences beyond the usual 
activist crowd.

Road Movies
133
Tactical insight #2: The vehicle is a simultaneously public  
and private space
‘Inside the car is another world’ runs Speed Sisters’s tagline. The vehicle belongs 
outdoors yet it is enclosed and sealed off from the street, making it a space that 
is both public and private. The film historian A. L. Rees writes, ‘the car is a social 
machine; only racing cars are for soloists, the rest carry passengers’.31 Although 
we might note that, in Speed Sisters, racing is also a team sport, the road and 
the vehicle are certainly sociable settings in many road movies, affording 
opportunities for conversation and chance encounters. In classical Hollywood, 
it gave rise to the genre motif of ‘the people’, as in It Happened One Night (1934) 
where the protagonist finds herself in an enforced intimacy with fellow travellers 
from different social classes. During the Production Code era (1934–68), 
Hollywood filmmakers were alive to the car’s creative possibilities: not only did 
the set-up of ‘[t]wo people in the front seat . . . make for easy classical framing 
and keep the dialogue going’, it allowed sexual tensions to be intimated at a time 
when sex was not permitted onscreen.32
The car as a vehicle for freedom of expression has been utilized in different 
creative ways in films from the region. An influential practitioner of this strategy, 
the Iranian director Kiarostami has frequently organized his films around the 
car and road trips.33 For him, the car’s appeal is twofold. Firstly, as he suggests 
in his documentary 10 on Ten (2004), the act of sitting side-by-side, rather 
than face-to-face, encourages people to talk more freely, since they can make 
eye contact only when they want to. Secondly, the car’s mobility compensates 
for the relatively static camera and supplies a varying backdrop. In the feature 
film Ten (2002), Kiarostami uses the car to bypass Iranian film censorship codes 
that stipulate wearing of hejāb at all times, even at home when women would 
not normally veil themselves, which prevents realistic portrayal of intimate 
conversations in domestic interiors. Ten is shot almost entirely inside a car, 
filmed with two digital cameras affixed to the dashboard. Its narrative consists 
of ten dialogues between a female driver, Mania, and her passengers who, 
apart from her son, are all female – non-professional actors playing versions of 
themselves. According to Mania Akbari (who stars in the film along with her 
own car and family members) the actors were not aware that they were being 
filmed, which raises profound ethical questions, as mentioned in Chapter 2. In 
his interview with Geoff Andrew, Kiarostami claimed he sometimes directed 
from the backseat or followed in another car, monitoring the performances on a 
screen.34 With these self-imposed constraints – including the single set (the car), 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
134
limited camera angles and a remote director, and the absence of a film crew – 
he showed the creative possibilities for making films this way. The car’s public/
private space provides the stage for intimate conversations that touch upon 
sensitive topics, such as women’s rights in Iran. In one scene, Mania’s passenger, 
a young woman whose fiancé has left her, removes her veil, revealing her shorn 
hair – an act that appears to be a personal gesture of freedom (since shaving her 
hair removes the need for the veil to cover it up) as well as a sign of mourning.
After Ten, Akbari turned to making her own, low-budget digital films. 
Intense conversations held in moving vehicles are a recurring feature of her 
Iranian movies. They maintain a dialogue with Ten, although the latter was 
made during a traumatic period in her and her child’s life, as mentioned 
in Chapter  2. For example, 20 Fingers (2004) consists of six episodes, each 
portraying a conversation between a man and a woman (played by Akbari and 
Bijan Daneshmand) travelling through Tehran or neighbouring areas by car, 
motorcycle, telecabin, train or boat. The film leaves it open as to whether the 
man and woman represent the same pair or different couples. They speak about 
sexual relations with unprecedented frankness for Iranian cinema at the time. 
In the different episodes, the woman boldly articulates her desires, broaching 
topics such as abortion, adultery and homosexuality. Each episode is improvised 
around Akbari’s script and filmed in one long take, a self-imposed constraint that 
enhances the intensity of these dialogues that are all about women’s alienation 
from and desire to have control over their bodies. The body and sex formed ‘a 
great part of the battles I had to fight as a woman raised in an Islamic society’, 
where a woman’s body is expected to be pure and virginal, Akbari explains. ‘For 
many men, it is crucial to be the first owners of that body . . . Later it became 
the subject of my films, this instinctive understanding of women’s situation, 
that things can’t continue the way they are defined.’35 The opening scene of 20 
Fingers implies an act of rape in the darkness of a car’s backseat when a man 
attempts to ascertain if his girlfriend is a virgin after she relates a childhood 
anecdote of playing ‘doctor’ with a male cousin. Akbari’s Iranian films were 
made underground and none of them have been officially screened in Iran 
‘but a lot of people watched them on the black market’.36 Having left Iran in 
2012 during a wave of government crackdowns on filmmakers, she still makes 
films and installation art about female desire and the body in exile in the UK. 
However, she now faces different types of constraints and moving vehicles with 
their private/public spaces are no longer prominent in her work.
In Jafar Panahi’s Taxi Tehran, his third feature since his 2010 sentence, a 
succession of passengers take a ride in a taxi, among them a DVD smuggler 

Road Movies
135
named Omid, a woman with her injured husband, Panahi’s argumentative young 
niece Hana, two women carrying their goldfish to a shrine and the defence 
lawyer Nasrin Sotoudeh. The taxi driver is none other than Panahi himself, 
disguised in a grey beret. Like Ten, Taxi takes place inside a car, largely filmed 
by a dashboard-mounted camera. Its use of the car as a private/public space 
is shaped by its clandestine conditions of production and mobility restrictions 
imposed on the director. All Panahi’s post-filmmaking ban films have 
necessitated sealed locations. This is because, as he says himself, ‘Anybody who 
wants to use public locations in Iran for making a movie has to have permission 
from the government . . . Otherwise he or she will be arrested by the police and 
their equipment confiscated’.37 Panahi’s first two films after the ban, This Is Not 
a Film (2011) and Closed Curtain (2013), were made in indoor, private spaces: 
his Tehran apartment and his beach house near the Caspian Sea, respectively. 
This production constraint gives Closed Curtain its title, as well as its story 
about a filmmaker trying to hide his dog (following an Iranian law banning 
such pets in the home) by keeping the curtains closed. Fundamentally, the black 
drapes across the window are there to conceal the shoot ‘so that nobody from 
outside could see us’.38 Mahsa Salamati argues that all of Panahi’s post-ban films 
involve the ‘creation of “other spaces”’, or what she calls, using Foucault’s term, 
‘heterotopias’: ‘Once we enter these spaces we are bound to stay, as the camera 
never leaves’.39 On a more literal level, however, the camera never leaves these 
confined spaces for safety reasons.
In order not to attract attention and minimize risks to his collaborators, Panahi 
employs a limited cast and crew in his post-ban films. Despite these precautions, 
Mojtaba Mirtahmasb, co-director of This Is Not a Film, had his passport 
confiscated and later the same happened to Kambuzia Partovi and Maryam 
Moqadam, co-director and actress of Closed Curtain, when they were due to 
leave the country to attend the Berlinale premiere – repercussions that curtailed 
their own freedom of movement. ‘That’s why I really have to reconsider what I’m 
doing and come up with a small-scale project that I can shoot and sound-record 
myself without involving other people’, Panahi explains. ‘By necessity my movies 
are becoming more and more minimalistic’.40 It is also in this light that we can 
understand Panahi’s own appearances in these films: ‘if there is a part I can play, 
I just do it myself’.41 Not only, or primarily, instances of authorial self-reflexivity, 
which is how they are usually interpreted, these cameo or ‘star’ appearances are 
a product of constraints under which he is working.
While these restrictions would be limiting to most filmmakers, they are 
particularly so for Panahi who regards himself as a socially committed director, 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
136
reflecting his surroundings in his movies. Before the ban, he filmed in bustling, 
urban, exterior spaces. At the time of Closed Curtain, he commented, ‘When you 
go inside, you feel so limited. In our case, we couldn’t even look out the window 
because of security’.42 By contrast, his next two films, Taxi Tehran and 3 Faces 
(2018), are both road movies – the former set in Tehran, the latter in the remote 
countryside. By means of the car, a sealed, private space within the public realm, 
and small digital cameras, they permit him to shoot outside and reconnect with the 
social side of his filmmaking. In Taxi Tehran, the shared taxi is a social machine. 
It enables Panahi to capture the city and its inhabitants via the road movie motif 
of ‘the people’, as passengers share brief encounters within the vehicle. Their 
conversations touch on debates on human rights and cinema as well as offering 
occasions for much merriment and humour. Unlike Ten, the dashboard camera 
points inwards and outwards, turning the windscreen into a mobile viewpoint on 
the city. It is supplemented by other cameras within the narrative reality to follow 
the action from different angles. For example, when the injured man and his 
wife scramble onto the backseat, Panahi lends Omid his mobile phone to record 
the man’s last will. Panahi not only stars; he is a cinematographer, too, manually 
turning the dashboard camera to film events outside the car. While he is certainly 
in charge of the location, ‘the one who decides what part of the reality outside is 
to be captured’,43 Taxi Tehran is not just a self-reflexive self-portrait but makes 
creative use of the vehicle as a social ensemble.
Figure 5.2  Jafar Panahi’s role as the taxi driver in Taxi Tehran is not just a self-reflexive 
gesture but results from the constraints under which he is working. Taxi Tehran directed 
by Jafar Panahi © Jafar Panahi Film Productions 2015. All Rights Reserved.

Road Movies
137
Sotoudeh, whose cameo is significant, shared with Panahi the Sakharov 
Prize for Freedom of Thought in 2012. Known for defending political prisoners, 
Sotoudeh has herself been repeatedly imprisoned for her work and, like Panahi, 
has been banned from leaving Iran and practising her profession. During the 
conversation she quips, ‘Although you are released from prison, the outside 
world is only a bigger prison’, since the authorities are always watching. Before 
leaving the cab, she adds that Panahi had better remove her words from his film 
otherwise he will be accused of siāh-namāyi (‘showing the negative aspects’) and 
the authorities will give him more trouble. As Trevor Johnston remarks in his 
review,
being out and about in the city (or country) yet still sheltered enough to be able to 
speak your mind, is what the setting of the car has afforded all these filmmakers, 
bringing with it the implication that once you step outside the vehicle you’re in 
an environment where words and behaviour must be kept within strictly defined 
and policed parameters.44
In this respect, the car is a heterotopia, affording an exceptional space for freedom 
of expression. However, Panahi is more constrained than most other filmmakers 
using this strategy because he has to direct from inside the car whereas they can 
direct from outside or another vehicle.
The DVD smuggler Omid plays a further key role. Firstly, he is the one who 
recognizes Panahi and that he is making a movie. Omid makes viewers aware 
that the film is scripted, relating the dialogue between the first two passengers 
to the director’s earlier film Crimson Gold (2003). With carefully orchestrated 
character appearances and narrative twists, Taxi is not merely an observational 
document as it appears. Secondly, Omid’s profession as a movie smuggler (known 
in Iran as a fīlmī) brings screen traffic into the picture, in particular the social 
practice of watching banned films bought from street vendors who sell pirated 
DVDs to car passengers and undertake home deliveries. In a context where the 
state tightly controls film distribution through regular channels, Omid claims 
to be providing a cultural service since he offers viewers in Iran rare access to 
foreign and banned Iranian films. It is on the DVD black market that banned 
work by Panahi, Akbari and others is found, a shadow economy that puts films 
into circulation while withholding financial remuneration from filmmakers.45 In 
interview, Panahi has joked that ‘not only did I not make any money, but when I 
want to give copies of my own films to my friends, I have to buy the DVDs. I don’t 
even get a discount!’46 Yet through these informal networks, local audiences can 
see his films, a matter of importance to Panahi himself, who has been accused 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
138
of making films exclusively for international festivals. In the absence of official 
endorsement, piracy is a pragmatic alternative, turning Panahi and the DVD 
smuggler into veritable ‘partners’, as Omid hints in Taxi Tehran.
In other scenes, we follow Hana, who is making a film for her homework 
assignment which has to conform to certain rules to be ‘distributable’.47 The rules 
belong to the Ministry of Culture and Islamic Guidance’s censorship guidelines.48 
One of them is to avoid exhibiting the dark side of realities (siāh-namāyi). 
Hana’s experiences show how making a movie that can be legally shown in Iran 
can compromise the truth, since everyday reality is complex, with both ‘light’ 
and ‘dark’ sides. Taxi underlines the need for alternative outlets, a point that 
is reinforced when, in the absence of end credits, a title expresses gratitude to 
all those who helped anonymously with this ‘undistributable’ film, stamping its 
modes of production and circulation on the finished film.
Although not a road movie, Lebanese filmmaker Lara Zeidan’s fictional short 
Three Centimetres is a variation on its tropes, using a ferris wheel ride in Beirut 
for an intimate conversation between four teenage girls, Suzie, Manal, Joanna and 
Tamara. Suzie confides in the others that she has had sex without compromising 
her virginity; the secret is not to exceed three centimetres. Advising Joanna 
how to overcome a recent break-up, Suzie then relates a scenario that is clearly 
homophobic. It provokes Manal to come out as gay herself, to her friends’ 
disbelief since she does not conform to their preconceptions of gay people and 
has hidden this part of her life from them. Just then, a power cut brings the ferris 
wheel to a halt, suspending the girls in mid-air without any immediate prospect 
of escape from their tense exchange. The need to lead double lives links the two 
parts of the conversation, as it shifts from preserving virginity to homosexuality. 
In their different ways, Suzie and Manal are both attempting to experience 
freedom in a society where, in certain respects, they cannot be entirely free, 
due to expectations of staying a virgin before marriage, on the one hand, and 
homophobia, on the other. As Zeidan comments, Lebanon is ‘not really a closed 
society’ since it has both ‘conservative’ and ‘open-minded’ elements, sometimes 
in the same family and not necessarily related to religion; yet, as the society 
undergoes changes, young people often find themselves
stuck between both, between being open-minded and not wanting to discuss 
things and not wanting to disrespect. There is this understanding that there 
are different ways of seeing things. And that’s why some things stay hidden 
because sometimes you don’t want to fight another’s opinion but you still want 
to be what you want. So the way is just not to talk about things and lead a 
double life.49

Road Movies
139
As an undergraduate at the American University of Beirut, Zeidan visited 
the nearby ferris wheel at Luna Park and wrote her script when applying to the 
London Film School, unearthing it two-and-a-half years later for her graduation 
short. Situated next to the corniche, the Luna Park is a well-known landmark, 
purportedly the Middle East’s oldest fairground, now almost abandoned, due 
to the growth of mall culture. As Zeidan reflects, the ferris wheel cabin was a 
useful dramatic set-up for her to tackle the conversation about virginity and 
homosexuality: ‘It is a public space but very private; they are alone in the air and 
no one [else] is with them’, imparting a sense of safety for the girls to express 
themselves about these topics.50 Moreover, they are stuck together, especially 
when the power cut happens, so they cannot escape when they feel uncomfortable. 
Because of the cabin’s surround structure, ‘they all sit next to each other instead 
of facing each other’,51 an arrangement that enables them to talk more freely, 
recalling Kiarostami’s insight about the car. While the conversation could have 
occurred in a car, the ferris wheel provides an even more dynamic setting. In the 
open air, yet enclosed, it transports us from the darkness at its base to its airy 
summit, where traffic clamour subsides into the calm sea. Integrated into the 
shots is a central pole, dividing Suzie and Manal, while different camera angles 
are achieved via a wheel that turns the cabin in different directions.
Like 20 Fingers, Three Centimetres adopts the self-imposed constraint to 
shoot in one take. Although challenging, Zeidan reveals that, once everything 
was planned, this suited the ferris wheel set-up and made filming easier and 
more efficient for the crew since it took place at sunset, when light changes 
quickly. Carrying the camera on an easy rig, the cinematographer accompanied 
the girls in the cabin. Along with the focus-puller and sound recordist, Zeidan 
was three cabins away, communicating via walkie-talkie and watching the 
action via a monitor. The crew recorded a total of eighteen takes, of which 
the best, in terms of lighting and performance, was chosen for the final film. 
The single long take suited the story, building its intensity, as became apparent 
when an editor attempted an alternative version with two cuts; although those 
cuts were invisible, the intensity was lost. ‘The constraint of one-shot let things 
happen’, explains Zeidan, since the actors used both her script (which she had 
workshopped with them during rehearsals; they also substituted some lines) and 
on-set improvisation.52
While, within the story, the cabin’s private/public space enables a conversation 
about intimate topics that are otherwise difficult to articulate, Three Centimetres 
itself contributes to conversations about hidden sexualities in the Middle East. 
The film has travelled worldwide, as well as being exhibited (without censorship) 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
140
in Lebanon, at the Beirut International Women’s Film Festival and Cinema al 
Fouad, the country’s first queer film festival, and on the Beirut-based streaming 
platform Aflamuna. As Zeidan says, ‘It puts on screen what is usually spoken 
in private’.53
Tactical insight #3: The road movie’s foreground/background 
dynamics marries popular appeal with political consciousness
In the Argentine film The Motorcycle Diaries (2004), a dramatization of Ernesto 
‘Che’ Guevara and his friend Alberto Granado’s journey across Latin America, 
the focus diverts from the male buddies’ story of adventure and sexual conquest 
to solidarity with the oppressed people whose struggles they witness on the 
road. Real people that the cast and crew met on the road are incorporated into 
the film, implying continuities between past injustices that revolutionized ‘Che’ 
Guevara and the present. Several road movies from the Middle East have also 
exploited relationships between foreground (the travelling characters in their 
vehicle) and background (the landscape and people that form their journey’s 
backdrop) to generate political consciousness under the guise of an entertaining 
trip. Earlier examples include Under the Bombs (2007) which the Lebanese 
director Philippe Aractingi shot ‘Dogme 95-style’ during and in the immediate 
aftermath of the July 2006 War (also known as the Israel-Hezbollah War).54 Its 
foreground story, of a wealthy Lebanese Shiite-Muslim woman travelling from 
Beirut to South Lebanon by taxi with a Christian driver to look for her missing 
son, is placed ‘inside the chaos’ of the real-life war.55 The professional lead actors 
interact with actual civilians, soldiers and rescue-workers on location, who 
react spontaneously with authentic dialogue expressing their testimonies of the 
crisis. Through journeys that take characters out of their comfort zone and into 
contact with people and places they might otherwise never encounter, this use 
of the genre highlights the road trip’s transformative power and allows a country 
or region’s social hardships to be explored.
In academic studies, the turn to popular genres such as road movies in 
filmmaking practices outside Hollywood is often explained in terms of seeking 
international audiences. However, it can also be an attempt to reach domestic 
audiences. Realizing that films funded by foreign grants and aimed at festivals 
tended not to be successful with locals, Aractingi decided to make films that 
work at the box office, in order to attract the Lebanese audience first, then the 
international one.56 Attracting audiences is essential to a self-sustaining film 

Road Movies
141
industry for which making popular genres has been embraced as a solution in 
the UAE as well, by the Abu Dhabi government-funded media company Image 
Nation. For the Emirati director Ali Mostafa, however, genre exploration is a 
self-imposed constraint rather than an externally, market-driven one and he sees 
it as part of his apprenticeship as a filmmaker: ‘I felt I wanted to tap into all the 
genres as much as I can’.57
Directly inspired by The Motorcycle Diaries, Mostafa’s film From A to B is 
about three wealthy young expats, Omar (a Syrian), Ramy (an Egyptian) and 
Youssef (a Saudi), on a road trip from Abu Dhabi to Beirut in honour of their 
high school friend Hady who died in the July 2006 War. The trio are performed 
by first-time actors, although two of them were previously known in Arab 
comedy: Saudi comedian Fahad Albutairi (who plays Youssef) and Shadi Alfons 
(who plays Ramy), a writer on the Egyptian TV show Al-Bernameg (discussed 
in Chapter 6). The film was mostly shot in Abu Dhabi, as well as Jordan and 
Lebanon. Jordan also acts as a substitute location when the buddies enter Saudi 
Arabia and Syria, the latter off limits because of the war. In fact, a journey of this 
kind across the Arab region, although once feasible, has become unimaginable 
due to regional turbulence. Starting as an escapist adventure, the story is set 
against the backdrop of these conflicts. Susan Hayward writes that ‘Generically 
speaking, the road movie goes from A to B in a finite and chronological time’.58 
In From A to B, the initials stand for the characters’ starting point, Abu Dhabi, 
and their destination, Beirut. If this implies a linearity, that is far from the case, 
as their journey has several disruptions, which are initially comic – wrong turns, 
arrest for suspected homosexuality and a crash (into a camel) resulting in a 
broken windshield – before becoming darker towards the end. The protagonists’ 
Range Rover is itself a subject of comedy as its smashed windshield is patched up 
with tape by the only car-repairer that they encounter on the road.
Always rumbling in the background, regional politics takes a decisive step into 
the foreground when the buddies meet Shadya, a young Syrian who was Hady’s 
girlfriend, and escort her to her hometown, Deraa. At the Syrian border, they 
are stopped by Syrian regime soldiers. Because he has a diplomatic passport (his 
father is a Syrian ambassador in Egypt), Omar is handled more gently. Eventually 
the group is released, but warned of the risks of driving in Syria with Gulf number 
plates, a reference to Gulf states’ backing of Syrian rebels. It is Omar’s first visit 
to Syria, the country of his heritage, although he never imagined it would be 
like this. After dropping off Shadya, the trio pass a place where civilians are 
identifying their dead. Seizing the chance for some real journalism (previously, 
he is shown attempting to report on the ‘Arab Spring’ from his bedroom), Ramy 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
142
starts filming the scene. When armed rebels ambush them, we see a different 
attitude to Omar’s diplomatic passport. Yousef waves it in the car, not realizing 
that this makes them more of a target. The trio are taken captive and interrogated 
in a scene that enacts further political alliances and rivalries. As a Saudi, Yousef 
is hailed as a friend, but Omar is under suspicion. Finally, they are released, 
urged to spread word of the suffering they have witnessed.
A latent homoeroticism pervades mainstream road movies where male 
buddies share intimacy on the road, ‘cut off from any emotional ties except to 
each other’.59 In From A to B, this manifests comically when the buddies are 
arrested for suspected homosexuality while camping in the Saudi desert; the 
incident is underpinned by knowledge that they are straight, making gay people 
the butt of the joke. In the experimental short film Mondial 2010, there is a shift 
to an explicitly gay couple, two young Lebanese men, Yousef and Ibrahim, who 
drive from Beirut to Ramallah. It shows an ‘impossible journey’:60 these cities are 
geographically close, yet it is illegal for Lebanese nationals to visit Palestine, since 
it is occupied by Israel. As the director, Roy Dib, remarks, ‘those impossibilities 
and constraints are a major element of why the movie was made and how it was 
made’.61 Due to the travel restriction that prevents him from going to Palestine, 
he never met Palestinians living in Palestine until he participated in a teachers’ 
workshop in Jordan. By asking some friends that he met there to film their cities 
as if he were visiting them, he obtained the rushes that he later transformed 
into Mondial 2010, whose story was dictated by footage that he acquired from a 
friend in Ramallah. As Dib elaborates, ‘In filmmaking, the director [usually] has 
control, thinking of the image and the actors while writing’, then supervising the 
shooting and editing but, with this film, ‘first of all, I haven’t filmed the footage, 
so I had no control over this. Second, I’m dealing with a city and a landscape 
that I don’t know.’62 In one scene, a group of people in a cafe are talking about the 
World Cup and address the friend who is filming by his name, Yousef. From this, 
Dib adopted the name Yousef for one of his protagonists and set the story during 
World Cup 2010; hence, the title.
Dib worked with a sound engineer, sound designer and two actors to create 
the dialogue and sound effects in similar spaces to those shown in the footage. 
For example, sound for the car scenes was recorded in a car. Although we never 
see the couple, the construction of cinematic space through sound and off-screen 
voices enables us to place the characters in the scenes and creates a convincing 
illusion that they really went on a road trip to Ramallah. Dib was influenced by 
one of Jean-Luc Godard’s films on the Israel-Palestine conflict, Notre Musique 
(2004), in which he meditates on the shot/reverse shot. This classical Hollywood 

Road Movies
143
technique constructs conversation scenes from disparate shots of actors talking 
and looking off-screen. For Godard, it illustrates the dialectical relationship 
between image (documentary) and text (fiction) which he compares to the 
Palestinian Nakba and the Jewish exodus as two sides of the same story. This 
laid the basis for Dib’s thinking about foreground/background dynamics: ‘When 
we talk about Palestine, we tend to talk more about Israel, about what Israel is 
doing. So Palestine is on the third layer of the image, not the front layer.’63 In 
Mondial 2010, he attempts to place Palestine in the foreground and Israel in 
the background. The only time we see Israelis is at a demonstration in which 
soldiers recede into the back of the image. In other scenes, Israeli settlements 
materialize in the backdrop.
Mondial 2010 further manipulates fields of foreground and background in its 
story of gay characters, identities that, if not exactly ‘absent’ in Middle Eastern 
cinema, have tended to be marginalized and stereotyped. It stages an ‘impossible 
journey’ in this sense, too, as characters that are ‘not allowed to speak [their love] 
in public’ are given a voice and brought into the foreground.64 The story is told 
as if it were a video diary by Ibrahim, filming through the windshield from the 
passenger seat, next to his boyfriend, Yousef, who is driving. Their conversation 
on the road was ‘built on small details’ related to everyday difficulties faced by 
gay couples in the Arab world through which, Dib says, ‘you get to understand 
much more’ about their situation.65 For example, they are afraid of reserving a 
hotel room with one bed; Yousef suggests booking one with two beds to ‘avoid 
any trouble’. Later, they joke about a love bite that Ibrahim has given Yousef that 
might betray their relationship to others. When Yousef’s friends discuss football 
at the cafe, Ibrahim teases his lover that he should reveal that they are gay and 
that they hate football, one of their motivations for leaving Beirut for Ramallah 
being that they could not stand World Cup festivities. Their relationship is 
hidden, even from friends, because of the lack of legal protections for LGBTQ 
communities in the region.
By ingeniously splicing together foreground and background, the film 
constructs the space of a gay road movie. It makes possible that impossible journey 
in the sense that cinema can take us to places to which we cannot physically go 
and can create an entirely new, imaginary space that has never existed in reality. 
Dib regards this imaginary space as ‘a tool for politics’, like the dialectic that 
Godard discussed in Notre Musique. While Mondial 2010 is fictional, written 
in the popular genre of the road movie, it is also documentary, composed of 
commissioned footage that documents real places. The story builds towards a 
rooftop scene in which a Palestinian shows Israeli settlement-building in the 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
144
surrounding area, ‘Look how close it is to us. It is almost here’, he says. Through 
him, the characters and we, as viewers, witness a city that is disappearing. 
Ibrahim is unsettled by the experience, since it does not fit the image of Palestine 
he had; it burdens him with the responsibility of witnessing. Dib explains, ‘I 
wanted the focus of this queer road movie to shift from the body of protagonists 
to what they are seeing.’66 We do not see the gay couple; instead, we see what they 
are seeing, diverting the gaze onto the politically contested territory through 
which they are travelling. Although it would have been possible to insert images 
of the protagonists, not being able to see them was a political decision for 
Dib, part of an ‘intersectionality of causes. I’m not interested in doing a story 
about the drama of two lovers, about what happened in their relationship. I’m 
interested in using their story to tackle a wider society.’67 In her essay, ‘Film and 
the Visible’, Teresa de Lauretis argues that films that merely represent gays and 
lesbians without altering conventional forms of seeing remain trapped within 
a heterosexual frame of visibility. By contrast, Mondial 2010, to borrow de 
Lauretis’s words, ‘create[s] a space for questioning not only what they see but 
also what we see in the film’.68 The film’s double taboo of a gay love story and 
filming in Palestinian territory makes screening in Lebanon risky, although it 
has been shown at festival openings (which are exempt from screening permits 
because attendance is by invitation only) and online by Aflamuna. In addition, it 
has screened internationally, including at the Berlinale where it won the Teddy 
Award for best LGBT-related film.
Conclusion
As adapted in the films in this chapter, the road movie, with its tropes of freedom 
and movement, vividly dramatizes the injustices of discrepant mobility in the 
region. Furthermore, discrepant mobility is not just a thematic concern; it 
underlies the conditions in which these films are made and distributed. Limits 
imposed on travel affect access to filmmaking locations and screening venues, 
as well the ease with which cast and crew can move to and from these spaces, 
depending on their citizenship status and the geopolitical situation. At the same 
time, the road movie has provided filmmakers with the creative impetus to 
overcome limitations on free speech and movement, a resourcefulness displayed 
in each of the case study films. As a private/public space, the vehicle allows 
filmmakers to engage with controversial subjects, pushing the boundaries of 
what is permissible to portray. Although it is usually enclosed, the outside world 

Road Movies
145
is glimpsed through its windscreens and side windows as it travels through 
politically contested landscapes, bringing those geopolitics into the story in a 
dynamic relationship between foreground and background. For similar reasons, 
the moving vehicle has been used as a logistical as well as a creative solution for 
filming in conflict zones, as seen in other chapters.

146

Humour disarms and invites you in to understand the people rather than just 
feel sorry for them.
Larissa Sansour1
Humour is present in films featured throughout this book – even the experimental 
short Mondial 2010 (2013) which, as shown in the last chapter, charts a gay 
Lebanese couple’s ‘impossible’ road trip to Palestine. Unable to make the journey 
himself, the director Roy Dib commissioned the footage from his Palestinian 
friends and created a story around it, matching dialogue and sound effects to 
the images. The film uses humour right from the opening credits in which Dib 
offers his thanks ‘to everyone who participated in the film, with or without their 
knowledge (or mine)’. Dib explains, ‘In all my work, I always use humour as a 
tool.’ He needed humour in this film because we never see the protagonists: ‘I 
wanted people to identify with them, to try to imagine their faces, to imagine 
who those people are, and to connect to them.’2
Scholarship on humour often focuses on why certain works are funny.3 This 
kind of analysis has been seen as essential to the task of taking comedy seriously, 
often contrasted with the view, usually attributed to practitioners, that dissecting 
a joke destroys it and undermines its unconscious, intuitive sources of creativity. 
In my conversations with filmmakers, I was struck by the fact that they were not 
concerned with why works are funny but, rather, with the humour’s purpose and 
intended impact on target audiences. For them, humour is one of the creative 
tools at their disposal. This chapter seeks to understand it from their perspective.
In this chapter, the word ‘humour’ describes both a cultural phenomenon 
and a creative tactic. ‘Comedy’ refers to genre, although it materializes in 
different modes, such as satire, black humour, romantic comedy and irony, 
and is not confined to films explicitly made as comedies.4 As demonstrated in 
the chapter’s case studies, filmmakers tactically adopt different comic modes 
­6
Humour

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
148
according to their purpose and sociopolitical circumstances. Starting with 
satires such as the Syrian YouTube puppet show series Top Goon: Diaries of a 
Little Dictator (2011–12), we will see how this direct mode of humour mocks the 
powerful and punctures spectacles of power. Secondly, works by the Palestinian 
filmmakers Elia Suleiman and Basil Khalil, together with the Iranian director 
Mani Haghighi’s black comedy Pig (2018), illustrate how situational absurdity 
is exposed in the surrealist mode. Finally, we turn to the indirect mode of irony 
in Ali Jaberansari’s Tehran: City of Love (2018), which uses deadpan humour 
to veil expected emotions in stories of unrequited love in contemporary Iran, 
and Mahmoud Sabbagh’s Barakah Meets Barakah (2016) in which the romcom 
genre serves as an ironic vehicle for non-provocative criticism of restrictions on 
public space and cross-gender mixing in Saudi society. Sometimes these modes 
overlap; for example, satire often employs irony, and surreal and satiric modes 
can blacken into dark humour. They form a spectrum that acts as an index of the 
range of freedom of expression enjoyed by the filmmakers.
As Geoff King states, ‘Comedy, by definition, is not usually taken entirely 
seriously, a fact that sometimes gives it licence to trade in areas that might 
otherwise be off-limits.’5 This licence to say the unsayable has allowed it to thrive 
in socially conservative and authoritarian contexts. A common explanation for 
the workings of humour under the region’s authoritarian states is ‘safety valve’ 
theory, known in Arabic as tanafas (‘breathing’), in which the breaching of 
customary constraints is permitted under certain circumstances. It suggests 
that the state tolerates some criticisms of its apparatus, while other areas (such 
as direct attacks on the president) are forbidden; this allows release of tensions 
that might otherwise find outlet in political action.6 It is in this regard that Lisa 
Wedeen discusses Allayth Hajju’s Spotlight (2001–) and A Forgotten Village 
(2008, 2010) as permitted television comedies under Bashar al-Assad’s rule in 
Syria.7 While useful, safety-valve theory attributes top-down control to the state, 
which it assumes is the main source of censorship. By itself, it is too limited 
for analysing the films in this chapter, which shows that filmmakers carefully 
calculate the effects of their humour through their tactical use of comic modes. 
This shifts the focus from state censorship to filmmakers’ agency and chosen 
creative forms within the constraints.
Like the Arabic saying ‘a knife that cuts both ways’, comedy can be oppositional 
and affirm the status quo. Sometimes it can be both simultaneously, due to its 
ability to mean something different to different audiences. The philosopher Henri 
Bergson once said that ‘laughter always implies a kind of secret freemasonry’.8 
The fact that humour requires a shared context in order to be understood, such 

Humour
149
as language and cultural references, can be turned to a filmmaker’s advantage: to 
say things in such a way that those who are meant to understand do so. Naziha 
Arebi remarks that her documentary Freedom Fields has ‘quite a lot of humour 
that Libyans might laugh at’, but some of it might ‘go over a certain age group’s 
heads’.9 Strategically preserving these layers of meaning at the editing stage 
enabled her to show the film in Libya and overcome age-related barriers of social 
disapproval. Comedy is one of the region’s most popular genres, and where 
there have been objections to it, this has often been from parties other than the 
government. In Iran, some comedies approved for screening by the state have 
been subsequently removed from the theatres due to religious intervention, as 
happened to the satirical box-office hit The Lizard (2004) although it continued 
to circulate widely underground.10 In Saudi Arabia, the satirical comedy Tash ma 
Tash (1993–2011), broadcast on state television during Ramadan, also provoked 
clerical ire, forcing the makers to relocate to Dubai after threats to them and their 
families; the show resumed from there on the Saudi-owned network MBC.11
Despite its domestic popularity, comedy is one of the least exportable genres. 
Hisham Fageeh, one of Saudi stand-up comedy’s pioneers, is very aware of 
this constraint. In the early 2010s, Saudi stand-up began handling provocative 
topics with unprecedented candour in the kingdom.12 At that time, there were 
no cinemas for alternative entertainment, ‘so people went onto YouTube and 
I happened to be one of the people that showed up early on’, Fageeh relates.13 
Working for the media company Telfaz 11, he produced the viral YouTube 
video No Woman, No Drive (2013). In it, he and fellow stand-up comedian 
Fahad Albutairi (who starred in From A to B, discussed in Chapter  5) sing 
an acapella version of Bob Marley’s song ‘No Woman, No Cry’ in a parody of 
religious discourse that justified the women’s driving ban, then official Saudi 
policy. Speaking of the Saudi comedy scene, Fageeh says ‘there’s an incredible 
group of people doing grassroots stuff in Saudi Arabia . . . There are things that 
work abroad, others that only work locally. When I speak to the world, if I’m 
too specific in my details, it will go over people’s heads.’14 While his material is 
in Arabic and deals with Saudi issues, he maintains a cosmopolitan outlook in a 
nod to international audiences.
One comment that is often made about humour is that it is untranslatable. 
In Barakah Meets Barakah, the jokes and punchlines were written with the 
Saudi audience in mind, then tailored to the international audience through 
English subtitles. Fageeh, who starred in and co-produced the film, also 
wrote the subtitles, underlining ‘the importance of translating idiomatically 
because a lot of things are lost in translation’, for example, slang and different 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
150
dialects (the latter are a frequent source of comedy in the region).15 He tried 
to write each character’s subtitles differently to convey their colloquial style. 
Fageeh’s comments emphasize the importance of audience targeting to humour 
creation: ‘In production, it was “Let’s do this for Jeddah, for Saudi”. Then, in 
post-production, “Let’s do this for the world”.’16
Basil Khalil further reveals shifts that can occur as a film goes through the 
production process. In order to raise finance for his film Ave Maria (2015) in the 
West, he had to write the screenplay in English, then translate it into Arabic and 
Hebrew. In fact, he trained himself to write scripts in English, the language of 
screenwriting software. This has, he reflects, affected his style of comedy, which 
is not based on verbal puns, jokes and punchlines but, rather, ‘embarrassing 
situations that anyone would identify with’ – what is known as ‘cringe comedy’.17 
In writing the script, he tried to make it as ‘funny and as flowing as possible in 
English, without mentioning which language is being spoken’, always conscious 
of what it will sound like in the other language, so that the translation has ‘the 
same meaning, not word for word, but the same context, timing, humour’.18
These are some of the general constraints affecting filmmakers using humour. 
The next sections explore their use of particular comic modes in response to 
constraints.
Mocking the powerful: the satirical mode
Satire is the most politically explicit mode of humour. At one end of the spectrum, 
it often targets powerful figures and institutions, which makes it highly risky. 
At the other end lie more evasive and ambiguous forms of humour linked to 
practices of veiling, dissimulation, ritual politeness and indirection.19 As we 
shall see, in films from Iran and Saudi Arabia, indirect humour still flourishes. 
However, like other creative strategies charted in this book, the region’s humour 
is generally becoming more direct in its critical edge. Practices of dissimulation 
long prevalent in the region have created a division between what is appropriate 
to say in public and private. When such practices hold sway, jokes about rulers 
are mostly told behind closed doors, in private, between people who trust each 
other. The Internet and social media, particularly YouTube, have broken these 
walls by creating an alternative public space for sharing satirical laughter. The 
post-2009 uprisings destroyed them further. As Mohamed M. Helmy and Sabine 
Frerichs record in their first-person account of the 2011 Egyptian revolution, 
the president was openly ridiculed with songs and slogans.20 Humour gave voice 

Humour
151
to the protestors’ dissent and helped to break the fear and isolation of years of 
dissimulation, especially for the younger generation who were less conditioned, 
rallying their collective spirits in their successful toppling of the despot.
It was in the more open freedom of expression climate fostered by the Egyptian 
revolution that Bassem Youssef, then a cardiac surgeon, began his notorious 
satirical news show Al-Bernameg (2011–14). Initially uploaded to YouTube 
(under the title The B+ Show) the programme was later aired by Egyptian 
television channels, including ONTV and CBC satellite network. Like Jon 
Stewart’s The Daily Show, it is a parodic send-up of current affairs programmes, 
with skits juxtaposed with real news footage and guest appearances. On Al-
Bernameg, Youssef satirized the entire establishment – government, media and 
religious leaders. In one satirical attack on President Morsi, leader of the Muslim 
Brotherhood, he sported a gigantic graduation hat in parody of the one worn 
by Morsi during an honorary degree ceremony in Pakistan, exposing his vanity 
and his power’s frail foundations, like the unveiled emperor in Hans Christian 
Anderson’s tale. Youssef faced several court cases, accused of insulting Morsi 
(among others) and, when Sisi came to power in 2014, the military ruler proved 
himself to be even less tolerant of his satire than his Islamist predecessor by 
jamming broadcasts of the show. Following a legal dispute with CBC in which 
he faced a fine of around three million US dollars and a prison sentence, Youssef 
fled Egypt and now lives in exile in the United States.
Masasit Mati, the largely anonymous Syrian collective behind Top Goon, 
released their first two seasons on YouTube in 2011 and 2012, each consisting of 
multiple short episodes.21 Their risky circumstances, in the midst of the Syrian 
crisis, influenced their choice of media: Internet video and home-made finger 
puppets ‘easy to smuggle through checkpoints’.22 These finger puppets move 
across a wooden stage against a black backdrop, filmed in an underground 
theatre. The puppeteers’ identities and location are hidden, although they 
occasionally appear above stage with keffiyeh scarves concealing their faces. Top 
Goon openly satirizes the Syrian regime, without hedging or evasion. The group’s 
director, known by the pseudonym Jamil al-Abyad, remarks, ‘There are taboos 
and red lines you could not cross. We tried to break exactly these red lines and 
destroy them.’23 Ridicule of the president is at the core of the series; he is the 
principal character in the form of Beeshu – a belittling nickname for Bashar al-
Assad – with his long face, pointy nose, enormous ears and lisp. Other regular 
cast members are loyalist regime thug Shabih, George the Peaceful Protester and 
the Rose of Damascus.

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
152
Wearing a stripy nightgown and cap in the first episode, ‘Beeshu’s Nightmares’, 
the president is caricatured as infantile, cowardly and insecure, needing to 
be lullabied to sleep by his reliable thug. The puppet doubles over with high-
pitched wailing, haunted by his loss of popularity (‘Why don’t Syrians love me 
anymore? Why do they want to put me on trial?’) despite not having massacred 
as many people as his father Hafez al-Assad did in Hama in 1982. The second 
episode, ‘Who Wants to Kill a Million?’ is a parody of the globally popular TV 
show Who Wants to Be a Millionaire, alluding to the tens of thousands killed 
by the Syrian regime’s security forces at this point in the crisis. In a swipe at 
the neoliberal aspirations of the television game show as well as autocracy,24 the 
cash prize is macabrely transformed into body count. Beeshu sets his sights on 
the million-body trophy, following previous contestants Hosni Mubarak, who 
attained ‘3,000 killed’, and Muammar Gaddafi, whose score was 20,000 killed. 
When asked the final question, ‘Will you manage to crush the protests and put 
an end to the Syrian revolution?’, Beeshu hesitates, saying he would like to call a 
friend. ‘You still have friends?’ the presenter asks incredulously. Beeshu decides 
that he will crush the protests against everyone’s will – and rages impetuously 
when told it is not the right answer.
Top Goon deconstructs Assad’s charade, showing him to be propped up 
by regime-friendly media – a parody of Dunia TV, an independent channel 
Figure  6.1  The episode ‘Who Wants to Kill a Million?’ satirizes Syrian President 
Bashar al-Assad with its macabre parody of the television game show Who Wants to 
Be a Millionaire. Top Goon: Diaries of a Little Dictator directed by Jamil al-Abyad © 
Masasit Mati 2011–12. All Rights Reserved.

Humour
153
virtually controlled by the Syrian government. With its provocative scripts, 
the series exposes the lies and propaganda upon which the regime has rested 
its authority, among which is its championing of the Palestinian cause that has 
formed the pretext for over forty years of emergency. Each episode begins with 
Beeshu feverishly repeating ‘I am not crazy!’ but implying the exact opposite. 
As if to confirm this, in December 2011, while the first season was ongoing, 
al-Assad appeared on the US network ABC denying all responsibility for killing 
protesters, insisting that Syria’s security forces were not his forces and that ‘No 
government in the world kills its people, unless it’s led by a crazy person’.25 The 
title Top Goon refers to Assad as the highest commander of Syria’s armed forces, 
underlining his leading role in the killings, despite his denials.
In season one’s last episode, a puppeteer whose face is masked by the Syrian 
revolutionary flag confronts Beeshu – ‘I am the one who breathes life into you’ – 
and rests the puppet on the stage. The lifeless figurine unmasks the president 
as a hollow character with strings pulled by external forces, removing the fear 
associated with him. By eroding Assad’s personality cult and turning him into 
a diminutive finger puppet, Top Goon performs the function of ‘reiterative 
resignification’ that Amber Day ascribes to satire, ‘gradually changing the pictures 
and associations that we have of particular people, concepts, or ideologies’.26 The 
English words ‘Freedom is coming’ appear on the revolutionary flag, pointing to 
the satire’s ultimately regenerative purpose of arousing international solidarity 
and morale-boosting for the Syrian resistance. Seasons one and two are English-
subtitled throughout. Several years on, after the revolution’s failure and Assad’s 
reconsolidation of his power with the help of his Russian and Iranian allies, 
the words concluding season one read poignantly. Yet, as al-Abyad declares, 
‘Comedy strips things bare and gives you the strength to fight’ and these Syrians 
show by their humour their refusal to become merely victims.27
Situational absurdity: a surrealist mode of humour
Filmmakers and critics alike often characterize humour in terms of nationality. 
For example, Leila Sansour initially reacted to a question regarding the presence of 
humour in her documentary Open Bethlehem (2014) by saying that ‘Palestinians 
are often extremely humorous’.28 However, she immediately related it to the 
‘bleak’ and ‘absurd’ world of the Israeli occupation, which ‘feed[s] the cannon 
on a daily basis for humour. People are humorous because they find themselves 
players in a surreal reality that unfolds in front of them all the time.’29 Moreover, 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
154
that dry, absurd humour, often identified as ‘Palestinian humour’ is, as, another 
Palestinian filmmaker Annemarie Jacir observes, ‘typical of people all over the 
world when they’re living in difficult conditions’.30 In her study of Palestinian 
art and film, Chrisoula Lionis points to the failure of the Oslo peace process as 
the juncture that has led to the ‘prominence of humour’ in Palestinian collective 
identity and experience.31 Such humour is rooted in a particular context, as 
Lionis suggests, but it is also somewhat universal, emerging as part of a response 
to, and commentary on, an ongoing crisis. I am calling this ‘strange, situational 
humour’32 surrealist because of its similarities to the Theatre of the Absurd and its 
occasional black comedy; these are features of surrealist aesthetics.33 Absurdity 
is intrinsic to surrealism’s bizarre juxtapositions, usually deployed for sinister, 
unsettling effects but also for humorously subverting normal expectations – for 
example, Méret Oppenheim’s sculpture Breakfast in Fur (1936) which comprises 
a teacup, saucer and spoon coated in fur. For Larissa Sansour (Leila’s sister), 
who uses both science fiction and humour in her work, these creative strategies 
encapsulate the occupation’s surreal elements and absurdity in a way that mere 
factual documentation would not.34
In order to handle the occupation’s everyday violence and humiliation, 
‘Palestinians have to have a sense of humour’, Larissa Sansour explains.35 
Growing up in Bethlehem, ‘I experienced this occupation first-hand so it’s 
very defining of who I am . . . Humour is there as a self-defence mechanism 
to deal with such hardship.’36 The Lebanese filmmaker Mounia Akl voiced 
a similar sentiment, ‘In Lebanon, our status quo is sometimes absurdity’.37 
Although chronic hardships in Lebanon are different, there, too, a sense 
of humour is a way of managing in desperate times. In the documentary 
For Sama (2019), filmed under siege in Aleppo during the Syrian war (as 
discussed in Chapter 1), we hear jokes told by the director Waad al-Kateab’s 
friend Afraa, who calls the siege a ‘daily bombardment soap opera featuring 
all your favourite bombs’. These lighter moments are highlighted by the film’s 
nonlinear storytelling which creates tonal shifts that, co-director Edward Watts 
claims, are ‘true to conflict experiences, how light and dark sit side by side, the 
way people tell jokes in the worst of times to get each other through’.38 In his 
essay ‘On Humour’, Sigmund Freud links the concept of humour as a defence 
mechanism to black humour through an anecdote. A condemned man is led 
to the gallows. ‘Well, the week’s beginning nicely,’ he remarks.39 According to 
Freud, this ‘gallows humour’ bespeaks a refusal to be hurt by adverse realities. 
In his economic model of the psyche, based on energy circulation and 
distribution, humour saves the expenditure of feeling caused by pain, which 

Humour
155
has a liberating effect. In today’s well-being parlance, people talk of the defence 
humour provides against stress, as laughter is accompanied by release of pain-
relieving endorphins. However, as well as relief, this humour’s purpose is also 
resistance, as Freud’s anecdote implies. Jacir explains, ‘When your reality is so 
absurd that laws are designed to keep you marginalised and subservient, when 
there is a boot on your neck, you’ve got to find ways to resist. And laughing is 
one of them.’40 Creators of this dark humour tend not to harbour illusions that 
the situation will change. Nonetheless, the very existence of humour gives a 
glimmer of that possibility.
Even when it is dark, humour is a way of lightening difficult subjects – again, 
not merely for the sake of relief. ‘When you tackle topics that are usually heavy 
with humour, you keep asking the same questions but in fact you do them in a 
different way,’ Dib says.41 The need to reach audiences and establish channels 
of communication is an important factor. ‘Neither do I like to produce films 
with no light in them,’ Leila Sansour told me. ‘I wouldn’t want to inflict that 
on others.’42 As her sister Larissa explains, humour is a crucial tool for forging 
bonds of sympathy and empathy, capable of (temporarily) overriding the 
power asymmetries of international news coverage that determine who gets to 
sympathize with whom:
We know so much about America that whatever tragedy befalls Americans we 
feel closer to them. I think it’s quite an important element that Palestinians never 
had. People [in the West] don’t feel close to them; they feel close to the Israelis 
[because] they’re more western. Also, they feel guilty about what happened in 
Europe so it’s a closer subject than the Palestinians. People [in Palestine] are 
much more aware of what’s happening internationally than the international 
world knows what’s happening in Palestine. That’s something very tragic in 
the dynamic of the colonizer and the colonized. The colonized always have an 
understanding of the oppressor that’s oppressing them, while the person that’s in 
power doesn’t have to extend their mind that far.43
In news footage and war documentaries, Palestinians are often associated with 
tragedy, viewed as victims through a humanitarian gaze that calls upon viewers to 
feel sorry for and help them. Over the course of the Israel–Palestine crisis, which 
has been ongoing for over seventy years, this approach has become repetitive 
and fosters a sense of hopelessness. Humour presents a different perspective on 
adversity. Many films from the Middle East aimed at international audiences 
seek to challenge preconceptions about the region. Absurdist humour can offer 
a subtle way of doing this.

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
156
Elia Suleiman’s films form an important benchmark for this use of humour. 
His gags are surreal, ironic and fantastical, often featuring his silent, deadpan 
persona E.S., played by himself. For example, in Divine Intervention (2002), 
E.S. meets his lover at a checkpoint. Their tryst is confined to a car, since the 
occupation prevents them from travelling between their cities. E.S. produces a 
red balloon and inflates it, revealing the smiling face of then PLO leader Yasser 
Arafat imprinted on it. The balloon sails over the checkpoint, distracting the 
soldiers who aim their weapons at it, while the lovers drive through unimpeded.
Suleiman’s feature films up to The Time That Remains (2009) have been set 
in Palestine, usually in his hometown Nazareth or the West Bank, utilizing that 
‘reality as a backdrop, or even a set, speaking its own absurdities’.44 In Chronicle of 
a Disappearance (1996), for instance, an Israeli police van skids to a halt and the 
policemen line up against a wall in perfect unison, then pile back into the vehicle, 
leaving as abruptly as they came. When he appears, Suleiman’s onscreen avatar 
mutely observes the strange proceedings with an ironic distance. In contrast, 
It Must Be Heaven (2019), his most recent film to date, takes place in Paris and 
New York as well as Palestine and finds parallels for the occupation’s absurdity 
in the ‘state of exception everywhere’, which he sees as the ‘Palestinisation of 
the world as a whole’.45 In one scene, French police roll through a cobbled street 
on Segways in a perfectly synchronized triad reminiscent of Chronicle of a 
Disappearance.
Producing these pleasurably comic images involves a great deal of hard work, 
as Suleiman reveals: the humour is created by the choreography and precision 
timing of the characters’ movements, together with accentuated sound in post-
production. His distinctive style and narrative structure come from compiling 
everyday observations in a notebook: ‘If suddenly an image touches me – a 
movement, a choreography, a banality, something makes me laugh – I jot it 
down.’46 After collecting these images, he builds successive tableaux, adding 
details as he goes along. His comic persona is integrated into the emerging 
narrative. In film history, early comedies consisted entirely of gags that formed 
the basis of one-shot silent films or were layered one after another into extended 
narratives before the rise of classical narrative.47 Suleiman’s work returns to the 
episodic mode of early silent movies. In It Must Be Heaven, there is a scene based 
on his attempts to finance his first feature. A Parisian producer (acted by Vincent 
Maraval, producer of the film we are watching) tells Suleiman’s avatar that his 
latest script ‘is not Palestinian enough’ and throws him out of the production 
office. As Suleiman told me, ‘They [the producers] don’t want to let you say 

Humour
157
what you want to say. I was faced with a lot of rejections, mainly because of the 
narrative structure of the film and the humour.’48
The difficulties Suleiman experienced can be explained firstly by the fact that 
audience conditioning to narrative cinema has made sequences of gags without 
an apparent overarching ‘story’ seem deficient. His films inspire puzzlement 
in some critics and audiences who struggle to make sense of them narratively, 
as can be seen whenever anyone tries to summarize their ‘plots’. Secondly, 
Suleiman’s use of humour did not meet expectations of what a Palestinian film 
is, as he remarks: ‘To producers at this moment in history, there is no way that 
Palestinians laugh. They only cry, they get beaten, they get tortured, they get 
arrested, so they are victims.’49 Now, with four feature films behind him, he is 
at a stage in his career when he no longer encounters this particular hurdle. 
However, when It Must Be Heaven began screening at festivals, its global canvas 
provoked similar censure from audiences. As Suleiman retorts, ‘A Palestinian 
has to stay in his own cage and should not talk about Paris or New York.’50
Struggling for ten years to raise funds for a feature, Basil Khalil made the 
short Ave Maria to prove that Palestinian comedy was commercially viable and 
could offer a different perspective: ‘You can get misery for free on the news, 
why pay for it at the cinema?’ he jokes.51 In Ave Maria, five Palestinian nuns 
immersed in a daily routine of prayer and silence in their remote West Bank 
convent are startled by a family of Israeli settlers whose car breaks down and 
crashes into a Virgin Mary statue outside. One of the settlers, Moshe, asks to 
use the nuns’ telephone for emergency services but, because it is the Sabbath, 
he cannot operate machinery and asks a young nun, Marie, to dial for him 
and even put the earpiece to his ear, which she refuses. The nuns hit upon a 
solution – purportedly in answer to their prayer to God. Led by Marie (who 
turns out to be an expert mechanic) they fix a vintage car owned by their 
deceased colleague, Sister Bernadette. Moshe’s wife Rachel is initially reluctant 
to borrow the car because it looks distinctly ‘Arab’. So the nuns refurbish it 
with a gaudy Virgin Mary statue on the roof and church music on the stereo, 
enabling the settlers to drive away without being shot at by the Israeli army. 
Although Khalil worked as an assistant on Divine Intervention, Ave Maria’s 
style is not arthouse like Suleiman’s and the humour is more overt. As Khalil 
explains, ‘the audience for Palestinian films is limited to people who have 
already bought into our cause. People go to see Elia Suleiman’s films because 
they want to see Palestinian stories, not because they want to see a Palestinian 
comedy.’52 Rather than ‘preaching to the choir’, his goal with Ave Maria was to 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
158
reach people who might watch the film after reading the synopsis about nuns 
in Palestine and think ‘this might be funny’.53
Speaking about nuns as a source of humour, Khalil remarks, ‘I think it’s just 
the rigidness of it all in a world that is not rigid, but always changing. Also, you 
don’t expect that from Palestine although it makes sense because that’s where 
Jesus was from.’54 Khalil himself comes from a Christian background; his father 
was an evangelical pastor and he was brought up with religious restrictions 
similar to those parodied in Ave Maria. For him, religion is an ‘absurd, man-
made concept’: ‘In Israel-Palestine, religion defines what rights you get as 
a human being. If you’re Jewish, you get full rights; if you’re not, you don’t.’55 
Additionally, ‘You don’t get to choose your religion’, since you are born into it, 
‘but you do get to choose the level of extremity.’56 In Ave Maria, he sought to 
portray the absurdities of the extreme, from the Israeli settlers who believe that 
historic Palestine is their God-given land, to the Palestinian nuns in their vow 
of silence. Both groups are bound by ‘absurd rules’ and find themselves in an 
‘absurd situation’ that forces them to break those rules.57 The film’s surrealist 
spirit is akin to the anthropologist Mary Douglas’s notion of a joke as ‘an anti-
rite’,58 since it plays on the lack of logic behind society’s accepted practices, 
revealing their arbitrary and socially constructed nature as well as implying that 
those practices could be changed for the better.
In a survey of the UK public’s perceptions fostered by primetime television 
news, the Glasgow University Media Group reported that viewers often 
regard the relationship between Israel and Palestine as a conflict between two 
communities who merely cannot get along, which glosses over gross inequities.59 
Through its comedy, Ave Maria tackles the issue of co-existence. Rather than 
offering a fantasy of reconciliation in which two opposing sides resolve their 
differences, the nuns and settlers only cooperate because they want to get rid 
of each other, then resume their lives. As Khalil asserts, the film does not paint 
‘a rosy picture that everything is well at the end. If I was younger, I would have 
naively put it in, since that’s what western audiences want’.60 While developing 
the script, he felt it was ethically important to avoid this simplification: ‘I had to 
make clear that they [the Palestinians and settlers] are not equal. They get along 
when they have to. I don’t want to give the wrong impression’ that all would be 
resolved ‘if only the Palestinians would bend. I had to make sure I wasn’t laying 
myself open to being appropriated to an agenda’.61
Ave Maria took four years to finance, facing some rejections from European 
funders until the Robert Bosch Foundation, which encourages co-productions 
between German and Arab producers, was willing to take the risk. Khalil 

Humour
159
recounts that it was initially also rejected by festivals since it was perceived 
as neither arthouse nor political enough and therefore did not meet their 
expectations. However, following its acceptance into competition at Cannes and 
Oscar nomination for Best Live Action Short, it had a highly successful release in 
theatres and online platforms. At the time of writing, Khalil had secured backing 
for his feature A Gaza Weekend, having demonstrated that there is an audience 
for Palestinian comedy and that gatekeepers of film funds and festivals ‘dictating 
what is acceptable to be a Palestinian story’ were wrong.62
The Iranian cinema that is exported to the world, epitomized by Abbas 
Kiarostami’s work and social dramas by twice-Oscar-winning director Asghar 
Farhadi, is not known for comedy. These internationally acclaimed movies have 
a ‘serious, sad, or downright tragic’ tone63 that has fostered certain images of 
Iran that affect how its films are judged abroad. But, as elsewhere in the region, 
comedy is hugely popular within Iran and humour is a way of coping with daily 
hardships and absurdities. It is abundantly present in Iranians’ use of the social 
media app Telegram to share political jokes, including about the president. 
Even the Iranian art cinema known abroad has undercurrents of humour. For 
example, in Jafar Panahi’s Offside (2006), girls disguise themselves as boys to 
attend a World Cup qualifier due to a law that forbids women from going to 
men’s football matches. Guards catch and confine them to a barricaded area 
outside the stadium, where comic exchanges ensue between the streetwise city 
girls and naïve rural soldiers whose protectiveness expresses moral views about 
cross-gender relations. One girl begs to go to the toilet. As the stadium lacks 
women’s toilets, a soldier chaperons her to the men’s, crafting a mask from a 
football star’s poster and tying it with a shoelace around her head to conceal 
her gender. She is an accomplished footballer herself, she tells him en route, 
although she has to undergo this charade just to watch a men’s match. The surreal 
humour playfully illuminates the absurdity of practices that exclude women 
on this gendered basis. Panahi made Offside before his twenty-year sentence 
banning him from filmmaking although it, too, was banned. Nonetheless, it has 
been guaranteed a local audience on the black market and has become his most 
popular movie in Iran.64
The director of Pig, Mani Haghighi, related to me that a journalist once asked 
him if he thought Panahi was a charlatan ‘making a living out of his oppression’.65 
He disagreed. At the same time, the idea of filmmaker obsessed with becoming a 
victim or martyr interested him and laid the basis for his story. In Pig, a serial killer 
is intent on beheading Iran’s prominent filmmakers and carves the word khuk 
(‘pig’) onto their foreheads as a signature of his work. A blacklisted filmmaker 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
160
named Hasan wonders why the killer has not yet targeted him, narcissistically 
believing that he deserves that honour as a big-shot director himself (‘Don’t 
worry’, his mother reassures him, ‘the killer is saving the best to last’). Some 
real-life directors are written into the story as victims – Rakhshan Banietemad, 
Ebrahim Hatamikia, Hamid Nematollah and Haghighi himself, whose severed 
head turns up on the pavement in the opening. Pig’s black humour is, by turns, 
macabre, absurd and ironic. Its storyline has led some international reviewers 
to interpret it as a satire of state censorship.66 In fact, Pig alludes to the Iranian 
government’s killings of prominent writers and dissidents sometimes known as 
the ‘Chain Murders’ (1988–98). Ironically, however, ‘not a single frame of the 
film was censored. And the script was approved in one day’, Haghighi recalls. 
‘I was astonished because it clearly makes obvious reference to the murder of 
intellectuals by state operatives. But it wasn’t explicit – that was the main thing.’67
In Pig, the murdered filmmakers represent diverse sociopolitical views, as 
emphasized in a scene with a New York Times journalist who interviews Hasan 
about the killings. ‘What could have been the common factor that led to their 
murder?’ he asks. When Hasan exclaims, ‘These people simply hate us!’ the film 
prompts us to think about who ‘these people’ – the enemies of free expression – 
might be. It suggests that state censorship is not the sole culprit. Haghighi says 
that Pig was motivated by a general malaise that freedom of speech is universally 
not as valued as it once was, citing the Enlightenment saying, ‘I disapprove of 
what you say, but I will defend to the death your right to say it’.68 On social media, 
members of the public are ‘emulating and replicating the tropes and strategies of 
state oppression’, he explains.
As an example, right now I’m in pre-production for my new film and we’re 
working with an actress who was recently charged by the state for slander against 
the police. She wrote something in her Instagram account about the way security 
forces treated protestors and so she was brought in, questioned, tried, charged 
and there was a verdict against her. They didn’t prevent her from acting. They 
just gave her a sentence of some kind. When we announced we were working 
with her, there was this huge [uproar] on social media where people were asking, 
‘How come she gets to act now, hasn’t she been charged with some crime?’ And 
it was them, not the state, who were demanding her removal from my cast.69
Compared to this ‘mob justice of “The People”’, Haghighi claims, ‘state 
censorship is nothing’.70 Or, at least, it is easier to handle since, once a script or 
film is submitted, filmmakers can enter into negotiations with the authorities:

Humour
161
They call you in, they give you a list of things that they’re unhappy with in the 
film, you have meetings with them and you try to convince them that they’re 
wrong. I usually succeed. And that’s the end of state censorship for me. In more 
extreme cases, like Jafar [Panahi], he makes his film, he puts it on a flashcard and 
sends it by DHL to the Berlin Film Festival and they screen it.71
However, this is not to underplay the ‘very real and very dangerous problem’ 
posed by state censorship, which Haghighi recognizes.72 As shown in other 
chapters, not all filmmakers can count on a smooth passage through this process, 
and many have been prevented from working in Iran altogether.
Pig’s acerbic humour culminates in Hasan’s attempt to restore his reputation 
by staging his own attempted murder. He posts it on Instagram, where it gains 
instantaneous ‘likes’. The film’s title refers to the murderer, who sports a pig 
mask. Unlike the comic levity of animals behaving like humans, as we saw in 
The Wanted 18 (in Chapter 3), the human turned animal betokens a darker 
humour.73 When I put this to Haghighi, he concurred: ‘It’s sinister, yes – like 
behaving like a pack of wolves.’74 The human–animal transformation in the 
film, however, is into a pig – a provocative choice since Islam deems this animal 
harām. This did cause some trouble from the Ministry of Culture and Islamic 
Guidance, but Haghighi persuaded them to let him keep it, arguing that ‘nobody 
eats a pig in the film’.75
Deadpan comedy and romcom: the ironic mode
The films in this final section take the situational humour that arises from real-
world observations and construct ironic scenarios that are more ambiguous. 
Linda Hutcheon asserts that in irony ‘the said and the unsaid must play off against 
each other’.76 Since it works by inference of another meaning, irony has a certain 
degree of indirectness and therefore lends itself to being strategically adopted in 
circumstances where a more direct approach might be risky or controversial. In 
Tehran: City of Love (first discussed in relation to psychogeography in Chapter 4), 
the director Ali Jaberansari wanted to experiment with the form of deadpan 
humour, a choice that arose both from his own enjoyment of this genre and 
censorship restrictions in Iran: ‘When you’re working with constraints, you find 
out how am I going to say what I’m going to say with all these constraints.’77 He 
refers to Elia Suleiman as a director whose use of humour has a similar function 
of highlighting situational absurdities but, as Tehran: City of Love is deadpan 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
162
rather than surreal, he acknowledges the Finnish director Aki Kaurismäki as his 
most direct stylistic influence.78
Like Kaurismäki’s characters, Tehran: City of Love’s protagonists are misfits 
who are socially awkward and unable to communicate their feelings. Suffering 
from unrequited love, they are engaged in a Sisyphus-like search for happiness, 
seeming to find it and at that moment losing it again.79 Although Tehran: City of 
Love does not have the overtly political aspects of Kaurismäki’s cinema in which 
characters are crushed by capitalist forces, it uses its deadpan humour to comment 
on Iranian society, particularly its dating culture. As a comic mode, deadpan 
can be traced to silent cinema, encapsulated in Buster Keaton’s expressionless 
performance in Steamboat Bill, Jr (1928) when he stands in front of a house 
whose detached façade collapses around him. It is a comedy of understatement, 
where actors remain tactically ‘poker-faced’ and refrain from conventionally 
dramatic vocal and bodily gestures. ‘Expected emotions’80 are drained away from 
‘an emotionally heightened moment’ which produces ‘a sense of ironic distance 
from the effective demands such a moment seems logically to make’.81 In his 
directorial style, Kaurismäki declares he has ‘an iron law’ – ‘I do not want acting 
in my movies. The performer should definitely play, but so you cannot tell. He 
should not wave his hands about or cry.’82 As Michael Lawrence argues in his 
analysis of Kaurismäki’s films, deadpan performance ‘present[s] a mask that 
obscures the emotions we assume to be there’; it renders those emotions ‘oblique’ 
or ‘ambiguous’ and prevents them from being ‘quickly’ or ‘easily legible’.83 Yet, the 
emotions that the character struggles to articulate can be inferred.
Tehran: City of Love makes use of the ambiguities of deadpan performance. 
Jaberansari asked his actors to watch Kaurismäki’s films to prepare for their 
roles, although this was difficult as not many of them are translated into Persian; 
in particular, they viewed La Vie de Bohème (1992), Drifting Clouds (1996) and 
Take Care of Your Scarf, Tatiana (1994). Directing actors in this style involved 
instructing them to keep their hands down and maintain expressionless faces, 
which was challenging since it ran counter to their previous training and 
expectations of dramatic performance (especially for the amateur actor who 
plays Hessam, the bodybuilder). The ironic ambiguities of deadpan performance 
extend to the manner in which lines are delivered. In Kaurismäki’s films, the 
characters speak absurd dialogue in ‘literary Finnish with a serious voice, 
devoid of emotion, slang intonation and contemporary phrasings’,84 which lends 
a comical strangeness. Although the dialogue in Tehran: City of Love is more 
realist, the main characters speak in a similarly sparse, clipped Persian, unlike 
how most Persian speakers talk in reality.

Humour
163
One predecessor for deadpan humour in Iranian cinema is Risk of Acid Rain 
(2015), whose cinematographer, Mohammad Reza Jahanpanah, was hired by 
Jaberansari for his film. Although deadpan humour is largely expressed through 
performance, camerawork plays an important role in generating levels of 
‘discrepant awareness’85 between the audience and characters who, as discussed 
in Chapter 4, lack self-knowledge about their desires. The camera calls attention 
to the disparity between the characters’ reticent façades and expected emotions 
by adopting a certain distance from them in long takes and static framings. At 
the same time, it remains close enough to imbue the humour with empathy, 
which invites us to laugh at the characters’ awkward situations and naivety, 
but not at their distress.86 In this respect, Tehran: City of Love has elements of 
melancholy and pathos that distinguish it from the cringe comedy of Ave Maria.
When new male clients arrive at the beauty clinic where she works, Mina, a 
plump receptionist, scribbles a star next to their name and telephone number in 
the appointments diary and later calls them on her smart phone, impersonating 
a woman with model looks. She arranges dates with them, sending pictures via 
her Telegram app, then stands them up. In Tehran, cafés form one of the few 
meeting places for dating couples. Because love and affection are not displayed 
publicly, lovers behave with distance and reserve towards each other in these 
public places. Sitting discreetly at a table on her own, Mina uses a café as a place 
to lure men, forming a humorous commentary on the dislocations of modern 
dating. When, finally, she meets Reza, a man who likes her for who she is, not her 
sexy virtual avatar, she initially behaves cautiously – shy, hesitant and uncertain 
of his attentions. Her newfound happiness is fleeting, as he later reveals he is 
married. As if to compensate for the news, he sends her a giant teddy bear by 
courier. As seen in Chapter  2, post-revolutionary Iranian cinema has often 
used proxies, such as children, to express desire between men and women. The 
gargantuan soft toy appears as a comic stand-in for Reza, as we follow Mina 
attempting to hail a taxi with it hoisted on her back and then sitting next to 
it at a bus shelter. The film lingers on her and the teddy bear seated together, 
highlighting her inscrutable expression.
When another character, the professional mourner Vahid, is abandoned by 
his fiancé, his friend tells him, ‘No girl is going to put up with this lifestyle of 
yours’. To give him something more ‘upbeat’, he gets him hired as a wedding 
singer. Accustomed to singing at funerals, Vahid’s doleful voice is clearly not 
suitable for weddings. Nonetheless, he enthusiastically throws himself into his 
new job when he falls for a female wedding photographer. From legal, sex-
segregated weddings, he progresses to illegal, mixed-gender parties. His revived 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
164
spirit is dashed, however, when he is arrested in a police raid. Editing is essential 
to the film’s deadpan irony here, through an impeccably timed cut juxtaposing 
an unusually exuberant Vahid on stage with his usual reticent self in a police car. 
The ellipsis highlights the contrast and, moreover, implies that the law has been 
broken, without showing the events.
As mentioned in Chapter 4, Hessam is a personal trainer at a gym who is 
coaching a young client, Arshia, for a championship. During the time they 
spend with each other, Hessam’s inchoate feelings for Arshia grow. In one scene, 
at a traffic jam, two young women in a nearby car joke to Arshia, ‘Does your 
friend have a sore neck?’, since Hessam has not turned sideways to look at them. 
Later, Hessam invites Arshia to his home one night to watch videos of former 
championships. As the two men sit together on the sofa, Hessam turns sideways 
to look at Arshia with an expressionless gaze that the camera lingers on. For 
viewers with a higher level of awareness than the character, the gesture carries 
connotations of desire. Arshia feels Hessam’s gaze upon him and returns the look. 
We do not see what, if anything, happens between them, leaving the possibilities 
to viewers’ imaginations. After this, however, Arshia discontinues his training 
with Hessam on pretext of quitting the championship. Discussing Kaurismäki’s 
film The Man without a Past (2002), Jonathan Romney remarks that ‘Few recent 
films have depended so much on their stars’ facial architecture’.87 The same 
could be argued of Tehran: City of Love, where the amateur actor Amir Hessam 
Bekhtiari’s blank, large-boned face veils his character’s homoerotic feelings and 
carries much of the story’s unspoken subtleties about unrequited gay love.
In the ironic mode, contradictory possibilities can be held together at the 
same time. One way that filmmakers do this is by putting the entire film or 
particular scenes into the cinematic equivalents of quotation marks, implying 
that those scene(s) should not be read at face value.88 For example, the Saudi 
romcom Barakah Meets Barakah begins with this title: ‘The pixelation you 
will experience during this film is totally normal. It is not a commentary on 
censorship. We repeat, it is not a commentary on censorship.’ Coming before the 
audience’s encounter with the ‘main text’, it emphasizes that what is being said is 
‘both meant and not meant’.89 Since the film was made at a time when there was 
no theatrical cinema exhibition in Saudi Arabia, the director Mahmoud Sabbagh 
applied for a TV shoot permit to the Ministry of Culture and Information (the 
body responsible for broadcast, print and online media regulation). Saudi Arabia 
has a reputation for heavy censorship. However, Sabbagh was only required to 
submit a synopsis, not a full script.90 As a journalist, he was already cognizant 
of realms of permissibility. Furthermore, as he stresses, ‘People tend to forget or 

Humour
165
don’t know that there is a strong critical culture in Saudi Arabia – in journalism, 
caricature, even in civil society.’91
Barakah Meets Barakah explores restrictions in Saudi society from the 
perspective of the country’s millennial generation, to which Sabbagh and the 
two lead actors Hisham Fageeh and Fatima al-Banawi belong. It is set in Jeddah, 
where Barakah, a lowly municipal employee whose job is to enforce public space 
regulations, falls in love with Bibi, an Instagram star and adopted daughter of 
a wealthy family. When the couple attempt to date, they find the simple matter 
of even sharing a moment together laden with challenges, as unrelated men 
and women have few opportunities to meet in public. Traditions of gender 
segregation, prevalent throughout the region, are more extensive in Saudi Arabia 
and the Arabian Gulf, manifesting in separate areas for men and women in many 
public places, with black coverings required for women and white robes for men. 
Moreover, Fageeh claims, because of market-led urban planning, corporations 
have acquired land in the heart of cities: ‘Civic identity was a big sacrifice for this 
[millennial] generation.’92 Social media forms ‘a big part of our identity because 
it creates a virtual public space to our non-existent public space’.93
The genre of romantic comedy, with its typical narrative of ‘boy meets girl’ 
and diverse obstacles that thwart their union, forms a perfect vehicle to express 
these concerns. The couple first meet when Barakah receives a complaint about 
mixing on a beach and stumbles upon Bibi modelling in a photoshoot for her 
mother’s boutique. At an art gallery, one of the few public spaces without gender 
segregation, they run into each other again. They exchange a few thoughts 
on conceptual art (Saudi Arabia has a vibrant arts scene and many works are 
displayed in the film) before somebody announces the religious police’s arrival 
and Bibi hastily exits.94 When the couple review their options for meeting-places, 
a comic montage displays them in typical settings for dates – a restaurant, a 
beach, a car – but, each time, the action freezes and religious police break up 
their trysts.
From the outset, Barakah and Bibi are a mismatched couple, a staple of the 
romcom genre where such ‘incompatibility may arise from social status, wealth, 
conflicting lifestyles and attitudes, or even purely their differing expectations of 
relationships’.95 The film uses their differences to complicate its picture of Saudi 
society and highlight a neoliberal structure of access. Despite living in Saudi 
patriarchy, Bibi is in some respects more powerful in terms of her wealth and 
access to the beach; the lower-class Barakah lives on the other side of Jeddah, in 
one of its old, ramshackle neighbourhoods. In courtship, Barakah is gauche and 
naïve – in typical romcom fashion, a male needing experienced female guidance. 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
166
When he presents Bibi with an underwear thong in a heart-shaped box, she is 
horrified and teaches him that flowers are the perfect romantic gift. The film 
underlines that Barakah’s comic immaturity owes to his lack of love life, itself 
due to restrictions on cross-gender mixing.
Going back to early ‘screwball comedies’, such as Bringing Up Baby (1938), 
romcoms have debated society’s changing attitudes to gender roles through the 
recurring theme of gender reversal. Barakah participates in an all-male amateur 
theatrical troupe, rehearsing for a production of Hamlet. In the film’s opening, 
dressed in traditional male Saudi attire, a white thawb (long garment) and 
ghutrah (headdress), he enters a women’s clothes shop and bemusedly holds up a 
frilly pink push-up bra which is, we later learn, to accompany his Ophelia outfit. 
Crossdressing is part of theatre tradition. In Shakespeare’s time, men performed 
female roles; likewise, in contemporary, Saudi Arabia, men and women generally 
perform on different stages.96 In another gender reversal, Bibi dons a moustache, 
ghutrah, waistcoat and pantaloons for her mother’s costume party and drives 
off in an open-topped car – a transgressive act, since this was when the ban 
on women driving was still in force. While crossdressing is a common source 
of comedy, frequently located in the incongruous ‘breach’ of gender norms, 
its purpose in Barakah Meets Barakah is to play around with and question the 
gender binaries that underlie such restrictions. Even the film’s title is pun on a 
unisex name – Bibi confesses that her birthname is also Barakah, which means 
‘blessing’ in Arabic.
Figure 6.2  Romantic comedy’s boy-meets-girl format is transformed into a vehicle 
for exploring gender segregation and other restrictions on interacting in public space 
in Saudi society. Barakah Meets Barakah directed by Mahmoud Sabbagh © El Housh 
Productions 2016. All Rights Reserved.

Humour
167
Saudi society was not always so restrictive, Barakah reflects. In two 
sequences, present-day photographs are juxtaposed with those from the 1960s 
and 70s, when cinemas flourished, airline stewardesses wore miniskirts and his 
unmarried parents dated relatively freely. The turning point was in 1979, when 
Islamic militants laid siege to Mecca’s Grand Mosque in an attempt to topple 
the monarchy. As a result, the reigning King Khaled conceded more power 
to religious conservatives, which led to stricter application of Sharia law and 
changes throughout Saudi society, including the banning of movie theatres and 
greater restrictions on women’s rights. Addressing his father, Barakah declares 
that the older generation surrendered the younger generation to the conservative 
forces that took hold of society, and ‘didn’t defend our generation’s rights’ to the 
more open society that existed in the past. Communicating these points from 
his nostalgic perspective helps the film retain a degree of ironic detachment. Yet, 
his perception that Saudi society used to be more liberal evokes the possibility of 
change: it can be like that again.
At film screenings and discussions, the filmmakers have presented their 
film as part of a conversation about social change in Saudi Arabia; as al-Banawi 
puts it, art is a ‘soft weapon for addressing these issues’, ‘a platform that enables 
dialogue’.97 They are equally concerned about what form dissent should take 
and not being provocative, carefully weighing up the effects of their freedom of 
expression on the wider industry as well as their personal safety in Saudi Arabia. 
As Fageeh says, ‘You have to plant seeds towards real, tangible optimism . . . If 
we were to make a movie that was tending towards our provocateur nature, we 
would have prevented a lot of people from creating movies but now we have two 
movies in the pipeline and many more.’98 The use of the romcom genre, with its 
‘gentle tone’99 that more often upholds dominant ideology, may be seen in this 
light, for when it does challenge, its manner is restrained and nuanced. Along 
with irony, it enables the filmmakers to achieve the delicate balance needed for 
exploring controversial subjects without seeming provocative.
The film’s significant impact proves the success of their approach. As intended, 
it has instigated debates among Saudis.100 The Saudi government selected 
Barakah Meets Barakah for the country’s foreign-language Oscar entry in 2017, 
conferring an official endorsement even though it was independently produced. 
Moreover, in 2017, Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman gave a speech that 
reiterated Barakah’s sentiments, stating that Saudi Arabia ‘would soon return to 
the “moderate” form of Islam present in the kingdom before the unleashing of 
“extremist ideologies” after 1979’.101 The lifting of the bans on cinema exhibition 
and women driving in 2018 are part of this apparent attempt to return to a more 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
168
moderate past. Sean Foley argues that these changes should not be seen merely 
as the monarchy’s top-down decisions but instead as indicating the influence 
of debates in artistic forms ‘occurring “beneath the surfaces of power”’.102 This 
makes films such as Barakah Meets Barakah into engines of this social change. 
Yet, there are strategic reasons behind these developments, too, intended to 
‘oversee a transition to a less oil-dependent economy’.103 Ahd Kamel, another 
Saudi filmmaker, believes that the relaxing of rules on driving and entertainment 
will make people’s lives less hard. But other than that, she says, ‘I don’t think it’s a 
reform in any shape or form.’104 A joke circulated amongst her friends when the 
Saudi monarchy announced the decision to allow women to drive: ‘2017 was the 
year they discovered women’.105
Conclusion
In this chapter, I have sought to analyse humour from practitioners’ perspectives, 
exploring its purpose and the different comic modes they adopt, depending 
on their sociopolitical circumstances. These range from direct satire to the 
indirectness of irony, reflecting the realms of permissible speech. Humour 
enjoys a certain licence to say the unsayable but, as emphasized throughout this 
chapter, it is used to circumvent multiple constraints, not just state censorship. 
The pressures on freedom of expression come in a variety of forms. Religious 
authorities, public opinion, funders and festivals as well as governments all place 
limits on what filmmakers are allowed or expected to say in their bids to be 
humorous.
Writing this chapter also made me acutely aware of gender imbalance. Unlike 
most other chapters in this book, where male and female filmmakers are equally 
represented, works by male directors or performers have dominated. Although 
women also incorporate humour, as testified by plentiful quotes from my female 
interviewees, fewer of them have chosen to foreground this strategy in their 
work. Speaking of US satire, Amber Day asserts that male satirists are more 
able to mock the powerful because they possess some power in the first place, 
suggesting that there are greater constraints for women undertaking comic 
strategies internationally.106 ‘Being male, I have a privilege’, Fageeh observes, 
while his co-star al-Banawi ‘has more reason to be more anxious’.107 As King 
writes, ‘The dominant norms of many cultures give women less licence than 
men to depart from prevailing inhibitions, especially in public forms such as 
performance.’108 This can be seen in the music video Hawages (2016) directed by 

Humour
169
Majed Alesa, which followed No Women, No Drive in demanding women’s right 
to drive in Saudi Arabia. It begins with three women getting into a car driven by 
a young boy, referring to male guardianship laws that grant greater authority to 
male minors than to adult women. Subsequently, the women perform various 
activities, including basketball and skateboarding, traditionally forbidden to 
them. They all wear a niqāb that covers their entire body apart from their eyes, 
concealing their identities.

170

Storytelling has the power to seize our attention. The traditional Arab oral 
storyteller, known as al-hakawati, drew stories from a repertoire collectively 
owned by the community and wove them together in different ways for 
different audiences. They would tell one story after another with variations, 
embedding them within a frame story that contained all the tales.1 Stories 
within stories feature in both Arabic and Persian traditions. As Orkideh 
Behrouzan notes, ‘Epic Persian literature, Islamic and Zoroastrian scripture, 
even the Koran itself, can be read as a series of collected short stories.’2 
One of the best-known examples is The Thousand and One Nights, which 
contains Persian, Indian and Arabic folktales compiled by multiple scribes 
and editors.3 In the frame story, following betrayal by his former wife, King 
Shahriyar resolves to marry a virgin every night and kill her the next day. To 
avoid execution, his newly wed, Scheherazade (Shahrazad in Persian), tells 
him stories night after night.
Conventional film narrative is built around a single main character or pair 
of protagonists in three acts leading to a definitive ending.4 In contrast, stories 
within stories have an open-ended, rhizomatic character that is ‘additive’ and 
‘aggregative’ like oral culture in general.5 While a frame story delimits the text, 
it guarantees neither a particular internal structure nor a fixed number of 
protagonists nor closure, as the storytelling could go on and on. This chapter, 
with its case studies – the multi-strand fictional narrative Tales (2014), collective 
documentary Profession: Documentarist (2014) and theatre documentary 
Queens of Syria (2014) – explores how filmmakers from the region have adopted 
a stories-within-stories technique during crisis conditions. The flexibility of 
this form makes it useful for filmmaking in crisis, since stories can be added or 
subtracted depending on changing risks and circumstances; it also lends itself to 
collective authorship. Furthermore, while international mainstream media often 
­7
Stories within stories

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
172
promote one-dimensional views of the region, ranging from misunderstandings 
about veiled women to ‘view from above’ reporting on political tensions and 
conflicts, this strategy unfolds a multiplicity of different perspectives. It is one 
way that the filmmakers attempt to do justice to the complexity of everyday life 
during crises, when a singular viewpoint would be insufficient.
As María del Mar Azcona writes of the multi-protagonist film, a transnational 
multi-strand narrative genre that, she argues, has risen since the end of the 
twentieth century, ‘By easily moving between different characters and storylines 
of similar narrative importance, these texts refuse to offer a monolithic view of 
events but rather favor the portrayal of several, and sometimes contradictory, 
points of view.’6 Stories within stories reveal fragments of lives ranging along a 
cross-section of society. This form of storytelling is close to anthropology since it 
is deeply embedded in the social contexts of people’s lives, attempting to convey 
nuances of ‘life as lived’ in a community.7
Storytelling itself emerges from crisis, as both filmmakers and their characters 
turn to stories to work through painful and difficult experiences, improve social 
conditions and, especially in Queens of Syria, to galvanize international attention 
to their predicament. Although some hold it responsible for propagating 
Orientalist images of the Middle East,8 The Thousand and One Nights epitomizes 
this aspect of storytelling as creative therapy and changemaking. Already in a 
dangerous situation, Scheherazade takes a gamble and harnesses the power 
of storytelling to create change for herself and others by altering the king’s 
perception of women. In fact, fatal risk presides over many of her tales, together 
with recourse to stories as a means of delaying or eluding that violence, suggesting 
that, through the act of storytelling, those facing crisis gain the agency to speak 
out and become survivors, rather than merely victims. As the narrative unfolds, 
characters detach themselves from the story in which they first appear to tell 
their own tales in their own voices.9
In this chapter, I analyse how filmmakers use stories within stories, and the 
role this strategy plays in freedom of expression more generally before focusing 
on the case studies, which are all directed by women. Steeped in the politics of 
voice, Tales, Profession: Documentarist and Queens of Syria largely tell women’s 
stories, using their embedded tales as a strategy for narrating women’s inner, 
private lives, their traumatic histories, hopes, anxieties and challenges. Turning 
away from dramatic events taking place in the public arena, they dwell on the 
interior spaces of homes and relationships, exploring the everyday effects of 
crises upon civilians.

Stories within Stories
173
The story within a story as a mise en abyme
Inserting a story within a story is a technique known in literary theory as mise 
en abyme. For Lucien Dällenbach, the mise en abyme functions as a mirror, 
making the work ‘an internal play of mirrors’.10 The frame and inner stories 
reflect and illuminate each other. This can have a ‘subversive intent’, as seen 
in Shakespeare’s Hamlet, in which Hamlet commissions a theatrical troupe to 
perform The Mousetrap, a play within a play that illustrates the murder of his 
father in order to implicate his uncle.11 In Cinema 2, Gilles Deleuze uses the 
term ‘crystal images’ for types of mise en abyme. One form that they take is a 
work within a work in which the reflecting work can be from another medium, 
such as a play, or it can be a film within a film, contemplating ‘the process of its 
making or of its setbacks in being made’.12 It might seem ‘inevitable’, Deleuze 
writes, ‘that cinema, in the crises of the action image . . . having no more stories 
to tell, would take itself as its object and would be able to tell only its own story’, 
yet filmmakers internationally have found in the film within the film a means 
of creating ‘special’ images.13 If such techniques are present, they are often not 
merely self-referential but are there for a reason.
Several directors from the region have used the film within the film to 
document crisis and the constraints of making their films in creative ways 
that go far beyond standard ‘behind the scenes’ features. For example, Abbas 
Kiarostami’s And Life Goes On (1992) and Through the Olive Trees (1994) were 
both made in the aftermath of the Koker earthquake and use the film-within-
a-film technique to revisit the region that was the location of his earlier film, 
Where Is the Friend’s House? (1987). Fictional stand-ins are used for the director 
in the latter two films, art and life mirroring each other in an infinite regression. 
Mohamed Al-Daradji’s documentary War, Love, God & Madness (2008) is 
about the making of his film Dreams (2006) in the risky, chaotic conditions of 
occupied Iraq, as director and crew members battle against time pressures and 
the worsening spiral of security that leads to their kidnapping and torture. In 
The Immortal Sergeant (2014), Ziad Kalthoum records the making of Mohamed 
Malas’s Ladder to Damascus (2013) during the Syrian uprising, when the shoot 
was disrupted by explosions, attempts to halt filming and the crew members’ 
traumatic breakdowns.
Historically, the story within a story has functioned as a way to avert 
censorship. For example, the Syrian director Duraid Lahham’s satire The Report 
(1987) features a dream in which a balance hangs lopsided in a courtroom, an 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
174
indirect critique of official corruption.14 The dream affords a certain protection: 
not only is it unreal, but the scandalous content is buried deep within the work, 
where it can pass unnoticed. This use of the story within a story to deflect 
censorship persists today. In Asghar Farhadi’s The Salesman (2016), Arthur 
Miller’s Death of a Salesman is the play inside the film that the protagonists 
Emad and Rana are performing as part of an amateur drama group. Through 
its parallels with the film, the play illuminates the married couple’s dynamics, 
especially after Rana is assaulted by an intruder into their flat, a scene that 
remains unshown, partly to avoid censorship and partly to implicate the 
audience in speculation around what happened between Rana and her attacker. 
As Nacim Pak-Shiraz says of another of Farhadi’s films, The Separation (2011), 
‘attaining the very truth of the events themselves becomes impossible’.15 She 
writes, ‘In Shi‘i and Sufi thought, truth is multi-layered. It has a ẓāhir, outward 
or exoteric, and bāṭin, internal or esoteric, meaning.’16 Applying this logic, the 
story within a story holds further layers of meaning that are necessary to unpeel 
in order to reveal the complete picture. However, as Farhadi’s films intimate, 
attaining ‘the whole truth’ is impossible, even by viewers who have a greater 
range of knowledge over the narrative events than any of the characters. All 
we can grasp are fragments of the truth, like the poet Rumi’s saying, ‘Truth is a 
mirror that falls from the hand of God and shatters into pieces. Everyone picks 
up a piece and believes that that piece contains the whole truth, even though the 
truth is left sown about in each fragment.’17
However, circumventing censorship is not always the primary purpose of 
the story within a story. We can see this in Mohammed Rasoulof’s Manuscripts 
Don’t Burn (2013) which is such a direct indictment of Iran’s security apparatus 
that it has been called ‘the most inflammatory Iranian film ever made’.18 In his 
earlier career, Rasoulof was known for making cryptic, allegorical films such 
as Iron Island (2005) and The White Meadows (2009). His arrest in 2010, along 
with Jafar Panahi, on charges of filming without a permit, led him to change his 
approach. Like Panahi, he was sentenced to six years in prison and a twenty-
year filmmaking ban (although, also like Panahi, his prison sentence has not 
yet been enforced). As Rasoulof declares, ‘I used to think that the best way of 
evading the pressure exerted by the all-consuming and powerful government 
institutions was those artistic devices that are prevalent in our culture: namely, 
metaphors and indirect references.’19 However, after his arrest, he felt it was no 
longer necessary to use those strategies since ‘my new circumstances meant that 
I no longer required them.’20 Like Panahi, he has continued filmmaking despite 
his ban and his films have become much more direct.

Stories within Stories
175
Manuscripts Don’t Burn has the appearance of a thriller. Its outer story is 
that of two hitmen driving around Tehran, exchanging mundane remarks and 
running everyday errands. The hitmen hunt down two dissident writers to 
retrieve copies of a manuscript they possess and then kill them. The manuscript 
has been written by a third author, as a memoir of an incident years earlier 
when a delegation of Iranian writers were travelling to Armenia and their driver 
attempted to crash the bus. It makes direct reference to an actual event in 1996 
that was part of a programme of political assassinations known as ‘the Chain 
Murders’ carried out by Iran’s Ministry of Intelligence. ‘The Chain Murders’ 
came to light during a period of greater press freedom in 1998. Like Hamlet 
playing a cat-and-mouse game with the state, Rasoulof revives this incident 
in the Ahmadinejad era, when freedom of speech was drastically curtailed, 
especially after the 2009 Green Movement.
By necessity, the film was shot underground, on a low budget; despite this, it 
looks polished with its blue- and grey-hued cinematography, lacking the low-
tech appearance of many other underground films. For security reasons, only 
Rasoulof’s name appears in the credits (as writer and director, although he also 
has an uncredited role as one of the hitmen, Morteza). He wrote the script with 
production limitations in mind, and shot half the film in Iran and the other 
half in Germany, with some scenes filmed in multiple locations across the two 
countries depending on what could be replicated elsewhere (the interior story 
of the writers) and what had to be in Tehran (the outer story of the hitmen’s 
rounds). Rasoulof reflects that ‘Ultimately, these limitations resulted in small 
bursts of creativity and ingenuity from which I feel that the film benefitted 
structurally’.21 The result is the story-within-a-story structure. The title 
Manuscripts Don’t Burn comes from the Soviet writer Mikhail Bulgakov’s novel 
The Master and Margarita (1966). It epitomizes the idea that stories cannot be 
completely destroyed, however much trouble they give to beleaguered writers 
or governments who try to ban them. Stories have a way of coming to light: a 
leitmotif of many films in this chapter.
Although many constraints on filmmaking were already in place before 
the 2009 protests in Iran, after these events the state hugely increased the 
restrictions. As Shirin Barghnavard, one of the co-directors of Profession: 
Documentarist, explains, ‘That was the first time that the state found out the 
power of documentary films because people were documenting the events on 
their cellphones. Previously you only needed a permit for shooting and screening 
feature-length fiction films; suddenly, new rules applied to documentary and 
short films’, which now require both shooting and screening permission.22 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
176
Despite the fact that short films are now subject to censorship in a way they 
were not before, constructing a feature film from a series of shorts has remained 
a creative way of defying the authorities. Rasoulof’s There Is No Evil (2020) 
consists of short stories exploring characters involved in the state’s machinery 
of capital punishment. Mindful of his filmmaking ban, his production team 
applied for licences to make four short films in different provinces, without 
giving his name on the forms.23 As we will see in the following case study, 
Rakhshan Banietemad, while not operating under a filmmaking ban, was a 
pioneer of this strategy in Tales.
Tales: a feature composed from short films
Tales consists of seven intersecting stories featuring characters from Banietemad’s 
fiction films from the previous two decades. It imagines how these characters are 
faring under the hardships of Ahmadinejad’s second term of presidency when it 
was made. Knowledge of their backstories in the earlier films – Under the Skin of 
the City (2001), Off-limits (1988), Gilaneh (2005), The Blue-Veiled (1995), Nargess 
(1992) and Mainline (2006) – compensates for the characters’ brief screen time 
and adds significant depth to the narrative.24 As Zahra Khosroshahi comments, 
‘not only do these past characters reappear, but they also join to be part of the 
same story’.25 On the surface, Tales seems like other multi-strand narratives that 
have arisen since the end of the twentieth century, known by different labels such 
as ensemble and mosaic films,26 network narratives,27 multi-protagonist films28 
and kaleidoscopic storytelling.29 These films often have multiple, intersecting 
storylines that follow a range of characters loosely linked together by a shared 
location (such as a city or neighbourhood) and a circumscribed time-frame or 
event, emphasizing chance and coincidence. This kind of multi-story pattern is 
associated with the American independent director Robert Altman (Short Cuts 
(1993)), but it has also been used in Hong Kong by Wong Kar-wai (Chungking 
Express (1994)), in Mexico by Alejandro González Iñárritu (Babel (2006)), in 
Egypt by Ahmad Abdalla (Heliopolis (2009)), in the UAE by Ali Mostafa (City of 
Life (2009)) and in Iran by Ali Jaberansari (Tehran: City of Love (2018)) as well as 
in many other places. However, what distinguishes Tales is the constraints under 
which it was produced.
Before Tales, Banietemad had made her fictional features via the state-
sponsored Farabi Cinema Foundation, which is directly supervised by Iran’s 
Ministry of Culture and Islamic Guidance (MCIG). This ensconced her firmly 

Stories within Stories
177
within the system, although during this time she was able to make socially and 
politically challenging works through constant negotiations with the authorities, 
as well as numerous documentaries.30 Her documentaries are sources of 
inspiration for the social issues that she treats in her fictional narratives, 
grounding them in concrete realities.31 However, ‘Under the Ahmadinejad 
government’, she declares, ‘I boycotted film-making. I didn’t accept the new 
management of the ministry of arts and culture, and I didn’t want to make films 
under such conditions.’ For this reason, Banietemad states, ‘Tales was made up 
of shorter films, which meant it didn’t require a license, and as a result was made 
independently.’32 Later, when reformist president Hasan Rouhani was elected, 
she joined these short films together in order to release the work as a feature. 
Not only did her chosen creative strategy give her greater freedom of expression, 
she suggests that it was necessitated by the crisis in Iran’s film industry during 
Ahmadinejad’s presidency, leading her to produce her first truly independent 
fictional work.
The crisis conditions of the film’s production, amidst Western sanctions, 
hyperinflation and greater restrictions on freedom of expression, are reflected 
in the storylines which foreground the everyday impact of these broader 
social, political and economic phenomena. Through its multi-story structure, 
Tales explores a cross-section of Iranian society in the aftermath of 2009, with 
the aforementioned crises acting as an event-frame that connects disparate 
characters. Their tales are linked by transitional scenes in which a character from 
one story crosses paths with characters from the next, and a frame story of an 
unnamed filmmaker struggling to make a documentary in these circumstances. 
Indeed, the stories are so well interwoven, using continuity editing techniques to 
bridge the different episodes (as is common in multi-strand narrative),33 that it is 
hard to imagine that they began their life as independent shorts.
The filmmaker’s documentary forms a film within a film, another story 
within a story that encapsulates the characters’ experience of crisis. In one scene, 
he boards a minibus to film workers demanding their rights after their factory’s 
closure and the owner’s departure without paying them. Among the mainly 
male workers is a woman named Tuba (whose backstory viewers may know 
from Under the Skin of the City), who emerges as their spokesperson. Despite 
her chronic cough, a result of her constant exposure to factory dust, she gives 
a heartfelt speech on how she and her co-workers have been affected by the 
economic and political situation: ‘The high prices are breaking us . . . To get any 
kind of job you need to pull the right strings.’ Worried that she will cause trouble, 
her colleagues urge her not to make these political statements on camera, yet 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
178
she persists. ‘It’s a year since they arrested my boy,’ she remonstrates, alluding to 
the 2009 protests in which, the film implies, her son participated. Additionally, 
she mentions drug abuse by Iran’s youth, thankful that her son never became a 
heroin addict. In despair that anything can be changed, she concludes by looking 
into the camera and exclaiming, ‘Who watches these films anyway?!’
This line is a reprise of Tuba’s words in Banietemad’s previous films Under 
the Skin of the City and The May Lady (1998). As both Zahra Khosroshahi and 
Maryam Ghorbankarimi point out in their contributions to an edited book on 
Banietemad, its origins lie in an utterance by Mehri, a protagonist of Banietemad’s 
documentary, To Whom Do You Show These Films? (1993).34 While this might be 
seen as part of the ‘self-referential intertextuality’ that Ghorbankarimi identifies 
throughout Banietemad’s work, the filmmaker herself states, ‘for me, cinema 
is a tool and device, not the endpoint’.35 A concern with social conditions and 
cinema as an impact tool forms the context within which the film within a film 
appears in Tales.36 Most of the scene is shown in one apparent long take (with 
cuts disguised by people passing in front of the camera) through the viewfinder 
on the filmmaker’s camcorder. The camera point of view emphasizes the power 
of cinematic storytelling to capture people’s everyday struggles and render 
them with a sense of immediacy. But, as Tuba’s line highlights, a film’s ability to 
bear witness and create social impact is questionable if it cannot be distributed 
and reach an audience – even then, the path to change is not guaranteed. Sure 
enough, the camera is detected by one of the authorities who approaches the 
minibus; the recording halts abruptly and Tales shifts to the next story, implying 
the camera’s confiscation.
In the film’s final scene, the filmmaker has regained his camera, although 
the footage has been seized. He nonetheless affirms his desire to keep shooting, 
since ‘no film will ever stay in the closet. Someday, somehow, whether we’re 
here or not, these films will be shown.’ His words articulate a well-known 
saying in Iran that a film’s raison d’être is to be exhibited to an audience, 
whatever obstacles beset its production and release. Although unable to be 
screened during Ahmadinejad’s presidency, Tales did not remain in the closet. 
Its stories were retrieved and assembled into a feature that finally obtained 
screening permission when Rouhani came to power. Even then, its theatrical 
release in Iran was obstructed for another two years by pressure groups who 
accused it of portraying a negative view of the country, as Banietemad recalls: 
‘The main cinemas that belonged to government institutions in Tehran and 
other cities boycotted the film and prevented its screening. They even blocked 
me from attending Q&A sessions and other events. At the end, without any 

Stories within Stories
179
publicity, and without any television or radio advertisement, and very few 
exhibiting slots, the film was screened.’37
­Profession: Documentarist: collective filmmaking
Profession: Documentarist is a collective film comprising seven stories by seven 
Iranian female documentary makers who came of age after the 1979 Revolution. 
These are autobiographical stories in which the women talk about themselves 
and their profession, ‘living in a country where documentary makers face a lot of 
limitations’, as Barghnavard, one of the seven, explains.38 With the introduction 
of new rules requiring both shooting and screening permits, conditions for 
documentary makers in Iran worsened after the 2009 protests. The risks also 
increased, as attested to by the persecution and arrests of several filmmakers 
alleged to be working with BBC Persian.39 These factors added to general 
difficulties faced by documentary makers, who ‘are more marginalized, seen 
as more specialist than mainstream’, says Barghnavard. Although the form is 
gaining more recognition as a creative art, ‘by choosing to become documentary 
makers, you have chosen not to be seen or heard a lot’.40 Profession: Documentarist 
arose from this post-2009 crisis. Feeling depressed and weighed down by the 
difficulty of making feature-length documentaries on their own, the group of 
filmmakers, who were already friends, arrived at the solution of making a film 
collectively: a shared creation through which they could support each other and 
gain solidarity to move on.
In its collective mode of production, Profession: Documentarist salvages a 
historical tactic from earlier filmmaking cooperatives that include Third Cinema 
practices in decolonizing nations, alternative filmmaking collectives in the 
United States and UK in the 1960s and 1970s and Black Audio Film Collective 
in Britain in the 1980s and 1990s. As Helen Michiel and Patricia Zimmerman 
note, there is a ‘history of media collectives responding to social and political 
crises’ going as least as far back as the 1930s when the US Workers Film and 
Photo League ‘represented left-leaning film makers and writers’ responses’ 
to the Depression and its effects on ordinary people, offering an ‘alternative 
view to newsreels’ through short films shown outside commercial venues.41 In 
cooperative filmmaking, several filmmakers collaborate in one project, sharing 
common goals and collectively making production decisions. Instead of the 
authority of one director/producer, creative responsibility is distributed more 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
180
equally and roles are often rotated. The productions are usually small-scale, 
often financed by the collective’s personal resources.
This is exactly how Profession: Documentarist was made. From conceiving the 
stories through to script development, research, shooting and post-production, 
every stage of the production process was performed collectively by the women 
themselves, apart from cinematography and sound design. Although they 
realized the film’s potential interest for foreign co-producers, the collective 
shared the cost themselves without applying for any external funding, since 
‘the subject is sensitive and by getting money from global organisations, we 
might be placing ourselves in greater danger’.42 They wanted to avoid a common 
accusation levelled against filmmakers, of using Western funds to act against 
Iran’s interests. Barghnavard believes this is contrary to how they made the film, 
suffusing it with ‘love for our country, for our memories, for the society’, despite 
also being critical of the system.43 Nonetheless, the costly nature of filmmaking 
made this abjuring of external funding hugely challenging. The cinematographer 
(Barghnavard’s husband Mohammad Reza Jahanpanah) and sound designer 
worked pro bono on promise of shared revenues from the film, although that did 
not amount to much because of its limited distribution. Even while engaged in it, 
the collective was aware that this way of working lacked long-term sustainability.
Initially, there were ten filmmakers for ten episodes, but they were reduced 
to seven during the challenging two-and-a-half-year process. ‘There were 
arguments’, Barghnavard recalls, and some filmmakers left.44 Consequently, the 
number of stories fluctuated, and their order was also not fixed in advance. In 
the edit, the collective experimented with different sequences, including ending 
with Barghnavard’s story which, as we will see in the analysis below, has a bitter 
tone. Instead, they ultimately chose to conclude with Nahid Rezaei’s more 
optimistic episode. However, the stories could easily have been in a different 
order, like the multi-strand tales in oral storytelling. As in other community 
projects, the filmmakers regarded the collaborative process of filmmaking as 
more important than the outcome.45 Not everyone was satisfied with the final 
product, Barghnavard says, yet ‘in the end, we decided to accept this as it is . . . It 
wasn’t only about filmmaking; it was about friendship’.46 The act of making the 
film together was ‘an excuse to meet frequently’ and discuss their sorrows and it 
‘gradually became a therapy’.47
Profession: Documentarist builds a kaleidoscopic view of crisis through the 
filmmakers’ different perspectives in their respective episodes. Each episode 
is titled with the filmmaker’s first name, and features her voice-over narrating 
her story, thoughts and concerns. The use of first names and first-person voice 

Stories within Stories
181
is characteristic of the film’s intimate, confidential tone, while the changes in 
narrative voice for each story recall The Thousand and One Nights. Many stories 
are told through autobiographical documents, such as family photographs and 
home movies, that transform into dynamic frames within the frame, generating 
further mise-en-abyme effects. As Farahnaz Sharifi says in her segment, home 
videos are ‘full of things you’re only allowed to do at home’. Despite the state’s 
attempts to intrude into private space and politicize women’s bodies, this was 
resisted by the Iranian population and so the home has ‘remained a “state-free” 
site, a “release valve” for public tensions’.48 The home-movie footage reveals 
women’s parallel lives in their homes – dancing without hejāb, among other 
things – and makes their experiences visible in a way they can never be in 
MCIG-approved cinema.
Barghnavard’s opening story, ‘Shirin’, reflects on experiences of war.49 It 
begins with sounds of missiles and an animation of Tehran’s distinctive cityscape 
illuminated by white flares in the night sky. We realize that this is a videogame, 
in which you play a US soldier invading Iran. At first, the marines lie in ambush, 
then the ‘camera’ takes their point of view as they advance and blow up Gisha 
Bridge. Through their weapon’s viewfinder we see ‘an enemy’ on the other 
side. Shirin’s voice-over personalizes the landscape targeted for destruction, 
identifying the neighbourhood where she lived during her childhood: ‘This is my 
hometown, Tehran. The place I grew up.’ It inverts the videogame’s usual point 
of view and generic images with the experience of an ‘I’, offering an intimate 
tale that gives a sense of what it feels like to be inside these events in a way that 
cannot be captured from outside. The film’s camera then moves out to show the 
videogame is playing on a monitor, another frame within a frame.
The videogame is a product of political discourse about an imminent war 
with Iran. ‘That was a very real issue at the time and has also recurred now,’ 
Barghnavard comments, referring to tensions that resurfaced during President 
Trump’s era. ‘We are constantly faced with domestic and international issues 
imposed on us.’50 The film abruptly cuts from the appropriated video game to 
archive footage of the Iran–Iraq war, another barrage of sounds and images of 
violence. The shift from iconic animated images to indexical found images serves 
to remind viewers that Shirin’s generation already experienced a war, and that 
what can start with a game can easily transform into a reality where loved ones 
are lost. Using photographs of her as a child, just five years old when the war 
started, the story recounts its effects on civilians through aerial bombardment 
and internal displacement. The Gisha neighbourhood bombing shattered all 
the windows in her house: ‘the war had reached our front door’. Thereafter she 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
182
was evacuated to northern Iran, which was safer. There she met her first love, a 
boy who was later killed in the conflict. Having layered speculation of a future 
possible war with the legacy of a past war, the film captures images of Tehran in 
the present day. It suggests that the scars of war remain as undercurrents under 
the surface – ‘hidden, subtle and mute’.
When, in 2003, Iraqis faced another war, the 2003 US-led invasion, Shirin 
was in Perth and captured the anti-war rallies there. It was safe for her to 
film demonstrations in Australia; however, when the 2009 Green Movement 
happened in Iran, and people documented it as citizen journalists with their 
mobile phones, she was fearful and did not record it herself. Shirin’s story is 
about a documentary filmmaker’s capacity for documenting violence, something 
to which she is averse. This is not only because of the risks: ‘I cannot tolerate any 
violence,’ she reflects. ‘But sometimes it imposes itself on you and you are inside 
it. In those situations, I am not the kind of person who can take their camera and 
record the violence.’51
In another episode, Firouzeh relates her anxieties about returning to Iran 
after trips abroad. One time her name was announced over Tehran airport’s 
tannoy and an official came over to her and took her passport. Although her 
passport was returned, the incident unsettled her. She hears of friends who have 
Figure  7.1  Shirin’s voice-over lays the nuances of her lived experience over a 
videogame of US soldiers invading Iran, deploying a story-within-a-story strategy. 
Profession: Documentarist directed by Shirin Barghnavard, Firouzeh Khosrovani, 
Farahnaz Sharifi, Mina Keshavarz, Sepideh Abtahi, Sahar Salahshoor, Nahid Rezaei © 
Profession: Documentarist collective 2014. All Rights Reserved.

Stories within Stories
183
been taken from their homes and detained, and fears the same may happen to 
her. Farahnaz in her segment discloses, ‘We Iranian documentary filmmakers 
have movies that can only be made in our minds. Sometimes we tell them 
to each other.’ She tells us about one such film she wanted to make about the 
popular Iranian singer Googoosh since, after the 1979 revolution, solo female 
singers were banned from singing in public. In other stories, Mina contemplates 
leaving Iran while another filmmaker, Sepideh, interweaves the story of the 1979 
revolution with her family history. Sahar’s story centres on the window in her 
home that overlooks a prison. It likens her own home to a prison and expresses 
her longing to live somewhere she would not need to conceal herself but could do 
everything in the open. In the final episode, Nahid, the eldest of the filmmakers, 
focuses on personal and professional strategies to overcome these limitations, 
documenting the collective who made the film we are watching. With her, we 
enter the House of Cinema, the filmmakers’ guild where they gather to watch 
each other’s banned films. Her story ends with celebrations of the 2013 election 
result, which brought Rouhani to power, and shows Nahid out on the streets, 
filming.
The collective knew it was ‘pointless’ to apply for a screening permit since 
their film did not abide by censorship rules, featuring women singing among 
other things.52 With this, they accepted that screening possibilities within Iran 
were limited. So they self-distributed the film, hiring a 400-seat cinema in a 
private school for the invitation-only première. Later, Profession: Documentarist 
was exhibited at galleries and other private venues. It was also selected for 
screening at the House of Cinema’s Celebration of Iranian Cinema. While the 
collective was careful not to draw attention to the film in Iran, they submitted it 
to as many international festivals as they could and therefore it was more widely 
seen abroad. ‘I think any filmmaker makes films to be seen,’ Barghnavard says, 
utilizing the same saying that occurs at the end of Tales. ‘It used to be said that 
“at least we documented it; though there’s no space to show it, perhaps it can be 
shown later”. But now, we have to show it – if not here, then somewhere else.’53
Queens of Syria: sharing other people’s stories
Queens of Syria is a documentary about Syrian refugee women in Jordan who 
perform their own interpretation of Euripides’s classical Greek play The Trojan 
Women (415 BC). These women, who had fled the Syrian war, had never acted 
previously. The play dramatizes the plight of women whose city was destroyed by 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
184
the Greek army, resulting in their captivity and forced exile. It has continually lent 
itself to contemporary parallels since it deals with war crimes against civilians, 
displacement and sexual violence against women in conflict.54 Charlotte Eagar, 
one of the executive producers of the British company, Refuge Productions, that 
instigated the project, has spoken of how she saw it as an ‘opportunity’ to make 
powerful drama and highlight the Syrian refugee crisis: ‘because the amateur 
cast are playing out experiences very similar to their own, even though they are 
not professional actors, they can give very powerful performances’.55
However, contradictions can exist between the emancipatory potential 
of ‘giving voice’ and how this is managed by media professionals.56 Yasmin 
Fedda was very aware of this when she was hired to direct the documentary. A 
Palestinian by background, with a Syrian grandmother, she now lives in Britain, 
although she grew up in Kuwait and lived in Syria at various times, making her 
previous films there. Fedda was not interested in the fact that a British production 
company conceived the idea, but rather in what happened in the workshops 
leading to the performance, the Syrian women involved and their journey over 
that two month-period. The producer Itab Izzam recruited women to take part, 
visiting community centres and refugee drop-in places to convince them. ‘She 
would just say, “Just come for a day”’, Fedda recalls.57 The women came, not 
knowing what to expect or even understanding what the project was. Knowing 
this, and informed by her own background in anthropology, which had taught 
her to be sensitive to people’s stories, Fedda felt that an observational approach 
would be productive: ‘Spending a long time in the room and not imposing my 
ideas was a starting point, and giving it the time to see what would happen.’58 She 
gained the women’s trust by being continually around, as they became used to 
her and her camera.
Although we follow the theatre production through workshops and rehearsals, 
Queens of Syria is more than just a behind-the-scenes documentary. It gives us 
deeper access to the women’s stories and their perspectives by documenting 
their creative process and debates about the play as well as taking us into some 
of their homes. Initially part of trust-building during the filmmaking process, 
these more intimate, domestic scenes were integrated in the edit. One of the 
women we see at home is Maha, who talks about her fear and exhilaration of 
going on stage, as it will be her first time speaking in public. Otherwise, she feels, 
her everyday horizons are low: ‘I live on a floor with two foam mattresses. What 
can I dream about?’ Later, she recounts losing this meagre home, as its roof flew 
off in a storm, rendering her family homeless again, in an anecdote made more 
tangible to the audience by already having witnessed her lodgings.

Stories within Stories
185
While the film has a linear structure, tracing the production’s creative 
development and its realization on stage at the end, this is broken up by scenes 
from the stage performance interspersed throughout. Fedda explains, ‘we had 
really limited funds, it was just me filming’; therefore, ‘we couldn’t really show 
the whole play’ from just one angle.59 Listening to the stories in the workshops, 
then seeing them transform on stage, she realized that she could interweave 
them. This lends the film a stories-within-stories structure, as it shifts back and 
forth between the workshops and the actual performance. The different versions 
of the stories are distinguished by background – variegated colours for the 
rehearsal room, black for the theatre and white for videos projected onstage – 
and costume, as the women exchange their coats and headscarves for black 
abayahs and veils that, fittingly for a Greek tragedy, frame their faces like masks.
In the film, the theatre director Omar Abu Saada is shown creating a new 
script with the women, inspired by Euripides’s play yet containing ‘their stories, 
thoughts and experiences’. In other words, they use The Trojan Woman as a frame 
narrative. The women are startled to find parallels between their experiences 
and the play, which they interpret as a reflection of their reality: ‘It’s not just in 
Troy. This has happened for real. It’s happened to us even,’ Maha says.60 When 
she recites a line from the play, ‘Tragedy is living a painful present while your 
soul yearns for happy past’, she pauses, as its weighted correspondence with her 
own life sinks in. The play moves the women because they recognize the difficult 
circumstances that its characters undergo; it becomes a vehicle for articulating 
their own stories and sentiments. That the play belongs to a publicly owned 
cultural repertoire perhaps makes it easier for them to insert their stories into 
it, turning their experiences into something more universal. Moreover, it allows 
the women to speak with greater freedom about themselves through ‘an element 
of depersonalization’, switching between first and third person.61 As Fedda 
remarks, ‘There was the chorus, and personalities from the play to break the 
themes of what everyone was talking about. Using the Greek play in 2013 made 
people more able to express their stories, because there was a slight remove; it 
made them feel that it was not just them, that there was a higher purpose.’62
The fact that the women can ‘cloak’ their experiences in this way might 
suggest that the play works as an allegory for the contemporary regime. 
This is certainly how some adaptations, for example Shakespeare’s plays, 
have functioned historically in Syria.63 However, in neither the film nor the 
stage performance does the play serve a purely allegorical role, since the 
form of expression is both direct and indirect. In a technique that I prefer to 
call ‘double-voicing’, sometimes the women channel their own experiences 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
186
through their characters; at others, they speak as themselves. In fact, at the 
beginning, Fedda told me, some women ‘didn’t see it as a play, they saw it as a 
platform to share their stories’.64 Several had to negotiate being on stage with 
their families since, according to their conservative social customs, acting is 
not seen as proper behaviour for women, so they preferred to think of it as 
‘sharing’, which made it more acceptable. On the other hand, some women 
are seen having fun with acting, as in one backstage scene where they express 
their inner divas. While sharing, they would be affected by the power of each 
other’s stories, which they regarded as belonging to collective experience.65 
Asserting individual authorship did not concern them. At home in her 
kitchen, one of the women, Fatima, reveals her identification with Queen 
Hecuba, a high-ranking woman who ‘lost everything she owned’. For Fatima, 
her house was her kingdom, despite being small, and she was ‘the queen’ of 
it.66 Although the play features a number of characters, Hecuba’s perspective 
on loss of home, family members and status resonated the most, inspiring 
the film’s title, Queens of Syria. The women speak Hecuba’s lines in unison 
when she buries her grandchild; their chorus of voices evokes a multiplicity 
of stories similar to these experiences.
As Fedda revealed, the women were always negotiating what stories they 
would share in the play or the film, aware of the different risks accompanying 
these media.67 While the play was due to be performed for only two days in 
Jordan, the film could potentially be shown anywhere – even, via satellite TV, 
in Syria. These constraints on free expression are reflected in the film, which 
begins with the women rehearsing their lines covering their mouths with their 
hands. The women saw the play and the film as a way of telling the world about 
their struggles, which they felt had been unheard due to media underreporting. 
Some of them wanted to be more direct, so upset were they at what had 
happened to their families. ‘We can’t be afraid in our country and out of it,’ 
one says. However, another cautions, ‘People will understand that we’re anti-
regime. Even if we don’t say it directly, people will understand that we’re against 
Bashar.’ Having grown up in a dictatorship, the women know that Syrians are 
well-versed in this ‘cloaked’ manner of speaking. Many of the women become 
reluctant to participate or talk about their experiences in the play since they fear 
repercussions for their families in Syria or for themselves should they return 
while Assad is still in power. They debate with Omar about whether they will 
reveal their names, and some of them opt to wear a niqāb to conceal their faces. 
As time goes on, the group gets smaller; a weekly countdown shows participant 
numbers dwindling from sixty to twenty-five.

Stories within Stories
187
These constraints likewise affected the making of Fedda’s film. Early on, 
almost half the women declared that they did not want to appear on camera. 
Although many changed their minds later, this put the documentary in jeopardy 
and Fedda briefly contemplated animating it to overcome this constraint.68 
Several faces are blurred to preserve anonymity, a mark of the ingrained fear 
that comes from living in ‘a dictatorship run on fear’, even when the risks had 
subsided for some: ‘the fear was there, so you have to be sensitive to that reality’, 
Fedda explains.69 Although the atrocities that the women relate in their stories 
were mainly carried out by the Syrian state, there are only a few mentions of Assad 
in the film and the stage performance itself contains no direct references to the 
regime. As Fedda states, some audiences, particularly Syrians, will ‘understand 
that, if there was an incursion, it’s most likely it’s a regime unit or an affiliated 
militia’.70 However, these meanings are not so legible to international audiences, 
as she discovered during screenings when she was asked, ‘What about ISIS?’ 
Before 2013, by which time the woman had left Syria and taken part in the play, 
ISIS was not active in Syria. Yet, due to dominant media narratives about Syria, 
ISIS is imagined to be the bigger threat which, as Fedda stresses, is ‘a complete 
misunderstanding of the causes of the crisis’.71
As this shows, there is censorship of different kinds in how stories are shared. 
‘Some women’s stories had really strong parallels with the play but, because they 
were so strong, they were too sensitive to go in the film,’ Fedda notes. It is striking 
that there are no stories about sexual violence, a prominent theme in The Trojan 
Women. Moreover, Fedda exercised her own self-censorship, removing material 
‘because the situation was fragile or had changed after filming’, possibly putting 
the women at risk.72 This was based partly on her own knowledge of what would 
be sensitive in Syria and partly on checking with the women whether scenes she 
was planning to include were acceptable. One of the women whose situation 
changed was Huyam, an activist in the revolution who had powerful stories to 
share. She quit the production, because her family was against her performing 
on stage and thought it might endanger her fifteen-year-old son who had been 
imprisoned in Syria. When Fedda rang her afterwards, Huyam urged her to use 
her story. By then, she had learned that her son had been executed: ‘Her position 
had changed horribly,’ Fedda recalls. ‘She had censored herself at the time, then 
decided she didn’t want to be censored anymore.’73
Aside from political sensitivities, there were social constraints that caused 
difficulties. For example, a woman who blows a kiss backstage on the opening 
night got into trouble with her family because of expectations around how 
married women should behave. The scene appears in the version of the film 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
188
broadcast by BBC Arabic. Although it is a beautiful moment of lightness, Fedda 
decided to excise it from the Middle East theatrical version, while retaining 
it for the international festival version. The necessity for three versions of the 
film encapsulates the multiple constraints under which the documentary was 
produced. On stage towards the end, we see the women perform the same lines 
that they rehearsed at the beginning, with their hands cupped over their mouths: 
‘I have reached the end of my sorrows. I shall leave as my city turns to dust.’ 
The repetition underscores how far they have come on their journey. As Fedda 
remarks, the film could have ended ‘with women coming off stage, crying and 
emotional’, yet she felt she needed ‘to leave the audience with a moment to pause 
and reflect, because it was hard for them to go on stage and tell their stories’.74 
Instead, the film concludes with empty shots of the rehearsal room and corridors 
of that building to emphasize the significance of the process for the women. For 
its duration, the project had created a sense of purpose and freedom that they 
had not experienced before, along with many friendships. It gave them a chance 
to talk about their experiences and process the trauma that it opened up through 
drama therapy. When it ended, it left many feeling bereft since it wasn’t going to 
be a regular part of their lives anymore.
In 2016, Refuge Productions brought some of the women to the UK to 
perform another version of the play, which emphasized themes of motherhood 
Figure 7.2  A group of Syrian refugee women rehearse their version of The Trojan 
Women with their hands covering their mouths, pointing to constraints upon their free 
expression. The same constraints impacted upon the film. Queens of Syria directed by 
Yasmin Fedda © Refuge Productions 2014. All Rights Reserved.

Stories within Stories
189
and migration. The accompanying brochure depicted women in Afghan-style 
burkas, which is not how Syrian women dress, branding them with a generic, 
Orientalist image of female victimhood. While the UK stage play gave the 
women another opportunity to get their stories heard and was an empowering 
experience for them, it returns us to ethical problems around how stories 
are shared. While the women in Queens of Syria are victims of violence, the 
documentary never shows them as merely victimized. Moreover, as Fedda 
remarks, ‘Though they talked about their experiences and their children, it was 
them as a person, not just as a mother, through their relationships to others. I 
think that was important because it gives them a sense of worth – that they’re 
not just a wife or mother.’75 As part of her own ethical documentary practice, 
she has kept in touch with the women, some of whom have migrated to other 
countries, such as Germany and the United States, yet ‘they are not in easy 
conditions still’.76
Conclusion
The films featured in this chapter have all adopted stories within stories, an 
influential template for which is The Thousand and One Nights. We have 
seen how filmmakers have used this technique for storytelling from multiple 
perspectives under crisis conditions and documenting production constraints, 
as well as how it functions as a resourceful means of circumventing censorship. 
Moreover, in the case-study films centring on female stories, the technique 
provides intimate tales of ‘life as lived’ in particular communities, for the most 
part challenging dominant cultural representations of Middle Eastern women 
and politics in the region. As shown especially in relation to Queens of Syria, 
there are issues of risk and ethical practice around how stories are shared that 
affect which stories are told, how they are presented and where they can be 
distributed. Unlike the resolute closure of conventional film narrative, these 
women’s stories are unfinished and their telling has ongoing repercussions on 
their real lives. At the same time, these films testify to a determination to get 
stories heard or shown somehow.
In the web 2.0 era, people can upload their stories onto video-sharing websites 
or social media, or appropriate stories from this online storytelling database, as 
we will see in the next chapter on archival strategies. Among other films, we will 
consider the ethics of Silvered Water, Syria Self-Portrait (2014) which is largely 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
190
composed of YouTube videos. Its authorship is attributed to ‘1001 Syrians’ – a 
kind of Thousand and One Nights for the digital era, with a story-within-a-story 
structure created by embedding these online artefacts. Through these video 
fragments, the film gives visibility to a multiplicity of storytelling perspectives 
in which protesters ‘tell’ their stories under life-threatening circumstances and 
it even has a Scheherazade-like storyteller.

Being Lebanese, with my history, I always think that anything I have can 
disappear forever in some twist of history.
Rania Stephan1
On 4  August 2020, as I was writing this book, a catastrophic explosion of 
ammonium nitrate stored at Beirut’s port destroyed much of Gemmayzeh 
and Mar Mikhael, the city’s hubs of art and nightlife. Among the devastated 
buildings was the Arab Image Foundation (AIF), founded in 1997 to safeguard 
the photographic heritage of the Middle East in the wake of recurrent crises and 
state neglect. Although their premises and equipment were severely damaged, 
the AIF’s methods of protection saved their collection – a testament to their 
valuable work and ethics of care in archiving other people’s images.2 Archives 
in the region are frequently in a poor state or non-existent due to ravages of 
conflict, censorship, looting and other disasters as well as negligence resulting 
from underfunding and inadequate preservation. These conditions intensify 
gaps and occlusions: records are never made, distorted, lost, discarded or 
degenerate over time. But as filmmaker Mariam Ghani says, ‘archive fever is 
most likely to break out when your history is being erased’.3 Archival strategies 
arise out of these crises, as a form of creative resistance for those whose histories 
are contested and unevenly represented.
An archive is a place where documents (including photos, videos and other 
objects) are stored, usually organized according to principles of collection and 
access. While some archives are ‘official’, controlled by governments, universities 
and corporations, others might be classified as ‘unofficial’, such as home movies, 
home video collections and online user-generated materials, although these are 
increasingly reshaping what we understand as archival.4 Whether official or 
unofficial, archiving is never ideologically neutral or comprehensive. For Jacques 
Derrida, archives don’t just preserve the past; they interpret and ‘produce’ it 
­8
Archival strategies

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
192
through their classificatory systems and judgements about which documents 
are kept and which are excluded.5 As Beirut’s port explosion shows, archival 
documents are vulnerable to loss and ruin. In fact, Derrida suggests that the 
desire to archive is haunted by the threat of destruction, ‘introducing, a priori, 
forgetfulness and the archiviolithic into the heart of the monument’.6
In salvaging fragments from archives that give visibility to a past at risk of 
being forgotten or wiped out, filmmakers share the sensibility of historians 
who critique official history’s grand narratives, shifting the focus onto ordinary 
people’s ‘microhistories’ and untold perspectives voiced through unofficial 
documents.7 The strategy holds many possibilities for articulating desires and 
critical standpoints marginalized in mainstream accounts. In their purest form, 
archival strategies enable expressive filmmaking without recourse to a camera 
and on-location filmmaking. Their domain is postproduction: the assemblage 
of recorded materials, mediated by editing, sound, subtitles and special effects, 
rather than production of raw images. For this reason, archival strategies lend 
themselves well to working within constraints, as well as offering ways to 
overcome them.
The case studies in this chapter, Rania Stephan’s The Three Disappearances of 
Soad Hosni (2011), Ossama Mohammed and Wiam Simav Bedirxan’s Silvered 
Water, Syria Self-Portrait (2014) and Yasmin Fedda’s Ayouni (2020), are made 
entirely or in a large part from archival moving images. Before looking at these 
films, the chapter briefly contextualizes their archival strategies in relation to 
practices of appropriation and postproduction in film and art history. Unlike 
witnessing on the spot which emphasizes immediacy (as explored in Chapter 1), 
archival strategies take place at a temporal and spatial remove from events. 
The filmmakers’ roles are similar to that of a historian or curator, collecting, 
rearranging and preserving existing materials to tell new stories about the 
past in ways that resonate with the present. Yet, as members of the Pad.ma 
online video archive remark, ‘Historians have merely interpreted the Archive. 
The Point however is to Feel it.’8 At the same time, archival strategies prompt 
questions around what materials can be found, what can be used and how they 
are deployed, leading me to emphasize an ethics of care that manifests to varying 
degrees in the case study films.
The film medium is itself an archive, ‘by virtue of its indexical and recording 
properties’.9 As artefacts, films become part of archives or are incorporated 
into other films. Archival footage frequently provides documentary ‘evidence’ 
of the past, as in Little Gandhi (2016), which uncovers the forgotten history of 
the Syrian uprising’s peaceful origins, or Coup 53 (2019) which tells the story 

Archival Strategies
193
of UK and US covert operations to overthrow Iran’s democratically elected 
Prime Minister Mossadegh in 1953. Nowadays, filmmakers often produce 
films from personal archives consisting of hundreds of hours of footage stored 
on their digital hard drives, as was the case in For Sama (2019) and 5 Broken 
Cameras (2011) (discussed in Chapter 1). Their purpose may be creative as well 
as evidential. To distinguish the archival strategies in this chapter from more 
general use of archival evidence, it is helpful to invoke Jaime Baron’s emphasis 
on the ‘foundness’ of found footage, consisting of a perception that the images 
come from another time and context of use: ‘this sense of “foundness” is integral 
to the experience of the archive effect’.10 In this reading, a film like For Sama, at 
least at the time of its release, is not primarily perceived as archival although this 
may change over time. In this respect, an additional factor suggested by Adrian 
Danks – ‘whether or to what extent the footage’s recontextualised materiality 
is recognised or insisted on’ – serves to narrow the field of what I am talking 
about.11
Precursors of this strategy are scattered through film history. Radical 
possibilities for repurposing archival footage were shown by 1920s Soviet 
filmmakers in their use of dialectical montage. For example, Esfir Shub’s The Fall 
of the Romanov Dynasty (1927) subverts the intended meanings and ideological 
functions of Western and Russian imperial news footage which it appropriates 
to narrate the ‘glorious’ birth of the Soviet Union, creating new connections by 
juxtaposing disparate fragments. Marginalized groups have also used found 
footage to uncover and inject new meanings into dominant texts, a strategy that, 
according to Paul Arthur, can be traced back to the 1960s, expressing a ‘desire 
to reformulate tropes of historical narrative’ and undertake a ‘micro-political 
critique of historical exclusion or distortion’.12
By redefining the concept of creation, these practices provoke questions about 
boundaries between the appropriated document and its creative interpretation: 
where does one end and the other begin? One answer to this lies in what Baron 
calls ‘intentional disparity’, since filmmakers are incorporating the footage in 
ways unlikely to have been anticipated by the original producers. Even if the 
original producers’ intentions are unknown, viewers reach ‘probable conclusions’ 
about the found footage’s intended context of use and reception, which shape 
how we understand its recontextualization.13 The degree of intentional disparity 
varies, ranging from very high at one end of the spectrum, as we will see in Three 
Disappearances and Silvered Water, to fairly low, when the footage’s original 
purpose does not appear to conflict with its purpose in the film. However, 
there is always some discrepancy between the ‘intentions’ of the found footage 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
194
and those of filmmakers appropriating it; whenever objects enter an archive or 
another context of use, they are ‘inherently decontextualized’, that is, ‘detached 
from the conditions and situations in which they were produced’.14 As Nicolas 
Bourriaud says, ‘To use an object is necessarily to interpret it . . . We never read a 
book the way its author would like us to.’15
In 2001, Bourriaud adopted the term postproduction for a contemporary 
trend of making artworks from pre-existing cultural products.16 Although he 
describes mostly Western artworks, this chapter’s case study films use similar 
tactics in different contexts. Postproduction is about ‘inventing protocols of use’, 
creating original pathways through pre-existing materials and reassembling 
them into ‘a new whole’. The artist Marcel Duchamp’s ready-mades are an obvious 
forerunner. The creative use of archives can, further, be linked to techniques 
of collage and assemblage in Cubism, Dada and Surrealism as well as acts of 
détournement (subversions of a pre-existing work’s intended meaning or usage) 
advocated by the avant-garde collective Situationist International.17 The strategy 
has also been influenced by cultures of sampling and remixing, exemplified for 
Bourriaud by the DJ and computer programmer, ‘both of whom have the task of 
selecting cultural objects and inserting them into new contexts’.18 Furthermore, 
the Internet has generated and given access to new archives, including those 
hosted on social media platforms, and has led to widespread practices of 
repurposing known as mash-ups.
As seen in the Iranian Green Movement and ‘Arab Spring’, user-generated 
videos on social media form a vast content library documenting crisis from 
many perspectives. As micronarratives of events, they expand the arena of the 
visible and what we count as historical. Unlike traditional archives, anyone can 
post items for anyone else to access. On the one hand, these electronic archives 
are treasure troves of material; on the other, their sheer volume is a nightmare 
to sift through. In 2020, it was reported that over 500 hours of video were being 
uploaded to YouTube every minute.19 YouTube has been hailed as ‘a public, 
complex and heterogeneous digital archive of recorded virtual memories’.20 
However, archives are not just deposits of live memories; they are better 
understood as external supplements to memory, helping to retell the past in the 
present. As Derrida reminds us, ‘The archive . . . will never be either memory 
or anamnesis as spontaneous, alive and internal experience. On the contrary: 
the archive takes place at the place of originary and structural breakdown of 
the said memory.’21 Moreover, not everything is shared online, for numerous 
reasons, among them security risks and Internet speed. Zaheer Omareen, a 
Syrian filmmaker, told me that he knew several activists afraid to upload their 

Archival Strategies
195
videos because their faces were visible, compromising their safety while still in 
Syria.22 Many terabytes of recordings remain tucked away on people’s hard drives 
or mobile phones.
Electronic archives such as YouTube have their own curating practices 
shaped by powerful interests, including market forces, that affect search engine 
results and access to content. Search results are ranked according to matches 
between search terms and uploaders’ textual descriptors of content, and large 
corporations tag themselves to their uploaded videos to ensure their visibility.23 
Descriptors have variable precision; as anyone who has performed a Google 
search in different languages will know, each search turns up different results. 
Moreover, videos are frequently removed by tech companies for breaches of 
copyright and community service guidelines. As Baron writes, ‘On the Internet, 
things appear and disappear all the time.’24 So far, Syria is the most documented 
conflict, yet it, too, may become an empty record. Since 2017, under pressure 
from the US-led coalition fighting ISIS in Iraq and Syria, social media giants 
have been algorithmically suppressing ‘extremist’ content.25 Numerous videos 
have been deleted, including substantial footage from early peaceful protests, 
along with videos of human rights violations that conflict monitors consider 
valuable documents for future justice. Although some content has been restored 
through appeals to YouTube, other deleted videos may be lost forever as many 
videographers have been displaced or killed in the conflict.26 It is not only the 
Syrian crisis that is at stake. Tech companies are setting rules about which 
‘images should be passed to future generations’ and which should be consigned 
to oblivion, thus shaping our memory of events.27 This is contrary to the 
perception, fostered by tech companies themselves, of social media platforms as 
a creative commons, and certainly at odds with people risking their lives to film 
and upload images.
Even if videos have been uploaded online for public consumption, often 
anonymously and without remuneration, recirculating them still raises legal and 
ethical challenges. Many filmmakers raid electronic archives without seeking 
permissions. As Joshka Wessels recounts, videographers don’t appear to have 
any rights when their uploaded YouTube footage is recontextualized without 
consent by other parties who, in turn, justify their actions by saying it was 
impossible to contact the anonymous creators.28 Amid wider concerns about 
ownership of this material, YouTube footage from the Syrian crisis has become 
the site of bitter conflicts over copyright, evoking the post-Marxist critique of 
the exploitation of digital labour.29 According to this interpretation, exploiting 
and editing others’ footage for free, without consent or financial rights, while 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
196
enjoying all the reputational value and sales profits oneself is ‘purely extractive’ 
behaviour.30 It becomes particularly ethically complex when the work is a record 
of other people’s suffering. For Abounaddara, a largely anonymous filmmaking 
collective from Syria, what is at stake here is the appropriation of these images 
in ways that deprive Syrians of dignity, transforming them from revolutionaries 
into victims that merely arouse ‘sorrow or disgust’; it denies them ‘the right to 
represent the crimes committed against them in a way that is compatible with 
their own political project’.31
Jon Dovey argues that there should be at least an implicit contract between 
image-makers and filmmakers who use their content – for instance, proper 
credits and arrangements for image-makers to share benefits and rewards.32 In 
another vein, the collective Pad.ma offers an ethical approach that transcends 
legal claims of copyright and ‘narrow ideas’ of authorship by recommending 
that we treat archives with ‘Intellectual Propriety’ rather than as ‘Property’.33 
Intellectual propriety acknowledges that archivists are entrusted with other 
peoples’ memories and transmit public knowledge. It extends care and 
responsibility in preservation methods to the context and content of archival 
documents. In the case studies, we will see how this ethics of care plays out 
in different ways: one fundamental concern is to safeguard the security and 
dignity of people appearing in the videos, especially given that some of them 
may be dead or still living in conflict zones; another is political agency over the 
historical narrative.
Online videos have been curated into archival projects by activists striving 
to build their own permanent record of testimonial images, rather than leaving 
them to the mercy of tech companies, algorithms or governments that might 
destroy them or distort the historical record. For example, Syrian Archive gathers 
and curates materials from elsewhere on the Internet on its own server; it is 
dedicated to mass-archiving, verifying, annotating and publicly storing evidence 
for accountability and justice – although without guarantees that it will be used 
in court – as well as counteracting revisionist or simplified narratives.34 Other 
collectives commemorate creative resistance, such as Creative Memory of the 
Syrian Revolution which archives Syrian artworks in the name of solidarity with 
the Syrian people,35 or Mosireen whose 858: An Archive of Resistance compiles 
footage from the Egyptian Revolution as a resource for future uprisings. Unlike 
Syrian Archive, 858 does not seek to document crimes and appeal to an absent 
law; rather, its aim is ‘narrating our version of the story’.36
In contrast to these collective endeavours, the feature-length films that form 
this chapter’s case studies belong to an authorial cinema. They are made by 

Archival Strategies
197
filmmakers, not necessarily activists, who imprint their distinctive vision and 
personality on the material. They work in a different country from the subject 
matter they are dealing with, and their use of archival strategies is facilitated by 
the fact that they do not require on-location production. As Fedda, director of 
Ayouni, explains, the risks she faces are lower than those of people witnessing 
on the ground and so she sees her role as amplifying their voices.37 Whereas 
‘witnessing’ videos capture the immediacy of unfolding events, the feature films 
that appropriate them take a broader view, curating the sounds and images 
to construct a memory of these conflicts that will endure in their aftermath. 
Yet by drawing on archives, films are conditioned by their limits. For example, 
Ali Samadi Ahadi’s The Green Wave, whose use of animation was discussed in 
Chapter 3, also uses social media archives and was shaped by what was available 
on the Internet. Despite the fact that Iran has one of the world’s most active 
social media populations, text-based activities such as blogging and tweeting 
are more prevalent there than video-uploading due to the government’s periodic 
blocking of YouTube (including during the 2009 protests) and speed-limiting of 
the Internet. As a result, Samadi’s team had limited video material, a constraint 
that led them to use animation as a creative strategy to bring to life character-
driven stories based on blog entries. As well as extending the lifespan of materials 
that may not endure on the Internet, films such as this perform a vital service of 
cultural translation, since they give visibility to documents that might otherwise 
be invisible to outside audiences unlikely to find this footage themselves or 
watch it without subtitles.
Mohammed Ali Atassi has argued that videographers and filmmakers ‘belong 
to two different worlds’ and that, by extension, film theory’s tools are not meant 
for analysing videos on the Internet.38 Although I respect the grounds on which 
he makes this claim – namely, that videographers and filmmakers are working in 
different contexts – I take a different perspective. Digital video is often claimed 
to be ‘something else’, even if it is ‘descended’ from film and contains cinematic 
layers in its shots.39 At the same time, the rise of newer technologies has inspired 
the rethinking of cinema. Intermediality, the study of relations between different 
media, suggests that cinema, along with any other medium, has always been 
mixed and impure. Although known (erroneously) as a theorist of cinematic 
specificity, André Bazin recognized this in his essay ‘In Defense of Mixed 
Cinema’ (1951).40 Shifting media technologies and aesthetic practices have 
exposed cinema to change throughout its history, making it evolve and adapt 
into new forms. Claims for a ‘historical break’ return us to an essentialist position 
of media purity rather than this more historicist view of media impurity.41 The 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
198
use of archival footage is itself a hybrid and impure strategy in which contents 
of newer media are found in an older one, or vice versa. We can see this in 
The Green Wave, which is composed of many different media, as well as in this 
chapter’s case studies.
Another way of telling: The Three Disappearances of  
Soad Hosni
The Egyptian film star Soad Hosni died in 2001 after falling from a London 
high-rise apartment in what were rumoured to be suspicious circumstances. The 
Three Disappearances of Soad Hosni is a fiction film constructed from VHS clips 
from her long career, which spanned from 1959 to 1991. Its Lebanese director, 
Rania Stephan, physically procured videotapes of Hosni’s entire oeuvre, then 
digitized them. Although several of Hosni’s films have a digital afterlife on 
YouTube, older VHS technology was the only way of salvaging her complete 
body of work and many original negatives in Egypt’s National Film Archives 
have been lost or destroyed due to ‘inadequate storage facilities and two major 
fires’.42 The materiality of media becomes tangible when they are duplicated 
and reformatted, as they are in movies with archival footage, resulting in loss 
of resolution. Laura Marks suggests that archival fragments retain the trace of 
their material history, like the train of a lady’s gown that ‘sweeps up and carries 
along debris as she passes’.43 In Three Disappearances, the ageing VHS images are 
fuzzy, streaked with tracking lines and static resulting from damage to magnetic 
tapes. White spots, squiggles and colour splodges inherited from original film 
negatives further add to their textures, lovingly preserved in Stephan’s movie, 
as she remarks: ‘Everything comes from VHS . . . every breath, phrase, image, 
scratch, the music; everything comes from the body of films of Soad Hosni.’44 Her 
film makes expressive use of the ‘poor’ image, part of a longer history of archival 
strategies in experimental cinema; it also forms a precursor to appropriation of 
online archives in films such as Silvered Water, as we will see.
Three Disappearances was created entirely in postproduction, a method 
adopted partly because of Stephan’s artistic training but also, she says, as ‘an 
aesthetic and moral choice’ not to submit to production and permit procedures.45 
She works ‘under the radar’ in a small-scale, artisanal way that gives her creative 
freedom, although it comes with financial and other constraints. In Lebanon, 
her work has largely been shown in galleries, which are exempt from screening 
permits, and it has been exhibited in museums and in some theatres worldwide. 

Archival Strategies
199
Stephan calls herself ‘a sculptor of images’.46 The images are ‘matter’ that she works 
with, and ideas are shaped ‘through the materiality of the images’ in the editing 
process. ‘It’s not like I sit down and wait for the idea to come,’ she told me. ‘You 
have to go inside the image and feel it.’47 For her, editing is not merely a technical 
process or rational construction of story, it is also a sensual and physical relation: 
‘When you edit you experience the image over again. It’s completely tactile – the 
way you sit in front of it, the way you receive it through your eyes, your ears . . . 
Sometimes I edit without thinking. It’s about how images resonate with each 
other, the underground layers that come through.’48 This applies to Panoptic, a 
film that Stephan edited (discussed in Chapter 4), as well as her own films in 
which sound and image are lent equal importance. ‘I often edit with my ears’, 
she says.49 While inspired by experimental cinema, her use of sound is similar to 
that of a DJ, ‘copying and pasting together loops of sound’.50 She constructs her 
soundtrack from existing dialogue and music, building new scenes from extracts 
and layering together sounds and images from different films.
In Three Disappearances, Stephan ‘reshuffles’ Hosni’s body of work into a new 
fiction.51 It is structured as a flashback of Hosni’s life. In a prologue, Hosni lies on 
an analyst’s couch, trying to remember her past. ‘A tragedy in three acts’ follows, 
consisting of a montage of clips from her different film roles that unfold her 
memories and dreams. Stephan’s editing turns Egyptian popular cinema into 
a dream-like avant-garde work reminiscent of surrealist practices. In Act One, 
Soad is a young actress whose sensuality embodies the secular spirit of pan-
Arab nationalism; she is a self-declared ‘child of the [1952] revolution’. In the 
second act, she undergoes one marriage after another, as she did in real life. By 
Act Three, she is a mature actress. The dream has turned into a nightmare, filled 
with tears, divorce, death and torture, the trauma of these events enhanced by 
video static that forms part of the editing rhythm. Here, Hosni dreams of falling 
from a construction site and finally identifies her own dead body at a morgue. 
Principles of continuity editing, such as eyeline match, are used to join together 
and construct a story from disparate clips.
The film recounts not just Hosni’s life, but also Egypt’s modern political and 
cultural history. Tonally, it moves from the optimism of pan-Arab nationalism, 
which peaked in the 1960s, a time when social change seemed a real possibility, 
to the dark years of Mubarak’s brutal dictatorship (1981–2011). The structure 
reflects the historical vantage-point from which Stephan made the film; it was 
completed in early 2011, coincidentally just as the Egyptian Revolution started 
and protesters were singing Hosni’s song ‘I’m going down to the square’. It 
starts portentously with footage of the Cairo fires on 26 January 1952 which 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
200
were anti-British protests that have been likened to the 25 January 2011 ‘Day 
of Rage’ against police brutality.52 These political events can be referenced in 
Three Disappearances precisely because it is built from popular clips: cultural 
artefacts that are ‘materializations’53 of historical and ideological narratives. The 
film charts Egyptian cinema’s golden age and its decline, hastened by removal 
of state support for the industry which soon after lost its dominance of Arab 
popular culture to regional satellite TV networks.
In contemporary archival film practices, Baron identifies ‘a desire to find and 
“collect” the contingent synchronicities that occur across sources previously 
unrelated to one another’.54 Three Disappearances assembles similar gestures 
and actions from Hosni’s films, revealing textual and cultural patterns. In one 
sequence, drawing on snippets from Al-Karnak (1975) where Hosni plays a 
student political activist who undergoes torture, state brutality and domestic 
violence are juxtaposed. This lends the film to an allegorical reading, like the 
one proposed by Catherine Russell, centring around Hosni’s fall in which she 
embodies both the failure of utopian ideals and the fading of a female star, 
valued only for her appearance and subject to ‘the obsolescence intrinsic to 
commodity capitalism’.55 However, Three Disappearances is open to many 
different interpretations. It is also, as I have suggested, another way of telling 
Egypt’s modern history. Due to present-day censorship, Hosni’s early films 
cannot be shown in their entirety on Egyptian television: ‘even a kiss is now 
forbidden’.56 As Bourriaud remarks, art has an ability ‘to give shape and weight 
to . . . what is disappearing before our eyes’.57 Through its archival fragments, 
Three Disappearances renders visible these ‘disappearances’ that have profoundly 
altered the media and political landscape during Hosni’s career.
Preserving the stories of the multitude: Silvered Water,  
Syria Self-Portrait
Silvered Water, Syria Self-Portrait contains YouTube videos shot on mobile phones 
by anonymous videomakers during the early years of the Syrian revolution 
and war, footage taken by Wiam Simav Bedirxan, an amateur Syrian-Kurdish 
filmmaker from the besieged city of Homs, and an exchange of letters between 
her and her co-director Ossama Mohammed. In the credits, Mohammed 
acknowledges the film’s collective authorship, attributing it to ‘1001 Syrians, 
Wiam Bedirxan and me’. He selects and arranges this material to relay stories 
within stories, Thousand and One Nights-style, told by diverse actors – activists, 

Archival Strategies
201
armed rebels, jihadis, regime soldiers and torturers – who filmed the images. A 
veteran filmmaker previously known for his poetic experimental cinema made 
under Syria’s National Film Organisation, Mohammed left Syria for France in 
May 2011, believing his life was in danger after protesting against the regime’s 
detention of activists. Silvered Water was inspired by the YouTube videos he saw 
online, ‘Watching from far away, I had the feeling that my internal time had 
become corrupt. I wanted to save myself and my humanity.’58 The strategy of using 
online archives enabled Mohammed to overcome the constraints of distance and 
exile. Maisoun Assad, another Syrian exile in Paris, helped him find the footage 
online and later became the film’s editor. The film’s subtitle, Syria Self-Portrait, 
epitomizes its archival strategy: assembling a multitude of user-generated videos 
that together constitute a ‘self-portrait’ of Syrians’ collective suffering.
In his voice-over, Mohammed contemplates the YouTube videos from afar, 
making personal associations. For him, ‘Syria’s 2011 revolution was a revolution 
of images’, heralding a new kind of cinema liberated from standard conventions 
of quality and artistic unity.59 He offers a poetic reading of this amateur footage, 
as Lebanese artists Ali Cherri and Rabih Mroué have also done in their work.60 
However, more than any other film about the Syrian crisis, Silvered Water has 
attracted severe criticism. Since an emphasis on graphic violence contributes to 
local and international powers’ sensationalist narratives of the Syrian conflict 
as sectarian and barbaric,61 Silvered Water has, firstly, been lambasted from this 
perspective. Its graphic imagery has been called Orientalist, even judged as such 
merely by its references to The Thousand and One Nights, and unfavourably 
contrasted with Abounaddara’s ethical practice of avoiding direct depictions of 
violence. Abounaddara themselves have raised questions about the dignity of 
the people who appear in the videos.62 Secondly, critics have contested Silvered 
Water’s interpretation of the mobile phone videos as a new form of cinema, 
arguing that this footage’s purpose was simply to document, without any 
cinematic or expressive purpose.63 Thirdly, although Mohammed credits the film 
to ‘1001 Syrians’, it has been argued that his voice-over dominates the footage 
and ‘paradoxically silences the voices of the Syrians that Mohammed himself 
wishes so much to be heard’.64 This lays the film open to charges of extractive 
labour discussed earlier: the exploitation of amateur footage as ‘raw material’ 
by a professional filmmaker not responsible for its production who benefits by 
turning it into an artistic commodity.65
While these arguments have gained traction among some critics, I want 
to show how Mohammed’s approach shares some common ground with 
the amateur creators and activates this footage’s long-term significance. As 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
202
emphasized earlier, when archival fragments are repurposed in a film, they 
are recontextualized. Removed from their original context, the videos in 
Silvered Water are layered with subjective associations and suffused with poetic 
ambiguity. Their original ‘intentions’, however, can be perceived beneath, like 
a palimpsest.66 For example, in one of many videos showing the aftermath 
of an attack, the camera phone is dropped in the chaos, capturing sounds of 
screaming and partial glimpses of skin and fabric, a person lying on the ground 
and trails of blood. We have just been jolted into the embodied experience of a 
terrified Syrian protestor, filming their surroundings at that instant. Although 
the unsteady, pixelated images result from the urgency under which they were 
recorded and are probably not intended by the filmer as expressive qualities, it is 
precisely these that interest Mohammed as signs of a new cinema and that invite 
us, as viewers, to reconsider the footage. Some images are repeated or slowed 
down, with the original sound removed and the director’s voice-over laid over 
them – established techniques in archival movies that emphasize intentional 
disparity, often to reveal hidden subtexts.67 Despite their differing outlooks and 
backgrounds, Mohammed finds common cause with the videographers since 
his purpose, too, is to commemorate martyrs and preserve moments for others 
to see, although by a different route.
In the videos, many people, unknown to each other, documented their 
experiences in an uncoordinated manner and uploaded their footage online. 
In Silvered Water, we obtain a ‘god’s eye view’68 of this multitude: their stories 
are gathered together in a mosaic structure, like The Thousand and One Nights. 
The film itself acts as an archive, creating not a single story but a multi-strand 
narrative of that time. Mohammed told me that the first YouTube video he 
watched – of a ‘“Teenager boy” in the back of a pickup car, bending over the body 
of his father, raising his head to the sky and sobbing’ – was what prompted him 
to make the film.69 This video forms one of many recurring images, along with 
that of a newborn baby having its umbilical cord cut and a teenager in prison, 
one of several schoolboys from Dera’a arrested for writing anti-regime graffiti 
whose brutal treatment in custody was a catalyst of the revolution. A signifier 
of birth, the newborn baby implies causal links between stories. As Mohammed 
puts it, ‘The story of the boy who got arrested gave birth to demonstrations 
[which] gave birth to a new cinema and to the anonymous filmmaker. The 
first demonstration caused the first massacre [which] causes a funeral . . . and 
gives birth to the rebellion of the first soldier, Spartacus.’70 Although not a linear 
timeline, Silvered Water’s sequencing reflects the cycle of protests, outrage and 
grief in video content uploaded by the Syrian opposition: street demonstrations, 

Archival Strategies
203
followed by funerals, more demonstrations, bombings and other war crimes. 
‘Spartacus’, the video of soldier Walid Qashami announcing his defection 
from the regime army, is important to the revolution’s chronology since he 
was the first army defector (he later disappeared in 2013 and is still missing). 
Speaking to camera, he holds up his military ID in defiance of the regime and 
testifies how he was ordered to fire on peaceful protestors under the pretext 
that they were an armed gang, setting the pattern for many defector videos that 
followed. Combining oppositional footage with videos by regime agents, who 
recorded themselves carrying out atrocities or at leisure, Silvered Water offers 
prismatic micro-histories of the conflict that differ from either official regime 
or international media coverage. Contrary to claims about the film’s attempted 
appeal to Western audiences, this structure is only apparent to those familiar 
with the events or who have studied them closely.
The selected footage reveals patterns that the filmmakers-turned-curator has 
found within the YouTube archive, establishing their own coherence on these 
Figure 8.1  A mosaic composition of YouTube clips presents stories of the multitude 
during the early years of the Syrian revolution and war, including a video by the first 
Syrian army defector, Walid Qashami. Silvered Water, Syria Self-Portrait directed by 
Ossama Mohammed and Wiam Simav Bedirxan © Les Films d’ici and Proaction Film 
2014. All Rights Reserved.

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
204
previously unrelated fragments. As in Three Disappearances, the patterns express 
synchronicities inconceivable by the image-makers themselves, including 
patterns of human behaviour. For example, in one sequence, people poignantly 
attempt to bring home dead bodies lying on the street by pulling them in with 
a rope, since it is too dangerous to venture out themselves – an effort to bestow 
dignity with last rites. As Baron mentions, digital archives and search engines 
have created unprecedented opportunities for filmmakers to aggregate hundreds 
of unrelated videos into a ‘chorus’ of voices speaking of human pluralities.71 It is 
precisely this chorus that Silvered Water evokes with its ‘1001’ references.
Mohammed sought ways ‘to compose a character of the anonymous image-
maker’ who is ‘the “Hero of this time”’.72 However, he says, ‘it was not easy to 
build a cinematic personage, from and with huge numbers of defiant images of 
Syria, or tragic Syria’.73 Amidst the chorus, the voice of the opera singer Nouma 
Omran can be heard humming and sighing on the soundtrack. Mohammed 
regards her as the film’s ‘hidden narrator’, a Scheherazade figure whose voice 
later ‘merges and becomes one with that of Simav’; in a powerful sequence, 
Nouma’s lyrics and Simav’s voice-over echo each other. Credited as co-director, 
Simav is introduced around a third of the way through the film. She personifies 
the anonymous filmmaker. The film’s title derives from her name, meaning 
‘silver water’ in Kurdish; it also alludes to silver nitrate, which formed the 
basis of film stock. Simav, then, becomes the storyteller. The film recalls how 
Mohammed and Simav met online. ‘Are you Ossama Mohammed?’ she asks. ‘If 
your camera were here in Homs, what would you have captured?’ ‘Everything’, 
he answers. Simav travels 500 miles to obtain a camera, then smuggles it back 
to Homs. Her footage has been regarded as commissioned footage, since ‘the 
encounter between the two allowed Mohammed to have eyes and hands in Syria 
that he could, to some extent, control from a distance’.74 It is certainly true that 
he originated cinematic devices such as their exchange of letters (conducted, 
like Mohammed’s voice-over, in poetic, standard Arabic) but, although Simav 
had no previous experience of filmmaking, her footage makes startling creative 
choices that distinguish it from the rest of the movie. She narrates the story of 
besieged Homs and the school that she opens, and accompanies a small boy, 
Omar, gathering roses for his father’s grave – a beautiful act that recomposes 
the film’s painful world. If anything, her footage has even more of a collecting 
tendency than Mohammed’s selection of YouTube videos. What she collects are 
heart-rending images of starving, wounded cats and dead children – all innocent 
victims of regime bombings.75 If the world doesn’t care about Syrian people’s 
suffering, these sequences seem to say, maybe it will care about cats.

Archival Strategies
205
As Derrida noted, death haunts the archive. In Silvered Water, we look at 
these ‘1001’ stories, ‘each a metonymic fragment’76 of the larger archive from 
which they came, and see lives lost and destroyed, people who may now be 
dead, victims of a genocide who can never be brought back. Silvered Water 
is haunted by the pathos of this loss, even as it tries to preserve the victims’ 
memory in film. It recalls what Bazin calls ‘the mummy complex’ implicit in 
film and photography; the ‘desire to preserve objects against the ravages of 
time’ is a defence against death, compelled by the irrational belief that we can.77 
Several years after the revolution, many of these videos have disappeared from 
the Internet, for reasons discussed earlier. With its archival strategy, Silvered 
Water has accrued a historical value, since it enables these stories to be replayed 
in a thoughtful manner. The significance of this footage has also changed 
over time, from documenting creative resistance to being a record of the past, 
perhaps a pledge of justice for the future. As Enrico De Angelis remarks, for 
the videographers, ‘[t]he photographic act becomes the last resource against 
the danger of oblivion’ which would erase the memory of the victims forever.78 
This is what Mohammed recognizes when he claims that ‘aesthetic and ethical 
criteria are the same; Syrians were resisting violence with beauty. The criterion 
of beauty is to rescue the tale of the victim from oblivion. Beauty is when you 
retain justice somewhere, even if this somewhere is in the future.’79
­Intimate access to memories of the disappeared: Ayouni
In the documentary Ayouni, the protagonists are the lovers Bassel and Noura 
and siblings Paolo and Machi. Bassel Khartabil Safadi, a Syrian open-source 
software developer and activist who established Creative Commons Syria, was 
disappeared by the Syrian regime in 2015. Father Paolo Dall’Oglio, an Italian 
Jesuit priest, lived for over thirty years in Syria, where he turned the Deir Mar 
Musa monastery into a centre for interfaith dialogue. After his expulsion by 
the Syrian government in 2012, he smuggled himself back into the country 
to negotiate hostages’ release in Raqqa, where he himself was kidnapped, 
presumably by ISIS, in 2013. Ayouni follows Noura and Machi in their search for 
their missing loved ones, giving the disappeared voice and visibility through its 
archival strategies.
Ayouni’s British-Palestinian director, Yasmin Fedda, did not set out to make 
a documentary about enforced disappearance. She had filmed with Paolo 
previously, between 2004 and 2010, then began filming him again when he 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
206
became active in the Syrian Revolution; his kidnapping dramatically changed 
her film’s course. Meeting many Syrians who knew people who had disappeared 
led her to understand that forcible disappearance was being used as a systematic 
tactic, in the vast majority of cases by the regime.80 As mentioned in previous 
chapters, it has also occurred in Lebanon, Egypt and Iran. An international crime 
deployed in many contexts over the last century, enforced disappearance is an 
attempt to make people vanish without a trace and silence them, leaving relatives 
in a painful state of uncertainty about their loved ones’ fate and whereabouts, 
unsure if they are alive or dead. In Syria, as elsewhere, activists are often the 
targets, particularly those who stand up for free speech.
What makes disappearance peculiar as a crime also poses a problem for 
filmmaking: how does one resurrect bodies that are absent and invisible, and 
convey the void of forcible disappearance to audiences? Ayouni has parallels 
with films from Argentina and Chile addressing enforced disappearance. There 
is no closure as such, since people are still missing and families continue to 
seek justice. But those films are mainly about the medium to long-term past.81 
‘There’s a passage of time and a different kind of reflection,’ says Fedda. In Syria, 
‘we’re still in the middle of it . . . People are still being detained and disappeared’.82 
So in Ayouni reflection can only be ‘very close to the moment’.83 As we will see, 
the film works creatively within these constraints by using its archival footage to 
narrate the story in the present tense.
One of Fedda’s aims was to try to understand forcible disappearance ‘in an 
intimate way, rather than a statistical way [that just] talks about it as a crime. It 
is a crime, but [I wanted] to go behind what happens.’84 Although she personally 
knew Paolo and Bassel, it was only later that she met Machi and Noura. Through 
meeting them, she came to grasp the phenomenon through relationships:
When I understood that was our key to unlock it, I also understood that was 
how we needed to build the film. And I also realized that I had my own footage 
of Paolo that I’d filmed from the past [and] I had access to Bassel and Noura’s 
footage that their friends had filmed and that they had filmed [which] could 
bring the disappeared, Bassel and Paolo, to life in their own voices. We could 
create a presence through our edit, so that we live with them a little bit. So that 
was our way to bring that presence back.85
Roughly half of Ayouni is composed of different types of found footage (in 
addition to Bassel and Noura’s personal archives, this includes YouTube videos 
of the revolution and television archive material), while the other half is shot 
by Fedda herself. While, as high-profile activists, both Paolo and Bassel had 

Archival Strategies
207
become global icons, Ayouni remembers them as people known and loved by 
their closest ones. Fedda attempts to use the footage to tell her protagonists’ 
story ‘through their eyes’, in the present tense, eliminating voice-over which, as 
seen in Silvered Water, often imposes other meanings; instead, the film retains 
the original audio-visual qualities, as a way of giving back ‘voice’ to the images.
Bassel and Noura’s personal archives can be classified as ‘home mode’ records, 
in the sense that they were, like home movies, intended for private rather than 
public communication.86 Filmed by themselves or their friends, the footage 
contains a special intimacy, as in a cafe scene when they have just got engaged. 
Bassel and Noura are then at their closest and happiest, laughing and joking 
about when they first met. They are even sharing the same chair; they couldn’t 
be closer. As Fedda says, these moments transport viewers into their lives, 
enabling them somehow to relive what the lovers were feeling.87 Like footage 
of the uprisings uploaded to YouTube, they narrate from the micro-historical 
perspectives of people inside these events. But while most of those YouTube 
videos are intended for public consumption and document public events, home 
mode activities are private, intimate and personal, filmed in domestic and interior 
spaces. Increasingly, ‘with the advent of analog video and then digital cameras, 
moments that previously might not have been preserved on film . . . are now 
recorded and retained’, among them intimate occasions and moments when the 
filmer records themselves alone.88 This proliferation in the recording of private 
Figure  8.2  Bassel and Noura’s personal archives tell their story through their 
perspective to foster a more intimate understanding of forcible disappearance. Ayouni 
directed by Yasmin Fedda © Banyak Films and Hakawati 2020. All Rights Reserved.

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
208
lives is what enables present-tense narration in Ayouni and what distinguishes 
it from many previous documentaries about enforced disappearance that are 
retrospective accounts of what happened. As Fedda says, we are now in a unique 
position compared to over thirty years ago when people were not filming as 
much – access to personal video archives is ‘such an opportunity to tell those 
stories more fully or in a different way, not only by someone explaining to us but 
by feeling it with them’.89
These personal archives come with further ethical challenges intensified by 
the currency of events, posing this question for Fedda: ‘How do I make sure 
people are safe when I put this out?’90 As she did for Queens of Syria (discussed 
in Chapter 7) she negotiated with individuals involved before making the work 
public, because of potential repercussions: ‘As a filmmaker it’s really important 
to constantly have those conversations, that you’re clear with everyone what 
you’re doing,’ she stresses.91 The use of other people’s private communications 
in a film has distinct ethical implications since it transfers artefacts from a 
private to a public context of reception for which they were never intended.92 
For example, the day after her engagement party, Noura filmed herself wearing 
her engagement ring, curled up alone on her bed at home. This intimate video, 
meant for Bassel’s eyes only, gives us a sense of entering a private moment. 
Found in a hard drive that Fedda obtained from Noura, it was used with her 
permission.
Watching Ayouni is like jacking into other people’s memories, reminiscent 
of science-fiction films such as Mnemophrenia (2019) or Strange Days (1995) 
where characters access recorded memories via a headset. In this case, there is 
no headset – just the film itself. As Fedda suggests, filmmaking is a ‘memory-
making machine’ for events we have not experienced first-hand.93 Although she 
was not there when footage of Bassel and Noura was shot, watching it repeatedly 
during the edit turned it into, not a lived memory exactly, but something familiar 
that acts like a memory:
[W]orking with footage shot by someone else, actually Bassel himself, it’s really 
strange watching it again and again because you feel so present, yet you’re not . . . 
I mean, when I watched that material, I could feel Bassel there, I could feel Paolo 
there. I understood that, sometimes, there are just these tiny fragments, that 
little clip we had of someone, [that] gave us something about these people’s lives 
and voices.94
­Although it was not Fedda’s intention, Ayouni has become a memory for Noura, 
preserving her relationship with Bassel.95 As Ghani writes, ‘A film archive is . . . 

Archival Strategies
209
full of flickering images of things and people long lost.’96 Ayouni uses its archival 
footage to evoke memory, as when Noura is shown alone in the kitchen, waiting 
for a pan of water to boil, and smoking on the balcony. Like a fleeting memory, 
a brief snippet of the footage of Bassel in the café materializes, then vanishes, 
replaced by a black screen; as viewers, we, too, are made to feel loss, as Bassel is 
taken away from us.
Scenes like this activate the metaphoric potential of the film’s title. Literally 
meaning ‘my eyes’ in Arabic, ayouni is also a term of endearment between 
lovers and siblings. Bassel, the beloved, disappears from Noura’s vision. On a 
black screen, the words of a poem by Dunya Mikhail appear, read in Fedda’s 
off-screen voice: ‘If the world were flat/like a flying carpet, our sorrow/would 
have a beginning and an end.’ Similar to Middle Eastern oral storytelling, where 
poetry is inserted into prose narrative,97 Ayouni is punctuated by intervals of 
poetry to create a respite from the stories and pause for reflection upon their 
meaning.98 But while poetry is often an indirect mode of telling, Iraqi-American 
poet Mikhail’s work was chosen for Ayouni because of its straightforwardness.99 
It offers a lucid way of imagining what it is like to lose someone through its 
simple, cosmic metaphors.100
While archive footage, along with poetry, forms a creative solution to the 
problem of representing disappearance, reliance upon it also becomes a 
constraint. Through an interview that Noura gives, we learn that she and Bassel 
got married in prison. The film does not show us their secret wedding nor does it 
tell us that Noura visited Bassel in prison regularly for two years before he finally 
disappeared in 2015. The complex circumstances behind this were that Bassel 
was initially disappeared, then reappeared in a civilian prison, managing to get 
word out to his family via another prisoner.101 There, Noura was able to visit him, 
both as a human rights lawyer specializing in political prisoner detention and as 
his partner. As part of the #FreeBassel campaign, Noura took letters to Bassel 
and posted his replies online. Despite trying out experiments with filming their 
letters, these events were eventually excluded from the film because they did not 
‘fit’ its emotional arc, the crew were not there to document them and there was 
no archival footage.102 Cinema, documentary filmmaking in particular, is always 
constrained by what can be presented as a counterpart to experience, although 
this can conflict with actual events, since Bassel did not vanish from Noura’s eyes 
in the abrupt and final way that the film suggests.
In one scene in Ayouni, Bassel films a person demonstrating how to shoot 
with a hidden phone camera by inserting it under his shirt, where it acts like 
another ‘eye’ during protests. Part of Bassel’s work involves uploading witness 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
210
footage online to ensure that it is disseminated to the world: ‘Otherwise there’ll 
be massacres happening without anyone knowing about it,’ he says in the film. 
In their different ways, both Bassel and Paolo use their platforms for witnessing, 
evoking another connotation of the word ayouni: ‘seeing’. However, as seen 
in Chapter 1, witnessing is usually carried out by someone there at the time, 
filming and sharing in the hope of bringing about change. This raises questions 
about the value of archival strategies that give access to knowledge after events 
have passed. Does a film like Ayouni ‘position us as belated witnesses’, as one 
audience member asked during a Q&A?103 Fedda answered, ‘Even if you are 
belatedly witnessing, you still are.’104 Not forgetting the disappeared is part of 
the long-term value of films such as Ayouni, which turns private memories 
into public knowledge; for relatives and those who are detained this is an 
important basis for solidarity. Moreover, Fedda believes the film can play a 
role by encouraging people to report disappeared family members (since many 
disappearances go unrecorded) and put pressure on authorities: ‘It’s a very slow, 
long process but if we can plant the seeds for justice and accountability’, families 
may eventually obtain answers to what happened to their loved ones; along with 
legal frameworks, it can be ‘one little piece in that larger struggle.’105 Finally, since 
enforced disappearance is not just a Syrian issue but one with ‘international 
reach and resonance’, this lends the film potential to inspire conversations about 
other histories of the disappeared, and it has been subtitled into seven languages 
for this purpose.106
Conclusion
In this chapter we have seen how archival strategies are driven by contested 
histories and even the threat of the destruction of archives themselves. I have 
argued against the idea of a digital break by emphasizing the character of 
archival strategies, which mix different media. Since archival films are mainly 
created in the edit, they offer ways of working within constraints, such as limited 
access to locations, making them amenable to filmmakers working abroad. 
Through assemblage and mediation of material artefacts, filmmakers can 
construct alternative historical accounts that counter dominant narratives and 
may endure longer than the artefacts themselves. Their archival strategies give 
these artefacts an afterlife, lending them an ongoing power and testimony for 
belated witnessing by new audiences. As this chapter has stressed, especially in 
relation to Ayouni, archival strategies have a value in communicating knowledge 

Archival Strategies
211
after events have passed, since they offer thoughtful reflection on those events 
and can play a part in struggles for justice and accountability.
As Derrida suggests, the archive is not merely a record of the past but an 
undertaking for the future since it poses ‘the question of a response, promise 
and of a responsibility for tomorrow’.107 An ethical responsibility is invested in 
the archive, partly because it is an attempt to battle disappearances of different 
kinds. Further, appropriating materials produced by others and transferring 
them to another context of use require an ethics of care over the dignity, safety 
and political agency of people who appear in them. The films in this chapter 
are conditioned by limits of the archive itself: ‘since it is impossible for every – 
or any – single event to be recorded from every possible angle, there will always 
be missing pieces in the histories we were able to tell’.108 But these films (and 
this book itself) form a collective archive of the times of crisis in which they 
were made.

212

The period following the Green Movement protests in Iran and the ‘Arab Spring’ 
has been a rollercoaster ride of euphoria and despair. Hopes for a better future 
have faded as the situation has worsened economically, politically and socially in 
many parts of the region, manifesting in resurgent dictatorships, civil wars, the 
rise of extremist groups, rampant inflation, high unemployment and the ongoing 
colonization of Palestine. Science-fiction dystopia often extrapolates from 
present tendencies and projects them into the future, acting as ‘the canary in a 
cage . . . warning us of terrible sociopolitical tendencies that could, if continued, 
turn our contemporary world into the iron cages portrayed’.1 As reality overtakes 
fiction, many citizens in the region already have a sense of living in dystopias, 
seemingly making redundant the need to imagine them.
Science fiction, however, is more than a predictive genre; it emerges from 
crisis, being ‘predominantly found in the great whirlpools of history’.2 Moreover, 
as Michael Gordin, Helen Tilley and Gyan Prakash suggest, ‘utopias and dystopias 
are histories of the present’ – practices used by historical actors to understand 
their contemporary environment.3 In this chapter, dystopia designates both 
a sub-genre of science fiction and a perception of unliveable conditions. The 
term comes from the Greek dus-topos, designating ‘a diseased, bad, faulty, or 
unfavourable place’.4 It evokes its apparent opposite, utopia, which has a double 
meaning: both ‘no place’ from the Greek ou-topos, and ‘a good place’, an earthly 
paradise, from the near-identical eu-topos. In their imagining, utopia and dystopia 
are implicated in each other, shown by the ‘dystopian transfiguration’ of utopian 
hopes of the uprisings in subsequent counterrevolutions and repressions.5
Darko Suvin describes science fiction as the art of ‘cognitive estrangement’, ‘a 
creative approach’ that dynamically transforms the author’s environment, using 
‘imagination as a means of understanding the tendencies latent in reality’.6 It 
creates an alternate reality that is a cousin of the one in which we are living. 
Totalitarian states are a staple of dystopian fiction, including classics such as We 
­9
Sci-fi dystopia

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
214
(1924), 1984 (1949) and The Handmaid’s Tale (1985); the popularity of the latter 
soared in the United States after Donald Trump’s election in 2016, indicating 
the topic’s wider salience. With its themes of thought control, surveillance and 
rewriting the past, 1984 exemplifies the genre’s preoccupation with freedom of 
expression. Science fiction’s ‘estranging devices’7 have, moreover, historically 
provided cover for sociopolitical commentary. As Ian Campbell writes, Arab 
science-fiction novelists such as Ahmed Towfik have ‘learned to conceal their 
critique under layers of story in order to provide plausible deniability in the face 
of scrutiny by their regime’.8
Science fiction is a burgeoning strategy in filmmaking from the region, as 
recognized by a growing body of scholarship.9 However, the case studies in 
this chapter – Ali Ahmadzadeh’s Atomic Heart Mother (2015), Johanna Domke 
and Marouan Omara’s Dreamaway (2018), Larissa Sansour’s Nation Estate 
(2013) and Mounia Akl’s Submarine (2016) – defy genre or are genre-blurring 
rather than fully embracing sci-fi dystopia. By taking on hybrid forms, they 
expand the dystopian imagination’s creative and critical possibilities. The films’ 
unconventional approaches also relate to ways in which science fiction’s poetics 
of estrangement have developed in the Middle East, where it has strong affinities 
with surrealism, magic realism and fantastic tales such as The Thousand and 
One Nights which, as discussed in Chapter 7, has Persian, Arabic and Indian 
provenance.10 The Arabic and Persian words for science fiction, khayāl ‘ilmi and 
dāstān takhayli ‘ilmi, respectively, derive from the Arabic word khayāl, meaning 
‘spirit’, ‘vision’, ‘fantasy’ and ‘imagination’; they stress otherworldly realms 
‘outside normal reality’ much more than the English equivalent.11 While Suvin 
excludes fantasy from his definition of science fiction, insisting that science-
fiction worlds are possible rather than impossible, the fabulous and the oneiric 
are indispensable elements of Middle Eastern science fiction.
As we will see, dreams serve important functions in this chapter’s films, acting 
as both a protective shield for sensitive subject matter and a means for moving 
fluidly between reality and fantasy. Laura Marks writes that ‘Many Muslims 
take dreams and visions seriously as signs of a reality more real than material 
reality and greater than individual imagination’.12 This is true not only of Islamic 
but also other Eastern philosophies in which dreams are held to emanate from 
exterior environments. A linguistic reflection of this thinking can be found in 
the fact that the English phrase ‘I had a dream’ literally translates as ‘I saw a 
dream’ in Persian, Arabic and Indian sub-continental languages, contrasting 
with the concept of the dream as a product of an individual psyche in much of 
Western thought and Freudian psychoanalysis.13

Sci-fi Dystopia
215
In these case studies, it is the often-unbelievable strangeness produced by 
the external environment that acts as a stimulus to the filmmakers’ creativity. 
While Campbell characterizes Arabic science-fiction literature as allegorical, 
sociopolitical commentary in the films works through surreal crossovers 
between reality and fiction rather than hidden subtexts. In this sense, they are 
like a pointing finger, which C.S. Peirce classifies as a type of index: ‘The index 
asserts nothing; it only says “There!” It takes hold of our eyes, as it were, and 
forcibly directs them to a particular object, and there it stops.’14 Furthermore, 
for these filmmakers, the motivation for adopting science-fictional strategies is 
not just to overcome state censorship but also other limitations. They turn these 
limitations into an advantage by making use of ‘found’ dystopias or alternate 
realities on their doorsteps, such as polluted cityscapes and desert landscapes.
The Middle East has frequently lent its landscapes to Western science fiction, 
turning deserts into a mainstay of the genre’s iconography. George Lucas shot 
Star  Wars: A New Hope (1977) and its immediate sequels in Tunisia, where 
he found a location for the alien desert planet Tatooine. Star Wars itself was 
influenced by Frank Herbert’s novel Dune (1965), set on Arrakis, an inhospitable 
desert planet that holds spice, a commodity essential for intergalactic space travel 
that alludes to Western power struggles over Middle Eastern oil.15 In Western 
productions, the desert functions primarily as a visual backdrop – a terra 
nullius (nobody’s land) indicating that science fiction’s otherworldly settings are 
often colonial spaces. As John Rieder has shown, science fiction has roots in 
colonial narratives in which explorers encounter their cultural past in the form 
of technologically-backward ‘natives’.16 Science-fictional estrangement can take 
the form of an Orientalizing gaze that sees the colonized as strange and inferior. 
Some films in this chapter play on the desert’s strangeness, although they do not 
present it as a terra nullius and their intercultural encounters are often narrated 
from the perspective of its inhabitants.
The first part of this chapter focuses on ‘weird and eerie’ forms of estrangement, 
expanding upon Farshid Kazemi’s argument that there is a new breed of Iranian 
films that evoke and critique ‘the menacing environment of post-2009 Iran’.17 I 
apply this more broadly to point to science-fictional strategies that have emerged 
in the economic, political and social downturn of this period. As terms defined 
by Mark Fisher, the weird and eerie are modes ‘found at the edges of genres 
such as horror and science fiction’, and share ‘a preoccupation with the strange’.18 
While the weird consists of the presence of a strange entity that ‘does not belong’ 
here, making us question how we make sense of the world,19 eerie feelings arise 
from mysterious absence or unexplained presence, provoking questions about 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
216
agency and unseen forces that rule our world.20 Fisher implies that the weird 
and eerie are largely absent from mainstream science fiction because of their 
ambiguity. Inspired by the weird and eerie in real life as well as in art, the films 
Atomic Heart and Dreamaway furnish us with means for speculation on their 
sociopolitical implications while keeping their purposes fairly ambiguous.
In films featured in the second part of the chapter, Nation Estate and 
Submarine, the goal of illuminating local and wider political and environmental 
issues is achieved by building alternative worlds projected into the future or 
parallel present. As discussed in this book’s introduction, many Middle Eastern 
filmmakers get frustrated by assumptions that they are merely dealing with 
local concerns and therefore that their work is not relevant to their international 
audiences’ daily lives. The use of science fiction enables them to tell ‘universal’ 
stories that reflect on unfolding local realities yet that transcend regional 
geography and specific events. In a reversal of developmental narratives, these 
filmmakers’ use of science-fictional strategies reveals the Middle East as a 
crucible of changes lying in store for the rest of humanity.
Weird and eerie estrangement: Atomic Heart and Dreamaway
Atomic Heart opens with a riddle: ‘This film is about one of the most important 
characters of our time./ This is a film about me./ About one of my dreams whose 
events occur on the night the subsidy payments were distributed./ I will never 
tell you who I am or what my name is/ and you will never find out.’21 A dystopian 
tale set in Tehran by night as two women in their late twenties, Arineh and 
Nobahar, drive home from a party, the film has two parts which, according to 
the director Ali Ahmadzadeh, are reality and dream, respectively, with a stranger 
in the second part who becomes increasingly menacing.22 In his Lacanian 
interpretation, Kazemi proposes instead that the film’s first part is fantasy and 
the second part is reality, stripped of its ‘fantasmatic supplement’, thus turning 
into a traumatic, ‘nightmarish surreality’: ‘The nightmare is not only related to 
the fears and anxieties of a possible nuclear destruction of Tehran, but more 
precisely, to the totalitarian nightmare of the Islamic Republic,’ embodied by 
the stranger.23 Kazemi highlights similarities to the films of David Lynch, an 
exemplar of ‘weird’ cinema, particularly the two-part structure of Lost Highway 
(1997) and Mulholland Drive (2001), and cites as another ‘influence’ Mikhail 
Bulgakov’s novel The Master and Margarita in which the devil figures as a 
totalitarian allegory.

Sci-fi Dystopia
217
Although these resemblances are striking, Ahmadzadeh told me that his 
main sources of inspiration were his own life and the city of Tehran, not these 
international artworks.24 In my reading of Atomic Heart, the environment itself 
produces a Lynchian strangeness, which is enhanced by science-fiction tropes. 
The first part focuses on the life that the protagonists are leading, which has 
utopian moments, then the second is its dystopian transfiguration, plunging us 
into a dark and depressing world that portends a terrifying future. Nevertheless, 
the two parts are intimately related, like a Moebius Strip on which we travel on 
the underside and overside, because the dictatorship projected as a dystopian 
possibility is the fictional world in which the characters already reside.25 We 
meet Arineh and Nobahar when they are emerging from a party, intoxicated. 
They belong to a modern, youthful and anarchic subculture from the generation 
born after the Islamic Revolution that likes to party, drink and take drugs. 
Two important features of this modern, urban, middle-class youth are that it 
is steeped in Western pop culture and that it rejects the Islamic Republic’s rules 
although, as we will see in the analysis below, its confrontation with the ruling 
power is more nuanced than a straightforward opposition.
Its focus on this generation links Atomic Heart to Ahmadzadeh’s previous 
feature, Kami’s Party (2013), which was made underground during the 
Ahmadinejad era since it failed to get either shooting or screening permits. 
Atomic Heart was made at the beginning of Rouhani’s presidential term and 
was granted a shooting permit. Even so, as Ahmadzadeh remarks, the group’s 
anti-regime attitude ‘cannot be easily shown, but it can be hinted at’ and 
therefore he decided to use ‘the logic of the road movie’ to overcome those 
restrictions.26 Atomic Heart is mostly set inside a car as Arineh and Nobahar 
drive around nocturnal Tehran, meeting other characters along the way – 
including, in the first part, their friend Kami whom they invite for a ride after 
finding him walking alone wearing sunglasses although it is night. As we saw in 
Chapter 5, where the road movie is discussed at length, the car affords creative 
and practical possibilities surmounting (among other things) the difficulties 
of depicting women realistically due to compulsory hejāb in Iranian cinema. 
In addition, Ahmadzadeh uses the road movie – a genre of freedom, rebellion 
and escapism – to show his characters’ unconventional lifestyle and desire for 
utopian transcendence. We see them stoned and breaking the law in numerous 
ways. As a private/public space, the car grants the characters a degree of free 
expression, where they can banter on eclectic subjects from theme tunes of 
children’s programmes to the cultural history of toilets.

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
218
From a high vantage point overlooking the city, Kami recalls a dream in which 
an atomic bomb exploded in Tehran and its fireball kindled his cigarette to the 
sounds of Pink Floyd’s Atom Heart Mother. As a reflection of the environment, 
the dream illuminates latent elements in reality. It signals apprehension over 
Iran’s nuclear programme and portends the reversal of utopia into dystopia 
that occurs soon after during a car crash on Valiasr Street. Once a two-way 
thoroughfare, Valiasr Street was turned into a one-way street after the 2009 
protests in an attempt to prevent crowds. Unaware of, or ignoring, this new 
urban layout that is a form of social control, Arineh drives the wrong way and 
collides with another car. Arineh and Nobahar’s behaviour changes after this 
turning point, highlighting the politicization of their bodies and the double life 
in the Islamic Republic in which one self is displayed in private and another in 
public. They start dissimulating, tucking their hair into their headscarves before 
getting out of the car and talking to the other driver.
When a policeman gets into the car, the film stages a confrontation between 
these rebellious characters and the regime, which invades private lives through 
its security apparatus. Although Ahmadzadeh identifies with the youth, he 
bestows his own surname upon the policeman to impart similarities between 
the regime and the counterculture. Their conversation turns to the Hollywood 
film Argo (2012) on which Lieutenant Ahmadzadeh seeks Arineh’s opinion. 
Gesturing to the way that Iran (and the Middle East more generally) is frequently 
misrepresented in Western media, Arineh asserts that Argo depicted Iran ‘in 
a bad light’. Her words echo the criticism siāh-namāyi (‘showing the negative 
aspects’) frequently levelled at filmmakers who offer critical perspectives on 
their country. The policeman replies, ‘Despite your looks, you are sometimes 
with the Islamic Republic.’ As the director reflects, the dialogue is ‘a kind of 
a dialectic’ in which ‘you could hear the voice of the police in the youth and 
the voice of the youth in the police’.27 They share concerns about how Iran is 
perceived by the outside world. The scene moreover serves to distinguish Atomic 
Heart’s complex dystopic vision from simplified portraits of Iran as a ‘bad place’.
Although the stranger appears about thirty minutes into the film, 
Ahmadzadeh regards him as the central character.28 He suddenly jumps into the 
frame after the accident, displaying his quality of appearing and disappearing 
mysteriously, like a being from another dimension exempt from our world’s 
physical laws. Upon his arrival, the film’s colour palette and lighting darken and 
turn colder, creating nightmarish sensations after the first part’s more inviting, 
warmer colours. Initially, the stranger seems benevolent, paying damages to the 
other driver as the protagonists cannot themselves obtain cash from ATMs on 

Sci-fi Dystopia
219
the night of the government’s subsidy distribution. He is played by Mohammad 
Reza Golzar, a superstar in Iran, chosen for his good looks and ability to embody 
this ambivalence: both attractive and diabolical, ordinary and supernatural, 
benign and repressive. As hinted in the opening riddle, his identity remains 
ambiguous and nameless, resisting reduction to a single meaning because the 
film is oneiric and speculative – not a simple allegory. Ahmadzadeh explained 
that he wanted this character to have ‘several layers, but much of it related to 
the dictatorship in power’, that is, the Islamic Republic.29 While writing this 
character, he was partly thinking of Ahmadinejad, yet the stranger is not only 
that; many of these types exist in society and government.
The first part’s triangular set-up – the two women in the front seat and Kami 
at the back – is repeated in the second part, with the stranger on the backseat. 
The car, already a claustrophobic space permitting only tight framings and 
limited camera movement, becomes a trap. The trio’s conversation becomes 
increasingly bizarre, interrupted by the stranger’s mobile ringtone, its piercing 
notes reminiscent of soundtracks evoking alien presence in science-fiction 
films, immediately creating an eerie atmosphere without any elaborate special 
effects. The stranger recounts setting foot in Lebanon and Syria, declaring, ‘I 
am in Syria now!’ The spatial paradox of being in two places at the same time 
provokes unsettling sensations, like the scene in Lynch’s Lost Highway where 
the Mystery Man tells the protagonist Fred at a party that he is at Fred’s house, 
even handing him a phone to prove it. Atomic Heart uses this weird motif to 
allude to Iran’s expanded influence in Syria and Lebanon through Hezbollah 
and the dystopia of resurgent dictatorships after the failed uprisings. ‘I’m real 
good friends with Bashar!’ the stranger goes on to claim. His relationship to 
dictatorial figures is reinforced when he takes the women to the same vantage-
point where Kami narrated his dream. In the headlights, a man in a dark suit 
turns around, revealing a striking resemblance to Saddam Hussein, the Iraqi 
dictator who died in 2006. Fisher writes, ‘It is the irruption into this world of 
something from outside which is the marker of the weird.’30 The dead dictator’s 
appearance from beyond this world marks a weird moment. All three characters 
in the car stare at him in disturbed disbelief, although once he climbs into the 
backseat, he and the stranger immediately converse in an alien language, with the 
reanimated Saddam speaking in distorted, synthetic vocals through a vocoder, 
which enhances the scene’s weirdness.
The stranger reveals himself as an agent from another world, assigned to 
Earth on a two-year mission, when he takes Nobahar and Arineh down a tunnel 
to a door marked C-27 in luminous orange.31 ‘This door is the gateway between 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
220
our world and yours,’ he claims. ‘Weird’ science fiction often ‘opens up an egress 
between this world and others’, creating exchanges between these different 
worlds.32 The stranger tries to persuade the women that the other world is ‘much 
better than here’ in order to transport them there: ‘Our doubles lead their lives 
there with no wars, no diseases.’ For him, this parallel world is a utopia; however, 
as he is someone who admires and consorts with dictators, we can infer that 
it is a kind of dystopia, similar to Nazi utopias of social engineering. In What 
is Philosophy? Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari distinguish between ‘different 
types of utopia’.33 Among these types are ‘authoritarian utopias, or utopias of 
transcendence’ that they contrast with ‘revolutionary, libertarian utopias’ which 
are immanent because they respond to our real conditions of existence and 
contemporary struggles. Through the science-fiction trope of an egress between 
worlds, Atomic Heart evokes authoritarian utopias: both government rhetoric 
promising to take citizens to a better place and, some might argue, the Islamic 
vision of paradise. That promised utopia serves as a fantasy for the populace 
since, Ahmadzadeh remarks, ‘behind that door, there could also be another 
dictatorship’.34
Despite obtaining a shooting permit, Atomic Heart was not approved for 
screening in Iran for three years until the time of the 2017 election, when it was 
granted a two-week theatrical run. After the election, which returned Rouhani to 
power, screening permission was again withdrawn. Ahmadzadeh’s experiences 
with state censorship indicate that harsh restrictions can remain under both 
‘moderate’ and ‘hardline’ presidents which, according to him, is because the 
same repressive apparatus is pulling the strings.35 The censors demanded thirty 
minutes of cuts altogether, including the scene with the policeman. The words of 
Mohammad Beheshti, former head of the Farabi Cinema Foundation, illuminate 
why this scene was judged particularly sensitive: ‘when a film-maker introduces 
a miscreant, a police officer or teacher . . . it has to be clear whether he is criticising 
an individual or the system as a whole. If the latter, then he must be stopped.’36 
As a solution to these restrictions, during his negotiations with the censors 
Ahmadzadeh proposed voice-over narration.37 So, in the version shown in Iran, 
the stranger narrates the story, permitting events and characters, including the 
policeman, to pass as his dream and therefore not ‘real’. With this alteration, 
Ahmadzadeh gave audiences the chance to see Atomic Heart in theatres in Iran 
(albeit briefly) without further interference by the authorities and in a manner 
that remains true to the importance of dreams within the film.
As its title suggests, dreams are also prominent in the fiction–documentary 
hybrid Dreamaway. In its opening, a strange humanoid creature, later revealed 

Sci-fi Dystopia
221
as an inflatable black monkey, ambles across a rocky desert, followed by seven 
individuals in party outfits. These seven characters are employees of the Sunrise 
Hotel in Sharm el-Sheikh, an enclave between the Sinai Desert and Red Sea 
coast, once a busy tourist spot. We watch the entertainment team welcome 
non-existent guests with a club dance by the swimming pool. ‘Wakey, wakey, 
Sharm el-Sheikhy’ comes a voice from the PA. The empty pool is surrounded by 
sunbeds that masseurs deck artistically with towels and wait around hopefully. 
Rami, a living statue in black-and-gold make up, performs without anyone to 
appreciate his art. At night, Taki the DJ plays his set to an empty dance floor 
apart from a cleaner mopping it. Virtually the only people at the resort are its 
employees, continuing their routines in the near absence of guests. The desert’s 
otherworldliness, the eerily empty town and focus on its last inhabitants evoke a 
utopian dream that has petered out. Dreamaway is reminiscent of J.G. Ballard’s 
science fiction set in present-day resorts and suburbia where he locates the 
seeds of the future.38 Sharm el-Sheikh’s Ballardian qualities also reside in the 
fact that its community is shaped by intercultural encounters with Western 
tourists, yet is now increasingly cut off from the outside world as fewer flights 
operate, leaving employees struggling to adapt and survive, and hoping that life 
will return to normal.
The demise of Egypt’s petroleum economy has made it dependent on tourism; 
however, since the 2011 revolution, there has been a fall in both tourism and 
foreign investment, linked to political developments. Egyptian filmmaker 
Marouan Omara and German filmmaker Johanna Domke, who began their 
cross-cultural creative partnership with their documentary Crop (2013), were 
interested in how young Egyptians were drawn to Sharm el-Sheikh not only to 
make a living but also to find freedom and explore their identities in this city 
where East and West meet.39 From 2013, Domke and Omara began going there 
to research and film material, although their main shoot took place in 2016. By 
then, Sharm el-Sheik, already declining due to the wider economic and political 
situation, had been turned into a ghost town by the 2015 bombing, claimed by 
ISIS, of a Russian passenger aircraft above the Sinai Peninsula. Inevitably, this 
changed the film, but not its concept, since the filmmakers were less interested 
in the tourists than the employees whose labour continued, despite reduced 
wages, since work elsewhere was scarce. In fact, the deserted town sharpened 
the contrast with the workers’ dreams and supported underlying themes of 
alienation.
The filmmakers did not get the permits to shoot a documentary, which was 
their original intention. As Omara explains, there were ‘a lot of constraints from 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
222
the political side’.40 Politically, documentaries are perceived as ‘problematic films’ 
in Egypt and fiction is preferable, although the type of fiction and topics are 
also subject to approval.41 Since Sharm el-Sheik is in the Sinai Peninsula, which 
is under military jurisdiction, ‘it’s a very sensitive place to film’, necessitating 
permits from the army as well as numerous other permits (including from 
the cinema syndicate and Ministry of the Interior) required for filmmaking 
in Egypt.42 Additionally, the filmmakers knew they would be followed, as can 
happen for any film production in Egypt but especially for international co-
productions like this: ‘It was really complicated and we had to be very careful 
while shooting it,’ Omara recalls.43 The story of how they were followed is like a 
dystopian comedy/thriller in itself, as their production company devised several 
strategies to dodge surveillants from the censorship bureau and secret police. 
One strategy was to announce the film shoot publicly in Sharm el-Sheikh to 
make it ‘as explicit as possible, so there was no suspicion of any kind of secrecy 
from our production team’.44
These constraints led to creative decisions that resulted in Dreamaway’s 
hybrid form. ‘Our choice was, okay, if we’re not allowed to shoot a documentary, 
then we’ll shoot a fiction’, Domke explains.45 The filmmakers wrote a fictional 
script that was accepted and earned the requisite permits. Because they had 
already planned to incorporate fictional elements (as discussed below), they 
had no problem re-classifying their work as fiction. Not being able to shoot 
a documentary clarified their approach to the filmmaking process: ‘it was a 
restriction that we could use creatively to design our film,’ Domke asserts.46 
The filmmakers posted a casting call in Sharm el-Sheikh seeking participants 
to create and play roles based on their ‘true stories’, to which three hundred 
people responded and from which they selected seven main ‘characters’. 
Making a fiction film reflected how the filmmakers saw Sharm el-Sheikh as a 
stage on which resort employees continually reinvented themselves, since they 
met new tourists weekly. Whenever the filmmakers returned they would find 
their protagonists with ‘a different haircut and style and even a different name’, 
working in an entirely different field.47 In many respects, the city itself was 
stranger than fiction, populated by a pink dinosaur and other fake animals, and 
filled with surreal scenes of empty hotels and employees performing to absent 
guests: ‘We didn’t even plan that. It was like that – happening in front of our eyes. 
We thought this is hilarious!’ Domke recollects.48
Another constraint that the filmmakers faced also drove them towards using 
fictional elements. When they began visiting Sharm el-Sheikh, they found 
employees willing to tell their stories and divulge their secrets. But as soon as 

Sci-fi Dystopia
223
they revealed they were filmmakers, their interlocutors became more cautious, 
apprehensive that for religious or other reasons their families would disapprove 
of the different personalities that they adopt in Sharm el-Sheikh. Therefore, 
the filmmakers introduced role-playing to blur boundaries between reality and 
fiction, and to act as a ‘security shield’ protecting their participants.49 This was 
an important ethical consideration since their film is about real people, not just 
fictional characters, and has repercussions on their lives. The fictionalization 
and role-playing were creative ways of overcoming this limitation so that their 
participants could simply say to others, ‘We’re acting’.50
Dreamaway is punctuated by scenes of the inflatable black monkey touring 
the city on a pick-up truck, enticing the characters to follow him and reveal their 
dreams and aspirations. Omara explains that the monkey ‘came from the same 
world of Sharm el-Sheikh, of alienation and sci-fi absurdity’.51 It is introduced 
with an alien-eerie soundtrack and speaks through an amplifier with an uncanny 
human voice. The filmmakers were drawn to the monkey aesthetically before 
beginning the production; however, its manner of deployment was decided much 
later, as part of their process of working with their actors. While fictionalizing 
their roles gave participants some security, they were still not confident acting 
on camera. The playful monkey scenes helped as a strategy of free expression. ‘If 
you deconstruct what the monkey is doing, he is just doing an interview,’ Omara 
says. ‘We decided, instead of just putting this interview in a normal set-up’, the 
monkey ‘could liberate them [the participants]’ to talk about subjects ‘that might 
be a bit sensitive to them without too much seriousness around it.’52 For Omara, 
the monkey additionally embodies the hopes and dreams of Sharm el-Sheikh 
that the characters are chasing. The city is like a ‘paradise’ to them where they 
believe their dreams will be realized, that they will become rich, marry foreigners 
and emigrate to Europe, although their actual experiences are often filled with 
‘harshness and disappointments’.53 During the film, the monkey changes from a 
hopeful to a demanding figure: ‘Why are you dragging me and asking all these 
questions?’, Alaa the masseur entreats. Finally, the monkey’s truck speeds away 
into the night, leaving the characters’ world and leaving them behind in that 
world. In this respect, Domke comments, it
reflects our role as directors, because we’re actually like this fantasy figure for them 
that comes to town and attracts them and drags them into the process of making 
a film and we represent hope for them that we will change the situation. We told 
them very clearly we will not be able to bring them to Hollywood, even though 
they had hopes for it. But that’s actually what you are always inclined to do as a 
filmmaker: you engage in other people’s lives and then you have to leave them.54

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
224
Dreamaway visualizes its characters’ dreams through scenes shot as if they are 
fantasy moments. Often these are about aspects of life that they miss, no longer 
happening due to the resort’s dire situation, itself a reflection of wider economic 
and political trends. When Alaa borrows his friend’s studio for a private 
massage, apparently requested by a hotel guest, a surreal cut turns the woman 
being massaged into a mannequin with a disjointed arm, raising doubt about 
the ‘reality’ of this incident. In Egypt, men are not allowed to massage women in 
hotels, and vice versa; breach of this law can result in a prison sentence. By filming 
the massage in this way, Dreamaway navigates around this problematic area, and 
opens up a space of speculation, making us wonder to what extent its characters’ 
stories are real or invented. In another scene, DJ Taki plays at a nightclub filled 
with revellers dressed in flamboyant circus outfits. The heady sequence is filmed 
impressionistically so that we infer it is his subjective perspective, catching 
glimpses of a trapeze artist spinning overhead, a flamethrower tossing a flame 
and a flourish of a can-can dancer’s skirt. It ends with a spotlight on Taki in 
the crowd, as if he imagined it. Domke revealed that this was real footage shot 
several years previously, during the film’s research stage, reflecting how Sharm 
el-Sheikh was then.55 However, its eerie insertion intimates the character’s 
Figure  9.1  A large, inflatable black monkey, found within the absurd sci-fi-like 
world of Sharm el-Sheik, became a playful tactic of free expression, encouraging 
the characters to speak about their dreams and longings as they follow him in his 
truck. Dreamaway directed by Johanna Domke and Marouan Omara © Monokel, 
WDR Westdeutscher  Rundfunk, Fruitmarket Kultur und Medien, Fig Leaf 2018. 
All Rights Reserved.

Sci-fi Dystopia
225
longing for those better times along with the invisible global forces that have led 
the resort and its employees to be abandoned.
The lack of people is a motif familiar from post-apocalyptic science-fiction 
films. According to Fisher, eerie feelings are usually short-lived in such films, 
since their plots explain why the cities have been depopulated. Enigma is 
what sustains eeriness; it revolves around ‘two questions – what happened and 
why?’56 By provoking these questions of agency, the eerie summons ‘the forces 
that govern our lives and the world’, including those usually hidden from our 
sense perceptions, such as global capitalist forces.57 Dreamaway does not offer 
any explanations about what happened and what made the tourists leave. It 
opens a space of speculation in which the eerie thrives. Without saying anything 
explicitly, its surreal portrayal of a resort devoid of guests and employees 
expending labour almost nobody needs is a glimpse into contemporary Egypt’s 
dire economic and political realities.
Omara was apprehensive when Dreamaway was completed because it dealt 
with many sensitive topics: ‘I was expecting it to be not even be allowed to be 
shown in Egypt with all these creative approaches that we did. It was a surprise 
that all this abstraction and the creative craziness allowed the film to be shown 
without a problem.’58 The production team member whose job was to obtain 
permits was told: ‘We are not happy with the film, but we cannot find anything 
against it.’59 The creative choices taken in Dreamaway, not least its science-
fictional tropes, enabled it to be seen widely in Egypt, at festivals in cities across 
the country and theatres in Cairo, where the participants attended to present the 
film and even took their families.
Parallel world-building: Nation Estate and Submarine
The films in this section move into more straightforward genre territory in 
that they are explicitly presented as science fiction/dystopia. However, the fact 
that they are made by filmmakers from the region means that their use of the 
genre is never straightforward. As Larissa Sansour remarks, science fiction is 
associated with progress and the Western world, rather than the Arab world.60 
In her work, science fiction is a way of overturning stereotypes about the Middle 
East, Palestine and herself as a female artist from the region. In this respect, it is 
like the use of humour, discussed in Chapter 6. Sansour declares, ‘Any form that 
is not associated with your gender or the region that you come from – anything 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
226
unexpected – is quite important for my work because I like challenging clichés 
of what I’m supposed to do.’61
Sansour’s art background forms the context in which she makes her short 
films which are designed for both gallery and theatrical spaces. Her early 
films such as Land Confiscation Order (2007) document people and places in 
the West Bank that she was afraid would disappear under Israeli annexation. 
However, she found this approach did not work for her target audiences in 
the West who could not believe that Israel, which presents itself as ‘the only 
democracy in the Middle East’, could carry out such human rights violations. 
When reality was more surreal than fiction, turning to the fictional realm was 
a way, she explains, to ‘speak more honestly and more directly about, or touch 
upon different dimensions of, what’s really going on’.62 Science fiction, which 
Sansour first ventured into with A Space Exodus (2009), allowed her to translate 
her personal experience of Israeli colonialism; in her words, the genre serves as 
‘a more universal language that everyone knows’.63
Furthermore, science fiction’s alternative world-building offers Sansour a 
framework in which to reset the terms of well-worn debates.64 This is exemplified 
in Nation Estate, where the future Palestinian state is a skyscraper in which each 
floor contains a simulacrum of its former cities and landmarks. A traveller, 
played by Sansour herself, ‘returns’ to Palestine via an underground train called 
Amman Express. The lengthy, convoluted trip that West Bank Palestinians 
undergo from Jordan after trips abroad (because they are not Israeli citizens, 
they cannot fly to Ben Gurion, Israel’s main airport) has become a swift, smooth 
journey through a tunnel. After passing security checks (a fingerprint- and eye-
scan), the traveller emerges into a pristine building, itself a technological marvel 
with efficient transportation, cavernous halls and interactive screens, giving 
viewers an initial impression of progress and comfort. Gone are the roadblocks 
and checkpoints that, as we saw in Chapter 5, seal off Palestinian cities from each 
other; intercity travel is made hassle-free by a single mode of public transport, 
an elevator that the traveller takes to Bethlehem floor. Walking past life-size 
replicas of Manger Square and the Nativity Church, she enters her apartment 
where she tends an olive tree growing from the floor.
Nation Estate’s world can be described as an ‘arcology’, a concept that the 
futurist Paolo Soleri coined from the words architecture and ecology.65 A self-
contained community, an arcology is usually designed to be isolated from the 
world and capable of surviving catastrophes. Soleri envisaged a form of utopian, 
sustainable living, with inhabitants cultivating their own crops indoors and 
relying on walking or public transport to access their work, public spaces and 

Sci-fi Dystopia
227
residential areas, all located close to each other to avoid the need for cars. As an 
arcology, the skyscraper in Nation Estate has utopian dimensions, expressing 
Palestinian yearning for an independent state and journeys free of obstacles.
Because the Palestinian predicament is suspended between projection of a 
future state (which we can call utopia) and past disaster – the historical and 
ongoing dispossession known as the Nakba – Sansour believes it is suited to 
science fiction.66 Within Nation Estate’s futuristic skyscraper, Palestinian 
national and cultural symbols proliferate. In the atrium, a huge Palestinian flag 
hangs vertically, ‘reminiscent of an altar’.67 Cacti in tall vases are arranged in lines 
(for generations Palestinians used sabr cacti to create fences around their lands). 
When the traveller prepares a meal in her apartment, she reheats futuristic sensor 
boxes containing traditional Palestinian food – tabouleh, falafel and marmaon – 
and decants it into porcelain plates imprinted with a keffiyeh pattern, a symbol 
of resistance. The olive tree in her apartment stands for connection to the land, 
while the key icon on the door represents the right of return. All these symbols 
are dearly valued by Palestinians, for whom they are an important means of 
transmitting memories and traditions, signifying national belonging, especially 
in the diaspora. However, Sansour approaches them from a different angle, 
suggesting that Palestinian resistance has stagnated, unable to move beyond 
these symbols: ‘I wanted to house these symbols in a museum-like structure’ so 
that they appear ‘as artefacts rather than living things.’68 In this dystopian future, 
Palestine has disappeared and a mausoleum of symbolic relics remains.
It becomes increasingly clear that this utopia is in fact a dystopia, that the 
aspiration for statehood has turned into a caged nightmare. Along with close-
ups of the traveller’s anxious eyes and her breathlessness, early indications 
of the building’s dystopic character include its prison-like structure and its 
atomized, alienated society, manifested in two people dressed in similar grey 
outfits to the traveller that she encounters in the lift and who merely nod at 
her, suggesting uniformity, group discipline and fear to speak. The building 
does not support any public social or cultural interaction; there are no crowds 
or collectives, and no unrest stirs. Grey watchtowers can be glimpsed through 
windows but in fact the whole building is a sentient surveillance machine 
with biometric security technologies installed in its doorways and elevator 
adverts that remind passengers to validate their passports for travel. Bathed 
in light, aimed at maximum visibility and control of the population’s mobility, 
the sterile, white atrium epitomizes what Helga Tawil-Souri calls the ‘sublime 
essence’ of surveillance, with ‘God-like capabilities: all-knowing, all-seeing, all 
the time, everywhere’.69 As in contemporary Palestine, surveillance operates 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
228
through a hybrid of high- and low-tech tools, and ‘hides the more ominous 
practice of colonialism’.70
In the final scene, the traveller adjusts her apartment’s window settings to 
reveal the outside landscape, with Jerusalem’s Dome of the Rock visible in the 
distance although from its hyperreal appearance we can infer it is a digital 
backdrop.71 She stands looking out, feeling her pregnant belly apprehensively, as 
the camera rapidly pulls back, revealing not only that Palestinians must live in 
this totally enclosed environment, segregated in numerous apartments, but they 
are also surrounded by a gigantic concrete wall. Outside there is nothing but 
a desolate wasteland. Although the skyscraper is nominally in the West Bank, 
the landscape is ambiguous and could be anywhere, suggesting that the ‘real’ 
Palestine has ceased to exist except in this virtual form.
Nation Estate’s futuristic dystopian setting alludes to realities playing out in 
Palestine today and forebodes what may happen if present policies continue. It 
powerfully reflects on land confiscation, drawing on Sansour’s own experiences: 
‘Whenever I go back to Bethlehem you can see that there is, first, the wall circling 
the city and then there are the Israeli settlements coming closer and closer, like 
an army. This is happening all over Palestine.’72 Moreover, as shown by ‘a more 
technologized and distant surveillance’73 since Israel’s 2005 withdrawal from 
Gaza, the colonizer’s physical presence is no longer required. Surveillance of 
Palestinians can be undertaken remotely – for example, by walls equipped with 
cameras and radar.74 As well as commenting on surveillance systems already in 
place and their direction of travel, the isolated skyscraper satirizes the so-called 
‘peace process’. A featured advertisement in the lift states that the week’s water 
supply is ‘supplied by Norwegian Fjords, proud supporter of the Pipes for Peace 
Program’, indicating the skyscraper is still dependent on foreign aid because of 
Israel’s control of water resources in Palestine. The ‘peace process’ contemplates 
all kinds of ‘solutions’ to the Palestinian question, even including the building of 
artificial islands – everything, it seems, except the lifting of the occupation itself.
Like Sansour’s other science-fiction films, Nation Estate uses green screens 
and CGI to build its alternative world. Her team added futuristic features to 
the Copenhagen Metro (where scenes were shot at 4.00 am when the place was 
deserted), and recreated landmarks such as the Dome of the Rock and Nativity 
Square from high-resolution photographs. These visual effects exponentially 
increase Sansour’s budgets, posing another challenge because it is not easy 
to raise these kinds of funds for experimental art films.75 However, directing 
glossy, high-budget productions is another way in which she seeks to subvert 
expectations of her as a Middle Eastern filmmaker.76 CGI also enabled her 

Sci-fi Dystopia
229
to overcome constraints of shooting in Palestine. Aside from difficulties of 
taking her whole team there and then finding a producer to secure locations 
and permits, one risk that Sansour did not want to gamble on was having 
expensive equipment and footage confiscated by Israeli officials during border 
inspections.77 Therefore, she opted for the more secure (though also expensive) 
solution of reconstructing Palestine through computers – fittingly for a story 
about a simulacral Palestinian state.
The keffiyeh-printed porcelain plates into which Sansour’s character pours 
food in Nation Estate became the starting-point for her next film, In the Future, 
They Ate from the Finest Porcelain (2015). In this, a futuristic resistance leader 
deploys spaceships to drop the plates into the ground as artefacts testifying to her 
people’s existence for future generations. Its premise is an ironic appropriation of 
Israel’s use of archaeological digs to prove its claims to historic Palestine. The crux 
of this strategy is the Zionist slogan, ‘a land without people, for a people without 
a land’. In this colonial imagination, Palestine figures as a barren desert: a terra 
nullius. In the Future questions this rewriting of history through its dreamlike 
desert landscape in which Palestine’s past, present and future manifest in the 
same space. It takes the form of a dialogue between the resistance leader and her 
psychiatrist; the landscape appears to be an externalization of her inner states, 
blurring real and unreal with the purpose of unravelling the processes through 
which memory and historical narrative are constructed. As part of the project, 
Sansour actually buried some porcelain plates in Palestine. She concealed their 
site coordinates in bomb-like contraptions modelled on her spaceships, which 
have been exhibited alongside the film: anyone who collects these objects can 
deduce the porcelain’s location.78 What was a prop in Nation Estate and later a 
plot device in In the Future steps out of the boundaries of fiction to intervene 
into reality, illuminating from another angle the crossover between reality and 
fiction in this chapter’s science-fictional strategies.
In Sansour’s subsequent film, In Vitro (2019), Palestine is ‘a microcosm and 
accelerated state’ of wider ecological disaster since climate change is happening 
faster there due to Israel’s control of water resources.79 Mounia Akl’s fictional 
short, Submarine, too, can be classified as an ecological dystopia, a sub-genre 
that has existed at least since the 1970s and that has (re-)emerged in the region 
and internationally amid renewed awareness of environmental crises we 
are collectively facing.80 In its dystopian world, uncollected rubbish piles up 
everywhere. People wear face masks to protect themselves from air pollution 
and diseases produced by accumulated trash. Lebanon has become an unliveable 
place and its rulers have fled abroad. Over a loudspeaker, a mass evacuation is 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
230
announced, as the population pack their suitcases and prepare to leave, too; only 
the protagonist, Hala, resolves to remain.
Submarine was inspired by the 2015 waste management crisis (known as 
the ‘trash crisis’) in Beirut and Mount Lebanon after the Namaah landfill site 
became overfull and was closed. In the absence of contingency plans, the private 
waste management company sub-contracted by the government suspended 
rubbish collection, resulting in large-scale dumping and burning of waste on 
the streets – a huge risk to public health and the environment. As Akl recalls, 
‘People were living in their own trash’ which was ‘environmentally and visually 
shocking’.81 Although municipal waste collection resumed shortly after, rubbish 
was simply disposed in locations around capital, ‘dumping “elsewhere” out of 
sight’ rather than solving the problem.82 Thousands of people poured onto the 
streets to protest, their demands expanding from solutions to the trash crisis to 
other innumerable problems afflicting Lebanon. The protests evolved into the 
grassroots ‘You Stink’ civil society movement which took ‘ownership of garbage 
management and disposal’ themselves.83 For protestors such as Akl herself, the 
trash crisis was a symptom of ‘everything that’s wrong in the country’, part of the 
long-term legacy of the Lebanese Civil War (1975–90) which left the country 
with a sect-based system of power-sharing and free market economy leading 
to continual political instability, dysfunctional government and private sector 
profiteering and corruption.
As Christine Mady suggests, random garbage is often a sign of ‘urban 
malfunction’ and ‘[i]f it endures, it signals a crisis’.84 The lack of waste management 
is an everyday crisis that points to wider instability. Akl states that she ‘wasn’t 
interested in making a documentary about the garbage crisis’; instead, the genre 
of dystopia became a creative way to ‘witness’ it because ‘for me that garbage 
crisis represented so much more than just a garbage crisis’, evoking ‘the cracks 
of our society and not just our government’.85 Moreover, it enabled her to make a 
film resonating with wider ecological issues, using Lebanon as ‘a microcosm of 
the world’.86 Science fiction/dystopia’s extrapolation of present trends served her 
purpose well since ‘imagining the worst-case scenarios can sometimes awaken 
desires to do something’.87 Akl recalls that, during the trash crisis, Lebanon’s 
Ministry of Tourism released images of the country’s most beautiful landscapes 
in an attempt to deflect from the disaster; the sci-fi genre appeared to solve the 
difficulty of tackling realities unpalatable for the Lebanese government.88 Despite 
this, Submarine was censored when it was due to have its Lebanese premiere at 
the Beirut Days Festival. General Security (the government body responsible for 
media censorship in Lebanon) claimed that the film did not represent Lebanon’s 

Sci-fi Dystopia
231
reality. As we have seen earlier in this book, this reaction is typical of censors 
who assume that a film’s purpose is to promote and affirm allegiance to the 
country without countenancing, as Akl puts it, that one can ‘be critical of it, 
while loving it’.89
Submarine was shot during the trash crisis, and Akl changed the script as the 
situation evolved. One of its locations is a real garbage dump at Beirut River, 
one of the sites around the capital where waste was thrown. As Akl recalls, ‘the 
garbage started disappearing from the streets of the city, but it was all dumped 
there and it was flowing into the river’.90 This landmark is incorporated into 
the film in a scene when Hala walks past a mountain of uncollected rubbish: 
an entangled mesh of tyres, plastic bottles, bags and cardboard boxes. Even 
as they purport to raise environmental awareness, eco-disaster films often 
exert a huge environmental impact; indeed, any ‘typical big-budget movie will 
consume immense amounts of resources and produce, as a result, comparable 
waste’.91 Submarine creatively works around these problems through its use of 
an actual dump, which points to a dystopian reality beyond the film as well as 
minimizing environmental damage by not altering the location for the purposes 
of the production. Nonetheless, filming there was hazardous since waste fumes 
caused breathing difficulties; therefore, the crew arrived equipped with masks 
and shooting was limited to four hours. Other scenes were shot in the city of 
Tyre (known as Sur in Arabic), where the garbage crisis was recreated with 
the residents’ cooperation, another instance of care towards the biophysical 
environment. ‘The people of Sur were helpful,’ Akl says, ‘because they read the 
script and understood that the film was made to change the situation.’92 They 
became part of the team, although Sur itself had not been affected by the crisis.
It was during her location scouting that garbage began to fascinate Akl as a 
marker of cultural identity. From a distance, waste seems an indistinguishable 
mass yet closer up these objects reveal themselves as ‘what people have left 
behind’.93 Garbage, therefore, tells stories about who we are. Wendy Faris 
suggests that magic realism, like surrealism, constructs ‘magical images’ from 
‘ordinary objects’ that exude an ‘aura of surprising craziness’ yet, while surreal 
images remain enigmatic, magic realist ones ‘tend to reveal their motivations – 
psychological, social, emotional, political – after some scrutiny’.94 Submarine 
creates magic realist images from garbage with these kinds of intentions. 
Like other science fiction/dystopias, it also deploys what David Desser calls a 
‘politicized production design’ in which spatial configurations, such as high/low, 
inside/outside or light/dark, highlight sociopolitical themes.95 In Submarine, 
inside/outside binaries convey the fictional world into which we are entering. 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
232
Initially, the outside environment is unambiguously dystopic, signalled by 
abnormal piles of garbage, while the interiors, although cluttered, have a convivial 
ambiance and appear safe. Akl says her training in architecture before she 
became a filmmaker has taught her ‘how to tell the story of someone through the 
spaces that they inhabit’.96 Hala’s living room is filled with personal possessions 
that reveal her past. Over the mantelpiece, a protest placard declares, in Arabic, 
‘The people want to topple the regime’ – an ‘Arab Spring’ chant adopted during 
Lebanon’s trash crisis protests. Inside/outside binaries are broken when Hala’s 
window is shattered. Despite her attempt to seal the crack, the whole window 
soon collapses, bringing garbage tumbling inside. The scene vividly realizes the 
idea of people living in their own trash.
When Akl participated in the trash crisis protests, members of her parents’ 
generation told her that they had lost hope. Their attitudes are shaped by the Civil 
War which still casts a long shadow on society, as an Amnesty Law passed by the 
post-war government pardoned most of the war’s crimes and thus permitted 
perpetrators to enter politics and obtain high-ranking positions. Since some 
political parties today are from the same groups that carried out past crimes, it 
seems as if there is no escape from this cycle of history. Clinging onto hope in 
a seemingly hopeless situation, when all around her the country descends into 
despair and decay, Hala’s character belongs to the younger generation, who are 
still trying to make change and lack the older generation’s cynicism, as shown 
when she asks her neighbour for help fixing her window; he chides her, asking 
‘Why do you want to stay? Don’t tell me you still have hope!’ Beirut, a ‘wounded 
Figure 9.2  The protagonist Hala walks past a real garbage dump in a dystopic sci-fi 
extrapolation of Lebanon’s trash crisis. Submarine directed by Mounia Akl © Columbia 
University School of Arts 2016. All Rights Reserved.

Sci-fi Dystopia
233
city’ with scars from its Civil War past, has a vibrant young generation ‘trying to 
keep the city alive with those pubs and restaurants that are the only thing that 
never fails’, Akl told me, before the 2020 port explosion that destroyed many bars 
in Gemmayzeh.97 In the film, the Submarine Bar is based on the Torino Express 
bar in that area, where people united after protests. Hala enters the empty bar, 
where chairs are stacked away and cardboard boxes are piled on the floor in 
anticipation that everyone will be leaving. She turns on the lights and music 
and begins to dance sensuously on her own. Akl uses magic realism’s porous 
boundaries between reality and fantasy to project her protagonist’s inner world, 
changing the environment in a fluid shot transition. Other people enter the 
frame and the bar fills with the town’s residents dancing (some of them still 
wearing their face masks) to live music. In this moment, Hala’s wishful thinking 
about staying in Lebanon becomes a reality, although it is left open as to whether 
she is imagining it or it is ‘really’ happening.
Leaving Lebanon is a stark option facing many citizens after continual crises 
have convinced them that the country holds no positive future for them. Since 
Submarine was made, the port explosion and currency collapse have become 
further catalysts for departure. This view is shared not only by the older 
generation who have lived through the war. Akl reflects, ‘It’s sad to see that with 
all those increasing problems, the younger generation think a better life for them 
awaits outside.’98 In the Submarine Bar, Hala’s lover Elie materializes sitting alone 
at the counter. He tells her he has heard she is planning to stay. ‘What are you 
trying to prove?’ he asks. Tenderly they dance together to a song called ‘Tango 
El Amal’ (‘Tango of Hope’). The scene poses the question of whether leaving 
the country is the solution, as Hala asks Elie, ‘Where are you going anyway?’ 
However, he insists that everything is over here, including the Submarine 
Bar itself and the politics of protest and hope it represents. Finally, he leaves, 
carrying his two small suitcases, packing lightly because he no longer wants to 
cling to things. Later, Hala goes to the beach where she encounters the townsfolk 
walking in the opposite direction, carrying their luggage to a ship, then she turns 
and follows them. She seems to change her mind, although we cannot be certain. 
That hopeless hope that she embodied is kept alive by this open ending.
Conclusion
We have come a long way from normative understandings of the genre but, 
as Sansour insists, ‘The goal is not the sci-fi’; rather, science fiction is a tool 
to reach the goal.99 As examples in this chapter have shown, science-fictional 

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
234
strategies are being used to capture surreal elements of the crises through 
which people in the region are living. Crossovers between fiction and reality, 
which point indexically to lived dystopias, are more pertinent to these strategies 
than hidden, allegorical meanings. Moreover, deliberately blurring fiction and 
reality helps to overcome political and cultural constraints. In Atomic Heart and 
Dreamaway this occurs through speculation provoked by the weird and eerie, 
while Nation Estate and Submarine use genre parameters, namely parallel world-
building, to reinvigorate political and environmental debates. We have seen how, 
by making creative use of ‘found’ dystopias, filmmakers turn the limitations of 
their environment into assets. Moreover, genre serves as a universal language to 
widen their work’s resonance beyond merely ‘local’ concerns.
Tom Moylan and Raffaella Baccolini write that dystopian texts, even as they 
offer us a ‘pessimistic presentation of the very worst social alternatives’, often 
‘maintain a horizon of hope’.100 One way that they do this is ‘by resisting closure: 
the ambiguous, open endings . . . maintain the utopian impulse within the 
work’.101 Most of this chapter’s films maintain ‘a horizon of hope’ through their 
open endings. In Atomic Heart, Arineh wins a wager with the stranger that he 
will be the first to jump from the roof of a building, which he claims is now their 
only way to the other world. A simple cut at the end leaves us with uncertainty 
about whether he has disappeared or not. Dreamaway’s ensemble cast continue 
to follow the Monkey, the embodiment of their hope. Submarine’s ending is also 
ambiguous, leaving a hopeful prospect. However, even if the ending remains 
pessimistic, as it does in Nation Estate, the politics of hope could be seen as 
intrinsic to dystopia, because its cautionary tales inspire renewed struggles and 
encourage us to bring about the change that will prevent current conditions 
from worsening. As Moylan states, ‘critical dystopia’ not only critiques the 
present order but also explores ‘the oppositional spaces and possibilities from 
which the next round of political activism can derive imaginative sustenance 
and inspiration’.102 The economic, social and political failures that drove the 
region’s citizens to demonstrate have not gone away and new waves of protests 
are always being launched. Despite dismal times, their activism and these films 
indicate that creative resistance will always evolve and continue in response to 
the constraints.

This book has attempted to deepen and complicate the existing picture of 
cinematic freedom of expression in the Middle East, the world’s so-called crisis 
hotspot. State censorship is often regarded as the main challenge for filmmakers. 
With a deliberate shift of focus onto constraint as a generic term for limitations 
upon and control of free expression, I have documented the much wider range 
of constraints that actually confront filmmakers and analysed nine creative 
strategies that they are using to tackle them. This is essential for enhancing 
understanding of the conditions in which independent films are made in the 
region and for breaking some of the stereotypes with which it is enshrouded.
The Introduction laid the groundwork for this analysis by identifying types 
of constraints in a twelve-part typology, which I expanded in relation to specific 
films within the chapters. The typology, and the book as a whole, highlights 
the multiple constraints that filmmakers contend with, in addition to state 
censorship, which is a major problem but not the only means of control; indeed, 
many filmmakers find that other obstacles, such as market mechanisms and 
lack of infrastructure, are just as restricting. Constraints also act on filmmakers 
differentially. Generally, filmmakers from the region face greater degrees of 
constrainedness depending on their status (e.g. their gender and country of 
residence) and the place and time in which they are working. This complex 
framework of constraints sets the extent of free expression under which they 
operate. Furthermore, as shown by the intensification of crisis as this book was 
being completed, new constraints, such as the COVID-19 pandemic, can arise 
and dramatically transform the filmmaking landscape.
My chapters have elaborated filmmakers’ creative solutions for working 
under constraints and crisis conditions. Their resourcefulness is illustrated in 
the analyses of case study films which combine my perspective as a film scholar 
with the filmmakers’ perspectives from ‘behind’ the works. As indicated by 
the chapter titles, the range of creative possibilities at filmmakers’ disposal is 
Conclusion

Crisis Cinema in the Middle East
236
considerable. Films often use a mixture of strategies, and this is by no means an 
exhaustive list as other strategies could be identified that are not discussed here.
It becomes clear that the films do not only capture the crises under which 
they were made in their storylines. They also capture them in their indexical 
relationship with their production constraints. The concept of indexicality 
also helps to explain why some of these films, especially In the Last Days of the 
City (Chapter 4), Atomic Heart and Dreamaway (Chapter 9), can be direct and 
elliptical: they register the circumstances in which they were made without 
making them explicit.
Additionally, I have discussed how filmmakers formulate practical and 
logistical solutions to their constraints, another way of being creative. As well as 
directing remotely via Skype (used to film in the Syrian war zone in Little Gandhi, 
mentioned in the Introduction), these include: location shooting, for a detailed 
evocation of place when limited resources are available for production design 
and hiring extras; non-professional actors, often playing versions of themselves; 
the use of small, hidden cameras for discreet or underground filmmaking; and 
moving vehicles as a relatively safe space for filming in conflict zones.
Creative strategies evolve as constraints alter; those creative strategies 
emerging from the region in the period covered in this book have become more 
direct than the allegorical modes that predominated in the past. Yet, allegory 
cannot be dispensed with altogether, as changing circumstances may demand a 
reversion to more guarded forms of expression; moreover, all films remain open 
to allegorical interpretation. At the same time, it is likely that, with ever-shifting 
constraints, more new creative strategies will arise in future.
Most filmmakers whom I interviewed agreed that their creativity is enhanced 
by constraints, whether from external pressures or self-imposed rules. However, 
several of them pointed cautiously to the difference between artists deciding 
which constraints to play with and living with imposed constraints, including 
state censorship. Ali Jaberansari remarks, ‘In an ideal world where you create 
those constraints for yourself, you have the freedom to choose,’ but ‘in certain 
places you are given certain constraints which, as a survival mechanism, 
you have to use as a creative tool’. His film Tehran: City of Love (discussed in 
Chapters 4 and 6) is a response to those constraints without which, he believes, 
‘it would be a completely different film’.1 It was instructive to hear diverging 
perspectives from Johanna Domke and Maraoun Omara, a German and an 
Egyptian filmmaker who have collaborated. Using dance as a metaphor for 
creativity, Domke elaborated:

Conclusion
237
It’s actually quite hard to do whatever is in your head but when you’re told you 
have to have one leg on the floor all the time, it actually gets easier because you 
have some sort of limitation that enables you to do other things more easily. So 
creativity grows when you have certain limitations because they enhance your 
imagination to overcome them.
‘For sure, I agree’, Omara responded. ‘But at some moments I’m so frustrated 
because the limits are filling my glass . . . So getting around them is getting 
more complicated.’2 The consensus among many filmmakers was that, while 
constraints stimulate creativity, they should not be glorified. Indeed, depending 
on their context and amount of professional experience, some of them (usually, 
newer filmmakers) valued constraints far less than others and wished for fewer 
limitations.
Interviewing filmmakers was an inspiring opportunity for me to hear them 
talk about their work and how they overcome their challenges. I was often struck 
by their fearlessness and resilience despite their numerous setbacks. In the book, 
I have sought to let them explain their constraints and creative solutions as 
voices of authority in their own right, and to emphasize their agency in the face 
of obstacles. Their insider knowledge of the field has offered rich and diverse 
insights, helping me to test my assumptions and flesh out my arguments.
The book’s broad scope has made it challenging for me as a writer and has 
confronted me with my own constraints. However, as I stated in the Introduction, 
it is not a comprehensive study, but aims to create a comparative, theoretical 
framework for thinking about freedom of expression that may be transferable 
to other contexts. The book’s interlocking arguments about crisis, creativity 
and constraints are particularly relevant to the conditions in which we now 
find ourselves, giving us the chance to learn from the filmmakers’ innovative 
practices. Yet, as all filmmaking is affected by constraints, I hope the book’s 
ramifications will be wider, illuminating the artist’s role not just in sites of crisis 
in the Middle East but beyond.

Notes
Introduction
1	
The World Free Press Index is available at https://rsf.org/en/ranking
2	
The UN International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (1966) is available at 
https://www.ohchr.org/en/professionalinterest/pages/ccpr.aspx
3	
Marwan Kraidy, The Naked Blogger of Cairo: Creative Insurgency in the Arab World 
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2016), 131.
4	
Joseph Fahim, ‘Creators Meet Censors: The Standoff between Creators and Censors 
in Post-2011 Egyptian Drama’, Cairo Review 28 (2018): 95.
5	
Orwa al-Mokdad, interview by the author, 8 August 2018.
6	
Nat Muller, ‘Contemporary Art in the Middle East’, in Contemporary Art in the 
Middle East, ed. Paul Sloman (London: Black Dog, 2009), 13.
7	
Amin Saikal, ‘Conclusion’, in The Arab World and Iran: A Turbulent Region in 
Transition, ed. Amin Saikal (Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2016), 183.
8	
Andrew Arslan, Lebanon: A Country in Fragments (London: Hurst & Company, 
2018), 10.
9	
Timothy L. Sellnow and Matthew W. Seeger, Theorizing Crisis Communication 
(Chichester: Wiley-Blackwell, 2013), 3.
10	 Craig Calhoun, ‘The Idea of Emergency’, in Contemporary States of Emergency: 
The Politics of Humanitarian Interventions, ed. Didier Fassin and Mariella Pandolfi 
(New York: Zone Books, 2010), 32.
11	 Janet Roitman, Anti-crisis (Durham: Duke University Press, 2013), 4.
12	 Marouan Omara and Johanna Domke, interview by the author, 14 October 2020.
13	 Mani Haghighi, email communication with the author, 7 October 2020.
14	 Beate Müller, ‘Censorship and Cultural Regulation: Mapping the Territory’, 
in Censorship and Cultural Regulation in the Modern Age, ed. Beate Müller 
(Amsterdam: Rodopi, 2004), 5.
15	 See, for example, Daniel Biltereyst and Roel Vande Winkel, eds. Silencing Cinema: 
Film Censorship around the World (London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2013).
16	 My account is largely based on Elster’s book Ulysses Unbound: Studies in 
Rationality, Precommitment and Constraints (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 2000), a revision of arguments set out in his earlier essay, ‘Conventions, 
Creativity, Originality’ in Rules and Conventions: Literature, Philosophy, Social 
Theory, ed. Mette Hjort (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1992). 

Notes
239
Although, for Elster, a constraint can be productive, it is different from Foucault’s 
concept of power, which does not equate to restriction.
17	 Elster, Ulysses, 264.
18	 Khalid Abdalla, interview by the author, 8 October 2018.
19	 Abdalla interview.
20	 Persheng Sadegh-Vaziri, ‘Iranian Documentary Filmmakers Association and the 
Fight for the House of Cinema’, in Iranian Cinema in a Global Context: Policy, 
Politics, and Form, ed. Peter Decherney and Blake Atwood (New York: Routledge, 
2015), 164.
21	 Hamid Naficy, A Social History of Iranian Cinema, Volume 4: The Globalizing Era, 
1984–2010 (Durham: Duke University Press, 2012), 250.
22	 Rania Stephan, interview by the author, 20 July 2018.
23	 Sadegh-Vaziri, ‘Iranian Documentary Filmmakers Association and the Fight for 
the House of Cinema’, 171.
24	 Ali Soozandeh, interview by the author, 23 August 2018.
25	 Saeed Zeydabadi-Nejad, The Politics of Iranian Cinema: Film and Society in the 
Islamic Republic (Abingdon: Routledge, 2010), 53; Mani Haghighi, interview by the 
author, 13 October 2020.
26	 Tamer el-Said, interview by Matt Morrison, 19 April 2018, available at https://www.
filmcomment.com/blog/interview-tamer-el-said/
27	 Keywan Karimi, interview by the author, 13 February 2021.
28	 Tamer el-Said, The Paradox of Creative Constraints symposium, The Mosaic 
Rooms, London, 7 September 2019.
29	 El-Said, The Paradox of Creative Constraints symposium.
30	 Haghighi, email communication with the author; Gilles Deleuze, Cinema 2: The 
Time-Image, trans. Hugh Tomlinson and Robert Galeta (London: Athlone Press, 
1989), 77.
31	 Rana Eid, interview by the author, 7 August 2018.
32	 Azadeh Farahmand, ‘Perspectives on Recent (International Acclaim for) Iranian 
Cinema’, in The New Iranian Cinema: Politics, Representation and Identity, ed. 
Richard Tapper (London: I.B. Tauris, 2002), 103.
33	 Philippe Aractingi, interview by the author, 4 October 2019.
34	 Shirin Barghnavard, interviewed by Christoph Dreher and Vinicius Jatobá, 
‘Expose yourself! Revealing the Flow of Life in Iran’, 4 September 2018, available 
at https://schloss-post.com/expose-yourself/; Mette Hjort, ‘Introduction: The Film 
Phenomenon and How Risk Pervades It’, in Film and Risk, ed. Mette Hjort (Detroit: 
Wayne State University Press, 2012), 15.
35	 Mahsa Salamati, ‘Transnational Film Circulation in the Iranian Context: From 
Conjunctural Crisis to Discursive Heterotopia’ (PhD Thesis, University of New 
South Wales, 2019), 50.

Notes
240
36	 Ruth Hodgins, ‘Imagination Is Power: How Bidayyat Captures Syria on Film’, 
11 April 2018, available at https://walkerart.org/magazine/imagination-is-power-
syria-on-film-with-bidayyat
37	 Al-Mokdad interview.
38	 Naficy, Social History of Iranian Cinema, 391.
39	 Mania Akbari, interview by the author, 6 September 2018.
40	 Shirin Barghnavard, interview by the author, 9 September 2019.
41	 Blake Atwood, Reform Cinema in Iran: Film and Political Change in the Islamic 
Republic (New York: Columbia University Press, 2016).
42	 Naficy, Social History of Iranian Cinema, 69; Parviz Jahed, ‘Underground Cinema’, 
in Iranian Cinema in a Global Context: Policy, Politics, and Form, ed. Peter 
Decherney and Blake Atwood (New York: Routledge, 2015), 226.
43	 Donatella Della Ratta, Shooting A Revolution: Visual Media and Warfare in Syria 
(London: Pluto Press, 2018), 176.
44	 Kamran Rastegar, Surviving Images: Cinema, War and Cultural Memory in the 
Middle East (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2015), 208.
45	 Chibab El Khachab, ‘State Control over Film Production in Egypt’, Arab Media & 
Society 23 (2017), available at https://www.arabmediasociety.com/state-control-
over-film-production-in-egypt
46	 Kaleem Aftab, ‘Why a Large Proportion of the Arab World’s Best Filmmakers Are 
Women’, The National, 3 December 2018, available at https://www.thenationalnews.
com/arts-culture/film/why-a-large-proportion-of-the-arab-world-s-best-
filmmakers-are-women-1.798541.
47	 Aftab, ‘Why a Large Proportion of the Arab World’s Best Filmmakers Are Women’.
48	 See Lila Abu-Lughod, Do Muslim Women Need Saving? (Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press, 2013)
49	 Mohamed Siam, interview by the author, 31 May 2018.
50	 Basil Khalil, interview by the author, 17 September 2019.
51	 Lisa Wedeen, Ambiguities of Domination: Politics, Rhetoric, and Symbols in 
Contemporary Syria (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2015), ix.
52	 Sadaf Foroughi, interview by the author, 10 September 2018.
53	 Hisham Fageeh, talk at NYU Abu Dhabi, organized by the author, 10 April 2017.
54	 See Mette Hjort, ‘Flamboyant Risk Taking: Why Some Filmmakers Embrace 
Avoidable and Excessive Risks’, in Film and Risk, ed. Mette Hjort (Detroit: Wayne 
State University Press, 2012), 31–54, which distinguishes between ‘inevitable risk’ 
and ‘excessive risks’.
55	 Hodgins, ‘Imagination Is Power’.
56	 Sam Kadi, interview by the author, 13 March 2017.
57	 Elster, ‘Conventions, Creativity, Originality’, 32.

Notes
241
58	 Thomas Elsaesser, ‘The Global Author: Control, Creative Constraints, and 
Performative Self-contradiction’, in The Global Auteur: The Politics of Authorship 
in 21st Century Cinema, ed. Seung-hoon Jeong and Jeremi Szaniawski (London: 
Bloomsbury Academic, 2016), 25.
59	 Karimi interview.
60	 See, for example, Meredith Taylor, ‘Tabl (2016) | Drum | Venice Settimana della 
Critica 2016’, 5 September 2016, available at https://filmuforia.com/tabl-2016-
drum-venice-settimana-della-critica-2016/
61	 Virginia Woolf, A Room of One’s Own (London: Penguin, 2020), 3.
62	 Stephan interview.
63	 Richard Maxwell and Toby Miller, ‘Film and the Environment: Risk Off Screen’, in 
Film and Risk, ed. Mette Hjort (Detroit: Wayne State University Press, 2012).
64	 Omara and Domke interview.
65	 Viola Shafik, Arab Cinema: History and Cultural Identity (Cairo: American 
University in Cairo Press, 2016), 26–7.
66	 Elster, Ulysses, 190, 214.
67	 Sara Afshar, interview by the author, 19 September 2018.
68	 Mounia Akl, interview by the author, 12 September 2019.
69	 Lara Zeidan, interview by the author, 26 August 2019.
70	 Elster, Ulysess, 175.
71	 For a detailed account of Dogme ’95 as a film movement, its significance as a 
filmmaking strategy within Denmark and its internationalization, see Mette Hjort 
and Scott MacKenzie, ed. Purity and Provocation: Dogme 95 (London: BFI, 2003).
72	 Mette Hjort, Lone Scherfig’s Italian for Beginners (Seattle: University of Washington 
Press, 2010), 44.
73	 Aractingi interview.
74	 Eid interview.
75	 Raymond Williams, Keywords: A Vocabulary of Culture and Society (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2015), 46.
76	 Samad Seyidov, Phenomenology of Creativity: History, Paradoxes, Personality 
(Milton Keynes: AuthorHouse, 2013), 38.
77	 See Henry Corbin, Alone with the Alone: The Creative Imagination in the Sufism of 
Ibn ‘Arabi (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1997).
78	 Maysoon Pachachi, interview by the author, 1 May 2016.
79	 Kraidy, Naked Blogger, 14.
80	 Rob Pope, Creativity: Theory, History, Practice (Abingdon: Routledge, 2005).
81	 Seyidov, Phenomenology of Creativity: History, Paradoxes, Personality, 38.
82	 Andrew Sarris, ‘The Auteur Theory Revisited’, in Critical Visions in Film Theory, ed. 
Timothy Corrigan, Patricia White and Meta Mazaj (New York: Bedford/St Martin’s, 
2011), 316.

Notes
242
83	 Mette Hjort, ‘Introduction: More than Film School – Why the Full Spectrum 
of Practice-Based Film Education Warrants Attention’, in The Education of 
the Filmmaker in Africa, the Middle East, and the Americas, ed. Mette Hjort 
(Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2013), 6.
84	 These terms are taken from Hjort, ‘Flamboyant Risk Taking’, 52.
85	 Angus Fletcher, Allegory: The Theory of a Symbolic Mode (Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press, 1964), 22.
86	 Rasha Salti, ‘Critical Nationals: The Paradoxes of Syrian Cinema’, in Insights into 
Syrian Cinema: Essays and Conversations with Filmmakers, ed. Rasha Salti (New 
York: Rattapallax Press, 2006), 39.
87	 Negar Mottahedeh, Displaced Allegories: Post-revolutionary Iranian Cinema 
(Durham: Duke University Press, 2008), 3.
88	 Michelle Langford, ‘The Circle’, in Directory of World Cinema: Iran 2, ed. Parviz 
Jahed (Bristol: Intellect, 2017), 150.
89	 Ahd Kamel, interview by the author, 10 May 2019.
90	 Haghighi email.
91	 Fredric Jameson, ‘Third-World Literature in the Era of Multinational Capitalism’, 
Social Text 15 (1986): 69.
92	 See Michelle Langford, Allegory in Iranian Cinema: The Aesthetics of Poetry and 
Resistance (London: Bloomsbury, 2019).
93	 Viola Shafik, ‘Resisting Pleasure? Political Opposition and the Body in Arab Cinema’, 
in Resistance in Contemporary Middle Eastern Cultures: Literature, Cinema and 
Music, ed. Karima Laachir and Saeed Talajooy (New York: Routledge, 2013), 121–37.
94	 Laura Marks, Hanan al-Cinema: Affections for the Moving Image (Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press, 2015), 73.
95	 Marks, Hanan al-Cinema, 78.
96	 Elster, Ulysses, 275.
97	 Gilles Deleuze, Cinema 1: The Movement-image, trans. Hugh Tomlinson and 
Barbara Habberjam (London: Athlone Press, 1992), 211.
98	 Michel de Certeau, The Practice of Everyday Life, trans. Steven F. Rendall (Berkeley: 
University of California, 1984), xix–xx; R.K. Khawsam, trans. Le Livre des ruses: La 
stratégie politique des Arabes (Paris: Phebus, 1976).
99	 Patricia Aufderheide, ‘Mainstream Documentary since 1999’, in American Film 
History: Selected Readings, 1960 to the Present, ed. Cynthia Lucia, Roy Grundmann 
and Art Simon (Chichester: Wiley-Blackwell, 2016), 376.
100	Abdalla interview.
101	Charles Sanders Peirce, The Essential Peirce: Selected Philosophical Writings, vol. 1, 
ed. The Peirce Edition Project (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1998), 9.
102	Siegfried Kracauer, Theory of Film: The Redemption of Physical Reality (New York: 
Oxford University Press, 1960), ix.

Notes
243
103	Mary Ann Doane, The Emergence of Cinematic Time: Modernity, Contingency, the 
Archive (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2002), 231.
104	Georgina Van Welie, interview by the author, 24 April 2018.
105	I owe this distinction between views ‘in front’ and ‘behind’ the film to 
conversations with Yasmin Fedda.
106	Abdalla interview.
107	Abdalla interview.
Chapter 1
1	
Barbie Zelizer, ‘On “Having Been There”: “Eyewitnessing” as a Journalistic Key 
Word’, Critical Studies in Media Communication 24.5 (2007): 410.
2	
Stuart Allan, Citizen Witnessing: Revisioning Journalism in Times of Crisis 
(Cambridge: Polity Press, 2013), 2.
3	
See Omar al-Ghazzi, ‘“Citizen Journalism” in the Syrian Uprising: Problematizing 
Western Narratives in a Local Context’, Communication Theory 24.4 (2014): 
435–54.
4	
‘Waad Al-Kateab – Activist and Filmmaker’, available at https://www.
actionforsama.com/waad-alkateab
5	
See, for example, Shoshana Felman, ‘In an Era of Testimony: Claude Lanzmann’s 
Shoah’, Yale French Studies 79 (1991): 39–81.
6	
Zelizer, ‘On “Having Been There”: “Eyewitnessing” as a Journalistic Key Word’, 421.
7	
Hamid Naficy, A Social History of Iranian Cinema, Volume 4: The Globalizing Era, 
1984–2010 (Durham: Duke University Press, 2012), 350.
8	
Similarly, in English, the word ‘martyr’ originates from the Greek for ‘witness’.
9	
Joshka Wessels, Documenting Syria: Film-making, Video Activism and Revolution 
(London: I.B. Tauris, 2019), 197. For definitions of martyrdom, see David Cook, 
Martyrdom in Islam (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007).
10	 Wessels, Documenting Syria: Film-making, Video Activism and Revolution, 169.
11	 Kari Andén-Papadopoulos, ‘Journalism, Memory and the “Crowd-sourced Video 
Revolution”’, in Journalism and Memory, ed. Barbie Zelizer and Keren Tenenboim-
Weinblatt (Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2014), 154.
12	 Julio García Espinosa, ‘For an Imperfect Cinema’, trans. Julianne Burton, Jump 
Cut 20 (1979): 24–6, available at: https://www.ejumpcut.org/archive/onlinessays/
JC20folder/ImperfectCinema.html
13	 Naficy, Social History of Iranian Cinema, 356–7; Chad Elias and Zaher Omareen, 
‘Syria’s Imperfect Cinema’, in Syria Speaks: Art and Culture from the Frontline, ed. 
Malu Halasa, Zaher Omareen and Nawara Mahfoud (London: Saqi Books, 2014), 
262.

Notes
244
14	 Gala Hernández López, ‘Notes on the Role of the Camera within a (Virtual) War: 
The Case of Silvered Water, Syria Self-portrait’, Digital War 1.1 (2021): 12.
15	 Naficy, Social History of Iranian Cinema, 356.
16	 Mohammed Ali Atassi, ‘The Digital Syrian Archive between Videos and 
Documentary Cinema’, in The Arab Archive: Mediated Memories and Digital 
Flows, ed. Donatella Della Ratta, Kay Dickinson and Sune Haugbolle (Amsterdam: 
Institute of Network Cultures, 2020), 65.
17	 William Brown, Non-Cinema: Global Digital Filmmaking and the Multitude 
(London: Bloomsbury, 2018), 4.
18	 García Espinosa, ‘For an Imperfect Cinema’.
19	 Orwa al-Mokdad, interview by the author, 8 August 2018.
20	 For further discussion of Little Gandhi, see Shohini Chaudhuri, ‘The Alterity of 
the Image: The Distant Spectator and Films about the Syrian Revolution and War’, 
Transnational Cinemas 9.1 (2018): 31–46.
21	 Georgina Van Welie, interview by the author, 24 April 2018.
22	 Naziha Arebi, interview by the author, 30 July 2019.
23	 Yasmin Fedda, ‘Syria on the Road: Stories of Conflict, Migration & Place’, 
17 November 2015, available at http://highlightarts.org/syria-on-the-road-stories-
of-conflict-migration-place-by-yasmin-fedda/
24	 Tamur Ashuri and Amit Pinchevski, ‘Witnessing as a Field’, in Media Witnessing: 
Testimony in the Age of Mass Communication, ed. Paul Frosch and Amit Pinchevski 
(Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2009), 141.
25	 Ashuri and Pinchevski, ‘Witnessing as a Field’, 144.
26	 Ashuri and Pinchevski, ‘Witnessing as a Field’, 144.
27	 Rik Smit, Ansgard Heinrich, and Marcel Broersma, ‘Witnessing in the New 
Memory Ecology: Memory Construction of the Syrian Conflict on YouTube’, New 
Media & Society 19.2 (2017): 300.
28	 Sara Afshar, interview by the author, 19 September 2018.
29	 Wessels, Documenting Syria: Film-making, Video Activism and Revolution, 205.
30	 Khalid Abdalla, interview by the author, 8 October 2018.
31	 Gil Z. Hochberg, Visual Occupations: Violence and Visibility in a Conflict Zone 
(Durham: Duke University Press, 2015), 19.
32	 Lilie Chouliaraki, ‘Digital Witnessing in Conflict Zones: The Politics of 
Remediation’, Information, Communication & Society 18.11 (2015): 1372.
33	 Chouliaraki, ‘Digital Witnessing in Conflict Zones’, 1372.
34	 Donatella Della Ratta, Shooting a Revolution: Visual Media and Warfare in Syria 
(London: Pluto Press, 2018), 6.
35	 Adi Kuntsman and Rebecca Stein, Digital Militarism: Israel’s Occupation in the 
Social Media Age (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2015), 58.

Notes
245
36	 Human Rights Watch, ‘Attacks on Ghouta: Analysis of Alleged Use of Chemical 
Weapons in Ghouta’, 10 September 2013, available at https://www.hrw.org/
report/2013/09/10/attacks-ghouta/analysis-alleged-use-chemical-weapons-syria#_
ftn3
37	 Marc Lynch, The New Arab Wars: Uprisings and Anarchy in the Middle East 
(Philadelphia: Perseus Books, 2016), xi,
38	 Steve Rose, ‘Lights, Camera, Revolution: The Birth of Libyan Cinema after 
Gaddafi’s Fall’, 1 October 2012, available at https://www.theguardian.com/
film/2012/oct/01/libya-film-gaddafi-arab-spring
39	 Leshu Torchin, Creating the Witness: Documenting Genocide on Film, Video, and the 
Internet (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2012), 170.
40	 Torchin, Creating the Witness: Documenting Genocide on Film, Video, and the 
Internet, 160.
41	 See, for example, Kamran Rastegar, Surviving Images: Cinema, War, and Cultural 
Memory in the Middle East (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2015); Miriam 
Cooke, Dancing in Damascus: Creativity, Resilience, and the Syrian Revolution (New 
York: Routledge 2017); Della Ratta, Shooting a Revolution, 159.
42	 Abdalla interview. In the Last Days of the City is discussed as adopting another 
strategy, psychogeography, in Chapter 4.
43	 Abdalla interview.
44	 Emad Burnat, 5 Broken Cameras Q&A, Palestine Expo, Queen Elizabeth II 
Conference Centre, London, 8 July 2017.
45	 Emad Burnat, 5 Broken Cameras Q&A, chaired by the author, Union Chapel, 
London, 5 July 2017.
46	 Emad Burnat, interview by the author, 8 July 2017.
47	 Burnat interview.
48	 Emad Burnat and Guy Davidi, 5 Broken Cameras Q&A, Riverside Studios, London, 
21 June 2012.
49	 Burnat and Davidi, 5 Broken Cameras Q&A.
50	 Burnat interview.
51	 Burnat interview.
52	 Yael Friedman, ‘Guises of Transnationalism in Israel/ Palestine: A Few Notes on 5 
Broken Cameras’, Transnational Cinemas 6.1 (2015): 26.
53	 Burnat, 5 Broken Cameras Q&A, chaired by the author.
54	 Jonathan Robbins, ‘Interview with Emad Burnat, “5 Broken Cameras”’, 1 June 2012, 
available at https://www.filmlinc.org/daily/interview-with-emad-burnat-5-broken-
cameras/
55	 Torchin, Creating the Witness: Documenting Genocide on Film, Video, and the 
Internet, 8.

Notes
246
56	 Previous Syrian films using epistolary forms include 300 Miles (2016) (discussed in 
Chapter 2), Silvered Water, Syria Self-Portrait (2014) (in Chapter 9) and Letters to S. 
(2015) where, incidentally, S stands for Sama.
57	 Donatella Della Ratta, ‘Emerging from the Underground: On “For Sama” 
and Mainstream Filmmaking’, 14 May 2020, available at https://syriauntold.
com/2020/05/14/emerging-from-the-underground-on-for-sama-and-mainstream-
filmmaking/
58	 Waad Al-Kateab, interview with the author, 8 May 2020.
59	 Al-Kateab interview.
60	 Al-Kateab interview.
61	 Al-Kateab interview.
62	 Naficy, Social History of Iranian Cinema, 353.
63	 Wessels, Documenting Syria: Film-making, Video Activism and Revolution, 188.
64	 Waad Al-Kateab, For Sama Q&A, Curzon Soho, 14 September 2019.
65	 Wessels, Documenting Syria: Film-making, Video Activism and Revolution, 236.
66	 Al-Kateab interview.
67	 Al-Kateab interview.
68	 Al-Kateab interview.
69	 Al-Kateab interview.
70	 Al-Kateab interview.
71	 Al-Kateab interview.
72	 Wessels, Documenting Syria: Film-making, Video Activism and Revolution, 198.
73	 Al-Kateab interview.
74	 Al-Kateab interview.
75	 Al-Kateab interview.
76	 Edward Watts, interview by the author, 13 May 2020.
77	 Donatella Della Ratta, ‘Emerging from the Underground’.
78	 Watts interview.
79	 Watts interview. Watts previously made the documentary Escape from ISIS (2015) 
which departs from the sensationalism of many films made by foreigners about 
ISIS by focusing on survivors, Yazidi women.
80	 They also had a two-week, in-person workshop together in summer 2017 while 
al-Kateab was still in Turkey.
81	 Waad Al-Kateab, For Sama Q&A, Picturehouse Central, London, 13 September 
2019.
82	 Watts interview.
83	 Watts interview.
84	 Watts interview.
85	 Watts interview.
86	 Watts interview.

Notes
247
87	 Ashuri and Pinchevski, ‘Witnessing as a Field’, 144.
88	 Della Ratta, ‘Emerging from the Underground’.
89	 Al-Kateab, For Sama Q&A, Curzon Soho.
90	 Wessels, Documenting Syria: Film-making, Video Activism and Revolution, 214.
91	 Stephanie Zacharek, ‘How Drones Are Revolutionizing the Way Film and 
Television Is Made’, 31 May 2018, available at https://time.com/5295594/drones-
hollywood-artists/
92	 Watts interview.
93	 Watts interview. Della Ratta writes, ‘suddenly, we are taken to the surface, as if to be 
granted some precious breath’. Della Ratta, ‘Emerging from the Underground’.
94	 Al-Kateab interview.
95	 The Cave (2019) is about a hospital in Ghouta built underground to avoid regime 
bombing.
96	 Al-Kateab interview.
97	 Torchin, Creating the Witness: Documenting Genocide on Film, Video, and the 
Internet, 161.
98	 At the time of For Sama’s release in 2019, the Syrian regime had taken back control 
of 80 per cent of Syria.
99	 Al-Kateab interview.
100	Mohamed Siam, interview by the author, 31 May 2018. There are many films about 
activists in the Egyptian Revolution, from Mosireen’s street-based witnessing to 
feature documentaries such as The Square (2013) and The Trials of Spring (2015). 
Amal (2017) also focuses on activists through a teenager’s perspective, as discussed 
in Chapter 2.
101	Scott Hibbard and Azza Salma Layton, ‘The Origins and Future of Egypt’s Revolt’, 
Journal of Islamic Law and Culture 12.3 (2010): 204.
102	Siam interview.
103	Siam interview.
104	One Egyptian fiction film regarded as a landmark for its depiction of police 
brutality is The Yacoubian Building (2006), discussed in Walter Armbrust, ‘Political 
Film in Egypt’, in Film in the Middle East and North Africa, ed. Joseph Gugler 
(Austin: University of Texas Press, 2011), 242. Others include Clash (2016) and 
The Nile Hilton Incident (2017). See Joseph Fahim, ‘Creators Meet Censors’, Cairo 
Review 28 (2018): 92–101.
105	Siam interview.
106	Siam interview.
107	Siam interview.
108	Van Welie interview.
109	Van Welie interview.
110	Siam interview.

Notes
248
111	Naziha Arebi, Freedom Fields Q&A, Picturehouse Central, London, 21 May 2019.
112	Naziha Arebi, The Paradox of Creative Constraints symposium, The Mosaic 
Rooms, London, 7 September 2019.
113	Arebi, The Paradox of Creative Constraints symposium.
114	Naziha Arebi, Freedom Fields Q&A, Frontline Club, London, 4 June 2019.
115	Arebi, The Paradox of Creative Constraints symposium.
116	Arebi, Freedom Fields Q&A, Frontline Club.
117	Steve Rose, ‘Lights, Camera, Revolution’.
118	Steve Rose, ‘“You Get Used to the Gunfire” – Filming the Libyan Women’s Football 
Team’, 31 May 2019, available at https://www.theguardian.com/film/2019/may/31/
libyan-womens-football-team-freedom-fields
119	Arebi, Freedom Fields Q&A, Frontline Club.
120	Arebi, The Paradox of Creative Constraints symposium.
121	Arebi, The Paradox of Creative Constraints symposium.
122	Arebi, Freedom Fields Q&A, Frontline Club.
123	Arebi, Freedom Fields Q&A, Picturehouse Central.
124	Arebi, The Paradox of Creative Constraints symposium.
125	Arebi, The Paradox of Creative Constraints symposium.
Chapter 2
1	
Susan Moeller, ‘A Hierarchy of Innocence: The Media’s use of Children in the 
Telling of International News’, The Harvard International Journal of Press/ Politics 
7.1 (2002): 48.
2	
Jamal Elias, Alef Is for Allah: Childhood, Emotion, and Visual Culture in Islamic 
Societies (Oakland: University of California Press, 2018), 2.
3	
Elias, Alef Is for Allah, 3.
4	
Omar Al-Ghazzi, ‘An Archetypal Digital Witness: The Child Figure and the Media 
Conflict over Syria’, International Journal of Communication 13 (2019): 3227.
5	
Al-Ghazzi, ‘An Archetypal Digital Witness’, 3227.
6	
Stephanie Hemelryk Donald, Emma Wilson, and Sarah Wright, ‘Introduction’, in 
Childhood and Nation in Contemporary World Cinema: Borders and Encounters, 
ed. Stephanie Hemelryk Donald, Emma Wilson and Sarah Wright (London: 
Bloomsbury, 2017), 2.
7	
Hamid Naficy, A Social History of Iranian Cinema, Volume 4: The Globalizing Era, 
1984–2010 (Durham: Duke University Press, 2012), 209.
8	
For critical perspectives on child performers in film history, see Michael Lawrence 
and Susan Smith, ‘The Child Performance Dossier Introduction’, Screen 53.4 
(2012): 436–9.

Notes
249
9	
Gilles Deleuze, Cinema 2: The Time-Image, trans. Hugh Tomlinson and Robert 
Galeta (London: Athlone Press, 1989), 2
10	 Deleuze, Cinema 2, 3.
11	 Laura E. Ruberto and Kristi M. Wilson, ‘Introduction’, in Italian Neorealism and 
Global Cinema, ed. Laura E. Ruberto and Kristi M. Wilson (Detroit: Wayne State 
University Press, 2007), 4.
12	 Vadim Rizov, ‘“In Prison, I had Some Peace of Mind”: Jafar Panahi on Closed 
Curtain’, in Jafar Panahi: Interviews, ed. Drew Todd (Jackson: University Press of 
Mississippi, 2019), 139.
13	 Fatima Mernissi, Beyond the Veil: Male-female Dynamics in Modern Muslim Society 
(Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1987), 97.
14	 Houshang Golmakani, ‘New Times, Same Problems’, Index on Censorship 3 (1992): 
20. The post-revolutionary Iranian government did, however, periodically publish 
film regulations, starting with the Film, Slide and Video Monitoring, and Screening 
Permission Byelaw in 1982. See ASL 19, ‘Censorship in Iranian Cinema’, in Iranian 
Cinema in a Global Context: Policy, Politics and Form, ed. Peter Decherney and 
Blake Atwood (New York: Routledge, 2015), 229–42.
15	 Hamid Naficy, ‘Veiled Vision/Powerful Presences: Women in Post-revolutionary 
Iranian Cinema’, in Eye of the Storm: Women in Post-Revolutionary Iran, ed. 
Mahnaz Afkhami and Erika Friedl (Syracuse: Syracuse University Press, 1994), 144. 
The opportunities that gender segregation affords for expressing same-sex desire 
are discussed in Chapter 4.
16	 Hamid Reza Sadr, ‘Children in Contemporary Iranian Cinema: When We Were 
Children’, in The New Iranian Cinema: Politics, Representation and Identity, ed. 
Richard Tapper (London: I.B. Tauris, 2002), 235. Azadeh Farahmand claims that 
Iranian cinema became increasingly ‘informed by sentimentality and an obsessive 
romance with children’s supposed innocence, purity and beauty’ in the 1990s, 
turning away from ‘resilient’ child characters in films made during the Iran-Iraq 
war (1980–8), such as The Runner and Bashu, the Little Stranger. See Azadeh 
Farahmand, ‘Perspectives on Recent (International Acclaim for) Iranian Cinema’, in 
The New Iranian Cinema: Politics, Representation and Identity, ed. Richard Tapper 
(London: I.B. Tauris, 2002), 104. Farahmand explains the shift by invoking the 
Islamic Republic’s use of cinema, including its child protagonists, to soften Iran’s 
image for international diplomacy. Rather than only seeing it in these terms, I 
would point to cinema’s indexical relationship with crisis (here, the Iran-Iraq war) 
which produces more direct, experiential approaches to child protagonists.
17	 Sadr, ‘Children in Contemporary Iranian Cinema: When We Were Children’, 235.
18	 Sadr, ‘Children in Contemporary Iranian Cinema: When We Were Children’, 237.
19	 Sadr, ‘Children in Contemporary Iranian Cinema: When We Were Children’, 236.

Notes
250
20	 Michelle Langford, Allegory in Iranian Cinema: The Aesthetics of Poetry and 
Resistance (London: Bloomsbury, 2019), 76.
21	 Karen Lury, The Child in Film: Tears, Fears and Fairytales (London: I.B. Tauris, 
2010), 120.
22	 Lury, The Child in Film: Tears, Fears and Fairytales, 129.
23	 Sadr, ‘Children in Contemporary Iranian Cinema: When We Were Children’, 236.
24	 Margherita Sprio, ‘Performing History: Girlhood and Sib/The Apple (Samira 
Makhmalbaf, 1998)’, in International Cinema and the Girl: Local Issues, 
Transnational Contexts, ed. Fiona Handyside and Kate Taylor-Jones (Basingstoke: 
Palgrave Macmillan, 2016), 166.
25	 For further discussion of the exploitation of child labour in cinema, see Lury, The 
Child in Film: Tears, Fears and Fairytales, 145–89.
26	 ‘Please read Amina Maher’s story’, Email from Mania Akbari to her mailing list, 
12 September 2020.
27	 Yahya al-Allaq, interview by the author, 5 May 2016. This interview was previously 
published in Shohini Chaudhuri, ‘Hidden Outside, but Not Hidden Inside’, 18 May 
2016, available at https://mosaicrooms.org/blog/page/4/
28	 Al-Allaq interview.
29	 For discussion of an earlier landmark featuring street children from the region, the 
Moroccan film Ali Zaoua, Prince of the Streets (2000) directed by Nabil Ayouch, 
see Josef Gugler, ‘Ali Zaoua: The Harsh Life of Street Children and the Poetics of 
Childhood’, The Journal of North African Studies 12.3 (2007): 369–79.
30	 Capernaum official website, available at https://sonyclassics.com/capernaum/
31	 Pamela Hutchinson, ‘City of Lost Children’, Sight & Sound 29.3 (2019): 34.
32	 Relations between the Lebanese and Syrians are further burdened by the history of 
Syrian occupation in Lebanon (1976–2005).
33	 I discuss sensitivities around this detention centre (which was situated underneath 
al-Tahwita Bridge in Beirut) in relation to the censored documentary Panoptic 
(2017) in Chapter 4.
34	 In the story, Sahar’s parents marry her off to an older man, pointing to the practice 
of child marriage which is common among Syrian refugees in Beirut’s Shatila camp.
35	 Al-Ghazzi, ‘An Archetypal Digital Witness’, 3226.
36	 Orwa al-Mokdad, interview by the author, 8 August 2018.
37	 Al-Mokdad interview. When I interviewed al-Mokdad, Nour had not yet seen 300 
Miles, indicating that he still wanted to ‘protect’ her and that, although it was made 
with her, he deemed its content and approach unsuitable for her.
38	 Eyas al-Mokdad, interview by the author, 24 April 2018. Eyas al-Mokdad is one of 
al-Mokdad’s four brothers and is a filmmaker himself.
39	 Orwa al-Mokdad interview.
40	 Orwa al-Mokdad interview.

Notes
251
41	 Orwa al-Mokdad interview.
42	 Orwa al-Mokdad interview.
43	 Moeller, ‘Hierarchy of Innocence’, 49.
44	 Moeller, ‘Hierarchy of Innocence’, 44.
45	 Anna Backman-Rogers, American Independent Cinema: Rites of Passage and the 
Crisis Image (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2015), 16.
46	 Lyn Mikel Brown, Raising Their Voices: The Politics of Girls’ Anger (Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press, 1998), 15–16.
47	 Sarah Projansky, Spectacular Girls: Media Fascination and Celebrity Culture (New 
York: New York University Press, 2014), 6.
48	 Mania Akbari, interview by the author, 6 September 2018.
49	 Akbari interview.
50	 Nawal Al-Saadawi, The Hidden Face of Eve: Women in the Arab World, trans. and 
ed. Sherif Hetata (London: Zed Books, 1991), 26.
51	 Elizabeth Warnock Fernea, ‘Childhood in the Muslim Middle East’, in Children in 
the Muslim Middle East, ed. Elizabeth Warnock Fernea (Austin: University of Texas 
Press, 1995), 10.
52	 Eric Egan, ‘Regime Critics Confront Censorship in Iranian Cinema’, in Film in 
the Middle East and North Africa: Creative Dissidence, ed. Josef Gugler (Austin: 
University of Texas Press, 2011), 55.
53	 Akbari’s 20 Fingers is discussed in Chapter 5.
54	 Naficy, A Social History of Iranian Cinema, vol. 4, 128.
55	 Naficy, A Social History of Iranian Cinema, vol. 4, 128.
56	 Naficy, A Social History of Iranian Cinema, vol. 4, 146.
57	 Projansky defines ‘tween’ age as between eight and twelve. Projansky, 18.
58	 Ahd Kamel, interview by the author, 10 May 2019.
59	 Wadjda evokes the Orientalist dimensions of this in its trailer which quotes from 
The Hollywood Reporter review – ‘A real discovery that throws open a previously 
closed world’.
60	 Kamel interview.
61	 Mernissi, Beyond the Veil: Male-female Dynamics in Modern Muslim Society, 19.
62	 Mernissi, Beyond the Veil: Male-female Dynamics in Modern Muslim Society, 31.
63	 Maria Garcia, ‘A Woman’s Voice Is Her Nakedness: An Interview with Haifa Al 
Mansour’, Cineaste 38.4 (2013): 34.
64	 Melanie Goodfellow, ‘Haifaa Al Mansour on Returning Home to Saudi Arabia to 
Shoot TIFF Title “A Perfect Candidate”’, 13 September 2019, available at https://
www.screendaily.com/features/haifaa-al-mansour-on-returning-home-to-saudi-
arabia-to-shoot-tiff-title-a-perfect-candidate/5142835.article
65	 For a detailed discussion of the bicycle motif, including in another forerunner, 
The Day I Became a Woman (2000), see Anne Ciecko, ‘Bicycle Borrowers after 

Notes
252
Neorealism: Global Nou-Velo Cinema’, in Culture on Two Wheels: The Bicycle in 
Literature and Film, ed. Jeremy Withers and Daniel P. Shea (Lincoln: University of 
Nebraska Press, 2016), 244–62.
66	 Sadaf Foroughi, interview by the author, 10 September 2018.
67	 T’cha Dunlevy, ‘TIFF 2017: Iranian Montrealer Sadaf Foroughi Makes Waves 
with First Feature Ava’, Montreal Gazette, 12 September 2017, available at: https://
montrealgazette.com/entertainment/local-arts/tiff-2017-iranian-montrealer-sadaf-
foroughi-makes-waves-with-first-feature-ava
68	 Sadaf Foroughi, Screen Talk, Human Rights Watch Film Festival, London, 
15 March 2018. To date, however, Ava has not been officially screened in Iran.
69	 Sarah Hentges, Pictures of Girlhood: Modern Female Adolescence on Film (Jefferson, 
NC: McFarland, 2006), 60.
70	 Peter Bradshaw, ‘Ava Review – Smart Teenage Thriller Amps Up the Micro-tyrannies’, 
The Guardian, 19 August 2020, available at https://www.theguardian.com/film/2020/
aug/19/ava-review-smart-teenage-thriller-amps-up-the-micro-tyrannies
71	 In this respect, Ava is similar to Dressage (2018), another Iranian fiction film where 
the teenage girl protagonist rebels against social expectations.
72	 Richard Marcus, ‘Ava, My Adolescent Self’, 9 July 2018, available at: https://
en.qantara.de/content/interview-with-award-winning-iranian-film-director-sadaf-
foroughi-ava-my-adolescent-self. This closing image forms a dialogue with New 
Iranian Cinema’s ‘open images’. See Shohini Chaudhuri and Howard Finn, ‘The 
Open Image: Poetic Realism and the New Iranian Cinema’, Screen 44.1 (2003): 
38–57.
73	 See Damon Wise, ‘IDFA: “Amal” Director Mohamed Siam on Documenting 
Disillusioned Arab Youth: “They had to swallow their dreams”’, 16 November 2017, 
available at: https://variety.com/2017/film/festivals/idfa-amal-mohamed-siam-
documenting-disillusioned-arab-youth-1202616288/
74	 Erick Neher, ‘Richard Linklater’s Sculpture in Time’, Hudson Review 67.3 (2014): 
473.
75	 ‘M. Siam le réalisateur, entretien “Je voulais comprendre l’Égypt à travers leurs 
yeux”’, Amal dossier presse (Juste distribution: Paris, 2017).
76	 ‘Myriam Sassine la productrice, entretien’, Amal dossier presse (my translation).
77	 Moeller, ‘Hierarchy of Innocence’, 44.
78	 Maha El Said, Lena Meari and Nicola Pratt, ‘Introduction’, in Rethinking Gender 
in Revolutions and Resistance in the Arab World: Lessons from the Arab World, ed. 
Maha El Said, Lena Meari and Nicola Pratt (London: Zed Books, 2015), 16. See also 
Gini Reticker’s Trials of Spring (2015) which documents women’s participation in 
the Egyptian revolution (and on which Siam worked as a cinematographer).
79	 Hentges, Pictures of Girlhood: Modern Female Adolescence on Film, 68.
80	 Mohamed Siam, interview by the author, 31 May 2018.

Notes
253
Chapter 3
1	
See Ali Jaafar, ‘“Persepolis” Banned in Lebanon’, Variety, 10 March 2008, available 
at https://variety.com/2008/digital/markets-festivals/persepolis-banned-in-
lebanon-1117982145/ In addition, the book was briefly censored in the USA; see 
Marie Ostby, ‘Graphics and Global Dissent: Marjane Satrapi’s Persepolis, Persian 
Miniatures, and the Multifaceted Power of Comic Protest’, PMLA 132.3 (2017): 575.
2	
Nea Ehrlich and Jonathan Murray, ‘Introduction’, in Drawn from Life: Issues and 
Themes in Animated Documentary Cinema, ed. Nea Ehrlich and Jonathan Murray 
(Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2019), 4.
3	
See Annabelle Honess Roe, Animated Documentary (Basingstoke: Palgrave 
Macmillan, 2013), 11.
4	
Cited in Janet Hetherington, ‘“Persepolis” in Motion’, Animation World Network, 
21 December 2007, available at https://www.awn.com/animationworld/persepolis-
motion (accessed 19 January 2020).
5	
Laura U. Marks, ‘Calligraphic Animation: Documenting the Invisible’, Animation: 
An Interdisciplinary Journal 6.4 (2011): 312.
6	
Marks, ‘Calligraphic Animation’, 312.
7	
See Giannalberto Bendazzi, Animation: A World History (Boca Raton, FL: CRC 
Press, 2016), 7.
8	
Paul Wells, Animation: Genre and Authorship (London: Wallflower, 2002), 49.
9	
Sergei Eisenstein, On Disney, ed. Jay Leyda, trans. Alan Upchurch (Calcutta: 
Seagull Books, 2017), 32.
10	 Nea Ehrlich, ‘Animated Documentaries: Aesthetics, Politics and Viewer 
Engagement’, in Pervasive Animation, ed. Suzanne Buchan (New York: Routledge, 
2013), 253.
11	 Ali Soozandeh, interview by the author, 23 August 2018.
12	 Wells acknowledges this as a qualification of his arguments. See Wells, Animation: 
Genre and Authorship, 16.
13	 Soozandeh interview.
14	 Hetherington, ‘“Persepolis” in Motion’.
15	 Marks, ‘Calligraphic Animation’, 309.
16	 Nargess Shahmanesh-Banks, ‘Animation: Hand Over Art’, Design Week 23.16 
(2008): n.p.
17	 Honess Roe, Animated Documentary, 3.
18	 Maureen Furniss, Art in Motion: Animation Aesthetics (Sydney: John Libbey and 
Co, 1998), 170.
19	 Paul Wells, Understanding Animation: A Guide to Everything from Flipbooks to 
Flash (London: Routledge, 1998), 6.
20	 Wells, Understanding Animation, 86.

Notes
254
21	 Furniss, Art in Motion: Animation Aesthetics, 163.
22	 Furniss, Art in Motion: Animation Aesthetics, 163.
23	 Fatemeh Hosseini-Shakib, ‘Iranian Animation’, in Directory of World Cinema: Iran 
2, ed. Parviz Jahed (Bristol: Intellect, 2017), 230.
24	 Hosseini-Shakib, ‘Iranian Animation’, 234.
25	 Hosseini-Shakib, ‘Iranian Animation’, 240.
26	 Tariq al-Rimawi, ‘Issues of Representation in Arab Animation Cinema: Practice, 
History and Theory’ (PhD Thesis, Loughborough University, 2014), 19.
27	 The Thousand and One Nights is a collection of folktales that belongs to both 
Arabic and Persian traditions, as discussed in Chapter 7.
28	 Ehrlich, ‘Animated Documentaries: Aesthetics, Politics and Viewer Engagement’, 
251.
29	 For further discussion of The General’s Boot and its influence on other animators 
since the ‘Arab Spring’, see Stefanie Van de Peer, ‘From Animated Cartoons to 
Suspended Animation: The History of Syrian Animation’, in Animation in the 
Middle East: Practice and Aesthetics from Baghdad to Casablanca, ed. Stefanie Van 
de Peer (London: I.B. Tauris, 2017), 107–28.
30	 Al-Rimawi, ‘Issues of Representation in Arab Animation Cinema: Practice, History 
and Theory’, 5.
31	 See Stefanie Van de Peer, ‘Introduction: Modelling Local Content for Animation 
in the Middle East’, in Animation in the Middle East: Practice and Aesthetics from 
Baghdad to Casablanca, ed. Stefanie Van de Peer (London: I.B. Tauris, 2017), 11.
32	 Paul Wells, ‘Animation in the Gallery and the Gestalt: György Kovásznai and 
William Kentridge’, in Global Animation Theory: International Perspectives at 
Animafest Zagreb, ed. Franziska Bruckner, Nikica Gilić, Holger Lang, Daniel Šuljić́ 
and Hrvoje Turković́ (London: Bloomsbury Academic, 2019), 15.
33	 See Christa Blackmon, ‘Animating Torture: A New Horizon in Human Rights 
Reporting’, 17 August 2018, available at https://observatoryihr.org/priority_posts/
animating-torture-a-new-horizon-in-human-rights-reporting/
34	 Soozandeh interview.
35	 Furniss, Art in Motion: Animation Aesthetics, 135–6
36	 Wells, Understanding Animation, 11.
37	 Soozandeh interview.
38	 Soozandeh interview.
39	 Soozandeh interview.
40	 Soozandeh interview.
41	 For example, British-Iranian producer and programmer Elhum Shakerifar 
effectively called for Tehran Taboo to be censored in angry tweets to the 
British Board of Film Classification (BBFC), which approved the film for UK 
distribution under a 12A certificate. She protested against what she saw as 

Notes
255
stereotypical representations and coarse language: ‘Tehran Taboo is not a film 
about taboos in Iran, it’s a film about all the things the Western world thinks it 
knows about a country that is constantly misunderstood, misrepresented and 
vilified’. Shakerifar, Tweet, 2 October 2018. Many diasporic Iranians are sensitive 
to the fact that Iran is shrouded in stereotypes and misconceptions in the West, 
which also affects their response to Iranian films they consider ‘damaging’ 
to Iran’s image. For further discussion of Iran diasporic audiences’ negative 
reactions to Iranian films screened in the West, see Shahab Esfandiary, Iranian 
Cinema and Globalization: National, Transnational and Islamic Dimensions 
(Bristol: Intellect, 2012), 74.
42	 Soozandeh interview.
43	 Furniss, Art in Motion: Animation Aesthetics, 77.
44	 Honess Roe, Animated Documentary, 82.
45	 Soozandeh interview.
46	 Soozandeh interview.
47	 Soozandeh interview.
48	 Stanley Cavell, The World Viewed: Reflections on the Ontology of Film (Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press, 1979), 170.
49	 Nadia Yaqub, Palestinian Cinema in the Days of Revolution (Austin: University of 
Texas Press, 2018), 6.
50	 Cited in Carol Hills, ‘Why Israel Declared 18 Dairy Cows a National Security Risk’, 
The World, 18 June 2015, available at https://www.pri.org/stories/2015-06-18/
wanted-18-dairy-cows-considered-security-risk
51	 Cited in Hills.
52	 Another example is Naila and the Uprising (2017), set in Gaza during the First 
Intifada.
53	 For an overview of links between animation and humour, see Wells, Understanding 
Animation, 127–86.
54	 Cited in Dalia Hatuqa, ‘Q&A: Middle East’s Most Powerful Army Chasing 18 Cows’, 
21 March 2016, available at: https://www.aljazeera.com/features/2016/3/21/qa-
middle-easts-most-powerful-army-chasing-18-cows
55	 Cited in Hills.
56	 Honess Roe, Animated Documentary, 79.
57	 The films in The Trilogy of Voice (2014) are What do you call it? (in which Syrian 
women talk about the names they give to their vaginas), Suleima and When I Heard 
My Voice for the First Time. The first two are animated, while the third uses archival 
footage as visuals. See Estayqazat’s YouTube channel, available at https://www.
youtube.com/channel/UCx1yTQXkkeSHjl_v7Z66GVw
58	 Van de Peer, ‘From Animated Cartoons to Suspended Animation’, 107.
59	 Interview with Jalal Maghout, 5 May 2016.

Notes
256
60	 Miriam Cooke, Dancing in Damascus: Creativity, Resilience, and the Syrian 
Revolution (New York: Routledge 2017), 101–2.
61	 Maghout interview.
62	 For a general elucidation of this strategy, see Honess Roe, Animated Documentary, 
78.
63	 Maghout interview.
64	 Honess Roe, Animated Documentary, 88.
65	 This is a common sentiment among Syrian revolutionaries, which I heard from 
several filmmakers. We also hear it in For Sama (2019), where Waad al-Kateab 
states, ‘If I could rewind the days I would do exactly the same even if I never 
recover from the trauma’.
66	 Maghout interview.
67	 Ehrlich, ‘Animated Documentaries: Aesthetics, Politics and Viewer Engagement’, 
255–6.
68	 Maghout interview.
Chapter 4
1	
Fuad Abdulaziz, Sana‘a: A Symphony talk, University of Essex, 26 November 2020; 
Michel de Certeau, The Practice of Everyday Life, trans. Steven F. Rendall (Berkeley: 
University of California, 1984).
2	
Guy Debord, ‘Introduction to a Critique of Urban Geography’, in Situationist 
International Anthology, ed. and trans. Ken Knabb (Berkeley: Bureau of Public 
Secrets, 1995), 8.
3	
Guy Debord, ‘Theory of the Dérive’, in Situationist International Anthology, ed. and 
trans. Ken Knabb (Berkeley: Bureau of Public Secrets, 1995), 62.
4	
Merlin Coverley, Psychogeography (Harpenden: Pocket Essentials, 2010), 12.
5	
Giuliana Bruno, Atlas of Emotion: Journeys in Art, Architecture and Film (New York: 
Verso, 2002), 15.
6	
Thomas Deane Tucker, The Peripatetic Frame: Images of Walking in Cinema 
(Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2020), 11.
7	
Siegfried Kracauer, Theory of Film: The Redemption of Physical Reality (New York: 
Oxford University Press, 1960), 254.
8	
Gilles Deleuze, Cinema 1: The Movement-image, trans. Hugh Tomlinson and 
Barbara Habberjam (London: Athlone Press, 1992), 212.
9	
Viola Shafik, Arab Cinema: History and Cultural Identity (Cairo: American 
University in Cairo Press, 2016), 136.
10	 Khalid Abdalla, interview by the author, 8 October 2018.

Notes
257
11	 Blake Atwood, Reform Cinema in Iran: Film and Political Change in the Islamic 
Republic (New York: Columbia University Press, 2016), 82.
12	 For details of Lefebvre’s relationship with Situationist International, see Kristin 
Ross, ‘Lefebvre on the Situationists: An Interview’, October 79 (1997): 69–83.
13	 Henri Lefebvre, Writings on Cities, trans. and ed. Eleonore Kaufman and Elizabeth 
Lebas (Oxford: Blackwell, 1996).
14	 Keywan Karimi, interview by the author, 13 February 2021.
15	 Karimi interview.
16	 Karimi interview.
17	 Karimi interview.
18	 My translation. Cited in Hadrien Salducci, ‘KEYWAN KARIMI, rencontre avec 
un cinéaste censure’, 13 June 2018, available at https://www.leblogducinema.com/
portrait/keywan-karimi-interview-867162/
19	 The female narrator is Farahnaz Sharifi, herself a documentary filmmaker whose 
co-authored work Profession: Documentarist (2014) is discussed in Chapter 7. With 
its dialectic of male and female voice-overs, Writing on the City is also reminiscent 
of Forugh Farrokhzad’s The House is Black (1963).
20	 Karimi interview.
21	 Raoul Vaneigem, ‘The Wall Is a Mirror’, available at https://www.
puntodevistafestival.com/en/noticias.asp?IdNoticia=399
22	 The term ‘habitus’ originates from the work of sociologist Pierre Bourdieu; see 
Pierre Bourdieu, Outline of a Theory of Practice, trans. Richard Nice (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1979), 72. Tehran: City of Love also uses deadpan 
humour to explore its themes, as discussed in Chapter 6.
23	 An earlier film that features a zūrkhāneh is Qays
˙
ar (1969).
24	 Ali Jaberansari, The Paradox of Creative Constraints symposium, The Mosaic 
Rooms, London, 7 September 2019.
25	 Ali Jaberansari, interview by the author, 30 October 2018.
26	 In earlier chapters, this is discussed as the practice of taqieh.
27	 Jaberansari interview.
28	 Henri Lefebvre, The Production of Space, trans. Donald Nicholson-Smith (Oxford: 
Blackwell, 1991), 57.
29	 Ali Jaberansari, Tehran: City of Love Q&A, Poetry in Motion, Barbican, London, 
13 April 2019.
30	 Jaberansari, Tehran: City of Love Q&A, Poetry in Motion.
31	 Jaberansari interview.
32	 Pedram Partovi, Popular Iranian Cinema before the Revolution: Family and Nation 
in FilmFarsi (Abingdon: Routledge, 2017), 110. Fīlmfārsī is the name given to the 
mainstream cinema that predominated in Iran before the Islamic Republic.
33	 Jaberansari, Tehran: City of Love Q&A, Poetry in Motion.

Notes
258
34	 Jaberansari, The Paradox of Creative Constraints symposium.
35	 Jaberansari, The Paradox of Creative Constraints symposium.
36	 Lina Khatib, Lebanese Cinema: Imagining the Civil War and beyond (London: I.B. 
Tauris, 2008), 57–8.
37	 T.J. Demos, The Migrant Image: The Art and Politics of Documentary during Global 
Crisis (Durham: Duke University Press, 2013), 187.
38	 Rana Eid, interview by the author, 7 August 2018.
39	 Nadine Labaki later filmed the same detention centre in Capernaum (2018), as 
discussed in Chapter 2. The facility has since been dismantled.
40	 Eid interview.
41	 Rania Stephan, interview by the author, 20 July 2018.
42	 Henri Lefebvre, Rhythmanalysis: Space, Time and Everyday Life, trans. Stuart Elden 
and Gerald Moore (London: Bloomsbury, 2013), 30.
43	 Eid interview.
44	 Michel Foucault, The Birth of the Clinic (Abingdon: Routledge, 2003), 45.
45	 Lefebvre, Production of Space, 98.
46	 Eid interview.
47	 Stephan interview. Stephan’s own film, The Three Disappearances of Soad Hosni 
(2011), is discussed in Chapter 8.
48	 Eid interview.
49	 Eid interview.
50	 Eid interview.
51	 Eid interview. She was referring to the Civil War and, before that, several 
earthquakes.
52	 Eid interview.
53	 Stephan interview.
54	 Eid interview.
55	 Eid interview.
56	 Geraldine Pratt and Rose Marie San Juan, Film and Urban Space: Critical 
Possibilities (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2014), 105.
57	 Pratt and San Juan, Film and Urban Space, 105.
58	 Abdalla interview.
59	 Khalid Abdalla, In the Last Days of the City Q&A, The Mosaic Rooms, London, 
6 September 2018.
60	 Abdalla interview.
61	 Abdalla interview.
62	 Abdalla interview.
63	 Gilles Deleuze, Cinema 2: The Time-Image, trans. Hugh Tomlinson and Robert 
Galeta (London: Athlone Press, 1989), 78.
64	 Abdalla interview.

Notes
259
65	 I borrow the term déjà disparu from Ackbar Abbas’s writing on Hong Kong cinema 
in the shadow of the city’s 1997 handover to China. See Abbas, Hong Kong: Culture 
and the Politics of Disappearance (Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, 
1997), 25.
66	 Abdalla interview.
67	 Abdalla, In the Last Days of the City Q&A, Mosaic Rooms.
68	 Abdalla, In the Last Days of the City Q&A, Mosaic Rooms.
69	 Walter Benjamin, Illuminations, trans. Harry Zohn (London: Fontana Press, 1992), 
230.
70	 For the symbolism of the Rabea hand, see Marwan Kraidy, The Naked Blogger of 
Cairo: Creative Insurgency in the Arab World (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press, 2016), 104.
71	 Abdalla interview.
72	 Abdalla interview.
73	 Abdalla interview.
74	 Giuliana Bruno, ‘Bodily Architectures’, Assemblage 19 (1992): 108.
75	 Debord, ‘Theory of the Dérive’, 62.
76	 See Lina Khatib, Image Politics in the Middle East: The Role of the Visual in Political 
Struggle (London: I.B. Tauris, 2012).
77	 Debord, ‘Theory of the Dérive’, 62.
78	 Coverley, Psychogeography, 97.
Chapter 5
1	
Kay Dickinson, ‘The Palestinian Road (Block) Movie Everyday Geographies of 
Second Intifada Cinema’, in Cinema at the Periphery, ed. Dina Iordanova, David 
Martin-Jones and Belén Vidal (Detroit: Wayne State University Press, 2010), 143.
2	
Laura Marks, Hanan al-Cinema: Affections for the Moving Image (Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press, 2015), 159.
3	
Gilles Deleuze, Cinema 1: The Movement-image, trans. Hugh Tomlinson and 
Barbara Habberjam (London: Athlone Press, 1992), 208.
4	
Nadia Yaqub, ‘Utopia and Dystopia in Palestinian Circular Journeys from Ghassān 
Kanafānī to Contemporary Film’, Middle Eastern Literatures 15.3 (2012): 306.
5	
Rebecca Stein, Itineraries in Conflict: Israelis, Palestinians, and the Political Lives of 
Tourism (Durham: Duke University Press, 2008), 14.
6	
Laura Berger, ‘Oscars 2018: Foreign Lang Contenders: Annemarie Jacir “Wajib”’, 
27 November 2017, available at https://womenandhollywood.com/oscars-2018-
foreign-language-contenders-annemarie-jacir-wajib-809a634d10f2/

Notes
260
7	
However, even foreign passport holders take risks (for example, of having footage 
or equipment taken from them at Israeli border control) every time they enter or 
leave the country.
8	
Annemarie Jacir, ‘“For Cultural Purposes Only”: Curating a Palestinian Film 
Festival’, in Dreams of a Nation: On Palestinian Cinema, ed. Hamid Dabashi 
(London: Verso, 2006), 27.
9	
Jafar Panahi, interview by Tobias Grey, ‘Iranian Director Flouts Ban on 
Filmmaking’, in Jafar Panahi: Interviews, ed. Drew Todd (Jackson: University Press 
of Mississippi, 2019), 134.
10	 Jafar Panahi, ‘Dissident Cinema: A Conversation between Jafar Panahi and 
Jamsheed Akrami’, World Policy Journal 35.1 (2018): 62.
11	 Annemarie Jacir, tweet, 10 September 2018.
12	 Annemarie Jacir, interview by Rolex Mentor, ‘Film Wajib Wins Prizes and Praise’, 
March 2018, available at https://www.rolexmentorprotege.com/journal/article/
annemarie-jacir-wajib (accessed 19 September 2018).
13	 Naziha Arebi, interview by the author, 30 July 2019.
14	 Larissa Sansour, interview by the author, 7 August 2017. Her films are discussed in 
Chapter 9.
15	 Marks, Hanan al-Cinema, 168.
16	 Harriet Sherwood, ‘Speed Sisters on Track for Race Equality’, The Guardian, 
18 June 2010, available at https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/jun/18/
palestine-speed-sisters-race
17	 Amber Fares, interview by the author, 15 May 2020.
18	 Fares interview.
19	 Israeli and Palestinian territory number plates are differentiated by colour: the 
former are yellow, while the latter are white.
20	 Fares interview.
21	 Fares interview.
22	 Fares interview.
23	 Fares interview. Fares directed a behind-the-scenes documentary for The Idol 
(2015) in Gaza.
24	 Fares interview.
25	 Fares interview.
26	 Fares interview.
27	 Fares interview.
28	 Fares interview.
29	 Fares interview.
30	 Fares interview.
31	 A.L. Rees, ‘Moving Spaces’, in Autopia: Cars and Culture, ed. Peter Wollen and Joe 
Kerr (London: Reaktion Books, 2002), 93.

Notes
261
32	 Steve Cohan and Ina Rae Hark, ‘Introduction’, in The Road Movie Book, ed. Steve 
Cohan and Ina Rae Hark (London: Routledge, 2002), 8.
33	 For detailed discussion of Kiarostami’s use of the car, see Devin Orgeron, Road 
Movies: From Muybridge and Méliès to Lynch and Kiarostami (Basingstoke: Palgrave 
Macmillan, 2008).
34	 Geoff Andrew, 10 (London: British Film Institute, 2005), 38.
35	 Mania Akbari, interview by the author, 6 September 2018.
36	 Akbari interview.
37	 Panahi interview by Grey, 133.
38	 Panahi interview by Grey, 134.
39	 Mahsa Salamati, ‘Transnational Film Circulation in the Iranian Context: From 
Conjunctural Crisis to Discursive Heterotopia’ (PhD Thesis, University of New 
South Wales, 2019), 193–4.
40	 Panahi interview by Grey, 132.
41	 Panahi, ‘Dissident Cinema’, 69.
42	 Panahi, interview by Vadim Rizov, ‘“In Prison, I had Some Peace of Mind”: Jafar 
Panahi on Closed Curtain’, in Jafar Panahi: Interviews, ed. Drew Todd (Jackson: 
University Press of Mississippi, 2019), 138.
43	 Salamati, ‘Transnational Film Circulation in the Iranian Context’, 224.
44	 Trevor Johnston, ‘Taxi Tehran’, Sight & Sound 25.11 (2015): 68–9.
45	 In Iran, movie smugglers also provide pirated movies for download from their 
websites or Telegram accounts.
46	 Panahi, ‘Dissident Cinema’, 64–5.
47	 The Farsi term is qābl-e pakhsh, literally ‘worthy of distribution’.
48	 Salamati, ‘Transnational Film Circulation in the Iranian Context’, 202.
49	 Lara Zeidan, interview by the author, 26 August 2019.
50	 Zeidan interview.
51	 Zeidan interview.
52	 Zeidan interview.
53	 Lara Zeidan, interview by Jennifer Merin, ‘Whistler Film Festival 2018: Lara 
Zeidan, director of Three Centimetres’, 29 November 2018, available at https://awfj.
org/female-gaze/2018/11/29/whistler-film-festival-2018-lara-zeidan-director-of-
three-centimetres/?doing_wp_cron=1618823363.8232939243316650390625
54	 Philippe Aractingi, interview by the author, 4 October 2019.
55	 Aractingi interview.
56	 Aractingi interview.
57	 Ali Mostafa, The Worthy Q&A chaired by the author, NYU Arts Center, Abu Dhabi, 
3 April 2017. Popular genres are no guarantee of commercial success, given that 
Mostafa’s independent debut feature, City of Life (2009), performed better at the 

Notes
262
box office than his subsequent Image Nation-supported popular genre films From 
A to B and The Worthy (2016).
58	 Susan Hayward, Cinema Studies: The Key Concepts (London: Routledge, 2000), 313.
59	 Cohan and Hark, ‘Introduction’, 9.
60	 Roy Dib, interview by the author, 19 June 2020.
61	 Dib interview.
62	 Dib interview.
63	 Dib interview.
64	 Dib interview.
65	 Dib interview.
66	 Dib interview.
67	 Dib interview.
68	 Teresa de Lauretis, ‘Film and the Visible’, in How Do I Look: Queer Film and Video, 
ed. Bad Object-Choices (Seattle: Bay Press, 1991), 255.
Chapter 6
1	
Larissa Sansour, interview by the author, 7 August 2017.
2	
Roy Dib, interview by the author, 19 June 2020.
3	
This includes scholarship on humour in the Middle East, as well as general works 
on the philosophy of humour. See Gayatri Devi and Najat Rahman, ed. Humor in 
Middle Eastern Cinema (Detroit: Wayne State University Press, 2014); Chrisoula 
Lionis, Laughter in Occupied Palestine: Comedy and Identity in Art and Film 
(London: I.B. Tauris, 2016); Simon Critchley, On Humour (London: Routledge, 
2002); John Morreall, Comic Relief: A Comprehensive Philosophy of Humor (Malden: 
Wiley-Blackwell, 2009). There are other works that emphasize the motivation and 
purpose of humour, which are practitioner or activist-led, although none of these 
focus on cinema. See, for example, Janjira Sombatpoonsiri, Humor and Nonviolent 
Struggle in Serbia (New York: Syracuse University Press, 2015), Mahmud Farjami, 
Iranian Political Satirists: Experience and Motivation in the Contemporary Era 
(Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing Company, 2017); Amber Day, ed. Satire 
and Dissent (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2011).
4	
I borrow the idea of comic modes from Geoff King, Film Comedy (New York: 
Columbia University Press, 2002), 2.
5	
King, Film Comedy, 2.
6	
For further discussion of safety valve theory and ‘permitted criticism’, see 
Lisa Wedeen, Ambiguities of Domination: Politics, Rhetoric, and Symbols in 
Contemporary Syria (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2015), 88.

Notes
263
7	
See Lisa Wedeen, Authoritarian Apprehensions: Ideology, Judgment, and Mourning 
in Syria (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2019), 51.
8	
Henri Bergson, Laughter: An Essay on the Meaning of the Comic, trans. Cloudesley 
Brereton and Fred Rothwell (Salt Lake City, UT: Project Gutenberg, 2009), 15.
9	
Naziha Arebi, The Paradox of Creative Constraints symposium, The Mosaic 
Rooms, London, 7 September 2019.
10	 Nacim Pak-Shiraz, ‘Iranian Comedies’, in Directory of World Cinema: Iran 2, ed. 
Parviz Jahed (Bristol: Intellect, 2017), 266.
11	 See Sean Foley, Changing Saudi Arabia: Art, Culture and Society in the Kingdom 
(Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner Publishers, 2019), 77–9.
12	 Foley, Changing Saudi Arabia, 75.
13	 Hisham Fageeh, talk at NYU Abu Dhabi, organized by the author, 10 April 2017.
14	 Fageeh NYU Abu Dhabi talk.
15	 Fageeh NYU Abu Dhabi talk.
16	 Fageeh NYU Abu Dhabi talk.
17	 Basil Khalil, interview by the author, 17 September 2019.
18	 Khalil interview.
19	 Hamid Naficy, A Social History of Iranian Cinema, Volume 4: The Globalizing Era, 
1984–2010 (Durham: Duke University Press, 2012), 190.
20	 Mohamed M. Helmy and Sabine Frerichs, ‘Stripping the Boss: The Powerful Role of 
Humor in the Egyptian Revolution 2011’, Integrative Psychological and Behavioral 
Science 47 (2013): 452.
21	 The collective’s name, Masasit Mati, refers to the straw with which Syrians (or, 
more specifically, Alawites, the sect to which the al-Assad family belongs) drink 
Mati tea. They have since created another series, Top Goon Reloaded, which 
satirizes the international community’s response to the Syrian crisis and dictators 
from other countries.
22	 Masasit Mati, ‘Who Wants to Kill a Million?’ in Syria Speaks: Art and Culture from 
the Frontline, ed. Malu Halasa, Zaher Omareen and Nawara Mahfoud (London: 
Saqi Books, 2014), 269.
23	 Jamil al-Abyad, interviewed by Annasofie Flamand and Hugh Macleod, ‘Little 
Dictator’, Witness, Aljazeera, 21 August 2012, available at https://www.aljazeera.
com/program/episode/2012/8/21/little-dictator/
24	 Wedeen, Authoritarian Apprehensions, 74.
25	 Cited in Hugh Macleod and Annasofie Flamand, ‘Top Goon: Puppet Drama 
Lampoons Syria’s Bashar al-Assad’, Global Post, 12 December 2011, available at 
https://www.pri.org/stories/2011-12-12/top-goon-puppet-drama-lampoons-syrias-
bashar-al-assad
26	 Amber Day, ‘Introduction: Poking Holes in the Spectacle’, in Satire and Dissent, ed. 
Amber Day (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2011), 21.

Notes
264
27	 Cited in Macleod and Flamand, ‘Top Goon: Puppet Drama Lampoons Serious 
Bashar al-Assad’.
28	 Leila Sansour, interview by the author, 9 November 2015.
29	 Leila Sansour interview.
30	 Annemarie Jacir, interview by Melanie Goodfellow, ‘Annemarie Jacir on the 
Tensions of Shooting “Wajib” in Nazareth’, 15 December 2017, available at https://
www.screendaily.com/features/annemarie-jacir-on-the-tensions-of-shooting-wajib-
in-nazareth/5125051.article
31	 Lionis, Laughter in Occupied Palestine, 129.
32	 Leila Sansour interview.
33	 André Breton claims that the term ‘black humour’ didn’t exist as a dictionary term 
before An Anthology of Black Humour, a collection of texts that he edited in 1940 
to represent surrealist notions of humour. See Breton, ‘Foreword to 1966 French 
Edition’, in Anthology of Black Humour, ed. André Breton, trans. Mark Polizzoti 
(London: Telegram, 2009), 11.
34	 Chapter 9 is dedicated to science fiction and dystopia, including Larissa Sansour’s 
works.
35	 Larissa Sansour interview.
36	 Larissa Sansour interview.
37	 Mounia Akl, ‘Tales of the Silk Road – Lebanon Chapter’ Q&A, Rich Mix, London, 
25 February 2019.
38	 Edward Watts, interview by the author, 13 May 2020.
39	 Sigmund Freud, ‘On Humour’, in The Standard Edition of the Complete 
Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud, vol. 21, trans. James Strachey (London: 
Hogarth Press, 1961), 161.
40	 Jacir, interview by Leigh Singer, ‘“Laughing is a Way to Resist”: Annemarie Jacir on 
Her Father-son Wedding Drama Wajib’, 7 January 2019, available at https://www2.
bfi.org.uk/news-opinion/sight-sound-magazine/interviews/wajib-annemarie-jacir-
palestinian-father-son-wedding-drama
41	 Dib interview.
42	 Leila Sansour interview.
43	 Larissa Sansour interview.
44	 Haim Bresheeth, ‘A Symphony of Absence: Borders and Liminality in Elia 
Suleiman’s “Chronicle of a Disappearance”’, Framework: The Journal of Cinema and 
Media 43.2 (2002): 73.
45	 Elia Suleiman, It Must Be Heaven Q&A, BFI London Film Festival, 9 October 2019.
46	 Elia Suleiman, interview by Linda Butler, ‘The Occupation (and Life) through an 
Absurdist Lens’, Journal of Palestine Studies 32.2 (2003): 72.
47	 King, Film Comedy, 22–3.
48	 Suleiman, It Must Be Heaven Q&A.

Notes
265
49	 Suleiman, It Must Be Heaven Q&A.
50	 Suleiman, It Must Be Heaven Q&A.
51	 Basil Khalil, The Paradox of Creative Constraints symposium, The Mosaic Rooms, 
London, 7 September 2019.
52	 Khalil interview.
53	 Khalil interview.
54	 Khalil interview. Khalil’s comments recall Henri Bergson’s view of the comic as 
‘something mechanical encrusted on the living’. See Bergson, Laughter, 49.
55	 Khalil interview.
56	 Khalil interview.
57	 Khalil interview.
58	 Mary Douglas, ‘The Social Control of Cognition: Some Factors in Joke Perception’, 
Man 3.3 (1968): 369.
59	 Greg Philo, Alison Gilmour, Maureen Gilmour, Susanna Rust, Etta Gaskell and 
Lucy West, ‘The Israeli-Palestinian Conflict: TV News and Public Understanding’, 
in War and the Media: Reporting Conflict 24/7, ed. Daya Kishan Thussu and Des 
Freedman (London: Sage, 2003), 139.
60	 Khalil interview.
61	 Khalil interview.
62	 Khalil, The Paradox of Creative Constraints symposium.
63	 Liz Ferguson, ‘FNC 2018: Review of Iranian Comedy Pig (Khook)’, 9 October 
2018, available at https://mostlymovies.ca/2018/10/09/fnc-2018-review-of-iranian-
comedy-pig-khook/
64	 Anne Démy-Geroe, Iranian National Cinema: The Interaction of Policy, Genre, 
Funding and Reception (Abingdon: Routledge, 2020), 47.
65	 Mani Haghighi, interview by the author, 13 October 2020.
66	 See Richard Brody, ‘“Pig,” Reviewed: An Iranian Comedy about Film Makers Who 
Become the Targets of Murder’, 7 January 2019, available at https://www.newyorker.
com/culture/the-front-row/pig-reviewed-an-iranian-comedy-about-filmmakers-
who-become-the-targets-of-murder
67	 Haghighi interview.
68	 Haghighi interview. The phrase has been attributed to Voltaire but was written by 
S.G. Tallentyre (pseudonym of Evelyn Beatrice Hall) in Friends of Voltaire (1906) 
in order to encapsulate Voltaire’s attitude and has become the motto of some free 
speech advocators.
69	 Haghighi interview.
70	 Haghighi, email communication with the author, 7 October 2020.
71	 Haghighi interview.
72	 Haghighi, email communication with the author.
73	 Critchley, On Humour, 33.

Notes
266
74	 Haghighi interview.
75	 Mani Haghighi, interview by Sanam Shantyaei, ‘A Killer Comedy: France 24 Meets 
the Iranian Director behind “Pig”’, 5 December 2018, available at https://www.
youtube.com/watch?v=MTWTGc4i0MM
76	 Linda Hutcheon, ‘The Complex Functions of Irony’, Revista Canadiense de Estudios 
Hispánicos 16.2 (1992): 220.
77	 Ali Jaberansari, Paradox of Creative Constraints symposium, 7 September 2019.
78	 Ali Jaberansari, interview by the author, 30 October 2018.
79	 Ali Jaberansari, Tehran: City of Love Q&A, BFI London Film Festival, 14 October 
2018.
80	 James MacDowell, ‘Notes on Quirky’, Movie: A Journal of Film Criticism 1.1 (2010): 
3.
81	 James MacDowell, Irony in Film (London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2016), 145–6.
82	 Cited in Thomas Austin, ‘Introduction’, in The Films of Aki Kaurismäki: Ludic 
Engagements, ed. Thomas Austin (New York: Bloomsbury Academic, 2018), 3.
83	 Michael Lawrence, ‘Deadpan Dogs: Aki Kaurismäki’s Canine Comedies’, in The 
Films of Aki Kaurismäki: Ludic Engagements, ed. Thomas Austin (New York: 
Bloomsbury Academic, 2018), 200.
84	 Jaakko Seppälä, ‘The Camera’s Ironic Point of View: Notes on Strange and Comic 
Elements in the Films of Aki Kaurismäki’, in The Films of Aki Kaurismäki: Ludic 
Engagements, ed. Thomas Austin (New York: Bloomsbury Academic, 2018), 83–4.
85	 The term ‘discrepant awareness’ derives from Bertrand Evans, Shakespeare’s 
Comedies (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1960), 14. MacDowell deploys it extensively in 
his book Irony in Film.
86	 I am adapting MacDowell’s characterization of ‘quirky’. See MacDowell, ‘Notes on 
Quirky’, 3.
87	 Jonathan Romney, ‘Last Exit to Helsinki: The Bleak Comedic Genius of Aki 
Kaurismäki, Finland’s Finest’, Film Comment 39.2 (2003): 47.
88	 MacDowell, ‘Notes on Quirky’, 11.
89	 This is how Clare Colebrook defines ‘romantic irony’. See Colebrook, Irony 
(London: Routledge, 2004), 57.
90	 Mahmoud Sabbagh, Barakah Meets Barakah Q&A, BFI London Film Festival, 
8 October 2016.
91	 Sabbagh, Barakah Meets Barakah Q&A, BFI London Film Festival.
92	 Fageeh NYU Abu Dhabi talk.
93	 Fageeh, Barakah Meets Barakah Q&A, BFI London Film Festival, 8 October 2016.
94	 By the time Barakah Meets Barakah was released in 2016, the powers of the 
religious police (Committee for the Promotion of Virtue and Prevention of 
Vice, or mutawwa) had been reduced by the Council of Ministers. See Valerie 
Anishchenkova, Modern Saudi Arabia (ABC-CLIO, 2020), 95.

Notes
267
95	
Claire Mortimer, Romantic Comedy (Abingdon: Routledge, 2010), 4.
96	
Fageeh NYU Abu Dhabi talk.
97	
Fatima al-Banawi, Barakah Meets Barakah Q&A, BFI London Film Festival, 
8 October 2016.
98	
Fageeh NYU Abu Dhabi talk. Since Fageeh made this comment in 2017, many 
more Saudi movies have been produced.
99	
King, Film Comedy, 62.
100	 Foley, Changing Saudi Arabia, 173.
101	 Foley, Changing Saudi Arabia, 174.
102	 Foley, Changing Saudi Arabia, 4.
103	 Jane Kinninmont, ‘Saudi Arabia: Why Is Going to the Cinema Suddenly 
OK?’ 17 April 2018, available at https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-middle-
east-43738718
104	 Ahd Kamel, interview by the author, 10 May 2019.
105	 Kamel interview. Furthermore, Saudi women’s activism against the driving ban 
goes all the way back to the 1980s.
106	 Day, ‘Introduction’, 9.
107	 Fageeh NYU Abu Dhabi talk.
108	 King, Film Comedy, 133.
Chapter 7
1	
Viola Shafik, Arab Cinema: History and Cultural Identity (Cairo: The American 
University in Cairo Press, 2016), 92. This narrative structure is not unique to 
the region, however. It is said to have originated in Indian folktales such as 
Kathasaritsagara. See K. Ayyappa Panikkar, Indian Narratology (New Delhi: Indira 
Gandhi National Centre for the Arts, 2003).
2	
Orkideh Behrouzan, ‘Introduction’, in The Book of Tehran: A City in Short Fiction 
(Manchester: Comma Press, 2019), xi–xii.
3	
The frame story and some tales of The Thousand and One Nights have been 
traced to a Persian work, Hazar Afsanah (‘A thousand legends’). The work 
was translated into Arabic in the ninth century, when its title became Alf 
Layla (‘A Thousand Nights’) and later Alf Layla wa Layla (‘A Thousand and 
One Nights’). Indian and Arabic folktales were added by multiple scribes and 
editors. The arrangement of stories kept changing until a more fixed written 
form was adopted in the eighteenth century. It was first introduced to the 
West by Antoine Gallard’s French translation, Les mille et une nuits (1704). See 
David Pinault, Storytelling Techniques in the Arabian Nights (Leiden: E.J. Brill, 
1992), 6.

Notes
268
4	
David Bordwell, Poetics of Cinema (New York: Routledge, 2008), 105.
5	
Walter Ong, Orality and Literacy: The Technologizing of the Word (Abingdon: 
Routledge, 2006), 143.
6	
María Del Mar Azcona, The Multi-protagonist Film (Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell, 
2010), 33.
7	
The expression ‘life as lived’ derives from the anthropologist Paul Riesman, 
Freedom in Fulani Social Life: An Introspective Ethnography, trans. Martha Fuller 
(Chicago: Chicago University Press, 1977), 1.
8	
See, for example, Jack Shaheen, Real Bad Arabs: How Hollywood Vilifies a People 
(New York: Olive Branch Press, 2001), 8.
9	
Michel Foucault, Aesthetics, Method, and Epistemology: Essential Works of Foucault, 
1954–1984, ed. James D. Faubion (New York: The New Press, 1998), 139.
10	 Lucien Dällenbach, ‘Mise-en-abyme and Mirror Effects in Claude Simon’, in Claude 
Simon, ed. Celia Britton (New York: Longman, 1993), 141. Dällenbach treats 
the topic of mise en abyme more extensively in his book The Mirror in the Text 
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1989).
11	 Dällenbach, ‘Mise-en-abyme and Mirror Effects in Claude Simon’, 142.
12	 Gilles Deleuze, Cinema 2: The Time-Image, trans. Hugh Tomlinson and Robert 
Galeta (London: Athlone Press, 1989), 76.
13	 Deleuze, Cinema 2, 76.
14	 Shafik, Arab Cinema, 36.
15	 Nacim Pak-Shiraz, ‘Truth, Lies and Justice: The Fragmented Picture in Asghar 
Farhadi’s Films’, in Muslims in the Movies, ed. Kristian Peterson (Harvard: Harvard 
University Press, 2021), 156.
16	 Pak-Shiraz, ‘Truth, Lies and Justice’, 156.
17	 Cited in Lloyd Ridgeon, Makhmalbaf’s Broken Mirror: The Socio-political 
Significance of Modern Iranian Cinema (Durham: University of Durham, 2000), 12.
18	 Anne Démy-Geroe, Iranian National Cinema: The Interaction of Policy, Genre, 
Funding and Reception (Abingdon: Routledge, 2020), 177.
19	 Mohammad Rasoulof, interview by Ali Moosavi, ‘A Stranger in His Homeland’, 
Film International 84 (2018): 109–10.
20	 Rasoulof, interview by Moosavi, 110.
21	 Rasoulof, interview by Moosavi, 110.
22	 Shirin Barghnavard, The Paradox of Creative Constraints symposium, The Mosaic 
Rooms, London, 7 September 2019.
23	 Deutsche Welle, ‘Why Mohammad Rasoulof Still Makes Films Despite Iran’s Threats’, 
available at https://www.dw.com/en/why-mohammad-rasoulof-still-makes-films-
despite-irans-threats/a-52575195
24	 For an auteurist reading that unpacks these references to Banietemad’s earlier 
works, see Michelle Langford, ‘Tales and the Cinematic Divan of Rakshan 

Notes
269
Banietemad’, in Refocus: The Films of Rakshan Banietemad, ed. Maryam 
Ghorbankarimi (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2021).
25	 Zahra Khosroshahi, ‘The Films of Rakhshan Banietemad: A Gateway into the 
Representation of Women in Iranian Cinema’ (PhD Thesis, University of East 
Anglia, 2019), 207.
26	 Margrit Tröhler, ‘Les Films à protagonistes multiples et la logique des possibles’, Iris 
29 (2000): 85–102.
27	 Bordwell, Poetics of Cinema, 191.
28	 Azcona, The Multi-protagonist Film, 2.
29	 Shafik, Arab Cinema, 226.
30	 Banietemad, interview by Shiva Rahbaran, ‘Rakshan Bani-Etemad: Cinema as a 
Mirror of the Urban Image’, in Iranian Cinema Uncensored: Contemporary Film-
Makers since the Islamic Revolution (London: I.B. Tauris, 2016), 133–4.
31	 Banietemad, interview by Maryam Ghorbankarimi, ‘A Conversation with 
the Director’, in Refocus: The Films of Rakshan Banietemad, ed. Maryam 
Ghorbankarimi (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2021), 19.
32	 Kay Armatage and Zahra Khosroshahi, ‘An Interview with Rakhshan Banietemad’, 
Feminist Media Histories 3.1 (2017): 152.
33	 See Azcona, The Multi-protagonist Film, 39.
34	 Zahra Khosroshahi, ‘The Artistic and Political Implications of the Meta-
cinematic in Rakshan Banietemad’s Films’ and Maryam Ghorbankarimi, ‘Rakshan 
Banietemad’s Art of Social Realism: Bridging Realism and Fiction’, in Refocus: The 
Films of Rakshan Banietemad, ed. Maryam Ghorbankarimi (Edinburgh: Edinburgh 
University Press, 2021), 85, 198.
35	 Banietemad, interview by Ghorbankarimi, 14.
36	 Khosroshahi similarly argues that ‘Banietemad uses the meta-cinematic 
[including the film within a film] as an artistic tool to comment on social and 
political issues in Iran’ throughout her work. Khosroshahi, ‘Implications of the 
Metacinematic’, 93.
37	 Banietemad, interview by Armatage and Khosroshahi, 153.
38	 Barghnavard, The Paradox of Creative Constraints symposium.
39	 For an account of problems faced by Iranian documentary filmmakers who have 
worked with BBC Persian, see Persheng Sadegh-Vaziri, ‘The Fight for the House of 
Cinema’, in Iranian Cinema in a Global Context: Policy, Politics, and Form, ed. Peter 
Decherney and Blake Atwood (New York: Routledge, 2015), 170–1.
40	 Shirin Barghnavard, interview by the author, 9 September 2019.
41	 Helen De Michiel and Patricia R. Zimmerman, Open Space New Media 
Documentary: A Toolkit for Theory and Practice (New York: Routledge, 2018), xii.
42	 Barghnavard interview.
43	 Barghnavard interview.

Notes
270
44	 Barghnavard interview.
45	 Sarita Malik, ‘Diversity, Representation and Community Filmmaking’, in 
Community Filmmaking: Diversity, Practices and Places, ed. Sarita Malik, Caroline 
Chapain, Roberta Comunian (New York: Routledge, 2017), 24.
46	 Barghnavard interview.
47	 Barghnavard, The Paradox of Creative Constraints symposium.
48	 Hamid Naficy, A Social History of Iranian Cinema, Volume 4: The Globalizing Era, 
1984–2010 (Durham: Duke University Press, 2012), 344.
49	 In this analysis, I use ‘Shirin’ to refer to the voiceover and persona constructed 
within the film, and ‘Barghnavard’ to refer to the filmmaker outside the film.
50	 Barghnavard, The Paradox of Creative Constraints symposium.
51	 Barghnavard interview.
52	 Barghnavard interview.
53	 Barghnavard interview.
54	 See, for example, Ellen McLaughlin’s 1995 adaptation of the play in response to the 
Bosnian War. Ellen McLaughlin, The Trojan Women (New York: Playscripts, Inc., 
2011). Euripides himself used the myth of Troy to evoke the Peloponnesian War 
during his own time.
55	 Charlotte Eager, interview by Heather McRobie, ‘Trojan Women in the Twenty 
First Century: Women in War from Euripides to Syria’, 19 June 2014, available at 
https://www.opendemocracy.net/en/5050/trojan-women-in-twenty-first-century-
women-in-wa/
56	 Nico Carpentier, ‘The BBC’s Video Nation as a Participatory Media Practice: 
Signifying Everyday Life, Cultural Diversity and Participation in an Online 
Community’, International Journal of Cultural Studies 6.4 (2003): 426.
57	 Yasmin Fedda, interview by the author, 4 October 2016.
58	 Fedda interview.
59	 Fedda interview.
60	 In this respect, the women’s response to the play is similar to the Bedouin women 
reciting a popular form of poetry known as ghinnāwa analysed by Lila Abu-
Lughod. See Lila Abu-Lughod, Veiled Sentiments: Honor and Poetry in a Bedouin 
Society (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1999).
61	 Abu-Lughod, Veiled Sentiments, 181.
62	 Fedda interview.
63	 See Margaret Litvin, ‘When the Villain Steals the Show: The Character of Claudius 
in post-1975 Arab(ic) Hamlet Adaptations’, Journal of Arabic Literature 38.2 (2007): 
196–219.
64	 Fedda interview.
65	 Fedda interview.
66	 Fedda interview.

Notes
271
67	 Fedda interview.
68	 Chapter 3 explored animation as a creative solution for precisely these sorts of 
constraints.
69	 Fedda interview.
70	 Fedda interview.
71	 Fedda interview.
72	 Fedda interview.
73	 Fedda interview.
74	 Fedda interview.
75	 Fedda interview.
76	 Fedda interview.
Chapter 8
1	
Rania Stephan, interview by Elisabeth Stoney, ‘Life on Screen: Rania Stephan’, 
Art Asia Pacific 79, available at http://www.artasiapacific.com/Magazine/79/
LifeOnScreenRaniaStephan
2	
Jim Quilty, ‘The Collection Is Safe, the Foundation’s Ruined’, The Daily Star, 
25 August 2020, available at https://www.dailystar.com.lb/Arts-and-Ent/
Culture/2020/Aug-25/510765-the-collection-is-safe-the-foundations-ruined.ashx 
(accessed 11 September 2020).
3	
Mariam Ghani, ‘The Artist and the Archive’, in Dissonant Archives: Contemporary 
Visual Culture and Contested Narratives of the Middle East, ed. Anthony Downey 
(London: I.B. Tauris, 2015), 62.
4	
Jaimie Baron, The Archive Effect: Found Footage and the Audiovisual Experience of 
History (Abingdon: Routledge, 2014), 7.
5	
Jacques Derrida, ‘Archive Fever: A Freudian Impression’, trans. Eric Prenowitz, 
Diacritics 25.2 (1995): 17.
6	
Derrida, ‘Archive Fever: A Freudian Impression’, 14.
7	
The term ‘microhistories’ comes from the critical theory of New Historicism, 
influenced by the writings of Michel Foucault, Jacques Derrida and Hayden White.
8	
Pad.ma, ‘Theses on the Archive’, in Dissonant Archives: Contemporary Visual 
Culture and Contested Narratives of the Middle East, ed. Anthony Downey (London: 
I.B. Tauris, 2015), 356.
9	
Mary Ann Doane, The Emergence of Cinematic Time: Modernity, Contingency, the 
Archive (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2002), 222.
10	 Baron, The Archive Effect: Found Footage and the Audiovisual Experience of History, 
17.

Notes
272
11	 Adrian Danks, ‘The Global Art of Found Footage Cinema’, in Traditions in World 
Cinema, ed. Linda Badley, R. Barton Palmer and Steven Jay Schneider (Edinburgh: 
Edinburgh University Press, 2006), 246.
12	 Paul Arthur, ‘The Status of Found Footage’, Spectator 20.1 (1999–2000): 60.
13	 Baron, The Archive Effect: Found Footage and the Audiovisual Experience of History, 
25.
14	 Rik Smit, Ansgard Heinrich and Marcel Broersma, ‘Witnessing in the New 
Memory Ecology: Memory Construction of the Syrian Conflict on YouTube’, New 
Media & Society 19.2 (2017): 294.
15	 Nicolas Bourriaud, Postproduction – Culture as Screenplay: How Art Reprograms the 
World, trans. Jeanine Herman (New York: Lukas & Sternberg, 2002), 24.
16	 Bourriaud, Postproduction – Culture as Screenplay: How Art Reprograms the World, 
7.
17	 Guy Debord and Gil J. Wolman, ‘A User’s Guide to Détournement’, in Situationist 
International Anthology, ed. and trans. Ken Knabb (Berkeley: Bureau of Public 
Secrets, 1995), 19.
18	 Bourriaud, Postproduction – Culture as Screenplay: How Art Reprograms the World, 
13.
19	 Billy Perrigo, ‘These Tech Companies Managed to Eradicate ISIS Content. But 
They’re Also Erasing Crucial Evidence of War Crimes’, Time, 11 April 2020, 
available at https://time.com/5798001/facebook-youtube-algorithms-extremism/
20	 Joshka Wessels, Documenting Syria: Film-making, Video Activism and Revolution 
(London: I.B.Tauris, 2019), 178.
21	 Derrida, ‘Archive Fever: A Freudian Impression’, 14.
22	 Zaheer Omareen, interview by the author, 13 June 2016.
23	 Smit et al, ‘Witnessing in the New Memory Ecology: Memory Construction of the 
Syrian Conflict on YouTube’, 293.
24	 Baron, The Archive Effect: Found Footage and the Audiovisual Experience of History, 
153.
25	 Perrigo, ‘These Tech Companies Managed to Eradicate ISIS Content. But They’re 
Also Erasing Crucial Evidence of War Crimes’.
26	 Hadi al-Khatib, ‘Corporations Erasing History: The Case of the Syrian Archive’, in 
The Arab Archive: Mediated Memories and Digital Flows, ed. Donatella Della Ratta, 
Kay Dickinson and Sune Haugbolle (Amsterdam: Institute of Network Cultures, 
2020), 95.
27	 Donatella Della Ratta, ‘Why the Syrian Archive Is No Longer (only) about Syria’, in 
The Arab Archive: Mediated Memories and Digital Flows, ed. Donatella Della Ratta, 
Kay Dickinson and Sune Haugbolle (Amsterdam: Institute of Network Cultures, 
2020), 104.

Notes
273
28	 See Wessels, Documenting Syria: Film-making, Video activism and Revolution, 
238–40.
29	 See Tiziana Terranova, ‘Free Labour: Producing Culture for the Digital Economy’, 
Social Text 18.2 (2000): 33–58.
30	 Jon Dovey, ‘Documentary Ecosystems: Collaboration and Exploitation’, in New 
Documentary Ecologies: Emerging Platforms, Practices and Discourses, ed. Kate 
Nash, Craig Hight and Catherine Summerhayes (Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 
2014), 21.
31	 Abounaddara Collective, ‘The Syrian Who Wanted the Revolution’, 2 September 
2016, available at https://www.documenta14.de/en/notes-and-works/1524/the-
syrian-who-wanted-the-revolution
32	 Dovey, ‘Documentary Ecosystems: Collaboration and Exploitation’, 22.
33	 Pad.ma, ‘Theses on the Archive’, 360.
34	 See Jeff Deutsch and Niko Para, ‘Targeted Mass Archiving of Open Source 
Information: A Case Study’, in Digital Witness: Using Open Source Information for 
Human Rights Investigation, Documentation and Accountability, ed. Sam Dubberley, 
Alexa Koening and Daragh Murray (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2020), 
165–84. Syrian Archive is available at https://syrianarchive.org
35	 See Miriam Cooke, Dancing in Damascus: Creativity, Resilience, and the Syrian 
Revolution (New York: Routledge, 2017), 74–5.
36	 Mosireen_Soursar, ‘No Archive Is Innocent: On the Attempt of Archiving Revolt’, 
in The Arab Archive: Mediated Memories and Digital Flows, ed. Donatella Della 
Ratta, Kay Dickinson and Sune Haugbolle (Amsterdam: Institute of Network 
Cultures, 2020), 38.
37	 Yasmin Fedda, interview by Olivia Salazar-Winspear, ‘Love and Loss in a Time of 
Revolution: “Ayouni” Documents the Forcibly Disappeared in Syria’, 17 July 2020, 
available at https://www.france24.com/en/culture/20200717-encore-love-and-loss-
in-a-time-of-revolution-ayouni-documents-the-forcibly-disappeared-in-syria
38	 Mohammad Ali Atassi, ‘The Digital Syrian Archive between Videos and 
Documentary Cinema’, in The Arab Archive: Mediated Memories and Digital 
Flows, ed. Donatella Della Ratta, Kay Dickinson and Sune Haugbolle (Amsterdam: 
Institute of Network Cultures, 2020), 65–6.
39	 Dovey, ‘Documentary Ecosystems: Collaboration and Exploitation’, 15.
40	 André Bazin, ‘In Defense of Mixed Cinema’, in What Is Cinema? Volume 1, trans. 
Hugh Gray (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1967), 75. Philip Rosen claims 
that Hugh Gray’s translation of ‘cinéma impur’ (impure cinema) in Bazin’s essay 
title as ‘mixed cinema’ has led to these anti-essentialist elements being overlooked 
in Anglophone reception of his work. Rosen, ‘From Impurity to Historicity’, in 
Impure Cinema: Intermedial and Intercultural Approaches to Film, ed. Lúcia Nagib 
and Anne Jerslev (London: I.B. Tauris, 2014), 6.

Notes
274
41	 Rosen, ‘From Impurity to Historicity’, 17; Jørgen Bruhn and Anne Gjelsvik, Cinema 
between Media: An Intermediality Approach (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University 
Press, 2018), 4.
42	 Elisabeth Stoney, ‘Life on Screen: Rania Stephan’, Art Asia Pacific 79, available at 
http://www.artasiapacific.com/Magazine/79/LifeOnScreenRaniaStephan
43	 Marks, Hanan al-Cinema, 173.
44	 Stephan, interview by Stoney.
45	 Rania Stephan, interview by the author, 20 July 2018.
46	 Stephan interview.
47	 Stephan interview.
48	 Stephan interview.
49	 Stephan interview.
50	 Bourriaud, Postproduction – Culture as Screenplay: How Art Reprograms the World, 
18.
51	 Stephan, interview by Stoney.
52	 26 January is also Hosni’s birthday.
53	 Bourriaud, Postproduction – Culture as Screenplay: How Art Reprograms the World, 
45.
54	 Baron, The Archive Effect: Found Footage and the Audiovisual Experience of History, 
155.
55	 Catherine Russell, Archiveology: Walter Benjamin and Archival Film Practices 
(Durham: Duke University Press, 2018), 215.
56	 Stoney, ‘Life on Screen: Rania Stephan’.
57	 Bourriaud, Postproduction – Culture as Screenplay: How Art Reprograms the World, 
32.
58	 Ossama Mohammed, interview by the author, 12 June 2016. Parts of this interview 
were previously published in Shohini Chaudhuri, ‘Beauty Is When Justice Is 
Retained Somewhere, Even if This Somewhere Is in the Future’, 20 June 2016, 
available at https://mosaicrooms.org/blog/beauty-is-when-justice-is-retained-
somewhere-even-if-this-somewhere-is-in-the-future/
59	 Mohammed interview.
60	 See Kay Dickinson, ‘“Everyone’s Property”: Video Copying, Poetry, and Revolution 
in Arab West Asia’, in Asian Video Cultures in the Penumbra of the Global, ed. 
Joshua Neves and Bhaskar Sarkar (Durham: Duke University Press, 2017), 310.
61	 Enrico De Angelis, ‘The Controversial Archive: Negotiating Horror Images in 
Syria’, in The Arab Archive: Mediated Memories and Digital Flows, ed. Donatella 
Della Ratta, Kay Dickinson and Sune Haugbolle (Amsterdam: Institute of Network 
Cultures, 2020), 78.
62	 See Abounaddara Collective, ‘The Syrian Who wanted the Revolution’. Without 
naming Silvered Water, Abounaddara implicates it as an instance of unethical 

Notes
275
practice when they refer to ‘a documentary film that includes a scene of a Syrian 
boy being raped in a regime prison’ as indeed Silvered Water does.
63	 See, for example, Atassi, ‘The Digital Syrian Archive between Videos and 
Documentary Cinema’, 65–6.
64	 Gala Hernández López, ‘Notes on the Role of the Camera within a (Virtual) War: 
The Case of Silvered Water, Syria Self-portrait’, Digital War 1.1 (2021): 8.
65	 This is the nature of the critique made by Wessels, Documenting Syria: Film-making, 
Video activism and Revolution, 53.
66	 Baron, The Archive Effect: Found Footage and the Audiovisual Experience of History, 
91.
67	 Danks, ‘The Global Art of Found Footage Cinema’, 250.
68	 Baron, The Archive Effect: Found Footage and the Audiovisual Experience of History, 
152.
69	 Mohammed interview.
70	 Mohammed interview.
71	 Baron, The Archive Effect: Found Footage and the Audiovisual Experience of History, 
151.
72	 Mohammed interview.
73	 Mohammed interview.
74	 Hernández López, ‘Notes on the Role of the Camera within a (Virtual) War: The 
Case of Silvered Water, Syria Self-portrait’, 6.
75	 Viola Shafik also notes Simav’s collecting tendency. Shafik, Arab Cinema: History 
and Cultural Identity (Cairo: The American University in Cairo Press, 2016), 274.
76	 Baron, The Archive Effect: Found Footage and the Audiovisual Experience of History, 
150.
77	 Rosen, ‘From Impurity to Historicity’, 9.
78	 De Angelis, ‘The Controversial Archive: Negotiating Horror Images in Syria’, 79.
79	 Mohammed interview.
80	 Yasmin Fedda, interview by the author, Ayouni: Director Q&A, DocHouse, 24 July 
2020, available at https://dochouse.org/online/video/filmed-qna/ayouni-director-qa
81	 See Shohini Chaudhuri, Cinema of the Dark Side: Atrocity and the Ethics of 
Spectatorship (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2014), 84–114.
82	 Fedda, Ayouni Q&A. Sara Afshar faced the same challenge in her documentary 
Syria’s Disappeared (2017), discussed in Chapter 1.
83	 Fedda, Ayouni Q&A.
84	 Fedda, Ayouni Q&A.
85	 Fedda, Ayouni Q&A.
86	 The term ‘home mode’ comes from Richard Chalfen, Snapshot Versions of Life 
(Bowling Green: Bowling Green State University Popular Press, 1987), 8.
87	 Fedda, Ayouni Q&A.

Notes
276
88	 Baron, The Archive Effect: Found Footage and the Audiovisual Experience of History, 
84.
89	 Fedda, Ayouni Q&A.
90	 Fedda, Ayouni Q&A.
91	 Fedda, Ayouni Q&A.
92	 Baron, The Archive Effect: Found Footage and the Audiovisual Experience of History, 
89.
93	 Fedda, Conversation with the author, 20 July 2020.
94	 Fedda, Ayouni Q&A.
95	 Fedda, Conversation with the author, 20 July 2020.
96	 Ghani, ‘The Artist and the Archive’, 53.
97	 David Pinault, Storytelling Techniques in the Arabian Nights (Leiden: E.J. Brill, 
1992), 107.
98	 Fedda, Ayouni Q&A. For Sama is also punctuated with elements that the 
filmmakers felt necessary for audience respite although, as shown in Chapter 1, 
they were criticized for doing so.
99	 Fedda, Ayouni Q&A.
100	In this respect, Ayouni recalls Nostalgia for the Light (2010), a documentary about 
the Calama women searching for their disappeared loved ones’ remains in the 
Atacama Desert, Chile; Nostalgia for the Light uses metaphors of sand and skies.
101	Fedda, Conversation with the author, 20 July 2020.
102	Fedda, Conversation with the author, 20 July 2020.
103	Ayouni Q&A.
104	Fedda, Ayouni Q&A.
105	Fedda, Ayouni Q&A.
106	Yasmin Fedda, ‘The Search for Syria’s 100,000 Detained’, Syria Campaign Webinar, 
27 July 2020.
107	Derrida, ‘Archive Fever: A Freudian Impression’, 27.
108	Baron, The Archive Effect: Found Footage and the Audiovisual Experience of History, 
110.
Chapter 9
1	
Tom Moylan and Raffaella Baccolini, Dark Horizons: Science Fiction and the 
Dystopian Imagination (New York: Routledge, 2003), 1–2.
2	
Darko Suvin, Metamorphoses of Science Fiction: On the Poetics and History of a 
Literary Genre (Yale: Yale University Press, 1979), 7.

Notes
277
3	
Michael D. Gordin, Helen Tilley and Gyan Prakash, ‘Introduction’, in Utopia/
Dystopia: Conditions of Possibility, ed. Michael D. Gordin, Helen Tilley, and Gyan 
Prakash (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2010), 4.
4	
Gregory Claeys, Dystopia: A Natural History (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
2020), 4.
5	
May Telmissany, ‘The Utopian and Dystopian Functions of Tahrir Square’, 
Postcolonial Studies 17.1 (2014): 37.
6	
Suvin, Metamorphoses of Science Fiction, 4, 8, 10.
7	
Suvin, Metamorphoses of Science Fiction, 10.
8	
Ian Campbell, Arabic Science Fiction (Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2018), 7.
9	
See, for example, Lejla Kucukalic, ‘Arabian Wonder: Contemporary Science 
Fiction Transforming the Gulf’, The International Review of Science Fiction 44.121 
(2015): 8–17; Iman Haman, Science Fiction in Arab Comics and Film (forthcoming, 
Palgrave Macmillan). Furthermore, several PhD theses are being written on the 
subject, including by Nat Muller (Birmingham City University) and Ouissal Harize 
(Durham University). Muller has also interviewed Joana Hadjithomas and Khalil 
Joreige on their science-fictional documentary The Lebanese Rocket Society (2012) 
in ‘On Being Contemporary – re-activating the Present: Joana Hadjithomas and 
Khalil Joreige in Conversation with Nat Muller’, Art Papers 37.1 (2013): 33–6.
10	 The Thousand and One Nights, with its extraordinary voyages, has been considered 
a forerunner of science fiction in general, serving as an early thought experiment 
about ‘other’ places. See Salvatore Proietti, ‘A Groundbreaking Guide to Arab-
Language SF’, Science Fiction Studies 43 (2016): 377.
11	 Campbell, Arabic Science Fiction, 48.
12	 Laura Marks, ‘Real Images Flow: Mullā Sadrā Meets Film-Philosophy’, Film-
Philosophy 20 (2016): 30.
13	 One exception is the notion of ‘social dreaming’ that has developed out of Jungian 
psychoanalysis. See John Clare and Ali Zarbafi, Social Dreaming in the 21st Century 
(London: Karnac, 2009).
14	 C.S. Peirce, The Essential Peirce: Selected Philosophical Writings, vol. 1, ed. Nathan 
Houser and Christian Kloesel (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1992), 226.
15	 See Khalid Baheyeldin, ‘Arabic and Islamic Themes in Frank Herbert’s “Dune”’, 
22 January 2004, available at https://baheyeldin.com/literature/arabic-and-islamic-
themes-in-frank-herberts-dune.html
16	 John Rieder, Colonialism and the Emergence of Science Fiction (Middletown, CT: 
Wesleyan University Press, 2008), 31.
17	 Farshid Kazemi, ‘The Interpreter of Desires Iranian Cinema and Psychoanalysis’ 
(PhD Thesis, University of Edinburgh, 2019). Kazemi develops this analysis in his 
book on A Girl Walks Home Alone at Night (Liverpool: Liverpool University Press, 

Notes
278
2021), where he relates Fisher’s ‘weird and eerie’ to their Persian and Arabic literary 
counterparts, ajīb wa gharīb.
18	 Mark Fisher, The Weird and the Eerie (London: Repeater Books, 2016), 8.
19	 Fisher, The Weird and the Eerie, 10.
20	 Fisher, The Weird and the Eerie, 61.
21	 Ahmadinejad’s Subsidy Reform Plan was an attempt to remedy Iran’s ailing 
economy by distributing cash payments to citizens.
22	 Ali Ahmadzadeh, Atomic Heart Mother Q&A, Berlin Film Festival 2015, available 
at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cxA3wLhVs3E
23	 Kazemi, ‘The Interpreter of Desires Iranian Cinema and Psychoanalysis’, 146–7.
24	 Ali Ahmadzadeh, interview by the author, 22 October 2020. It should be noted that 
there are plenty of international influences in the film, including its title inspired by 
Pink Floyd’s album Atom Heart Mother (1970).
25	 Iran is not technically a dictatorship. For example, although presidential candidates 
are ‘approved’ by the Guardian Council (consisting of clerics and lawyers), 
presidents are elected and serve a maximum of two terms. However, Iran has been 
experienced as a dictatorship by some of its citizens and this is the perception 
fostered by Atomic Heart’s second part.
26	 Ahmadzadeh interview.
27	 Ahmadzadeh interview.
28	 Ahmadzadeh interview.
29	 Ahmadzadeh interview.
30	 Fisher, The Weird and the Eerie, 20.
31	 C-27 alludes to the film’s first part, where Kami explains ‘Club 27’ is a group of 
celebrities who died at the age of twenty-seven such as Jim Morrison, Kurt Cobain, 
Jimi Hendrix and Amy Winehouse. Ahmadzadeh was also twenty-seven when he 
made Atomic Heart.
32	 Fisher, The Weird and the Eerie, 19.
33	 Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari, What Is Philosophy? trans. Graham Burchell and 
Hugh Tomlinson (London: Verso, 1994), 100.
34	 Ahmadzadeh interview.
35	 Ahmadzadeh interview.
36	 Cited in Houshang Golmakani, ‘New Times, Same Problems’, Index on Censorship 3 
(1992): 21.
37	 Ahmadzadeh interview.
38	 For example, J.G. Ballard, Cocaine Nights (London: HarperCollins, 1997). Parallels 
also exist between Dreamaway and Towfik’s novel Utopia (2008) where, as Ian 
Campbell describes, ‘The Egyptian masses can no longer produce anything worth 
buying: their only options are to work as servants for the Utopians.’ Ian Campbell, 

Notes
279
‘Prefiguring Egypt’s Arab Spring: Allegory and Allusion in Ahmad Tawfiq’s Utopia’, 
Science-Fiction Studies 42.3 (2015): 544.
39	 Marouan Omara and Johanna Domke, interview by the author, 14 October 2020.
40	 Omara and Domke interview.
41	 Omara and Domke interview.
42	 Omara and Domke interview. For an account of the bureaucratic permits system in 
Egypt, see Chibab El Khachab, ‘State Control over Film Production in Egypt’, Arab 
Media & Society 23 (2017), available at https://www.arabmediasociety.com/state-
control-over-film-production-in-egypt
43	 Omara and Domke interview.
44	 Omara and Domke interview.
45	 Omara and Domke interview.
46	 Omara and Domke interview.
47	 Omara and Domke interview.
48	 Omara and Domke interview.
49	 Omara and Domke interview.
50	 Omara and Domke interview.
51	 Omara and Domke interview.
52	 Omara and Domke interview.
53	 Omara and Domke interview.
54	 Omara and Domke interview.
55	 Omara and Domke interview.
56	 Fisher, The Weird and the Eerie, 62.
57	 Fisher, The Weird and the Eerie, 64.
58	 Omara and Domke interview.
59	 Omara and Domke interview. Due to bureaucratic processes for acquiring permits, 
many larger film productions in Egypt employ a worker specializing in this role. 
See El Khachab, ‘State Control Over Film Production in Egypt’.
60	 Larissa Sansour, interview by the author, 7 August 2017.
61	 Sansour interview.
62	 Sansour interview.
63	 Sansour Interview.
64	 Sansour interview.
65	 Paolo Soleri, Arcology: The City in the Image of Man (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 
1971).
66	 Sansour interview.
67	 Carol Que, ‘Mechanisms of a Settler Colonial Architecture in Larissa Sansour’s 
Nation Estate (2012)’, Jerusalem Quarterly 73 (2018): 130.
68	 Sansour interview.

Notes
280
69	 Helga Tawil-Souri, ‘Surveillance Sublime: The Security State in Jerusalem’, 
Jerusalem Quarterly 68 (2016): 56.
70	 Tawil-Souri, ‘Surveillance Sublime’, 58.
71	 Despite indications to the contrary, several commentators assume that the window 
view is supposed to be real – see for example, Gil Hochberg, ‘“Jerusalem, We 
Have a Problem”: Larissa Sansour’s Sci-Fi Trilogy and The Impetus of Dystopic 
Imagination’, Arab Studies Journal 26.1 (2018): 34–57. One exception, however, 
is Jussi Parikka, ‘Middle East and Other Futurisms: Imaginary Temporalities in 
Contemporary Art and Visual Culture’, Culture, Theory and Critique 59.1 (2018): 
51.
72	 Larissa Sansour, Shubbak: Imagined Futures Shorts Programme Q&A, Barbican, 
London, 4 July 2017. Sansour’s description of the Israeli settlements encroaching 
upon Bethlehem ‘like an army’ echoes her sister Leila Sansour’s documentary Open 
Bethlehem (2014).
73	 Tawil-Souri, ‘Surveillance Sublime’, 59.
74	 Eyal Weizman, Hollow Land: Israel’s Architecture of Occupation (London: Verso, 
2007), 161.
75	 Sansour interview.
76	 Sansour interview.
77	 Sansour interview.
78	 Sansour interview. The first of these exhibitions was In the Future They Ate from the 
Finest Porcelain at The Mosaic Rooms, London, June–August 2016.
79	 Sansour interview.
80	 Early ecological dystopias include ZPG (1971) and Soylent Green (1973) which both 
tackle overpopulation and air pollution.
81	 Mounia Akl, Tales of the Silk Road – Lebanon Chapter Q&A, Rich Mix, London, 
25 February 2019.
82	 Christine Mady, ‘The Imaginaries of Beirut’s “Invisible” Solid Waste: Exploring 
Walls as Temporary Temporal Pauses amidst the Beirut Garbage Prices’, in The 
Temporalities of Waste: Out of Sight, Out of Time, ed. Fiona Allon, Ruth Barcan and 
Karma Eddison-Cogan (Abingdon: Routledge, 2021), 100.
83	 Marwan Kraidy, ‘Trashing the Sectarian System? Lebanon’s “You Stink” Movement 
and the Making of Affective Publics’, Communication and the Public 1.1 (2016): 20.
84	 Mady, ‘The Imaginaries of Beirut’s “Invisible” Solid Waste’, 87.
85	 Mounia Akl, interview by the author, 12 September 2019.
86	 Akl interview.
87	 Akl interview.
88	 Mounia Akl, The Paradox of Creative Constraints symposium, The Mosaic Rooms, 
London, 7 September 2019.
89	 Akl, Paradox of Creative Constraints symposium.

Notes
281
90	 Akl interview.
91	 Nadia Bozak, The Cinematic Footprint: Lights, Camera, Natural Resources (Rutgers: 
Rutgers University Press, 2011), 6.
92	 Akl, The Paradox of Creative Constraints symposium.
93	 Akl interview.
94	 Wendy B. Faris, ‘Scheherazade’s Children: Magical Realism and Postmodern 
Fiction’, in Magic Realism: Theory, History, Community, ed. Zamora Lois Parkinson 
and Wendy B. Faris (Durham: Duke University Press, 1995), 169.
95	 David Desser, ‘Race, Space and Class: The Politics of Cityscapes in Science Fiction 
Films’, in Alien Zone 2: The Spaces of Science Fiction, ed. Annette Kuhn (London: 
Verso, 1999), 84.
96	 Akl interview.
97	 Akl interview.
98	 Akl interview.
99	 Sansour interview.
100	Moylan and Baccolini, Dark Horizons, 6.
101	Moylan and Baccolini, Dark Horizons, 7.
102	Tom Moylan, Scraps of the Untainted Sky: Science Fiction, Utopia, Dystopia (New 
York: Routledge, 2018), xv.
Conclusion
1	
Ali Jaberansari, The Paradox of Creative Constraints symposium, The Mosaic 
Rooms, London, 7 September 2019.
2	
Marouan Omara and Johanna Domke, interview by the author, 14 October 2020.

Abbas, Ackbar. Hong Kong: Culture and the Politics of Disappearance. Minneapolis, MN: 
University of Minnesota Press, 1997.
Abdalla, Khalid. In the Last Days of the City Q&A. The Mosaic Rooms. London, 
6 September 2018.
Abdalla, Khalid. Interview by the author, 8 October 2018.
Abdulaziz, Fuad. Sana‘a: A Symphony talk. University of Essex, 26 November 2020.
Abounaddara Collective. ‘The Syrian Who Wanted the Revolution’, 2 September 2016. 
Available at https://www.documenta14.de/en/notes-and-works/1524/the-syrian-
who-wanted-the-revolution
Abu-Lughod, Lila. Veiled Sentiments: Honor and Poetry in a Bedouin Society. Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 1999.
Abu-Lughod, Lila. Do Muslim Women Need Saving? Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press, 2013.
Al-Abyad, Jamil. Interview by Annasofie Flamand and Hugh Macleod. ‘Little Dictator’. 
Witness. Aljazeera, 21 August 2012. Available at https://www.aljazeera.com/
program/episode/2012/8/21/little-dictator/
Afshar, Sara. Interview with the author, 19 September 2018.
Aftab, Kaleem. ‘Why a Large Proportion of the Arab World’s Best Filmmakers Are 
Women’. The National, 3 December 2018. Available at https://www.thenationalnews.
com/arts-culture/film/why-a-large-proportion-of-the-arab-world-s-best-
filmmakers-are-women-1.798541.
Ahmadzadeh, Ali. Atomic Heart Mother Q&A, Berlin Film Festival 2015. Available at 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cxA3wLhVs3E
Ahmadzadeh, Ali. Interview by the author, 22 October 2020.
Akbari, Mania. Interview by the author, 6 September 2018.
Akl, Mounia. ‘Tales of the Silk Road – Lebanon Chapter’ Q&A. Rich Mix. London, 
25 February 2019.
Akl, Mounia. The Paradox of Creative Constraints symposium. The Mosaic Rooms, 
London, 7 September 2019.
Akl, Mounia. Interview by the author, 12 September 2019.
Allan, Stuart. Citizen Witnessing: Revisioning Journalism in Times of Crisis. Cambridge: 
Polity Press, 2013.
Al-Allaq, Yahya. Interview by the author, 5 May 2016.
Andén-Papadopoulos, Kari. ‘Journalism, Memory and the “Crowd-sourced Video 
Revolution”’. In Journalism and Memory, edited by Barbie Zelizer and Keren 
Tenenboim-Weinblatt, 148–63. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2014.
Bibliography

Bibliography
283
Andrew, Geoff. 10. London: British Film Institute, 2005.
Anishchenkova, Valerie. Modern Saudi Arabia. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO, 2020.
Aractingi, Philippe. Interview by the author, 4 October 2019.
Arebi, Naziha. Freedom Fields Q&A. Picturehouse Central, London, 21 May 2019.
­Arebi, Naziha. Freedom Fields Q&A. Frontline Club, London, 4 June 2019.
Arebi, Naziha. Interview by the author, 30 July 2019.
Arebi, Naziha. The Paradox of Creative Constraints symposium. The Mosaic Rooms, 
London, 7 September 2019.
Armatage, Kay and Zahra Khosroshahi. ‘An Interview with Rakhshan Banietemad’. 
Feminist Media Histories 3.1 (2017): 140–55.
Armbrust, Walter. ‘Political Film in Egypt’. In Film in the Middle East and North Africa, 
edited by Joseph Gugler, 228–51. Austin: University of Texas Press, 2011.
Arslan, Andrew. Lebanon: A Country in Fragments. London: Hurst & Company, 
2018.
Arthur, Paul. ‘The Status of Found Footage’. Spectator 20.1 (1999–2000): 57–69.
ASL 19. ‘Censorship in Iranian Cinema’. In Iranian Cinema in a Global Context: Policy, 
Politics and Form, edited by Peter Decherney and Blake Atwood, 229–42. New York: 
Routledge, 2015.
Atwood, Blake. Reform Cinema in Iran: Film and Political Change in the Islamic 
Republic. New York: Columbia University Press, 2016.
Ashuri, Tamur and Amit Pinchevski. ‘Witnessing as a Field’. In Media Witnessing: 
Testimony in the Age of Mass Communication, edited by Paul Frosch and Amit 
Pinchevski, 133–57. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2009.
Atassi, Mohammed Ali. ‘The Digital Syrian Archive between Videos and Documentary 
Cinema’. In The Arab Archive: Mediated Memories and Digital Flows, edited by 
Donatella Della Ratta, Kay Dickinson and Sune Haugbolle, 60–8. Amsterdam: 
Institute of Network Cultures, 2020.
Aufderheide, Patricia. ‘Mainstream Documentary since 1999’. In American Film History: 
Selected Readings, 1960 to the Present, edited by Cynthia Lucia, Roy Grundmann and 
Art Simon, 376–92. Chichester: Wiley-Blackwell, 2016.
Austin, Thomas. ‘Introduction’. In The Films of Aki Kaurismäki: Ludic Engagements, 
edited by Thomas Austin, 1–16. New York: Bloomsbury Academic, 2018.
Azcona, María Del Mar. The Multi-protagonist Film. Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell, 
2010.
Backman-Rogers, Anna. American Independent Cinema: Rites of Passage and the Crisis 
Image. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2015.
Baheyeldin, Khalid. ‘Arabic and Islamic Themes in Frank Herbert’s “Dune”’, 22 January 
2004. Available at https://baheyeldin.com/literature/arabic-and-islamic-themes-in-
frank-herberts-dune.html
Ballard, J.G. Cocaine Nights. London: HarperCollins, 1997.
Al-Banawi, Fatima. Barakah Meets Barakah Q&A. BFI London Film Festival, 8 October 
2016.

Bibliography
284
Banietemad, Rakhshan. Interview by Shiva Rahbaran. ‘Rakshan Bani-Etemad: Cinema 
as a Mirror of the Urban Image’. In Iranian Cinema Uncensored: Contemporary Film-
makers since the Islamic Revolution, edited by Shiva Rahbaran, 127–45. London: I.B. 
Tauris, 2016.
­Banietemad, Rakhshan. Interview by Maryam Ghorbankarimi. ‘A Conversation with 
the Director’. In Refocus: The Films of Rakshan Banietemad, edited by Maryam 
Ghorbankarimi, 12–24. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2021.
Baron, Jaimie. The Archive Effect: Found Footage and the Audiovisual Experience of 
History. Abingdon: Routledge, 2014.
Barghnavard, Shirin. Interview by Christoph Dreher and Vinicius Jatobá. ‘Expose 
Yourself! Revealing the Flow of Life in Iran’, 4 September 2018, available at https://
schloss-post.com/expose-yourself/
Barghnavard, Shirin. The Paradox of Creative Constraints symposium. The Mosaic 
Rooms, London, 7 September 2019.
Barghnavard, Shirin. Interview by the author, 9 September 2019.
Bazin, André. ‘In Defense of Mixed Cinema’. In What Is Cinema? Volume 1, translated 
by Hugh Gray, 53–75. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1967.
Behrouzan, Orkideh. ‘Introduction’. In The Book of Tehran: A City in Short Fiction, 
edited by Fereshteh Ahmadi, vii–xxii. Manchester: Comma Press, 2019.
Bendazzi, Giannalberto. Animation: A World History. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 2016.
Benjamin, Walter. Illuminations, translated by Harry Zohn. London: Fontana Press, 
1992.
Berger, Laura. ‘Oscars 2018: Foreign Lang Contenders: Annemarie Jacir “Wajib”’, 
27 November 2017. Available at https://womenandhollywood.com/oscars-2018-
foreign-language-contenders-annemarie-jacir-wajib-809a634d10f2/
Bergson, Henri. Laughter: An Essay on the Meaning of the Comic, translated by 
Cloudesley Brereton and Fred Rothwell. Salt Lake City, UT: Project Gutenberg, 2009.
Biltereyst, Daniel and Roel Vande Winkel. Eds. Silencing Cinema: Film Censorship 
around the World. London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2013.
Blackmon, Christa. ‘Animating Torture: A New Horizon in Human Rights Reporting’, 
17 August 2018. Available at https://observatoryihr.org/priority_posts/animating-
torture-a-new-horizon-in-human-rights-reporting/
Bourdieu, Pierre. Outline of a Theory of Practice, translated by Richard Nice. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1979.
Bozak, Nadia. The Cinematic Footprint: Lights, Camera, Natural Resources. Rutgers: 
Rutgers University Press, 2011.
Bradshaw, Peter. ‘Ava Review – Smart Teenage Thriller Amps up the Micro-tyrannies’. 
The Guardian, 19 August 2020. Available at https://www.theguardian.com/
film/2020/aug/19/ava-review-smart-teenage-thriller-amps-up-the-micro-tyrannies
Bresheeth, Haim. ‘A Symphony of Absence: Borders and Liminality in Elia Suleiman’s 
“Chronicle of a Disappearance”’. Framework: The Journal of Cinema and Media 43.2. 
(2002): 71–84.

Bibliography
285
Breton, André. ‘Foreword to 1966 French Edition’. In Anthology of Black Humour, edited 
by André Breton, translated by Mark Polizzoti, 11. London: Telegram, 2009.
Bordwell, David. Poetics of Cinema. New York: Routledge, 2008.
­Bourriaud, Nicolas. Postproduction – Culture as Screenplay: How Art Reprograms the 
World, translated by Jeanine Herman. New York: Lukas & Sternberg, 2002.
Brody, Richard. ‘“Pig,” Reviewed: An Iranian Comedy about Film Makers Who Become 
the Targets of Murder’, 7 January 2019. Available at https://www.newyorker.com/
culture/the-front-row/pig-reviewed-an-iranian-comedy-about-filmmakers-who-
become-the-targets-of-murder
Brown, Lyn Mikel. Raising Their Voices: The Politics of Girls’ Anger. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press, 1998.
Brown, William. Non-Cinema: Global Digital Filmmaking and the Multitude. London: 
Bloomsbury, 2018.
Bruhn, Jørgen and Anne Gjelsvik. Cinema between Media: An Intermediality Approach. 
Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2018.
Bruno, Giuliana. ‘Bodily Architectures’. Assemblage 19 (1992): 106–11.
Bruno, Giuliana. Atlas of Emotion: Journeys in Art, Architecture and Film. New York: 
Verso, 2002.
Burnat, Emad. 5 Broken Cameras Q&A, chaired by the author. Union Chapel, London, 
5 July 2017.
Burnat, Emad. 5 Broken Cameras Q&A, Palestine Expo. Queen Elizabeth II Conference 
Centre, London, 8 July 2017.
Burnat, Emad. Interview by the author, 8 July 2017.
Burnat, Emad and Guy Davidi, 5 Broken Cameras Q&A. Riverside Studios, London, 
21 June 2012.
Calhoun, Craig. ‘The Idea of Emergency’. In Contemporary States of Emergency: The 
Politics of Humanitarian Interventions, edited by Didier Fassin and Mariella Pandolfi, 
29–58. New York: Zone Books, 2010.
Campbell, Ian. ‘Prefiguring Egypt’s Arab Spring: Allegory and Allusion in Ahmad 
Tawfiq’s Utopia’. Science-Fiction Studies 42.3 (2015): 541–56.
Campbell, Ian. Arabic Science Fiction. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2018.
Carpentier, Nico. ‘The BBC’s Video Nation as a Participatory Media Practice: Signifying 
Everyday Life, Cultural Diversity and Participation in an Online Community’. 
International Journal of Cultural Studies 6.4 (2003): 425–47.
Cavell, Stanley. The World Viewed: Reflections on the Ontology of Film. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press, 1979.
Chalfen, Richard. Snapshot Versions of Life. Bowling Green: Bowling Green State 
University Popular Press, 1987.
Chaudhuri, Shohini. Cinema of the Dark Side: Atrocity and the Ethics of Spectatorship. 
Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2014.
Chaudhuri, Shohini. ‘The Alterity of the Image: The Distant Spectator and Films about 
the Syrian Revolution and War’. Transnational Cinemas 9.1 (2018): 31–46.

Bibliography
286
Chaudhuri, Shohini and Howard Finn. ‘The Open Image: Poetic Realism and the New 
Iranian Cinema’. Screen 44.1 (2003): 38–57.
Clare, John and Ali Zarbafi. Social Dreaming in the 21st Century. London: Karnac, 2009.
­Chouliaraki, Lilie. ‘Digital Witnessing in Conflict Zones: The Politics of Remediation’. 
Information, Communication & Society 18.11 (2015): 1362–77.
Ciecko, Anne. ‘Bicycle Borrowers after Neorealism: Global Nou-Velo Cinema’. In 
Culture on Two Wheels: The Bicycle in Literature and Film, edited by Jeremy Withers 
and Daniel P. Shea, 244–62. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 2016.
Claeys, Gregory. Dystopia: A Natural History. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2020.
Cohan, Steve and Ina Rae Hark. ‘Introduction’. In The Road Movie Book, edited by Steve 
Cohan and Ina Rae Hark, 1–14. London: Routledge, 2002.
Colebrook, Claire. Irony. London: Routledge, 2004.
Cook, David. Martyrdom in Islam. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007.
Cooke, Miriam. Dancing in Damascus: Creativity, Resilience, and the Syrian Revolution. 
New York: Routledge 2017.
Corbin, Henry. Alone with the Alone: The Creative Imagination in the Sufism of Ibn 
‘Arabi. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1997.
Coverley, Merlin. Psychogeography. Harpenden: Pocket Essentials, 2010.
Critchley, Simon. On Humour. London: Routledge, 2002.
Dällenbach, Lucien. The Mirror in the Text. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1989.
Dällenbach, Lucien. ‘Mise-en-abyme and Mirror Effects in Claude Simon’. In Claude 
Simon, edited by Celia Britton, 140–58. New York: Longman, 1993.
Danks, Adrian. ‘The Global Art of Found Footage Cinema’. In Traditions in World 
Cinema, edited by Linda Badley, R. Barton Palmer and Steven Jay Schneider, 241–53. 
Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2006.
Day, Amber. Ed. Satire and Dissent. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2011.
Day, Amber. ‘Introduction: Poking Holes in the Spectacle’. In Satire and Dissent, edited 
by Amber Day, 1–23. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2011.
De Angelis, Enrico. ‘The Controversial Archive: Negotiating Horror Images in Syria’. In 
The Arab Archive: Mediated Memories and Digital Flows, edited by Donatella Della 
Ratta, Kay Dickinson and Sune Haugbolle, 71–90. Amsterdam: Institute of Network 
Cultures, 2020.
De Certeau, Michel. The Practice of Everyday Life, translated by Steven F. Rendall. 
Berkeley: University of California, 1984.
De Lauretis, Teresa. ‘Film and the Visible’. In How Do I Look: Queer Film and Video, 
edited by Bad Object-Choices, 223–64. Seattle: Bay Press, 1991.
De Michiel, Helen and Patricia R. Zimmerman. Open Space New Media Documentary: 
A Toolkit for Theory and Practice. New York: Routledge, 2018.
Debord, Guy. ‘Introduction to a Critique of Urban Geography’. In Situationist 
International Anthology, edited and translated by Ken Knabb, 8–12. Berkeley: Bureau 
of Public Secrets, 1995.
Debord, Guy. ‘Theory of the Dérive’. In Situationist International Anthology, edited and 
translated by Ken Knabb, 62–6. Berkeley: Bureau of Public Secrets, 1995.

Bibliography
287
Debord, Guy and Gil J. Wolman. ‘A User’s Guide to Détournement’. In Situationist 
International Anthology, edited and translated by Ken Knabb, 14–21. Berkeley: 
Bureau of Public Secrets, 1995.
­Deleuze, Gilles. Cinema 1: The Movement-image, translated by Hugh Tomlinson and 
Barbara Habberjam. London: Athlone Press, 1992.
Deleuze, Gilles. Cinema 2: The Time-Image, translated by Hugh Tomlinson and Robert 
Galeta. London: Athlone Press, 1989.
Deleuze, Gilles and Félix Guattari. What Is Philosophy? translated by Graham Burchell 
and Hugh Tomlinson. London: Verso 1994.
Della Ratta, Donatella. Shooting A Revolution: Visual Media and Warfare in Syria. 
London: Pluto Press, 2018.
Della Ratta, Donatella. ‘Emerging from the Underground: On “For Sama” and 
Mainstream Filmmaking’, 14 May 2020. Available at https://syriauntold.
com/2020/05/14/emerging-from-the-underground-on-for-sama-and-mainstream-
filmmaking/
Della Ratta, Donatella. ‘Why the Syrian Archive Is No Longer (only) about Syria’. In The 
Arab Archive: Mediated Memories and Digital Flows, edited by Donatella Della Ratta, 
Kay Dickinson and Sune Haugbolle, 101–16. Amsterdam: Institute of Network 
Cultures, 2020.
Demos, T.J. The Migrant Image: The Art and Politics of Documentary during Global 
Crisis. Durham: Duke University Press, 2013.
Démy-Geroe, Anne. Iranian National Cinema: The Interaction of Policy, Genre, Funding 
and Reception. Abingdon: Routledge, 2020.
Derrida, Jacques. ‘Archive Fever: A Freudian Impression’. Translated by Eric Prenowitz. 
Diacritics 25.2 (1995): 9–63.
Desser, David. ‘Race, Space and Class: The Politics of Cityscapes in Science Fiction 
Films’. In Alien Zone 2: the Spaces of Science Fiction, edited by Annette Kuhn, 80–96. 
London: Verso, 1999.
Deutsch, Jeff and Niko Para. ‘Targeted Mass Archiving of Open Source 
Information: A Case Study’. In Digital Witness: Using Open Source Information 
for Human Rights Investigation, Documentation and Accountability, edited by 
Sam Dubberley, Alexa Koening and Daragh Murray, 165–84. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2020.
Deutsche Welle. ‘Why Mohammad Rasoulof Still Makes Films despite Iran’s Threats’. 
Available at https://www.dw.com/en/why-mohammad-rasoulof-still-makes-films-
despite-irans-threats/a-52575195
Devi, Gayatri and Najat Rahman. Eds. Humor in Middle Eastern Cinema. Detroit: 
Wayne State University Press, 2014/
Dib, Roy. Interview by the author, 19 June 2020.
Dickinson, Kay. ‘The Palestinian Road (Block) Movie Everyday Geographies of 
Second Intifada Cinema’. In Cinema at the Periphery, edited by Dina Iordanova, 
David Martin-Jones and Belén Vidal. Detroit: Wayne State University Press, 
2010.

Bibliography
288
­Dickinson, Kay. ‘“Everyone’s Property”: Video Copying, Poetry, and Revolution in Arab 
West Asia’. In Asian Video Cultures in the Penumbra of the Global, edited by Joshua 
Neves and Bhaskar Sarkar, 307–26. Durham: Duke University Press, 2017.
Doane, Mary Ann. The Emergence of Cinematic Time: Modernity, Contingency, the 
Archive. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2002.
Donald, Stephanie Hemelryk, Emma Wilson, Sarah Wright. ‘Introduction’. In Childhood 
and Nation in Contemporary World Cinema: Borders and Encounters, edited by 
Stephanie Hemelryk Donald, Emma Wilson and Sarah Wright, 1–11. London: 
Bloomsbury, 2017.
Douglas, Mary. ‘The Social Control of Cognition: Some Factors in Joke Perception’. 
Man 3.3 (1968): 361–76.
Dovey, Jon. ‘Documentary Ecosystems: Collaboration and Exploitation’. In New 
Documentary Ecologies: Emerging Platforms, Practices and Discourses, edited by 
Kate Nash, Craig Hight and Catherine Summerhayes, 11–32. Basingstoke: Palgrave 
Macmillan, 2014.
Dunlevy, T’cha. ‘TIFF 2017: Iranian Montrealer Sadaf Foroughi Makes Waves with 
First Feature Ava’. Montreal Gazette, 12 September 2017. Available at: https://
montrealgazette.com/entertainment/local-arts/tiff-2017-iranian-montrealer-sadaf-
foroughi-makes-waves-with-first-feature-ava
Eager, Charlotte. Interview by Heather McRobie. ‘Trojan Women in the Twenty First 
Century: Women in War from Euripides to Syria’, 19 June 2014. Available at https://
www.opendemocracy.net/en/5050/trojan-women-in-twenty-first-century-women-
in-wa/
Egan, Eric. ‘Regime Critics Confront Censorship in Iranian Cinema’. In Film in the 
Middle East and North Africa: Creative Dissidence, edited by Josef Gugler, 37–62. 
Austin: University of Texas Press, 2011.
Ehrlich, Nea. ‘Animated Documentaries: Aesthetics, Politics and Viewer Engagement’. 
In Pervasive Animation, edited by Suzanne Buchan, 248–71. New York: Routledge, 
2013.
Ehrlich, Nea and Jonathan Murray. ‘Introduction’. In Drawn from Life: Issues and 
Themes in Animated Documentary Cinema, 1–11. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University 
Press, 2019.
Eid, Rana. Interview with the author, 8 August 2018.
Eisenstein, Sergei. On Disney, edited by Jay Leyda, translated by Alan Upchurch. 
Calcutta: Seagull Books, 2017.
Elias, Chad and Zaher Omareen. ‘Syria’s Imperfect Cinema’. In Syria Speaks: Art and 
Culture from the Frontline, edited by Malu Halasa, Zaher Omareen and Nawara 
Mahfoud, 257–68. London: Saqi Books, 2014.
Elias, Jamal. Alef Is for Allah: Childhood, Emotion, and Visual Culture in Islamic 
Societies. Oakland: University of California Press, 2018.
Elsaesser, Thomas. ‘The Global Author: Control, Creative Constraints, and 
Performative Self-contradiction’. In The Global Auteur: The Politics of Authorship in 

Bibliography
289
21st Century Cinema, edited by Seung-hoon Jeong and Jeremi Szaniawski. London: 
Bloomsbury Academic, 2016.
Elster, Jon. ‘Conventions, Creativity, Originality’. In Rules and Conventions: Literature, 
Philosophy, Social Theory, edited by Mette Hjort, 32–44. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins 
University Press, 1992.
Elster, Jon. Ulysses Unbound: Studies in Rationality, Precommitment and Constraints. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000.
Esfandiary, Shahab. Iranian Cinema and Globalization: National, Transnational and 
Islamic Dimensions. Bristol: Intellect, 2012.
Evans, Bertrand. Shakespeare’s Comedies. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1960.
Fageeh, Hisham. Barakah Meets Barakah Q&A. BFI London Film Festival, 8 October 
2016.
Fageeh, Hisham. Talk at NYU Abu Dhabi. Organized by the author, 10 April 2017.
Fahim, Joseph. ‘Creators Meet Censors: The Standoff between Creators and Censors in 
Post-2011 Egyptian Drama’. Cairo Review 28 (2018): 92–101.
Farahmand, Azadeh. ‘Perspectives on Recent (International Acclaim for) Iranian 
Cinema’. In The New Iranian Cinema: Politics, Representation and Identity, edited by 
Richard Tapper, 86–108. London: I.B. Tauris, 2002.
Fares, Amber. Interview by the author, 15 May 2020.
Faris, Wendy B. ‘Scheherazade’s Children: Magical Realism and Postmodern Fiction’. In 
Magic Realism: Theory, History, Community, edited by Zamora Lois Parkinson and 
Wendy B. Faris, 163–90. Durham: Duke University Press, 1995.
Farjami, Mahmud. Iranian Political Satirists: Experience and Motivation in the 
Contemporary Era. Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing Company, 2017.
Fedda, Yasmin. ‘Syria on the Road: Stories of Conflict, Migration & Place’, 17 November 
2015. Available at http://highlightarts.org/syria-on-the-road-stories-of-conflict-
migration-place-by-yasmin-fedda/
Fedda, Yasmin. Interview by the author, 4 October 2016.
Fedda, Yasmin. Interview by Olivia Salazar-Winspear. ‘Love and Loss in a Time of 
Revolution: “Ayouni” Documents the Forcibly Disappeared in Syria’, 17 July 2020. 
Available at https://www.france24.com/en/culture/20200717-encore-love-and-loss-
in-a-time-of-revolution-ayouni-documents-the-forcibly-disappeared-in-syria
Fedda, Yasmin. Interview by the author. Ayouni: Director Q&A. DocHouse, 24 July 
2020. Available at https://dochouse.org/online/video/filmed-qna/ayouni-
director-qa
Fedda, Yasmin. ‘The Search for Syria’s 100,000 Detained’. Syria Campaign Webinar, 
27 July 2020.
Felman, Shoshana. ‘In an Era of Testimony: Claude Lanzmann’s Shoah’. Yale French 
Studies 79 (1991): 39–81.
Ferguson, Liz. ‘FNC 2018: Review of Iranian Comedy Pig (Khook)’, 9 October 2018. 
Available at https://mostlymovies.ca/2018/10/09/fnc-2018-review-of-iranian-
comedy-pig-khook/

Bibliography
290
­Fernea, Elizabeth Warnock. ‘Childhood in the Muslim Middle East’. In Children in the 
Muslim Middle East, edited by Elizabeth Warnock Fernea, 3–16. Austin: University 
of Texas Press, 1995.
Fisher, Mark. The Weird and the Eerie. London: Repeater Books, 2016.
Fletcher, Angus. Allegory: The Theory of a Symbolic Mode. Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press, 1964.
Foley, Sean. Changing Saudi Arabia: Art, Culture and Society in the Kingdom. Boulder, 
CO: Lynne Rienner Publishers, 2019.
Friedman, Yael. ‘Guises of Transnationalism in Israel/Palestine: A Few Notes on 5 
Broken Cameras’. Transnational Cinemas 6.1 (2015): 17–32.
Foroughi, Sadaf. Screen Talk. Human Rights Watch Film Festival. London, 15 March 
2018.
Foroughi, Sadaf. Interview by the author, 10 September 2018.
Foucault, Michel. Aesthetics, Method, and Epistemology: Essential Works of Foucault, 
1954–1984, edited by James D. Faubion. New York: The New Press, 1998.
Foucault, Michel. The Birth of the Clinic. Abingdon: Routledge, 2003.
Freud, Sigmund. ‘On Humour’. In The Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological 
Works of Sigmund Freud, vol. 21, translated by James Strachey, 159–66. London: 
Hogarth Press, 1961.
Furniss, Maureen. Art in Motion: Animation Aesthetics. Sydney: John Libbey and Co, 
1998.
García Espinosa, Julio. ‘For an Imperfect Cinema’, translated by Julianne Burton. Jump 
Cut 20 (1979): 24–6. Available at: https://www.ejumpcut.org/archive/onlinessays/
JC20folder/ImperfectCinema.html
Garcia, Maria. ‘A Woman’s Voice Is Her Nakedness: An Interview with Haifa Al 
Mansour’. Cineaste 38.4 (2013): 34–7.
Ghani, Mariam. ‘The Artist and the Archive’. In Dissonant Archives: Contemporary 
Visual Culture and Contested Narratives of the Middle East, edited by Anthony 
Downey, 43–63. London: I.B. Tauris, 2015.
Al-Ghazzi, Omar. ‘“Citizen Journalism” in the Syrian Uprising: Problematizing Western 
Narratives in a Local Context’. Communication Theory 24.4 (2014): 435–54.
Al-Ghazzi, Omar. ‘An Archetypal Digital Witness: The Child Figure and the Media 
Conflict over Syria’. International Journal of Communication 13 (2019): 3225–43.
Ghorbankarimi, Maryam. ‘Rakshan Banietemad’s Art of Social Realism: Bridging 
Realism and Fiction’. In Refocus: The Films of Rakshan Banietemad, edited by 
Maryam Ghorbankarimi, 189–205. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2021.
Golmakani, Houshang. ‘New Times, Same Problems’. Index on Censorship 3 (1992): 
19–22.
Goodfellow, Melanie. ‘Haifaa Al Mansour on Returning Home to Saudi Arabia to Shoot 
TIFF Title “A Perfect Candidate”’, 13 September 2019. Available at https://www.
screendaily.com/features/haifaa-al-mansour-on-returning-home-to-saudi-arabia-to-
shoot-tiff-title-a-perfect-candidate/5142835.article

Bibliography
291
­Gordin, Michael D., Helen Tilley and Gyan Prakash. ‘Introduction’. In Utopia/Dystopia: 
Conditions of Possibility, edited by Michael D. Gordin, Helen Tilley, and Gyan 
Prakash, 1–18. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2010.
Gugler, Josef. ‘Ali Zaoua: The Harsh Life of Street Children and the Poetics of 
Childhood’. The Journal of North African Studies 12.3 (2007): 369–79.
Haghighi, Mani. Interview by Sanam Shantyaei. ‘A Killer Comedy: France 24 Meets the 
Iranian Director behind “Pig”’, 5 December 2018. Available at https://www.youtube.
com/watch?v=MTWTGc4i0MM
Haghighi, Mani. Email communication with the author, 7 October 2020.
Haghighi, Mani. Interview by the author, 13 October 2020.
Hatuqa, Dalia. ‘Q&A: Middle East’s Most Powerful Army Chasing 18 Cows’, 21 March 
2016. Available at: https://www.aljazeera.com/features/2016/3/21/qa-middle-easts-
most-powerful-army-chasing-18-cows
Hayward, Susan. Cinema Studies: The Key Concepts. London: Routledge, 2000.
Helmy, Mohamed M. and Sabine Frerichs. ‘Stripping the Boss: The Powerful Role of 
Humor in the Egyptian Revolution 2011’. Integrative Psychological and Behavioral 
Science 47 (2013): 450–81.
Hentges, Sarah. Pictures of Girlhood: Modern Female Adolescence on Film. Jefferson, NC: 
McFarland, 2006.
Hernández López, Gala. ‘Notes on the Role of the Camera within a (Virtual) War: The 
Case of Silvered Water, Syria Self-portrait’. Digital War 1.1 (2021): 1–15.
Hetherington, Janet. ‘“Persepolis” in Motion’. Animation World Network, 21 December 
2007. Available at https://www.awn.com/animationworld/persepolis-motion 
(accessed 19 January 2020).
Hibbard, Scott and Azza Salma Layton, ‘The Origins and Future of Egypt’s Revolt’. 
Journal of Islamic Law and Culture 12.3 (2010): 197–214.
Hills, Carol. ‘Why Israel Declared 18 Dairy Cows a National Security Risk’. The World, 
18 June 2015. Available at https://www.pri.org/stories/2015-06-18/wanted-18-dairy-
cows-considered-security-risk
Hjort, Mette and Scott MacKenzie. Eds. Purity and Provocation: Dogme 95. London: 
BFI, 2003.
Hjort, Mette. Lone Scherfig’s Italian for Beginners. Seattle: University of Washington 
Press, 2010.
Hjort, Mette. ‘Flamboyant Risk Taking: Why Some Filmmakers Embrace Avoidable and 
Excessive Risks’. In Film and Risk, edited by Mette Hjort, 31–54. Detroit, MI: Wayne 
State University Press, 2012.
Hjort, Mette. ‘Introduction: The Film Phenomenon and How Risk Pervades It’. In Film 
and Risk, edited by Mette Hjort, 1–30. Detroit, MI: Wayne State University Press, 2012.
Hjort, Mette. ‘Introduction: More than Film School – Why the Full Spectrum of 
Practice-Based Film Education Warrants Attention’. In The Education of the 
Filmmaker in Africa, the Middle East, and the Americas, edited by Mette Hjort, 1–22. 
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2013.

Bibliography
292
Hochberg, Gil Z. Visual Occupations: Violence and Visibility in a Conflict Zone. 
Durham: Duke University Press, 2015.
Hochberg, Gil Z. ‘“Jerusalem, We Have a Problem”: Larissa Sansour’s Sci-Fi Trilogy 
and The Impetus of Dystopic Imagination’. Arab Studies Journal 26.1 (2018): 
34–57.
Hodgins, Ruth. ‘Imagination Is Power: How Bidayyat Captures Syria on Film’, 11 April 
2018. Available at https://walkerart.org/magazine/imagination-is-power-syria-on-
film-with-bidayyat
Honess Roe, Annabelle. Animated Documentary. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 
2013.
Hosseini-Shakib, Fatemeh. ‘Iranian Animation’. In Directory of World Cinema: Iran 2, 
edited by Parviz Jahed, 228–47. Bristol: Intellect, 2017.
Human Rights Watch. ‘Attacks on Ghouta: Analysis of Alleged Use of Chemical 
Weapons in Ghouta’, 10 September 2013. Available at https://www.hrw.org/
report/2013/09/10/attacks-ghouta/analysis-alleged-use-chemical-weapons-syria#_
ftn3
Hutcheon, Linda. ‘The Complex Functions of Irony’. Revista Canadiense de Estudios 
Hispánicos 16. 2 (1992): 219–34.
Hutchinson, Pamela. ‘City of Lost Children’. Sight & Sound 29.3 (2019): 32–4.
Jaafar, Ali. ‘“Persepolis” banned in Lebanon’. Variety, 10 March 2008. Available 
at https://variety.com/2008/digital/markets-festivals/persepolis-banned-in-
lebanon-1117982145/
Jaberansari, Ali. Tehran: City of Love Q&A. BFI London Film Festival, 14 October 2018.
Jaberansari, Ali. Interview by the author, 30 October 2018.
Jaberansari, Ali. Tehran: City of Love Q&A. Poetry in Motion. Barbican, London, 
13 April 2019.
Jaberansari, Ali. The Paradox of Creative Constraints symposium, The Mosaic Rooms, 
London, 7 September 2019.
Jacir, Annemarie. ‘“For Cultural Purposes Only”: Curating a Palestinian Film Festival’. 
In Dreams of a Nation: On Palestinian Cinema, edited by Hamid Dabashi, 23–31. 
London: Verso, 2006.
Jacir, Annemarie. Interview by Melanie Goodfellow. ‘Annemarie Jacir on the Tensions 
of Shooting “Wajib” in Nazareth’, 15 December 2017. Available at https://www.
screendaily.com/features/annemarie-jacir-on-the-tensions-of-shooting-wajib-in-
nazareth/5125051.article
Jacir, Annemarie. Interview by Rolex Mentor, ‘Film Wajib Wins Prizes and Praise’, 
March 2018. Available at https://www.rolexmentorprotege.com/journal/article/
annemarie-jacir-wajib (accessed 19 September 2018).
Jacir, Annemarie. Interview by Leigh Singer, ‘“Laughing Is a Way to Resist”: Annemarie 
Jacir on Her Father-son Wedding Drama Wajib’, 7 January 2019. Available at https://
www2.bfi.org.uk/news-opinion/sight-sound-magazine/interviews/wajib-annemarie-
jacir-palestinian-father-son-wedding-drama

Bibliography
293
Jameson, Fredric. ‘Third-World Literature in the Era of Multinational Capitalism’. Social 
Text 15 (1986): 65–88.
Johnston, Trevor. ‘Taxi Tehran’. Sight & Sound 25.11 (2015): 68–9.
Kadi, Sam. Interview by the author, 13 March 2017.
Kamel, Ahd. Interview by the author, 10 May 2019.
Karimi, Keywan. Interview by the author, 13 February 2021.
Al-Kateab, Waad. For Sama Q&A. Picturehouse Central, London, 13 September 2019.
Al-Kateab, Waad. For Sama Q&A. Curzon Soho, 14 September 2019.
Al-Kateab, Waad. Interview with the author, 8 May 2020.
Kazemi, Farshid. ‘The Interpreter of Desires Iranian Cinema and Psychoanalysis’. PhD 
Thesis, University of Edinburgh, 2019.
Kazemi, Farshid. A Girl Walks Home Alone at Night. Liverpool: Liverpool University 
Press, 2021.
El Khachab, Chibab. ‘State Control over Film Production in Egypt’. Arab Media & 
Society 23 (2017). Available at https://www.arabmediasociety.com/state-control-
over-film-production-in-egypt
Khalil, Basil. The Paradox of Creative Constraints symposium. The Mosaic Rooms, 
London, 7 September 2019.
Khalil, Basil. Interview by the author, 17 September 2019.
Al-Khatib, Hadi. ‘Corporations Erasing History: The Case of the Syrian Archive’. In The 
Arab Archive: Mediated Memories and Digital Flows, edited by Donatella Della Ratta, 
Kay Dickinson and Sune Haugbolle, 91–100. Amsterdam: Institute of Network 
Cultures, 2020.
Khatib, Lina. Lebanese Cinema: Imagining the Civil War and beyond. London: I.B. 
Tauris, 2008.
Khatib, Lina. Image Politics in the Middle East: The Role of the Visual in Political 
Struggle. London: I.B. Tauris, 2012.
Khosroshahi, Zahra. ‘The Films of Rakhshan Banietemad: A Gateway into the 
Representation of Women in Iranian Cinema’. PhD Thesis, University of East Anglia, 
2019.
Khosroshahi, Zahra. ‘The Artistic and Political Implications of the Meta-cinematic in 
Rakshan Banietemad’s Films’. In Refocus: The Films of Rakshan Banietemad, edited 
by Maryam Ghorbankarimi, 79–93. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2021.
King, Geoff. Film Comedy. New York: Columbia University Press, 2002.
Kinninmont, Jane. ‘Saudi Arabia: Why Is Going to the Cinema Suddenly OK?’ 17 April 
2018. Available at https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-middle-east-43738718
Kracauer, Siegfried. Theory of Film: The Redemption of Physical Reality. New York: 
Oxford University Press, 1960.
Kraidy, Marwan. The Naked Blogger of Cairo: Creative Insurgency in the Arab World. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2016.
­Kraidy, Marwan. ‘Trashing the Sectarian System? Lebanon’s “You Stink” Movement and 
the Making of Affective Publics’. Communication and the Public 1.1 (2016): 19–26.

Bibliography
294
Kucukalic, Lejla. ‘Arabian Wonder: Contemporary Science Fiction Transforming the 
Gulf’. The International Review of Science Fiction 44. 121 (2015): 8–17.
Kuntsman, Adi and Rebecca Stein. Digital Militarism: Israel’s Occupation in the Social 
Media Age. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2015.
Langford, Michelle. ‘The Circle’. In Directory of World Cinema: Iran 2, edited by Parviz 
Jahed, 148–50. Bristol: Intellect, 2017.
Langford, Michelle. Allegory in Iranian Cinema: The Aesthetics of Poetry and Resistance. 
London: Bloomsbury, 2019.
Langford, Michelle. ‘Tales and the Cinematic Divan of Rakshan Banietemad’. In Refocus: 
The Films of Rakshan Banietemad, edited by Maryam Ghorbankarimi, 57–78. 
Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2021.
Lawrence, Michael. ‘Deadpan Dogs: Aki Kaurismäki’s Canine Comedies’. In The Films 
of Aki Kaurismäki: Ludic Engagements, edited by Thomas Austin, 187–204. New 
York: Bloomsbury Academic, 2018.
Lawrence, Michael and Susan Smith. Eds. ‘The Child Performance Dossier’. Screen 53.4 
(Winter 2012): 436–76.
Lefebvre, Henri. The Production of Space, translated by Donald Nicholson-Smith. 
Oxford: Blackwell, 1991.
Lefebvre, Henri. Writings on Cities, translated and edited by Eleonore Kaufman and 
Elizabeth Lebas. Oxford: Blackwell, 1996.
Lefebvre, Henri. Rhythmanalysis: Space, Time and Everyday Life, translated by Stuart 
Elden and Gerald Moore. London: Bloomsbury, 2013.
Lionis, Chrisoula. Laughter in Occupied Palestine: Comedy and Identity in Art and Film. 
London: I.B. Tauris, 2016.
Litvin, Margaret. ‘When the Villain Steals the Show: The Character of Claudius in 
Post-1975 Arab(ic) Hamlet Adaptations’. Journal of Arabic Literature 38.2 (2007): 
196–219.
Lury, Karen. The Child in Film: Tears, Fears and Fairytales. London: I.B. Tauris, 2010.
Lynch, Marc. The New Arab Wars: Uprisings and Anarchy in the Middle East. 
Philadelphia: Perseus Books, 2016.
MacDowell, James. ‘Notes on Quirky’. Movie: A Journal of Film Criticism 1.1 (2010): 
1–16.
MacDowell, James. Irony in Film. London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2016.
Macleod, Hugh and Annasofie Flamand. ‘Top Goon: Puppet Drama Lampoons Syria’s 
Bashar al-Assad’. Global Post. 12 December 2011. Available at https://www.pri.org/
stories/2011-12-12/top-goon-puppet-drama-lampoons-syrias-bashar-al-assad
Mady, Christine. ‘The Imaginaries of Beirut’s “Invisible” Solid Waste: Exploring Walls as 
Temporary Temporal Pauses amidst the Beirut Garbage Prices’. In The Temporalities 
of Waste: Out of Sight, Out of Time, edited by Fiona Allon, Ruth Barcan and Karma 
Eddison-Cogan, 87–104. Abingdon: Routledge, 2021.
Maghout, Jalal. Interview with the author, 4 May 2016.

Bibliography
295
­Malik, Sarita. ‘Diversity, Representation and Community Filmmaking’. In Community 
Filmmaking: Diversity, Practices and Places, edited by Sarita Malik, Caroline Chapain 
and Roberta Comunian, 21–5. New York: Routledge, 2017.
Marcus, Richard. ‘Ava, My Adolescent Self’, 9 July 2018. Available at: https://en.qantara.
de/content/interview-with-award-winning-iranian-film-director-sadaf-foroughi-
ava-my-adolescent-self.
Marks, Laura U. ‘Calligraphic Animation: Documenting the Invisible,’ Animation: An 
Interdisciplinary Journal 6.4 (2011): 307–23.
Marks, Laura U. Hanan al-Cinema: Affections for the Moving Image. Cambridge, MA: 
MIT, 2015.
Marks, Laura U. ‘Real Images Flow: Mullā Sadrā Meets Film-Philosophy’. Film-
Philosophy 20 (2016): 24–46.
Masasit Mati. ‘Who Wants to Kill a Million?’ In Syria Speaks: Art and Culture from the 
Frontline, edited by Malu Halasa, Zaher Omareen and Nawara Mahfoud, 269–75. 
London: Saqi Books, 2014.
Maxwell, Richard and Toby Miller. ‘Film and the Environment: Risk Off Screen’. In Film 
and Risk, edited by Mette Hjort, 271–89. Detroit: Wayne State University Press, 2012.
McLaughlin, Ellen. The Trojan Women. New York: Playscripts, Inc., 2011.
Mernissi, Fatima. Beyond the Veil: Male-female Dynamics in Modern Muslim Society. 
Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1987.
Meures, Susanne Regina. Interview by the author, 25 September 2018.
Moeller, Susan. ‘A Hierarchy of Innocence: The Media’s Use of Children in the Telling 
of International News’. The Harvard International Journal of Press/Politics 7.1 (2002): 
36–56.
Mohammed, Ossama. Interview by the author, 12 June 2016.
Al-Mokdad, Eyas. Interview by the author, 24 April 2018.
Al-Mokdad, Orwa. Interview by the author, 8 August 2018.
Morreall, John. Comic Relief: A Comprehensive Philosophy of Humor. Malden: Wiley-
Blackwell, 2009.
Mortimer, Claire. Romantic Comedy. Abingdon: Routledge, 2010.
Mosireen_Soursar. ‘No Archive Is Innocent: On the Attempt of Archiving Revolt’. In 
The Arab Archive: Mediated Memories and Digital Flows, edited by Donatella Della 
Ratta, Kay Dickinson and Sune Haugbolle, 35–40. Amsterdam: Institute of Network 
Cultures, 2020.
Mostafa, Ali. The Worthy Q&A chaired by the author. NYU Arts Center, Abu Dhabi, 
3 April 2017.
Mottahedeh, Negar. Displaced Allegories: Post-revolutionary Iranian Cinema. Durham: 
Duke University Press, 2008.
Moylan, Tom. Scraps of the Untainted Sky: Science Fiction, Utopia, Dystopia. New York: 
Routledge, 2018.
Moylan, Tom and Raffaella Baccolini. Dark Horizons: Science Fiction and the Dystopian 
Imagination. New York: Routledge, 2003.

Bibliography
296
‘M. Siam le réalisateur, entretien “Je voulais comprendre l’Égypt à travers leurs yeux”’. 
Amal dossier presse. Juste distribution: Paris, 2017.
Müller, Beate. ‘Censorship and Cultural Regulation: Mapping the Territory’. In 
Censorship and Cultural Regulation in the Modern Age, edited by Beate Müller, 1–31. 
Amsterdam: Rodopi, 2004.
Muller, Nat. ‘Contemporary Art in the Middle East’. In Contemporary Art in the Middle 
East, edited by Paul Sloman, 12–25. London: Black Dog, 2009.
Muller, Nat. ‘On Being Contemporary – re-activating the Present: Joana Hadjithomas 
and Khalil Joreige in Conversation with Nat Muller’. Art Papers 37.1 (2013): 33–6.
‘Myriam Sassine la productrice, entretien’. Amal dossier presse. Juste distribution: Paris, 
2017.
Naficy, Hamid. ‘Veiled Vision/Powerful Presences: Women in Post-revolutionary 
Iranian Cinema’. In Eye of the Storm: Women in Post-Revolutionary Iran, edited by 
Mahnaz Afkhami and Erika Friedl, 131–50. Syracuse: Syracuse University Press, 
1994.
Naficy, Hamid. A Social History of Iranian Cinema, Volume 4: The Globalizing Era, 
1984–2010. Durham: Duke University Press, 2012.
Neher, Erick. ‘Richard Linklater’s Sculpture in Time’. Hudson Review 67.3 (2014): 470–6.
Omara, Marouan and Johanna Domke. Interview by the author, 14 October 2020.
Omareen, Zaheer. Interview by the author, 13 June 2016
Ong, Walter. Orality and Literacy: The Technologizing of the Word. Abingdon: 
Routledge, 2006.
Orgeron, Devin. Road Movies: From Muybridge and Méliès to Lynch and Kiarostami. 
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2008.
Ostby, Marie. ‘Graphics and Global Dissent: Marjane Satrapi’s Persepolis, Persian 
Miniatures, and the Multifaceted Power of Comic Protest’. PMLA 132.3 (2017): 
558–79.
Pachachi, Maysoon. Interview by the author, 1 May 2016.
Pad.ma. ‘Theses on the Archive’. In Dissonant Archives: Contemporary Visual Culture 
and Contested Narratives of the Middle East, edited by Anthony Downey, 352–63. 
London: I.B. Tauris, 2015.
Pak-Shiraz, Nacim. ‘Iranian Comedies’. In Directory of World Cinema: Iran 2, edited by 
Parviz Jahed, 262–70. Bristol: Intellect, 2017.
Pak-Shiraz, Nacim. ‘Truth, Lies and Justice: The Fragmented Picture in Asghar 
Farhadi’s Films’. In Muslims in the Movies, edited by Kristian Peterson, 143–61. 
Harvard: Harvard University Press, 2021.
Panahi, Jafar. ‘Dissident Cinema: A Conversation between Jafar Panahi and Jamsheed 
Akrami’. World Policy Journal 35.1 (2018): 56–69.
Panahi, Jafar. Interview by Tobias Grey, ‘Iranian Director Flouts Ban on Filmmaking’. In 
Jafar Panahi: Interviews, edited by Drew Todd, 130–5. Jackson: University Press of 
Mississippi, 2019.

Bibliography
297
­Panahi, Jafar. Interview by Vadim Rizov, ‘“In Prison, I had Some Peace of Mind”: Jafar 
Panahi on Closed Curtain’. In Jafar Panahi: Interviews, edited by Drew Todd, 136–9. 
Jackson: University Press of Mississippi, 2019.
Parikka, Jussi. ‘Middle East and Other Futurisms: Imaginary Temporalities in 
Contemporary Art and Visual Culture’. Culture, Theory and Critique 59.1 (2018): 
40–58.
Partovi, Pedram. Popular Iranian Cinema before the Revolution: Family and Nation in 
FilmFarsi. Abingdon: Routledge, 2017.
Peirce, Charles Sanders. The Essential Peirce: Selected Philosophical Writings, vol. 1, 
edited by The Peirce Edition Project. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1998.
Perrigo, Billy. ‘These Tech Companies Managed to Eradicate ISIS Content. But They’re 
Also Erasing Crucial Evidence of War Crimes’. Time, 11 April 2020. Available at 
https://time.com/5798001/facebook-youtube-algorithms-extremism/
Philo, Greg, Alison Gilmour, Maureen Gilmour, Susanna Rust, Etta Gaskell and Lucy 
West. ‘The Israeli-Palestinian Conflict: TV News and Public Understanding’. In 
War and the Media: Reporting Conflict 24/7, edited by Daya Kishan Thussu and Des 
Freedman, 133–48. London: Sage, 2003.
Pinault, David. Storytelling Techniques in the Arabian Nights. Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1992.
Pope, Rob. Creativity: Theory, History, Practice. Abingdon: Routledge, 2005.
Pratt, Geraldine and Rose Marie San Juan. Film and Urban Space: Critical Possibilities. 
Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2014.
Proietti, Salvatore. ‘A Groundbreaking Guide to Arab-Language SF’. Science Fiction 
Studies 43 (2016): 376–9.
Projansky, Sarah. Spectacular Girls: Media Fascination and Celebrity Culture. New York: 
New York University Press, 2014.
Que, Carol. ‘Mechanisms of a Settler Colonial Architecture in Larissa Sansour’s Nation 
Estate (2012)’. Jerusalem Quarterly 73 (2018): 124–39.
Quilty, Jim. ‘The Collection Is Safe, the Foundation’s Ruined’. The Daily Star, 25 August 
2020. Available at https://www.dailystar.com.lb/Arts-and-Ent/Culture/2020/
Aug-25/510765-the-collection-is-safe-the-foundations-ruined.ashx (accessed 
11 September 2020).
Rastegar, Kamran. Surviving Images: Cinema, War and Cultural Memory in the Middle 
East. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2015.
Rees, A.L. ‘Moving Spaces’. In Autopia: Cars and Culture, edited by Peter Wollen and Joe 
Kerr, 83–94. London: Reaktion Books, 2002.
Ridgeon, Lloyd. Makhmalbaf’s Broken Mirror: The Socio-political Significance of Modern 
Iranian Cinema. Durham: University of Durham, 2000.
Rieder, John. Colonialism and the Emergence of Science Fiction. Middletown, CT: 
Wesleyan University Press, 2008.
Riesman, Paul. Freedom in Fulani Social Life: An Introspective Ethnography, translated 
by Martha Fuller. Chicago: Chicago University Press, 1977.

Bibliography
298
­Al-Rimawi, Tariq. ‘Issues of Representation in Arab Animation Cinema: Practice, 
History and Theory’. PhD Thesis, Loughborough University, 2014.
Robbins, Jonathan. ‘Interview with Emad Burnat, “5 Broken Cameras”’, 1 June 2012. 
Available at https://www.filmlinc.org/daily/interview-with-emad-burnat-5-broken-
cameras/
Roitman, Janet. Anti-crisis. Durham: Duke University Press, 2013.
Rose, Steve. ‘Lights, Camera, Revolution: The Birth of Libyan Cinema after Gaddafi’s 
Fall’, 1 October 2012. Available at https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/oct/01/
libya-film-gaddafi-arab-spring
Rose, Steve. ‘You Get Used to the Gunfire’ – Filming the Libyan Women’s Football 
Team’, 31 May 2019, available at https://www.theguardian.com/film/2019/may/31/
libyan-womens-football-team-freedom-fields
Rosen, Philip. ‘From Impurity to Historicity’. In Impure Cinema: Intermedial and 
Intercultural Approaches to Film, edited by Lúcia Nagib and Anne Jerslev, 3–20. 
London: I.B. Tauris, 2014.
Ross, Kristin. ‘Lefebvre on the Situationists: An Interview’. October 79 (1997): 69–83.
Rasoulof, Mohammad. Interview by Ali Moosavi, ‘A Stranger in His Homeland’. Film 
International 84 (2018): 109–13.
Ruberto, Laura E. and Kristi M. Wilson, ‘Introduction’. In Italian Neorealism and Global 
Cinema, edited by Laura E. Ruberto and Kristi M. Wilson, 1–15. Detroit: Wayne 
State University Press, 2007.
Russell, Catherine. Archiveology: Walter Benjamin and Archival Film Practices. Durham: 
Duke University Press, 2018.
Al-Saadawi, Nawal. The Hidden Face of Eve: Women in the Arab World, translated and 
edited by Sherif Hetata. London: Zed Books, 1991.
Sabbagh, Mahmoud. Barakah Meets Barakah Q&A. BFI London Film Festival, 
8 October 2016.
Sadegh-Vaziri, Persheng. ‘Iranian Documentary Filmmakers Association and the Fight 
for the House of Cinema’. In Iranian Cinema in a Global Context: Policy, Politics, and 
Form, edited by Peter Decherney and Blake Atwood, 164–82. New York: Routledge, 
2015.
Sadr, Hamid Reza. ‘Children in Contemporary Iranian Cinema: When We Were 
Children’. In The New Iranian Cinema: Politics, Representation and Identity, edited by 
Richard Tapper, 227–37. London: I.B. Tauris, 2002.
Salducci, Hadrien. ‘KEYWAN KARIMI, rencontre avec un cinéaste censure’, 13 June 
2018. Available at https://www.leblogducinema.com/portrait/keywan-karimi-
interview-867162/
El Said, Maha, Lena Meari and Nicola Pratt. ‘Introduction’. In Rethinking Gender in 
Revolutions and Resistance in the Arab World: Lessons from the Arab World, 1–32. 
London: Zed Books, 2015.
El-Said, Tamer. Interview by Matt Morrison, 19 April 2018, available at https://www.
filmcomment.com/blog/interview-tamer-el-said/

Bibliography
299
­El-Said, Tamer. The Paradox of Creative Constraints symposium, The Mosaic Rooms, 
London, 7 September 2019.
Saikal, Amin. ‘Conclusion’. In The Arab World and Iran: A Turbulent Region in 
Transition, edited by Amin Saikal, 181–6. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2016.
Salamati, Mahsa. ‘Transnational Film Circulation in the Iranian Context: From 
Conjunctural Crisis to Discursive Heterotopia’. PhD Thesis, University of New South 
Wales, 2019.
Salti, Rasha. ‘Critical Nationals: The Paradoxes of Syrian Cinema’. In Insights into Syrian 
Cinema: Essays and Conversations with Filmmakers, edited by Rasha Salti, 21–44. 
New York: Rattapallax Press, 2006.
Sansour, Larissa. Shubbak: Imagined Futures Shorts Programme Q&A. Barbican, 
London, 4 July 2017.
Sansour, Larissa. Interview by the author, 7 August 2017.
Sansour, Leila. Interview by the author, 9 November 2015.
Sarris, Andrew. ‘The Auteur Theory Revisited’. In Critical Visions in Film Theory, edited 
by Timothy Corrigan, Patricia White and Meta Mazaj, 354–61. New York: Bedford/
St Martin’s, 2011.
Sellnow, Timothy L. and Matthew W. Seeger. Theorizing Crisis Communication. 
Chichester: Wiley-Blackwell, 2013.
Seppälä, Jaakko. ‘The Camera’s Ironic Point of View: Notes on Strange and Comic 
Elements in the Films of Aki Kaurismäki’. In The Films of Aki Kaurismäki: Ludic 
Engagements, edited by Thomas Austin, 83–101. New York: Bloomsbury Academic, 
2018.
Seyidov, Samad. Phenomenology of Creativity: History, Paradoxes, Personality. Milton 
Keynes: AuthorHouse, 2013.
Shafik, Viola, ‘Resisting Pleasure? Political Opposition and the Body in Arab Cinema’. 
In Resistance in Contemporary Middle Eastern Cultures: Literature, Cinema and 
Music, edited by Karima Laachir and Saeed Talajooy. New York: Routledge, 2013.
Shafik, Viola. Arab Cinema: History and Cultural Identity. Cairo: American University 
in Cairo Press, 2016.
Shaheen, Jack. Real Bad Arabs: How Hollywood Vilifies a People. New York: Olive 
Branch Press, 2001.
Shahmanesh-Banks, Nargess. ‘Animation: Hand Over Art’. Design Week 23.16 (2008): 
n.p.
Sherwood, Harriet. ‘Speed Sisters on Track for Race Equality’. The Guardian, 18 June 
2010. Available at https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/jun/18/palestine-
speed-sisters-race
Siam, Mohamed. Interview by the author, 31 May 2018.
Smit, Rik Ansgard Heinrich, and Marcel Broersma. ‘Witnessing in the New Memory 
Ecology: Memory Construction of the Syrian Conflict on YouTube’. New Media & 
Society 19.2 (2017): 289–307.
Soleri, Paolo. Arcology: The City in the Image of Man. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1971.

Bibliography
300
­Sombatpoonsiri, Janjira. Humor and Nonviolent Struggle in Serbia. New York: Syracuse 
University Press, 2015.
Soozandeh, Ali. Interview by the author, 23 August 2018.
Sprio, Margherita. ‘Performing History: Girlhood and Sib/The Apple (Samira 
Makhmalbaf, 1998)’. In International Cinema and the Girl: Local Issues, 
Transnational Contexts, edited by Fiona Handyside and Kate Taylor-Jones, 165–177. 
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2016.
Stein, Rebecca. Itineraries in Conflict: Israelis, Palestinians, and the Political Lives of 
Tourism. Durham: Duke University Press, 2008.
Stephan, Rania. Interview by Elisabeth Stoney. ‘Life on Screen: Rania Stephan’. 
Art Asia Pacific 79. Available at http://www.artasiapacific.com/Magazine/79/
LifeOnScreenRaniaStephan
Stephan, Rania. Interview by the author, 20 July 2018.
Stoney, Elisabeth. ‘Life on Screen: Rania Stephan’. Art Asia Pacific 79. Available at http://
www.artasiapacific.com/Magazine/79/LifeOnScreenRaniaStephan
Suleiman, Elia. Interview by Linda Butler. ‘The Occupation (and Life) through an 
Absurdist Lens’. Journal of Palestine Studies 32.2 (2003): 63–73.
Suleiman, Elia. It Must Be Heaven Q&A. BFI London Film Festival, 9 October 2019.
Suvin, Darko. Metamorphoses of Science Fiction: On the Poetics and History of a Literary 
Genre. Yale: Yale University Press, 1979.
Tawil-Souri, Helga. ‘Surveillance Sublime: The Security State in Jerusalem’. Jerusalem 
Quarterly 68 (2016): 56–65.
Taylor, Meredith. ‘Tabl (2016) | Drum | Venice Settimana della Critica 2016’, 
5 September 2016. Available at https://filmuforia.com/tabl-2016-drum-venice-
settimana-della-critica-2016/
Telmissany, May. ‘The Utopian and Dystopian Functions of Tahrir Square’. Postcolonial 
Studies 17:1 (2014): 36–46.
Terranova, Tiziana. ‘Free Labour: Producing Culture for the Digital Economy’. Social 
Text 18.2 (2000): 33–58.
Torchin, Leshu. Creating the Witness: Documenting Genocide on Film, Video, and the 
Internet. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2012.
Tröhler, Margrit. ‘Les Films à protagonistes multiples et la logique des possibles’. Iris 29 
(2000): 85–102.
Tucker, Thomas Deane. The Peripatetic Frame: Images of Walking in Cinema. 
Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2020.
Van de Peer, Stefanie. ‘From Animated Cartoons to Suspended Animation: The History 
of Syrian Animation’. In Animation in the Middle East: Practice and Aesthetics from 
Baghdad to Casablanca, edited by Stefanie Van de Peer. London: I.B. Tauris, 2017.
Vaneigem, Raoul. ‘The Wall Is a Mirror’. Available at https://www.puntodevistafestival.
com/en/noticias.asp?IdNoticia=399
Van Welie, Georgina. Interview by the author, 24 April 2018.
Watts, Edward. Interview by the author, 13 May 2020.

Bibliography
301
­Wedeen, Lisa. Ambiguities of Domination: Politics, Rhetoric, and Symbols in 
Contemporary Syria. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2015.
Wedeen, Lisa. Authoritarian Apprehensions: Ideology, Judgment, and Mourning in Syria. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2019.
Weizman, Eyal. Hollow Land: Israel’s Architecture of Occupation. London: Verso, 2007.
Wells, Paul. Understanding Animation: A Guide to Everything from Flipbooks to Flash. 
London: Routledge, 1998.
Wells, Paul. Animation: Genre and Authorship. London: Wallflower, 2002.
Wells, Paul. ‘Animation in the Gallery and the Gestalt: György Kovásznai and William 
Kentridge’. In Global Animation Theory: International Perspectives at Animafest 
Zagreb, edited by Franziska Bruckner, Nikica Gilić, Holger Lang, Daniel Šuljić and 
Hrvoje Turković, 11–27. London: Bloomsbury Academic, 2019.
Wessels, Joshka. Documenting Syria: Film-making, Video Activism and Revolution. 
London: I.B. Tauris, 2019.
Williams, Raymond. Keywords: A Vocabulary of Culture and Society. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2015.
Wise, Damon. ‘IDFA: “Amal” Director Mohamed Siam on Documenting Disillusioned 
Arab Youth: “They had to swallow their dreams”’, 16 November 2017, available at: 
https://variety.com/2017/film/festivals/idfa-amal-mohamed-siam-documenting-
disillusioned-arab-youth-1202616288/
Woolf, Virginia. A Room of One’s Own. London: Penguin, 2020.
Yaqub, Nadia. ‘Utopia and Dystopia in Palestinian Circular Journeys from Ghassān 
Kanafānī to Contemporary Film’. Middle Eastern Literatures 15.3 (2012): 305–18.
Yaqub, Nadia. Palestinian Cinema in the Days of Revolution. Austin: University of Texas 
Press, 2018.
Zeidan, Lara. Interview by Jennifer Merin, ‘Whistler Film Festival 2018: Lara Zeidan, 
Director of Three Centimetres’, 29 November 2018. Available at https://awfj.org/
female-gaze/2018/11/29/whistler-film-festival-2018-lara-zeidan-director-of-three-
centimetres/?doing_wp_cron=1618823363.8232939243316650390625
Zeidan, Lara. Interview by the author, 26 August 2019.
Zelizer, Barbie. ‘On “Having Been There”: “Eyewitnessing” as a Journalistic Key Word’. 
Critical Studies in Media Communication 24.5 (2007): 408–28.
Zacharek, Stephanie. ‘How Drones Are Revolutionizing the Way Film and Television 
Is Made’, 31 May 2018. Available at https://time.com/5295594/drones-hollywood-
artists/
Zeydabadi-Nejad, Saeed. The Politics of Iranian Cinema: Film and Society in the Islamic 
Republic. Abingdon: Routledge, 2010.

5 Broken Cameras (Burnat and Davidi) 20, 
25, 28, 31, 36–9, 45, 56, 193
20 Fingers (Akbari) 69, 134, 139
300 Miles (Al-Mokdad) 10, 25, 33, 58, 
65–7, 246 n. 56, 250 n. 37
858: An Archive of Resistance (Mosireen) 
196
Abbas, Ackbar 259 n. 65
Abdalla, Ahmad 176
Abdalla, Khalid 6, 22, 35, 36, 104, 116–17, 
119–20
Abdulaziz, Fuad 101
Abounaddara collective 196, 201
absurdity 26, 94, 96, 148, 153–61, 223
Abtahi, Sepideh 183
Abu Dhabi 141
Abu-Lughod, Lila 12, 270 n. 60
activism 19, 28, 234, 267 n. 105
activists
as an audience 132
constraints on free expression 43, 50
role in witnessing and filmmaking 13, 
28, 29, 31, 34, 36, 38, 65, 86, 194–5, 
196
targeted for forcible disappearance 29, 
206
Adventure of a Married Couple (Karimi) 
105, 28
Afshar, Sara 28, 33
agency 19, 31, 37, 45, 57, 59, 61, 64, 67, 
70, 78, 79, 148, 172, 196, 211, 216, 
225, 237
Agha, Akram 86
Agha-Soltan, Neda 28
Ahadi, Ali Samedi 87, 197
Ahmadinejad, Mahmoud 69, 87, 89, 
106, 175, 176, 177, 178, 217, 219, 
278 n. 21
Ahmadzadeh, Ali 214, 216–20, 278 n. 31
Akbari, Mania 10, 68, 69, 125, 133, 134, 137
Akl, Mounia 16, 154, 214, 229–33
al-Abed, Bana 64, 153
al-Abyad, Jamil 151
al-Allaq, Yahya 62, 63
al-Assad, Bashar 67, 121, 122, 148, 151, 
152, 186
al-Assad, Hafiz 12
Alawiye, Malak 28
Aleppo 28, 40, 41–5, 47, 57, 64, 65, 66, 
154
­Algeria 102, 129
Ali Zaoua (Ayouch) 250 n. 29
allegory 19–21, 23, 25, 61, 101, 185, 216, 
219, 236
Amal (Siam) 25, 49, 58, 75–9, 247 n. 100
And Life Goes On (Kiarostami) 173
animation 25, 81–100, 181, 197, 271 n. 68
anonymity, need for 13, 25, 30, 81, 87, 
96–9, 120, 187
appropriation, practices of 192, 196, 198, 
229
Apu Trilogy (Ray) 59
Arabic language 6, 16, 29, 40, 78, 119, 127, 
148, 149–50, 166, 204, 209, 214, 232
Arab Image Foundation (AIF) 191
Arab Spring
breaking the ‘wall of fear’ 2, 21, 30, 86, 
150–1
contrast with public space before 
uprisings 121
cross-influences between different 
uprisings 35
dystopian transformation of 213, 219
effect on filmmaking 29–30, 50, 76, 
117, 201, 207
Iranian Green Movement as a 
forerunner of 3, 27
relationship with anti-occupation 
protests in Palestine 39
relationship with Lebanese trash crisis 
232
role of women in 43, 96, 187
state crackdowns on 3
Index

Index
303
use of archives as a resource for future 
uprisings 196
(see also post-Arab Spring protests)
Arab uprisings (see Arab Spring)
Aractingi, Philippe 9, 18, 140
archival footage, use of 26, 76, 93, 94, 107, 
189, 191–211, 255 n. 57
archives
traditional archives 93, 105, 191–2
digital archives 26, 190, 193–6, 197, 
201, 204, 206–8
Argo (Affleck) 218
Arthur, Paul 193
artisanal production 10, 198
Arebi, Naziha 28, 32, 51–5, 127, 149
Ashuri, Tamur 25, 32, 46
Assad, Maisoun 201
Atassi, Mohammed Ali 31, 197
Atomic Heart Mother (Ahmadzadeh) 26, 
214, 216–20, 234, 236, 278 n. 24, 
278 n. 25, 278 n. 31
auteur theory 19
authorship 19, 171, 186, 190, 196, 200
Ava (Foroughi) 25, 58, 73–5, 108
Ave Maria (Khalil) 26, 150, 157–9, 163
Ayouni (Fedda) 26, 29, 129, 197, 205–10
Babel (Iñárritu) 176
Baghdad 62–3, 117
Ballard, J.G. 221, 278 n. 38
ban
on filmmaking 135, 159, 174, 176
­on films 81, 86, 115, 120, 137, 159, 183
on travel 14, 52, 128, 137
al-Banawi, Fatima 165, 167, 168
Banietemad, Rakshan 104, 160, 167–79, 
268 n. 24, 269 n. 36
Barakah Meets Barakah (Sabbagh) 26, 148, 
149, 164–8
Barghnavard, Shirin 10, 14, 175, 179–83
Baron, Jaimie 193, 195, 200, 204
Bashu, The Little Stranger (Beyzai) 60, 
249 n. 16
Bazin, André 23, 197, 205, 273 n. 40
BBC Arabic 188
BBC Persian 107, 179, 269 n. 39
Bedirxan, Wiam Simav 192, 200, 204
Beheshti, Mohammad 220
Behrouzan, Orkideh 171
Beirut 14, 63, 64, 93, 101, 110–15, 117, 
138–40, 141, 142–3, 191–2, 230–2, 
250 n. 33 (see also Lebanon)
Beit Sahour 93, 95
Bergson, Henri 148, 265 n. 54
Berlin, Symphony of a City (Ruttman) 103
Al-Bernameg (Youssef) 119, 141, 151
Bethlehem 131, 153, 154, 226, 228, 
280 n. 72
Beyzai, Bahram 59
bicycle motif 58, 70, 72, 73, 251 n. 65
Bicycle Thieves (de Sica) 58, 59
Bidayyat 10
Bil‘in 28, 36–9
Bin Salman, Mohammed 167
Black Audio Film Collective 179
black market 134, 137, 159
Blue-Veiled, The (Banietemad) 176
Bourriaud, Nicolas 194, 200
Boyhood (Linklater) 76
Bringing Up Baby (Hawks) 166
Bruno, Giuliana 102, 121
Burnat, Emad 28, 36–9, 45
al-Butairi, Fahad 141, 149
Cairo 15, 49, 78, 101, 115–20, 199, 225
Campbell, Ian 214, 215, 278 n. 38
Capernaum (Labaki) 25, 58, 63–4, 
258 n. 39
censorship 5, 30, 37, 60, 68, 86, 138, 148, 
164, 191, 200, 220, 230
circumventing state censorship 7, 25, 
26, 29, 69, 81, 84–5, 90, 99, 102, 
106, 110, 189, 115, 133, 173, 174, 
176, 183, 189, 222
self-censorship 12–13, 21, 55, 187
state censorship as one of many 
challenges 8–9, 104, 160–1, 168, 
215, 235–6
tendency to focus on state censorship 
1, 2, 4–5, 19–20
checkpoints 66, 125, 126, 127, 130, 131, 
151, 226
Cherri, Ali 201
children
as assumed audience 83–6
as protagonists 22, 25, 41, 46, 57–79, 
93, 163, 249 n. 16
­Chouliaraki, Lilie 33, 34

Index
304
Chronicle of a Disappearance (Suleiman) 
156
Circle, The (Panahi) 69, 70
citizen journalism 25, 27, 28, 36, 56, 182
city, representation of 25, 46–7, 62–4, 89, 
92, 101–23, 136–7, 142, 144, 176, 
181–2, 217–18, 221–2, 226
Closed Curtain (Panahi) 135, 136
cognitive estrangement 213–16
collective filmmaking 8, 28, 35, 96, 116, 
151, 171, 179–83, 196, 200
comedy 26, 141, 147, 148–50, 153, 154, 
157–9, 161–8
coming-of-age films 67–79
conflict (see also country-specific entries)
association with the Middle East 1, 3
constructing a memory of 195, 197
effect on freedom of movement 53, 127
effect on freedom of expression 8, 15
filming in conflict zones 13, 25, 28, 29, 
31, 32, 145, 236
on the ground perspectives 36, 39, 40, 
52, 65, 181, 203
‘view from above’ media reporting 4, 
33, 101, 123, 172, 201
consent 44, 62, 195
conservative values 43, 55, 70, 73, 75, 138, 
148, 167, 186
constraints
creativity within constraints 22, 54, 
59, 62, 64, 74, 81, 99, 142, 148, 161, 
175, 176, 192, 206, 210
Elster’s theory of constraints 5, 21
indexical relationship with film 
production 20, 23, 25, 29, 32, 56, 
84, 100, 120, 134, 135, 187, 236
as a stimulus to creativity 2, 10, 18, 20, 
24, 128, 215, 236–7
typology of constraints 6–18, 235
(see also different types of constraints)
copyright (see intellectual property)
Costa Brava Lebanon (Akl) 17
countries in transition 28, 48–56
Coup 53 (Amirani) 192
COVID-19 pandemic 4, 235
Creative Memory of the Syrian Revolution 
196
creativity
concept of 5, 18–19
creative resistance 38
relationship with constraints 
1–2, 31 (see also creativity within 
constraints under constraints)
crisis 3–4
and animation 81, 87, 100
and archival strategies 194
and child protagonists 58–9, 62–4
and humour 154
and psychogeography 25, 103
and road movie 17, 125–6, 140
and science fiction 17, 213
­and story within a story 26, 171–2, 
173, 177
and teen protagonists 68–70, 79
and witnessing 27, 29, 30, 32, 33, 34, 
39, 52
crisis image 21–2
Crop (Omara and Domke) 221
curfews 125, 127, 130
Dällenbach, Lucien 173, 268 n. 10
Dall’Oglio, Father Paolo 205, 206, 208, 210
Damascus 33, 97, 102, 120–3
al-Daradji, Mohamed 62–3, 173
Day, Amber 168
Day and a Button, A (Hamwi) 102, 120–3
Day I Became a Woman, The (Meshkini) 
251 n. 65
De Angelis, Enrico 205
de Certeau, Michel 22, 101, 102, 105
De Michiel, Helen 179
De Sica, Vittorio 58
Death of a Salesman (Miller) 174
Debord, Guy 102, 104, 121, 122
déjà disparu 118, 259 n. 65
Del Mar Azcona, María 172
Deleuze, Gilles 8, 19, 21, 24, 220
crisis of the action image 58, 60, 103
crystal image 117, 173
time image 22, 59, 68, 126
Della Ratta, Donatella 40, 45, 47
Dera’a 65, 141
dérive 102, 120, 121, 123 (see also 
psychogeography)
Derrida, Jacques 191–2, 194, 205, 211
détournement 194
desert landscape, use of 126, 142 215, 221, 
229
Desser, David 231
dialects 16, 150

Index
305
diaspora 90, 227
Dib, Roy 126, 142–4, 147, 155
Dickinson, Kay 125
dictatorship
experience of living under dictatorship 
21, 42, 43, 98, 186–7, 199, 217, 219, 
278 n. 25
resurgent dictatorships 3, 50, 213
digital video
advent of digital cameras 10, 207
distribution 127, 198
relationship with cinema 29, 30, 197
suspicion of 34
(see also digital archives under 
archives)
dignity 87, 96, 196, 201, 204, 211
disappearance
of cities 101, 116
of history 191, 200, 211
­of people 27, 205–10
direct strategies
dependent on filmmaker’s situation 
150, 174
relationship with indexicality 23, 56, 
120, 215
shift towards 21, 22, 25, 26, 29, 35, 58, 
79, 101, 104, 150, 168, 236
discrepant mobility 126, 144
dissent 19, 20, 21, 49, 86, 151, 167
dissimulation 12, 13, 21, 73, 150, 151, 218
Divine Intervention (Suleiman) 156, 157
documentary
animated documentary 84, 87–9, 93–4, 
96, 98
cinéma vérité 30
relationship with journalism 39
rise of 22
perceived as ‘politically problematic’ 
179, 183, 222
documentary-fiction hybrid 22, 35–6, 58, 
103, 116, 117, 220, 222
Dogme ’95 17, 30, 32, 140, 241 n. 71
Domke, Johanna 214, 220–5, 237–8
Douglas, Mary 158
Dreamaway (Omara and Domke) 26, 214, 
216, 220–5, 234, 236, 278 n. 3
Dreams (al-Daradji) 178
dreams, use of 18, 99, 106, 199, 214, 216, 
220, 221, 223
Dressage (Badkoobeh) 252 n. 71
Drifting Clouds (Kaurismäki) 162
Drum (Karimi) 14–15
Duchamp, Michel 194
Duped, The (Saleh) 126
dystopia 26, 213–34
critical dystopia 234
‘found’ dystopia 215, 230, 234
(see also utopia)
Eager, Charlotte 184
Eastern Europe 84, 85
Easy Rider (Hopper) 125
eco-disaster film 229, 231
economic constraints 5, 8–10, 18, 29, 31, 
37, 59, 130
Egypt
25 January 2011 ‘Day of Rage’ 200
2011 revolution 35, 48, 49, 75, 76, 77, 
116, 119, 120, 150, 151, 196, 247 
n. 100
constraints of production and 
distribution 6, 8, 15, 51, 104, 120, 
222
counterrevolution 3, 48, 50, 78
economic situation 221, 225
Maspero Massacre 28
Rabea Massacre 119
Eid, Rana 18, 111–15
Eisenstein, Sergei 82
Elster, Jon 5–6, 16, 17, 21, 238–9 n. 16
émigré filmmakers 19, 31, 81, 101
empathy 82, 95, 96, 98, 99, 155, 163
­environmental constraints 15
environmental crisis 216, 229, 230, 231, 
234
epistolary form 40, 246 n. 56
Alesa, Majed 169
Escape from ISIS (Watts) 246 n. 79
Estayqazat 96, 255 n. 59
ethics 13–14, 36, 44, 62, 65, 87, 97, 133, 
158, 189, 191, 192, 195, 196, 201, 
205, 208, 211, 223, 274
Euripides 183, 185, 270 n. 54
exile 2, 10, 15, 19, 50, 88, 96, 119, 134, 151, 
184, 201
experimental filmmaking 16, 18, 74, 85, 
142, 147, 198, 199, 201, 228
exploitation
of child actors 62, 250 n. 25
of digital labour 195, 201

Index
306
Fageeh, Hisham 13, 149–50, 165, 167, 168
Fall of the Romanov Dynasty, The (Shub) 
193
Farabi Cinema Foundation 176, 220
Farahmand, Azadeh 249 n. 16
Fares, Amber 125, 128–32
Farhadi, Asghar 108, 159, 174
Farrokhzad, Forugh 257 n. 19
Farsi (see Persian language)
Fedda, Yasmin 14, 32, 184–9, 192, 197, 
205–10, 243 n. 105
female filmmakers (see under women)
film festivals 4, 7, 8–9, 10, 14, 16, 32, 35, 
70, 85, 86, 127, 129, 138, 140, 144, 
157, 159, 168, 183, 225
film funding 7, 8–10, 16, 17, 21, 37, 39, 51, 
52, 54, 71, 83, 140, 141, 157, 158, 
159, 168, 180, 185, 228
fīlmfārsī 109, 257 n. 32
film within a film 173, 177, 178, 179, 181, 
200 (see also story within a story 
under storytelling)
Fisher, Mark 215–16, 219, 225
foreground/background dynamics 52, 126, 
140–4, 145
Forgotten Village, A (Hajju) 148
formal constraints 16–17
Foroughi, Sadaf 13, 73–5, 108
For Sama (Al-Kateab and Watts) 25, 28, 
31, 34, 36, 39–48, 56, 57, 65, 120, 
154, 193, 256 n. 65, 276 n. 98
Foucault, Michel 5, 112, 135, 239 n. 16, 
271 n. 7
found footage 26, 181, 192, 193, 203
frame story 171, 177, 267 n. 3
Free Syrian Army (FSA) 42–3, 66, 120
freedom
of expression 1–2, 5, 6, 11, 15, 17, 21, 
24, 26, 42, 50, 69, 82, 86, 96, 120, 
133, 137, 148, 151, 160, 167, 168, 
172, 175, 177, 185, 188, 214, 217, 
223, 235–7
of movement 3, 26, 53, 64, 125, 126, 
127, 130, 131, 135, 144
Freedom Fields (Arebi) 25, 28, 32, 48, 
51–6, 127, 149
Freud, Sigmund 154–5, 214
friendship, theme of 109, 117, 180, 188
­In the Future They Ate from the Finest 
Porcelain (Sansour) 229
From A to B (Mostafa) 26, 126, 141–2, 149
al-Gaddafi, Muammar 51, 52, 152
García Espinosa, Julio 30, 31
Gaza 3, 127, 131, 228, 255, 260 n. 23
Gaza Weekend, A (Khalil) 159
gender
constraints 12, 55, 73, 121, 168, 235
role reversal 106, 166
segregation 59–60, 70, 79, 148
General’s Boot, The (Agha) 86
General Security, Lebanon 115, 230–1
genre
as a formal constraint 5, 17
transformation of existing genres 17, 
26, 125, 143, 165, 214, 225, 233
as a ‘universal’ language 78, 226, 234
use of popular genres 140–1, 149, 
261 n. 57
(see also under individual genres)
Germany Year Zero (Rossellini) 58
Ghani, Mariam 191, 208
Ghazi Safadi, Noura 205–9
al-Ghazzi, Omar 57, 64
Ghouta 33, 34, 96, 247 n. 95
Gilaneh (Banietemad) 176
Girl in the Sneakers, The (Sadrameli) 
69–70
Girl Walks Home Alone at Night, A 
(Amirpour) 277 n. 17
Glasgow University Media Group 158
Godard, Jean-Luc 142–3
graffiti 29, 32, 37, 98, 104–7, 122, 202
Grapes of Wrath, The (Ford) 126
Great Depression, USA 126, 179
Green Wave, The (Ahadi) 25, 81, 87–9, 90, 
94, 99, 197, 198
Guattari, Félix 220
Gulf states 3, 141, 165
Hadjithomas, Joana 110, 227 n. 9
Haghighi, Mani 4, 7, 8, 148, 159–61
Hamlet (Shakespeare) 166, 173, 175
Hamwi, Azza 120–3
Hand, The (Trnka) 84–5
Hatamikia, Ebrahim 160
Hawages (Alesa) 168–9
Hebrew language 38, 150
hejāb (principle of modesty) 11, 59–60, 76, 
133, 181, 217
Heliopolis (Abdalla) 176
Hezbollah 140, 219
Hjort, Mette 19

Index
307
Hollywood 104, 125, 133, 218
classical narrative 16, 142, 156
Production Code 5, 133
­Holocaust 28, 33
home mode documents 207, 275 n. 86
homosexuality 7, 107, 109, 134, 138–9, 
141, 142 (see also same-sex desire)
homosociality 109
Homs 200, 204
Honess Roe, Annabelle 84, 97, 256 n. 62
honour 11, 68, 75, 77, 90, 96 (see also 
virginity)
hope, theme of 57, 78, 223, 232–3, 234
Hosni, Soad 198–9
House is Black, The (Farrokhzad) 257 n. 19
House of Cinema 183
human-animal transformation 94, 161
human rights 2, 50, 72, 87, 88, 136, 158, 
195, 226
humanitarian gaze 93, 155
humour 71, 94, 130, 136, 147–69, 225, 225 
n 53, 262 n. 3
black humour 147, 148, 160, 264 n 33
deadpan humour 26, 148, 154, 161–4, 
257 n. 22
surrealist humour 26, 153–61
translatability of 149–50
(see also irony, jokes, laughter and 
satire)
Hussein, Saddam 219
Hutcheon, Linda 161
Idol, The (Abu-Assad) 260 n. 23
Image Nation, Abu Dhabi 141, 261 n. 57
Immortal Sergeant, The (Kalthoum) 173
independent cinema 1, 4, 8, 10, 12, 14, 21, 
54, 104, 126, 167, 177, 235
indexicality 22–3, 25, 29, 56, 58, 83–4, 
148, 181, 192, 215, 234, 236
indirect strategies 5, 13, 21, 26, 30, 90, 91, 
148, 150, 161, 168, 174, 185, 209
individuals at risk 13–14, 19, 29, 30, 37, 
50, 62, 87
infrastructural constraints 7–8, 10, 25, 79, 
103–4, 120, 123
Inside Aleppo (Channel 4, UK) 41–2, 44, 45
Institute for the Intellectual Development 
of Children and Young Adults 59, 85
intellectual property 195, 196
intentional disparity 193, 202
intermediality 197
Internet
as an archive 194, 196
censorship of 11, 127, 195, 197
as a distribution platform 1, 10, 11, 34, 
35, 150, 151
slow speed of 15, 197
(see also social media, YouTube and 
web 2.0)
interview methodology 23–4
intimacy, depiction of 12, 54, 107, 108, 
109, 133, 142, 207
Invisible (Barghnavard) 14
Iran
1978–9 revolution 8, 59, 104, 105, 179, 
183
Chain Murders 160, 175
Green Movement 3, 30, 27, 29, 87, 88, 
104, 106–7, 175, 178, 182, 194, 213, 
218
Iran-Iraq war 60, 81, 106, 181–2, 249 
n. 16
­Islamic Republic of 11–12, 20, 60, 62, 
75, 85, 106, 216–19, 249 n. 16
Koker earthquake 173
nuclear anxiety 3, 216, 218
Iraq
Iraq war 34, 62
US-led invasion and occupation 3, 116, 
173, 182
Iron Island (Rasoulof) 174
irony 147, 148, 161–8
Islam 12, 68, 72, 73, 161
attitudes to image-making 82
Shi‘a 12, 73, 174
Sunni 70
Wahhabi 70
Islamic philosophy 21, 214
Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) 3, 13, 
33, 187, 195, 205, 221
Israel-Hezbollah War (see July 2006 War 
under Lebanon)
It Happened One Night (Capra) 133
It Must Be Heaven (Suleiman) 26, 156, 
157
Izzam, Itab 184
Jaberansari, Ali 107–10, 148, 161–3, 176, 
236
Jacir, Annemarie 12, 126, 127, 154, 155
Jaffa 130
Jahanpanah, Mohammad Reza 163, 180

Index
308
Jeddah 150, 165
Jenin 128, 131
Jericho 131
Jerusalem 3, 128, 130, 228
jokes 149, 150, 154, 158, 159 (see also 
humour)
Jordan 141, 142, 183, 186, 226
Joreige, Khalil 110, 277 n. 9
Kabyle 102
Kadi, Sam 13, 31
Kalthoum, Ziad 173
Kamel, Ahd 20, 71, 72, 168
Kami’s Party (Ahmadzadeh) 217
Kanun (see Institute for the Intellectual 
Development of Children and 
Young Adults)
Karimi, Keywan 7, 14, 104–7
al-Karnak (Badrakhan) 200
al-Kateab, Waad 28, 39–48, 154, 256 n. 65
Kaurismäki, Aki 162, 164
Kazemi, Farshid 215, 216, 277 n. 17
Keaton, Buster 162
Keshavarz, Mina 183
Khalatbari, Mitra 89
Khalil, Basil 12, 148, 150, 157–9
Khameni, Ayatollah 89
Khatami, Mohammad 68–9, 90, 104, 106
Khosroshahi, Zahra 176, 178
Khosrovani, Firouzeh 182
­Kiarostami, Abbas 18, 59, 62, 125, 133, 
139, 159, 173, 261 n. 33
King, Geoff 148, 262 n. 4
Kracauer, Siegfried 23, 103
Kraidy, Marwan 2, 19, 259 n. 70
Kuntsman, Adi 34
Labaki, Nadine 63, 64, 258 n. 39
Ladder to Damascus (Malas) 173
Land Confiscation Order (Sansour) 226
Langford, Michelle 21, 61, 268 n. 24
In the Last Days of the City (el-Said) 8, 25, 
35, 101, 115–20, 236
laughter 94, 99, 148, 150, 155 (see also 
humour)
Lawrence, Michael 162, 248 n. 8
Lebanese Rocket Society, The (Hadjithomas 
and Joreige) 277 n. 9
Lebanon
Amnesty law 110, 232
Beirut Port explosion 111, 114, 191, 
192, 233
civil war 3, 18, 110–15, 230, 232–3
economic crisis 3, 111, 233
immigration detention 111, 115, 
258 n. 39
July 2006 War 110, 116, 140, 141
relationship with Israel 128
Syrian occupation 111, 113, 114, 
250 n. 32
Syrian refugees in 3, 14, 63
trash crisis 230–2
Lefebvre, Henri 105, 108, 112, 257 n. 12
Letters to S. (Abyad) 246 n. 56
‘life as lived’ 172, 268 n. 7
limitation (see constraints)
Libya
2011 revolution 51
civil war 3, 34, 51–6, 127
limits of representation (see 
representational limits)
linguistic constraints 15–16, 38
Lionis, Chrisoula 154
Little Gandhi (Kadi) 13, 31, 192, 236, 
244 n. 20
live action 81, 82, 83, 84, 91, 92, 96, 99
Lizard, The (Tabrizi) 149
location shooting 90, 103, 104, 112, 116, 
123, 229, 231, 236
Lost Highway (Lynch) 216
Lynch, David 216–17, 219
Lynch, Marc 34
Mad, Mad, Mad World (Zarrinkelk) 85
Mady, Christine 230
Maghout, Jalal 96–9
magic realism 214, 231, 233
Mainline (Banietemad) 176
Maklouf, Mohammed 35
Malas, Mohamed 173
male guardianship 53, 169
­Man with a Movie Camera (Vertov) 103
Man without a Past (Kaurismäki) 164
Al-Mansour, Haifaa 12, 70–3
Manuscripts Don’t Burn (Rasoulof) 174–5
Marks, Laura 21, 82, 83, 125, 128, 198, 214
Masasit Mati 151, 263 n. 21
Master and Margarita, The (Bulgakov) 
175, 216
May Lady (Banietemad) 178

Index
309
Mernissi, Fatima 72
microhistories 26, 192, 271 n. 7
Middle East
as a crisis hotspot 1–4, 101, 235
as a problematic term 3–4
Mikhail, Dunya 209
Milani, Tahmineh 108
Ministry of Culture and Islamic Guidance 
(MCIG) 73, 138, 161, 176, 181
Mirtahmasb, Mojtiba 135
Mirror (Tarkovsky) 61
Mirror, The (Panahi) 59, 78
mise-en-abyme structure 117, 173–6, 181, 
268 n. 10
mobility restrictions 14, 73, 125, 126, 
127, 131, 135 (see also freedom of 
movement and travel restrictions)
Mohammed, Ossama 20, 192, 200–5
Al-Mokdad, Orwa 2, 10, 14, 31, 33, 65–7
Mondial 2010 (Dib) 26, 126, 142–4, 147
Morsi, Mohamed 3, 50, 78, 119, 151
Mosireen 8, 28, 35, 116, 117, 196, 247 n. 100
Mossadegh, Mohammad 193
Mostafa, Ali 126, 141–2, 176, 261 n. 57
Mottahedeh, Negar 20
Motorcycle Diaries (Salles) 140, 141
Mousavi, Mir-Hussein 87, 89
Mubarak, Hosni 3, 49, 78, 116, 120, 152, 
199
Mulholland Drive (Lynch) 216
multi-protagonist film 172, 176
multi-strand narrative 171, 172, 176, 177, 
180, 202
Muslim ban, USA 127
Naficy, Hamid 30, 31, 57, 70
Naila and the Uprising (Bacha) 255 n. 52
Nargess (Banietemad) 176
Nation Estate (Sansour) 26, 214, 216, 
225–9, 234
National Film Organisation (NFO), Syria
Nematollah, Hamid 160
neorealism 58–62, 63, 64, 79, 103, 126
news reporting 4, 33, 67, 155, 203
No Woman No Drive (Fageeh and 
al-Butairi) 149, 169
non-professional actors 58–62, 63–4, 76, 
133, 140, 236
Nostalgia for the Light (Guzmán) 276 n. 100
Notre musique (Godard) 142, 143
­obstacles (see constraints)
Off-Limits (Banietemad) 176
Offside (Panahi) 159
Through the Olive Trees (Kiarostami) 173
Omara, Marouan 4, 15, 214, 221–5, 236–7
Omareen, Zaher 30, 194
Omari, Mansour 27, 29
Open Bethlehem (Sansour) 153, 280
Oppenheim, Meret 154
Orientalism 3, 9, 16, 45, 70, 86, 172, 189, 
201, 251
Oulipo 5, 18
Pachachi, Maysoon 18
Pak-Shiraz, Nacim 174
Palestine
First Intifada 93, 94, 225 n. 52
Nakba 126, 143, 227
occupation and colonization of 3, 14, 
131, 155, 156, 213, 228–9
relationship with Israel 158
Second Intifada 125
Separation Wall 28, 36, 38, 130, 228
Panahi, Jafar 9, 14, 59, 69, 76, 125, 127, 
128, 134–8, 159, 161, 174
Panoptic (Eid) 18, 25, 103, 111–15, 120, 
199, 250 n. 33
parallel world-building 225–33, 234
Partovi, Kambuzia 135
patriarchy 70, 75, 165
Peirce, C.S. 22, 215
Perfect Candidate, The (al-Mansour) 73
permits
for filmmaking and screening 6, 10, 
53, 73, 76, 110, 115, 120, 135, 144, 
164, 174, 175, 177, 178, 179, 183, 
198, 217, 220, 221, 222, 225, 229, 
249 n. 14, 279 n. 42
for travel 126, 127, 130
permitted criticism 148, 262 n. 6
Persepolis (Satrapi) 81, 82, 83, 85, 86, 87, 
88, 98, 99
Persian language 16, 29, 68, 75, 109, 162, 
277 n. 17
Pig (Haghighi) 26, 148, 159–61
Pinchevski, Amit 25, 32, 46
piracy 137–8
Pixelated Revolution, The (Mroué) 30
poetry
citation of poetry 209, 270 n. 60

Index
310
poetic language in cinema 21, 103, 105, 
201, 202, 204, 252 n. 72
police brutality 49, 89, 200, 247 n. 104
political constraints 2, 6–7, 10, 12, 15, 25, 
32, 56, 76, 120, 187, 221–2, 234
political filmmaking 21–3, 30
political prisoners 105, 137, 209
post-Arab Spring protests 3, 11, 28, 234
postproduction, practices of 192, 194, 198
practitioner’s agency 19
prison experience, depiction of 18, 27, 29, 
87, 99, 111, 112, 202, 209, 275 n. 62
­private space 59, 123, 125, 130, 133–6, 
139, 144, 150, 172, 181, 207, 217
Profession: Documentarist (Barghnavard 
et al) 26, 171, 172, 175, 179–83, 
257 n. 19
psychogeography 25, 101–23
public space 12, 29, 54, 59, 60, 72, 73, 106, 
121, 123, 125, 133–6, 139, 144, 148, 
150, 165, 207, 217
puppets, use of 84–5, 96, 148, 151–3
Queens of Syria (Fedda) 14, 26, 171, 172, 
183–9, 208
queer cinema 140, 144
Quran 72, 171, 132
Qashami, Walid 203
Raheb, Eliane 13
Ramallah 142, 143
Raqqa 205
Rasoulof, Mohammed 174–6
Ray, Satyajit 59
Rees, A.L. 133
representational limits 20, 28
Rezaei, Nahid 180, 183
al-Rimawi, Tariq 86
refugees 3, 14, 53, 63, 93, 94, 126, 128, 183, 
184, 250 n. 34
restriction (see constraints)
Report, The (Lahham) 173
Reporters without Borders 1
Rieder, John 215
Risk of Acid Rain (Sanaeeha) 163
road movie 14, 17, 26, 123, 125–45, 217
romantic comedy 26, 147, 147, 164–7
Rossellini, Roberto 58
Rouhani, Hasan 177, 178, 183, 217, 220
Runner, The (Naderi) 249 n. 16
Rumi, Jalal al-Din Muhammad 174
Russell, Catherine 200
Sabbagh, Mahmoud 148, 164–8
Sadegh-Vaziri, Persheng 269 n. 39
Sadeghi, Ali Akbar 85
Sadr, Hamid Reza 60, 61
Sadrameli, Rasoul 69
Safadi, Bassel 29, 205–10
safety valve theory 148, 262 n. 6
El-Said, Tamer 7, 8, 115–20
Salahshoor, Sahar 183
Salamati, Mahsa 135
Salesman, The (Farhadi) 174
Salt of this Sea (Jacir) 12
same-sex desire (see also homosexuality) 
108, 109, 110, 134, 138, 164
Sana‘a 101
Sana‘a: A Symphony (Abdulaziz) 101, 103, 
127
Sansour, Larissa 17, 128, 147, 154, 214, 
225–9, 233
Sansour, Leila 153, 155
­Sassine, Myriam 76
satire 26, 85, 147, 148, 150–3, 160, 168, 
178
Satrapi, Marjane 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 86
Saudi Arabia
ban on cinema exhibition 70, 73, 167, 
168
ban on women driving 72–3, 149, 166, 
167, 168, 267 n. 105
religious police 165, 266 n. 94
Scheherazade/Shahrazad 171, 172, 190, 
204 (see also The Thousand and 
One Nights)
science fiction 17, 154, 213–34
Second World War 22, 28, 58, 59
security risks 2, 9, 11, 13–14, 19, 21, 29, 
30, 33, 37, 44, 50, 96, 107, 120, 121, 
135, 151, 172, 173, 179, 186–7, 189, 
194, 197, 239, 230, 260 n. 7
self-imposed constraints 5, 17–18, 24, 63, 
85, 108, 133, 134, 139, 141, 236
self-reflexivity 35, 78, 135, 136, 173, 178
Senna (Kapadia) 129
Separation, The (Farhadi) 174
Shafik, Viola 21, 104

Index
311
Sharifi, Farahnaz 181, 257 n. 19
Sharm el-Sheik 221–4
Shomali, Amer 93–6
Short Cuts (Altman) 176
short films 1, 16–17, 28, 175, 176, 177, 
179, 226
siāh-namāyi (showing the negative 
aspects) 7, 137, 138, 218
Siam, Mohamed 12, 28, 48–51, 55, 75–9
Silvered Water, Syria Self-Portrait 
(Mohammad and Bedirxan) 26, 
189, 192, 193, 198, 200–5, 207, 
274 n. 62
Sinking of the Lusitania, The (McCay) 84
el-Sisi, Abdel Fattah 3, 120, 151
Situationist International 102, 105, 107, 
120, 194, 257 n. 12
Under the Skin of the City (Banietemad) 
104, 176, 178
smuggling of films 9, 13, 127, 137–8, 
261 n. 45
Soleri, Paolo 226
Soozandeh, Ali 7, 83, 88, 90–3
Sotoudeh, Nasrin 135
Space Exodus, A 226
Speed Sisters (Fares) 26, 125, 128–33
Spotlight (Hajju) 148
Square, The (Noujaim) 247 n. 100
social media 3, 34, 150, 159, 160, 165, 189, 
194, 195, 197
social and religious constraints 5, 11–13, 
21, 55, 70, 73, 148, 149, 168, 187, 
234
songs, use of 63, 79, 122, 129, 149, 150, 
199, 233
sound design 18, 99, 103, 111–15, 74, 118, 
129, 142, 156, 180, 199, 202, 219, 
204, 223
Soviet Union 193
Star Wars: A New Hope (Lucas) 215
Stars in Broad Daylight (Mohammed) 20
Steamboat Bill, Jr (Keaton) 162
Stein, Rebecca 34, 126
Stephan, Rania 15, 113, 191, 192, 
198–200
storytelling 16, 26, 40, 45, 87, 108, 154, 
171–2
­oral storytelling 171, 180, 209
sharing stories 186, 189
story within a story 171–90
women’s stories 172, 176–89
strategy, as a concept 22, 24–5, 59 (see also 
tactic)
Submarine (Akl) 17, 26, 214, 216, 229–33, 
234
subtitles, use of 16, 149–50, 153, 192, 197, 
210
Sufism 18, 19, 24, 174
Suleima (Maghout) 25, 81, 91, 96–9
Suleiman, Elia 148, 156–7, 161
Sur 231
surrealism 102, 153–61, 194, 199, 214, 231
surveillance 21, 74, 98, 112, 113, 122, 214, 
227, 228
Suvin, Darko 213, 214
Syria
Ghouta chemical attack 34
Hama massacre 98, 152
Syrian opposition 42, 64–6, 96, 122, 
202
Syrian uprising 2, 10, 30, 33, 41, 44, 47, 
98, 120, 152–3, 173, 187, 196, 200, 
201, 203, 206
Syrian War 8, 13, 27, 31, 42–3, 64, 66, 
96, 120, 154, 183, 200, 236
Syrian Archive 196
Syria’s Disappeared (Afshar) 27, 28, 33
tactic, as a concept 22, 23, 125
Take Care of Your Scarf, Tatiana 
(Kaurismäki) 162
Tales (Banietemad) 26, 172, 176–9, 183
taqiya 12, 73 (see also dissimulation)
Tash ma Tash (al-Hamoud and 
al-Ghanim) 149
Tawil-Souri, Helga 227
Taxi Tehran (Panahi) 26, 125, 134–8
technological constraints 5, 10–11, 31, 83
teenagers 58, 67–79, 247 n. 100
Tehran 10, 14, 92, 101, 104–10, 134, 136, 
163, 175, 181–2, 216–18
Tehran: City of Love (Jaberansari) 25, 26, 
101, 107–10, 148, 161–4, 236
Tehran Taboo (Soozandeh) 7, 25, 81, 83, 
90–3, 94, 99, 254 n. 41
Telfaz 11 149
temporal constraints 14–15, 29, 76, 83, 
100, 235

Index
312
Ten on 10 (Kiarostami) 133
testimony 27, 35, 36, 37, 46, 49, 84, 87, 89, 
96, 99, 210
theatre production 151, 166, 184
Thelma and Louise (Scott) 125
Third Cinema 23, 30, 179
This is Not a Film (Panahi) 9, 135
Thousand and One Nights, The 86, 171, 
172, 181, 189, 190, 200, 201, 202, 
214, 254 n. 27, 267 n. 3, 277 n. 10
Three Centimetres (Zeidan) 17, 26, 126, 
138–40
Three Disappearances of Soad Hosni, 
The (Stephan) 26, 192, 198–200, 
258 n. 47
Time for Drunken Horses, A (Ghobadi) 60
Time That Remains, The (Suleiman) 156
­Top Goon: Diaries of a Little Dictator 26, 
148, 151–3
Torchin, Leshu 35, 48
Towfik, Ahmed 214, 278 n. 38
trauma 43, 53, 65, 114, 134, 172, 173, 188, 
256 n. 65
travel restrictions 14, 125–8 (see also 
mobility restrictions and discrepant 
mobility)
Trials of Spring, The (Reticker) 247 n. 100, 
252 n. 78
Trilogy of Voice (Estayqazat) 96, 255 n. 57
Trojan Women, The (Euripides)
Trump, Donald 127, 181, 214
Tunisia 21, 81, 86, 215
Turkey 13, 42, 45
Turtles Can Fly (Ghobadi) 60
Tyre (see Sur)
Under the Bombs (Aractingi) 140
Under the Skin of the City (Banietemad) 
104, 176, 178
underground films 10–11, 29, 69, 102, 
134, 175, 236
United Arab Emirates (UAE) 141, 176
utopia 213, 218, 220, 226–7, 234
Utopia (Towfik) 214, 278 n. 38
Van Welie, Georgina 32, 51
veiling as a creative strategy 96, 148, 150
verification of digital artefacts 34, 196
Vie de Bohème, La (Kaurismäki) 162
view from ‘behind’ the film 23, 
243 n. 105
violence
depiction of 75, 81, 87, 92, 93, 182, 187, 
200, 201
experience of 29, 37, 66, 67, 110, 111, 
154, 189
virginity 68, 69, 72, 74, 75, 77, 90, 138–9 
(see also honour)
visa restrictions 14, 127, 128
voice
double-voicing 185
politics of 24, 41, 68, 72, 75, 106, 143, 
172, 184, 205
voice-over, construction of 42, 46, 51, 77, 
96–7, 105, 142, 180–1, 202, 204, 
220
Voyage to Italy (Rossellini) 126
vulnerable groups / individuals (see 
individuals at risk)
Wadjda (al-Mansour) 12, 26, 58, 70–3, 74, 
251 n. 59
Wajib (Jacir) 127
Wanted 18, The (Shomali and Cowan) 25, 
81, 93–6, 99, 161
Waltz with Bashir (Folman) 81, 83
war (see under conflict and country-
specific entries)
War Canister (Al-Allaq) 25, 58, 62–3
War, Love, God & Madness (al-Daradji) 
173
Watts, Edward 28, 45–8, 154, 245 n. 79
web 2.0 27, 189 (see also Internet and 
social media and YouTube)
weird and eerie, concept of 215, 216, 
277 n. 17
Wells, Paul 82, 84, 255 n. 53
Wessels, Joshka 30, 195
West Bank, Palestine 3, 28, 36, 93, 126–7, 
130, 131, 156, 157, 226, 228
Where is the Friend’s House (Kiarostami) 
173
­White Balloon, The (Panahi) 59, 60, 62
White Meadows, The (Rasoulof) 174
To Whom Do You Show these Films? 
(Banietemad) 178

Index
313
Whose Country? (Siam) 28, 32, 48–51, 52, 
75, 76
witnessing 25, 26, 27–56, 65, 67, 87, 101, 
117, 144, 192, 197, 210
women
as filmmakers 11, 12, 54, 70, 73, 168, 
172, 179, 180
representation of 9, 53, 58, 60, 69–70, 
96, 132, 133, 172, 181, 184, 187, 
189, 217
(see also Arab Spring, role of women in)
World Free Press Index 1
Writing on the City (Karimi) 25, 101, 
104–7
Yacoubian Building, The (Hamed) 
247 n. 104
Yaqub, Nadia 126
Yemen
civil war 3, 101, 119, 127
Youssef, Bassem 119, 151
YouTube, use of 14, 28, 41, 47, 86, 88, 96, 
105, 148, 149, 150, 151, 190, 194, 
195, 200–4, 206–7
Zarrinkelk, Nourredin 85
Zeidan, Lara 17, 126, 138–40
Zelizer, Barbie 27
Zimmerman, Patricia 179

314

315

316

