
Critical Thinking

This page intentionally left blank 

Critical Thinking
The Art of Argument
George W. Rainbolt
Georgia State University
Sandra L. Dwyer
Georgia State University
Australia • Brazil • Japan • Korea • Mexico • Singapore • Spain • United Kingdom • United States

This  an electronic version of the print textbook. Due to electronic rights 
 
 
  
 
restrictions, some third party content may be suppressed. Editorial
review has deemed that any suppres ed content does not materially
 affect the overall learning experience. The publisher reserves the 
right to remove content from this title at any time if subsequent
rights restrictions require it. For valuable information on pricing, previous 
editions, changes to current editions, and alternate formats, please visit
www.cengage.com/highered to search by ISBN#, author, title, or keyword 
 for materials in your areas of interest.
s
is

Printed in Canada
1  2  3  4  5  6  7  14  13  12  11  10
Critical Thinking: The Art of 
Argument
George W. Rainbolt
Sandra L. Dwyer
Publisher: Clark Baxter 
Senior Sponsoring Editor: Joann Kozyrev  
Development Editor: Florence Kilgo
Assistant Editor: Joshua Duncan
Media Editor: Kimberly Apfelbaum
Marketing Manager: Mark T. Haynes
Marketing Coordinator: Josh Hendrick
Marketing Communications Manager: 
 Laura Localio
Associate Content Project Manager: 
 Sara Abbott
Senior Art Director: Jennifer Wahi
Manufacturing Buyer: Linda Hsu
Senior Rights Acquisition Specialist, 
 Text: Katie Huha
Production Service: 
 Cadmus Communications 
Text Designer: Roy Neuhaus Design
Rights Acquisition Specialist, Image: 
 Amanda Groszko
Cover Designer: Jeﬀ  Bane, CMB Design
Cover Image: Getty Images
Compositor: KnowledgeWorks Global 
 Limited
© 2012 Wadsworth, Cengage Learning
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. No part of this work covered by the 
copyright herein may be reproduced, transmitted, stored, or used 
in any form or by any means graphic, electronic, or mechanical, 
including but not limited to photocopying, recording, scanning, 
digitizing, taping, Web distribution, information networks, or 
information storage and retrieval systems, except as permitted 
under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright 
Act, without the prior written permission of the publisher.
For product information and technology assistance, 
contact us at Cengage Learning 
Customer & Sales Support, 1-800-354-9706
For permission to use material from this text or product,
submit all requests online at 
www.cengage.com/permissions.
Further permissions questions can be emailed to 
permissionrequest@cengage.com.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2010932169
ISBN-13: 978-0-495-50157-2
ISBN-10: 0-495-50157-3
Wadsworth
20 Channel Center Street
Boston, MA 02210
USA
Cengage Learning is a leading provider of customized learning 
solutions with office locations around the globe, including 
Singapore, the United Kingdom, Australia, Mexico, Brazil and 
Japan. Locate your local office at international.cengage.com/
region
Cengage Learning products are represented in Canada by Nelson 
Education, Ltd.
For your course and learning solutions, visit www.cengage.com.
Purchase any of our products at your local college store or at our 
preferred online store www.CengageBrain.com.

   3
Brief Contents
v
 
Preface xvii
 Introduction How to Use This Book 1
 Chapter 1 
Critical Thinking and Arguments 4
 Chapter 2 
What Makes a Good Argument? 42
 Chapter 3 
Premises and Conclusions 86
 Chapter 4 
Language 116
 Chapter 5 
Propositional Arguments 146
 Chapter 6 
Categorical Arguments 174
 Chapter 7 
Analogical Arguments 228
 Chapter 8 
Statistical Arguments 258
 Chapter 9 
Causal Arguments 294
 Chapter 10 
Moral Arguments 342

vi  Contents
vi
vi  Brief Contents
Answers to Selected Exercises 374
Reference Guide 410
 Fallacies 410
 Guides 411
 Habits of Critical Thinkers 411
 Index (Including Key Concepts and Technical Terms) 412
  Summary Guide for Finding, Standardizing, and 
 Evaluating Arguments 415
List of Citations 424

Critical Thinking and Arguments 4
 C H A P T E R  1
What Is Critical Thinking? 5
What Is an Argument? 7
Statements 7
Statements and Sentences 8
Why Think Critically? 13
Finding Arguments 13
The First Three Steps 13
Look for an Attempt to Convince 13
Find the Conclusion 13
Find the Premises 14
Complicating Factors 16
Indicator Words Are Imperfect Guides 16
Sentence Order 16
Conclusions and Premises Not in Declarative Form 16
Unstated Premises and Unstated Conclusions 19
Contents
vii
PREFACE xvii
How to Use This Book 
1
 I N T R O D U C T I O N

viii  Contents
Things That Are Not Arguments 23
Assertions 23
Descriptions 23
Questions and Instructions 24
Explanations 24
Putting Arguments into Standard Form 31
Diagramming Arguments 39
Chapter Summary 40
Guide: Finding and Standardizing Arguments 41
 C H A P T E R  2
What Makes a Good Argument? 42
The Two Characteristics of a Good Argument 43
True Premises 47
Audience 47
The Problem of Ignorance 49
Proper Form 51
Deductive and Inductive Arguments 55
Guide:  Terms Used in Logic, Philosophy, and Math to Refer 
to Good and Bad Arguments 59
Relevance 63
Dependent and Independent Premises 65
Arguing about Arguments 69
Fallacies and Relevance 70
Fallacy: Easy Target 71
Fallacy: Appeal to Popularity 72
Fallacy: Appeal to Novelty or Tradition 73

Contents  ix
Three Kinds of Premises 87
Empirical Statements 87
Defi nition of Empirical Statements 87
Testimonial Empirical Statements 90
Defi nitional Statements 93
Statements by Experts 97
Appropriate Credentials 98
Reliability 98
Lack of Bias 98
Appropriate Area of Expertise 100
Fallacy: Inappropriate Expertise 101
Expert Consensus 101
Guide: Proper Citation of Experts 102
Premises and the Internet 103
A Common Mistake 104
Conclusions 108
Strength of Conclusions 108
Scope of Conclusions 109
Chapter Summary 115
 C H A P T E R  3
Premises and Conclusions 
86
Fallacy: Ad Hominem 76
Fallacy: Appeal to Ignorance 78
Fallacy: Begging the Question 78
Chapter Summary 83
Guide: Finding, Standardizing, and Evaluating Arguments 83

x  Contents
Identifying Propositional Statements 147
Negations 148
Disjunctions 150
Conjunctions 152
Conditionals 154
Conditionals: Some Complications 155
 C H A P T E R  5
Propositional Arguments 
146
Identifying Defi nitions 117
Extension and Intension 117
Guide: Defi nitions and Quotation Marks 118
Genus and Species 119
Dictionary Defi nitions  120
Guide: Dictionaries 122
Technical Defi nitions 123
Evaluating Defi nitions 128
Correct Extension 128
Correct Intension 130
Persuasive Defi nitions 131
Language and Clarity 133
Ambiguity 134
Fallacy: Equivocation 134
Vagueness 136
Language and Emotion 139
Fallacy: Appeal to Emotions 140
Euphemism 141
Rhetorical Devices 141
Chapter Summary 145
 C H A P T E R  4
Language 
116

Contents  xi
Identifying Categorical Statements 175
The Four Standard Categorical Statement Forms 175
Universal Affi rmative: All G1 Are G2 178
Categorical Statements: Important Details 179
Venn Diagrams 179
Empty Categories 180
Category Variables 182
Complex Categories 183
Universal Negative: All G1 Are Not G2 184
Particular Affi rmative: Some G1 Are G2 186
Particular Negative: Some G1 Are Not G2 187
Evaluating Categorical Arguments with One Premise 190
Contradiction 190
Fallacy: Confusing a Contrary and a Contradictory 192
Conversion 194
 C H A P T E R  6
Categorical Arguments 
174
Guide:  Negation, Disjunction, Conjunction, and Conditional 
Indicator Words 156
Evaluating Propositional Arguments 159
Denying a Disjunct 159
Fallacy: Affi rming an Inclusive Disjunct 160
Affi rming an Exclusive Disjunct 162
Fallacy: False Dichotomy 163
Affi rming the Antecedent 165
Fallacy: Denying the Antecedent 166
Denying the Consequent 167
Fallacy: Affi rming the Consequent 167
Tri-Conditional 168
Chapter Summary 171
Guide:  Finding, Standardizing, and Evaluating Propositional 
Arguments 171

xii  Contents
Identifying Analogical Arguments 229
The Form of Analogies 230
Illustrative Analogies 233
Uses of Analogies 238
Logical Analogies 240
Refutation by Logical Analogy 240
Evaluating Analogical Arguments 244
The True Premises Test 244
The Proper Form Test 247
Analogies, Consistency, and False Beliefs 250
 C H A P T E R  7
Analogical Arguments 
228
Distribution 195
Complements 197
Contraposition 197
Obversion 198
Guide: Some Valid Categorical Argument Forms with One Premise 200
Evaluating Categorical Arguments with Two Premises 202
Identifying Categorical Syllogisms 202
Evaluating Categorical Syllogisms: The Test Method 207
Guide: Validity of Categorical Syllogisms: The Test Method 208
The Equal Negatives Test 208
The Quantity Test 208
The Distributed Conclusion Test 209
The Distributed Middle Category Test 210
Guide: Doing the Distributed Conclusion Test 210
Evaluating Categorical Syllogisms: The Venn Method 211
Guide: Validity of Categorical Syllogisms: Venn Method 215
Chapter Summary 225
Guide:  Finding, Standardizing, and Evaluating 
Categorical Arguments 226

Contents  xiii
Descriptive Statistics 259
The Many Meanings of “Average” 260
Mean 261
Weighted Mean 261
Mode 262
Midrange 262
Median 262
Outliers and Resistance 263
Standard Deviation 268
Distributions 269
Regressions 273
Identifying Statistical Arguments 275
Parts of a Statistical Argument 276
Statistical Arguments and Analogical Arguments 278
Evaluating Statistical Arguments 281
The True Premises Test 281
The Proper Form Test 281
Guideline 1: Size  282
Guideline 2: Variety 282
Sampling Techniques 283
Statistical Fallacies 286
Fallacy: Hasty Generalization 286
Fallacy: Biased Sample 286
Fallacy: Biased Questions 287
Chapter Summary 291
Guide: Finding, Standardizing, and Evaluating Statistical Arguments 292
 C H A P T E R  8
Statistical Arguments 
258
Chapter Summary 254
Guide:  Finding, Standardizing, and Evaluating 
Analogical Arguments 255

xiv  Contents
The Many Meanings of “Cause” 295
Cause as Necessary Condition 296
Cause as Suffi cient Condition 298
Cause as Necessary and Suffi cient Condition 298
Contributory Cause 298
Primary Cause 299
Remote and Proximate Causes 299
Identifying Causal Arguments 302
The Form of a Causal Argument 302
Evaluating Causal Arguments 306
Premise (1): Correlation 306
Binary and Scalar Features 306
Binary Correlation 307
Scalar Correlation 307
Establishing Correlations: Mill’s Methods 310
The Method of Agreement 310
The Method of Difference 310
The Joint Method of Agreement and Difference 311
The Method of Scalar Variation 311
Correlation Is Not Causation 312
Fallacy: Hasty Cause 313
Fallacy: Causal Slippery Slope 314
Premise (2): Causation and Time 316
Fallacy: Post Hoc 317
Premise (3): Third-Party Causation 318
Causal Arguments by Elimination 319
Premise (4): Coincidental Correlation 320
 C H A P T E R  9
Causal Arguments 
294

Contents  xv
Identifying Moral Arguments 343
Values: Often Overlooked Presuppositions 344
The Nature of Moral Arguments  348
Moral Arguments and Truth 348
Moral Arguments, Emotion, and Self-Interest 349
Evaluating Moral Arguments 351
Consequentialist Moral Arguments 353
What Sorts of Consequences Are Morally Important? 353
Who Is Morally Important? 356
What’s the Correct Amount of the Morally Important Consequences?  357
Deontic Moral Arguments 359
Universalizability 360
Cooperation 362
Aretaic Moral Arguments  365
Moral Confl ict 367
A Final Thought 369
Chapter Summary 370
Guide: Finding, Standardizing, and Evaluating Moral Arguments 371
 C H A P T E R  10
Moral Arguments 
342
The Scientifi c Method 326
Step 1: Identify the Question to Be Answered 326
Step 2: Formulate a Tentative Theory 327
Step 3: Check for Correlations 327
Step 4: If Necessary, Formulate a New Theory 328
Step 5:  Check for Reverse Causation, Third-Party Causation, 
and Coincidental Correlation 329
Step 6: Develop New Questions 329
An Example of the Scientifi c Method 329
Chapter Summary 338
Guide: Finding, Standardizing, and Evaluating Causal Arguments 339

xvi  Contents
 
Answers to Selected Exercises 
374
Fallacies 410
Guides 411
Habits of Critical Thinkers 411
Index (Including Key Concepts and Technical Terms) 412
Summary Guide for Finding, Standardizing, and Evaluating Arguments 415
 
Reference Guide 
410
 
List of Citations 
424
The following additional chapters are available for inclusion in custom 
versions of Critical Thinking: The Art of Argument:
Custom Chapter A: Propositional Arguments in a Formal Language
Custom Chapter B: Aristotelian Categorical Arguments
Custom Chapter C: Success in College, More Than Critical Thinking
Custom Chapter D: Critical Thinking Across The Disciplines
Contact your Cengage Learning representative for more information.

xvii
Why Critical Thinking: The Art of Argument?
In 2006, we faced the task of choosing the textbook for Phil 1010, Critical 
Thinking. At Georgia State University, Phil 1010 is a core curriculum course, 
taken by more than 3,000 students a year, and taught almost exclusively by 
graduate students. During our textbook search, we identifi ed two challenges 
that our textbook must meet. First, we needed a book that would help stu-
dents acquire skills quickly. Georgia State students take Critical Thinking 
because the course is required. They are under pressure to quickly acquire the 
skills needed to complete their courses for graduation and they do best if it is 
clear to them that the course and the required book are helping prepare them 
for college classes and the rest of their life. Second, we wanted our Critical 
Thinking instructors, many of whom are in their fi rst year of teaching, to be 
able to trust the book to explain the fundamentals clearly and accurately so 
that they do not have to defend oversimplifi cations and omissions.
In short, we needed a textbook that was accessible (easy for students to 
read and understand), relevant to students’ lives (both in and out of the class-
room), and rigorous (did not oversimplify the material). 
None of the existing textbooks that we reviewed met all of these crite-
ria, so we wrote Critical Thinking: The Art of Argument. Over the course of 
three years, the book was tested with more than 10,000 students and more 
than fi fty instructors. We revised the book three times in light of classroom 
feedback, and then, based on reviewer feedback, we revised it further before 
issuing this fi rst edition. Throughout this process, we focused on maintain-
ing the rigor that has made the text a success at Georgia State. For the four 
semesters prior to the introduction of the new textbook, 26% of students in 
Critical Thinking earned an unsatisfactory grade (i.e., a D, a W, or an F), but 
in the four semesters after the introduction of the new book, only 21.2% of 
students in the course earned an unsatisfactory grade. 
Through this process, we also refi ned our own understanding of what 
we meant by “rigor.” The right balance needs to be achieved between two 
Preface

extremes: lengthy, complicated explanations and oversimplifi ed, incomplete 
presentations. “Rigorous” does not mean overly complex and incomprehen-
sible. On the other hand, every teacher has had the experience of presenting a 
simplifi ed defi nition or explanation to a class of students, only to have a good 
student raise a hand and ask, “But what about…” or say “But that doesn’t 
make sense if….” Extensive class testing and several development reviews 
have helped us craft, test, and clarify explanations and examples to ensure that 
they are rigorous, relevant, and accessible.
What You Will Find in Critical Thinking: 
The Art of Argument
Critical Thinking: The Art of Argument introduces all major types of argu-
ments. Its focus on accessibility and rigor particularly enhances the presen-
tation of analogical, statistical, and causal arguments. The book’s informal, 
conversational style and relevant, real-life examples from students’ lives 
in class, online, with friends, or at home are proven tools that facilitate 
comprehension without sacrifi cing accuracy or thoroughness. In addition, 
extensive sets of exercises emphasize application over memorization and 
help meet the goal of offering a complete, approachable presentation of the 
essentials of critical thinking. 
Critical Thinking: The Art of Argument has unique features to help 
students learn and help instructors teach.
Consistent Focus on Arguments
Students learn best when they are shown patterns and know what to expect. To 
provide this consistency, we use an innovative two-part test for a good argument 
(the true premises test and the proper form test) for all types of arguments. Stu-
dents sometimes struggle to see the overarching commonalities across the range 
of arguments found in good reasoning. When we started using our book with the 
consistent use of the two-part test, students were able to see these patterns clearly 
and this problem was solved. 
Distinctive Semiformal Method for Standardizing Arguments
Students need to focus on argument form in order to grasp the funda-
mental point that arguments can have a proper formal structure inde-
pendent of the truth or falsity of their premises. On the other hand, the 
complexity and abstraction of formal symbolic language intimidates some 
students. We have adopted an easy-to-understand semiformal method of 
standardizing arguments. Consider, for example, the case of Affirming the 
Antecedent (a.k.a. Modus Ponens) discussed in Chapter Five. The purely 
formal approach can be too disconnected from meaning for students to 
understand:
(1) P ⊃ Q
(2) P
∴
(3) Q
xviii  Preface

Arguments presented in ordinary language are more comfortable for students:
(1) If Coke has calories, then it provides energy.
(2) Coke has calories.
Therefore, 
(3) Coke provides energy.
However, when arguments are presented only in ordinary language, stu-
dents cannot “see” the argument’s logical form. They are often unable to 
recognize which form the particular example illustrates.
Our semiformal method bridges the student’s need for meaning and the 
requirement to focus on form by using a combination of letters as variables 
(such as S1 for one statement and S2 for another statement), and common 
words instead of symbols, like this:
(1) If S1, then S2.
(2) S1.
Therefore,
(3) S2.
Testing of the book revealed that retaining the use of common words for 
the key parts of arguments (such as “if,” “then,” and “therefore”) allows stu-
dents to “see” an argument’s logical form more easily. The use of S1 and S2 as 
variables reminds students that affirming the antecedent expresses a relation-
ship between statements. This semiformal method illustrates the concept 
of logical form while maintaining a visible connection to ordinary speech. 
The book avoids both extremes: what can be the confusing novelty of purely 
symbolic standardizations and the inadequate representation of logical form 
in arguments expressed completely in ordinary language.
Semiformal Method’s Unifi ed Focus on Every Argument Form
To further our goal of showing students the commonalities of all arguments, 
we use the semiformal method of notation to present the logical form for 
all of the major types of arguments. As an example, look at the treatment of 
form in Ad Hominem Fallacy (Chapter Two) and Causal Arguments (Chapter 
Nine).
The Form of the Ad Hominem Fallacy
(1) Person H asserts statement S.
(2) There is something objectionable about Person H.
Therefore,
(3) Statement S is false.
The Form of Causal Arguments
(1) Event E1 is correlated with event E2.
(2) E2 is not the cause of E1.
(3) There is no event E3 that is the cause of E1 and E2.
(4) E1 and E2 are not coincidentally correlated.
Therefore,
(5) E1 is a cause of E2.
Preface  xix

Preface  xx
This unifi ed focus on form combined with the consistent use of the two-part 
test for a good argument lead our students to better comprehend the fact that 
arguments can have a proper formal structure independent of the truth or fal-
sity of their premises.
Informal, Conversational Style of Language
This style facilitates comprehension and makes the content accessible to all 
students, at all levels and from all backgrounds. For example, we use contrac-
tions to make the writing style more accessible and we address the students 
directly in the second person.
Fallacies in Context
The study of fallacies is only useful when students learn to identify falla-
cious arguments and to avoid resorting to fallacies in their own arguments. 
When students study fallacies in a single chapter, for example, they tend to 
focus on memorizing the names of the fallacies rather than really being able 
to distinguish a fallacious argument from a good one. To better contrast fal-
lacies with properly formed arguments of the same type, Critical Thinking: 
The Art of Argument introduces each fallacy alongside good arguments of 
the same type, e.g., causal fallacies are discussed in the chapter on causal 
arguments, propositional fallacies are in the chapter on propositional argu-
ments, etc. 
Exercises Require Application, Not Merely Memorization
Critical thinkers must know how to identify and analyze arguments, not 
merely defi ne terms. Learning the art of argument requires practice and 
application—recitation of technical defi nitions does not contribute to the 
development of this skill. For this reason, we crafted all of our exercises to 
avoid mere memorization. We chose exercises like this one:
“Call me Ishmael.” This sentence is
(a) a statement.
(b) a question.
(c) a command.
(d) an exclamation.
instead of an exercise that requires memorization like this one:
A statement is 
(a) a sentence that makes a claim that can be either true or false.
(b) a sentence that asks for information.
(c) a question or command.
(d) a speech.
Before we started using this book, we found that many students could, for 
example, spit back the defi nition of an argument but could not identify one 
in a passage. In addition to offering invaluable practice, exercises that require 
application help students overcome this problem.

xxi  Preface
Unique Pedagogical Aids
 • Learning Outcomes. While they are now a key feature of higher education, 
learning outcomes are rarely explicitly listed for students. Each chapter of 
Critical Thinking: The Art of Argument begins with a list of fi ve practical 
learning outcomes, specifi c things students should be able to do after 
studying the chapter. 
 • Key Concepts. Points fundamental to a student’s success, these concepts 
are visually enhanced and included in the margin. This presentation helps 
highlight their importance and facilitates reviewing for exams.
 • Habits of a Critical Thinker. Critical thinking is a skill and, like all skills, 
it requires habits of mind in addition to content knowledge. Special boxes 
throughout the text point to the habits required to be a good critical thinker. 
Examples include being inquisitive, being attentive to detail, and being bold. 
 • Technical Terms. One barrier to college students’ learning is the fact that 
different disciplines use different words for the same thing or the same 
word for different things. Technical Terms notes throughout the text 
explain these differences. For example, one Technical Terms note explains 
different uses of the word “valid.”
 • Connections. The pages in a book have to be numbered sequentially, 1, 
2, 3, etc. But critical thinking is more like a web of topics than a line 
of topics. The Connections feature shows students the weblike nature 
of critical thinking by referring them to discussions of related matters 
elsewhere in the text. 
 • Guides. These tools are step-by-step instructions that tell students how to 
perform important tasks. For example, the end of Chapter One presents a 
guide for fi nding and standardizing arguments, and this guide is included 
at the end of relevant chapters, updated with specifi c comments keyed to 
each type of argument. 
 • Reference Guide. Found at the end of the book, the Reference Guide 
allows students to fi nd material quickly. It contains alphabetical lists of 
Key Concepts, Guides, Fallacies, and Technical Terms. It also includes all 
the argument forms discussed in the book.
Additional Resources to Critical Thinking: 
The Art of Argument
Critical Thinking: The Art of Argument is more than a textbook. It is a com-
plete course-delivery package that includes:
 • Aplia. This online solution helps students stay on top of their coursework 
with regularly scheduled homework assignments. Interactive tools and 
content further increase engagement and comprehension. The Aplia 
assignments match the language, style, and structure of the textbook, 
allowing students to apply what they learn in the text directly to their 
homework.
 • PowerPoint presentations for each chapter. 

Preface  xxii
 • A test bank of multiple-choice questions that can be used on quizzes and 
tests.
 • Sample essays written by actual college students. While some texts provide 
sample essays written by professors or found in the news media, none 
includes texts written by students. Thus, no other text provides students 
with models they can use when writing their own essays. 
 • Sample essays written by academics from across the disciplines. These 
can be used either as prompts for writing assignments or prompts for 
class discussions.
Acknowledgements
Martin Carrier, Lauren Adamson, Kathryn McClymond, and the University 
of Bielefeld generously provided me with visiting scholar status and there-
fore with the time to fi nish this book. Corbin and Joseph Rainbolt provided 
helpful distractions and, unbeknownst to them, several examples. Madeline 
Zavodny read the entire manuscript multiple times and provided voluminous 
and enlightening comments. She also did more than her share of child care 
and put up with a grumpy husband. My debts to her are greater than I can say. 
Bises, Jolie.
GWR
I thank George Rainbolt and Madeline Zavodny for the friendship they 
showed me when I was ill that helped me continue doing the work I love, 
including fi nishing this book. I thank Anne Owens for critiquing and com-
menting on the manuscript and, above all, for doing it with gentleness and 
humor that sustained me during chemotherapy.
SLD
We would like to thank the members of the Board of Consultants not only 
for the fi ne pieces that are part of the ancillaries but also for their detailed 
comments. 
Laura Paluki Blake, Assistant Director, Cooperative Institutional 
 Research Program (CIRP)
Russell Blyth, Associate Professor of Mathematics, Saint Louis University
Rebecca Bordt, Associate Professor and Chair of Sociology & Anthropology, 
 DePauw University
Gregory Brack, Associate Professor of Counseling and Psychological 
 Services, Georgia State University
Nelson de Jesus, Professor of French, Oberlin College
Nickitas J. Demos, Andrew C. and Eula C. Family Associate Professor of 
 Composition, Georgia State University
Donald Edwards, Regents Professor of Biology, Georgia State University
Paula Eubanks, Associate Professor of Art, Georgia State University
Doug Falen, Assistant Professor of Anthropology, Agnes Scott College
William Fritz, Professor of Geology & Provost and Senior Vice President 
 for Academic Affairs, College of Staten Island, CUNY
Reina Hayaki, Assistant Professor of Philosophy, University of Nebraska
Ted Jelen, Professor of Political Science, University of Nevada Las Vegas

xxiii  Preface
Kathryn McClymond, Associate Professor and Chair of Religious Studies, 
 Georgia State University
Marnie McInnes, Professor of English and Women’s Studies & Dean of 
 Academic Life, Depauw University
Laurence Peck, Assistant Professor of Philosophy, Georgia Perimeter 
 College John Schlotterbeck, Professor of History, Depauw University
Paul Wiita, Professor of Physics and Astronomy, Georgia State University
Madeline Zavodny, Professor of Economics, Agnes Scott College
Janice Zinser, Professor of French, Oberlin College
In several cases, the comments were over ten single-spaced pages. As this 
book ventures to say things about disciplines outside philosophy, the Board 
saved us from many howlers.
The faculty members of Georgia State University Department of Philoso-
phy wrote many exercises. They gave us many helpful comments, graciously 
put up with a department chair who often did not give them the attention 
they deserved, and pitched in to help an absent Coordinator of Graduate 
Teaching.
Many talented graduate students helped us with suggestions at every stage 
of the manuscript, as well as helping with the bibliography, permissions log, and 
index. They include: Joseph Adams, William Baird, Brandi Martinez-Bedard, 
Ryan Born, Ngoc Bui, Shane Callahan, Nicolas Condom, Theresa Creighton, 
Timothy Crews-Anderson, Angela Desaulniers, Ian Dunkle, Benjamin Fischer, 
Jesse Gero, Walter Glazer, Cleo Grimaldi, Andrew Hookom, Maria Montello, 
Jason Outlaw, Paul Pfeilschiefter, Cindy Phillips, Joy Salvatore, and Tracy 
Vanwagner.
We also thank Holly Adams, Sarah Alexander, Michael Augustin, J. Aaron 
Brown, Steve Beighley, Tyson Bittrich, Michael Bolding, Joseph Bullock, 
Sean Bustard, John Cadenhead, Charles Carmichael, Jeanelle Carda, Grant 
Christopher, Timothy Clewell, Jason Craig, Stephen Duncan, Keith Fox, 
Katherine Fulfer, Melissa Garland, Jodi Geever-Ostrowsky, Maria Gourova, 
Daniel Griffin, Steven Hager, Ian Halloran, Brent Hiatt, Kyle Hirsch, Matthew 
Hudgens-Haney, Daniel Issler, Lucas Keefer, Eli Kelsey, Katy Kramer, Thomas 
Kersey, Kathryn Kramer, Richard Latta, Jason Lesandrini, Mary Leukam, James 
Lorusso, Ryan McWhorter, Katherine Milby, Raleigh Miller, Sherry Morton, 
Andrew Reagan, John Rivernbark, Bryan Russell, Joseph Slade, Kelly Smith, 
Kenneth Smith, Anais Stenson, Melissa Strahm, Hugh Thompson, Paul 
Tulipana, Brad Wissmueller, and Jared Yarsevich. 
We also thank the undergraduates who contributed suggestions during 
testing of the book, including Sarah Bedzk, Jennifer Buchanan, Tibor Zsolt 
Nagy, David Newey, Mignonette Padmore, and Samantha Vernon.
We thank the following reviewers for their helpful comments, which 
contributed to improving many aspects of this edition:
Edward Abplanalp, University of Nebraska at Omaha
Rebecca G. Addy, University of Nebraska at Kearney
Jennifer Altenhofel, CSU Bakersfi eld
Jami Anderson, University of Michigan-Flint
Tim Black, California State University, Northridge
Raymond Brown, Keiser University

Preface  xxiv
Timothy Burns, Loyola Marymount University
Christopher Caldwell, Virginia State University
Barbara Carlson, Clark University
Lee Carter, Glendale Community College
John Casey, Northeastern Illinois University
Sherry Cisler, Arizona State University, West Campus
James Cox, Strayer University
Margaret Crouch, Eastern Michigan University
Michelle Darnell, Fayetteville State University
James Donelan, Franklin Pierce University
L Sidney Fox, California State University Long Beach
Augustine Yaw Frimpong-Mansoh, CSU Bakersfi eld
John Gibson, University of Louisville
Lawrence Habermehl, American International College
Shahrokh Haghighi, Cal State University, Long Beach
Richard Hall, Fayetteville State University
Courtney Hammond, Cuyamaca College
Steve Hiltz, Southern Methodist University
Ken Hochstetter, College of Southern Nevada
Elaine Hurst, St. Francis College
Benjamin Hutchens, James Madison University
Polycarp Ikuenobe, Kent State University
Barbara King, Chaffey College
David Kite, Champlain College
Rory Kraft, York College of Pennsylvania
Emily Kulbacki, Green River Community College
Emilie Kutash
Michael C. LaBossiere, Florida A&M University
Sunita Lanka, Hartnell College
John Ludes, University of Nevada Las Vegas
Teri Mayfi eld, Washington State University
Joseph Monast, Modesto Junior College
Anne Morrissey, California State University, Chico
Alan Nichols, Georgia Highlands College
Eric Parkinson, Syracuse University
Andrew Pavelich, University of Houston - Downtown
Nenad Popovic, Southern Methodist University
Francesco Pupa
Joseph Rabbitt, Indiana University-South Bend
Reginald Raymer, University of North Carolina Charlotte
Lou Reich, Cal State University, San Bernardino
Robin Roth, CSU of Dominguez Hills
Gregory Sadler, Fayetteville State University
Steven Schandler, Chapman University
Pat Shade, Rhodes College
Nick Sinigaglia, Moreno Valley College
Taggart Smith, College of Technology, Purdue University, 
 West Lafayette campus
John Sullins, Sonoma State University
Weimin Sun, California State University Northridge

xxv  Preface
Ruth Swissa, Keiser University
William Tell Gifford, Truckee Meadows CC
Jayne Tristan, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
Stuart Vyse
Helmut Wautischer, Sonoma State University
Debra Welkley, California State University Sacramento
Andrew Wible, Muskegon Community College
Hugh Wilder, The College of Charleston
Linda Williams, Kent State University
Nancy M. Williams, Wofford College
Lynn Wilson, Strayer University
Kerry Ybarra, Fresno City College
Marie G. Zaccaria, Georgia Perimeter College
Finally, we thank our editors at Wadsworth, Worth Hawes, Florence Kilgo, 
and Joann Kozyrev, for most of their late-night suggestions and all of their help 
with the production process.
George W. Rainbolt
Sandra L. Dwyer
Georgia State University

This page intentionally left blank 

1
Introduction: 
How to Use This Book
Read this.
It will help you get better grades.
This book has some unusual features: learning outcomes, notes, boxes, and guides. 
Getting to know these features and using them correctly will help you do well in this 
course.
Learning Outcomes
Learning outcomes are things that your instructor wants you 
to learn. In this book, they are things you should be able to do. 
(But you’ll have to have some knowledge to do them.) Learning 
outcomes are an ideal place to begin when studying for tests or 
writing papers. They often are larger tasks that require you to 
 accomplish a series of smaller tasks, and professors often put 
these sorts of larger tasks on tests and papers.
You’ll fi nd a list of learning outcomes at the beginning of 
each chapter. Here’s the learning outcome for this introduction:
After studying the material in this introduction, you should be 
able to:
 Correctly identify and use the learning outcomes, comments, 
boxes, and guides found in this book.

2  Introduction
Key Concepts
In the margins you will fi nd notes with the title “Key Concept.” The feature 
included here in the margin is an example of a key concept. It tells you that 
key concepts are especially important.
Habits of a Critical Thinker
Critical thinking is a skill. Most skills require you to know some set of facts 
and also to have some good habits. A good cook makes it a habit to wash his 
hands. A good skier makes it a habit to check the weather report. Certain 
habits are essential to being a good critical thinker and Habits of a Critical 
Thinker boxes point you to these habits. Here’s an example:
Key Concept
Key concepts are points 
that are fundamental 
to your success in this 
course and a place for 
you to begin when 
you’re studying.
Habits of a Critical Thinker
Studying on a Schedule
One habit of critical thinkers who are college  students 
is studying on a schedule. You probably know your 
schedule of classes, but you might not have put 
together a schedule for time to study. Students who 
get good grades usually set and stick to a schedule for 
study times. If you don’t set aside some time to study, 
other things can fi ll up your days until you are staring 
at a bunch of tests with no time to study.
Technical Terms
As people learn more, it becomes impossible for anyone to know everything 
about every subject. That’s why knowledge has been divided into areas, often 
called “disciplines” or “subjects.” Different disciplines use different words 
for the same thing or the same word for different things. This is a challenge 
for college students. Technical Terms boxes explain these differences. Here’s 
a Technical Terms note: 
Technical Terms: Category Theory
Chapter Six discusses categorical logic. In mathematics, categorical logic is treated 
as a part of category theory. In a math class, you might hear an instructor talk 
about the material in Chapter Six as “category theory.” 
Connections
The pages in a book have to be numbered linearly, 1, 2, 3, etc. But critical 
thinking is more like a web of topics than a line of topics. Connections com-
ments show you the web-like nature of critical thinking. You will fi nd them 

Introduction  3
where material in one chapter touches on the material in another chapter. 
Connections notes are in blue. Here’s a Connections note:
Connections
The web-like nature of critical thinking is also discussed in Chapter Four.
Guides
Guides are step-by-step instructions that tell you how to perform some 
important task. See the Guide on Finding and Standardizing Arguments in 
Chapter One, on page 41.
Reference Guide
The Reference Guide at the end of the book allows you to fi nd material 
quickly. It contains alphabetical lists of Key Concepts, Guides, Fallacies, and 
Technical Terms.
Knowing and correctly using the features of this book will help you get a bet-
ter grade in your class. It will also help you with something more important 
than a good grade: thinking critically.
G U I D E
Finding and Standardizing Arguments
Here’s a review of the steps to fi nd and standardize an argument:
 1. Look for an attempt to convince.
 2. Find the conclusion.
 3. Find the premises.
 4. Review the following to make sure that you have correctly identifi ed the conclusion and 
the premises: imperfect indicator words, sentence order, premises and/or conclusion 
not in declarative form, and unstated premises and/or conclusion.
 5. Review the following to make sure that you haven’t incorrectly identifi ed something as 
a premise or a conclusion when in fact it isn’t part of an argument: assertions, questions, 
instructions, descriptions, and explanations.

4
Call me Ishmael. Some years ago—never mind how long precisely—having little or no 
money in my purse, and nothing particular to interest me on shore, I thought I would 
sail about a little and see the watery part of the world. 
—Herman Melville, Moby-Dick (2008, 1)
[The] peculiar evil of silencing the expression of an opinion is that it is robbing the 
human race, those who dissent from the opinion still more than those who hold it. If 
the opinion is right, they are deprived of the opportunity of exchanging error for truth. 
If wrong, they lose what is almost as great a benefi t, the clearer perception and livelier 
impression of truth produced by its collision with error. 
—John Stuart Mill, On Liberty (1999, 59–60, material omitted and 
punctuation modernized)
1
Critical Thinking 
and Arguments
Learning Outcomes
After studying the material in this chapter, you should be able to:
1. Identify arguments.
2. Identify the conclusion and premise(s) of arguments.
3. Distinguish arguments from explanations.
4. Put arguments into standard form.
5. Identify unstated premises and subarguments.

What Is Critical Thinking?  5
There is no substitute for critical thinking. Critical thinking is the skill 
of making decisions based on good reasons. Learning to think critically 
is one of the most valuable skills you can acquire because its refl ective, 
 analytical, and evaluative aspects can be brought to bear on any 
problem or issue. Critical thinking has led people to create ideas and 
 inventions that make life today dramatically better than it was in 
the past.
When you give reasons for what you believe, you make arguments. In 
this way critical thinking is linked to arguments. The two passages on the 
previous page were both written in the middle of the 1800s. The fi rst is quite 
famous. The second, while less well known, is a central document in the 
discussion of free speech. The fi rst passage doesn’t make an argument. The 
second passage makes an argument in favor of freedom of speech. In this 
book, we’ll focus on passages like the second one. We’ll work on identifying 
arguments and on determining whether arguments are good or bad.
What Is Critical Thinking?
Suppose that a professor in an economics course asks you to write a paper 
about whether gas prices will rise or fall over the next six months. How should 
you decide what you believe? One option would be to fl ip a coin. Heads, you 
decide to believe that gas prices will rise. Tails, you decide to believe that gas 
prices will fall. Another option would be to consult an astrologer and believe 
what the stars tell you. Neither of these is an example of critical thinking. To 
use critical thinking skills to write your paper about gas prices, you’d need to 
look for good reasons to think that gas prices will rise and for good reasons to 
think that gas prices will fall. Then you’d need to determine which reasons 
are better. When you provide reasons for believing something, you make an 
argument.
Here’s an argument for the view that gas prices will rise: 
Over the next six months, China will have an increased demand for gas 
and other petroleum products. So, the price of gas will rise.
Here’s an argument for the view that gas prices will fall:
Over the next six months, Saudi Arabia will increase oil production. So, 
gas prices will fall.
Unlike someone who fl ips a coin to decide what to believe about gas 
prices, someone who considers arguments is beginning to think critically.  
Critical thinking is the skill of correctly evaluating arguments made by oth-
ers and composing good arguments of your own. Arguments can be about 
Key Concept
Critical thinking is 
the skill of correctly 
evaluating arguments 
made by others and 
composing good 
arguments of your own.

6  Chapter 1 Critical Thinking and Arguments 
any subject. For this reason, critical thinking is an important skill. You 
should use it in every college course you take and throughout the rest of 
your life.
Many skills other than critical thinking are important. The ability to 
quickly and correctly multiply is an essential life skill, but it isn’t critical 
thinking. The ability to safely handle equipment in a chemistry lab is essen-
tial for doing well in chemistry classes, but it isn’t a critical thinking skill; 
neither are reading, writing, study, artistic, interpersonal, or time manage-
ment skills.
Critical thinking isn’t knowing facts. Knowing facts is important in all 
college courses. You won’t do well in history if you think that the United 
States has existed for 5 million years. You won’t do well in accounting if you 
don’t know a debit from a credit. Knowing facts is also vital outside of class. 
Lots of people have lost lots of money because they didn’t know important 
facts about their investments. For centuries, lack of knowledge about germs 
caused countless deaths. But you can fail a course and make serious mistakes 
in life even when you know lots of facts. If you can’t think critically, the 
facts you know are just fl oating around in your head. You must use critical 
thinking skills to understand facts, to put them into context, and to see how 
they’re connected to each other.
Habits of a Critical Thinker
Self-Refl ection
If you look back at the Key Concept note above, 
you’ll see that the skill of critical thinking includes 
composing good arguments of your own. Finding the 
strengths and fl aws in the arguments made by others 
is usually easier than making arguments of your own. 
Good critical thinkers compose their own arguments, 
subject them to critical analysis, and use what they’ve 
learned from this critical analysis to compose new 
and better arguments.
 
Evaluating your own arguments is part of being 
self-refl ective. Good critical thinkers know their own 
thoughts. They stop and ask themselves, “What am I 
thinking?” They evaluate their own arguments. You 
don’t know your own thoughts unless you think 
about them!
 
Self-refl ective thinkers think about where their 
thoughts come from. Did someone else put this 
thought into my head? If so, does that person have 
anything to gain from my having this thought? Am 
I prone to these sorts of thoughts even though I 
shouldn’t be? A self-refl ective person might discover 
that she tends to see the downside of things. If she 
is aware of that bias, she has the opportunity to 
combat it. 
 
Self-refl ective thinkers think about what they are 
doing with their thoughts. Am I thinking about an 
argument, am I wishing, am I hoping, am I dreaming? 
Just as a self-refl ective thinker is aware of what the 
sources of her thoughts tend to be, she is aware of 
what she tends to do with her thoughts. Am I really 
arguing with someone, trying to annoy someone, or 
showing off? Am I using arguments to hide from a 
diffi cult discussion?

What Is an Argument?  7
What Is an Argument?
An argument is an attempt to provide reasons for thinking that some belief 
is true. All arguments have two parts. The fi rst part is the reasons, and the 
second part is the belief that those reasons are intended to support. The 
reasons are the premises and the belief being supported is the conclusion. 
Look back at our fi rst argument about rising and falling gas prices. The 
premise is:
(1)  Over the next six months, China will have an increased demand for 
gas and other petroleum products. 
The conclusion is:
(2) Over the next six months, the price of gas will rise.
The premise provides a reason for thinking that the conclusion is true.
In this book, an argument is an attempt to provide reasons for thinking 
that some belief is true. When you hear someone say, “I had an argument 
with my husband last night,” the word “argument” refers to a verbal fi ght. 
This text isn’t using “argument” that way.
Statements
Premises and conclusions are both statements. A statement is a sentence that 
makes a claim that can be either true or false. Every argument is composed of 
two or more statements. The conclusion is the statement that the argument 
is intended to support. The premises are the statements that are intended to 
support the conclusion. In other words, conclusions are statements that are 
supported, and premises are statements that are supporting. 
Key Concept
An argument is an 
attempt to provide 
reasons for thinking 
that some belief is true. 
The reasons are the 
premises, and the belief 
being supported is the 
conclusion.
Key Concept
A statement is a 
sentence that makes 
a claim that can be 
either true or false. 
The conclusion is the 
statement that the 
argument is intended to 
support. The premises 
are the statements that 
are intended to support 
the conclusion.
Conclusion
Premise
Premise
Premise
Premise
Premise
Premise
Premises support 
 conclusions.
Dave Newman/
iStockphoto.com

8  Chapter 1 Critical Thinking and Arguments 
Premises and conclusions must be statements, and every statement is either 
true or false. A sentence that is neither true nor false can’t be a statement and 
can’t be part of a well-formed argument. Here are four sentences:
1. Read the chapter about the planets in our solar system.
2. There are at least eight planets in our solar system.
3. There are at least twenty planets in our solar system.
4. How many planets are in our solar system?
Sentence 1 gives an instruction. It’s a perfectly good sentence. But because it 
gives an instruction, it can’t be true and it can’t be false. Sentence 4 is a ques-
tion. Questions can’t be true and they can’t be false. Questions and instructions 
aren’t statements. Sentences 2 and 3 are declarative sentences. Sentence 2 is 
true. Sentence 3 is false. Sentences 2 and 3 are both statements. 
If an argument includes sentences that aren’t statements, then it isn’t a 
well-formed argument. But people often use non-declarative sentences in a way 
that indicates they want to make an argument. In these cases, the sentences 
can be restated as declarative sentences.
Connections
Later in this chapter, you’ll see how to paraphrase non-declarative sentences into 
statements.
Technical Term: Truth-Value
In some fi elds you’ll fi nd discussions of the “truth-value” of a statement. This is a 
technical way of indicating whether a statement is true or false. “The truth-value 
of this statement is T” is another way of saying that the statement is true. “The 
truth-value of this statement is F” is another way of saying that the statement 
is false. In advanced courses, you may come across discussions in which you’ll 
 consider truth-values besides “true” and “false.”
Statements and Sentences
Don’t confuse statements with sentences. Whether a string of words is a 
 sentence is determined by rules of grammar. Whether a string of words is a 
statement is determined by whether it makes a claim that can be true or false. 
Key Concept
Premises and conclusions 
must be statements, and 
every statement is either 
true or false.
Sun
Pluto
Neptune
Uranus
Earth
Mars
Venus
Saturn
Jupiter
Mercury
The solar system.
© Cengage Learning

What Is an Argument?  9
As just noted, only one kind of sentence, a declarative sentence, can be true 
or false.
One sentence can contain two or more statements. Here’s an example of 
one sentence that contains two statements:
(a) Because so much of modern medicine depends on chemistry, it is es-
sential that students who intend to enter the health professions have 
some understanding of basic chemistry. (Bettelheim 2007, 2) 
It contains this statement: 
Much of modern medicine depends on chemistry.
and this one too:
It is essential that students who intend to enter the health professions 
have some understanding of basic chemistry.
The fi rst statement is a premise, and the second statement is a conclusion. 
You must distinguish sentences from statements to be able to discern prem-
ises and conclusions. If you thought that sentence (a) was a single statement, 
you wouldn’t be able to see that it’s an argument.
 
Two or more sentences may contain only one statement. For example, 
authors sometimes repeat a central point. The following passage contains 
eight declarative sentences but only seven statements.
Weather infl uences our everyday activities, our jobs, and our health and 
comfort. There are few other aspects of our physical environment that 
affect our lives more than the phenomena we collectively call the weath-
er. On January 25, 2000, North Carolina and nearby states experienced a 
record-breaking winter storm. In September of that year, Hurricane Floyd 
brought fl ooding rains, damaging winds, and rough seas to a large portion 
of the Atlantic Seaboard. More than 2.5 million people evacuated their 
homes. These memorable weather events serve to  illustrate the fact that 
the United States has the greatest variety of weather of any country in 
the world. Weather clearly infl uences our lives a great deal. So there is a 
need for increased awareness and understanding of our atmosphere and 
its behavior. (Lutgens 2004, 4; italics added and material omitted)
Key Concept
One sentence can 
contain two or more 
statements. Two or more 
sentences may contain 
only one statement.
Critical Thinkers
Rosalind Franklin
 The importance of critical thinking in chemistry is vividly illustrated in the life and work of 
the English chemist Rosalind Franklin (1920–1958). If she hadn’t died of ovarian cancer, 
she would have won the Nobel Prize in conjunction with James Watson and Francis 
Crick for their work on discovering the structure of DNA. (Nobel Prizes are not awarded 
posthumously.) Franklin’s work contributed to our understanding of the molecular 
structure of DNA, RNA, viruses, coal, and graphite. You can see Franklin’s paper on DNA, 
in the journal Nature (1953), at http://www.nature.com/nature/dna50/archive.html.
Photo Researchers

10  Chapter 1 Critical Thinking and Arguments 
The two sentences in italics make the same statement. In looking for argu-
ments, you can’t simply count the sentences to fi nd the statements.
Technical Terms: Arguments, Claims, Statements, Propositions
Statements are also called “propositions.” Some textbooks use the term “claim” 
to refer to arguments and statements. Other books use “claim” to refer to the 
conclusion of an argument. 
EXERCISE 1.1
A. Which of the following sentences would not typically express a statement? Explain why.
The answers for starred exercises can be found at the end of the book.
 1. Oxygen is an element.
 2. “Why do fools fall in love?” (Title of a song by Frankie Lymon & the Teenagers)*
 3. The earth revolves around the sun.
 *4. The moon revolves around the sun.
 5. “Stop in the name of love.” (Title of a song by Diana Ross and the Supremes)
 6. Eat fi ve portions of vegetables every day.
 7. Comets are made of frozen gases and dust.
 *8. Pure oxygen rarely occurs naturally on Earth.
 9. How long do you think it will rain?
 10. Go Tigers!
 11. Many children use a blanket as a comfort device.
 *12. I hate broccoli!
 13. How many times have I told you to clean your room?
 14. “[The] peculiar evil of silencing the expression of an opinion is that it is robbing the 
 human race, those who dissent from the opinion still more than those who hold it.” 
(Mill 1999, 59–60, material omitted and punctuation modernized)
 15. “Call me Ishmael.” (Melville 2008, 1)
B. (a) For each sentence, indicate whether it makes a statement or not. (b) For each sentence 
that isn’t a statement, describe what it does.
Jack: Let’s go up the hill.
Jill: That’s a bad idea. 
Jack: Why?
Jill: It’s a very steep hill.
Jack: I don’t care about that.
*Frankie Lymon & the Teenagers. “Why do fools fall in love?” Why Do Fools Fall in Love and Other Hits. Rhino 
Flashback, 2003 [1956]. CD
†Diana Ross and the Supremes. “Stop in the name of love.” Diana Ross and the Supremes—The Ultimate Collection. 
Motown, 1997 [1965]. CD

What Is an Argument?  11
Jill: But I’ve a heart condition.
Jack: I don’t care about that either.
Jill: Well, I see that you’re a heartless human being.
Jack: To the contrary, I’ve a very healthy heart.
Jill: But you don’t care at all about my heart.
Jack: If you have a heart condition, you should get a good cardiologist to care for it.
Jill: You’re making stupid jokes about my heart condition. Are you some kind of jerk 
or what?
C. How many statements are found in each of the following sentences?
 1. Stefan walked to the store, bought a newspaper, and then went to a café to read it.
 2. Mercury is composed mostly of hot gases.
 3. How many times must I play the fool?
 *4. You break it, you bought it.
 5. The internet and cell phones have revolutionized the way people communicate.
 6. Back to Black (Title of an Amy Winehouse album.)*
 7. Would you like soup or salad with that?
 *8. He’ll have either soup or salad.
 9. “[A]sk not what your country can do for you—ask what you can do for your country.” 
(Kennedy 1961)
 10. “The Cherokees believed that they had a sacred duty to avenge the deaths of fallen 
comrades, and so war parties formed quickly following a death.” (Perdue 2005, 3)
 11. “One of the striking differences between a cat and a lie is that a cat has only nine lives.” 
(Twain 1999, 30)
 *12. “While I know myself as a creation of God, I am also obligated to realize and remember 
that everyone else and everything else are also God’s creation.” (Angelou 1994, 34)
 13. “[W]hile government should not be in the business of limiting speech, an institution 
[such as a university] should have the freedom to restrict the speech of anyone at any time 
who utilizes resources within the jurisdiction of [the] institution.” (Shermer 2000, 13) 
 14. “There is good reason why it is considered important to be able to listen to another 
person, why we have to listen—for we do not have to learn to interrupt which comes 
naturally.” (Yakubinsky 1997, 249) 
 15. “It does not matter whether a man prospers as an individual: if his country is destroyed, 
he is lost with it; but if he meets with misfortune, he is far safer in a fortunate [country] 
than he would be otherwise.” (Thucydides 1993, 52–53)
D. Which of the following sentences are not likely to be the premise of any argument? Explain.
 1. Many people in the United States own a car.
 2. Freedom is the most important value.
 3. Hang-gliding is more dangerous than walking on a beach.
*Winehouse, Amy. Back to Black. Republic, 2007. CD

12  Chapter 1 Critical Thinking and Arguments 
 *4. “Give me liberty or give me death.”  (Henry 1999, 232)
 5. Democracy is the best form of government.
 6. Communism was an evil system.
 7. Evil will win if good people don’t fi ght against it.
 *8. Back to Black (Title of an Amy Winehouse album.)
 9. Abortion should be legal.
 10. Abortion should be illegal.
 11. How far until the next exit?
 *12. Everyone should take an economics course.
 13. “It is considered important to be able to listen to another person.” (Yakubinsky 1997, 
249) 
 14. “[G]overnment should not be in the business of limiting speech.” (Shermer 2000, 13) 
 15. “The Cherokees believed that they had a sacred duty to avenge the deaths of fallen 
comrades.” (Perdue 2005, 3)
E. Which of the following sentences are not likely to be the conclusion of an argument?  
Explain.
 1. Al Gore was the real winner in the presidential election of 2000.
 2. The economic policies of George W. Bush helped the country.
 3. Thomas Jefferson was the best American President in history.
 *4. Bill Clinton lied many times to the American public.
 5. Please don’t say bad things about any President of the United States.
 6. Grass is usually green.
 7. Many people like ice cream.
 *8. How many times have you tried to reboot this computer?
 9. Elementary students should learn a foreign language.
 10. You should invest in exchange-traded funds.
 11. You really should watch the Super Bowl tonight.
 *12. “Call me Ishmael.” (Melville 2008, 1) 
 13. “It is considered important to be able to listen to another person.” (Yakubinsky 1997, 
249) 
 14. “[G]overnment should not be in the business of limiting speech.” (Shermer 2000, 13) 
 15. “The Cherokees believed that they had a sacred duty to avenge the deaths of fallen 
comrades.” (Perdue 2005, 3)

Why Think Critically?  13
Why Think Critically?
In our gas price example, why is it better to consider arguments instead 
of fl ipping a coin or consulting an astrologer? It would be faster to fl ip a 
coin, and it might be more fun to visit an astrologer. The answer is that, 
if there’s a good argument for a belief, that belief is more likely to be true. 
Good arguments give you evidence for the truth of the conclusion. If you 
carefully examine the arguments concerning gas prices and base your be-
lief about gas prices on those arguments, you’re more likely to have a true 
belief about gas prices than if you fl ip a coin or consult an astrologer.
Having true beliefs is better than having false beliefs. Perhaps the least 
interesting reason that true beliefs are better than false ones is that you’ll 
get better grades. If you’re taking a geology course and you have false beliefs 
about the rock formations you’re studying, you probably won’t do well on 
your geology tests. When you reveal false beliefs on an exam, your instructor 
will give you a lower grade and your college career could be on the rocks!
Another reason why you’re better off with true beliefs is that false beliefs are 
often expensive. We hope that you didn’t have many false beliefs about the college 
you chose to attend because if you did, you’re probably unhappy at that college. If 
you are so unhappy that you decide to transfer, it will cost you time and money.
But the best reason to have true beliefs is that you want to understand the 
world you live in. A person who has lots of false beliefs loses touch with reality. 
Finding Arguments
Here’s the bottom line when it comes to fi nding arguments: you must fi nd a set 
of statements (the premises) that someone claims support another statement 
(the conclusion). One reason critical thinking is the art of argument is that fi nd-
ing arguments isn’t a mechanical process. It isn’t like fi nding the answer to a 
long division problem. But some guidelines and indicator words can help.
The First Three Steps
When you’re trying to determine whether a text contains an argument, fol-
low these three steps. Students often make the mistake of skipping the fi rst 
step. Don’t fall into that trap.
Step 1. Look for an Attempt to Convince
As you read or listen to someone, ask yourself whether the author/speaker wants 
to convince you that something is true. If so, you have a good indication that 
there’s an argument. People only try to convince other people of things that the 
other people don’t already believe. You’ve probably never seen an argument for 
the view that grass is green. Arguments are responses to disagreement. When 
people disagree they’ll often try to convince each other to change their minds. 
Step 2. Find the Conclusion
The next step is to look for a conclusion. Look for the author’s main point. 
That will be the argument’s conclusion. Conclusions are usually easier to 
fi nd than premises, and fi nding the conclusion will help you fi nd premises.
Key Concept
Good arguments give 
you evidence for the 
truth of the conclusion.

14  Chapter 1 Critical Thinking and Arguments 
Some words are commonly used to point to conclusions. We’ve listed 
some below.
Conclusion Indicator Words
so
therefore
thus
hence
consequently
then
accordingly
proves that
as a result
for these reasons
it follows that
we infer that
implies that
means that
which entails that
we can show
accordingly
indicates that
in fact
in short
it is clear that
it is likely that
shows that
suggests that
the point is
it must be that
serves to show that
in conclusion
demonstrates
as a consequence
so we see that
is evidence that
Step 3. Find the Premises
After fi nding the conclusion, ask yourself why the arguer believes that con-
clusion. Statements answering that question will be the premises of the argu-
ment. Here are some words that often point to premises:
Premise Indicator Words
since
because
for
as
based on
follows from
as shown by
inasmuch as
as indicated by
reason 
may be inferred from
derived from
given that
on account of
due to
suppose that
for the reason
seeing that
is clear from
insofar as
assuming that
on the grounds that
granted that
owing to
Habits of a Critical Thinker
Curiosity
Critical thinkers are intellectually curious. As a 
critical thinker, you want to have true beliefs and 
seek out good arguments to decide what to believe. 
Rather than passively receiving beliefs that hap-
pen to come your way, you wonder about things, 
seek out interesting problems, and attempt to fi nd 
 arguments about those problems. Of course, no one 
is curious about everything. (Some are curious about 
the history of baseball and others aren’t.) But a criti-
cal thinker is curious about many different things, 
enjoys examining arguments, and wants to learn 
new things.
EXERCISE 1.2
A. In the discussion between Jack and Jill in Exercise 1.1 B, fi nd all the arguments, and identify 
the premises and conclusion of each argument.
B. In each of the following passages: (a) determine whether or not an argument is present, 
(b) if an argument is present, identify the premises and the conclusion.
 1. Exchange-traded funds result in lower capital gains and so in lower taxes. For this rea-
son, they should be considered by investors in higher tax brackets.
Key Concept
The fi rst three steps for 
fi nding arguments.

Finding Arguments  15
 2. Every time you hang out with him, you feel miserable. So you shouldn’t go out with him.
 3. I’ve seen 1,000 swans, and all of them are white. Therefore, most swans are white.
 *4. Given that gas prices will rise and the housing market will continue to slump, the 
United States will surely fall into a recession next year.
 5. Due to higher carbon-dioxide emissions and increased atmospheric particulates, global 
temperatures will rise over the coming century. 
 6. If you eat too much, you’ll gain weight.
 7. You say that all famous philosophers are men. But look at Mary Wollenstonecraft—
she’s a famous philosopher, so some famous philosophers are women.
 *8. I bet that he’s at Starbucks because I’ve seen him there most days at about this time.
 9. The survey was given to 146 thirteen-year-olds selected at random from the list of 
thirteen-year-old students enrolled at West Junior High School.
 10. Why don’t you try the tai nam? You’ll like it. It’s my favorite kind of Vietnamese 
noodles.
 11. “[A]sk not what your country can do for you—ask what you can do for your country.” 
(Kennedy 1961)
 *12. “One of the striking differences between a cat and a lie is that a cat has only nine lives.” 
(Twain 1999, 30)
 13. “The Cherokees believed that they had a sacred duty to avenge the deaths of fallen 
comrades, and so war parties formed quickly following a death.” (Perdue 2005, 3)
 14. “It was the best of times, it was the worst of times, it was the age of wisdom, it was 
the age of foolishness, it was the epoch of belief, it was the epoch of incredulity, it was 
the season of Light, it was the season of Darkness, it was the spring of hope, it was the 
winter of despair, we had everything before us, we had nothing before us, we were all 
going direct to Heaven, we were all going direct the other way. There were a king with 
a large jaw and a queen with a plain face, on the throne of England; there were a king 
with a large jaw and a queen with a fair face, on the throne of France. In both countries 
it was clearer than crystal to the lords of the State, that things in general were settled 
for ever. It was the year of Our Lord one thousand seven hundred and seventy-fi ve.” 
(Dickens 1922, 1, material omitted)
 15. “Although I believe that [a] table is ‘really’ of the same color all over, the parts that 
refl ect the light look much brighter than the other parts, and some parts look white 
because of the refl ected light. I know that, if I move, the parts that refl ect light will 
be different, so that the apparent distribution of colours on the table will change. It 
follows that if several people are looking at the table at the same moment, no two 
of them will see exactly the same distribution of colours, because no two can see it 
from exactly the same point of view, and any change in the point of view makes some 
change in the way the light is refl ected.” (Russell 1912, 8–9)
 C. Redo the questions in Exercises 1.1 D and E in light of the fact that arguments are re-
sponses to disagreement. Remember that conclusions tend to be statements about which 
people disagree and premises tend to be statements about which people agree.

16  Chapter 1 Critical Thinking and Arguments 
Complicating Factors
The three simple steps discussed above are too simple. You need to know 
about some complications. 
Indicator Words Are Imperfect Guides
The fi rst complication is that someone can write an argument using no indicator 
words and someone can use indicator words without making an argument.
Look again at this argument:
Over the next six months, China will have an increased demand for gas 
and other petroleum products. So, the price of gas will rise.
“So” is the only indicator word in this passage. Here’s the argument rewritten 
without this word:
Over the next six months, China will have an increased demand for gas 
and other petroleum products. The price of gas will certainly rise.
Arguments that contain no indicator words aren’t that common. But they do 
exist, and you need to watch out for them.
Passages that aren’t arguments are frequently fi lled with indicator words. 
Here’s a perfectly appropriate use of “since” that isn’t an argument:
My car has been in the shop since last Tuesday! 
Here’s an example of “because” occurring outside an argument:
My car has been in the shop since last Tuesday because the mechanic 
keeps breaking it!
In this example, the person with the car in the shop isn’t trying to convince 
us that her car is in the shop. This person is only explaining why the car has 
been in the shop for so long. 
Sentence Order
The second complicating factor is that the order in which sentences and 
statements are made by the arguer doesn’t determine whether a statement is 
a premise or a conclusion. People often speak or write in the order in which 
things occur to them or in an order that they take to be an effective style. 
In fact, passages in which the premises are listed fi rst and the conclusion is 
listed last aren’t that common.
Conclusions and Premises Not in Declarative Form
The third complicating factor is that some statements aren’t in declarative 
form. As we saw above,
only statements can be parts of an argument, 
not all sentences are statements, and 
well-formed arguments contain only declarative sentences. 
But people can use sentences that aren’t declarative to assert statements. 
Let’s look at an argument that contains statements not in declarative form. 
To understand it, you’ll need some background information.
In the late 1800s, Captain Albert Dreyfus, a Jewish officer in the French 
army, was accused of passing secret documents to the Germans. He was 

Finding Arguments  17
convicted and sentenced to a long prison term. Investigations by Colonel 
Picquart revealed that the documents were actually passed to the Germans 
by another officer, Major Esterhazy. A key piece of evidence indicating 
 Esterhazy’s guilt was a telegram. Picquart’s investigations also revealed 
that several high-ranking French generals knew that Dreyfus was innocent. 
These generals were prejudiced against Jews and afraid of admitting that 
the army had made a mistake when it brought charges against Dreyfus. 
They conducted an elaborate cover-up that included falsely accusing Jew-
ish people of making payments to Dreyfus and producing fake documents 
that were secretly shown to the judges in Dreyfus’ trial. (This is a simplifi ed 
description of the Dreyfus affair.)
The Dreyfus affair became a political scandal, and Emile Zola published 
a letter to the President of the French Republic entitled J’accuse! (I Accuse!), 
in which he argued that Picquart was correct and that Dreyfus was innocent. 
Many of his arguments were made with non-declarative sentences. Here’s 
one of them.
(a) Some have gone as far as to claim that Picquart was a forger, that he 
forged the telegram to ruin Esterhazy. (b) But, good God, why? (c) For 
what reason? (d) Give me a motive. (e) Was he too paid by the Jews? (Zola 
1898, 1, translated by the authors of this book)
We’ve added the letters (a)–(e) to help refer to the sentences Zola wrote. His 
point, his conclusion, is clear. He wants to convince you that Picquart didn’t 
forge the telegram that’s evidence against Esterhazy. But sentences (b), (c), and 
(e) are interrogatives (questions), and sentence (d) is an imperative (an order). 
Although Zola used three interrogatives and an imperative, his point can be 
made with declarative sentences. 
(1)   Picquart had no reason to forge the telegram to ruin Esterhazy.
Therefore,
(2)   Picquart didn’t forge the telegram.
Critical Thinkers
Emile Zola
Emile Zola (1840–1902) was the author of many works, including a twenty-volume set 
of novels about the life and troubles of fi ve generations of two French families. These 
novels trace many problems caused by the Industrial Revolution, but the J’accuse! 
letter did more to ignite public argument about justice, religious persecution, and their 
relation to the state than any of his novels. Zola was convicted of libel for the letter. 
Both Dreyfus and Zola were pardoned (but not acquitted!). Many think that Zola’s letter 
led to the French laws that separated church and state. You can get inexpensive editions 
of Zola’s works, including The Human Beast, The Three Cities Trilogy, The Fat and the 
Thin, and more.
Mary Evans Picture Library/Alamy

18  Chapter 1 Critical Thinking and Arguments 
EXERCISE 1.3
A. In each of the following passages: (a) determine whether or not an argument is present, 
(b) if an argument is present, identify the premises and the conclusion.
 1. Don’t go out with him! Every time you hang out with him, you feel miserable.
 2. How can anyone support gun control? Look at all the lives that have been saved because 
someone had a gun. And then there’s the economic benefi ts of gun sales. Do you want 
people who make guns to lose their jobs?
 3. The car slid off the road because the road was wet and the car’s tires were improperly 
infl ated.
 *4. The war in Iraq was a serious mistake.
 5. Why don’t people save for retirement? I’m puzzled by this. Perhaps they fail to under-
stand how long they’re likely to live. Or perhaps they think they’ll earn more money 
later in life. Another possibility is that it seems too complicated to save. 
 6. Murata has more experience and better communication skills than Johnson. We should 
hire Murata.
 7. In 2010, a survey of 1,000 college students found that 87% of them preferred instant 
messaging to email. The vast majority of college students prefer instant messaging to 
email.
 *8. “Under the statute criminalizing the manufacture and distribution of cocaine, 21 U. S. C. 
§841, and the relevant Federal Sentencing Guidelines, a drug trafficker dealing in crack 
cocaine is subject to the same sentence as one dealing in 100 times more powder co-
caine. Petitioner Kimbrough pleaded guilty to four offenses: conspiracy to distribute 
crack and powder; possession with intent to distribute more than 50 grams of crack; 
possession with intent to distribute powder; and possession of a fi rearm in furtherance 
of a drug-trafficking offense.” (Kimbrough 2007, 1)
 9. “As America’s youth have grown fatter and the number with adult diabetes continues 
to rise, there is one obvious way to help. Public schools should stop selling students so 
much unhealthy food.” (New York Times “Junking Fat Foods in Schools” 2007, A26) 
 10. “The idea that the law is what the words that constitute it mean is of course too simple. 
Most words are open to multiple interpretations. To say that laws are what their words 
mean would be to leave the meaning of most laws unacceptably ambiguous.” (Scalia 
1997, vii)
 11. “[R]acism is not merely an attitude or set of beliefs; it also sustains or proposes to 
establish a racial order, a permanent group hierarchy.” (Frederickson 2002, 6, material 
omitted)
 *12. “[W]hile government should not be in the business of limiting speech, an institution 
[such as a university] should have the freedom to restrict the speech of anyone at any time 
who utilizes resources within the jurisdiction of [the] institution.” (Shermer 2000, 13)
 13. “It is a stark reality that the black communities are becoming more and more economi-
cally depressed. In June 1966, the Bureau of Labor Statistics reported on the deteriorated 
condition of black people in this country. In 1948, the jobless rate of non-white males 
between the ages of fourteen and nineteen was 7.6 percent. In 1965 [it] was 22.6 percent. 
The corresponding fi gures for unemployed white male teenagers were 8.3 percent in 
1948 and 11.8 percent in 1965.” (Ture 1967, 18–19) 

Finding Arguments  19
 14. The following passage is about one species of male earwig, a winged insect with two 
penises:
“Writing in the Journal of Morphology, Yoshitaka Kamimura describes his investi-
gations of the private life of the doubly endowed male of the earwig species Labidura 
riparia. He shows that this earwig has a strong preference for its right penis: nearly 90% 
of fi eld-collected and laboratory-reared males hold their intromittent organs [i.e., their 
penises] in the ‘right-ready’ state (right side extended backwards, ready to mate) when 
not mating, as well as when in fl agrante delicto. Curiously, the earwig’s two penises 
are morphologically indistinguishable and fully functional. They connect to equivalent 
testes, and individuals with an injured or experimentally ablated right penis readily 
revert to using the left one. This right-ready asymmetry is therefore largely—if not en-
tirely—behavioural [i.e., the asymmetry is not determined by differences in the penises 
and how well they work].” (Palmer 2006, 690–691) 
 15. “During the fi rst World War, I believed implicitly all the Allied propaganda against 
Germany and fully accepted the alleged sole war guilt of Germany. I was not awakened 
to a consciousness of the error of my ways until the publication of the striking articles 
on the truth about 1914 by Professor Sidney B. Fay which were printed in the lead-
ing American historical journal, American Historical Review, in 1920–1921.” (Barnes 
1972, 2, material omitted)
Unstated Premises and Unstated Conclusions
The fourth complicating factor is that sometimes conclusions and premises 
aren’t stated at all! Look back at the quote from Zola. He doesn’t state his 
conclusion. The interrogatives and imperatives are Zola’s way of expressing 
the premise of his argument. But he never says that Picquart didn’t forge the 
telegram. Instead he says:
(a)    Some have gone as far as to claim that Picquart was a forger, that he 
forged the telegram to ruin Esterhazy.
He doesn’t directly express his conclusion. An unstated conclusion occurs 
when the author doesn’t explicitly state the argument’s conclusion. 
Unstated conclusions are fairly common. You should suspect that a con-
clusion is unstated when you fi nd that someone is trying to convince you 
that some view is true or false but she never explicitly states the view. The 
author will often do what Zola did and make it clear that she disagrees with 
something that another person said. Unstated conclusions don’t usually 
cause much trouble. If you ask yourself whether the author is trying to con-
vince you of something, you should be able to determine whether a passage 
contains an unstated conclusion or doesn’t contain an argument at all.
Unstated premises are more difficult. An unstated premise occurs when 
an author (1) believes that a statement is true, (2) intends for this statement 
to be a premise of an argument, but (3) doesn’t include any sentence (declara-
tive or non-declarative) that asserts the statement. You usually can’t ask the 
author if she believes that a certain statement is true and if she intends for 
this statement to be part of her argument. That can make it hard to determine 
if a premise is unstated.
Key Concept
An unstated conclusion 
occurs when the author 
doesn’t explicitly 
state the argument’s 
conclusion.
Key Concept
The three characteristics 
of an unstated premise.

20  Chapter 1 Critical Thinking and Arguments 
Technical Term: Enthymeme
Arguments with an unstated premise or an unstated conclusion are enthymemes.
Suppose that you found the following in a reading for a class:
As part of their study, Dr. Frederick’s research group is considering giving 
the drug miconazole to a group of children. But they shouldn’t do this 
because miconazole always has serious side effects that harm children. It 
causes vomiting, bloody stools, and severe abdominal cramping.
Let’s call this argument “argument A.” The author’s conclusion and one 
premise are clear.
(A1)   Miconazole harms children by causing vomiting, bloody stools, and 
severe abdominal cramping.
Therefore,
(A3)   Dr. Frederick’s research group should not give miconazole to a 
group of children.
This argument is missing a step. A1 by itself doesn’t support A3. Here’s the 
missing premise:
(A2) People should not do things that harm children.
Is it likely that the author of argument A believes that A2 is true? Is it likely 
that the author intends for A2 to be part of the argument? The answer to 
both questions is “yes.” A2 is something that almost everyone believes. The 
author probably thought that A2 was so obvious that it didn’t need to be 
stated. A2 is also a necessary logical link between A1 and A3. It would be 
appropriate to attribute an unstated premise, A2, to the author of this argument. 
Look at this argument:
A review of laws regulating gun ownership and use in Britain reveals that 
those laws are much more restrictive than the laws regulating gun own-
ership and use found in most U.S. jurisdictions. The number of deaths 
and injuries per capita involving guns is much lower in Britain than in 
the United States. It seems clear that more restrictive laws would reduce 
deaths and injuries in the United States.
Let’s call this “argument B.” It has two stated premises and a conclusion.
(B1)  Laws regulating gun ownership and use in Britain are much more 
restrictive than the laws regulating gun ownership and use found in 
most U.S. jurisdictions. 
(B2)  The number of deaths and injuries per capita involving guns is 
much lower in Britain than in the United States. 
Therefore,
(B4)  More restrictive laws regulating gun ownership and use would re-
duce deaths and injuries in the United States.
You might think that this argument is missing a step. It might be this premise:
(B3)  There are no other differences between Britain and the United States 
that can explain the lower rate of deaths and injuries  involving guns 
in Britain.

Finding Arguments  21
Is it likely that the author intends for B3 to be part of the argument? B3 is a 
controversial statement. Some people believe B3 is true. Others believe it’s 
false. The author of argument B was probably not assuming that everyone 
would agree that B3 is true. The author probably failed to notice that B3 was 
a needed step in the argument. It wouldn’t be appropriate to attribute B3 to 
this author as an unstated premise.
Here are two guidelines for fi nding unstated premises:
1. An unstated premise must be a logically necessary step between the 
premises and the conclusion. 
2. An unstated premise must be something that the author and almost 
everyone else thinks is true. 
One way of considering the matter of unstated premises is to imagine 
yourself asking the author: Did you intend this statement as an unstated 
premise in your argument? Then imagine what you think the author’s re-
sponse would be. If it would be: “Of course! Everyone knows that’s true,” 
the statement is probably an unstated premise. If it would be: “Hmm, 
I hadn’t thought of that,” the statement is probably not an unstated 
premise. 
EXERCISE 1.4
A. Each of the following arguments may contain an unstated premise and/or an unstat-
ed conclusion. If one is present, identify the unstated premise and/or the unstated 
conclusion.
 1. Households that have guns are signifi cantly more likely to have deaths due to suicide. 
Therefore, people shouldn’t keep guns in their homes.
 2. Households that have guns are signifi cantly less likely to be victims of crime. There-
fore, people should keep guns in their homes.
 3. A single-payer health care system would raise costs. A single-payer health care sys-
tem would reduce the quality of care. A single-payer health care system is un-Ameri-
can. [Note: A single-payer health care system is one in which one agency, usually the 
government, functions either as the sole insurance company or the sole provider of 
health care.]
 *4. France and Germany have single-payer health care systems. They spend less on health 
care than the United States, have a longer life expectancy, and have lower infant mor-
tality rates. It’s clear what the United States should do.
 5. Either Willa took Bio 101 or Chem 101. And she didn’t take both. I think she took 
Chem 101. 
 6. She graduated, so she must have completed her academic residency requirements.

22  Chapter 1 Critical Thinking and Arguments 
 7. China’s economy is likely to explode over the next ten years. They’re making the tran-
sition from an agrarian society to an industrial society, and previous societies that went 
through this transition saw stunning economic progress.
 *8. Well, the precipitate isn’t calcium. It must be sodium.
 9. “The 2008 presidential election has fundamentally shifted, but it hasn’t been be-
cause of events in Iowa and New Hampshire. It’s because of events everywhere else. 
In Washington, the National Intelligence Estimate was released, suggesting the next 
president will not face an imminent nuclear showdown with Iran. In Iraq, the surge 
and tribal revolts produce increasing stability. In Pakistan, the streets have not ex-
ploded. In the Middle East, the Arabs and Palestinians stumble toward some sort 
of peace process. In Venezuela, a referendum set President Hugo Chávez back on 
his heels. The world still has its problems, but it no longer seems to be building to-
ward some larger crisis. The atmosphere of fear and confl ict has at least temporarily 
abated. With the change in conditions, the election of 2008 is beginning to feel like 
a postwar election.” (Brooks 2007, A33)
 10. “I don’t know anybody who likes to lose money, but as an investor it’s something that 
simply has to be accepted, because only with risk comes excess return.” (Sonders 2007)
 11. Romeo: Let’s elope. 
Juliet: Are you crazy?
Romeo: What’s the problem?
Juliet: Our families are the problem, Einstein. They’d kill us for eloping.
Romeo: Einstein doesn’t get born for another couple of centuries. Kindly restrict your 
remarks to this century, please.
Juliet: Well, our families would kill us in this century. Is that good enough for you?
Romeo: Very persuasive.
 *12.  Fossils of amphibians have been found in Antarctica. This shows that the world as a 
whole must have been much warmer in the past than it is today.
 13. “[S]ince the early 1990s, astronomers have found several objects of comparable size 
to Pluto in an outer region of the Solar System called the Kuiper Belt. Some astrono-
mers have long argued that Pluto would be better categorised alongside this popula-
tion of small, icy worlds. The critical blow for Pluto came with the discovery three 
years ago of an object currently designated 2003 UB313. After being measured with 
the Hubble Space Telescope, it was shown to be some 3,000 km (1,864 miles) in di-
ameter: it is bigger than Pluto. 2003 UB313 will now join Pluto in the [new] category 
[of dwarf planet], along with the biggest asteroid in the Solar System, Ceres.” (BBC 
2006) 
 14. The following passage is from the travel journals of an Englishman who was visiting 
France in 1787.
 
 
“The palace of Versailles, one of the objects of which report had given me the great-
est expectation, is not in the least striking. I view it without emotion: the impression 
it makes is nothing. What can compensate for the want of unity? From whatever point 
viewed, it appears as an assemblage of buildings; a splendid quarter of a town, but not a 
fi ne edifi ce.” (Dawson 1967, 8) 

Things That Are Not Arguments  23
 15. “The post-war consumer group has market strength due to its size and affluence. This is 
a group where 70 percent of its members are in full- or part-time employment. Previous 
studies have found that mature women continue to be fashion conscious. Furthermore, 
[mature women who responded to our survey] were interested in the activity of clothes 
shopping, but became frustrated by high-street retailers’ lack of attention to this sector 
of the market. An increasing number of fashion retailers are trying to target the younger 
market, which is in decline. At the same time, the opportunity exists to satisfy the afflu-
ent mature market which seeks specifi c design details in garments. Independent retailers 
or department stores are supplying these clothes.” (Birtwistle 2005, 462, material omitted)
Things That Are Not Arguments
Finding arguments is easier if you’re aware of things that aren’t arguments: 
assertions, descriptions, questions, instructions, and explanations.
Assertions
A single statement can’t be an argument. It could be an important and true 
statement. It could be part of an argument. But a single statement can’t be an 
argument because an argument must have at least two statements, a premise 
and a conclusion. 
Connections
If one statement is both a premise and the conclusion in the same argument, the argu-
ment commits the fallacy of begging the question. Chapter Two discusses this fallacy.
If you said
(a)  Everyone should take a philosophy class.
you’d have made an assertion, not an argument. If you added
Philosophy helps your critical thinking skills and your ability to fi gure 
out the structure of complex issues.
then the statement (a) would become a conclusion of an argument. If, instead, 
you were to have added
So, Paul should take a philosophy course this semester.
then statement (a) would be a premise in an argument. Many passages are 
lists of assertions that don’t form an argument. Descriptions are examples of 
assertions.
Descriptions
A description is intended to give the reader a mental image of something. 
You can describe physical things, activities, feelings, sounds, emotions, and 
tastes. Descriptions can be beautiful, true, and important. But they can’t be 
arguments. Here’s a beautiful description from Charlotte Bronte’s Jane Eyre.

24  Chapter 1 Critical Thinking and Arguments 
Two wax candles stood lighted on the table, and two 
on the mantelpiece. Half reclined on a couch appeared 
Mr. Rochester, his foot supported by the cushion; he 
was looking at Adele and the dog: the fi re shone full 
on his face. I knew my traveller with his broad and 
jetty eyebrows; his square forehead, made squarer by 
the horizontal sweep of his black hair. I recognised 
his decisive nose, more remarkable for character than 
beauty; his full nostrils; his grim mouth, chin, and 
jaw—yes, all three were very grim, and no mistake. 
His shape, now divested of cloak, I perceived harmon-
ised in squareness with his physiognomy: I suppose it 
was a good fi gure in the athletic sense of the term—
broad chested and thin fl anked, though neither tall 
nor graceful. (Bronte 1908, 115, material omitted)
Questions and Instructions
Above you saw that because questions and instruc-
tions are neither true nor false, they can’t be state-
ments. That means that they can’t be arguments, or 
even parts of arguments. But as you saw in the Zola 
example, sometimes the correct interpretation of 
a passage is that the author is making an argument 
even though the sentences aren’t in declarative form.
Explanations
There are two different kinds of explanations: ex-
planations of how to do something and explanations of why something is 
true. As an example of how to do something, here’s an explanation of how to 
decant a liquid from a solid.
 Prepare, clean, and dry (1) a container with a small spout, (2) an empty con-
tainer, and (3) a stirring rod. Pour the liquid-solid mixture into the container 
with a small spout. If you are decanting more than you can comfortably 
hold up at one time, do the decanting in batches. Place the stirring rod one 
to three centimeters above the empty container. Take the container with 
the liquid-solid mixture and hold it so that the spout rests gently against the 
stirring rod. Slowly tilt the container with the liquid-solid mixture so that 
liquid slowly swirls down the stirring rod into the empty container. The 
stirring rod should stay at the spout of the container so that it keeps any of 
the solid particles from going into the container with the liquid. Do not 
attempt to remove all the liquid from the liquid-solid mixture.
Explanations of how to do something are rarely confused with arguments. 
But explanations of why something is true are often confused with argu-
ments. From this point on “explanation” will refer only to explanations of 
why something is true. 
Explanations are often confused with arguments because they’re similar 
in several ways. They both use declarative statements. In an explanation, 
Decanting a liquid from 
a solid.
http://orgchem.colorado.edu/

Things That Are Not Arguments  25
the statement of what’s to be explained is the explanandum. The statements 
that do the explaining are the explanans. The explanandum is often mistaken 
for the conclusion of an argument, and the explanans are often mistaken for 
premises. They both use the same indicator words. The premise indicator 
words can be used to indicate explanans and the conclusion indicator words 
can be used to indicate explananda. They’re both concerned with truth. But 
they’re concerned with truth in different ways. An argument is an attempt to 
show that some statement is true. An explanation is an attempt to tell some-
one why a statement is true. An explanation assumes that we all agree that 
the explanandum is true. An argument assumes that someone doesn’t agree 
that the conclusion is true. Look back at the two statements about the car be-
ing in the shop since last Tuesday. (Page 16) Both are examples of explanations.
Argument
Premises
Explanans
Explanandum
Accepted
facts
Claimed to
prove
Claimed to
shed light on
Accepted
fact
Conclusion
Explanation
It’s also hard to distinguish arguments from explanations because people 
argue about explanations. One famous case of this concerns the extinction 
of the dinosaurs. Here’s a review of this debate from the web pages of the 
University of California at Berkeley’s Museum of Paleontology:
Two main camps exist in paleontology today, each having a different view 
of what killed the dinosaurs. The major sides of the schism can be broken 
down into “intrinsic gradualists” and “extrinsic catastrophists.”
The “Intrinsic Gradualists”
Those scientists falling into this category believe that the ultimate cause of 
the extinction was intrinsic, meaning of an Earthly nature, and gradual, taking 
some time to occur (several million years). Two main hypotheses exist today.
1. Volcanism: We are quite certain that [at] the end of the Cretaceous period
there was increased volcanic activity. Over a period of several million 
years, this increased volcanism could have created enough dust and soot to 
block out sunlight; producing the climatic change. In India during the Late 
Cretaceous, huge volcanic eruptions were spewing forth fl oods of lava.
2. Plate Tectonics: Major changes in the organization of the continental 
plates (continental drift) were occurring. The oceans were receding from 
the land. A less mild climate would have been the result, and this would 
have taken a long time.
Note that these two above hypotheses are inextricably tied together; volca-
nism can’t occur without the action of plate tectonics, and vice versa. If the 
extinction was intrinsic and gradual, both processes probably played a role.
Key Concept
In an explanation, the 
statement of what’s 
to be explained is the 
explanandum. The 
statements that do 
the explaining are the 
explanans.

26  Chapter 1 Critical Thinking and Arguments 
The “Extrinsic Catastrophists”
This side of the controversy holds that the ultimate cause of the ex-
tinction was extrinsic, meaning of an extraterrestrial nature, and cata-
strophic, meaning fairly sudden and punctuated. The main hypothesis 
was proposed in 1980 by (among others) Luis and Walter Alvarez of the 
University of California at Berkeley.
The Alvarez Hypothesis: The original hypothesis is the basis for sev-
eral subsequent variations on the theme that a large extraterrestrial ob-
ject collided with the Earth, its impact throwing up enough dust to cause 
the climatic change. (Hutchinson 2006, material omitted)*
Intrinsic gradualists and extrinsic catastrophists are both proposing an expla-
nation of why the dinosaurs are extinct. They don’t disagree about whether 
dinosaurs are extinct. The disagreement occurs because people defend two 
different proposed explanations. They each provide arguments to support 
their preferred explanation of the extinction of the dinosaurs. Extrinsic cata-
strophists might make the following argument:
(1) The extinction of the dinosaurs was swift.
(2)  Volcanism and plate tectonics can’t explain the swiftness of the 
extinction of the dinosaurs.
Therefore,
(3) Intrinsic gradualism is false.
Intrinsic gradualists might make the following argument:
(1)  If a large extraterrestrial object had collided with the Earth, it would 
have left a large crater. 
(2) There’s no such crater.
Therefore,
(3) Extrinsic catastrophism is false.
The two sides in this debate are arguing about explanations. The texts you 
might read about this issue intersperse arguments and explanations. This 
makes it difficult to distinguish the arguments from the explanations. The 
key point to keep in mind is the presence or absence of agreement. If there’s 
no disagreement as to whether a statement is true, that statement probably 
isn’t the conclusion of an argument. If there’s disagreement as to whether a 
statement is true, it’s probably the conclusion of an argument.
Habits of a Critical Thinker
Intellectual Courage
Critical thinkers aren’t afraid to question their own 
beliefs and the beliefs of others. It might require intel-
lectual courage for you to consider debates about the 
extinction of the dinosaurs, vegetarianism, or the exis-
tence of God. Your family and friends might have strong 
views about these issues and you might worry about the 
loss of their support if you were to come to have differ-
ent views. It might feel safer just to avoid these issues. 
A critical thinker has the courage to take these risks and 
seek the truth even when the truth is uncomfortable.
*Hutchinson, John. “What Killed the Dinosaurs?” 1994. DinoBuzz: Current Topics Concerning Dinosaurs 
<http://www.ucmp.berkeley.edu/diapsids/extinctheory.html> 3 Oct. 2006. Copyright 1994–2006 by the 
Regents of the University of California, all rights reserved.

Things That Are Not Arguments  27
EXERCISE 1.5
A. Find the arguments in the discussions below. Identify the premises and the conclusion of 
each argument.
*1. Jack and Jill
Jack: Let’s climb up that beanstalk.
Jill: Stupid idea. 
Jack: Why?
Jill: Don’t you know that there’s a mean giant at the top of the beanstalk? 
Jack: No way!!! Where’d you hear that?
Jill: I read about it in a book.
Jack: What did it say in the book?
Jill: There was some moron named “Jack” who climbed up a beanstalk and came face 
to face with a giant. The giant went after him, and Jack had to scramble down the 
beanstalk to save his life.
Jack: That’s a totally different Jack.
Jill: Yeah, but it might be the same beanstalk!!
Jack: I hadn’t thought of that. Let’s get out of here!!!
 2. Two emergency room physicians, Dr. Diagnosis (Dr. D) and Dr. Misdiagnosis (Dr. M).
Dr. M: The patient is having a heart attack. We must immediately open the blocked arteries.
Dr. D: Don’t do that. The patient is not having a heart attack. It’s simply indigestion.
Dr. M: But the patient is having severe chest pain, and there’s a history of heart attacks 
in his family.
Dr. D: Indeed. But look closely at the receipt that fell out of his pocket. And then in-
spect his hands.
Dr. M: What are you talking about?
Dr. D: It’s a receipt from Joe’s Greasy Fried Chicken Shack, and it shows that he ordered 
fi ve portions of Super-Duper Deep Fat Totally Greasy chicken wings. And his hands 
have enough grease on them to lubricate every car in California.
B. Determine whether each of the following passages contains: an argument, an assertion, a 
question, a command, or a description. If the passage contains an argument, identify the 
premises and conclusion.
 1. Look, we need to take I-285 instead of I-75. At this time of day I-75 is always a mess, and 
I read in the newspaper this morning that they were repaving part of I-75 today.
 2. The patient presents with fever, sweating, and a cough but claims that she has no pain 
in the throat or the ears.
 3. Your car is pulling right, but the tires look ok. I think one of your tie rods is bent.
 *4. “Get thee to a nunnery!” (Shakespeare, Hamlet, Act 3, Sc. 1)
 5. “Oh! you gods, why do you make us love your goodly gifts, and snatch them straight 
away?” (Shakespeare, Pericles, Act 3, Sc. 1)
 6. “Your mother was a hamster and your father smelt of elderberries!” (Monty Python and 
the Holy Grail 1975)

28  Chapter 1 Critical Thinking and Arguments 
 7. “It is often said that brown sugar is a healthier option than white sugar. In reality, 
brown sugar is most often ordinary table sugar that is turned brown by the reintroduc-
tion of molasses. Normally molasses is separated and removed when sugar is created. 
Because of its molasses content, brown sugar does contain certain minerals. But these 
minerals are present in only minuscule amounts. Nutritionally, brown sugar and white 
sugar are not much different.” (O’Connor 2007, D5, material omitted)
 *8. “[A]ll genuine political theories presuppose man to be evil. This can be easily documented 
in the works of every specifi c political thinker.” (Schmitt 1996, 61, material omitted)
 9. The following passage is about the Spanish conquest of the Aztecs. It speaks of the Aztec 
emperor, Moctezuma, the Spanish conquistador, Cortes, and the legendary  Aztec god-King, 
Queutzalcoatl, who had been driven from his throne and had vowed to return some day.
 
“Moctezuma was said to believe that Cortes was Queutzalcoatl. There is no reason 
to doubt the good faith of the authors of these accounts: it is clear that they believed 
this version. Nonetheless, the same may not have been true of Moctezuma and his re-
lations. The Spaniards appeared for the fi rst time in 1517, whereas Queutzalcoatl was 
supposed to have returned in a One-Reed year of the Aztec calendar in 1519.” (Todorov 
1995, 22–23, material omitted)
 10. “In a few days Mr. Bingley returned Mr. Bennet’s visit, and sat about ten minutes with 
him in his library. He had entertained hopes of being admitted to a sight of the young 
ladies, of whose beauty he had heard much; but he saw only the father. The ladies were 
somewhat more fortunate, for they had the advantage of ascertaining from an upper 
window that he wore a blue coat, and rode a black horse.” (Austen 1981, 7)
 11. “In perpetrating a revolution, there are two requirements: someone or something to re-
volt against, and someone to actually show up to do the revolting. Dress is usually causal 
and both parties may be fl exible about the time and place. In the Chinese revolution of 
1650 neither party showed up, and the deposit on the hall was forfeited.” (Allen 1991, 69, 
material omitted)
 *12. “Dreams are not to be likened to the unregulated sounds that rise from a musical instru-
ment struck by the blow of some external force instead of by a player’s hand, they are not 
meaningless; they are not absurd. On the contrary, they are psychical [mental] phenom-
ena of complete validity—fulfi llments of wishes.” (Freud 1969, 155, material omitted) 
 13. “The growth and intensifi cation of serfdom was a major tendency in Russian history. 
[A]t the end of the nineteenth century thirty-four million people out of a population of 
thirty-six millions were reckoned as serfs.” (Chamberlain 1965, 5, material omitted)
 14. Background information: Amphibians are cold-blooded. They draw all the heat they 
need to live from their environment.
“New fossilized remains of an amphibian which roamed the Earth more than 
245 million years ago have been discovered in Antarctica, suggesting that its [climate] 
during much of the Triassic, the epoch when dinosaurs and the fi rst primitive mammals 
emerged, was remarkably warm. The 60-cm (24-inch) piece of skull was dug out from 
thick sandstone at Fremouw Peak in the Transantarctic Mountains, just six degrees 
away from the South Pole. The mixed team of European-American paleontologists has 
assessed the creature as a Parotosuchus, a 2-m (6.5-ft)-long giant crocodile-like predator 
(but it was rather related to modern salamanders) that lived 40 million years before the 
fi rst dinosaurs appeared, inhabiting lakes and rivers.” (Anitei 2007) 
 15. The following passage is about a study conducted by the anthropologist Bronoslaw 
 Malinowski. 

Things That Are Not Arguments  29
“Malinowski’s famous study of Melanesian sexual beliefs and practices provides 
 evidence that sexual jealousy really does have a genetic rather than a purely cultural 
explanation. The tribe that he studied did not believe in physiological paternity; they 
thought the only function of sexual intercourse was to enlarge the vagina so that spirits 
could implant the fetus in the womb. Nevertheless, men were as jealous as in societies in 
which the male role in procreation is understood.” (Posner 1992, 97–98, material omitted) 
C. Determine whether each of the following passages contains an argument, an explanation, 
or neither an argument nor an explanation. If it contains an argument, identify the premises 
and the conclusion. If it contains an explanation, identify the explanans and explanandum.
 1. We should decrease class sizes in our elementary schools. Students do better when 
classes are smaller.
 2. He’s getting fat and it’s easy to see why. He never exercises, he has donuts for breakfast 
every morning, and hamburgers for dinner every night.
 3. The drop in his grades wasn’t caused by the divorce of his parents, because that occurred 
before he was two. There must be some other cause of the problem.
 *4. You can see from the deformation of the right foot that it was broken and healed very 
badly. This dinosaur could barely walk. That’s why she died.
 5. Thirty-seven times sixty-four is 2,428.  
 6. “Help!”
 7. “You might be surprised to learn that when you turn your car, your front wheels are 
not pointing in the same direction. For a car to turn smoothly, each wheel must follow 
a different circle. Since the inside wheel is following a circle with a smaller radius, it is 
actually making a tighter turn than the outside wheel.” (Howstuffworks.com 2007) 
 *8. “The Cherokees believed that they had a sacred duty to avenge the deaths of fallen com-
rades, and so war parties formed quickly following a death.” (Perdue 2005, 3)
 9. “Stocks fell yesterday, led by fi nancial services stocks, on concerns that the economy’s 
expansion will erode [due to] troubles in the mortgage industry.” (New York Times, “Fi-
nancial Shares Lead Market Lower,” 2007, C13)
 10. The following passage comes from a nineteenth century decision of the U.S. Supreme 
Court. The case involved a dispute in which the state of Georgia sought to impose its 
laws on the Cherokee tribe.
 
“If it be true that the Cherokee nation has rights, this is not the tribunal in which 
those rights are to be asserted. If it be true that wrongs have been infl icted, and that 
still greater are to be apprehended, this is not the tribunal which can redress the past or 
prevent the future.” (Cherokee Nation 1831, 20)
 11. Why don’t humans have fur? Because fur is a great place to be a bug. Fur helps keep an 
animal warm but it is also a breeding ground for ticks, lice, and other parasites. Think 
about all the fl eas on a dog. Humans did not need fur for warmth because they can build 
shelters, use fi re, and make clothes. So humans with less fur gradually replaced those 
with more, in a classic example of Darwin’s natural selection.
 *12. “Historians have noted the Protestant origins of many of the early scientists. The Pu-
ritan preachers insisted that the universe was law-abiding. The [Protestant] Reverend 
George Hakewill published [a book] in 1627 [that] argued that scientifi c observation was 
more important than traditional authority. It was man’s duty to study the universe and 
fi nd out its laws.” (Hill 1966, 92) 

30  Chapter 1 Critical Thinking and Arguments 
 13. The following passage comes from an address of Martin Luther King, Jr. In it, he speaks 
to other clergyman about the war in Vietnam.
 
“I knew that America would never invest the necessary funds or energies in rehabili-
tation of its poor so long as adventures like Vietnam continued to draw men and skills 
and money like some demonic destructive suction tube. So I was increasingly compelled 
to see the war as an enemy of the poor and to attack it as such.” (King 1991, 232–233) 
 14. “There is good reason why it is considered important to be able to listen to another per-
son, why we have to listen—for we do not have to learn to interrupt which comes natu-
rally. Interrupting is generally considered impolite. Here indispensable social norms not 
rooted in the organism’s natural inclinations are motivated and determined by propriety 
and politeness.” (Yakubinsky 1997, 249, material omitted) 
 15. The Pope has the power to excommunicate any member of the Catholic Church. Ex-
communication expels a person from the Church, and, according to Roman Catholic 
belief, there is no salvation outside of the Church. Following is an excerpt from the 
Papal announcement excommunicating Martin Luther.
 
“Our decrees which follow are passed against Martin and others who follow him in the 
obstinacy of his depraved and damnable purpose, as also against those who defend and protect 
him with a military bodyguard, and do not fear to support him with their own resources or 
in any other way. On all these we decree the sentences of excommunication, of anathema, of 
privation of dignitaries, honors and property on them and their descendants and these and the 
other sentences, censures, and punishments which are infl icted by canon law on heretics we 
decree to have fallen on all of these men to their damnation.” (Rupp 1970, 65, material omitted) 
D. Constructing arguments. Read the following passages and then, in each case, construct two 
arguments that support opposing explanations. 
 1. “In recent years, researchers have discovered tantalizing evidence that antidepressants 
combat depression by promoting neurogenesis, the growth of new neurons in the brain. 
The evidence derives from several striking observations. One is that stressed monkeys 
grow fewer new cells in the hippocampus region of the brain than their healthy counter-
parts do. Secondly, most depression treatments, from drugs such as Prozac to a type of pow-
erful magnetic stimulation, increase new neuron growth by up to 75 percent in rodents. 
 
“And in the most telling study to date, scientists from Columbia University and 
Yale University directed radiation at the hippocampi of mice to prevent neurogenesis. 
When given fl uoxetine, also known as Prozac, the mice exhibited none of the behavioral 
changes normally associated with the drug. If neurogenesis is required to kick depres-
sion, as the result suggested, maybe its loss sends the mind into a tailspin. ‘It’s a very ap-
pealing idea,’ comments Eric Nestler of the University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center at Dallas. ‘It provides a mechanism to explain why many cases of depression are 
chronic and progressive.’ It would also explain why Prozac takes a few weeks to exert 
its effects. The growth of neurons from stem cells takes a few weeks as well. 
 
“But the details nag at some researchers. Fritz Henn of Brookhaven National Labo-
ratory says he was captivated by the idea early on. ‘I thought it was a good target for 
a fi nal common pathway’ underlying all forms of depression. But when Henn and his 
colleagues randomly shocked the feet of mice—a treatment that is known to erode 
 neurogenesis—not all of the animals became depressed. ‘That experiment made me 
leery,’ he says. When neurogenesis is abridged by other means, such as irradiation, the 
animals do not all go on to show signs of depression.” (Minkel 2006)
 2. “A recent scientifi c theory is known as “string theory.” It says that everything is made of 
incredibly tiny loops of energy that vibrate in ten or eleven dimensions. These tiny loops, 

Putting Arguments into Standard Form  31
or strings, can explain all of the four basic physical forces: gravity, electromagnetism, and 
the strong and weak nuclear forces. No other theory can explain all of the forces. But a 
startling discovery had led some scientists to reject string theory. In 1998 astronomers 
discovered that all of the galaxies in the universe are fl ying away from one another at an 
accelerating rate. This contradicted the prevailing view that the galaxies are fl ying away 
from one another but at a slower and slower rate. A previously unknown form of energy 
was needed to explain the discovery, which scientists called “dark energy.” 
 
An explanation of the problem that dark energy poses for string theory and the 
response of string theorists are given in the passage below. Read the passage and then, 
based on the information contained in it, construct two arguments, one that could be 
given by an anti-string theorist and another that could be given by a string theorist. 
 
“Simple calculations suggested this energy should be enormous [but in fact the 
energy is much smaller]. Ideally, string theory should account for why dark energy is 
so much weaker than it could be. The only explanation string theory proponents have 
come up with is an unpalatable one to many physicists: assume that string theory is 
capable of describing [a large] number of different universes, each with its own dark 
energy, and note that one of those universes is bound to look like ours. Skeptics see the 
landscape as an abandonment of centuries-old scientifi c practice, in which a successful 
theory is one that ultimately describes only one universe: the one we see around us. In 
their eyes, string theorists are in the undesirable position of having to change the rules 
of science to make their theory work.” (Minkel 2006, material omitted)
Putting Arguments into Standard Form
Because arguments can be hard to follow, it’s useful to put them into standard 
form. To put an argument into standard form you:
1. put all the statements into declarative sentences and replace all pronouns 
with nouns; 
2. insert any unstated premises and any unstated conclusion; 
3. number each statement; 
4. place the premises before their conclusion; and  
5. indicate conclusions with the word “therefore.”
Here’s an example of the format of the standardization of a simple argument:
(1) This is the fi rst premise.
(2) This is the second premise. 
[3] This is the third premise.
Therefore,
(4) This is the conclusion.
Let’s agree to put brackets, [ ], around the numbers of unstated premises and 
conclusions. Premise [3] above is unstated.
 
Suppose you came across the following passage in an editorial from a 
business magazine you were studying in a Finance course.
Where is the stock market headed? Some think we are in the middle of a 
sustained bull market. My view is that stock market prices will go down 
this coming quarter because if interest rates go up, stock market prices will 
go down, and the Federal Reserve has indicated that interest rates will rise.
Key Concept
How to standardize 
arguments.

32  Chapter 1 Critical Thinking and Arguments 
Following the fi rst of the three steps for fi nding arguments you begin by looking 
for an attempt to convince. The word “because” is a premise indicator. The phrase 
“my view” is another sign that the passage contains a point that’s controversial. 
You also rely on your background knowledge that people frequently disagree about 
whether stock prices will rise or fall. This passage contains an argument.
 
The second step is to fi nd the conclusion. The main point of this passage 
is the statement that stock market prices will go down this coming quarter. 
You need to put this conclusion into a declarative sentence.
(C) Stock market prices will fall this coming quarter.
The third step is to fi nd the premises. Two of them are clear.
(P) If interest rates rise, stock market prices will fall.
(P) Interest rates will rise.
Your fi rst draft of a standardization of this argument might look like this:
(1) If interest rates rise, stock market prices will fall.
(2) Interest rates will rise.
Therefore,
(3) Stock market prices will fall this coming quarter.
Standardizing isn’t rearranging the phrases you fi nd in a text. When you stan-
dardize, you should edit the phrases you fi nd to make the argument clearer. 
Here’s another way that critical thinking is an art, not a mechanical process. 
In this example, the author uses the phrases “will go down” and “will rise.” 
The standardization changes “will go down” to “will fall” to make the con-
trast between rising and falling prices clearer. You temporarily assign “(C)” to 
the conclusion. You can’t put a number in place of the “(C)” yet because you 
don’t yet know how many premises there’ll be. For this same reason you tem-
porarily assign “(P)” to each premise. You have to read and reread the passage. 
You have to carefully note the relationships between the various sentences 
in the passage.
 
This standardization omits material. The two sentences
Where is the stock market headed? 
and
Some think we are in the middle of a sustained bull market. 
1,100
1,000
900
800
700
Apr.
July
Oct.
Time
FSM (Fictitious Stock Market) Index, Apr. 2009−−Jan. 2010
FSM Index
2010
Jan.
An imaginary sample of 
a stock graph.

Putting Arguments into Standard Form  33
aren’t in the standardization. They’re omitted because they aren’t part of the argu-
ment. The fi rst sentence is a question used to introduce the topic, and the second 
sentence sets up the argument by pointing to views that the  author doesn’t share.
 
What about the phrase “the Federal Reserve has indicated that”? What is 
the function of this phrase? It supports the view that interest rates will rise. 
You’ve discovered that this passage contains two arguments. The one you’ve 
just discovered can be standardized like this:
(1) The Federal Reserve has indicated that interest rates will rise.
 
Therefore,
(2) Interest rates will rise.
The conclusion of this argument is the fi rst premise of the other argument in 
the passage. You can put the standardizations together like this: 
(1) The Federal Reserve has indicated that interest rates will rise.
 
Therefore,
(2) Interest rates will rise.
(3) If interest rates rise, stock market prices will fall.
 
Therefore,
(4) Stock market prices will fall this coming quarter.
The passage contains two arguments. The fi rst argument has (1) as its premise 
and (2) as its conclusion. The second argument has (2) and (3) as its premises 
and (4) as its conclusion. Statement (2) is the conclusion of one argument and 
a premise in another argument. When the conclusion of one argument is the 
premise of another argument, the two arguments are linked arguments. Argu-
ments that are used to support premises of the main argument are called subar-
guments. In the example above, the argument composed of statements (1) and 
(2) is a subargument. The argument composed of statements (2), (3), and (4) is 
the main argument. Any number of arguments could be linked together. For 
example, the author of the argument above might have presented a subargu-
ment for (1) and a subargument for (3). In that case there would have been four 
linked arguments (the main argument and three subarguments).
Technical Terms: Complex Arguments, Simple Arguments
Linked arguments are sometimes called “complex arguments.” Unlinked arguments 
are sometimes called “simple arguments.”
Here’s an example of the format of the standardization of an argument that 
contains subarguments:
(1) This is the fi rst premise of the fi rst subargument.
(2) This is the second premise of the fi rst subargument.
 
Therefore,
(3)  This is the conclusion of the fi rst subargument and the fi rst premise 
of the main argument.
(4) This is the fi rst premise of the second subargument.
 
Therefore,
(5)  This is the conclusion of the second subargument and the second 
premise of the main argument.
 
Therefore,
(6) This is the conclusion of the main argument.
Key Concept
When the conclusion 
of one argument is the 
premise of another 
argument, the two 
arguments are linked 
arguments.
Key Concept
Arguments that are used 
to support premises of 
the main argument are 
called subarguments.

34  Chapter 1 Critical Thinking and Arguments 
This example has two subarguments and a main argument. The fi rst subargu-
ment has two premises, (1) and (2), and its conclusion is (3). The second subar-
gument has one premise, (4), and its conclusion is (5). The main argument has 
two premises, (3) and (5), and its conclusion is (6). Let’s agree to put blank lines 
between arguments to help you see the main argument and the subarguments.
Here’s an example of linked arguments. One popular theory of manage-
ment is the stockholder theory. This theory holds that the only job of Chief 
Executive Officers (CEOs) of publicly traded corporations is to maximize value 
for stockholders. R. Edward Freeman (1997) argues against the stockholder 
theory. He thinks that CEOs should take into account anyone who is a stake-
holder of their corporation. Here’s a standardization of his main argument:
(1)  Stakeholders include any groups who are vital to the success of the 
corporation.
(2)  Stockholders, employees, and customers are vital to the success of 
the corporation.
 
Therefore,
(3) Stockholders, employees, and customers are stakeholders.
(4) Corporations have a responsibility to all stakeholders.
(5) The job of the CEO is to act on behalf of the corporation.
 
Therefore,
(6)  The job of the CEO is to take all stakeholders into account when 
making decisions on behalf of the corporation.
Statements (1), (2), and (3) form a subargument. Statements (3), (4), (5), and (6) 
form the main argument. Freeman knows that stockholder theorists are likely 
to reject premise (4), and he uses linked arguments to defend this premise.
Freeman attempts to support (4) by pointing to the laws which address 
the interests of the groups named in premise (3). Here’s a standardization of 
two arguments Freeman uses to defend premise (4):
(P) There are labor laws that give employees the right to unionize.
(P)  There are civil rights and equal pay laws that put constraints on hir-
ing practices.
 
Therefore,
(C) Some laws support the interests of employees against corporations.
(P)  There are laws that hold manufacturing corporations liable for 
damage by their products even when they have exercised all care 
in production and even when the product was misused by the 
 customer.
 
Therefore,
(C) Some laws support the interests of customers against corporations.
You can combine the conclusions of the above two subarguments to get:
(P) Some laws support the interests of employees against corporations.
(P) Some laws support the interests of customers against corporations.
 
Therefore
(C)  Some laws support the interests of employees and customers against 
corporations.

Putting Arguments into Standard Form  35
You can put all the arguments together like this:
(1)  Stakeholders include any groups who are vital to the success of the 
corporation.
(2)  Owners, employees, and customers are vital to the success of the 
 corporation.
 
Therefore,
(3) Owners, employees, and customers are stakeholders.
(4) There are labor laws that give employees the right to unionize.
(5)  There are civil rights and equal pay laws that put constraints on  hiring 
practices.
 
Therefore,
(6) Some laws support the interests of employees against corporations.
(7)  There are laws that hold manufacturing corporations liable for damage by 
their products even when they have exercised all care in production and 
even when the product was misused by the  customer.
 
Therefore,
(8) Some laws support the interests of customers against corporations.
Therefore,
(9)  Some laws support the interests of employees and customers against 
corporations. (From premises (6) and (8).)
 
Therefore,
(10) Corporations have a responsibility to all stakeholders.
(11) The job of the CEO is to act on behalf of the corporation.
Therefore, 
(12)  The job of the CEO is to take all stakeholders into account when 
making decisions on behalf of the corporation.
Freeman’s main conclusion, (12), is supported by premises (3), (10), and (11). He 
uses fi ve subarguments to defend these premises. Premises (1) and (2) support 
(3). Statements (4) and (5) support (6), and statement (7) supports (8). Statements 
(6) and (8) are then used to support (9), and (9) is used to support (10). This argu-
ment has a pretty complex structure. (And, believe it or not, we have simplifi ed 
Freeman’s argument!)
 
Let’s look at the passage from John Stuart Mill’s On Liberty that you saw 
at the beginning of this chapter.
[The] peculiar evil of silencing the expression of an opinion is that it is 
robbing the human race, those who dissent from the opinion still more 
than those who hold it. If the opinion is right, they are deprived of the 
opportunity of exchanging error for truth. If wrong, they lose, what is 
almost as great a benefi t, the clearer perception and livelier impression of 
truth produced by its collision with error.
Once again, you follow the three fi rst steps outlined above. The fi rst step is 
to look for an attempt to convince. Mill is arguing for freedom of speech. He’s 
trying to convince you that silencing the expression of an opinion is evil. 
This makes your second step (fi nd the conclusion) easy. His conclusion is:
(C) No one should silence the expression of an opinion.

36  Chapter 1 Critical Thinking and Arguments 
The third step is to fi nd the premises. The structure of the premises in this pas-
sage is complex. Mill divides the matter into two cases: when the silenced opin-
ion is true (“right”) and when the silenced is false (“wrong”). One premise is:
(P)  If someone suppresses a true opinion, people who don’t know this 
opinion lose the opportunity to learn it.
and another is
(P)  If someone suppresses a false opinion, people who know the truth 
lose the opportunity to gain a greater appreciation of the truth by 
comparing it to a false opinion.
We’ve rewritten Mill’s words to make them clearer. For example, we’ve re-
placed his “if wrong” with “if someone suppresses a false opinion.” You im-
prove clarity by replacing the pronouns in the original text with the noun or 
noun phrase to which the pronoun refers. Making these sorts of changes to 
Mill’s wording gives you this fi rst draft of a standardization of Mill’s argument: 
(P)  If someone suppresses a true opinion, people who don’t know this 
opinion lose the opportunity to learn it.
(P)  If someone suppresses a false opinion, people who know the truth 
lose the opportunity to gain a greater appreciation of the truth by 
comparing it to a false opinion.
Therefore,
(C) No one should silence the expression of an opinion.
As you review this, you might notice a missing step. What if an opinion isn’t 
true or false? Mill assumes that:
[P] All opinions are either true or false.
This is a classic case of an unstated premise. If you were to ask Mill, “Are 
all opinions either true or false?” he’d respond “Of course.” Here’s the fi nal 
standardization of the argument:
[1] All opinions are either true or false.
(2)  If someone suppresses a true opinion, people who don’t know this 
opinion lose the opportunity to learn it.
(3)  If someone suppresses a false opinion, people who know the truth 
lose the opportunity to gain a greater appreciation of the truth by 
comparing it to a false opinion.
Therefore,
(4) No one should silence the expression of an opinion.
Any argument can be correctly standardized in different ways. If the word “opin-
ion” in the standardization of Mill’s argument above were replaced with the 
word “view,” that would be an equally good standardization. You could move 
and renumber premise [1] to be premise [3] without changing the quality of the 
standardization. But some ways of standardizing an argument are much better 
than others. A standardization of Mill’s argument that omitted premise (2) would 
be seriously fl awed. If you made a mistake and thought that this sentence
If wrong, they lose, what is almost as great a benefi t, the clearer percep-
tion and livelier impression of truth produced by its collision with error.
was the conclusion of Mill’s argument, you would produce a poor 
standardization.

Putting Arguments into Standard Form  37
EXERCISE 1.6
 A. Find all the arguments in the discussions in Exercise 1.5 A and put them into standard form. 
 B. For each passage in Exercises 1.5 B, C, and D, determine which contains an argument(s), 
and put the argument into standard form. 
 C. Determine whether each of the following passages contains an argument(s). If the passage 
contains an argument or arguments, put it/them into standard form.
 1. Don’t cry. Your toy dinosaur’s around here somewhere. You were playing with it in the kitch-
en less than an hour ago, and you haven’t been out of the house since then. We’ll fi nd it.
 2. I got angry. Then I told him, “Listen, I don’t want kumquats! I want oranges!” 
 3. If he goes to work, he’ll get very sick. But he won’t go to work, so I don’t think that he’ll 
get sick.
 *4. Why do you want to make me feel so bad?
 5. Napoleon either lost at Waterloo or at Austerlitz. There’s a statue in honor of his vic-
tory at Austerlitz, so he must have lost at Waterloo.
 6. “[There is some red dirt on your shoe.] Just opposite the Seymour Street Post Office 
they have taken up the pavement and thrown up some earth, which lies in such a way 
that it is difficult to avoid treading in it in entering. The earth is of this peculiar reddish 
tint which is found, as far as I know, nowhere else in the neighborhood. [You must have 
been to the post office.]” (Doyle 1890, 12) 
 7. “Many people have the reasoning faculty, but no one uses it in religious matters. The 
best minds will tell you that when a man has begotten a child he is morally bound to 
tenderly care for it, protect it from hurt, shield it from disease, clothe it, feed it, bear with 
its waywardness, lay no hand upon it save in kindness and for its own good, and never 
in any case infl ict upon it a wanton cruelty. God’s treatment of his earthly children, 
every day and every night, is the exact opposite of all that, yet those best minds warmly 
justify these crimes, condone them, excuse them, and indignantly refuse to regard them 
as crimes at all, when he commits them. (Twain 2007, 380–381, material omitted)
 *8. “Early in the morning of March 10, 2003, after a raucous party that lasted into the small 
hours, a groggy and hungover 20-year-old named Ryan Holle lent his Chevrolet Metro to 
a friend. That decision, prosecutors later said, was tantamount to murder. The friend used 
the car to drive three men to the Pensacola home of a marijuana dealer, aiming to steal a 
safe. The burglary turned violent, and one of the men killed the dealer’s 18-year-old daugh-
ter by beating her head in with a shotgun he found in the home. Mr. Holle was a mile and 
a half away, but that did not matter. He was convicted of murder under a distinctively 
American legal doctrine that makes accomplices as liable as the actual killer for murders 
committed during felonies like burglaries, rapes, and robberies.” (Liptak 2007, A1)
 9. [Peter Singer] thinks that the suffering of non-human animals is as morally important 
as our own suffering. [He] claims that there are no morally relevant differences between 
some non-human animals and some severely mentally impaired human beings. [I]f the 
refl ective, communicative, emotional, or social abilities of such impaired humans [are] 
not any greater than that of a pig or a primate, then we must treat [all] these beings in 
similar ways.” (Feinberg 2002, 546, material omitted)
 10. The following passage was written by an economist, and it concerns the question of 
whether the United States could produce more goods than it is currently producing. 
 
“[T]he U.S. economy currently holds very little excess capacity. The official data 
show that capacity utilization in manufacturing now stands at 82.4 percent up from 

38  Chapter 1 Critical Thinking and Arguments 
a cyclical low of 73.9. Although these fi gures suggest ample excess capacity, the im-
pression is misleading. Most U.S. manufacturing excess capacity resides in obsolete or 
noncompetitive plants and equipment.” (Kaufman 2007, 24)
 11. The following comes from a speech made by Malcolm X in 1964.
 
“1964 threatens to be the most explosive year America has ever witnessed. Why? 
It’s also a political year. The year when all of the white political crooks will be back in 
your and my community with their false promises, building up our hopes for a letdown, 
with their trickery and their treachery. [I]t can only lead to one thing: an explosion.” 
(Breitman 1965, 25, material omitted)
 *12. “My pulse is throbbing like a war drum. I want to slaughter something—give pain, give 
death to what, I do not know. But the piece ends. The men of the orchestra wipe their 
lips and rest their fi ngers. I creep slowly to the veneer we call civilization with the last 
tone and fi nd the white friend sitting motionless in his seat, smoking calmly.
 
“ ‘Good music they have here,’ he remarks, drumming the table with his fi ngertips.
 
“Music. The great blobs of purple and red emotion have not touched him. He has 
only heard what I felt. He is far away and I see him dimly across the ocean and the conti-
nent that have fallen between us. He is so pale with his whiteness and I am so colored.” 
(Hurston 2000, 116)
 13. “The study was undertaken to investigate the effect of sesame oil in hypertensive patients. 
Thirty-two male and 18 female patients aged 35 to 60 years old were supplied sesame oil 
and instructed to use it as the only edible oil for 45 days. Blood pressure, anthropometry, 
lipid profi le, lipid peroxidation, and enzymic and non-enzymic antioxidants were mea-
sured at baseline and after 45 days of sesame oil substitution. Substitution of sesame oil 
brought down systolic and diastolic blood pressure to normal. The same patients were 
asked to withdraw sesame oil consumption for another 45 days, and the measurements 
were repeated at the end of the withdrawal period. Withdrawal of sesame oil substitution 
brought back the initial blood pressure values.  The results suggested that sesame oil as 
edible oil lowered blood pressure, decreased lipid peroxidation, and increased antioxidant 
status in hypertensive patients.” (Sankar 2006, 19, material omitted)
 14. “Several years have now elapsed since I fi rst became aware that I had accepted, even 
from my youth, many false opinions for true, and that consequently what I afterward 
based on such principles was highly doubtful; and from that time I was convinced of 
the necessity of undertaking once in my life to rid myself of all the opinions I had ad-
opted, and of commencing anew the work of building from the foundation, if I desired 
to establish a fi rm and abiding superstructure in the sciences. But as this enterprise ap-
peared to me to be one of great magnitude, I waited until I had attained an age so mature 
as to leave me no hope that at any stage of life more advanced I should be better able 
to execute my design. On this account, I have delayed so long that I should henceforth 
consider I was doing wrong were I still to consume in deliberation any of the time that 
now remains for action. Today, then, since I have opportunely freed my mind from all 
cares [and am happily disturbed by no passions], and since I am in the secure possession 
of leisure in a peaceable retirement, I will at length apply myself earnestly and freely to 
the general overthrow of all my former opinions.” (Descartes 1913, 21) 
 15. “Under federal law, the maximum prison term for a felon convicted of possessing a fi rearm 
is ordinarily 10 years. If the offender’s prior criminal record includes at least three convic-
tions for ‘violent felon[ies,’ federal law] mandates a minimum term of 15 years. [However,] 
Congress amended [the law] in 1986 to exclude from qualifi cation for enhanced sentencing 
‘any conviction which has been expunged, or set aside or for which a person has been par-
doned or has had civil rights [i.e., rights to vote, hold office, and serve on a jury] restored.’

Diagramming Arguments  39
“[Mr.] Logan pleaded guilty to being a felon in possession of a fi rearm and received a 
15-year sentence, the mandatory minimum under ACCA. In imposing this sentence, the 
court took account of three Wisconsin misdemeanor battery convictions, none of them 
revoking any of Logan’s civil rights. Logan challenged his sentence on the ground that his 
state-court convictions fell within [the] ‘civil rights restored’ exemption [added in 1986]. 
Rights retained, Logan [claimed], should be treated the same as rights revoked but later 
restored.
 
“The exemption [added in the 1986] does not cover the case of an offender who 
retained civil rights at all times. The ordinary meaning of the word ‘restored’—giving 
back something that has been taken away—does not include retention of something 
never lost. Moreover, the context in which ‘restored’ appears in [the text of the law] 
counsels adherence to the word’s ordinary meaning. In [the text of the law] the words 
‘civil rights restored’ appear in the company of ‘expunged,’ ‘set aside,’ and ‘pardoned.’ 
Each of those terms describes a measure by which the government relieves an of-
fender of some or all of the consequences of his conviction.” (Logan 2007, 1, material 
omitted)
Diagramming Arguments
One can take a standardized argument and make a kind of picture that repre-
sents the structure of the argument. These pictures are argument diagrams. 
Let’s look again at this standardization:
(1) The Federal Reserve has indicated that interest rates will rise.
 
Therefore,
(2) Interest rates will rise.
(3) If interest rates rise, stock market prices will fall.
 
Therefore,
(4) Stock market prices will fall this coming quarter.
Here’s the diagram of these arguments.
Key Concept
One can take a 
standardized argument 
and make a kind of 
picture that represents 
the structure of the 
argument. These 
pictures are argument 
diagrams.
3
1
2
4
 In a diagram, each statement is represented by a number in a circle. A line 
of inference from a premise to the conclusion is represented by a line with 
an arrow pointing to the conclusion. A conclusion is touched by the point of 
an arrow. In a set of linked arguments like this one, the diagram will always 
include more than one conclusion and at least one circle will have an arrow 
pointing to it and an arrow pointing away from it.

40  Chapter 1 Critical Thinking and Arguments 
EXERCISE 1.7
 A. Diagram the other arguments that are standardized in this chapter.
 B. Diagram the arguments you standardized in Exercise 1.6.
*
Critical thinking is the skill of correctly evalu-
ating the arguments made by others and com-
posing good arguments of your own. A person 
thinks critically when she bases her beliefs on 
good arguments.
 
An argument is an attempt to provide rea-
sons for thinking that some belief is true. The 
reasons are premises, and the belief the reasons 
are intended to support is the conclusion. Both 
premises and conclusions are statements. But 
not all statements are parts of an argument. For 
an argument to be present, there must be an at-
tempt to convince. Indicator words are helpful 
but imperfect guides. Some arguments present 
premises and conclusions in non-declarative 
forms. Some arguments have unstated  premises 
and/or conclusions. Some passages contain 
two or more arguments linked together, called 
“subarguments” and the “main argument.” 
Recognizing these complications will help you 
distinguish arguments from groups of state-
ments that aren’t arguments, such as descrip-
tions and explanations. 
Chapter Summary
 
It can be hard to distinguish arguments 
from explanations. Explanations and arguments 
use many of the same indicator words. Ulti-
mately, the difference between the two is based 
on whether there’s an attempt to convince. If 
there’s no disagreement about the truth of a 
statement, there’s usually no argument for that 
statement.
 
Arguments can be standardized in order to 
clarify them. In a standardization, premises 
and conclusions are numbered. Premises 
and subarguments are listed fi rst. The word 
“therefore” is used to indicate each conclusion. 
Blank lines are used to indicate the difference 
between a subargument and a main argument. 
Brackets are used to indicate unstated  premises 
and conclusions. Diagramming is a second 
method of clarifying the relations between 
arguments and subarguments. Arrows and 
lines graphically depict the relations between 
the premises, conclusions, and sub- and main 
 arguments.

Chapter Summary  41
G U I D E
Finding and Standardizing Arguments
Here’s a review of the steps to fi nd and standardize an argument:
 1. Look for an attempt to convince.
 2. Find the conclusion.
 3. Find the premises.
 4. Review the following to make sure that you have correctly identifi ed the conclusion and 
the premises: imperfect indicator words, sentence order, premises and/or conclusion 
not in declarative form, and unstated premises and/or conclusion.
 5. Review the following to make sure that you haven’t incorrectly identifi ed something as 
a premise or a conclusion when in fact it isn’t part of an argument: assertions, questions, 
instructions, descriptions, and explanations.
 6. Rewrite the premises and the conclusion as declarative sentences. Make sure that each 
premise and the conclusion is a grammatically correct declarative sentence. Rewrite the 
premises and conclusion as necessary to make them clearer, but don’t change the mean-
ing of the passage. Remove pronouns from the sentences and replace them with nouns 
or noun phrases.
 7. Review any phrases you have omitted to be sure that they aren’t premises or a  conclusion.
 8. Number the premises and the conclusion. Put [ ] around the number of an unstated 
premise or conclusion. Place premises before their conclusion and insert “Therefore,” 
between the premises and the conclusion. Use blank lines to indicate subarguments.
 9. Compare your standardization to the original passage to make sure that you haven’t 
omitted any arguments found in the passage and to be sure that you have correctly iden-
tifi ed the premises and the conclusion.

42
What Makes a 
Good Argument?
2
[The Catholic Church] holds that it is not admissible to ordain women to the priesthood 
for very fundamental reasons. These reasons include: the example recorded in the 
Sacred Scriptures of Christ choosing his Apostles only from among men; the constant 
practice of the Church, which has imitated Christ in choosing only men; and her living 
teaching authority which has consistently held that the exclusion of women from the 
priesthood is in accordance with God’s plan for his Church.
—Pope Paul VI, “Response to the Letter of His Grace the Most Reverend 
Dr. F.D. Coggan, Archbishop of Canterbury, concerning the Ordination 
of Women to the Priesthood” (1976, 599)
Learning Outcomes
After studying the material in this chapter, you should be able to:
1. Produce examples of each of the following kinds of arguments: 
arguments that pass the true premises test, arguments that fail 
the true premises test, arguments that pass the proper form 
test, and arguments that fail the proper form test.
2. Produce examples of deductive and inductive arguments.
3. Produce examples to illustrate the difference between a valid 
argument and a sound argument as well as the difference 
between a strong argument and a cogent argument.
4. Produce examples to illustrate the differences between 
relevant premises and irrelevant premises.
5. Use the true premises test and the proper form test to 
evaluate simple arguments.

The Two Characteristics of a Good Argument  43
Critical thinkers choose beliefs based on good arguments. But what is a 
good argument? Is Pope Paul’s argument on the previous page a good argu-
ment? After studying the material in this chapter, you should be able to tell.
Determining whether an argument is a good argument is a complex 
matter. The rest of this book will be devoted to distinguishing good argu-
ments from bad ones. As you will see in later chapters, there are different 
kinds of arguments and they have to be evaluated in different ways. But all 
good arguments share some common features. These features are the focus 
of this chapter.
The Two Characteristics 
of a Good Argument
All good arguments share two characteristics:
1. The argument’s premises are true.
2. The argument has a proper form.
These characteristics can be used as tests for determining whether an argu-
ment is a good argument. First, check to see if the argument’s premises are 
true. Second, check to see if the argument has a proper form. Let’s call the 
fi rst test the “true premises test” and the second test the “proper form test.” 
If an argument passes both tests, it’s a good argument.
True premises
Proper form 
Good argument
+
=
Here’s a good argument about the philosopher Socrates:
(1) Socrates was a human being.
(2) All human beings are mortal.
 
Therefore,
(3) Socrates was mortal.
Both premises are true: Socrates was a human being, and all human beings are 
mortal. The argument has a proper form: the truth of these two premises is a 
good reason to think that the conclusion is true. 
An argument is bad when it fails one or both of the tests. Here’s an argu-
ment that fails the true premises test:
(1)  The authors of this textbook have seen at least 40,000 fi sh and all of 
them had two fi ns.
 
Therefore, 
(2) All fi sh have two fi ns.
Key Concept
The two characteristics 
of a good argument.

44  Chapter 2 What Makes a Good Argument? 
The premise of this argument is false. We’ve probably seen at least 40,000 
fi sh in our lives. We’ve been to many fi sh markets and several aquariums. But 
most of the fi sh we’ve seen have had more than two fi ns.
This argument passes the proper form test. Pretend that it was true that 
we’d seen more than 40,000 fi sh and all of them had two fi ns. In that case, 
we’d have good grounds for thinking that all fi sh had two fi ns. If the premises 
were true, they would provide a good reason to think that the conclusion was 
true. This illustrates an important point about the proper form test: when 
performing the proper form test, you assume or pretend that all the premises 
are true.
 
Here’s an argument that fails the proper form test:
(1) All roses are plants.
(2) All roses have thorns.
 
Therefore,
(3) All plants have thorns.
This argument passes the true premises test. Roses are plants and they’ve got 
thorns. But the fact that one kind of plant has thorns doesn’t mean that all 
plants have thorns.
 
Here’s an example of an argument that fails both tests:
(1) All roses are plants.
(2) All roses eat meat.
 
Therefore,
(3) All plants eat meat.
The second premise is false. Roses don’t eat meat. The argument fails the true 
premises test.
Now let’s see if this argument passes the proper form test. Your fi rst 
step is to assume or pretend that both premises are true. In this case, the 
fi rst premise really is true but you have to pretend that the second premise 
is true. You pretend that roses eat meat. But when you assume that roses are 
plants and pretend that roses eat meat, you see that the two premises don’t 
provide good grounds for the conclusion. Even if it were true that roses were 
plants and that roses ate meat, this wouldn’t demonstrate that all plants eat 
meat. This argument fails the proper form test.
Now you can see another reason why critical thinking is the art of argu-
ment. The mastery of any art, any skill, takes practice. Talent, a desire to 
know, loving family members, and other kinds of luck all help, but without 
regular practice no one would excel at any art. To master the art of argument, 
you need to practice pretending that premises are true even when you know 
they aren’t.
 
A bad argument can have a true conclusion. Suppose that a person makes 
the following silly argument:
(1)  Over the next six months, my sister will drive more than she has in 
the past six months.
 
Therefore,
(2) Over the next six months, the price of gas will rise.
Let’s assume that, over the next six months, gas prices rise. (2) turns out to 
be true. That doesn’t mean that (1) and (2) form a good argument. The person 
Key Concept
When performing the 
proper form test, you 
assume or pretend that 
all the premises are true.

The Two Characteristics of a Good Argument  45
who made this argument just got lucky. The conclusion of the argument hap-
pened to be true, even though the premise of the argument doesn’t provide a 
good reason for the conclusion.
We’ve written as if passing or failing the true premises test and the proper 
form test was like passing or failing a course that had only two possible 
grades: P for passing and F for failing. In reality, the true premises test and 
proper form test are like grades on a 0–100 scale. There are many passing 
scores (you can pass with a 93, an 85, or a 72) and many failing scores (you 
can fail with a 50, a 33, or a 22). Some passing arguments are better than other 
passing arguments, and some failing arguments are worse than other failing 
arguments. An argument’s fi nal grade will depend on its score on both tests. 
(You shouldn’t try to actually assign grades to arguments. This is just an il-
lustrative analogy.)
EXERCISE 2.1
A. Which of the following arguments pass the true premises test? Which pass the proper form 
test? Explain.
 1. (1) Oxygen is an element essential for life on Earth as we know it.
 
 
Therefore,
  (2) If oxygen were to vanish from the Earth’s atmosphere, life as we know it would cease.
 2. (1) All birds can fl y.
  (2) Penguins are birds.
 
  Therefore,
  (3) Penguins can fl y.
 3. (1) All cars are blue.
  (2) All pigs have wings.
 
 
Therefore,
  (3) All buses have three wheels.
 *4.  (1) Elephants are mammals.
  (2) Dogs are mammals.
 
 
Therefore,
  (3) Elephants are dogs.
 5. (1) Many types of plastic can be recycled.
  (2) Many types of glass can be recycled.
 
 
Therefore,
  (3) Many types of paper can be recycled.
 6. (1) Julia Roberts is either a man or a woman.
  (2) Julia Roberts is a man.
 
 
Therefore,
  (3) Julia Roberts isn’t a woman.

46  Chapter 2 What Makes a Good Argument? 
 7. (1) Everyone likes pizza.
  (2) Everyone who likes pizza buys it regularly.
 
 
Therefore,
 
 
(3) Pizza sales will rise over the next six months.
 *8. (1)  If you drop wood into water, it fl oats unless it’s held underwater by a heavy 
object.
  (2) Trees are made of wood.
 
 
Therefore,
  (3)  When trees fall into water, they fl oat unless they’re held underwater by a heavy 
object.
 9. (1) The discovery of antibiotics increased life expectancy.
  (2) Antibiotics have no effect on viruses.
 
 
Therefore,
  (3) There must be some causes of reduced life expectancy besides viruses.
 10. (1) All cars have three wheels.
  (2) Everything with three wheels is blue.
 
 
Therefore,
  (3) All cars are blue.
 11. (1) If you walk on the lines in the sidewalk, you will be eaten by bears.
  (2) Sometime in the next week, someone will walk on the lines in the sidewalk.
 
 
Therefore,
  (3) Sometime in the next week, someone will be eaten by bears.
 *12. (1) I have seen 4,000 houses, and every last one of them was purple.
 
 
Therefore,
  (2) All houses are purple.
 13. (1) I have seen 4,000 ducks, and every last one of them had webbed feet.
 
 
Therefore,
  (2) All ducks have webbed feet.
 14. (1) Many people like candy.
  (2) Many people like cats.
 
 
Therefore,
  (3) Many people like going to the movies. 
 15. (1) If you walk to the store, you will get a latté.
  (2) You did not get a latté.
 
 
Therefore,
  (3) You did not walk to the store.
B. Use the examples in 2.1 A above as models for these exercises.
 1. Compose an argument that fails only the true premises test.
 2. Compose an argument that fails only the proper form test.
 3. Compose an argument that fails both the true premises test and the proper form test.
 4. Compose an argument that fails neither the true premises test nor the proper form test.

True Premises  47
True Premises
When is a premise true? Truth has puzzled scholars for centuries. Fortunately 
we can focus on a simple theory of truth. A statement is true when what it 
says about the world is accurate. A statement is false when what it says about 
the world is inaccurate. The statement
All roses are plants.
is true because what it says about the world is accurate. Roses are in fact 
plants. The statement
All roses eat meat.
is false because what it says about the world isn’t accurate. Roses don’t eat meat.
Statements are attempts to describe the world. When a statement suc-
ceeds in correctly describing the world, it’s true. When it fails to correctly 
describe the world, it’s false.
Connections
Chapter One notes that all statements are either true or false. 
Audience
All arguments have an audience. The audience of an argument is the group 
that the person making the argument wishes to convince. A premise can 
be true even though no one in the audience knows that it’s true. Look at 
this statement about transfatty acids, an ingredient found in some processed 
foods.
Transfatty acids contribute to heart disease.
Suppose that someone said this in 1965. At that time, no one knew whether 
this statement was true. It wasn’t until the 1990s that scientists learned that 
this statement is true. Suppose that in 1965 someone offered the following 
argument:
(1) Transfatty acids contribute to heart disease.
(2) Children should not be given foods that contribute to heart disease.
 
Therefore,
(3) Children should not be given foods that contain transfatty acids.
Is this a good argument? Let’s assume that the second premise is true. Then 
this argument is a good argument. Even in 1965, the premises were true and 
they provided good grounds for the conclusion. But in 1965 no one in the au-
dience for this argument knew that premise (1) was true. This means that in 
1965 no one knew that this was a good argument. It was only in the 1990s that 
premise (1) was shown to be true and therefore people came to see that the ar-
gument above is a good argument. Because a premise can be true even though 
no one knows that it’s true, an argument can be a good argument even though 
no one knows that it’s a good argument.
Key Concept
A statement is true when 
what it says about the 
world is accurate.
Key Concept
The audience of an 
argument is the group 
that the person making 
the argument wishes to 
convince.

48  Chapter 2 What Makes a Good Argument? 
Suppose that you were writing an essay in an astronomy class. Your class 
is studying our solar system. In such a class, the statement
There is a belt of asteroids between Mars and Jupiter.
might be a statement that everyone in the class knows. On the other hand, if 
you were in a psychology class, this same statement might be one that fewer 
people know. When you’re composing your own arguments, you should use 
premises that your audience knows.
Critical Thinkers
Carolyn Spellman Shoemaker
Astronomer Carolyn Spellman Shoemaker (1929–still star-gazing) has discovered 800 asteroids as well as 
discovering more comets than any other astronomer (32 as of 2002). She studied history 
and political science in college but decided to study the stars, beginning in 1980 at the 
Palomar Observatory in San Diego, California. She was research professor of astronomy 
at Northern Arizona University. Her best-known work is in developing photographic 
techniques for the detection of fast-moving asteroids. Her most signifi cant discovery, 
made with her husband, planetary geologist Eugene, and fellow astronomer David Levy, 
was of the Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9, which collided with Jupiter in 1994.
Courtesy of Carolyn Spellman Shoemaker
Asteroid belts.
BSIP/Photo Researchers, Inc.

True Premises  49
The Problem of Ignorance
The problem of ignorance is that you don’t know everything. The problem 
makes it hard to answer this question: When can you assume a premise? If 
you had complete knowledge, you could assume a premise when it was true 
and not assume it when it was false. But because of the problem of ignorance, 
this strategy won’t work.
Another effect of the problem of ignorance is that sometimes you don’t 
know what you don’t know. Think about that last sentence for a moment. 
Sometimes you think that you know something but you don’t. You might 
remember being sure of something only to discover that you were wrong.
On the other hand, sometimes you do know what you don’t know. For ex-
ample, because you read it in a reputable newspaper, you might know that the 
President of France was taken to the hospital. But you might not have read any 
news of his condition since then. In this case, you know what you don’t know. 
You know that you aren’t up-to-date on the President’s medical condition.
Key Concept
The problem of 
ignorance is that you 
don’t know everything.
EXERCISE 2.2
A. For each of the following statements, indicate an audience that is likely to know that the 
statement is true and an audience that isn’t likely to know that the statement is true.
 1. In 1900, William I was the Emperor of Germany.
 2. Each water molecule contains two atoms of hydrogen and one atom of oxygen.
 3. In 2007, Dina Bowman published an article in The Journal of Sociology.
 *4. Between 1997 and 2007, standardized testing became more common in American 
 elementary schools.
 5. Football is a popular American sport.
 6. The famous philosopher René Descartes was born in France and died in Sweden.
 7. Two plus two equals four.
 *8. The two tests for a good argument are the true premises test and the proper form test.
 9. Hyat Custovic is 5’6” tall.
 10. All matter exhibits wave-like properties. (This is a version of the de Broglie hypothesis, 
a fundamental theory of physics.)
 11. The speed of a computer processor of a given price doubles approximately every two 
years. (This statement is often called “Moore’s Law.”) 
 *12. “Buy land—they aren’t making any more of it.” (This statement has been attributed to 
many people, including Will Rogers and Mark Twain.) 
 13. “Outside of a dog, a book is a man’s best friend. Inside of a dog, it is too dark to read.” 
(Attributed to Groucho Marx. Source unknown) This quote contains two statements. 
 14. The U.S. Census occurs every ten years.
 15. “TRPML3 is a member of the TRPML subfamily of the transient receptor potential 
cation channel superfamily.” (Kim 2007, 36138) 
B. List fi ve things that you know that your instructor is unlikely to know. Then do the same 
thing for one of your best friends.

50  Chapter 2 What Makes a Good Argument? 
There’s no complete cure for ignorance, but you can do things that re-
duce your ignorance. First, you can avoid basing your beliefs on arguments 
with improper forms. Basing your beliefs on an argument with an improper 
form usually increases your ignorance. Second, as just noted in the Habits of 
a Critical Thinker box above, you can recognize your ignorance. Third, you 
can follow some guidelines that minimize the chance that you’ll assume false 
premises.
Connections
Chapter Three discusses some guidelines for assuming premises.
Habits of a Critical Thinker
Not Jumping to Conclusions
It’s easy to jump to conclusions, especially to con-
clusions that are critical of others. Suppose that a 
student at a university located in the middle of the 
downtown of a major metropolitan area writes a 
letter to the editor of the student newspaper com-
plaining about the lack of parking. The student writing 
the letter asserts that the university administration 
is a bunch of idiots for not recognizing this problem 
and building more parking decks. The letter contains 
no evidence that the author has done any research 
on the issue. Research might have revealed: how the 
ratio of parking spots to students at the university 
compares to the ratio at other universities, the cost 
of acquiring land in the center of a large city, what 
else might be done with the large sums of money it 
would take to construct a parking deck, and other 
reasons why the university hasn’t built more parking 
decks. But our imaginary student didn’t look into this. 
He jumped to a conclusion. Remember the problem of 
ignorance and evaluate arguments only after you’ve 
done adequate research and carefully considered 
everything you know about the situation.
Habits of a Critical Thinker
Recognizing Your Own Ignorance
No one knows everything. Do you know all the fol-
lowing: how the screen on your cell phone works? 
why electricity doesn’t pass through plastic? all 
about the U.S. tax code? You may not like to admit 
that you don’t know something. But a problem 
doesn’t go away if you refuse to acknowledge it. 
Until you acknowledge your ignorance, you can’t 
work to reduce it.
 
When you don’t have knowledge, the best 
course of action is simply to admit it. If you don’t 
have enough knowledge to tell whether a premise 
in an argument is true or false, you should admit 
that. When evaluating arguments, be prepared to 
admit that you can’t completely carry out the true 
premises test. When someone asks you a ques-
tion, you should remember that “I don’t know” is 
always a possible response. In fact, it may be the 
most frequent correct answer to questions. Don’t 
be afraid to say, “I don’t know.” Admission of your 
ignorance usually isn’t an admission of failure. It 
shows that you have a correct appreciation of your 
own ignorance.
 
It takes practice to recognize your own ignorance. 
It’s often hard to admit that you don’t know some-
thing. But you’ll get better at it with practice. This is 
another part of the art of argument.

Proper Form  51
Proper Form
An argument has a proper form when 
If the premises were true, they would provide support for the conclusion.
Proper form is a matter of the logical relationship between the premises and 
the conclusion, of the logical form of the argument. What is the logical form 
of an argument? To answer this question, let’s begin with the notion of what 
a form is.
You’ve used variables in your math classes. A variable represents a num-
ber, but it can represent any number. Think about the mathematical formula
2x = x + x
This tells you that two times any number is equal to that number added to 
itself. You can put any number in place of the “x.”
2 times 2 equals 4, and 2 plus 2 also equals 4 
2 × 2 = 2 + 2 
2 times 10 equals 20, and 10 plus 10 also equals 20
2 × 10 = 10 + 10
Why is 2x = x + x called a “formula”? Because it’s a form, a shape, of a 
 mathematical equation. This formula expresses a relationship between 2x 
and x + x and holds no matter what value you put in for x. 
Logical form is like mathematical form. Logical form expresses a relation-
ship that holds between the premises and the conclusion. This  relationship 
holds even if the subject discussed in the premises changes. Let’s look at the 
argument about fi sh mentioned above.
(1)  The authors of this textbook have seen at least 40,000 fi sh and all of 
them had two fi ns.
 
Therefore, 
(2) All fi sh have two fi ns.
Let’s follow the mathematical model and use variables that stand for parts of 
this argument.
(1)  The authors of this textbook have seen at least 40,000 x and all of 
them had y.
 
Therefore, 
(2) All x have y.
Key Concept
An argument has a 
proper form when: if the 
premises were true, they 
would provide support 
for the conclusion.
EXERCISE 2.3
A. Write fi ve questions to indicate fi ve things that you don’t know that you wish you knew.
B. List fi ve things that you know that you don’t know.
C. Briefl y describe three actual cases in your life in which you thought that you knew some-
thing but it turned out that you didn’t know what you thought you knew.

52  Chapter 2 What Makes a Good Argument? 
Using variables reveals the logical form of the argument. If you put in 
“fish” for “x” and “two fins” for “y,” the premise of this argument is 
false. But if you put in “gills” for “y” instead of “fins,” then you have 
this argument.
(1)  The authors of this textbook have seen at least 40,000 fi sh and all of 
them had gills.
 
Therefore,
(2) All fi sh have gills.
Now the premise is true and the argument passes both the true premises 
test and the proper form test. Only the gills argument passes the true prem-
ises test. Both the fi ns argument and the gills argument pass the proper 
form test.
Let’s look again at the argument about roses. It fails the proper form test.
(1) All roses are plants.
(2) All roses have thorns.
 
Therefore,
(3) All plants have thorns.
This argument is about groups of things. Roses, plants, and things with thorns 
are all groups. Let’s use “G1” to stand for the group “roses,” “G2” to stand 
for the group “plants,” and “G3” to stand for the group “things with thorns.” 
You can then put this argument into the following form:
(a) (1) All G1 are G2.
 (2) All G1 are G3.
 
Therefore,
 
(3) All G2 are G3.
Here’s another argument with form (a):
(1) All Germans are Americans.
(2) All Germans are people with large feet.
 
Therefore,
(3) All Americans are people with large feet.
In this case G1  Germans, G2  Americans, and G3  people with large 
feet. This argument fails the true premises test. It also fails the proper form 
test. It has the same form as the argument about roses, which also fails the 
proper form test. Any argument that has form (a) fails the proper form test. 
Form (a) is an improper form.
The notion of logical form is so important that you should look at an-
other example.
(1) If Anne goes to the café, she will get a latté.
(2) Anne will go to the café.
 
Therefore,
(3) Anne will get a latté.
Does this argument pass the true premises test? You don’t know. You don’t 
know who Anne is. You don’t know whether she likes lattés. Here’s another 
argument with the same form.

Proper Form  53
(1)  If Bill Clinton became President of the United States, he received 
more electoral votes than his opponent. 
(2) Bill Clinton became President of the United States.
 
Therefore,
(3) Bill Clinton received more electoral votes than his opponent. 
This argument passes the true premises test. You have one argument that 
may or may not pass the true premises test and one that does pass the true 
premises test. But both arguments have the same logical form. In this case, 
the logical form of the argument refers to statements. Let’s use S1 and S2 as 
variables. Here’s the logical form of the two arguments above:
(b) (1) If S1, then S2.
 
(2) S1.
 
 
Therefore,
 
(3) S2.
In the fi rst argument with form (b), the variables are used as follows:
S1 = Anne goes to the café.
S2 = Anne gets a latté.
In the second argument with form (b), the variables are used like this:
S1 = Bill Clinton became President of the United States.
S2 = Bill Clinton received more electoral votes than his opponent.
Form (b) is a proper form. Both the Anne argument and the Bill Clinton argu-
ment pass the proper form test. But the Anne argument fails the true prem-
ises test, while the Bill Clinton argument passes the true premises test. 
EXERCISE 2.4
 A. Call the following argument forms A, B, C, and D.
 A (1) All G1 are G2.
  (2) All G1 are G3.
  Therefore,
  (3) All G2 are G3.
 C (1) If S1, then S2.
  (2) S1.
  Therefore,
  (3) S2.
 B (1) All G1 are G2.
  (1) All G2 are G3.
  Therefore,
  (3) All G1 are G3
 D (1) If S1, then S2.
  (2) S2.
  Therefore,
  (3) S1.
 
 Identify the form of each argument. In some cases, the form of the argument is neither A, 
B, C, nor D. In that case, indicate “other form.”
 1. (1) All dogs are mammals.
  (2) All mammals are things with hair.
  Therefore,
  (3) All dogs are things with hair.

54  Chapter 2 What Makes a Good Argument? 
 2. (1) If that’s a car, then I’m a donkey.
  (2) I’m a donkey.
  Therefore,
  (3) That’s a car.
 3. (1) All children are humans.
  (2) All humans are mammals.
  Therefore,
  (3) All children are mammals.
 *4. (1) All men are humans.
  (2) All men are under eighteen years of age.
  Therefore,
  (3) All women are under eighteen years of age.
 5. (1) If you throw a match on that gas, it will burn.
  (2) You will throw a match on that gas.
  Therefore,
  (3) It will burn.
 6. (1) All houses are made of wood.
  (2) All houses are made of stone.
  Therefore,
  (3) Everything made of wood is made of stone.
 7. (1) If he gets in trouble, he’ll call his Mom.
  (2) He won’t get in trouble.
  Therefore,
  (3) He won’t call his Mom.
 *8. (1) Some computers are PCs.
  (2) All PCs aren’t Macintoshes.
  Therefore,
  (3) Some computers aren’t Macintoshes.
 9. (1) She’s either at the grocery store or at the mall.
  (2) She isn’t at the mall.
  Therefore,
  (3) She’s at the grocery store.
 10. (1) All cows are pigs.
  (2) All pigs are ducks.
  Therefore,
  (3) All cows are ducks.
 11. (1) George is a human.
  (2) All humans are mammals.
  Therefore,
  (3) George is a mammal.
 *12. (1) If you jump from the Empire State Building, you will die.
  (2) You will jump from the Empire State Building.
  Therefore,
  (3) You will die.

Proper Form  55
 13. (1) If you are human, you will die.
  (2) You will die.
  Therefore,
  (3) You are human.
 14. (1) All pigs are things that have wings.
  (2) All pigs are things that love country music.
  Therefore,
  (3) All things that have wings are things that love country music.
 15. (1) Cell phones have replaced many cameras.
  (2) Cameras all use fi lm.
  Therefore,
  (3) Cell phones all use fi lm.
Deductive and Inductive Arguments
Arguments have two types of forms, deductive and inductive. A deductive 
 argument claims that the truth of the premises shows that the conclusion 
must be true. An inductive argument claims that the truth of the premises 
shows that the conclusion is likely to be true.
Technical Terms: Deduction and Induction
Some disciplines defi ne deductive and inductive arguments in terms of the gener-
ality and specifi city of the statements. In these fi elds, deduction is said to be from 
general to specifi c and inductive from specifi c to general. “Deduction” is sometimes 
used to refer generally to the process of reasoning. In other cases, “deduction” is 
used to refer to the act of taking something away from something else. You’ve 
probably heard of tax deductions. 
In some cases, the phrase “inductive arguments” is used to refer to what 
this book calls “statistical arguments.” Chapter Eight discusses this type of argu-
ment. In mathematics, one type of proof is called “mathematical induction.” In 
a proof by mathematical induction the demonstration of the validity of a law 
concerning all the positive integers is provided by proving that the law holds 
for the integer 1 and that if it holds for an arbitrarily chosen positive integer k, 
it must hold for the integer k + 1. Mathematical induction is an example of de-
ductive reasoning. “Induction” can also refer to a ceremony to offi cially install a 
person in some position, the process by which an electrical conductor becomes 
electrifi ed, the movement of a mixture of air and gas from the carburetor of a 
car into the piston chamber of the car’s engine, and to a process that embryonic 
cells undergo as they become the various different kinds of cells found in an 
adult organism.
Key Concept
A deductive argument 
claims that the truth of 
the premises shows that 
the conclusion must 
be true. An inductive 
argument claims 
that the truth of the 
premises shows that the 
conclusion is likely to be 
true.

56  Chapter 2 What Makes a Good Argument? 
Deductive Forms
The argument above about Anne and her lattés is a deductive argument. Pre-
tend that you know that it’s true that 
(1) If Anne goes to the café, Anne will get a latté. 
Pretend that you also know that it’s true that 
(2) Anne will go to the café. 
In that case, it’s certain that 
(3) Anne will get a latté.
If Anne didn’t get a latté, you know that one of the premises is false. Either 
she didn’t go to the café or it isn’t true that if Anne goes to the café, she’ll get 
a latté. This argument has a proper deductive form. Any argument with the 
form:
(b) (1) If S1, then S2.
 
(2) S1.
 
Therefore,
 
(3) S2.
is a deductive argument with a proper form.
 
Here’s another proper deductive form:
(1) Either S1 or S2.
(2) Not S2.
 
Therefore,
(3) S1.
Here’s an example of an argument with this form:
(1) Either Margaret is outside or she is in the kitchen.
(2) Margaret is not in the kitchen.
 
Therefore,
(3) Margaret is outside.
As with the argument about Anne and her latté, you don’t know whether the 
premises of this argument are true or false because you don’t know who Marga-
ret is or what she is doing. But you do know that this argument has a proper de-
ductive form. As you look at this form, you’ll see that, no matter what you put in 
for S1 and S2, if both premises were true, the conclusion would have to be true.
 
You’ve already seen some arguments with improper deductive forms. 
Remember the argument about roses.
(1) All roses are plants.
(2) All roses have thorns.
 
Therefore,
(3) All plants have thorns.
The form of this argument looks like this:
(a) (1) All G1 are G2.
 
(2) All G1 are G3.
 
Therefore,
 
(3) All G2 are G3.

Proper Form  57
As you saw above, the truth of the premises of an argument with this form 
doesn’t guarantee that the conclusion is true.
Inductive Forms
Let’s look at some inductive argument forms. The arguments concerning fi sh 
discussed above are inductive arguments. To see the form of these arguments, 
let’s use “X” to refer to things and “F” to refer to features of those things.
(1)  The authors of this textbook have seen at least 40,000 X and all of 
them had F.
 
Therefore, 
(2) All X have F.
Think about this example of the above form:
(1)  The authors of this textbook have seen at least 40,000 swans and all 
of them were white.
 
Therefore, 
(2) All swans are white.
Forty thousand swans is a lot of swans. If someone had seen 40,000 swans and 
all of them were white, that person would have good reason to think that all 
swans were white. But good reason isn’t certainty. It would still be possible 
that there’s a black swan out there. In arguments with this form, the truth of 
the premise doesn’t guarantee the truth of the conclusion. But this argument 
has a proper inductive form.
 
Here’s an example of an improper inductive form:
(1)  The authors of this textbook have seen at least 4 X and all of them had F.
 
Therefore, 
(2) All X have F.
If we’ve seen only four swans, that isn’t enough evidence to draw a conclu-
sion about the color of all swans.
Critical Thinkers
John Latham
John Latham (1740–1837), a British naturalist, has been called the “grandfather” of 
Australian ornithology. He discovered and named many Australian birds, including the 
emu. Latham might be best known for having fi rst described, in 1790, a large waterbird 
that was, in fact, a black swan (Cygnus atratus). It had been assumed by European 
naturalists that all swans were white.
National Portrait Gallery, London

58  Chapter 2 What Makes a Good Argument? 
Here’s another inductive argument form. It concerns events. Let’s use “E” to 
refer to events.
(1)  Many times in the past, when E1 occurred, E2 usually occurred shortly 
thereafter. 
 
Therefore,
(2) In the future, if E1 occurs, E2 will probably occur shortly thereafter.
This form is found in the following argument regarding how to start a car.
(1)  Many times in the past, when people have turned the key in their 
car’s ignition, it has almost always started the car.
 
Therefore,
(2)  In the future, if you turn the key in a car’s ignition, it will probably 
start the car.
This argument has a proper inductive form, but the truth of the premises 
doesn’t show that the conclusion must be true. Even the most reliable car 
will fail to start every now and then. But turning the key in the ignition is a 
good way to start a car. Given the inductive evidence you have, it would be 
weird for you to try to start your car by bouncing up and down in the seat. 
 
Here’s an improper inductive argument form:
(1) Yesterday, when E1 occurred, E2 occurred shortly thereafter. 
 
Therefore,
(2) In the future, if E1 occurs, E2 will probably occur shortly thereafter.
And here’s an example of an argument with this form:
(1)  Yesterday, I had a ham sandwich for lunch, and when I got back to the 
office my boss told me that I was getting a raise. 
 
Therefore,
(2) Tomorrow, if I have a ham sandwich for lunch, I’ll get another raise.
This argument fails the proper form test. That something happened one time 
in the past isn’t a good reason to think that it will happen again in the future.
Connections
Deductive arguments can be divided into at least two groups: propositional and 
categorical. Chapter Five focuses on propositional arguments. Chapter Six considers 
categorical arguments. Inductive arguments can be divided into at least three groups: 
analogical, statistical, and causal. Chaper Seven discusses analogical arguments, Chap-
ter Eight looks at statistical arguments, and Chapter Nine considers causal arguments.
Thus far, this book has been using the words “good argument,” “bad argu-
ment,” “proper form,” and “improper form.” But more specifi c words are used 
in philosophy, logic, and math courses. A deductive argument that passes the 
proper form test is called a “valid” argument. A deductive argument that fails 
the proper form test is called an “invalid” argument. An inductive argument 
that passes the proper form test is called a “strong” argument. An inductive 
argument that fails the proper form test is called a “weak” argument. 
Because all deductive arguments claim that if the premises are true then 
the conclusion must be true, they’re all either valid or invalid. An argument 
can’t be almost valid or somewhat valid. Deductive validity is not a matter of 
degree. But inductive arguments claim that whenever all the premises are true, 

Proper Form  59
True premises
Proper form 
Good argument
+
=
True premises
Valid deductive form
Good deductive argument
aka
Sound argument
+
=
True premises
Strong inductive form
Good inductive argument
aka
Cogent argument
+
=
the conclusion is likely to also be true. Thus, inductive arguments can be stron-
ger or weaker. You evaluate the form of inductive arguments in degrees of like-
lihood: from extremely weak (premises offer not much evidence at all) through 
degrees of probable strength to high degrees of strength to almost certain (prem-
ises offer extremely good evidence). Inductive strength is a matter of degree.
Philosophers and logicians have given special names for deductive argu-
ments that pass both tests of a good argument and for inductive arguments 
that pass both tests of a good argument. A valid deductive argument that also 
has all true premises is called a “sound” argument. A strong inductive argu-
ment that has all true premises is called a “cogent” argument. 
G U I D E
Terms Used in Logic, Philosophy, and Math to Refer to Good and Bad Arguments
Deductive
Inductive
All True Premises?
Yes
No Name
No Name
No
No Name
No Name
Proper Form?
Yes
Valid
Strong
No
Invalid
Weak
Proper Form AND All True Premises?
Yes
Sound
Cogent
No
Unsound
Not Cogent
Technical Terms: Valid, Strong, Sound, Cogent
The terms “valid,” “strong,” “sound,” and “cogent” are used in many different ways. In 
many cases, “valid” means “legally recognized.” Your driver’s license may be valid or 
invalid. In other cases, it means “meeting certain conditions.” If your bank requires that 
your ATM PIN be six characters and you attempt to enter a PIN with fi ve, you may get a 
message that says: “Invalid PIN.” “Strong” often refers to physical strength. “Sound” often 
refers to what you hear and “cogent” is often used to indicate that reasoning is good.

60  Chapter 2 What Makes a Good Argument? 
Technical Terms: Test Validity, Content Validity, Criterion Validity, 
Construct Validity, and Reliability
A great deal of research in social sciences concerns the analysis of tests and testing 
procedures. Test analysts frequently use the terms “test validity,” “content validity,” 
“criterion validity,” “construct validity,” and “reliability.” Social scientists and edu-
cational researchers use the word “valid” in a way that is different from the logical 
concept of validity used in this text.
A valid test is a test that is an accurate and useful measure of what it seeks to 
measure. If you were looking to hire an accountant and you gave all the applicants 
a test to determine their knowledge of cake-baking procedures, your test wouldn’t 
be valid. Its results wouldn’t be a useful measure of the applicants’ abilities as 
accountants. Test validity is usually broken down into content validity, criterion 
validity, and construct validity.
Tests are often constructed with questions, each of which is called a “test 
item.” Each test item is designed to test a certain skill or knowledge of a certain 
thing. Well-constructed test items will test only that specifi c skill or item of knowl-
edge. When all test items are well constructed, the test is said to have content 
validity.
Tests are sometimes designed to act as predictors of future performance of 
some kind. For example, the ACT and SAT tests are intended to indicate which stu-
dents will do well in college. If subsequent research shows a test is a good predic-
tor of what it was designed to predict, that test is said to have criterion validity.
Every test is constructed on the basis of a theory about what’s being tested. 
When a test is constructed so that it matches its underlying theory, it has construct 
validity.
The validity of a test is often discussed in conjunction with its reliability. 
Reliable tests have similar outcomes when they’re administered multiple times. If 
groups of test-takers take several forms of a test in different places at different 
times with similar results, the test is said to be reliable. A reliable test is one that 
gives consistent results. A reliable test can be invalid. If you developed a reliable 
test of our potential accountants’ cake-baking abilities, the test would give the 
same result if an applicant took it over and over again. On the other hand, an un-
reliable test can’t be valid. If a test gives inconsistent results, it can’t be an accurate 
measure of what it seeks to measure.
EXERCISE 2.5
A. In each of the following passages, determine whether or not an argument is present. If an 
argument is present, state whether it is inductive or deductive and explain your answer.
 1. If that’s a cow, then I’m a goat. Oh, it’s a cow! I guess I’m a goat!
 2. I called Joi and she said that she was at the library. So, I bet she’s at the library.
 3. The syllabus said that the paper had to cite three sources. You only cited one. Be care-
ful! You won’t get the grade you want.

Proper Form  61
 *4. Francis had pepperoni and mushrooms on her pizza. It follows that she had pepperoni 
on her pizza.
 5. That was a good talk. I had never considered the way that one’s emotions can affect 
one’s moral judgments. And the speaker was very clear, too.
 6. Where is Bret? He’s either in class or in the rec center. He isn’t here in class, so he must 
be in the rec center.
 7. Take one capsule orally three times a day for ten days. Finish all this medication unless 
otherwise directed by your physician.
 *8. My son started talking when he was two years old. This makes it obvious that all chil-
dren start speaking at that age.
 9. Socrates was a human being. All human beings are mortal. Therefore, Socrates was mortal.
 10. “Real people begin their lives as helpless infants, and remain in a state of extreme, 
asymmetrical dependency for anywhere from ten to twenty years. At the other end of 
life, those who are lucky enough to live on into old age are likely to encounter another 
period of extreme dependency which may itself continue in some form for as much as 
twenty years.” (Nussbaum 2006, 69–70, material omitted)
 11. “I reasoned thus with myself: I am wiser than this man, for neither of us appears to know 
anything great and good; but he fancies he knows something, although he knows nothing; 
whereas I, as I do not know anything, so I do not fancy I do. In this trifl ing particular, then, I 
appear to be wiser than he, because I do not fancy I know what I do not know.” (Plato 1897, 19)
 *12. In On the Heavens (Book II, Section 14) the ancient Greek philosopher Aristotle dis-
cussed the shape of the Earth. Here is a paraphrase of his claims. 
 
The earth is either fl at or spherical. If the earth is fl at, it does not project a circular 
shadow on the moon during a lunar eclipse. If the earth is round, it projects a circular 
shadow on the moon during a lunar eclipse. The Earth projects a circular shadow on the 
moon during a lunar eclipse. The earth is spherical. 
 13. In 1628, the English medical doctor William Harvey (1578–1657) published Exercitatio 
Anatomica de Motu Cordis et Sanguinis in Animalibus (An Anatomical Exercise on 
the Motion of the Heart and Blood in Animals). Harvey demonstrated that the blood 
is not produced by the liver, as everyone until then had thought, but rather circulates 
through the body. Harvey proposed a number of arguments to support the conclusion 
that the blood circulates. Look at the following paraphrase of Harvey’s work:
 
Every time the heart pumps 1/6 of an ounce of blood goes through it and the heart 
beats 1000 times every half hour. So, the heart pumps 540 pounds of blood in a day. The 
blood is either produced by the liver or it circulates. But if the blood is produced by the 
liver, the liver would have to produce 540 pounds of blood in a day, which it does not 
do. From this we can see that blood circulates.
 14. “Santiago Ramón y Cajal was born in May 1852 in the village of Petilla, in the region 
of Aragon in northeast Spain. His father was at that time the village surgeon (later on, 
in 1870, his father was appointed as Professor of Dissection at the University of Zara-
goza). Cajal was a rebellious teenager, and his father apprenticed him for a while to a 
shoemaker and to a barber. Cajal, however, had decided to become an artist. His passion 
for drawing, his sensitivity to visual esthetics and his talent in converting visual im-
ages into drawings remained the hallmarks of his future scientifi c activity. Finally en-
rolled in the medical school at Zaragoza, as a young student, Cajal, seized by a “graphic 

62  Chapter 2 What Makes a Good Argument? 
 mania,” was very fond of philosophy and gymnastics, restless, energetic, shy and soli-
tary. He graduated in medicine at the University of Zaragoza in 1873. Shortly after his 
degree he was drafted into the army and dispatched to Cuba, at that time under Spanish 
rule, as a medical officer. Cajal returned to Spain very sick (he had contracted malaria 
in Cuba, and then tuberculosis), and at the end of 1875 he started his academic career as 
“Auxiliary Professor” of Anatomy at the University of Zaragoza.” (nobelprize.org 2007) 
[Santiago Ramón y Cajal won the 1906 Nobel Prize in Medicine.]
 15. “For Kant, human dignity and our moral capacity are radically separate from the natu-
ral world. [T]he idea that we are at bottom split beings, both rational persons and ani-
mal dwellers in the world of nature, never ceases to infl uence Kant’s way of thinking. 
What’s wrong with the split? Quite a lot. First, it ignores the fact that our dignity just 
is the dignity of a certain sort of animal. Second, the split wrongly denies that animal-
ity itself can have a dignity. Third, it makes us think of the core of ourselves as self-
sufficient, not in need of the gifts of fortune. Fourth, it makes us think of ourselves as 
a-temporal. We forget that the usual human life cycle brings with it periods of extreme 
dependency.” (Nussbaum 2002,188–189, material omitted) 
B.  For each of the following conclusions, construct (a) a deductive argument that passes the 
proper form test and (b) an inductive argument that passes the proper form text. Your argu-
ment doesn’t have to pass the true premises test.
 1. The moon is made of green cheese.
 2. Martha Stewart is a good cook.
 3. It often rains in the Amazon jungle.
 *4. Most people prefer to eat in the company of other people.
 5. You should buy a new computer.
 6. My computer is gray.
 7. It is 5:42 pm.
 *8. My mother is a hamster.
 9. The Atlanta Braves are a good baseball team.
 10. I like Coldplay.
C. For the exercises in part A above, standardize the argument if one is present.
D. At the beginning of this chapter, you encountered the following argument as an example of 
an argument that passes the proper form test:
(1) Socrates was a human being.
(2) All human beings are mortal.
Therefore,
(3) Socrates was mortal.
a. Is this argument deductive or inductive argument?
b. Think about the nature of the evidence you have for premise (2). Is this relevant to 
your deciding whether this argument is deductive or inductive? 
c. Create a linked argument by constructing a subargument that supports premise (2). 

Relevance  63
Relevance
Relevance is an essential part of the proper form test. Premises are rele-
vant to the conclusion when the truth of the premises provides some evi-
dence that the conclusion is true. Premises are irrelevant when the truth 
of the premises provides no evidence that the conclusion is true. When an 
argument has a proper form, its premises are relevant to the conclusion. 
When an argument has an improper form, its premises are irrelevant to the 
conclusion.
Technical Term: Non Sequitur
An argument that contains a premise or premises that are irrelevant to the 
conclusion is sometimes said to contain a “non sequitur.“ “Non sequitur” is Latin 
for “it doesn’t follow.”
Suppose you’re studying with a friend and talking about topics to focus on 
for a geology test. The test covers the fi rst fi ve chapters of the textbook. You 
suggest studying sedimentary rocks because this topic is covered in Chapter 
Four. You’re making the following argument:
(1) The test covers Chapters 1–5.
(2) The topic of sedimentary rocks is in Chapter 4.
Therefore,
(3) We should study sedimentary rocks.
Suppose your friend responds that he doesn’t want to study sedimentary rocks 
because his brother thinks that sedimentary rocks are boring. Your friend is 
making the following argument:
(1) My brother thinks that sedimentary rocks are boring.
Therefore,
(2) We shouldn’t study sedimentary rocks.
This premise is irrelevant to the conclusion. Whether or not this premise is 
true, it doesn’t provide a good reason to believe the conclusion.
Key Concept
Premises are relevant 
to the conclusion when 
the truth of the premises 
provides some evidence 
that the conclusion 
is true. Premises are 
irrelevant when the 
truth of the premises 
provides no evidence that 
the conclusion is true.
E. The following argument doesn’t pass the proper form test. Demonstrate this clearly by 
using variables to illustrate its form and then constructing a more obviously invalid argu-
ment with the same form by substituting new phrases for those variables.
(1) Residents of the 4th Congressional District of our state will not be affected by the up-
coming tax hike. 
(2) Residents who do not earn more than the minimum wage will not be affected by the 
upcoming tax hike.
Therefore, 
(3) Residents of the 4th Congressional District of our state do not earn more than the mini-
mum wage.

64  Chapter 2 What Makes a Good Argument? 
EXERCISE 2.6
A. For each of the following pairs of statements, indicate whether the fi rst statement is rel-
evant or irrelevant to the second statement.
 1. Krystal’s losing weight. Krystal’s on a diet.
 2. Luke’s a cruel and unfeeling person. Luke’s views about water conservation are false.
 3. Danica got good grades in art and music courses. Danica would be a good airline pilot.
 *4. Oosh failed his College Algebra course. Oosh won’t graduate on time.
 5. Wireless mice are more comfortable because they don’t have a cord attached. Wireless 
mice will last longer than corded mice.
 6. The pipes are rusted, and the roof needs to be replaced. The house is in bad shape.
 7. On the SAT, Arica’s scores ranked in the bottom 25th percentile. Arica’s likely to be a 
very nice person.
 *8. Many country music fans hate NASCAR Sprint Cup Racing. Many country music fans 
hate NASCAR Camping World Truck Racing.
 9. The moon’s made of green cheese. The moon is edible.
 10. On Monday, the Federal Reserve announced plans to lend $60 billion to banks. Infl ation 
is likely to fall over the next six months.
 11. Children from single-parent families tend to have lower academic achievement in high 
school. Children from single-parent families tend to have lower incomes.
 *12. Today Coca-Cola reported that case sales fell 2% in the fi rst quarter of 2005. Coca-Cola 
profi ts fell in the fi rst quarter of 2005.
 13. Researchers have trained chimpanzees to understand words spoken by humans and 
found that they can understand simple commands. Chimpanzees may someday speak 
with humans. 
 14. “[O]ffspring [of self-fertilizing plants] carry only the genes of their single parent and do 
not maintain enough variation for evolutionary fl exibility in the face of environmental 
change.” “[S]elf-fertilization is a poor strategy for long-term survival.” (Gould 1992, 20, 
material omitted) 
 15. Background: A pluton is a large mass of rock (tens to hundreds of kilometers across), 
usually roughly circular, that was produced when magma rose from the center of the 
Earth but cooled and solidifi ed before breaking through the surface. When it cools, it 
turns into granite. 
  
“A prominent positive magnetic anomaly spans the 100 km distance between Prince 
 Edward Island and Cape Breton Island in the southern Gulf of St. Lawrence. Analysis of 
the magnetic anomaly led to the interpretation that it is produced by four separate, ap-
proximately circular, source bodies aligned along the northwesterly trend of the anomaly.
Relevance is a matter of degree. The premise of an argument can be more 
or less relevant to its conclusion. The more support a premise provides for a 
conclusion, the more relevant it is to the conclusion. Remember the metaphor 
of the grading of a test. A completely irrelevant premise gets a very low grade 
(maybe a 0). A premise that provides almost certain proof of a conclusion gets 
a high passing grade (perhaps a 95), while a premise that provides only a bit of 
support for a conclusion just barely earns a passing grade (say a 63).

Relevance  65
Seismic data, physical property measurements, and magnetic and gravity anomalies were 
used to further investigate the anomaly sources through forward modeling techniques.”
Statement 1:  “The four source bodies have densities and magnetic susceptibilities com-
patible with granitic compositions.”
Statement 2:  “[The] bodies are interpreted as plutons emplaced along the boundary between 
Ganderian composite terranes to the north and the Ganderian Brookville–
Bras d’Or terrane to the south.” (Cook 2007, 1551, material omitted) 
B. One place where people offer arguments to infl uence the beliefs of others is in court. At-
torneys attempt to persuade juries of the guilt or innocence of people charged with a crime. 
The relevance of each piece of evidence is important. The following argument was made 
by Counselor Smart, for the conclusion that the defendant, Shifty McRogue, is guilty of 
robbing a local bank. For each premise, decide whether it’s relevant or irrelevant to the 
conclusion. Give reasons for your answers.
 
 (1)  Several witnesses have confi rmed that the defendant has been in desperate need of 
money ever since he lost his job at the cracker factory. 
 
 (2)  And McRogue has the profi le of a criminal, anyway, since we know he has established 
a prior criminal record: he served thirty days in jail just last year for driving under the 
infl uence.
 
 (3)  Moreover, I have an expert witness, Dr. Quack, the famous phrenologist, who will 
testify that McRogue has a predisposition to rob banks. 
 
 (4)  In fact, if found guilty, this would be the defendant’s third conviction; under the state’s 
“three strikes” legislation, he would automatically serve the maximum sentence for 
his crime.
 
 (5)  Ever since his release from jail, McRogue has been seen regularly in the company of 
Max Cheatem, an ex-convict who himself served time for armed robbery.
 
 (6)  Two weeks ago, Max Cheatem lent McRogue his blue two-door Ford—a car of the 
same make, model, and color as the getaway vehicle used in the robbery.
 
 (7)  And fi nally, the bank was held up by an assailant carrying a .22 pistol; three days 
before the robbery, the defendant purchased a .22 pistol. 
 
 Therefore, 
 
 (8)  McRogue is guilty of robbing the bank. 
Dependent and Independent Premises
Premises can be relevant in two ways. Let’s look at two arguments. The fi rst, 
which you saw in Chapter One, concerns employment law.
(1) There are labor laws that give employees the right to unionize.
(2)  There are civil rights and equal pay laws that put constraints on hir-
ing practices.
 
Therefore,
(3) Some laws support the interests of employees against corporations.
The second is the argument above about studying for a test.
(1) The test covers Chapters 1–5.
(2) The topic of sedimentary rocks is in Chapter 4.
 
Therefore,
(3) We should study sedimentary rocks.

66  Chapter 2 What Makes a Good Argument? 
In the fi rst argument, if you remove either of the premises, the other still 
provides some support for the conclusion. The conclusion is that there are 
“some laws” that support employees. The premises are two examples of such 
laws. Removing one of the premises would do nothing more than reduce the 
number of examples. In this case, each premise supports the conclusion in-
dependently of the others. (1) and (2) are examples of independent premises. 
An independent premise is a premise that’s intended to provide some support 
for the argument’s conclusion even when the rest of the argument’s premises 
are removed.
The premises in the argument about studying for the geology test are 
dependent premises. A dependent premise is a premise that’s intended to 
provide support for the argument’s conclusion only when combined with 
another premise in the argument. Premise (1) by itself doesn’t provide any 
support for (3).
(1) The test covers Chapters 1–5.
 
Therefore,
(3) We should study sedimentary rocks.
Premise (1) doesn’t provide support for (3) unless it’s combined with a 
premise about the contents of Chapters 1–5. The same is true of premise (2).
 
(2) The topic of sedimentary rocks is in Chapter 4.
 
Therefore,
 
(3) We should study sedimentary rocks.
But together (1) and (2) are relevant to (3). 
Dependent premise
Dependent premise
Conclusion
Independent premise
Independent premise
Conclusion
The difference between independent and dependent premises is important 
when you evaluate arguments because it means that you can’t just look at 
premises individually to determine whether they’re relevant to the con-
clusion. It might be that you’re examining an argument with dependent 
premises. In that case, if you look at each premise individually you could 
mistakenly conclude that the premises were irrelevant to the conclusion 
Key Concept
An independent 
premise is a premise 
that’s intended to 
provide some support 
for the argument’s 
conclusion even 
when the rest of the 
argument’s premises are 
removed. A dependent 
premise is a premise 
that’s intended to 
provide support for the 
argument’s conclusion 
only when combined 
with another premise in 
the argument.

Relevance  67
EXERCISE 2.7
A. In each of the following passages, determine whether or not an argument is present. If an ar-
gument is present, standardize the argument. Determine whether the premises are relevant 
to the conclusion. If they’re relevant, determine whether they’re independent premises or 
dependent premises.
 1. Socrates was a human being. All human beings are mortal. Therefore, Socrates was mortal.
 2. Transfatty acids contribute to heart disease. Children shouldn’t be given foods that contribute 
to heart disease. Therefore, children shouldn’t be given foods that contain transfatty acids.
 3. Julia Roberts is either a man or a woman. Julia Roberts is a man. Therefore, Julia Rob-
erts isn’t a woman.
 *4. If you walk on the lines in the sidewalk, you’ll be eaten by bears. Sometime in the next 
week, someone will walk on the lines in the sidewalk. Therefore, sometime in the next 
week, someone will be eaten by bears.
 5. All cows are pigs. All pigs are ducks. Therefore, all cows are ducks.
 6. Reza didn’t have a bump on his head. If he’d fallen, he’d have a bump on his head. He 
didn’t fall. 
 7. The coffee cup was still warm. The newspaper was open on the dinning room table. The 
microwave was heating up a frozen dinner. The killer couldn’t have gone far!
 *8. Many people think that air pollution is a serious problem. And vehicle emissions are a 
signifi cant cause of air pollution. So it’s clear that most people support laws requiring a 
reduction in the emissions produced by cars.
 9. I walked down the street through the cold, crisp air. A front had come through, and the 
city air, usually so full of city smells, had a hint of the countryside in it. The smell of 
the horses pulling the carriages in Central Park added to the country-feel of the day.
 10. The fi rst survey indicated that 26% of likely voters favor Senator Smith. A second 
survey, taken a week later, found that 23% of likely voters favored him. It seems that 
Smith is likely to get about 25% of the vote in the primary.
and therefore that the argument failed the proper form test. When you think 
about the relevance of premises, you have to take two steps. First, look at 
each premise by itself and see if it’s relevant to the conclusion. When you 
do this, you’re checking for the relevance of independent premises. Second, 
look at the premises as a group. When you do this, you’re checking for the 
relevance of dependent premises.
Technical Terms: Dependent and Independent Premises
In some cases, authors use “dependent premise” to refer to a premise that’s true only if 
another premise in the argument is true. The truth of the dependent premise depends 
on the truth of the other premise in the sense that if the other premise is false, so is 
the dependent premise. In this sense, an independent premise is a premise whose truth 
isn’t logically related to the truth or falsity of the other premises in the argument.
Technical Term: Convergent Argument
An argument that’s composed exclusively of independent premises is sometimes 
called a “convergent argument.”

68  Chapter 2 What Makes a Good Argument? 
 11. The Toyota has better gas mileage than the Honda. The Toyota costs less and has a bet-
ter repair record. I’d say you should buy the Toyota.
 *12. “Segregation of white and colored children in public schools has a detrimental effect 
upon the colored children. The impact is greater when it has the sanction of the law; for 
the policy of separating the races is usually interpreted as denoting the inferiority of the 
negro group. A sense of inferiority affects the motivation of a child to learn. Segregation 
with the sanction of law, therefore, has a tendency to [retard] the educational and mental 
development of negro children and to deprive them of some of the benefi ts they would 
receive in a racial[ly] integrated school system.” (Brown v. Board of Education 1954, 495) 
 13. “Sarah, a woman of twenty-fi ve, lively and engaging at the time of the fi rst interview, 
is intelligent, humorous, and sad as she describes her experiences of self-defeat. [Her 
self-defeat is an unwanted pregnancy.] Pregnant again by the same man and confronting 
a second abortion, she sees the hopelessness of the relationship.” (Gilligan 1982, 116) 
 14. “[The Catholic Church] holds that it is not admissible to ordain women to the priest-
hood, for very fundamental reasons. These reasons include: the example recorded in the 
Sacred Scriptures of Christ choosing his Apostles only from among men; the constant 
practice of the Church, which has imitated Christ in choosing only men; and her living 
teaching authority which has consistently held that the exclusion of women from the 
priesthood is in accordance with God’s plan for his Church.” (Pope Paul VI 1976)
 15. “Atheists have solid reasons not to believe. We don’t need a divine being to explain the 
natural world, and don’t know why we should trust claims about humankind’s divine 
origins because they are in religious texts. Give 2001: A Space Odyssey a thousand 
years and who knows what might happen.” (Porter 2007, A34) 
B. Return to the passages found in Exercise 2.6 A. If the passage contains an argument, indi-
cate whether the premises of the argument are relevant and, if they are, whether they’re 
dependent premises or dependent premises.
C. Read the following conversation between the famous detective Sherlock Holmes and his 
friend Dr. Watson, from Sir Arthur Conan Doyle’s novel The Sign of the Four. 
“[Holmes leaned] back luxuriously in his armchair, and sending up thick blue wreaths 
from his pipe, [and said: “I see] that you have been to the Wigmore Street Post-Office this 
morning [and] that when there you dispatched a telegram.” 
“Right!” said [Watson]. “Right on both points! But I confess that I don’t see how you 
arrived at it. It was a sudden impulse upon my part, and I have mentioned it to no one.” 
“It is simplicity itself,” [Holmes] remarked, chuckling at my surprise,—“so absurdly 
simple that an explanation is superfl uous. Observation tells me that you have a little red-
dish [dirt] adhering to your instep. Just opposite the [Wigmore] Street Office they have  taken 
up the pavement and thrown up some earth which lies in such a way that it is  difficult to 
avoid treading in it in entering. The earth is of this peculiar reddish tint which is found, as 
far as I know, nowhere else in the neighborhood.”
“How, then, did you deduce the telegram?” 
“Why, of course I knew that you had not written a letter, since I sat opposite to you 
all morning. I see also in your open desk there that you have a sheet of stamps and a thick 
bundle of post-cards. What could you go into the post-office for, then, but to send a [tele-
gram]? Eliminate all other factors, and the one which remains must be the truth.” (Doyle 
1890, 12–13, material omitted)

Arguing about Arguments  69
Arguing about Arguments
When you claim that someone is making a bad argument, you’re either con-
structing an argument to show that someone else’s argument fails the true 
premises test or constructing an argument to show that the other person’s 
argument fails the proper form test. Suppose that one person makes an argu-
ment and then another person argues that this argument fails the true prem-
ises test and/or fails the proper form test. In many cases, the fi rst person will 
argue that the second person’s argument against the fi rst person’s argument 
is a bad argument. (Now there’s a weird sentence. Better read it again.) This 
can lead to an “argumentative tennis match” as the two people arguing make 
arguments for and against the various parts of their opponent’s arguments. 
Argumentative tennis matches are complex but exciting, and participating 
in these tennis matches is an excellent way to improve your critical thinking 
skills. 
Let’s imagine an argumentative tennis match between Al (who doesn’t 
believe in God) and Theresa (who does). Al offers the following argument:
(1) There is evil in the world.
(2)  An all-good, all-knowing, and all-powerful God would not allow evil 
to exist.
 
Therefore,
(3) There is no all-good, all-knowing, and all-powerful God.
Theresa can respond in two ways. She can offer a counter argument, an argu-
ment that draws a conclusion opposed to Al’s argument. For example, The-
resa could respond with the following argument:
 
(1) Some people have had mystical religious experiences.
(2)  When people have mystical religious experiences, they are experienc-
ing God.
 
Therefore,
(3) Some people have experienced God.
(4) If someone has experienced something, that thing exists.
 
Therefore,
(5) God exists.
Theresa’s response is a counter argument because it doesn’t attempt to show 
that Al’s argument fails either of the two tests for a good argument. Instead, 
she offers an argument for a conclusion opposed to Al’s.
Key Concept
A counter argument is 
an argument that draws 
a conclusion opposed to 
another argument.
Holmes presents two arguments in this passage. 
a. Standardize each of them. 
b. Determine whether they are inductive or deductive. 
c. Determine whether the premises are relevant to the conclusion. 
d. Assume that Sherlock Holmes’ fi ctional world is real and evaluate Holmes’ arguments 
using the true premises and proper form tests.

70  Chapter 2 What Makes a Good Argument? 
Theresa’s other option is to offer a refutation argument, an argument 
whose conclusion is that another argument fails the true premises or proper 
form test. Here’s an example of a refutation argument that Theresa might make: 
(1)  It is important that humans be able to choose between doing good and 
doing evil.
 
Therefore,
(2) It is important that people be allowed to do evil things.
 
Therefore,
(3)  An all-good, all-knowing, and all-powerful God would allow some 
evil to exist.
The conclusion of this argument is the opposite of premise (2) of Al’s argument. 
Theresa has presented a refutation argument intended to show that Al’s argu-
ment fails the true premises test. Whether Theresa offers a counter argument 
or a refutation argument, she has shot the argumentative tennis ball back to 
Al’s side of the net. It’s his turn to respond with either a counter argument or 
a refutation argument.
As you watch an argumentative tennis match, you need to keep track of 
where the ball is. You need to keep track of whether someone is presenting 
an original argument, a counter argument, or a refutation argument. In theory 
this process of argument, counter argument, and refutation argument could 
continue forever. In practice the match stops either because one side is con-
vinced to change beliefs or because the arguers run out of time.
Key Concept
A refutation argument 
is an argument whose 
conclusion is that 
another argument fails 
the true premises or 
proper form test.
EXERCISE 2.8
A. In Exercise 2.7 A, develop (a) a counter argument and (b) a refutation for each of the passages 
that contains an argument. 
B. Evaluate each of your counter arguments and each of your refutation arguments using the 
true premises and proper form tests.
Fallacies and Relevance
Fallacies are bad arguments that are so common that they’ve been given a 
name. Bad arguments that have been named as a fallacy occur frequently 
because they look like good arguments. Some people use fallacies without 
noticing that they’re bad arguments. Other people deliberately use fallacies 
when they’re unable to provide good arguments. These people want to con-
vince people to change their beliefs, but they don’t have a good argument. In-
stead, they use a fallacious argument and hope that the people they’re trying 
to convince won’t notice.
You’ll fi nd discussions of fallacies throughout this book. This section dis-
cusses six fallacies that involve relevance: the Easy Target Fallacy, Appeal to 
Key Concept
Fallacies are bad 
arguments that are so 
common that they’ve 
been given a name.

Fallacies and Relevance  71
Popularity, Appeal to Novelty or Tradition, Ad Hominem, Appeal to Igno-
rance, and Begging the Question.
Fallacy: Easy Target
The Easy Target Fallacy occurs in three steps. First, someone makes an inac-
curate claim about the views held by someone else. Second, the person argues 
that the inaccurately described view is false. Finally, the person asserts that 
this argument shows that the accurate view is false. The most common cases 
of this fallacy occur when someone presents an exaggerated version of some-
one else’s view. When someone presents his opponent’s views in an exagger-
ated way, he distorts his opponent’s claims. He’s offering an argument that’s 
irrelevant to the issue at hand, but by misdescribing his opponent’s view, 
his argument might deceive others into thinking he has countered the op-
ponent’s view. This fallacy is called the “Easy Target Fallacy” because when 
it occurs someone creates a view that’s an easier target to attack than their 
opponent’s actual view. 
Here’s the form of an Easy Target Fallacy. “S” is a variable that refers to 
statements.
(1) S2, a distorted version of S1, is false.
 
Therefore,
(2) S1 is false.
Technical Term: Straw Man Fallacy
The Easy Target Fallacy is often called the “Straw Man Fallacy.”
Suppose that Catherine asserts that school lunches should be made with less 
fat and less sugar. William responds to Catherine as follows:
I can’t believe that you favor the government deciding what people eat! 
If the government decided what people could eat, we wouldn’t be able to 
have a hot dog at the ball park or buttery popcorn at the movies. I want 
my hot dog, with chili please, and extra butter on my popcorn when I go 
to the movies!
William has committed the Easy Target Fallacy. He has chosen a target that’s 
easier to attack than Catherine’s actual view. Catherine didn’t assert that the 
government should decide what people eat. She asserted that there should be less 
fat and sugar in school lunches. Here’s a standardization of William’s argument:
(1)  If the government decided what people could eat, we wouldn’t be able 
to have a hot dog at the ball park or buttery popcorn at the movies.
(2)  We should be able to have a hot dog at the ball park and buttery pop-
corn at the movies.
 
Therefore,
(3) The government shouldn’t decide what people can eat.
 
Therefore,
(4) School lunches shouldn’t be made with less fat and less sugar.
Premise (3) of William’s argument is irrelevant to (4).
Key Concept
The three steps of the 
Easy Target Fallacy. 

72  Chapter 2 What Makes a Good Argument? 
Fallacy: Appeal to Popularity
The fallacy of Appeal to Popularity occurs when someone argues that a view 
is true on the grounds that it’s popular. Here’s the form of this fallacy:
(1) Most people approve of or believe S.
 
Therefore,
(2) S is true. 
The fact that most people approve or believe something doesn’t mean that it’s 
true. Before the introduction of telescopes, many people believed that there 
were only fi ve planets in the solar system. This doesn’t mean there really 
were only fi ve planets in the solar system. Suppose that Rachael and Van are 
discussing the question of whether extra sensory perception (ESP) exists. If 
Rachael offered the following argument:
(1) Most people think that ESP exists.
 
Therefore,
(2) ESP exists.
she’d have committed the fallacy of Appeal to Popularity. (1) is not suffi-
ciently relevant to (2). 
Technical Term: Argumentum Ad Populum, Bandwagon Fallacy
For many centuries, the discussion of logic and critical thinking occurred in Latin. 
Therefore, most fallacies were originally named in Latin. These Latin names are still 
used. The Latin name for an Appeal to Popularity is “Argumentum Ad Populum.” It’s 
also called the “Bandwagon Fallacy.”
Debra Lau Whelan wrote an article entitled “13,000 Kids Can’t Be Wrong.” 
Here’s the beginning of the article:
Whether it’s learning proper research skills, locating quality Web sites, or 
getting better test scores, an overwhelming number of kids think media 
specialists are essential to learning, according to a new study by profes-
sors Ross Todd and Carol Kuhlthau of Rutgers University’s Center for 
International Scholarship in School Libraries. Student Learning Through 
Ohio School Libraries reveals that 99.4 percent of students in grades 3 to 
12 believe school libraries and their services help them become better 
learners. (Whelan 2004, 46)
This passage and the article’s title indicate that Whelan is making the follow-
ing argument:
Key Concept
The fallacy of Appeal to 
Popularity occurs when 
someone argues that 
a view is true on the 
grounds that it’s popular.
Habits of a Critical Thinker
Giving Opposing Views Their Due
Someone who commits the Easy Target Fallacy needs 
to focus on giving opposing views their due. 
Considering views that aren’t in accord with your 
own beliefs can be diffi cult to do. But if you dismiss 
a view without giving it the consideration it deserves, 
you’ll never know whether the view is true.

Fallacies and Relevance  73
(1)  99.4 percent of students in grades 3 to 12 believe school libraries and 
their services help them become better learners.
 
Therefore,
(2)  School libraries and their services help students become better learners.
The fact that 99.4% of students believe that something is true doesn’t indi-
cate that it’s true. Elementary and high-school students have little informa-
tion about the benefi ts and costs of school libraries. Thirteen thousand kids 
could be wrong.
Fallacy: Appeal to Novelty or Tradition
The fallacy of Appeal to Novelty or Tradition occurs when someone argues 
that a statement is true because people have either believed it for a short time 
(novelty) or for a long time (tradition). Here’s the form of the fallacy:
(1) S has been believed by people for a short/long time.
 
Therefore,
(2) S is true.
In discussing how to organize the catalog of a university, someone might 
argue:
(1)  We have always organized the sections of the catalog by academic 
department, not by major.
 
Therefore,
(2)  We should continue to organize the sections of the catalog by 
 academic department, not by major.
This person has committed the fallacy of Appeal to Tradition. On the other 
hand, someone might argue: 
(1)  We have never organized the sections of the catalog by academic 
 department.
 
Therefore,
(2) We should organize the sections of the catalog by academic department.
This person has committed the fallacy of Appeal to Novelty. They’ve argued 
that something should be done only because it’s new and different.
Appeal to Novelty and Appeal to Tradition make the same mistake. Both 
reason from the claim about how long people have believed a view to a claim 
about the truth of a view. How long people have believed something is irrel-
evant to its truth. The fact that for hundreds of years many people believed 
that the Earth was fl at doesn’t mean that it was.
Technical Terms: Argumentum Ad Novitatem, Argumentum Ad 
 Antiquitatem
The Latin name for the Appeal to Novelty is “Argumentum Ad Novitatem.” The Latin 
name for the Appeal to Tradition is “Argumentum Ad Antiquitatem.”
 
At the beginning of this chapter, you saw the following quote. 
[The Catholic Church] holds that it is not admissible to ordain women to 
the priesthood for very fundamental reasons. These reasons include: the 
Key Concept
The fallacy of Appeal to 
Novelty or Tradition 
occurs when someone 
argues that a statement 
is true because people 
have either believed it 
for a short time (novelty) 
or believed it for a long 
time (tradition).

74  Chapter 2 What Makes a Good Argument? 
EXERCISE 2.9
A. Each of the following passages may contain one of the following fallacies: Easy Target, Ap-
peal to Popularity, Appeal to Novelty, or Appeal to Tradition. Determine whether one of 
these four fallacies is present and, if so, which fallacy it is.
 1. Munstermeister is North Rhine-Westphalia’s best selling beer! And North Rhine-West-
phalia is Germany’s most populous province. You should enjoy Munstermeister too!
 2. Budweiser is the best selling beer in the world. So it must be the best beer in the world.
 3. The Reinheitsgebot law about what ingredients could be used in beer governed 
 Germany‘s beer production from 1516 to 1987. And look how good German beer is. 
Germany should reinstate the Reinheitsgebot.
 *4. New Munstermeister Brat is Germany’s fi rst beer with the fl avor of bratwurst brewed 
right in! You should try Munstermeister Brat today!
 5. Angela: “I think that you shouldn’t have any more beer. You’ve had two and you have 
to drive home.”
Danielle: “I can’t believe that you think you should always decide what I eat and drink! 
It’s a free country and I’m going to eat and drink what I want!”
 6. “Mamas, Don’t Let Your Babies Grow Up to Be Cowboys.” (Title of a Willie Nelson 
(2003) song)
 7. Scientists at Very Cool University observed 12,456 gastropod mollusks (also known as 
snails and slugs) and noticed that 12,367 had two pairs of tentacles on their head. The 
remaining mollusks appeared to have lost one or more tentacles due to injury. They 
concluded that all gastropod mollusks have two pairs of tentacles.
example  recorded in the Sacred Scriptures of Christ choosing his Apostles 
only from among men; the constant practice of the Church, which has 
imitated Christ in choosing only men; and her living teaching authority 
which has consistently held that the exclusion of women from the priest-
hood is in accordance with God’s plan for his Church.
Pope Paul argues that women shouldn’t be allowed to be priests. He makes 
two arguments for his view. The fi rst is a Biblical argument concerning the 
actions of Christ. It doesn’t commit the fallacy of Appeal to Tradition. His 
second argument can be standardized as follows:
(1)  The constant practice of the Church has been to exclude women from 
the priesthood.
(2)  The Church has consistently held that women should be excluded 
from the priesthood.
 
Therefore,
(3) Women should continue to be excluded from the priesthood.
This argument commits the fallacy of Appeal to Tradition. Rather than use 
the word “tradition” he uses the phrase “constant practice” and “consis-
tently.” But the Pope is arguing that because some practice has been done for 
a long time, it should continue.

Fallacies and Relevance  75
 *8. As we consider whether or not to move from paper add–drop forms to an online add–
drop process, we need to remember that we’ve used paper add–drop forms for a long 
time. An online process might not work well for our university.
 9. Eric: “If we move to the online add–drop process, students who do not have access to 
the internet will have trouble adding and dropping courses. We don’t want that. So we 
shouldn’t use an online add–drop policy.”
  Samantha: “I think that most students nowadays have easy access to the internet. Most 
of my friends can surf on their cell phones. And the paper forms are a pain. I think on-
line adds and drops is a great idea.”
 10. Everyone thinks that the Earth is round. So why do you persist in saying that 
it’s fl at?
 11. Amanda: “I think it is important for the United States to remain in Iraq. If we don’t, oil 
supplies to the West could be threatened.”
  Luke: “How can you say that the United States should invade a country every time we 
think that there is a problem with oil supplies? We need to work to conserve energy at 
home, not send in the military to take it from others.”
 *12. Martha: “You need to put sage in the stuffing for your turkey.” 
 
Gareth: “Why do you say that?” 
 
Martha: “Well, my mother always put sage in her stuffing.”
 13. “Give me liberty or give me death!” Patrick Henry (Henry 1999, 232)
 14. The iPad is a revolutionary mobile tablet computer. [Assume that this is stated as a part 
of an argument for the conclusion that you should buy an iPad.]
 15. “Congress ordered [the Census Bureau] to study the common-sense idea of counting 
inmates at their homes rather than at prison. [The B]ureau responded with an obtuse 
and evasive report that supports the bad old status quo. The report [suggests] the change 
[desired by Congress] might require the costly and invasive procedure of interviewing 
every inmate.” (The New York Times, “Counting Noses in Prison” 2006) [The argu-
ment in this passage is attributed to the Census Bureau by The New York Times.]
B. Construct a fallacious appeal to tradition and a fallacious appeal to novelty in support of 
the following conclusions. 
 1. Astrological signs have an infl uence on a person’s destiny.
 2. Everyone should get a college education.
 3. You should get married.
 *4. The earth is fl at.
 5. Dwight Yoakam is a great country singer.
C. Discuss whether there are any fallacies in the following quote. Here’s some background 
information. The U.S. government keeps a stock of oil set aside for emergency, the “Stra-
tegic Petroleum Reserve” (SPR). After the attacks of September 11, 2001, President Bush 
directed that the amount of oil in the SPR be increased. The government gradually started 
buying oil and adding it to the SPR. In the presidential campaign of 2004, these purchases 

76  Chapter 2 What Makes a Good Argument? 
became an issue because the price of gas rose sharply. The Democratic candidate for Presi-
dent, Senator John Kerry, argued that the government should stop buying oil because its 
price was too high and because the purchases by the government were driving up prices. 
The Washington Post then reported President Bush’s response to Senator Kerry’s proposal.
“On May 19, Bush was asked about a plan by his Democratic opponent, Sen. John F. 
Kerry (Mass.), to halt shipments that are replenishing emergency petroleum reserves. Bush 
replied by saying we should not empty the reserves—something nobody in a responsible 
position has proposed. “The idea of emptying the Strategic Petroleum Reserve would put 
America in a dangerous position in the war on terror,” Bush said.” (Milbank 2004, A21) 
Fallacy: Ad Hominem
A person commits the Ad Hominem Fallacy when he attacks a person instead 
of arguing against the view the person asserts. It has the following form:
(1) H asserts statement S.
(2) There is something objectionable about Person H.
 
Therefore,
(3) Statement S is false.
 
or 
(3’) H’s arguments for S are bad arguments.
“H” refers to human beings. This form is an improper form. The premises say 
nothing at all about S except that H asserted it. The fact that there’s some-
thing objectionable about a person is irrelevant to the question of whether 
what a person says is true or whether that person has made a good argument.
People can perceive others to be objectionable for many reasons. In the 
past, it was quite common for a view to be rejected because the person who 
asserted the view was thought to be objectionable because of race, sex, reli-
gious beliefs, ethnicity, age, or social position. Even today, such cases of the 
Ad Hominem Fallacy are all too common.
Here’s an example of the Ad Hominem Fallacy. Craig Crawford wrote a 
review of a book by Frank Rich. Rich’s book was entitled The Greatest Story 
Ever Sold: The Decline and Fall of Truth from 9/11 to Katrina. In it, Rich 
argues that the administration of President George W. Bush used “deception, 
misinformation, and propaganda” to mislead the American people into sup-
porting the war in Iraq and re-electing Bush. Crawford believes that Rich uses 
ad hominem attacks.
The occasional ad hominem asides—referring to Mr. Bush as a “glad-
handing salesman,” a “spoiled brat” and a “rich kid who used his father’s 
connections to escape Vietnam”—will delight the Bush haters among Mr. 
Rich’s fan base, but tend to undermine the often eloquent conclusions 
that he draws from his own raw material. (Crawford 2006, E2)
Crawford is correct. Rich has committed the Ad Hominem Fallacy. Referring 
to Bush as a “glad-handing salesman” or a “spoiled brat” has no relevance to 
Bush’s arguments in defense of his actions.
Key Concept
A person commits the 
Ad Hominem Fallacy 
when he attacks a 
person instead of 
arguing against the view 
the person asserts.

Fallacies and Relevance  77
Technical Terms: Argumentum Ad Hominem, Argumentum Ad Personam
The phrase “ad hominem” comes from the Latin name for the Ad Hominem Fallacy, 
“Argumentum Ad Hominem.” While this book avoids using the Latin names of 
fallacies, it uses the Latin name for this fallacy because its Latin name is common. 
The Latin phrase “Argumentum Ad Personam” is sometimes used to refer to an 
ad hominem argument.
The Fallacy of Guilt by Association is a form of the Ad Hominem Fallacy. It 
occurs when people are attacked based on their association with a person, 
group, or view that’s considered objectionable.
In the typical case, someone asserts that another person’s view must be 
false because some objectionable group of people also hold the view. If you 
asserted that a view is false because it was held by the Communists, you’d be 
committing the Fallacy of Guilt by Association. 
Here’s an example from a radio broadcast by Rush Limbaugh as reported 
on his web page. As background information, Ayman al-Zawahiri is a leader 
of Al-Qaeda, the group that organized the attacks on the World Trade Center 
and the Pentagon on September 11, 2001. The issue under consideration here 
is whether sending additional troops to Iraq will enable that country to have 
a stable and peaceful society.
LIMBAUGH: Ayman al-Zawahiri [is] taunting Bush, “Come on, what 
do you mean 20,000? Give us 50, give us a hundred thousand to kill, 
you’re going to lose ‘em anyway.” Who does this sound like, by the 
way? Ayman al-Zawahiri, “Send us 20,000, give us 50, why not an-
other hundred? They’ll be defeated anyway.” We have heard this 
somewhere before.
KERRY: You can put a hundred thousand troops in, and you can up 
the casualties, up the stakes, increase the violence, and not get a reso-
lution.
LIMBAUGH: Yes! It was John Kerry, ladies and gentlemen, who 
served in Vietnam. [H]e, once again, is on the same page with Al-
Qaeda. John Kerry and the Democrats, whether they know it or not, 
their instincts lead them to say things that end up being parroted and 
repeated by Al-Qaeda as though Al-Qaeda are Democrat allies. (Lim-
baugh 2007, material omitted)
John Kerry, the Democratic candidate for President of the United States in 
2004, is quoted as asserting that sending additional troops to Iraq wouldn’t 
have a positive effect. Limbaugh didn’t offer any good arguments in support 
of the view that Kerry’s assertion was false. Rather than present a good argu-
ment, Limbaugh made an ad hominem attack of the guilt by association form. 
He attacked Kerry and the Democrats by associating them with Al-Qaeda.
Comments about a person are not always examples of the Ad Homi-
nem Fallacy. Look again at the form of the Ad Hominem Fallacy. Both 
premises are about a person. The fi rst asserts that a person made a state-
ment and the second asserts that the person has some objectionable fea-
ture. But the conclusion of the argument is not about a person. It’s about 
a statement. On the other hand, conclusions aren’t always about state-
ments. Sometimes an argument draws a conclusion about a person. You 
Key Concept
The Fallacy of Guilt by 
Association is a form of 
the Ad Hominem Fallacy. 
It occurs when people 
are attacked based on 
their association with 
a person, group, or 
view that’s considered 
objectionable.

78  Chapter 2 What Makes a Good Argument? 
might argue that a person is dishonest. You might argue that a person isn’t 
a good person for a job. When the conclusion of an argument is about a 
person (not a statement) premises about that person may be relevant. If 
he were attempting to defend the conclusion that Bush is a fl awed person 
or that you shouldn’t vote for Bush, Rich’s claims that Bush is a “glad-
handing salesman” and a “spoiled brat” wouldn’t be examples of the Ad 
Hominem Fallacy.
Fallacy: Appeal to Ignorance
Someone commits the fallacy of Appeal to Ignorance when he claims that a 
statement is true because it hasn’t been shown to be false. 
(1) It has not been shown that S is false.
 
Therefore,
(2) S is true.
In an Appeal to Ignorance the evidence being offered in the premises is actu-
ally the lack of evidence. Premise (1) doesn’t provide a good reason to believe (2).
Suppose that Brittany and Travis are talking about Samantha, a friend 
who has moved to another town. They’re discussing whether Samantha has 
bought a new car. Travis might make the following argument:
Well, what’s to say that she didn’t buy a new car? After all, she could have 
bought a new car. I think she got a new car.
Travis has committed the fallacy of Appeal to Ignorance. He has reasoned 
from a claim that he doesn’t know that Samantha didn’t buy a new car to the 
claim that she bought a new car. The following would also be an example of 
the same fallacy:
Well, what’s to say that she bought a new car? After all, she didn’t have to 
buy a new car. I don’t think she got a new car.
In this case, Travis has reasoned from his lack of knowledge that Samantha 
has bought a new car to the claim that she didn’t buy a new car. The ap-
propriate conclusion that Travis and Brittany should draw from their lack 
of evidence about Samantha’s car is that they don’t know whether she has 
bought a new car.
Technical Term: Argumentum Ad Ignorantiam, Argument from 
 Ignorance
The Latin name for the fallacy of Appeal to Ignorance is “Argumentum Ad 
Ignorantiam.” The Fallacy of Appeal to Ignorance is sometimes called the fallacy 
of “Argument from Ignorance.”
Fallacy: Begging the Question
This chapter ends with a fallacy that’s an exception to the rule that every bad 
argument fails the true premises tests and/or the proper form test. The fal-
lacy of Begging the Question occurs when a premise of an argument asserts 
the conclusion of the argument. The classic example of Begging the Question 
concerns the following argument for the existence of God.
Key Concept
Someone commits the 
fallacy of Appeal to 
Ignorance when he 
claims that a statement 
is true because it hasn’t 
been shown to be false.
Key Concept
The fallacy of Begging 
the Question occurs 
when a premise of 
an argument asserts 
the conclusion of the 
argument.

Fallacies and Relevance  79
(1) God wrote the Bible.
 
Therefore,
(2) Everything said in the Bible is true.
(3) The Bible asserts that God exists.
 
Therefore,
(4) God exists. 
This argument begs the question because the argument’s conclusion is as-
serted in the fi rst premise. Premise (1) asserts that God wrote the Bible. If God 
wrote the Bible, God exists, which is the conclusion of the argument.
The form of an argument that begs the question is shockingly simple.
(1) S.
 
Therefore,
(2) S.
Remember that “S” is a variable that stands for statements. In the case of beg-
ging the question, a premise is the conclusion! Continuing with the existence 
of God example, the simplest form of Begging the Question would be:
(1) God exists.
 
Therefore,
(2) God exists.
Put this way, an argument that begs the question wouldn’t fool anyone. Those 
who beg the question generally add additional premises and subarguments to 
hide the fact that the conclusion of the argument is contained in one of the 
premises. This occurred in the argument for the existence of God at the be-
ginning of this section. The two additional premises and the subargument 
served to conceal the assertion of the conclusion in premise (1).
Technical Term: Petitio Principii, Begging the Question
The Latin name for Begging the Question is “Petitio Principii.”
Recently, the phrase “begging the question” has come to be used to refer 
to a question that naturally comes to mind. For example, in a radio interview 
on the war in Iraq someone might assert that travel is difficult in a certain 
region because terrorist attacks have increased. The interviewer might then 
say: “That begs the question of why the attacks have increased.” When you 
hear the phrase “beg the question” you’ll need to examine the context to de-
termine which of these two uses of the phrase is being employed.
The problem with arguments that beg the question is that they aren’t 
arguments at all. Every argument has two parts, at least one premise and one 
conclusion. Look back at the form of an argument that begs the question. It 
contains only one statement. An argument that begs the question isn’t an 
argument but an assertion disguised to look like an argument. This explains 
why “arguments” that beg the question don’t fail either the true premises 
test or the proper form test. They fail a more basic test, the test of what it 
takes to be an argument. An argument has to have at least two statements, 
but an “argument” that begs the question only has one. 
Connections
Chapter One discusses the two parts of every argument, premises and conclusions.

80  Chapter 2 What Makes a Good Argument? 
EXERCISE 2.10
A. Each of the following passages may contain one of the following fallacies: Ad Hominem, 
Appeal to Ignorance, Begging the Question, Easy Target, Appeal to Popularity, Appeal to 
Novelty/Appeal to Tradition. Determine whether one of these six fallacies is present and, 
if so, which fallacy is present.
 1. I think that the oysters made me sick. After all, no one has shown me that they didn’t 
make me sick.
 2. Every morning for the past ten years I’ve had raisin bran for breakfast. I must keep having it.
 3. If you don’t start believing in this mission, you’ll spend the next ten years in the brig.
 *4. My opponent has committed adultery. He cheated on his taxes. He hired an illegal alien 
as a nanny. His views on tax reform simply can’t be trusted.
 5. Where is that package? Hmm, the time before last, a package fell off the porch and into 
the bushes. I better check there.
 6. “And I wonder, still I wonder, who’ll stop the rain?” (Lyrics from “Who’ll Stop the 
Rain?” Creedence Clearwater Revival 1976)
 7. When an abortion occurs, one person, the pregnant woman, has killed an innocent per-
son without any justifi cation. If someone kills an innocent person without justifi cation, 
they’ve committed murder. Therefore, abortion is a type of murder.
 *8. The chest pains indicate that he either has heart problems or acid refl ux. The EKG 
shows no heart problems, so he must have acid refl ux.
 9. Taxation is government theft of property. And theft is illegal! So taxation must be il-
legal as well.
 10. Congressman Eskandari’s tax proposal doesn’t deserve serious consideration. After all, 
Eskandari has been a Congressman for fourteen years and everyone knows what that 
means—that he has never met a tax plan he didn’t like.
 11. People buy more Budweiser than milk. Budweiser must be a great beer.
 *12. “Mr. and Mrs. Dursley, of number four, Privet Drive, were proud to say that they were 
perfectly normal, thank you very much. They were the last people you’d expect to be 
involved in anything strange or mysterious, because they just didn’t hold with such 
nonsense.” (Rowling 1997, 7) 
 13. “Who says I am not under the special protection of God?” (Often attributed to Adolf 
Hitler, but source is undocumented)
 14. Senator Joseph McCarthy argued that those named on a list of people were Commu-
nists. Regarding one person on his list, he stated: “I do not have much information on 
this [person] except the general statement of the agency that there is nothing in the fi les 
to disprove his Communist connections.” (Rover 1996, 132) 
 15. “In that direction,” the Cat said, waving its right paw round, “lives a Hatter: and in that direc-
tion,” waving the other paw, “lives a March Hare. Visit either you like: they’re both mad.”
 “But I don’t want to go among mad people,” Alice remarked.
 “Oh, you can’t help that,” said the Cat: “we’re all mad here. I’m mad. You’re mad.”
 “How do you know I’m mad?” said Alice.
 “You must be,” said the Cat, “or you wouldn’t have come here.”
 Alice didn’t think that proved it at all.
  
(Carroll 1982, 64) 

Fallacies and Relevance  81
B. The problem of skepticism is a famous philosophical puzzle. It begins with a simple ques-
tion. How do you know that your car, your friends, the chair in which you are sitting, and 
the entire universe exists? Before you answer, read the following story.
“It all began that cold Wednesday night. I was sitting alone in my office watching 
the rain come down on the deserted streets outside, when the phone rang. It was 
Harry’s wife, and she sounded terrifi ed. They had been having a late supper alone 
in their apartment when suddenly the front door came crashing in and six hooded 
men burst into the room. The men were armed and they made Harry and Anne lie 
face down on the fl oor while they went through Harry’s pockets. When they found 
his driver’s license one of them carefully scrutinized Harry’s face, comparing it with 
the official photograph and then muttered, “It’s him all right.” The leader of the 
intruders produced a hypodermic needle and injected Harry with something that 
made him lose consciousness almost immediately. For some reason they only tied 
and gagged Anne. Two of the men left the room and returned with a stretcher and 
white coats. They put Harry on the stretcher, donned the white coats, and trundled 
him out of the apartment, leaving Anne lying on the fl oor. She managed to squirm 
to the window in time to see them put Harry in an ambulance and drive away.”
“By the time she called me, Anne was coming apart at the seams. It had taken 
her several hours to get out of her bonds, and then she called the police. To her 
consternation, instead of uniformed officers, two plain clothes officials arrived 
and, without even looking over the scene, they proceeded to tell her that there was 
nothing they could do and if she knew what was good for her she would keep her 
mouth shut. If she raised a fuss they would put out the word that she was a psycho 
and she would never see her husband again.”
“Not knowing what else to do, Anne called me. She had the presence of mind 
to note down the number of the ambulance, and I had no great difficulty tracing it 
to a private clinic at the outskirts of town. When I arrived at the clinic I was sur-
prised to fi nd it locked up like a fortress. There were guards at the gate and it was 
surrounded by a massive wall. My commando training stood me in good stead as I 
negotiated the 20-foot wall, avoided the barbed wire, and silenced the guard dogs on 
the other side. The ground fl oor windows were all barred, but I managed to wriggle 
up a drainpipe and get in through a second story window that someone had left ajar. 
I found myself in a laboratory. Hearing muffled sounds next door I peeked through 
the keyhole and saw what appeared to be a complete operating room and a surgical 
team laboring over Harry. He was covered with a sheet from the neck down and 
they seemed to be connecting tubes and wires to him. I stifl ed a gasp when I realized 
that they had removed the top of Harry’s skull. To my considerable consternation, 
one of the surgeons reached into the open top of Harry’s head and eased his brain 
out, placing it in a stainless steel bowl. The tubes and wires I had noted earlier were 
connected to the now disembodied brain. The surgeons carried the bloody mass 
carefully to some kind of tank and lowered it in. My fi rst thought was that I had 
stumbled on a covey of futuristic Satanists who got their kicks from vivisection. 
My second thought was that Harry was an insurance agent. Maybe this was their 
way of getting even for the increases in their malpractice insurance rates. If they did 
this every Wednesday night, their rates were no higher than they should be!”
“My speculations were interrupted when the lights suddenly came on in my 
darkened hidey hole and I found myself looking up at the scariest group of medical 
men I had ever seen. They manhandled me into the next room and strapped me 
down on an operating table. I thought, “Oh, oh, I’m in for it now!” The doctors 

82  Chapter 2 What Makes a Good Argument? 
huddled at the other end of the room, but I couldn’t turn my head far enough to see 
what they were doing. They were mumbling among themselves, probably deciding 
my fate. A door opened and I heard a woman’s voice. The deferential manner as-
sumed by the medical malpractitioners made it obvious who was boss. I strained 
to see this mysterious woman, but she hovered just out of my view. Then, to my 
astonishment, she walked up and stood over me and I realized it was my secretary, 
Margot. I began to wish I had given her that Christmas bonus after all.”
“It was Margot, but it was a different Margot than I had ever seen. She was 
wallowing in the heady wine of authority as she bent over me. “Well, Mike, you 
thought you were so smart, tracking Harry here to the clinic,” she said. “It was all 
a trick to get you here. You saw what happened to Harry. He’s not really dead, you 
know. These gentlemen are the premier neuroscientists in the world today. They 
have developed a surgical procedure whereby they remove the brain from the body 
but keep it alive in a vat of nutrient. The Food and Drug Administration wouldn’t 
approve the procedure, but we’ll show them. You see all the wires going to Harry’s 
brain? They connect him up with a powerful computer. The computer monitors the 
output of his motor cortex and provides input to the sensory cortex in such a way 
that everything appears perfectly normal to Harry. It produces a fi ctitious mental 
life that merges perfectly into his past life so that he is unaware that anything has 
happened to him. He thinks he is shaving right now and getting ready to go to the 
office and stick it to another neurosurgeon. But actually, he’s just a brain in a vat.”
“Once we have our procedure perfected we’re going after the head of the Food 
and Drug Administration, but we needed some experimental subjects fi rst. Harry 
was easy. In order to really test our computer program we need someone who leads 
a more interesting and varied life—someone like you!” I was starting to squirm. 
The surgeons had drawn around me and were looking on with malevolent gleams 
in their eyes. But Margot gazed down at me and murmured in that incredible 
voice, “I’ll bet you think we’re going to operate on you and remove your brain just 
like we removed Harry’s, don’t you? But you have nothing to worry about. We’re 
not going to remove your brain. We already did—three months ago!”
“With that they let me go. I found my way back to my office in a daze. For 
some reason, I haven’t told anybody about this. I can’t make up my mind. I am 
racked by the suspicion that I am really a brain in a vat and all this I see around me 
is just a fi gment of a computer. After all, how could I tell? If the computer program 
really works, no matter what I do, everything will seem normal. Maybe nothing I 
see is real. It’s driving me crazy. (Pollock 1986, 1–3, material omitted)”
“Suppose that you were Mike, the detective in this story. How could you de-
termine whether Margot was telling the truth or not? How could you tell whether 
you are a brain in a body or a brain in a vat? Here are two arguments you might try.”
a. (1) I see that I have a body (that is, hands, feet, arms, etc.).
Therefore,
(2) I am not a brain in a vat.
b. (1) I think that I see that I have a body.
Therefore,
(2) I am not a brain in a vat.
Does either of these arguments beg the question? Why or why not? Evaluate both of these argu-
ments using the true premises and proper form tests.

Chapter Summary  83
Good arguments have true premises and a 
proper form. Bad arguments have false premises 
and/or an improper form.
 
The true premises test is limited by the 
argument’s audience. What’s an uncontroversial 
premise for one audience might not be known to 
another audience.
 
An argument with a proper form is an argu-
ment in which the truth of the premises provides 
support for the truth of the conclusion. An argu-
ment with one or more false premises can still 
have a proper form. Putting arguments into the 
various logical forms allows you to see whether 
the argument passes the proper form test.
 
Arguments can be divided into two types. 
Deductive arguments claim that the premises of 
the argument guarantee the truth of the conclu-
sion. Inductive arguments claim that the prem-
ises provide some support for, but no guarantee 
of, the truth of the conclusion.
 
When applying the proper form test, you 
must check the relevance of the premises to 
the conclusion. Premises can be relevant (they 
Chapter Summary
provide evidence for the conclusion) or irrelevant 
(they provide no evidence for the conclusion). 
In some arguments each premise is individually 
relevant to the conclusion. These are indepen-
dent premises. In other arguments the premises 
are only relevant when combined with the other 
premises. These are dependent premises. To test 
for relevance requires fi rst looking at the premises 
individually and then looking at them as a group.
 
Fallacies are bad arguments that are so com-
mon that they’ve been given a name. They usu-
ally have some feature that makes them appear 
to be good arguments.
 
The fallacies of relevance are arguments 
that fail the proper form test because their 
premises are irrelevant to the conclusion. Ad 
Hominem, Appeal to Ignorance, Begging the 
Question, Easy Target, Appeal to Popularity, 
Appeal to Novelty, or Appeal to Tradition are all 
fallacies of relevance.
 
An argument that begs the question isn’t 
really an argument but an assertion disguised to 
look like an argument. 
G U I D E
Finding, Standardizing, and Evaluating Arguments
Here’s a review of the steps to take to fi nd, standardize, and evaluate an argument. Steps 1–9 
below are copied from the Guide for Finding and Standardizing Arguments found in Chapter 
One. These steps are repeated here so that you have one handy place to see all the steps. As 
this book discusses the various types of arguments in later chapters, it will present different 
versions of this guide for each of type of argument.
Finding Arguments
 1. Look for an attempt to convince.
 2. Find the conclusion.
 3. Find the premises.
 4. Review the following to make sure that you’ve correctly identifi ed the conclusion and 
the premises: imperfect indicator words, sentence order, premises and/or conclusion 
not in declarative form, unstated premises, and/or conclusion.

84  Chapter 2 What Makes a Good Argument? 
 5. Review the following to make sure that you haven’t incorrectly identifi ed something 
as a premise or a conclusion when in fact it isn’t part of an argument: assertions, ques-
tions, instructions, descriptions, and explanations.
Standardizing Arguments
 6. Rewrite the premises and the conclusion as declarative sentences. Make sure that each 
premise and the conclusion is a grammatically correct declarative sentence. Rewrite 
the premises and conclusion as necessary to make them clearer but don’t change the 
meaning of the passage. Remove pronouns from the sentences and replace them with 
the nouns or noun phrases to which they refer.
 7. Review any phrases you’ve omitted to be sure that they aren’t premises or a conclusion.
 8. Number the premises and the conclusion. Put [ ] around the number of an unstated prem-
ise or conclusion. Place the premises before their conclusion and insert “Therefore,” 
between the premises and the conclusion. Use blank lines to indicate subarguments.
 9. Compare your standardization to the original passage to make sure that you haven’t 
omitted any arguments found in the passage and to be sure that you’ve correctly identi-
fi ed the premises and the conclusion. 
Evaluating Arguments: The True Premises Test
 10. Check to see whether the premises are accurate descriptions of the world. 
 11. Consider whether the premises are appropriate for the argument’s audience.
 12. Review the premises to be sure they are reasonable.
Evaluating Arguments: The Proper Form Test
 13. Determine whether the argument is a deductive argument or an inductive argument. 
 14. Determine whether the premises are relevant to the conclusion. Look at each premise 
individually to see whether the truth of the premise provides some evidence for the 
truth of the conclusion. Look at the premises as a group to see whether the truth of all 
of them provides some evidence for the truth of the conclusion.
Evaluating Arguments: Checking for Fallacies
 15. Compare the argument to the list of fallacies on page 410 to see whether the argument 
commits any of the fallacies.

This page intentionally left blank 

86
Learning Outcomes
After studying the material in this chapter, you should be able to:
1. Recognize and correctly evaluate empirical premises. 
2. Recognize and correctly evaluate testimonial premises.
3. Recognize and correctly evaluate defi nitional premises. 
4. Recognize and correctly evaluate statements by experts.
5. Correctly determine the strength and scope of conclusions.
Nanuwak had a diffi cult time processing the salmon with the ground-slate knife. Not 
long into the fi sh cutting, the [stone] blade showed several chips at the cutting surface. 
At the start she found that the stone knife cut the fl esh more easily than the salmon’s 
skin. Eventually she was sawing at the fl esh and using “lots of muscle” to cut it. 
—Lisa Frink, Brian Hoffman, and Robert Shaw, “Ulu Knife Use in Western 
Alaska: A Comparative Ethnoarchaeological Study” (2003, 119)
3
Premises and 
Conclusions

Three Kinds of Premises  87
The passage on the previous page is from an article about how Eskimos use 
stone knives. If these statements were premises, would they pass the true 
premises test? Are they premises that you should assume, or should you look 
for a subargument? Assuming premises must be done carefully. Premises 
should be assumed only when they’re likely to be true. This chapter will 
explore some guidelines for deciding whether a premise is likely to be true. It 
will also examine some details about conclusions and point out some things 
that make some conclusions more difficult to support.
Three Kinds of Premises
No matter what premise you put in an argument, someone can ask you 
why you think that premise is true. To answer that question, you can make 
a subargument. But someone can ask you why you think the premises of 
your subargument are true. You can then make more subarguments. In 
principle, you could go on forever. But you won’t live forever so you can’t 
go on providing subarguments. You must offer some premises without sup-
porting them. These premises are assumed premises. When can you assume 
a premise? It depends on what kind of premise it is. Three kinds of state-
ments are often used as premises: empirical statements, defi nitional state-
ments, and statements by experts. In each case, some guidelines will help 
you determine when these statements are likely to be true and therefore 
may be assumed.
Empirical Statements
Defi nition of Empirical Statements
Empirical statements are statements that report what people observe through 
their senses. When you observe with your senses you’re getting direct empiri-
cal evidence. When you get reports of observations from other people or from 
instruments, you’re getting indirect empirical evidence. Suppose that you’re 
working in the library and a friend comes in and tells you that it has started 
to rain. If she is telling the truth, your friend has direct empirical knowledge 
of the rain and you have indirect empirical knowledge of the rain. If you saw 
the rain on TV, that would be another kind of indirect empirical knowledge. 
Indirect empirical experience comes in two kinds: reports of observations of 
others (such as your friend) and observations that you make with the aid of 
instruments (such as the TV).
Technical Terms: Empirical Knowledge, Empirical Theories
Empirical knowledge is any knowledge acquired, either directly or indirectly, 
through observation. Empirical theories are theories about things you can observe.
Key Concept
Empirical statements 
are statements that 
report what people 
observe through their 
senses.

88  Chapter 3 Premises and Conclusions
Here are some examples of empirical 
statements:
 1. Triangular shapes are the most stable 
form for constructing the large moving 
cranes used in the construction of 
buildings.
 2. Grass turns purple when mowed by an 
unwilling teenager.
 3. In 2006, more than 1 million smokers 
stopped smoking for at least one day.
 4. René Descartes was living in China 
when he invented analytic geometry.
 5. More world championships have been 
won by the New York Yankees than by 
any other baseball team. 
 6. Cell phones regularly explode. 
The odd numbered statements are true and the even numbered statements 
are false, but all six statements are empirical statements. Statements 1, 3, 
and 5 are uncontroversial empirical statements. Because they’re likely to 
be true, uncontroversial empirical statements may be assumed to pass the 
true premises test. Don’t confuse uncontroversial empirical statements with 
statements you know to be true. Even if you didn’t know that statements 1, 3, 
or 5 above are true, they’re all plausible and easily verifi able empirical state-
ments. They may be assumed to be true.
Statements 2, 4, and 6 are uncontroversially false empirical statements. 
 Uncontroversially false empirical statements can be rejected without ar-
gument. You might think that you’d never fi nd an uncontroversially false 
empirical statement in an argument. After all, why would anyone put an 
uncontroversially false premise into an argument? But sometimes people 
decide too quickly or make simple mental errors. You might hear someone 
say:
Everyone knows that two plus two equals four.
You might think that this empirical statement is uncontroversially true. But 
think for a moment. People don’t learn to add until they’re four or fi ve years 
old. That means that lots of people don’t know that two plus two equals four. 
This statement isn’t uncontroversially true, it’s uncontroversially false! It 
fails the true premises test.
Lisa Frink and her team of researchers were studying the adoption 
of metal knives by Eskimos in Alaska. Before contact with Europeans, 
Eskimos used stone knives made of ground-slate. Then they started 
using metal knives. Frink wondered if metal knives were more efficient 
than slate knives. To test this, the researchers made some slate knives 
and asked some Eskimos to use them to cut up salmon. Here’s an image 
of the traditional knives that the Eskimos used. These knives are called 
“ulus.”
Key Concept
Uncontroversially true 
empirical statements 
may be assumed to pass 
the true premises test.
A moving crane.
Alexandr Tkachuk/iStockphoto.com

Three Kinds of Premises  89
One of the Eskimos who tested the knives was Mary Nanuwak. Here’s 
part of the quote you saw at the beginning of this chapter. The letters are 
added for clarity.
(a) Not long into the fi sh cutting, the [stone] blade showed several 
chips at the cutting surface. (b) At the start she found that the stone 
knife cut the fl esh more easily than the salmon’s skin. (c) Eventually 
she was sawing at the fl esh and using “lots of muscle” to cut it. (Frink 
2003, 119)
Sentences (a), (b), and (c) are empirical statements. Statement (a) is a direct ob-
servation by Nanuwak and Frink. Sentences (b) and (c) state direct empirical 
experience of Nanuwak and indirect empirical experiences of Frink. All three 
of them are uncontroversial. You can assume that they pass the true premises 
test. If someone were to state:
Stone ulus aren’t good knives.
that wouldn’t be an empirical statement. It’s an evaluation. 
Connections
Chapter Ten will say more about evaluative (moral) statements.
Habits of a Critical Thinker
Avoiding Self-Deception and Rationalization
One thing you can observe is yourself. When you say 
“I’m tired,” you have made an empirical statement 
about yourself. You can make incorrect empirical 
statements about yourself. When you do that, you 
could be deceiving yourself. 
Self-deception prevents you from being a good 
critical thinker. It keeps you from accurately evaluat-
ing your own beliefs. Believing fi ctions about oneself 
can be reassuring or fun. But discovering your actual 
strengths and weakness through honest self-
evaluation puts you in a better position to make 
good decisions.
Rationalization is a common form of self-decep-
tion. When you rationalize, you present yourself with 
a bad argument that’s plausible enough to fool you 
into thinking that you have good reasons for doing 
what you want to do.
You might want to go out over the weekend. You 
know that midterms are next week and you’ve got a 
biochemistry test. But you think to yourself: “Face it. 
I’m not going to pass that test anyway. I may as well 
have some fun.” Your argument might be standard-
ized like this:
(1) I am going to fail my biochemistry test.
(2)  If I am going to fail a test, there’s no point in 
studying.
(3)  If there is no point in studying, I might as 
well go to a party.
Therefore,
(4) I should go to a party.
This argument fails the true premises test. Premise (1) 
is almost certainly false. Whether you fail the biochem-
istry test depends, in part, on whether you study for it. 
Teachers don’t give tests that students will necessarily 
fail. You know this, but you really want to go out over 
the weekend. If you argue yourself out of studying, you 
have fallen prey to rationalization.
Ulu knife.
© Cengage Learning

90  Chapter 3 Premises and Conclusions
Testimonial Empirical Statements
Remember the two types of indirect empirical statements: statements that 
are the reports of what others have experienced and statements about obser-
vations made using instruments. The reports of what others have experienced 
are testimonial statements. Your friend’s statement that it has started to rain 
is (from your perspective) an example of testimony. (From her perspective, it’s 
a direct empirical statement.)
When are testimonial premises likely to be true? When should you as-
sume testimonial premises? Two important criteria help us answer these 
questions: plausibility and reliability.
Suppose that, instead of telling you that it has started to rain, your friend 
rushes in and says: “Space aliens are landing outside the library!” Your friend’s 
claim isn’t plausible. It doesn’t fi t with your background knowledge (such as 
that aliens don’t usually land on Earth). It wouldn’t be appropriate for you 
to use your friend’s statement as an assumed premise in an argument. Tes-
timonial statements should only be used as assumed premises when they’re 
plausible.
Let’s return to the original case. Your friend comes in and tells you that it 
has started to rain. Unless your college is in a desert, this claim is plausible. 
However, what if your friend has developed a habit of telling you that it’s 
raining even when it isn’t raining? This has become a running joke. In that 
case, you shouldn’t use your friend’s testimony as an assumed premise. The 
problem in this case isn’t plausibility but reliability. Testimonial statements 
should only be used as assumed premises if the person making the statement 
is reliable. A person is reliable when her past testimonial statements have 
been true. A plausible statement made by a reliable individual may be as-
sumed to pass the true premises test.
When considering reliability, you must think about whether people can 
accurately report their own experiences. Some people have better memories 
than others. Some people are less distracted by traumatic incidents than oth-
ers. Some people are more truthful than others. One of the authors of this 
book found to her surprise that she wasn’t always a reliable witness. When 
asked to report what happened one morning, she said that she’d seen a police 
car chasing a brown truck and that this brown truck crashed into a telephone 
pole. Then she found herself getting up from the ground with no memory of 
being thrown down. News footage later showed a white truck crashing into a 
brown car, which crashed into the telephone pole. The intensity of the experi-
ence affected her perception or memory. What she thought she saw didn’t co-
here with other evidence. If you know that the testimony you were intending 
to report came from people undergoing traumatic experiences, you shouldn’t 
use that testimony as an assumed premise.
Plausibility and reliability show that your knowledge of whether a testi-
monial statement is likely to be true turns on your background knowledge. 
You have background knowledge about aliens (including the knowledge that 
they haven’t landed recently in your city) which makes your friend’s claim 
implausible. In the case of your friend’s running joke, you’re also relying on the 
background knowledge that your friend is unreliable about rain.  Knowing how 
to apply background knowledge is another part of the art of argument. Know-
ing which facts to consider, for what audience, and in what context, are things 
Key Concept
The reports of what 
others have experienced 
are testimonial 
statements.
Key Concept
A plausible statement is 
one that fi ts with your 
background knowledge.
Key Concept
A plausible statement 
made by a reliable 
individual may be 
assumed to pass the true 
premises test.
Key Concept
A person is reliable 
when her past 
testimonial statements 
have been true.

Three Kinds of Premises  91
that you can only learn with practice. The more times you make a judgment 
about accepting someone’s testimony, the more you’ll develop a feel for what 
is plausible and how reliable someone is.
EXERCISE 3.1
A. Determine which of the following are empirical statements.
 1. Blue is the most popular color.
 2. Red is the color of grass.
 3. According to the American Heart Association, “Coronary heart disease is America’s 
No. 1 killer.”
 *4. According to the American Association of Fried Food Lovers, high cholesterol makes us 
healthy. 
 5. Cats and dogs make good pets.
 6. My roommate says that I snore.
 7. My roommate says that there are humans on Mars.
 *8. There are plenty of spiders around.
 9. Spiders are arachnids, which are animals that have eight legs.
 10. According to Dr. Who, an independent psychologist in Macon, GA, everyone should eat 
30 large pizzas per day.
 11. Spiders are very often poisonous.
Critical Thinkers
Marsha Coleman-Adebayo
Whistleblowers are employees who, based on their own empirical observations, report 
illegal or unethical conduct that harms the public. They offer prime examples of how 
empirical testimonial evidence in arguments can have life-saving or life-threatening 
consequences. Marsha Coleman-Adebayo, member of the Board of Directors of the 
National Whistleblowers Center, became a whistleblower when she was senior policy 
analyst for the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). Coleman-Adebayo 
discovered that a U.S. company mining vanadium was generating toxic waste, poisoning 
workers, and harming the environment. Coleman-Adebayo made that information public. 
She suffered retaliation and death threats due to her testimony. Her experience and the courage she exhibited 
led to the Notifi cation of Federal Employees Anti-Discrimination and Retaliation Act (called the “NO FEAR Act”). 
President George W. Bush signed the bill into law in 2002. It requires federal agencies to protect whistleblowers.
Courtesy of Marsha Coleman-Adebayo

92  Chapter 3 Premises and Conclusions
 *12. The items on the desk are pens.
 13. Pens are writing instruments made with ink inside a tube.
 14. According to the International Society of Astronomers, Pluto is a dwarf planet.
 15. According to what is seen through the Hubble telescope, Pluto is smaller than some 
asteroids.
B. If each of the following were premises in an argument, which of them could be assumed to 
pass the true premises test because they are uncontroversially true empirical statements?
 1. Blue is the most popular color.
 2. Red is the color of grass.
 3. According to the American Heart Association, “Coronary heart disease is America’s 
No. 1 killer.”
 *4. According to the American Association of Fried Food Lovers, high cholesterol makes us 
healthy. 
 5. Cats and dogs make good pets.
 6. My roommate says that I snore.
 7. My roommate says that there are humans on Mars.
 *8. There are plenty of spiders around.
 9. Spiders are arachnids, which are animals that have eight legs.
 10. “Abra Kadabra,” said Houdini, as he unlocked the chains on his arms.
 11. Spiders are very often poisonous.
 *12. Does your watch have a second hand?
 13. Your phone must be pretty old since it doesn’t have an alarm clock function.
 14. Hooray!
 15. According to a renowned psychologist, women are from Venus, and men are from Mars.
C. Determine whether the following statements are testimonial statements.
 1. The doctor said that she saw a broken bone on the x-ray. 
 2. According to the thermometer, it is fi ve degrees Celsius. 
 3. The witness claimed that the driver of the car didn’t brake before hitting the pedestrian. 
 *4. The food critic reported that the potatoes were salty. 
 5. My roommate says that there are humans on Mars.
 6. Spiders are arachnids, which are animals that have eight legs.
 7. “Abra Kadabra,” said Houdini, as he unlocked the chains on his arms.
 *8. Spiders are very often poisonous.
 9. Does your watch have a second hand?
 10. Your phone must be pretty old since it doesn’t have an alarm clock function.
 11. My roommate says she saw a mouse in the dining hall last night.
 *12. My roommate claims says that there are invisible winged horses in the dining hall.
 13. According to the American Heart Association, “Coronary heart disease is America’s 
No. 1 killer.”

Three Kinds of Premises  93
 14. According to the International Society of Astronomers, Pluto is a dwarf planet.
 15. According to what is seen through the Hubble telescope, Pluto is smaller than some 
asteroids.
D. Look in your textbooks for your other courses. Provide (a) two examples of uncontrover-
sially true empirical statements and (b) two examples of testimonial statements.
E. Determine whether the numbered statements are empirical statements. These statements 
are from an article on autism in the journal Molecular Psychiatry.
“[1] Autism/autistic disorder (MIM 209850) is a development disorder characterized by 
three classes of symptoms including impairments in communication and reciprocal social 
interactions, and repetitive or stereotyped behaviors and interests. [2] Twin studies have 
indicated that genetic factors play an important role in the etiology of autism as the con-
cordance rate for monozygotic twins is much higher than that of dizygotic twins. [3] In ad-
dition, family studies indicate that the recurrence to siblings, estimated from the multiple 
studies at 1–3%, is profoundly higher than the risk to the general population, which has 
been estimated at ~0.5–2/1000. [4] The mode of inheritance of autism appears complex and 
latent-class analyses suggest that 3–10 genes may underlie the disorder, although analysis 
of one genome-wide linkage has been used to suggest that at least 10 and as many as 100 
genes underlie the disorder.” (Buxbaum 2004, 144, material omitted) 
F. Explain whether and why the empirical statements in the following passage would make 
good premises.
“[1] “The rhesus macaque is the unsung hero of the maternity ward. [2] In 1940, Nobel 
laureate Karl Landsteiner and his student Alexander Weiner discovered in this monkey 
a blood protein they called the Rh (for Rhesus) factor. [3] Researchers soon found the Rh 
factor in some but not all humans and realized that a mother could react immunologi-
cally against the factor in her fetus. [4] Now a simple test and a vaccine prevent that 
reaction—and resulting mental retardation or even death in about 20,000 U.S. newborns 
a year.” (Pennisi 2007, 216)
Defi nitional Statements
What’s the difference between an empirical statement and a defi nitional 
statement? Let’s compare some examples of each. 
1. Empirical statement:  Triangular shapes are the most stable form for con-
structing large moving cranes used in construction.
 
Defi nitional statement: A triangle is a three-sided polygon. 
2. Empirical statement: Mark followed a recipe to make this cake. 
 
Defi nitional statement:  A recipe is a set of directions for making or 
preparing food. 
3. Empirical statement:  More world championships have been won by the 
New York Yankees than by any other baseball team. 
 
Defi nitional statement:  A home run is a hit in baseball that allows the 
batter to touch all the bases and score a run.

94  Chapter 3 Premises and Conclusions
The second statement in each pair is a defi nitional statement, a report about 
how a word is used. An empirical statement is a report of an observation. It 
wouldn’t be useful to consult a dictionary when trying to determine the truth 
of the fi rst statement in each pair above. Even if you looked up each word in 
the fi rst statement, it wouldn’t give the sort of information required to know 
whether triangular shapes are in fact best for insuring strength of a construc-
tion crane. In order to know which geometrical shapes make the best cranes, 
empirical investigation is needed.
The defi nition
A triangle is a three-sided polygon.
is uncontroversial. It presents an accurate report of how people use the word 
“triangle.” Like uncontroversial empirical statements, uncontroversial defi -
nitional statements may be assumed to pass the true premises test because 
they’re likely to be true. While dictionaries can’t resolve issues surrounding 
controversial terms, if used properly they’re your best fi rst step in trying to 
decide whether a defi nitional statement is true.
Frink’s article about Eskimo knife use contains a good example of an un-
controversial defi nitional statement.
This study deals with salmon butchering using a traditional semilunar 
knife known as the ulu. (Frink 2003, 116)
In this sentence Frink defi nes an ulu as a traditional semilunar knife. There’s 
no reason to doubt this uncontroversial defi nitional statement.
Here’s an uncontroversially false defi nitional statement:
If something has the genetic code of the species homo sapiens, it’s a hu-
man being.
This is a defi nition of “human being.” You might think that it’s true. 
But think for a moment. Recall from your high school biology classes that 
the genetic code of every living thing is present in every cell of that thing. 
And recall that every hair that falls from your head contains many cells 
from your body. Each of the cells has the genetic code of the species homo 
sapiens. But a strand of your hair isn’t fi lled with thousands of human be-
ings. This defi nition is uncontroversially false and fails the true premises 
test.
Connections
Chapter Four will say more about defi nitions. This chapter discusses only one type 
of defi nition, dictionary defi nitions.
Key Concept
A defi nitional 
statement is a report 
about how a word is 
used.
Key Concept
Uncontroversial 
defi nitional statements 
may be assumed to pass 
the true premises test.

Three Kinds of Premises  95
EXERCISE 3.2
A. Determine which of the following are defi nitions.
 1. Blue is the most popular color.
 2. Red is the color of grass.
 3. SCUBA means self-contained underwater body apparatus.
 *4. According to the American Association of Fried Food Lovers, high cholesterol makes us 
healthy. 
 5. Cats and dogs make good pets.
 6. My roommate says that I snore.
 7. My roommate says that there are humans on Mars.
 *8. There are plenty of spiders around.
 9. Spiders are arachnids, which are animals that have eight legs.
 10. According to Dr. Who, an independent psychologist in Macon, GA, everyone should eat 
30 large pizzas per day.
 11. Spiders are very often poisonous.
 *12. The items on the desk are pens.
 13. Pens are writing instruments made with ink inside a tube.
 14. According to the International Society of Astronomers, Pluto is a dwarf planet.
 15. According to what is seen through the Hubble telescope, Pluto is smaller than some 
asteroids.
B. If each of the following were premises in an argument, which of them could be assumed 
to pass the true premises test because they are uncontroversially true defi nitional 
 statements?
 1. Blue is the most popular color.
 2. Green is the color of grass.
 3. According to the American Heart Association, “Coronary heart disease is America’s 
No. 1 killer.”
 *4. According to the American Association of Fried Food Lovers, high cholesterol makes us 
healthy. 
 5. Cats and dogs make good pets.
 6. My roommate says that I snore.
 7. My roommate says that there are humans on Mars.
 *8. There are plenty of spiders around.
 9. Spiders are arachnids, which are animals that have eight legs.
 10. According to Dr. Nous, an independent psychologist in Macon, GA, everyone should 
eat 30 large pizzas per day.
 11. Spiders are very often poisonous.
 *12. According to my dictionary, SCUBA means self-contained underwater body apparatus.

96  Chapter 3 Premises and Conclusions
 13. Your phone must be pretty old since it doesn’t have an alarm clock function.
 14. “Abra Kadabra,” said Houdini, as he unlocked the chains on his arms.
 15. According to a renowned psychologist, women are from Venus, and men are from 
Mars.
C. Find two examples of uncontroversially true defi nitions in textbooks from your other 
courses.
D. For items 1–6 individually and items 7–10 in the paragraph below, determine whether each 
of the following is an empirical statement or a defi nitional statement. Of the empirical 
statements, which are testimonial? Then indicate which of the statements would make 
good premises and why.
1. Sometimes the sun appears to be about a hundred yards off.
2. My roommate said that the sun was so bright today that it appeared to be about a hun-
dred yards away.
3. The sun is a star that provides light and heat to the planets in this solar system.
*4. According to my dictionary, a star is a heavenly body capable of core fusion.
5. A planet is a heavenly body not capable of core fusion, said Gibor Basri, an astronomer 
at the University of California at Berkeley.
6. According to the results of a Google search, Gibor Basri received a BS in Physics from 
Stanford University in 1973, and a PhD in Astrophysics from the University of Colorado, 
Boulder in 1979.
[7] “Refl ecting on infectious conditions, it appears that disease burden, rapid change in disease 
incidence (suggesting preventability), and public concern about risk are three essential char-
acteristics that defi ne a public-health disorder. [8] By any one of several criteria, diabetes is as-
sociated with a very high burden to individuals with the disease, as well as to society in general. 
[9] Further, there is convincing and increasing evidence that primary, secondary, and tertiary 
prevention strategies are effective in reducing the disease burden associated with diabetes. 
[10] Yet most would still consider diabetes primarily to be a clinical disease. In part, this 
perception is based on the fact that, in association with aging and a possible strong family 
history, diabetes and its complications may appear inevitable to many. Further, much of 
the burden associated with diabetes is insidious, coming on gradually only after a consid-
erable number of years. Thus, the burden associated with diabetes has not dramatically 
increased in the past few months or years; it has been here for some time and is increasing 
steadily.” (Vinicor 1994, 22)
E. Determine whether the numbered statements are defi nitions. 
“[1] Autism/autistic disorder (MIM 209850) is a development disorder characterized 
by three classes of symptoms including impairments in communication and recip-
rocal social interactions, and repetitive or stereotyped behaviors and interests. [2] 
Twin studies have indicated that genetic factors play an important role in the etiol-
ogy of autism as the concordance rate for monozygotic twins is much higher than 
that of dizygotic twins. [3] In addition, family studies indicate that the recurrence 
to siblings, estimated from the multiple studies at 1–3%, is profoundly higher than 
the risk to the general population, which has been estimated at ~0.5–2/1000. [4] The 
mode of inheritance of autism appears complex and latent-class analyses suggest 

Three Kinds of Premises  97
that 3–10 genes may underlie the disorder, although analysis of one genome-wide 
linkage analysis has been used to suggest that at least 10 and as many as 100 genes 
underlie the disorder.” (Buxbaum 2004, 144, material omitted) 
F. Determine whether each of the following is an empirical statement, a testimonial premise, 
or a defi nition. Indicate which of the statements would make good premises.
1. “Cry9C is one of several so-called Bt proteins, but it is more heat stable and harder for 
humans to digest than its kin qualities that are typical of such allergens as peanuts.” 
(Kaiser 2000, 1867)* 
2. “The term basketry refers to woven textiles created manually without a frame or loom.” 
(Berman 2000, 422) 
3. “We observed 29 instances of wicker (FIG. 12), constituting 11.24% of the basketry 
weaves.” (Berman 2000, 427) 
*4.  “[O]ne of the best recent works, Wang Lixin’s Meiguo chuanjiaoshi yu wan Qing Zhongguo 
xiandaihua (American Missionaries and the Modernization of China in the Late Qing), 
argues that American missionaries, rather than being tools of cultural or other imperialism, 
were actually engaged in ‘cultural exchange,’ making a signifi cant contribution to China’s 
modernization in the late Qing period.” (Dunch 2002, 316) 
5. “Powerful storms have caused mass mortality of at least 10 Caribbean mangrove forests 
during the past 50 years.” (Cahoon 2003, 1094) 
Statements by Experts
The faculty in the Department of Religious Studies know a lot about Islam 
but less about classical music. The faculty in the Department of Music know 
a lot about classical music but less about Islam. The faculty of a college is 
a collection of experts. Experts are people who have specialized knowledge 
about a particular fi eld. Many experts work outside of college. The authors 
of this book would never dream of attempting to fi x the transmissions of 
their cars. We know a lot about critical thinking but not much about trans-
missions, marketing, plumbing, the cell structure of plants, insurance, how 
children learn to read, and many other subjects.
Technical Term: Authority
Another name for an expert is an authority. 
Some statements made by experts may be used as assumed premises. But 
appropriately assuming statements made by experts is a difficult matter. Be-
cause the use of the statements of experts is so common, this book will spend 
quite a bit of time laying out some guidelines for their use. You should use 
fi ve criteria to determine whether a statement by an expert may be used as an 
assumed premise: appropriate credentials, reliability, lack of bias, appropriate 
area of expertise, and expert consensus. A statement made by an expert that 
passes all of these fi ve criteria may be assumed to pass the true premises test.
Key Concept
Experts are people 
who have specialized 
knowledge about a 
particular fi eld.
Key Concept
A statement made by 
an expert that passes 
all fi ve of these criteria 
may be assumed to pass 
the true premises test: 
appropriate credentials, 
reliability, lack of bias, 
appropriate area of 
expertise, and expert 
consensus.
*Jocelyn Kaiser, Panel Urges Further Study of Biotech Corn. Science, Volume 290, no. 5498 
(December 8, 2000): 1867. Copyright © 2000 American Association for the Advancement of 
Science. All rights reserved.

98  Chapter 3 Premises and Conclusions
Appropriate Credentials
Anyone can say that she’s an expert. Credentials are the evidence that a per-
son provides to show that she really is an expert. The most common sort of 
credential is an academic degree. Having a degree in a particular fi eld is evi-
dence that a person is an expert in that fi eld. However, a person can lie about 
her degrees or go on the internet and buy a degree from a fake university. 
You may need to do some research to verify that the institution awarding the 
degree is a real university. This can be a bit more challenging than it sounds 
because the web pages of fake universities can look quite nice. But when you 
dig down into them you’ll fi nd very short lists of faculty, odd course names, 
or unusual information about the university’s address.
In addition to academic degrees, positions, publications, grants, awards, 
and honors are important credentials. Positions are the jobs an expert has 
had. The jobs that provide credentials are extremely varied. Being a professor 
is a job that provides a credential. Many jobs in the business world indicate 
a level of expertise. The Chairman of the Board of Governors of the United 
States Federal Reserve is Ben Bernanke. (The Federal Reserve system is the 
central banking system of the United States.) That Mr. Bernanke is Chairman 
of the Board of Governors of the United States Federal Reserve is one of his 
credentials. It indicates that he’s an expert about central banking. 
Especially for academic experts, publications and grants are important 
credentials. Professors write papers and send them to journals in the hope 
that they’ll be published. The journals receive many more papers than they 
can print. They use a board of editors to select the best of them. The same 
is true of books. Professors also apply for grants. Boards of reviewers select 
some of these applications for funding. Someone who has been published or 
has earned a grant has an important credential.
Awards and honors are also important credentials. For example, the title 
of “Associate of the Society of Actuaries” is awarded to actuaries who pass a 
certain number of tests. Actuaries help businesses manage risk. For example, 
actuaries help determine your car insurance premiums. The Society of Actu-
aries is a professional group for actuaries. The title “Associate of the Society 
of Actuaries” indicates that a person has achieved a level of expertise in help-
ing businesses manage risks.
Reliability
Reliability isn’t about the expert’s knowledge. It’s about the expert’s history 
of telling the truth. The question of the reliability of an expert is essentially 
the same as the question of the reliability of your friend’s statements about 
rain. As with your friend, if you know that an expert has made many false 
statements in the past, the expert’s current statements shouldn’t be assumed 
as premises.
Lack of Bias
An expert is biased when that expert has some reason to make statements 
that aren’t true. The most common causes of bias have to do with money. For 
example, if experts are being paid by a company whose profi ts will be affected 
by the truth or falsity of what the experts say, you should be hesitant to use 
the statements of these experts as assumed premises. On the other hand, you 

Three Kinds of Premises  99
can’t dismiss experts’ views only because the experts are being paid. The key 
is to consider whether the way the experts are paid will infl uence their views. 
Suppose that your instructor is being paid an annual salary. This payment 
method is unlikely to infl uence the grades she gives. On the other hand, sup-
pose that your instructor was paid for every student who passed the class. In 
that case, it would be reasonable to suspect that the instructor’s grades could 
be biased.
Another common source of bias is a political or ideological viewpoint. An 
expert might strongly believe in a cause. The expert might cite evidence in a 
slanted way in order to further the cause. Statements made by such an expert 
shouldn’t be used as assumed premises.
Don’t confuse bias with interest. Almost all experts are interested in the 
fi eld they study. A physicist who has spent her whole life trying to determine 
whether quarks are the smallest particles in the universe fi nds this ques-
tion extremely interesting. Her experiments may yield evidence that quarks 
are the smallest or that they’re not, or her results may be inconclusive. The 
physicist wants to know what the smallest particle is but has no stake in 
what that particle turns out to be.
Bias can be hard to eliminate. Suppose that you’re also a physicist and 
the physicist studying quarks is your friend. You’re one of the few experts on 
quarks and you’ve been chosen to be on a panel that will decide how grant 
money for the study of quarks will be distributed. Because one of the appli-
cants is your friend, you’re biased. If you’re one of a small number of experts 
on quarks it may not be possible to remove you from the panel making the 
grant decisions. In that case, it would be essential that you reveal that you’re 
friends with one of the applicants. When you do this, you’re making your bias 
transparent. A transparent bias is a bias that’s known to those evaluating the 
arguments of the person who’s biased. On the other hand, a bias that isn’t 
transparent is a hidden bias.
 
The American Enterprise Institute (AEI) is associated with conservative 
causes. It publishes studies on economic, social, and foreign policy issues. It 
makes no attempt to hide its perspective. The following is easily found on its 
web pages:
AEI’s purposes are to defend the principles and improve the institutions of 
American freedom and democratic capitalism—limited government, pri-
vate enterprise, individual liberty and responsibility, vigilant and effective 
defense and foreign policies, political accountability, and open debate. Its 
work is addressed to government officials and legislators, teachers and 
students, business executives, professionals, journalists, and all citizens 
interested in a serious understanding of government policy, the economy, 
and important social and political developments. (AEI 2006) 
People For the American Way (PFAW) is associated with liberal causes. It 
works in areas broadly similar to the AEI. Its perspective is similarly open.
People For the American Way is an energetic advocate for the values and 
institutions that sustain a diverse democratic society. Many of these 
are now threatened by the infl uence of the radical right and its allies 
who have risen to positions of political power. Our most fundamental 
rights and freedoms—and even our basic constitutional framework—are 
Key Concept
A transparent bias is 
a bias that’s known to 
those evaluating the 
arguments of the person 
who’s biased. On the 
other hand, a bias that 
isn’t transparent is a 
hidden bias.

100  Chapter 3 Premises and Conclusions
at risk. People For the American Way works in close collaboration with 
other leading national and state progressive organizations to mobilize 
Americans at this defi ning moment in our history. (PFAW 2006)
The AEI and the PFAW are transparently biased. 
Hidden biases are much more problematic than transparent biases. In 
general, if an expert’s biases are transparent and the other conditions for the 
assumption of a premise based on expertise have been met, you may use that 
expert’s statements as assumed premises. When it comes to biases, the condi-
tion of expert consensus (which is discussed below) is particularly important. 
If both the AEI and the PFAW were to assert the same statement, this state-
ment could be appropriately used as an assumed premise.
It’s hard to know your own biases. Tyler might be biased against people 
who are overweight. He might unconsciously assume that the arguments 
made by overweight people are worse than those made by those who aren’t 
overweight. Suppose that Tyler is a manager who supervises a large group 
of people and that he makes decisions about how his company should use 
its employees. Tyler’s two associate managers favor different uses, and each 
presents Tyler with arguments for their view. One of the associate managers 
is overweight. Tyler might incorrectly fi nd that the arguments made by the 
overweight associate manager are weaker than those made by the other as-
sociate manager. 
Appropriate Area of Expertise
A statement by an expert should only be used as an assumed premise if the 
statement falls within the expert’s area of expertise. Suppose that one of the 
authors of this textbook said:
Transmission fl uid is usually green.
It wouldn’t be appropriate to use this statement as an assumed premise be-
cause we aren’t experts about automotive mechanics. On the other hand, 
Critical Thinkers
Mahzarin Banaji, Anthony Greenwald, Brian Nosek
Mahzarin Banaji, Anthony 
Greenwald, and Brian Nosek 
have developed a test that 
they believe reveals people’s 
hidden biases. They call it the 
Implicit Association Test (IAT). 
If you go to implicit.harvard.
edu/implicit, you can see 
their results and even take their tests to see whether, according to these researchers, you have 
unconscious biases.
Courtesy of Mahzarin Banaji
Courtesy of Brian Nosek
Courtesy of Anthony Greenwald

Three Kinds of Premises  101
given the expertise of the authors of this book, it would be appropriate for you 
to use our statement that
Human rights are one kind of moral rights.
as an assumed premise.
Fallacy: Inappropriate Expertise
Famous athletes who know a great deal about their sports are frequently seen 
making statements about cars, shampoo, motor oil, mortgages, and many 
other things. None of these statements should be used as an assumed  premise. 
An argument that contains a premise that’s assumed on the basis of expertise 
but is about an issue outside an expert’s area of expertise commits the fallacy 
of Inappropriate Expertise.
Albert Einstein has become a misused expert. In addition to his groundbreak-
ing work in physics, he became known during World War II because of a letter 
he wrote to President Roosevelt about atomic experiments being carried out by 
Nazi scientists in Germany. Because Einstein’s knowledge helped spur the United 
States to concentrate more intensely on its own atomic program, many thought 
that Einstein helped bring the war to a quicker end. For the rest of Einstein’s life 
and even after his death, his name was constantly associated with genius. Report-
ers asked his opinion on everything from breakfast cereal to political candidates, 
a host of things that were irrelevant to his expert knowledge of physics. 
Technical Term: Appeal to an Inappropriate Authority, Argumentum ad 
Verecundiam
The fallacy of Inappropriate Expertise is also called the fallacy of Appeal to an 
 Inappropriate Authority. The Latin name for this fallacy is Argumentum ad Verecundiam.
Expert Consensus
If experts disagree about the truth of a statement, you shouldn’t use that 
statement as an assumed premise. Disagreement between experts is an op-
portunity for critical thinking. You should examine the arguments of the 
disagreeing experts. Now that you’re becoming familiar with what makes 
a good argument, you’re in a better position to critically evaluate the argu-
ments made by experts.
Key Concept
An argument that 
contains a premise 
that’s assumed on the 
basis of expertise but is 
about an issue outside 
an expert’s area of 
expertise commits the 
fallacy of Inappropriate 
Expertise.
Habits of a Critical Thinker
Resourcefulness
The task of deciding whether an argument passes the 
true premises test can be daunting. You need to check 
to see whether an empirical statement is uncontrover-
sial, examine testimonial statements, consider whether 
a statement is an appropriate use of defi nition, and 
consider the criteria for the evaluation of statements 
by experts. Doing these things requires you to be 
resourceful. A resourceful person fi gures out many 
different ways to get the job done. And evaluating 
premises requires you to do many different things. For 
example, to determine whether a person is an appropri-
ate expert you may need to do more than a simple web 
search. You might have to interview people or check 
court records. You might have to examine other works 
by this person. A good critical thinker is resourceful, 
fi guring out the best way to evaluate premises.

102  Chapter 3 Premises and Conclusions
Students often forget to check for disagreement between experts. If you 
only examine the view of one expert, it’s impossible for you to determine 
whether the view you’re reading is held by many experts or is the subject of 
intense debate. Before you use a statement of an expert as an assumed prem-
ise, you should check at least two experts.
G U I D E
Proper Citation of Experts
When you use an assumed premise on the grounds that it was made by an expert, you must cite 
the expert. Citations serve two functions. First, they show where your assumed premise came 
from so others can check it for themselves. Second, they give proper credit to experts for the work 
they’ve done. When you get an idea from an expert but don’t cite it, you’re asserting that you 
came up with the idea yourself. Failure to cite experts is theft of ideas. It’s plagiarism. 
How to Cite
Citations come in many formats. The rules for capitalization, punctuation, etc. vary dra-
matically from discipline to discipline. To illustrate this, let’s look at one article cited in 
two different formats. Here’s an example of what’s often called “science format.”
Carnevale, G. (2006). A new snake mackerel from the Miocene of Algeria. Palaeontol-
ogy 49, 391–403.
Here’s an example of the same article cited in what’s often called “Chicago style.”
1. Giorgio Carnevale, “A New Snake Mackerel From the Miocene of Algeria,” Palaeon-
tology 49 (2006): 391–403.
The second format is called “Chicago style” because it comes from The Chicago Manual of 
Style. This book tells academics how to cite the hundreds of different materials that they 
may need to cite. Science format and Chicago style are only two of many different formats.
In addition to using different formats, different rules govern the placement of citations. 
In science format, a reference to the article above would be made by putting
(Carnevale 2006)
into the text of the article at the place at which the author wishes to refer to Carnevale’s 
article. In Chicago style, there would be a “1” in the text and then the material above would 
either appear at the bottom of the page or at the end of the chapter or book. The “1” in the 
text would be in superscript; like this: 1.
You’ll use different citation formats for different classes. You should consult with your in-
structor regarding the proper citation format for that class. When you’ve chosen a major, you 
should buy a good citation guide for that discipline. Any faculty member in your major dis-
cipline should be able to point you to the standard citation reference work for her discipline.
What You Need to Cite
You must cite all uses of others’ ideas. This means that whenever you use an expert’s ideas, 
you need to cite that expert. If you use the words of others, you’ve used their ideas and must 
provide a citation. But you can use other people’s ideas without using their words, and when 
you do that you still must provide a citation. It doesn’t matter whether you use the words 
the expert wrote. You must always give credit where credit is due.

Premises and the Internet  103
Premises and the Internet
The internet is a powerful tool for researching premises. Like all powerful 
tools, the internet can be misused. Think about empirical statements. Find-
ing information about them used to require a trip to the library or at least 
reading from the thick volumes of an encyclopedia. Now you can go on the 
internet. But there’s one big problem when you compare the internet to a li-
brary or an encyclopedia. Anyone can post anything to the internet. There’s 
very little quality control, and much of what’s on the web is false.
 
Here’s an example from the web page english.pravda.ru. This web site 
claims to be the English language version of a web successor to the Russian 
newspaper Pravda, which was the official newspaper of the Communist party 
in Soviet Russia.  (The authors of this textbook have been unable to verify 
these claims.)
If aliens visited the Earth, their traces would be unusual, preternatural and 
having no scientifi c explanation. There have been plenty of such artifacts. 
 
In the Libyan desert mysterious glassy formations—tektites—were 
found. Radioactive isotopes were detected in the tektites. They prove that 
the tektites came into being as a result of strong radioactive emanation 
not earlier than one million years ago. The Earth was formed not millions, 
but billions of years ago, and tektites appeared on the formed planet. There 
were many attempts to give the explanation to these mysterious forma-
tions. There was a version that they appeared after a comet collided with 
the Earth, but no version was able to explain many peculiar features of tek-
tites, such as their concentration on some areas of the surface of the Earth. 
(Pravda 2006) 
These statements aren’t uncontroversial empirical statements. They aren’t 
defi nitions. No expert is identifi ed. You can’t check for appropriate creden-
tials, reliability, lack of bias, or appropriate area of expertise. None of these 
claims should be used as an assumed premise.
Tektites.
Harry Taylor/Dorling Kindersley/Getty Images

104  Chapter 3 Premises and Conclusions
The internet has also made researching the credentials of people who say 
that they’re experts easier and more dangerous. People who want others to 
think that they’re an expert actuary could quickly create a web site for a fake 
group, the Association of Actuaries, and claim to be the President of this Asso-
ciation. You can’t assume that the credentials you fi nd on the web are accurate.
What can you do about these problems with the internet? Parts of the inter-
net are subject to quality control, and you need to restrict your research to those 
parts. Because you’re a college student, the most important kind of organization 
that controls a portion of the web is your college. Universities work hard to see 
that the information in their web pages is accurate. University libraries review 
internet resources and give students access to reliable resources. Your library 
and its librarians are one of your best resources for navigating the internet.
A Common Mistake
What does it mean when you don’t have a good reason to assume a premise? 
Students sometimes jump from the claim that
A statement shouldn’t be used as an assumed premise.
to the claim that
The statement is false.
Don’t make this mistake. Even if a statement shouldn’t be used as an as-
sumed premise, that doesn’t mean that the statement is false. It only means 
that the statement shouldn’t be assumed to be true, that you should seek a 
subargument for the premise. When it comes to beliefs about the truth or 
falsity of a statement you have at least three options. 
1. You can believe that the statement is true.
2. You can believe that the statement is false.
3. You can believe that you don’t know whether the statement is true or false.
People often overlook option 3. 
Connections
Chapter Two notes that “I don’t know” is often the correct answer to a question.
EXERCISE 3.3
A. Identify the expert appealed to in each of the following passages and then identify the claims 
made by the expert. Determine whether each of the claims can be assumed to pass the true 
premises test.
 1. “ ‘The organic market has grown and so has the temptation for organic fraud,’ said 
Robynn Shrader, chief executive officer for the NCGA (National Cooperative Grocers 
Association). Our program will add a very critical safety checkpoint in the supply chain 
that will empower retailers and provide peace of mind for organic consumers.” (Smith 
2007, 3, material omitted)

A Common Mistake  105
 2. “Any employee who is convicted of unlawful manufacture, distribution, sale, use or 
possession of a controlled substance or other illegal or dangerous drug, or who admits 
guilt of any such offense in a court proceeding, shall be suspended for not less than 
two months or dismissed after compliance with procedural requirements.” (Safety Net 
2006, 15)
 3. From a brochure announcing the publication of a book for an introduction to philoso-
phy course: “[This] is an outstanding book on all fronts. The top-notch introductory 
essays and extensive glossary make the book extremely user-friendly from the student’s 
perspective.” (Stanley 2006) 
 *4. “Roger Penrose (1989, 1994) has argued that creative mathematicians do not think in 
a mechanistic way, but that they often have a kind of insight into the Platonic realm 
which exists independently from us [though] modesty forbids him saying it of himself. 
[Roger Penrose] has enjoyed some of the most profound mathematical experiences of 
recent times. If he has nothing more than a mere hunch that he is glimpsing into the 
Platonic realm, that in itself is something for us all to ponder.” (Brown 1999, 78, mate-
rial omitted)
 5. “A liberal arts education is associated with an increase in humanitarianism and a sense 
of civic responsibility, a greater interest in and more liberal attitudes toward a variety of 
social and political issues, and greater regard for civil rights and higher levels of tolerance 
related to social, racial, and ethnic diversity.” (Henderson-King 2000, 142–143, material 
omitted)
 6. “Policymakers that are accountable to the public should be more responsive to civil 
society organisations since they are reliant on the public for re-election and organized 
interests represent citizen interests.” (Mahoney 2007, 338)
 7. “Emotion must be included in a discussion of body intelligence because it is one of the 
means by which our bodies communicate knowledge to conscious awareness.” (Norris 
2001, 113)
 *8. “Since communication can take place directly through the body, the body can be inten-
tionally used to transmit information.” (Norris 2001, 116)
 9. Suppose a representative of Bayer were to propose the following argument to support 
the conclusion that aspirin, or acetylsalicylic acid, is an effective cure against the com-
mon cold: 
  (1)  95% of aspirin users are of the opinion that aspirin is an effective remedy against the 
common cold.
  Therefore,
  (2) Aspirin is an effective remedy against the common cold.
 10. “According to Bourdieu (1977), schools perpetuate inequality by rewarding the culture 
(i.e., behavior, habits, tastes, lifestyles, and attitudes) of the dominant class.” (Ross 
1999, 447)
 11. “Raphael (1996a, 2000) argued that as welfare recipients are pushed to move into the 
labor market, their dependence on the state may be eliminated, but it is replaced by 
increased dependence on abusive partners.” (Scott 2002, 881) 

106  Chapter 3 Premises and Conclusions
 *12. “In his survey of Arab cities during the Ottoman period, Andre Raymond states, 
‘The number of caravanserais serves as a defi nitive index of the amount of economic 
activity in a city.’ According to Raymond, the urban khan governs the level of whole-
sale trade in an exclusive fashion, thereby serving as an absolute indicator of the 
amount of large-scale commercial activity in a given city.” (Um 2003, 180–181, mate-
rial omitted) 
 13. “The main motivation for this paper stems from the observation that in the 1980s and 
1990s fi rms invested heavily in downsizing. Recent examples are National Westminster 
bank, AT&T, IBM and Scott Paper. As documented by Audretsch (1995: p. 27), Cameron 
(1994b), The Economist (1996a), Sampson (1995) and Kets de Vries and Balazs (1997), 
the mass fi rings that followed from this downsizing to a great extent involved middle 
managers.” (Boone 2000, 581) 
 14. “Five volunteers watching the republican presidential debate in Miami, in December 
2007, were wearing electrode-studded headsets that track electrical activity in the brain. 
When presidential candidate Mitt Romney said he was the only candidate to have got-
ten the problem of healthcare solved, “there was a pronounced shift in activity in their 
prefrontal lobes. ‘They liked what they were hearing,’ said Brad Feldman, an analyst 
with EmSence Corp., the company that conducted the test to monitor voters’ brains.” 
(Alter 2007, W1) 
 15. “ ‘People say one thing in a focus group and do another thing in the voting booth’ says 
Alex Lundry, research director for TargetPoint, a campaign strategy consultancy.” (Alter 
2007, W6)
B. Determine whether each of the following would be a good premise and why or why not. 
Explicitly use the guidelines discussed above. To do some of these exercises, you will need 
to fi nd and consult the citations page of this book.
 1. There are at least fi ve planets visible to the naked eye.
 2. “The subprime mortgage crisis has been a fi nancial disaster for much of Wall Street” 
wrote Kate Kelley, reporter for the Wall Street Journal. (Kelley 2007, A1)
 3. According to my neighbor who watched the nightly news last night, the subprime mort-
gage crisis has been a fi nancial disaster.
 *4. Kate Kelly, of the Wall Street Journal reported that “Mr. Blankfein is set to be paid close 
to $70 million this year, according to one person familiar with the matter.” (Kelley 
2007, A1)
 5. You probably decided whether to accept #4 as a premise based on the credentials of re-
porter Kate Kelly. But should Kate Kelly accept the claim about Blankfein’s salary, based 
on the testimony of “one person familiar with the matter”?
 6. Use the material from Exercise 3.3 A.14 above. 
 7. Use the material from Exercise 3.3 A.15 above.
 *8. “The term basketry refers to woven textiles created manually without a frame or loom.” 
(Berman 2000, 422)
 9. “We observed 29 instances of wicker (FIG. 12), constituting 11.24% of the basketry 
weaves.” (Berman 2000, 427)

A Common Mistake  107
 10. “[O]ne of the best recent works, Wang Lixin’s Meiguo chuanjiaoshi yu wan Qing Zhong-
guo xiandaihua (American Missionaries and the Modernization of China in the Late 
Qing), argues that American missionaries, rather than being tools of cultural or other 
imperialism, were actually engaged in ‘cultural exchange,’ making a signifi cant contri-
bution to China’s modernization in the late Qing period.” (Dunch 2002, 316)
 11. “Powerful storms have caused mass mortality of at least 10 Caribbean mangrove forests 
during the past 50 years.” (Cahoon 2003, 1094) 
 *12. “A liberal arts education is associated with an increase in humanitarianism and a sense of 
civic responsibility, a greater interest in and more liberal attitudes toward a variety of social 
and political issues and greater regard for civil rights and higher levels of tolerance related 
to social, racial, and ethnic diversity.” (Henderson-King 2000, 142, material omitted) 
 13. “The landscape, when considered through a contemporary aesthetic lens, is already a 
cultural ‘sculptural’ form marked and transformed through thousands of years of hu-
man activity.” (Tilley 2000, 36) 
 14. George Clooney, well-known celebrity for his roles on television and the big screen, 
spoke to the United Nations in 2006, asking the UN to help the people in Darfur who 
were suffering due to group confl icts. (Note: To determine this, you will need to do 
some research about George Clooney and his knowledge of Darfur.)
 15. In the United States, most lawyers specialize in a particular area of the law because it 
is nearly impossible to have specialized knowledge about all different areas of the law. 
Suppose that Mr. Smith becomes a member of the state bar of New York. He works exclu-
sively as a criminal defense attorney and comes to be recognized as an expert in criminal 
law. Now suppose that a reporter interviews Mr. Smith about one of his famous criminal 
defense cases and that at the end of the interview the reporter asks Mr. Smith who will 
prevail in a high profi le case in which a recording company is suing a celebrity musician 
for breach of contract (a matter of contract law). The celebrity claims the contract cannot 
be enforced because the record company didn’t give sufficient consideration for its bar-
gain. Mr. Smith, never shy about offering his opinion, states that the contract shouldn’t 
be enforced because no consideration was given in his view. Can Mr. Smith’s statement 
about the musician’s contract case be used as assumed premise? 
C. Evaluate the credentials of the authors of this book.
1. Look at the front of this book to fi nd our names and the name of the university where we 
work.
2. Then search the web to determine our positions, degrees, publications, and awards.
D. Identify the four empirical statements and two defi nitions in the following passage.
“Most of us grew up with the conventional defi nition of a planet as a body that orbits 
a star, shines by refl ecting the star’s light and is larger than an asteroid. Although the 
defi nition may not have been very precise, it clearly categorized the bodies we knew at 
the time. In the 1990s, however, a remarkable series of discoveries made it untenable. 
Beyond the orbit of Neptune,  astronomers found hundreds of icy worlds, some quite 
large, occupying a doughnut-shaped region called the Kuiper belt. Around scores of other 

108  Chapter 3 Premises and Conclusions
stars, they found other planets, many of whose orbits look nothing like those in our so-
lar system. They discovered brown dwarfs, which blur the distinction between planet 
and star. And they found planet-like objects drifting alone in the darkness of interstel-
lar space. These fi ndings ignited a debate about what a planet really is and led to the de-
cision last August by the International Astronomical Union (IAU), astronomers’ main 
professional society, to defi ne a planet as an object that orbits a star, is large enough to 
have settled into a round shape and, crucially, “has cleared the neighborhood around 
its orbit.” Controversially, the new defi nition removes Pluto from the list of planets.” 
(Soter 2007, 34) 
E. “Less than a decade ago, the biggest problem in global health seemed to be the lack of 
resources available to combat the multiple scourges ravaging the world’s poor and sick. 
Today, thanks to a recent extraordinary and unprecedented rise in public and private giv-
ing, more money is being directed toward pressing health challenges than ever before. But 
because the efforts this money is paying for are largely uncoordinated and directed mostly 
at specifi c high-profi le diseases—rather than at public health in general—there is a grave 
danger that the current age of generosity could not only fall short of expectations but actu-
ally make things worse on the ground. (Garrett 2007, 14) 
Imagine that someone makes the following argument, relying on and quoting some of 
Garrett’s claims. Evaluate the premises of this argument.
(1) “Less than a decade ago, the biggest problem in global health seemed to be the lack of 
resources available to combat the multiple scourges ravaging the world’s poor and sick.”
(2) “Today, thanks to a recent extraordinary and unprecedented rise in public and pri-
vate giving, more money is being directed toward pressing health challenges than ever 
 before.”
  Therefore,
(3) Experts in global health believe we are making progress on the problem of global 
health. 
Conclusions
Two features are crucial to assessing the conclusions of arguments: strength 
and scope. 
Strength of Conclusions
A conclusion can be stated with more or less strength. Let’s suppose that all 
of the following statements are offered as conclusions:
(a)  It’s just possible that infl ation will rise next year.
(b) Infl ation may rise next year.
(c)  There is a good chance that infl ation will rise next year.
(d) Infl ation is likely to rise next year.
(e)  Infl ation is very likely to rise next year.
(f)  It’s certain that infl ation will rise next year.

Conclusions  109
Each of these sentences expresses the same statement.
(A) Infl ation will rise next year.
But (a) through (f) express (A) with varying degrees of strength. Statement 
(a) expresses (A) weakly. Statement (f) expresses (A) with a great deal of 
strength. These statements use only some of the ways that you can in-
dicate the strength of a conclusion. Words such as “might,” “could,” 
“should,” “probably,” “defi nitely,” and many others can be used to indi-
cate the strength of a conclusion. The strength of a conclusion refers to 
the degree of certainty that the author of an argument attributes to the 
conclusion.
As conclusions get stronger they require more evidence to support them. 
If your conclusion is (a), it wouldn’t take that much evidence. But it would 
require a lot of evidence to show that (f) is true. In fact, you probably couldn’t 
provide enough evidence to show that (f) is true. 
Technical Terms: Strength of Arguments and Strength of Conclusions
Logicians use the word “strength” to refer both to good inductive arguments and 
to conclusions. This leads to confusing sentences such as: “We have a strong argu-
ment for a weak conclusion.” However, this double usage of the word “strength” 
is so common that this textbook adopts it. When you see the words “strong” or 
“weak” discussed in the context of arguments, you need to read carefully to see 
whether the words refer to the argument or to the conclusion.
Scope of Conclusions
Some conclusions are about groups of things. When a conclusion is about 
a group of things, the conclusion will have a scope. Look at the following 
statements:
(a)   There is at least one person who is taller than the authors of this 
book.
(b) Some people are taller than the authors of this book.
(c)  Quite a few people are taller than the authors of this book.
(d) About half of all people are taller than the authors of this book.
(e)  Most people are taller than the authors of this book.
(f)  Everyone is taller than the authors of this book.
Statement (a) is true and (f) is false. Statement (a) has narrower scope. State-
ment (f) has broader scope. In fact, (a) has the narrowest possible scope and (f) 
has the broadest possible scope. Scope refers to the percentage of a group in a 
conclusion that’s claimed to have a particular feature. The broader the scope 
of a conclusion, the better the argument in support of that conclusion needs 
to be. It wouldn’t take much of an argument to defend (a). It would take an 
extremely good argument to show that (f) is true.
Key Concept
The strength of a 
conclusion refers to 
the degree of certainty 
that the author of an 
argument attributes to 
the conclusion. 
Key Concept
Scope refers to the 
percentage of a group 
in a conclusion that’s 
claimed to have a 
particular feature.

110  Chapter 3 Premises and Conclusions
 
If a conclusion refers to more than one group, it will have more than one 
scope. Look at the statement:
(g)  Most trees are taller than some houses.
This statement refers to two groups, trees and houses. Its scope with respect 
to trees is broader than its scope with respect to houses. 
 
In addition to a conclusion having multiple scopes, it can have ambigu-
ous scope. Look at the statement:
(h) People are taller than the authors of this book.
Is this statement asserting (a), (f), or something in between? It makes a big 
difference, and you can’t answer this question because this statement has 
ambiguous scope.
When you’re evaluating arguments, you should note the strength and 
the scope of the conclusion. The stronger the conclusion and the broader its 
scope, the better an argument will have to be in order to provide a good reason 
to believe the conclusion. Very strong conclusions and very broad conclu-
sions should attract your attention. While you can defend strong and broad 
conclusions, it’s often difficult to do so.
EXERCISE 3.4
A. Arrange the following statements from weakest to strongest.
1. It will probably rain tomorrow.
2. It is almost certain to rain tomorrow. 
3. It may rain tomorrow.
4. It will rain tomorrow.
5. It is nearly impossible that it will rain tomorrow.
B. For each of the following, determine whether the scope and strength of the conclusion is 
warranted.
 1. I have known fi ve members of the Green party and all have been from France. Ralph 
Nader and Cynthia McKinney are members of the Green party, so they too are most 
likely from France.
 2. The great physician Dr. Dominose of Harvard University has done extensive research 
on nutritional needs. He has found that if a man weighs more than 500 pounds, that 
man would require as much protein as would be found in 30 pizzas in order to sustain 
himself. It is thus clear that everyone should eat 30 pizzas per day.
 3. In early 2009, there were several cases of the disease SARS reported by the Chinese gov-
ernment. Clearly, by 2011, there will be a SARS epidemic of tremendous proportions.
 *4. “Usually, girls who become cheerleaders in middle school are already part of the in-group 
(e.g., Preps) at school; thus, a congruity exists between peer groups and the social status of 
an activity.” (Bettis 2003, 130)
 5. “Any war between the two Chinas [the People’s Republic of China and Taiwan] could 
easily involve the United States. Under the 1979 Taiwan Relations Act, official U.S. 
law stipulates that the United States would view any confl ict over Taiwan with ‘grave 
concern.’ The 1995–96 Taiwan Strait crisis showed that the United States does not take 
its interest in Taiwan’s security lightly.” (O’Hanlon 2000, 42)

Conclusions  111
 6. I have visited three condominium communities and each had monthly assessments of $300 
or more. I shouldn’t buy a condo since I don’t want to spend that much on assessments.
 7. Tom Cruise is a scientologist. So is John Travolta. It seems that all movie stars are sci-
entologists.
 *8. “Its high content of alpha linolenic acids has made the ancient fl ax seed become our 
modern miracle food. Alpha linolenic acid is a type of plant-derived omega 3 fatty acid, 
similar to those found in fi sh such as salmon. Benefi ts of fl ax seed include lowering 
total cholesterol and LDL cholesterol (the Bad cholesterol) levels. [F]lax seed may also 
help lower blood triglyceride and blood pressure. It may also keep platelets from be-
coming sticky therefore reducing the risk of a heart attack. Aside from alpha linolenic 
acid, fl ax seed is rich in lignan. Lignan is a type of phytoestrogen (antioxidant) and also 
provides fi ber. Research reveals that lignan in fl ax seed shows a lot of promise in fi ght-
ing disease—including a possible role in cancer prevention, especially breast cancer. 
Moderately include fl ax seed in your diet.” (Tsang 2009, material omitted) 
 9. Anyone processing photographic fi lms and papers that use silver nitrate is familiar with 
the pungent aroma of chemical developers. I’ve worked with it and known hundreds of 
others who have, and we all agree it’s a bad smell. I’ve never met anyone who disagreed. 
Likely, anyone you meet will also think the smell is bad.
 10. Fifty percent of marriages end in divorce. Hence, it is certain that your marriage will 
end in divorce.
 11. “Although dependencies on violent men may have preexisted welfare reform and exist 
for some women who have never had to rely on welfare, they could be exacerbated by 
changes in the welfare regulations.” (Scott 2002, 892, material omitted) 
 *12. “The upper stories of the house, inhabited and used collectively by the family, could be 
securely closed off from the lower level by a door at the top of the stairs. It is possible that 
this upper door, rather than the front entrance to the house, acted as the true threshold to 
the domestic space. Today the current inhabitants enter and leave via the front door, which 
is kept unlocked and open. They lock only the upper door, which is unornamented and 
smaller, but seems to fulfi ll a more central function as a social boundary.” (Um 2003, 185) 
C. For the next two exercises, think about the following argument:
  (1) Bipeds are two-footed animals.
  Therefore,
  (2) George Bush is a biped.
 1. Explain why the premise doesn’t support the conclusion by itself.
 2. Provide the premise that is needed to support the conclusion.
 3. Explain in your own words why stronger conclusions require stronger arguments.
 *4. Give an example that illustrates that stronger conclusions require stronger arguments.
 
 For the next two exercises, think about the following argument:
“In Born to Rebel, F. Sulloway (1996) argued that, throughout history, later-borns 
have been more likely than fi rst-borns to challenge the status quo. The authors 
tested Sulloway’s hypothesis among a group of U.S. college students who had 
participated in civil disobedience as part of a labor dispute. The authors predicted 
that there would be a higher percentage of later-borns among those who had 
been arrested than among a group of their friends who had not participated in 

112  Chapter 3 Premises and Conclusions
civil disobedience or among a control group of students drawn from classes at 
the college. The fi ndings, in fact, revealed a signifi cant relationship between the 
number of times the students had been arrested and birth order.”
  In stating the results of their study, Zweignhaft and Von Ammon noted, “When we ex-
amined the number of times the participants had been arrested (none, one, or more than 
one) in terms of their birth orders (fi rst-borns, including only children, and later-borns), 
we found that 24 of the 56 (43%) who had not been arrested were later-borns, that 6 of 
the 12 (50%) who had been arrested once were later-borns, and that all 5 (100%) of those 
who had been arrested more than once were later-borns.” (Zweigenhaft 2000, 624)
 5. Given the fi ndings of the study, what is the strongest conclusion that can be supported?
  (a)   The study shows that it is possible that there is a relationship between birth order 
and the likelihood someone has been arrested.
  (b)   The study shows that it is likely that there is a relationship between birth order and 
the likelihood someone has been arrested.
  (c)   The study shows that there is certainly a relationship between birth order and the 
likelihood someone has been arrested.
 6. Which of the following statements is best supported by the evidence?
  (a) In the study, some later-borns had been arrested.
  (b) In the study, most later-borns had been arrested.
  (c) In the study, all later-borns had been arrested.
 
 For the next two exercises, look at the following argument:
“Women who take fi sh oil supplements while pregnant may improve the hand-
eye coordination of their children, according to a small Australian study. In a 
trial published online Dec. 21 in The Archives of Disease in Childhood: Fetal and 
Neonatal Edition, scientists divided 98 women into two groups. Beginning at 20 
weeks of pregnancy continuing until the women gave birth, the fi rst group took 
a daily dose of four grams of fi sh oil, while the second group took four grams of 
olive oil each day. Neither the mothers nor the researchers knew which supple-
ment the women had received until the study ended. The researchers examined 
72 children born to women who completed the study when the children were 2½ 
years old. In tests of locomotor ability, speech and hearing, vocabulary and practi-
cal reasoning, the children whose mothers were given fi sh oil during pregnancy 
scored slightly higher, but the differences were not statistically signifi cant. How-
ever, after controlling for maternal age, birth weight, breast-feeding and other 
factors, the children of the women who took fi sh oil were signifi cantly better at 
hand-eye coordination than those of the women who took the olive oil supple-
ment. The authors acknowledged that their sample was small, and that they 
could not exclude the possibility that the result was due to chance. Still, children 
who received prenatal fi sh oil did consistently perform better on all measures 
of development. “These preliminary data indicate that supplementation with 
a relatively high-dose fi sh oil during the last 20 weeks of pregnancy is not only 
safe,” the authors concluded, “but also seems to have potential benefi cial effects 
that need to be explored further.” (Bakalar 2007, F6)
 7. Given the fi ndings of the study, what is the strongest conclusion that can be supported?
  (a)   The study shows that it is possible that prenatal exposure to fi sh oil improves a 
child’s hand-eye coordination.

Conclusions  113
  (b)   The study shows that it is very probable that prenatal exposure to fi sh oil improves 
a child’s hand-eye coordination.
  (c)   The study shows with certainty that prenatal exposure to fi sh oil improves a child’s 
hand-eye coordination.
 *8. From the information provided in the passage above, what should you say about the 
scope of the fi ndings?
  (a)   Some children who had prenatal exposure to fi sh oil had better hand-eye coordina-
tion than those without prenatal exposure to fi sh oil.
  (b)   Most children who had prenatal exposure to fi sh oil had better hand-eye coordina-
tion than those without prenatal exposure to fi sh oil.
  (c)   All children who had prenatal exposure to fi sh oil had better hand-eye coordination 
than those without prenatal exposure to fi sh oil.
  (d)   Given the information in the passage, the scope cannot be properly assessed. 
 
 For the next two exercises, look at the following argument:
“A new study of Sumatran orangutans in Indonesia suggests that ancient 
apes may have developed upright walking while still living in the trees—
well before human ancestors, known as hominids, ever descended to the 
ground. The study authors spent many hours observing Sumatran orang-
utans as they moved about the canopy of their rain forest home in Gunung 
Leuser National Park. The critically endangered animals—which number 
about 7,300 in the wild—live nearly their whole lives aloft. On sturdier 
branches the orangutans use all four limbs. But on thinner branches in 
search of fruit, the apes move on two legs and use their arms for balance. 
“When they are on the very fi ne stuff, they are using bipedalism,” said 
study co-author Robin Crompton of the University of Liverpool in Eng-
land. “It shows that bipedalism can be adaptive in the trees,” Crompton said. 
“People have suspected that it evolved in the trees, but no one has been 
able to see a sensible reason why it should happen.” The researchers think 
they’ve uncovered that sensible reason: Upright bipedalism in human an-
cestors was quite likely an adaptation to moving and feeding on ripe fruit 
in the peripheries of trees, they say.” (Handwerk 2007, material omitted)
 9. Which statement best describes the strongest conclusion about bipedalism in humans 
that one could draw from the study reported in this passage?
  (a)  It is just possible that in human ancestors, bipedalism started in trees.
  (b) In the ancestors of humans, bipedalism may have started in trees. 
  (c)  It is certain that in the ancestors of humans, bipedalism started in trees.
 10. Which statement best describes the strongest conclusion about bipedalism in  orangutans 
that one could draw from the study reported in the passage above?
  (a)  It is possible that upright bipedalism in orangutans helps these animals get access to food.
  (b)  It is likely that upright bipedalism in orangutans helps these animals get access to food.
  (c)  It is certain that upright bipedalism in orangutans helps these animals get access to food.
For the next two exercises, look at the following argument: 
“Individuals aged 15 to 26 years were randomly sampled within households and 
households within media markets. Markets were systematically selected from 
the top 75 media markets, representing 79% of the U.S. population. The baseline 

114  Chapter 3 Premises and Conclusions
refusal rate was 24%. Sample sizes per wave were 1872, 1173, 787, and 588. Data 
on alcohol advertising expenditures on television, radio, billboards, and newspapers 
were collected. Youth who saw more alcohol advertisements on average drank more 
(each additional advertisement seen increased the number of drinks consumed by 
1% [event rate ratio, 1.01; 95% confi dence interval, 1.01–1.02]). Youth in markets 
with greater alcohol advertising expenditures drank more (each additional dollar 
spent per capita raised the number of drinks consumed by 3% [event rate ratio, 1.03; 
95% confi dence interval, 1.01–1.05]). Examining only youth younger than the legal 
drinking age of 21 years, alcohol advertisement exposure and expenditures still re-
lated to drinking. Youth in markets with more alcohol advertisements showed in-
creases in drinking levels into their late 20s, but drinking plateaued in the early 20s 
for youth in markets with fewer advertisements. Control variables included age, 
gender, ethnicity, high school or college enrollment, and alcohol sales. Conclusion. 
Alcohol advertising contributes to increased drinking among youth.” (Snyder 2006, 
18, material omitted) 
 11. From the information provided in the passage, the scope of the conclusion, “alcohol adver-
tising contributes to increased drinking among youth,” is ambiguous. Given the informa-
tion provided, which of the following statements do you think one could safely conclude?
  (a)   All youth exposed to alcohol advertising drink more than all youth not exposed.
  (b)   Some youth exposed to alcohol advertising drink more than some youth not  exposed. 
 *12. Is it possible to show that statement (a) above is true? Why or why?
For the next two exercises, look at the following argument:
“Nexavar, a drug currently on the U.S. market to treat kidney cancer, was shown to 
“signifi cantly” extend survival in patients with liver cancer. A study of 602 patients 
showed those receiving Nexavar had a median overall survival of 10.7 months compared 
to 7.9 months among patients taking placebo. About half the patients received Nexavar 
while the other half received placebo, or a fake treatment. Patients in the study had ad-
vanced liver cancer that could not be cured by surgery. Researchers said the survival dif-
ference translates into a signifi cant 44% survival advantage for patients in the Nexavar
group compared to those in the placebo group.” (Dooren 2007, D1, material omitted) 
 13. The conclusion provided in the excerpt above has an ambiguous scope. Given the informa-
tion provided, which of the following statements do you think one could safely conclude?
  (a)   Among individuals with liver cancer who participated in the study, a few patients 
taking Nexavar live longer than a few patients who take a placebo.
  (b)   Among individuals with liver cancer who participated in the study, many patients 
taking Nexavar live longer than some patients who take a placebo.
 14. Now think about the strength of the conclusion, which is also ambiguous: “Nexavar, a 
drug currently on the U.S. market to treat kidney cancer, was shown to ‘signifi cantly’ 
extend survival in patients with liver cancer.” Which of the following statements do 
you think best describes how strongly the author likely intends the conclusion to be?
  (a)   It is just possible that Nexavar can extend the life of those with liver cancer.
  (b)  Nexavar may extend the life of those with liver cancer.
  (c)   It is very likely that Nexavar can extend the life of those with liver cancer.
  (d)   It is certain that Nexavar can extend the life of those with liver cancer.

  For the next exercise think about the following argument: 
“In the U.S., certain health conditions are readily accepted as ‘public-health disorders,’ 
and others continue to be primarily viewed as ‘clinical diseases.’ Refl ecting on infec-
tious conditions, it appears that disease burden, rapid change in disease incidence (sug-
gesting preventability), and public concern about risk are three essential characteristics 
that defi ne a public-health disorder. By any one of several criteria, diabetes is associ-
ated with a very high burden to individuals with the disease, as well as to society in 
general. Further, there is convincing and increasing evidence that primary, secondary, 
and tertiary prevention strategies are effective in reducing the disease burden associ-
ated with diabetes. Yet most would still consider diabetes primarily to be a clinical dis-
ease. In part, this perception is based on the fact that, in association with aging and a 
possible strong family history, diabetes and its complications may appear inevitable to 
many. Further, much of the burden associated with diabetes is insidious, coming on 
gradually only after a considerable number of years. Thus, the burden associated with 
diabetes has not dramatically increased in the past few months or years; it has been 
here for some time and is increasing steadily. Finally, our understanding of public con-
cern is only now being systematically investigated. Factors that galvanize the public 
to demand societal or governmental action are quite complex and very different from 
those elements that convince the scientist/expert to request ‘public-health responses.’ 
Legitimate and important public-health dimensions associated with diabetes comple-
ment the critical role of clinical care. To effectively establish these public-health perspec-
tives, public concern must be incorporated into efforts to defi ne the burden of diabetes 
and our extant ability to prevent and thereby reduce this burden.” (Vinicor 1994, 22) 
 15. What is the strongest conclusion one should draw from the argument above?
  (a)   Diabetes must be treated as a public health issue and not a clinical disease.
  (b)   Diabetes probably would be better treated as a public health issue instead of a clini-
cal disease.
  (c)   Diabetes should continue to be treated as a clinical matter because physicians and 
the public don’t agree on the conditions required for something to be called a public 
health matter.
Some premises have to be assumed. Three 
main sources for assumed premises are uncon-
troversially true empirical statements, uncon-
troversially true defi nitional statements, and 
appropriate statements by experts. Some empiri-
cal statements are based on observations di-
rectly from our own senses. Others are based on 
indirect  observations through the use of instru-
ments (such as telescopes and microscopes) or 
on the reports of the observations made by oth-
ers. Indirect observations based on the reports 
of others are testimonial empirical statements. 
Chapter Summary
They may be assumed if they are  plausibile and 
the person making the report is reliable. State-
ments made by experts may be assumed to pass 
the true premises tests when the experts have 
appropriate credentials, are reliable, unbiased, 
have an appropriate area of expertise, and there 
is expert consensus about the statement. 
 
When reviewing arguments, you should note 
the strength and the scope of the conclusions. 
Arguments with weak and narrow conclusions 
are more likely to be good arguments than argu-
ments with stronger and broader conclusions.
Chapter Summary  115

116
It is a truth universally acknowledged, that a single man in possession of a good 
fortune, must be in want of a wife.
However little known the feelings or views of such a man may be on his fi rst entering 
a neighbourhood, this truth is so well fi xed in the minds of the surrounding families, 
that he is considered the rightful property of some one or other of their daughters.
“My dear Mr. Bennet,” said his lady to him one day, “have you heard that Netherfi eld 
Park is let at last?”
Mr. Bennet replied that he had not.
“But it is,” returned she; “for Mrs. Long has just been here, and she told me all about it.”
Mr. Bennet made no answer.
“Do you not want to know who has taken it?” cried his wife impatiently.
“You want to tell me, and I have no objection to hearing it.”
This was invitation enough. 
—Jane Austen, Pride and Prejudice (2008, 3)
4
4
Language
Learning Outcomes
After studying the material in this chapter, you should be able to:
1. Understand why language is important to the evaluation of 
arguments.
2. Identify and evaluate defi nitions.
3. Understand the importance of clear language.
4. Recognize and avoid ambiguity and vagueness.
5. Understand the links between language and emotion.

Identifying Defi nitions  117
The passage on the previous page contains an argument. But it may be 
hard for you to fi nd it because Pride and Prejudice was written in the early 
1800s and you aren’t used to the language. Understanding language is vital 
because all arguments are presented and evaluated in a language. 
Identifying Defi nitions
The conclusion of Mrs. Bennet’s argument is “Netherfi eld Park is let at last.” 
What’s Netherfi eld Park? And what does it mean to “let” it? If you don’t 
know the answers to these questions, you can’t evaluate Mrs. Bennet’s argu-
ment. Only by reading Pride and Prejudice can you discover that Netherfi eld 
Park is a mansion. If you look in a dictionary, you’ll discover that a defi nition 
of “let” is “to become rented.” Mrs. Bennet’s conclusion is that the mansion 
at Netherfi eld Park has fi nally been rented. 
If you don’t understand the language of a passage, you can’t do the true 
premises test because you don’t know whether the statement is true or false. 
If you don’t understand the language of a passage, you can’t do the proper form 
test because you can’t tell whether the premises support the conclusion. One 
key to understanding the language of a passage is to know the meaning of its 
words. A defi nition is a statement giving the meaning of a word. Good defi ni-
tions are essential because they help you understand statements, and under-
standing statements is required to do the true premises and proper form tests.
Extension and Intension
This textbook focuses on defi nitions for nouns and verbs. Nouns and verbs 
are class terms, terms that refer to a group of things. The word “mansion” is a 
noun that refers to mansions, a class of objects. The word “let” is a verb that 
refers to renting, a class of actions. Every defi nition of a class term indicates 
the word’s extensional meaning and its intensional meaning. The extension 
of a class term is the collection of things in its class. Take the class term 
“planet.” The extension of “planet” is: Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter, 
etc. To be complete, this list would have to be really long because it would 
have to include every planet, including those orbiting stars other than our Sun.
The intension of a class term is the collection of features that all of the 
members of the class have in common. The intension of “planet” is:
an object that does not produce its own light and revolves around a star. 
Technical Term: Intentional
Students sometimes confuse the word “intensional” with the word “intentional.” 
“Intentional” refers to an action that is done on purpose. You can say: “He inten-
tionally drove his car into the telephone post.” Although the two words look alike, 
“intensional” has nothing to do with “intentional.”
Key Concept
A defi nition is a 
statement giving the 
meaning of a word.
Key Concept
Nouns and verbs are 
class terms, terms that 
refer to a group of things.
Key Concept
The extension of a class 
term is the collection of 
things in its class. 
Key Concept
The intension of a class 
term is the collection of 
features that all of the 
members of the class 
have in common. 

118  Chapter 4 Language
The extension and the intension of a word inform each other. On the one 
hand, if you know that Mercury, Venus, and Mars are planets, you can tell 
something about the intension of the word by looking at the features that 
Mercury, Venus, and Mars share. On the other hand, in order to explain why 
Mercury belongs in the class of planets, you must know something about the 
intension of “planet.”
The extension of “let” is all the cases in which someone has rented some-
thing. The intension of “let” is “to take and use for a limited period of time 
under an agreement to pay for this use.”
G U I D E
Defi nitions and Quotation Marks
In standard American English, you put double quotation marks (“ ”) around a word to indi-
cate that you are talking about the word itself and not about the thing for which the word 
stands. You should write 
“Tree” has one syllable and four letters.
but
A tree fell on my car.
Technical Terms: Denotation, Connotation
The word “denotation” is sometimes used to refer to extension. The word “con-
notation” is sometimes used to refer to intension. In other cases, “denotation” is 
used to refer to the explicit meaning of a word, and “connotation” is used to refer 
to things associated with a word. Using words this way, the denotation of “apple” 
is the fl eshy rounded red, yellow, or green edible fruit of a tree of the rose family. 
The connotation of “apple” includes health (“an apple a day keeps the doctor away”) 
and sin (Genesis 3:2–6). Because “denotation” and “connotation” have two possible 
meanings, we’ll use “extension” and “intension.”
EXERCISE 4.1
A. For each of the following words, describe its extension and its intension. You may use a 
dictionary to complete this exercise. However, if you do so, be sure to cite the dictionary 
you’re using.
 1. Dog
 2. Car
 3. Skipping
 *4. Writing
 5. Music

Identifying Defi nitions  119
 6. Stipulate
 7. Benzene
 *8. Universalism
 9. Feminist
 10. Clarity
 11. Precision
 *12. Courage
 13. Perfection
 14. Wisdom
 15. Justice
B. Determine whether the following passages contain a defi nition. If it contains a defi nition, 
indicate its extension and its intension.
 1. Winder Hall is made of stone.
 2. What’s a fl ash memory stick? It’s a fl ash memory data storage device integrated with a 
universal serial bus (USB) interface.
 3. Parents are mothers and fathers.
 *4. A roof is the cover of a building.
 5. A cup is an open, usually bowl-shaped, drinking vessel.
 6. A building is a house, an office, or a factory.
 7. It’s cold and windy today.
 *8. As used in this document, a “professor” is an assistant professor, an associate professor, 
or a full professor.
 9. My calculator is dead. 
 10. In French, children are enfants.
 11. A Coke? It’s a carbonated soft drink.
 *12. Many people like mushrooms.
 13.  Caleb: What’s that, Daddy?
Daddy: It’s a lawn mower, a machine that cuts grass.
 14. “An act of clemency is an official act by a [legal] executive that removes all or some of 
the actual or possible punitive consequences of a criminal conviction.” (Moore 1989, 4, 
material omitted) 
 15. “[A] society is a cooperative venture for mutual advantage.” (Rawls 1971, 4, material 
omitted) 
Genus and Species
Most defi nitions follow the genus/species format. A defi nition with a genus/
species format defi nes a word by indicating (a) the genus (a group of which the 
thing being defi ned is a member) and (b) the species (the feature or features that 
set the particular thing to be defi ned apart from the other things in the group). 
Key Concept
The parts of a defi nition 
with a genus/species 
format.

120  Chapter 4 Language
Look at this defi nition of “airplane”:
An airplane is a vehicle that fl ies through the air.
The word being defi ned is “airplane,” the genus is “vehicle,” and the species 
is “fl ies through the air.” “Vehicle” is the genus because a vehicle is a group 
of things and airplanes are one of the things in this group. “Flying through the 
air” is the species because it’s the feature that sets airplanes apart from other 
vehicles. In this defi nition
An igloo is a dwelling made of packed snow or ice. 
“igloo” is the word being defi ned, “dwelling” is the genus, and the species is 
“being made of packed snow or ice.”
Compare the following defi nitions:
(a) A vehicle is an object used to transport people or objects.
(b) An airplane is a vehicle that fl ies through the air.
(c) A dog is a mammal that chases vehicles.
In (a), “vehicle” is the word being defi ned. In (b), “vehicle” is the genus, and 
in the (humorous) defi nition (c), “vehicle” is part of the species. Don’t fall 
into the trap of thinking that a particular word (such as “vehicle”) is either 
always a genus or always a species. Whether a word is a genus or a species 
isn’t a permanent fact about that word. It’s a matter of how the word is used 
in a particular defi nition.
Don’t assume that the species must refer to one simple sort of thing. 
The species of a defi nition can be a complex list of things. Here’s a defi nition 
of “fl u”:
Flu is a disease caused by one of many viruses that infect the respiratory 
tract and produce: fever (usually 100°F to 103°F in adults and often even 
higher in children), coughing, a sore throat, a stuffy nose, headache, mus-
cle aches, and extreme fatigue.
The genus of this defi nition is “disease,” and that’s pretty simple, but the 
species is complex:
caused by one of many viruses that infect the respiratory tract and pro-
duce: fever (usually 100°F to 103°F in adults and often even higher in 
children), coughing, a sore throat, a stuffy nose, headache, muscle aches, 
and extreme fatigue.
Many different viruses cause the fl u. You can have the fl u and not have all 
the symptoms listed above. One person might not get a cough, another person 
might not get muscle aches, etc. The defi nition of “fl u” has to have a com-
plex species.
Technical Term: Genus and Difference
“Genus and difference” is another name for genus and species. 
Dictionary Defi nitions 
Two kinds of defi nitions need a special look: dictionary defi nitions and tech-
nical defi nitions. They’re the most common kinds of defi nitions.

Identifying Defi nitions  121
Dictionary defi nitions are defi nitions that state the common usage of 
words. If the word being defi ned is a class term, dictionary defi nitions usu-
ally pick out the extension and intension of the word. Dictionaries gener-
ally use the genus/species format. Suppose you’re reading a book and come 
across the word “kite,” but it doesn’t make sense to you because the topic 
makes it clear that they’re not talking about the things you fl ew on the end 
of a long string when you were a kid. You check a dictionary and it says:
Kite, any of various small hawks with long narrow wings and a forked 
tail.
You probably didn’t know about this usage of “kite.” (Can you find the 
genus and the species? Can you pick out its extension and its intension? 
See the answers at the bottom of the page.)
Technical Terms: Lexical Defi nition, Reportive Defi nition
“Lexical defi nition” and “reportive defi nition” are other names for dictionary 
defi nitions.
Key Concept
Dictionary defi nitions 
are defi nitions that 
state the common 
usage of words.
Flu Virus*
Lipid Envelope
Neuraminidase
(Sialidase)
RNP
Capsid
Ion Channel
Hemagglutinin
© Cengage Learning
The genus is “small hawks” and the species is “having long narrow wings and forked tail.” 
Its extension would be a list of all the kites in the world. The intension is “a small hawk 
with long narrow wings and forked tail.”
*National Institutes of Health, part of the United States Department of Health and Human 
Services.

122  Chapter 4 Language
G U I D E
Dictionaries
Dictionaries are an important resource for evaluating arguments. Dictionaries are also es-
sential for reading plays, speaking a foreign language, reading a description of a painting, 
understanding your college catalog, and any other task that involves language. 
Dictionaries usually present information about the etymology (the roots and previous 
meanings) of words. Words change meaning over time. Two hundred years ago the word 
“corn” referred to the plant most Americans now call “wheat.” If you didn’t know this, you 
might well be confused by some passage written in the 1800s. A dictionary would reveal 
this older meaning of “corn.”
Some dictionaries are more comprehensive than others. The Oxford English Dictionary 
(OED) attempts to present all English words from their fi rst recorded use to their contem-
porary meanings. The OED is composed of twenty volumes and 22,000 pages. A student 
dictionary is usually intended for high-school students. A collegiate dictionary is usually 
appropriate for college students.
In addition to standard dictionaries, many specialized dictionaries are available. These 
include dictionaries for children, Scrabble players, crossword puzzlers, and afi cionados of 
every sort. Most relevant to this book are the specialized dictionaries used in academic, 
medical, legal, and other professional fi elds. Specialized dictionaries can be stand-alone 
works. They can also be parts of technical guides, desk references, fi eld manuals, encyclo-
pedias, and handbooks. They provide defi nitions for key technical terms of a discipline or 
profession. Examples include: Taber’s Cyclopedia of Medical Terms, Black’s Law Diction-
ary, Concise Chemical and Technical Dictionary, Technical Manual of Classical Ballet, 
Technical Dictionary of the Shoe Industry, English–German, and Technical Dictionary of 
Data Processing, Computers, Offi ce Machines in English, German, French, and Russian. 
Specialized dictionaries can help you understand your course material. University libraries 
often provide access to online editions of specialized dictionaries.
Using dictionaries is another part of the art of argument. Making standard and special-
ized dictionaries part of your life will broaden and deepen your intellectual skills. That will 
help you become a better critical thinker.
EXERCISE 4.2
A. Determine whether the following passages contain a defi nition. If it contains a defi nition, 
indicate its extension and its intension. If the defi nition is in genus/species format, indicate 
the genus and the species.
 1. A computer is a machine used for processing words and numbers.
 2. A cat is a carnivorous mammal long domesticated as a pet and for catching rats and 
mice.
 3. Tableware is forks, knives, and spoons.
 *4. What’s that? It’s a computer.

Identifying Defi nitions  123
 5. How much wood could a woodchuck chuck if a woodchuck could chuck wood?
 6. “The Sun’s yearly path around the celestial sphere is called the ecliptic.” (Chaisson 
2005, 29, material omitted)
 7. The moons of Jupiter are the four small points of light that Galileo saw when he was 
the fi rst person to look at Jupiter through a telescope. (This passage was written by the 
authors of this book from information provided in Chaisson 2005.)
 *8. “The mutual gravitational attraction between the Sun and the planets is responsible for 
the observed planetary orbits.” (Chaisson 2005, 54, material omitted)
 9. “Cartographers have been at work since the days of the early Egyptians, but it is only in 
the last half century that their technology has advanced beyond simple manual drawing 
on a piece of paper.” (McKnight 2005, 41, material omitted)
 10. “Orthophoto maps are multicolored, distortion-free photographic image maps.” 
( McKnight 2005, 45)
 11. Orthophoto maps are maps used to show topographic details of areas with very low 
relief, such as marshlands. (This passage was written by the authors of this book from 
information provided in McKnight 2005.)
 *12. “Matter is anything that occupies space, displays a property known as mass, and pos-
sesses inertia.” (Petrucci 2005, 4) 
 13. A base is a substance that, when prepared as a solution, makes phenol red become yel-
low. (This passage was written by the authors of this book from information provided 
in Petrucci 2005.)
 14. Iodine is the element that, at room temperature, is a violet-black solid, has a melting 
point of 114°C, and a boiling point of 184°C. (This passage was written by the authors 
of this book from information provided in Petrucci 2005)
 15. A furtum is a “thing which has been stolen.” (Nolan 1990, 676) 
Technical Defi nitions
A technical defi nition gives a word a meaning that doesn’t match common 
usage. Technical defi nitions refer to something that’s important for those 
working in a particular fi eld. A technical term is a word with a technical 
defi nition. 
Some philosophers needed a quick way to refer to beings that have the 
right to life. They decided to use the word “person.” When you fi nd the word 
“person” in an article by one of these philosophers, it may refer to any beings 
that have a right to life. If such a philosopher thought that gorillas have a 
right to life, he might say:
Gorillas are persons.
If you don’t know the philosophers’ technical defi nition of “person,” this 
statement might confuse you. 
In construction, “rebar” refers to a steel rod with ridges that’s used to 
reinforce concrete. “Rebar” isn’t a word that has common usage. Most people 
never use this word. But those in construction need a word to refer to this 
Key Concept
A technical defi nition 
gives a word a meaning 
that doesn’t match 
common usage. 
Key Concept
A technical term is a 
word with a technical 
defi nition.

124  Chapter 4 Language
type of steel rod, so they invented the word “ rebar.” (“Rebar” is an abbrevia-
tion of “reinforcing bar.”)
Technical terms are used in every discipline. Learning to recognize tech-
nical defi nitions and remembering their meanings is indispensable for suc-
cess in college. You’ve spent a lot of time studying technical defi nitions when 
you’ve studied for tests.
Here’s a passage from a chemistry article:
Melting points were measured by a Kofl er micromelting point apparatus 
and the results were uncorrected. IR spectra were recorded on a Bruker 
Vector 22 spectrometer in KBr with absorption in cm–1. H NMR spectra 
were determined on a Bruker AC 400 spectrometer as CDCl3 solutions. 
Chemical shifts (δ) are expressed in ppm downfi eld from the internal 
standard tetramethylsilane, and coupling constants (J) are given in Hz. 
(Fan 2005, 19)
You may not understand the complete meaning of this passage. (We don’t.) 
It’s fi lled with technical terms. 
Numerous clues help you fi nd technical terms. Authors sometimes put 
them in special type such as bold, underlined, or italic. You’ve probably 
 noticed by now that the authors of this book put a technical term in a special 
note in the margins. But such clues aren’t always present, and even if they are 
provided they’ll only be given the fi rst time the technical term is used. 
As noted above, if you don’t understand a word, your fi rst step should 
be to look it up in a standard dictionary. However, technical terms usually 
aren’t in standard dictionaries. If the word you don’t know isn’t in a standard 
dictionary, that’s a clue that it’s a technical term. You should check a special-
ized dictionary. If the word you don’t know is in a standard dictionary, but 
the meaning indicated there doesn’t make sense in the context in which you 
fi nd it, that’s another clue that it’s a technical term. Again, you should check 
a specialized dictionary.
Here are three important facts about technical terms.
(1) One technical term can be used in two fi elds with different meanings.
“Crystallized” is used in the fi eld of biology to describe any physical mass or-
ganized in a structurally uniform manner. This same word is used in English 
courses to describe a previously incoherent idea that has been made coherent. 
(2)  Two different technical terms can be used in two different fi elds to 
refer to the same thing.
“Taxonomy” and “ontology” are used in different fi elds to refer to the same 
thing. Both are used to mean a method of organizing and classifying a large 
number of types of entities.
(3)  Technical terms can be used in one or more fi elds in a way completely 
different from the common use of the same word. 
The example of “person” above illustrates this point. If you read a sentence 
and it looks like a perfectly ordinary word isn’t being used to mean what you 
think it means, it could be a technical term. When this happens, a standard 
dictionary may be misleading. It reports the common usage of a word, not its 
technical usage. You need to check a specialized dictionary. 

Identifying Defi nitions  125
Technical Term: Stipulative Defi nition
Another name for a technical defi nition is “stipulative defi nition.”
Why do people use technical defi nitions? One reason is convenience. 
Chapter Nine discusses causal arguments. Causes are relationships between 
events and/or states of affairs. We will need to refer to events and/or states of 
affairs many times. It would be annoying to repeat the phrase “events and/or 
states of affairs” over and over. We will technically defi ne “event” to refer to 
events and/or states of affairs. Using this one short word is more convenient. 
We will turn “event” into a technical term.
Acronyms are another example of technical defi nitions used for con-
venience. Acronyms are words formed by the initial letters of all the main 
words in a phrase. The word “GPA” is an acronym for “grade point average,” 
“NATO” is an acronym for “North Atlantic Treaty Organization,” and “US” 
is an acronym for “United States.”
Another reason for the use of technical defi nitions is that new things 
need names. Common usage can’t supply the name of a new thing. In the late 
1930s people developed self-contained underwater breathing apparatuses. For 
a while, this name was abbreviated to the acronym “SCUBA.” As SCUBA 
gear stopped being a new thing, the word “SCUBA” stopped being an acro-
nym, entered common usage and is now written like this, “scuba.”
Another reason for the use of technical defi nitions is that people need 
a precise word. Think about the word “dead.” The dictionary defi nition in-
cludes meanings such as (1) no longer alive, (2) unresponsive, (3) weary and 
worn-out, (4) inanimate, and (5) no longer in existence or use. Health insur-
ance companies aren’t legally required to pay for healthcare once a patient is 
dead. Suppose that a person is in the hospital. His brain stops working but his 
heart and lungs continue to work for another two days. Even after the heart 
and lungs stop working, some cells in his body will continue to be alive for a 
while. When does the insurance company’s obligation to pay end? When the 
brain stops working? When the heart stops? When the lungs stop working? 
When the last cell in the person’s body dies? The dictionary defi nitions of 
“dead” aren’t precise enough. The insurance company needs a technical defi -
nition. The insurance contract might include language such as:
In this contract, “dead person” refers to a person whose brain, heart, and 
lungs have ceased to function.
This allows the contract to clearly indicate when payments by the insurance 
company will stop.
Technical Term: Precising Defi nition
A technical defi nition that’s used because of a need for precision is sometimes 
called a “precising defi nition.”
Sometimes a researcher needs a defi nition that’s more precise than com-
mon usage because the researcher needs a word to be used in a theory. Recall 
the defi nition of “planet” discussed above.
A planet is a body that does not produce its own light and orbits a star.
Key Concept
Acronyms are words 
formed by the initial 
letters of all the main 
words in a phrase. 

126  Chapter 4 Language
“Star” was defi ned this way:
A star is a body that produces its own light. 
Recently, with the development of new technologies and more powerful 
 telescopes, scientists discovered objects in space that don’t fi t into the exten-
sions of these defi nitions. They discovered that sometimes a planet breaks 
out of orbit from around a star and goes wandering off into space. This sort of 
object doesn’t fall into the extension of “planet” as defi ned above because it’s 
not orbiting a star. This sort of object doesn’t fall into the extension of “star” 
as defi ned above because it doesn’t produce its own light. Another problem 
with the defi nitions above was caused by the discovery that some objects 
don’t yet produce their own light but will in the future, and other objects 
don’t now produce their own light but did in the past. (You could call these 
things “proto-stars” and “dead stars.”) Astronomers needed a more precise 
technical defi nition of “planet” and “star.” The following is a paraphrase of 
a technical defi nition of “planet” proposed by astronomer Gibor Basri:
A spherical object never capable of core fusion, which is formed in orbit 
around an object in which core fusion occurs at some time. (Basri 2003)
“Core fusion” refers to a star’s ability to generate its own light. The descrip-
tive phrase “object in which core fusion occurs” refers to what people ordi-
narily call a star. Basri’s proposal solves the problems noted above. Planets are 
things that aren’t and never were capable of generating their own light and 
were formed in orbit (as opposed to being in orbit) around an object that is or 
was capable of generating its own light (that is, a star). You can infer a defi ni-
tion of “star” from his defi nition of “planet.”
A star is a body that will, does, or did produce its own light. 
As we write this book, Basri is in the process of submitting his proposal to 
national and international organizations of astronomers. Perhaps by the time 
you’re reading this book, his proposal will be an officially recognized techni-
cal defi nition.
Technical Terms: Other Kinds of Defi nitions
Functional defi nitions usually follow the genus-species format and provide the 
function of the thing being defi ned as the species of the defi nition. Operational 
or behavioral defi nitions defi ne a word in terms of how a thing is identifi ed or 
Critical Thinkers
Gibor Basri
Gibor Basri (1951–still searching for planets) has been an astrophysicist for thirty years. He’s 
a professor in the astronomy department at the University of California, Berkeley. 
Dr. Basri has written nearly 200 publications. One of his most famous areas of research is his 
work to improve the defi nition of “planet.” You can read about Professor Basri’s work in on 
his webpage: http://astro.berkeley.edu/~basri/ 
Courtesy of Gibor Basri

Identifying Defi nitions  127
observed. Cluster defi nitions emphasize that not all of the things in the exten-
sion of the word being defi ned have to have the same features. They may have 
some (but not all) of the cluster of features identifi ed with the things in the 
extension.
Suppose you wanted to defi ne the word “tent.” “A shelter used by humans for 
living or camping” is a functional defi nition. “A thing that looks like a small colored 
square when viewed from an airplane” is an operational defi nition. “A shelter that 
is portable and/or makes for living or camping and/or is made of cloth and/or has 
a framework of poles and/or was used by Native Americans for living quarters” is a 
cluster defi nition. All three of these defi nitions are in genus-species format.
EXERCISE 4.3
A. Determine whether the following passages contain a defi nition. If it contains a defi nition, 
indicate whether it’s a dictionary defi nition or a technical defi nition. If it’s a technical defi -
nition, indicate whether is being used for convenience, a new thing, greater precision, or for 
a theory. A passage may contain more than one defi nition.
 1. This Dr. Pepper is cold.
 2. A magazine is a periodical containing miscellaneous pieces (as articles, stories, poems) 
and often illustrated.
 3. For the purposes of this document, “magazine” refers only to a room in which gun- 
powder is kept in a fort. Although there are other uses of this word, clarity requires us 
to focus on one particular use.
 *4. ABC is the American Broadcasting Company.
 5. A keyboard is an assemblage of systematically arranged keys by which a machine or 
device is operated.
 6. “You don’t know about me without you have read a book by the name of The Adven-
tures of Tom Sawyer, but that ain’t no matter. That book was made by Mr. Mark Twain, 
and he told the truth, mainly. There was things which he stretched, but mainly he told 
the truth. That is nothing. I never seen anybody but lied one time or another, without 
it was Aunt Polly, or the widow, or maybe Mary. Aunt Polly—Tom’s Aunt Polly, she 
is—and Mary, and the Widow Douglas, is all told about in that book, which is mostly a 
true book; with some stretchers, as I said before.” (Twain 2008, 1)
 7. “The broader question it explores is how exit options are constructed in social con-
tractarian (SC) arguments that seek to justify a particular division of the social surplus 
generated by political cooperation.” (Fried 2003, 41, material omitted)
 *8. “E-mail spam, also known as unsolicited bulk email (UBE) or unsolicited commercial email 
(UCE), is the practice of sending unwanted email messages, frequently with commercial 
content, in large quantities to an indiscriminate set of recipients.” (Wikipedia “Spam” 2007)
 9. “Give me liberty, or give me death!” (Henry 1999, 232)
 10. “Active sites are the locations at which catalysis occurs, whether on the surface of a 
heterogeneous catalyst or an enzyme.” (Petrucci 2005, A30)
 11. “Punk is musical freedom. It’s saying, doing, and playing what you want. In Webster’s 
terms, ‘nirvana’ means freedom from pain, suffering, and the external world, and that’s 
pretty close to my defi nition of punk rock.” (Kobain 2007) 

128  Chapter 4 Language
 *12. “The term ‘fi rearm’ means any weapon (including a starter gun) which will or is de-
signed to or may readily be converted to expel a projectile by the action of an explosive.” 
(18 USC 921, material omitted)
 13. “income = wages or salary from work and earnings from investments.” (Macionis 2006, 478) 
 14. “Auguste Comte and Karl Marx stand among the giants of sociology.” (Macionis 2006, 10) 
 15. “[Here is] the sense of ‘harm’ that is used in the harm principle: only setbacks of inter-
ests that are wrongs, and wrongs that are setbacks to interest, are to count as harms in 
the appropriate sense.” (Feinberg 1984, 36, material omitted) 
Evaluating Defi nitions
A good defi nition is a defi nition in which both the extension and the inten-
sion are accurate and clear. In other words, a good defi nition clearly and cor-
rectly tells you the borders of the extension of the word being defi ned and it 
also allows you to clearly determine the features that all of the members of 
this class have in common. Let’s look at some factors that need to be consid-
ered when evaluating a defi nition.
Correct Extension
A defi nition is accurate when it has correct extension and correct intension. 
What does it mean for a defi nition to have a correct extension? A defi nition that 
excludes some members of the class being defi ned has an extension that’s too 
narrow. A defi nition that includes entities that  don’t belong to that class has an 
extension that’s too broad. Good defi nitions are neither too narrow nor too broad.
To understand what it means for a defi nition to be too broad or too nar-
row, let’s look at three defi nitions of “human being.” One traditional defi ni-
tion of “human being” holds that 
(a) Human beings are animals that are toolmakers. 
In the 1960s biologist Jane Goodall lived with and studied chimpanzees in 
their natural habitat. Among other things, she discovered that chimpanzees 
make and use tools on a regular basis. Her research shows that the defi nition 
of human as a toolmaker was too broad. It included species other than the 
species that was being defi ned by that criterion. (If you want to know more 
about Goodall’s work, you could read her The Chimpanzee: The Living Link 
between ‘Man’ and ‘Beast’ (1992).)
You can graphically represent this case (see the graphic at the top of the 
next page). Use a circle with a solid border to indicate the extension of “hu-
man being.” All humans are inside the circle, and all non-humans are outside 
the circle. Use a circle with a dashed line to indicate the extension of a pro-
posed defi nition of “human being” as a toolmaker.
Madeline is inside the circle with a solid border because she’s a human 
being. She’s inside the circle with the dashed line because she’s a toolmaker. 
A chair is outside the border because a chair isn’t a human being. Chimpan-
zees aren’t inside the solid border because they aren’t humans, but they’re 
inside the dashed line because they’re toolmakers. That the dashed line is 
outside the solid is a representation of the fact that defi nition (a) is too broad.
Key Concept
A good defi nition is a 
defi nition in which both 
the extension and the 
intension are accurate 
and clear.
Key Concept
A defi nition that excludes 
some members of the 
class being defi ned has 
an extension that’s too 
narrow. A defi nition that 
includes entities that 
don’t belong to that class 
has an extension that’s 
too broad.

Evaluating Defi nitions  129
Suppose someone said that 
(b)  Human beings are bipedal primate mammals that can speak a language.
Defi nition (b) is too narrow because some humans (infants, some of the very 
elderly) can’t speak. You can graphically represent this case like this:
Madeline
A Chair
A Chimp
(a) Human beings are animals that are toolmakers.
JJJJJJJU
A Chair
Madeline
An Infant
A Chimp
(b) Human beings are bipedal primate mammals that can speak a language.
A Chair
Madeline
An Infant
A Chimp
A Blood
Cell
(c) Human beings are things with a perfect genetic code of a homo sapiens.
Madeline is inside both the solid and the dashed circle because she’s a human be-
ing who can speak a language. A human infant is inside the solid circle and out-
side the dashed circle. This represents the fact that defi nition (b) is too narrow.

130  Chapter 4 Language
A defi nition can be too broad and too narrow at the same time. Suppose 
that someone claimed that 
(c) Human beings are things with a perfect genetic code of a homo sapiens. 
Defi nition (c) is too broad because it includes any cell from a human body 
(such as those found in a drop of blood spilled on a counter) that has a per-
fect genetic code. Recall from your high-school science classes that every 
cell of an organism contains its genetic code. Defi nition (c) is also too nar-
row because it excludes those people who have genetic mutations (as most 
humans do).
To represent this graphically, let’s assume that Madeline has a perfect 
genetic code of a homo sapiens and that the infant doesn’t. This means that 
a drop of Madeline’s blood also has a perfect genetic code of a homo sapiens. 
This represents the fact that defi nition (c) is too broad and too narrow. The 
graphical representation of an extensionally perfect defi nition would have 
the solid line and the dashed line perfectly matched.
Correct Intension
Accurate defi nitions correctly point to the central features of everything be-
longing to the word being defi ned. If a defi nition points to unimportant or 
inessential features, the defi nition is poor. Defi nitions can fail to accurately 
indicate the intension of a word in at least three ways: metaphorical lan-
guage, unnecessary negations, and synonymous language.
Good defi nitions don’t use metaphors. Metaphors occur when someone 
compares two seemingly unrelated objects in order to point to some likeness 
between them. Here’s an example of metaphor from Shakespeare:
Life’s but a walking shadow, a poor player
That struts and frets his hour upon the stage
And then is heard no more: it is a tale
Told by an idiot, full of sound and fury,
Signifying nothing. (Macbeth, Act 5, Scene 5)
This passage contains three metaphors. It compares life to three things: a 
shadow, a bad actor, and a tale. But life can’t be defi ned as a kind of shadow, a 
kind of actor, or a kind of tale. 
Life is a tale told by an idiot.
is a poor defi nition of the word “life.” Metaphor is perfectly appropriate in 
many contexts. Metaphors are often vivid, rich, and fascinating. They offer 
you insight by suggesting ways to see things that may be hard to describe or 
defi ne. But they don’t clearly indicate the intension of a word.
Technical Term: Figurative Language
Another name for metaphorical language is “fi gurative language.”
Good defi nitions defi ne without negations. Defi nitions stated with a nega-
tive tell you what a thing isn’t. They don’t tell you what it is. Suppose 
someone said:
An apple is not an orange.

Evaluating Defi nitions  131
This defi nition doesn’t clearly point to the intension of “apple.” Mention-
ing one class to which apples don’t belong doesn’t eliminate much. Houses, 
dreams, coffee cups, telephones, and pine trees are also not oranges.
In a few cases a negative defi nition is appropriate. A scholar may want to 
focus on all things that lack a certain feature. In that case, a negative defi ni-
tion will be useful. Suppose that students at a university are asked (but not 
required) to check a box on their admission application that indicates their 
ethnicity. Some students don’t check any box. A researcher might use a tech-
nical term, “non-respondent,” and defi ne a “non-respondent” as a student 
who didn’t check any box. Given the nature of the admission application, this 
is an appropriate negative defi nition.
Good defi nitions avoid synonyms. Synonyms are two words that have the 
same meaning. No two words are perfectly synonymous. More or less subtle 
shades of difference are always present. But some words are close to perfectly 
synonymous. Think about “sofa” and “couch.” The Oxford English Dictionary 
(OED 2008) says that 
a sofa is a long upholstered seat with a back and arms, for two or more people. 
It says that
a couch is a long upholstered piece of furniture for several people.
“Sofa” and “couch” are close to being perfectly synonymous. 
You might think that the OED could simply say that
a sofa is a couch.
Why doesn’t the OED defi ne “sofa” this way? Because if you don’t know the 
defi nition of the synonym, it won’t provide any information about the word 
being defi ned. Suppose that someone doesn’t know what “sofa” means. You 
tell him that 
“Sofa” means the same thing as “couch.” 
Your statement is true. “Sofa” and “couch” are close synonyms. But you 
haven’t indicated the intension of “sofa.” Unless this person knows the in-
tension of “couch,” your defi nition won’t be helpful. The defi nition of sofa 
given by the OED indicates the intension of the word. A synonym doesn’t.
In a few cases synonymous defi nitions are acceptable. If the context is trans-
lation from one language to another, offering a synonym might be perfectly ap-
propriate. Suppose that in one of your courses the professor says that malus 
domestica don’t produce fruit in tropical climates. He’s using the Latin scientifi c 
name of this plant. But you don’t know what a malus domestica is. You ask a 
classmate: “What’s a malus domestica anyway?” She replies “It’s an apple tree.” 
This helps you because you already know the intension of “apple tree.” But out-
side of the context of translation, synonyms are almost always bad defi nitions.
Persuasive Defi nitions
Sometimes people put an incorrect extension or intension in a defi nition in 
hopes of fooling people. A persuasive defi nition looks like it is stating a dic-
tionary defi nition but actually gives the words a technical defi nition to be 
used in an argument. Suppose that two college students, Wen and Chris, are 
Key Concept
The difference between 
a persuasive defi nition 
and a dictionary 
defi nition.

132  Chapter 4 Language
arguing about whether there should be a military draft. Wen offers the follow-
ing arguments:
(1)  Children are all nothing but fragile, immature, undeveloped, inexpe-
rienced, adorable human beings who are 21 years old and younger.
(2)  Any civilized country (including the United States) should take mea-
sures to protect its children.
(3)  U.S. federal law requires male citizens 18 years old to register for the 
military draft.
(4)  Members of the military are the fi rst citizens to be sent to war.
Therefore,
(5)  The United States has a government that is deliberately instigating 
the murder of its own children.
Therefore,
(6)  The military draft should be abolished
The fi rst premise of this argument is a defi nition. Wen’s defi nition of “children” 
doesn’t match common usage so it’s a technical defi nition. But Wen isn’t using 
a technical defi nition for any of the good reasons you saw earlier in this chapter. 
Instead he defi nes “children” to bias the case against the draft. His defi nition 
is persuasive. He chooses only features of children that support the conclusion 
that we shouldn’t have a draft. If an argument contains a persuasive defi nition, 
it fails the true premises test because a persuasive defi nition isn’t accurate.
If a persuasive defi nition is a bad technical defi nition, what’s a good one? 
Because technical defi nitions are made up by authors for their own use, there 
is a sense in which a technical defi nition can’t have an incorrect extension 
or intension. The author is just telling you how he or she is using a term. But 
a technical defi nition can be unclear. In that case, it’s a bad technical defi -
nition. In addition, the case of persuasive defi nitions shows that technical 
defi nitions can be misused.
Connections
Persuasive defi nitions often use emotionally charged language. Emotionally 
charged language is discussed later in this chapter.
EXERCISE 4.4
A. Determine whether the following passages contain a defi nition. If a passage contains a 
defi nition, evaluate it using the following factors: broad, narrow, metaphors, negations, 
synonyms.
 1. Red things are those things that have the quality of redness.
 2. A vehicle is a means of transporting something.
 3. Chicken is the most popular meat in the United States.
 *4. To understand a concept is to grasp that concept.
 5. Buildings are things that are not natural.
 6. Hazing is any activity that singles out fi rst-years or newcomers.
 7. A dragon is a mythical serpent or lizard that is monstrous, winged, fi re-breathing, and 
has a crested head and enormous claws.

Language and Clarity  133
 *8. An economist is a person who knows the price of everything and the value of nothing.
 9. “Empirical: Objectively quantifi able observations.” (Smith 2007, 6)
 10. “The function concept is one of the most important ideas in mathematics” (Barnett 
2005, 3)
 11. “Formally, statistics is a branch of mathematics that focuses on the organization, analy-
sis, and interpretation of a group of numbers.” (Aron 2006, 2) 
 *12. “Earth is surrounded by a life-giving gaseous envelope called the atmosphere.” (Lutgens 
2004, 9)
 13. “The central concept of deductive logic is the concept of argument form.” (Epp 2004, 1) 
 14. “Men do not want solely the obedience of women, they want their sentiments. All 
men, except the most brutish, desire to have, in the woman most nearly connected 
with them, not a forced slave but a willing one. They have therefore put everything in 
practice to enslave their minds.” (Mill 1970, 141, material omitted) 
 15. “The term ‘forfeiture’ has been defi ned legally as the ‘loss of some right or property as 
a penalty for some illegal act.’” (Hyde 1995, 26) 
B. In Exercises 4.2 above, you set out the intension of some words. Go back to the inten-
sions you gave in these exercises, formulate them as defi nitions, and evaluate them. In 
 particular, indicate whether your intensional defi nitions have correct extension. Are they 
too broad, too narrow, too broad and too narrow, or neither too broad nor too narrow? If 
they are too broad, too narrow, or too broad and too narrow, provide examples to show this. 
Then evaluate the defi nitions you composed to see if they have metaphors, negations, or 
synonyms.
Language and Clarity
There’s a lot more to language than defi nitions. One key feature of language 
is clarity. Even if you know the meanings of all the words in a passage, you 
may not be able to fi gure out what a passage means because the words aren’t 
put together clearly. Lack of clarity is one of the most common faults that 
professors see in student writing. 
The fi rst step to writing clearly is to remember to try to write clearly. 
You talk to people all the time and they almost always know what you 
mean. You might think that this means that your writing is clear. But writ-
ing is different from talking. For one thing, practice makes perfect and you 
don’t practice writing clearly as much as you practice speaking clearly. 
Also, when you talk you use a lot more than words to make yourself clear. 
You use gestures, facial expressions, and body language. When you write, 
all of that goes away. In addition, when you talk, people can easily ask you 
questions. When someone sits down to read something you’ve written, you 
probably won’t be there to answer their questions. Finally, when you write 
(at least for college courses) you’re probably writing about things that are 
new to you. For all these reasons, when you write you need to remember to 
try to write clearly.

134  Chapter 4 Language
Ambiguity
Ambiguity is one of the most common problems with clarity. A passage is 
ambiguous when it doesn’t make clear which of two or more meanings it’s 
intended to have. Suppose that Melissa said:
I put coins in the bank next to the old oak tree.
Does she mean that she buried the coins in the river bank next to a tree? 
Or does she mean that she put the coins in the safe deposit box of a bank 
that has an old oak tree beside it? You can’t tell. Here’s a famous example of 
ambiguity. In 1967, the Beatles released a song called “Lucy in the Sky with 
Diamonds” (Beatles 1967).* Here’s part of the lyrics:
Picture yourself in a boat on a river,
With tangerine trees and marmalade skies.
Somebody calls you, you answer quite slowly,
A girl with kaleidoscope eyes.
Cellophane fl owers of yellow and green,
Towering over your head.
Look for the girl with the sun in her eyes,
And she’s gone.
{Refrain}
Lucy in the sky with diamonds.
Lucy in the sky with diamonds.
Lucy in the sky with diamonds.
The capital letters of the title are “LSD,” the acronym for a psychedelic drug. 
Is this song about a woman, Lucy, or a description of the effects of LSD? The 
song has two meanings. (The psychedelic music illustrates this point.) 
In songs and poetry, ambiguity isn’t a problem. It can be fun. But when it 
comes to arguments, ambiguity is a problem. It leads to a fallacy.
Fallacy: Equivocation
The Fallacy of Equivocation occurs when an argument trades on ambiguity. 
This fallacy is committed when one meaning of a word is used in one premise 
and another meaning of the same word is used in another premise or in the 
conclusion. Look at the following argument:
(1)  Many Democratic candidates run for office.
(2) Republicans claim they believe in democratic ideals.
Therefore, 
(3) Republicans should vote for Democrats.
In this argument, the word “democratic” is used in both premises. But it 
isn’t used to mean the same thing in each premise. In the fi rst premise it 
means
(a) a political party in the United States, not a type of government. 
*“Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds.” Sgt. Pepper’s Lonely Hearts Club Band. Parlophone, 1967. 
Copyright © 1967 Sony/ATV Music Publishing LLC. All rights administered by Sony/ATV 
Music Publishing LLC, 8 Music Square West, Nashville, TN 37203. All rights reserved. Used by 
permission.
Key Concept
A passage is ambiguous 
when it doesn’t make 
clear which of two or 
more meanings it’s 
intended to have.
Key Concept
The Fallacy of 
Equivocation occurs 
when an argument 
trades on ambiguity.

Language and Clarity  135
In the second premise it means
(b) a type of government, not a political party. 
If someone uses sense (a) in both premises, then premise (1) is true but 
premise (2) is false, and the argument fails the true premises test. If someone 
uses sense (b) in both premise, then premises (1) is false and premise (2) is 
true. The argument still fails the true premises test. If someone uses sense 
(a) in premise (1) and sense (b) in premise (2), then both premises are true and 
the argument passes the true premises test. But the argument fails the proper 
form test. Here’s the argument using sense (a) in premise (1) and sense (b) in 
premise (2):
(1) Many Democratic party candidates run for office.
(2) Republicans claim they believe in a democratic form of government.
Therefore, 
(3)  Republicans should vote for Democrats.
Once you see that the word “democratic” is used in one sense in the fi rst premise 
of the argument and in a different sense in the second premise of the argument, 
you can see that the truth of these premises doesn’t support the conclusion.
Technical Term: Equivocating
Someone who commits the Fallacy of Equivocation is equivocating.
Here’s another example of this fallacy. Philip Kitcher has noted that you 
sometimes see the following argument in the debate over whether evolution 
should be taught in schools (Kitcher 1983. Kitcher’s discussion of this issue is 
much more sophisticated than indicated here.)
(1) We ought not teach theories in school.
(2) Evolution is a theory.
Therefore,
(3) We ought not teach evolution in school.
The word “theory” has two meanings:
(a) the general or abstract principles of a body of fact.
(b) an unproved assumption.
Let’s fi rst assume that this argument is using sense (a) in both premises. On 
sense (a), a theory is a collection of statements of fact. In that case, premise (1) 
is false, and this argument fails the true premises test. Now let’s assume that 
this argument is using sense (b) in both premises. In that case, premise (2) is 
false. Evolution isn’t an unproven assumption. Many scientists have made 
many arguments in support of evolution. Those arguments may be fl awed, 
but evolution hasn’t been assumed. Once again this argument fails the true 
premises test. Finally, let’s assume that the word “theory” is used in sense 
(b) in (1) and (a) in (2). Then all the premises are true and the argument passes 
the true premises test. But now the argument fails the proper form test. You 
could rewrite it like this:
(1) We ought not teach unproven assumptions in school.
(2) Evolution is a body of fact.
Therefore,
(3) We ought not teach evolution in school.

136  Chapter 4 Language
The truth of (1) and (2) doesn’t provide any support for (3). Only arguments 
that avoid the Fallacy of Equivocation, that use words consistently, can be 
good arguments.
Improper grammar can lead to ambiguity. When this happens, you have a 
case of amphiboly. Amphiboly occurs when the grammatical structure of the 
statements in a passage makes it ambiguous. The most common place to fi nd 
amphiboly is in newspaper headlines and it’s often funny.
Patient at Death’s Door—Doctors Pull Him Through
Teacher Strikes Idle Kids
Lawyers Give Poor Free Legal Advice
Juvenile Court to Try Shooting Defendant
Autos Killing 110 a Day—Let’s Resolve to Do Better
(Thompson 2007) 
In each of these cases, the grammatical structure of the headline makes it 
unclear. Does “Lawyers Give Poor Free Legal Advice” mean that lawyers are 
giving free legal advice to people who are poor, or does it mean that lawyers 
aren’t charging for poor legal advice?
In student papers, the most common type of amphiboly is ambiguous 
pronoun reference. Ambiguous pronoun reference occurs when pronouns 
such as “he,” “she,” “it,” “they,” “this,” and “that” don’t refer clearly to one 
thing. Suppose a friend of yours made the claim that
Teddie never argues with his father when he’s drunk.
As the claim is stated, you don’t know who is drunk. Is it Teddie or his fa-
ther? Amphiboly exists because the word “he” is ambiguous. The sentence is 
poorly worded, and it’s impossible to tell what it means.
Key Concept
Amphiboly occurs 
when the grammatical 
structure of the 
statements in a passage 
makes it ambiguous.
Key Concept
Ambiguous pronoun 
reference occurs when 
pronouns such as “he,” 
“she,” “it,” “they,” “this,” 
and “that” don’t refer 
clearly to one thing.
Habits of a Critical Thinker
The Principle of Charity
In critical thinking, the principle of charity isn’t a 
principle about giving to the less fortunate. It’s a 
principle about how to deal with ambiguous pas-
sages. Suppose that you’re reading a text with an 
ambiguous argument. The author might be making 
one of two different arguments. One of these two 
arguments is a better argument than the other. The 
principle of charity states that you should assume 
the meaning of the text that makes for a better 
argument. 
Vagueness
A word is vague when the boundaries of its extension aren’t clear. One exam-
ple of a vague word is “old.” Suppose that someone said
“Old” is an adjective that refers to a person who is more than forty years 
old.
This isn’t accurate. You don’t suddenly become old when you turn forty. Five-
year-olds aren’t old, and eighty-year-olds are old. But the boundary between 
young and old isn’t clear. 
Many words are vague. When does a girl become a woman? When is a person 
tall? When is it cold outside? In the cases of “girl,” “tall,” and “cold,” borderline 
Key Concept
A word is vague when 
the boundaries of its 
extension aren’t clear.

Language and Clarity  137
cases can’t be avoided. Borderline cases are cases which aren’t clearly within the 
extension of the word and not clearly outside the extension of the word.
The dictionary defi nition of a vague word should capture its vagueness. 
A dictionary that defi ned “woman” as a human female who is eighteen or 
more years old would be failing to capture the common (vague) usage. A good 
dictionary defi nition of “woman” should be somewhat vague to capture the 
vagueness of “woman.” “An adult female person” seems good because the 
word “adult” is roughly as vague as the word “woman.”
You can’t avoid using vague words and you can’t completely remove 
vagueness. The key is to make sure that an argument doesn’t rely on vague-
ness. Look at this argument:
(1) Tax increases relate to economic growth.
(2) We want to encourage economic growth.
Therefore,
(3) We shouldn’t increase taxes.
Let’s assume that the second premise of this argument is true. But what about 
the fi rst premise? Is it true or false? To attempt to answer this question is 
to fall into the trap of failing to recognize vagueness. When a statement is 
vague, you can’t determine whether it’s true or false. You can’t determine 
whether (1) is true or false until you know what “relate” means. “Relate to” 
might mean many things. It could mean “cause,” or it could mean “prevent.” 
(1) might mean
(1a) Tax increases cause economic growth.
or it might mean
(1b) Tax increases prevent economic growth.
Until you know whether the author meant (1a), (1b), or something else, you 
can’t begin the process of determining whether (1) is true. An argument with 
a vague premise fails the true premises test because you can’t know that 
premise (1) is true.
Here are some words that are often vague. When you see one, you should 
be alert for the possibility of vagueness being used in an argument.
Vagueness Indicator Words
relates to  
involves 
connects to 
is associated with
is concerned with 
relies on 
revolves around
It can be difficult to distinguish vagueness from ambiguity. When you have 
ambiguity but not vagueness, you have a passage that has two clear meanings 
but you aren’t sure which of the two is being used in a passage. You could 
represent the situation as two boxes with clearly defi ned borders.
Ambiguous

138  Chapter 4 Language
Suppose that you read the following in a newspaper: “He saw the Presi-
dent of the United States and the President of General Motors and then 
talked with the President.” This sentence is ambiguous because you don’t 
know whether the third use of “President” in the sentence refers to the 
President of the United States or the President of General Motors. There 
isn’t much vagueness here because the word “President” isn’t very vague. 
When you have vagueness but not ambiguity, you have a passage that 
has one clear meaning but the boundaries of the extension of the vague 
word aren’t clear. You could represent the situation as one box with blurry 
borders.
EXERCISE 4.5
A. Determine whether the following passages contain any ambiguity and/or inappropriate 
vagueness.
 1. I don’t know. I guess that she is sort of tall.
 2. The key? What key?
 3. Give me that mouse!
 *4. That car is yellow.
 5. The ’68 Chevies and the ’69 Pontiacs used the same color of yellow.
Vague
Ambiguous and Vague
Suppose you read that: “The President’s office was painted in a light color.” In 
this context, “light” isn’t ambiguous. But it’s vague because it’s hard to know 
exactly when a color stops being light and starts being dark. 
In some cases, you have both vagueness and ambiguity. You could repre-
sent that situation as two boxes with blurry borders.
Suppose that you read this: “Taylor is cool.” It’s ambiguous because it could be 
saying that Taylor has a problem that could be solved by putting on a sweater 
or it could be saying that Taylor is a stylish person. It’s also vague because the 
boundaries of being cold and being stylish are both difficult to defi ne.

Language and Emotion  139
 6. There’re lots of branches in the gutter.
 7. “Should I turn left?” “Right.”
 *8. “A leaf obtains CO2 for photosynthesis from the air; adjustable pores in the epidermis, 
called stomata, open and close at appropriate times to admit air carrying CO2.” (Aude-
sirk 2005, 116, material omitted)
 9. “The dry and barren surface of the moon reminds us of how truly special Earth is— 
blanketed with green plants, blue oceans, and white clouds.” (Audesirk 2005, 1, mate-
rial omitted)
 10. “Infi nite. Nothing. Our soul is cast into a body, where it fi nds number, time, dimen-
sion. Thereupon it reasons, and calls this nature, necessity, and believes nothing else.” 
( Pascal 2007, 83)
 11. “As long as the utility reigning in moral value judgments is solely the utility of the 
herd, there can be no morality of ‘neighbor love.’” (Nietzsche 2002, 598) 
 *12. “I’m undaunted in my quest to amuse myself by constantly changing my hair.” (This 
quote is often attributed, without citation, to Hillary Clinton.)
 13. “All of us in America want there to be fairness when it comes to justice.” (This quote 
is often attributed, without citation, to George W. Bush.)
 14. “It is beyond me to keep secret my international orientation. The state to which I be-
long as a citizen does not play the least role in my spiritual life. I regard allegiance to a 
government as a business matter, somewhat like the relationship with a life insurance 
company.” (Einstein 1997, ix)
 15. “The word ‘harm’ is both vague and ambiguous.” (Feinberg 1984, 31, material omitted) 
Language and Emotion
Many words generate or suppress emotions. “Luxurious” generates positive 
emotions, and “rotting” generates negative emotions. Words that generate 
or suppress emotions have an emotional charge. People trying to sell prod-
ucts study the emotional charge of words and try to associate their products 
with words that have a positive emotional charge. When one of the authors 
of this book was in high school, home computers were rare. Input devices 
were primitive. Most computers had just a keyboard. There were no mice. 
A new input device was introduced. It was called a “scalar input device.” 
It was a small stick of plastic connected to a ball. The ball was set in a box. 
When you pushed the stick of plastic up, the things on the computer went up, 
when you pulled the stick of plastic down, the things on the computer went 
down. From a marketing perspective, “scalar input device” wasn’t a good 
phrase. Many people don’t know what “scalar” means, and “input device” 
has a negative emotional charge. It sounds dull. A new word was invented for 
the scalar input device. It was renamed a “joystick,” a stick of joy. This word 
has a positive emotional charge. This word has stuck and you may have never 
heard the phrase “scalar input device.” 

140  Chapter 4 Language
Do you think that the language in this textbook, in your other textbooks, 
and in your class discussions is dry and dull? If you do, one reason may be that 
you’re used to the emotionally charged language that’s common on televi-
sion and the radio. Marketers, talk-radio hosts, and politicians are masters at 
using emotionally charged language in place of good arguments. Textbooks 
and professors don’t do that, and this sometimes makes their language seem 
boring. Textbooks and professors want you to focus on the information and 
arguments in a book. They want you to be moved by their ideas, not by their 
language. 
Connections
Bias is also discussed in Chapters Three and Eight.
Fallacy: Appeal to Emotions
The Fallacy of Appeal to Emotions occurs when someone uses emotionally 
charged language in place of arguments. Various emotions can be used: pity, 
fear, ridicule, spite, anger, fl attery, and many others. One of the authors of 
this book sits on a committee to hear petitions of students asking for changes 
in their grades. In this job, he often sees students committing fallacious ap-
peals to pity. A student might write,
I deserve a B in this class. If I don’t get a B, I’ll lose my fi nancial aid and 
have to drop out of college.
Grades are based on performance in a class, not on fi nancial need. The fi rst 
sentence that this imaginary student wrote could be supported with argu-
ments about his work in class. But no such arguments are provided. The pas-
sage only appeals to pity. 
Key Concept
The Fallacy of Appeal 
to Emotions occurs 
when someone uses 
emotionally charged 
language in place of 
arguments.
Habits of a Critical Thinker
Recognizing Bias and Prejudice
When you see emotionally charged language in a pas-
sage of writing, you should be alert for bias and preju-
dice. In bowling, a ball is biased when it tends to roll 
to the left or right. The ball is biased because it tends 
to deviate from the course it should follow. Bias in 
people is similar. A person is biased when something 
about his personality causes his beliefs to deviate from 
the course they would take if he followed good argu-
ments. “Prejudice” is a synonym for “bias.” Someone 
who’s prejudiced is biased because he has pre-judged 
an issue. He has reached a conclusion before (“pre”) he 
has fairly examined the arguments about the issue.
 
Bias is unavoidable. Everyone comes to issues with 
beliefs that shape how they frame the debate and 
evaluate the arguments. We all have some irrational 
emotional reactions and these color our view of things. 
One of the authors of this book hates being called “sir.” 
He is biased against people who call him “sir,” and it 
takes more effort for him to correctly evaluate the 
arguments of someone who calls him “sir” simply be-
cause he’s annoyed by the use of “sir.” This same author 
is biased in favor of people who like baseball.
 
A crucial step in minimizing the effect of your 
biases is recognizing them. If a person is aware of 
his own biases, he’s much better equipped to combat 
them. The effect of unrecognized biases is hard to 
remove. You can’t work to minimize an effect that you 
don’t recognize.

Language and Emotion  141
Political candidates sometimes use appeals to fear. You might fi nd a poli-
tician asserting
If we don’t win the war in Iraq, terrorists will strike the United States 
again.
One could make an argument to support this claim, but no argument is pre-
sented here. This statement asserts that one event (not winning the war in 
Iraq) would cause another event (a terrorist strike in the United States). To 
support this claim, the politician must provide a causal argument. If no argu-
ment is made, this statement is a fallacious appeal to fear.
Connections
Causal arguments are discussed in Chapter Nine. 
Euphemism
Emotionally charged language includes not only words that generate emo-
tions but also words that suppress them. These words are euphemisms. “Eth-
nic cleansing” is a euphemism. In some cases, members of an ethnic majority 
have engaged in the systematic expulsion, imprisonment, rape, and killing 
of members of an ethnic minority in order to achieve ethnic homogeneity in 
a particular region. Announcing that you plan to expel, imprison, rape, and 
kill people because they belong to a particular ethnic group is likely to cause 
a strong emotional reaction in people. The phrase “ethnic cleansing” associ-
ates these activities with the simple and comforting act of cleaning one’s 
home. In this way it attempts to suppress the emotional reaction that’s likely 
to result from a non-emotionally charged description of the activity. 
An administrative assistant is a secretary, someone employed to manage 
routine work for someone else. Although the word “secretary” once had a 
positive emotional charge, it gradually lost it and gained a negative charge. 
The phrase “administrative assistant” was developed to avoid this negative 
charge. The authors of this textbook think that “administrative assistant” is 
developing a negative charge. Perhaps a new euphemism will replace it.
Rhetorical Devices
In addition to words, the way that a passage is written can have a powerful 
infl uence on emotions. Rhetorical devices are ways that writing can be made 
more emotionally powerful. The example of the Dreyfus affair discussed in 
Chapter One is an example of the power of rhetoric. Here’s Zola’s argument:
Some have gone as far as to claim that Picquart was a forger, that he 
forged the telegram to ruin Esterhazy. But, good God, why? For what rea-
son? Give me a motive. Was he too paid by the Jews?
Here’s our standardization of this argument:
(1) Picquart had no reason to forge the telegram to ruin Esterhazy.
Therefore
(2) Picquart did not forge the telegram.
Key Concept
Euphemisms are words 
that suppress emotions.
Key Concept
Rhetorical devices are 
ways that writing can be 
made more emotionally 
powerful.

142  Chapter 4 Language
The standardized version of Zola’s argument isn’t nearly as emotionally pow-
erful as the unstandardized version. Arguments presented in standard form 
are often less emotionally powerful than arguments presented in non-stand-
ard form. One reason you should put arguments into standard form is that it 
helps you reduce the chance that the emotional power of the language used 
to present the argument has misled you into thinking that a bad argument is 
a good argument.
Connections
Chapter One notes that one reason to standardize arguments is that standardiza-
tion serves to remove much of the emotional charge from a passage.
Scholars have identifi ed many rhetorical devices. Let’s look at a few. (The 
Department of Classics at the University of Kentucky has an extensive list on 
their web pages: http://www.uky.edu/AS/Classics/rhetoric.html).
Zola’s passage makes use of one common rhetorical device, the rhetorical 
question. Rhetorical questions are sentences that have the grammatical form 
of a question but are intended to persuade with emotion. “What time is it?” is 
a genuine question. “How can anyone support gun control?” and “But, good 
God, why?” are rhetorical questions. The key to recognizing rhetorical ques-
tions is to see that they expect no answer. In many cases, the arguer is sub-
stituting a question for a statement because the arguer has no subargument 
to support a controversial premise. A rhetorical question is offered instead. 
Beware of such premise substitutes. They’re often a sign that the author of a 
passage wants to change your beliefs based not on the power of critical think-
ing but instead on the power of rhetoric. Part of the art of argument is learn-
ing to distinguish between (a) a rhetorical device used by an author to get you 
to focus on an argument (as was the case with Zola) and (b) a rhetorical device 
used instead of arguments. If you feel tempted to put a rhetorical question 
in one of your papers, you may be trying to change people’s beliefs using the 
power of rhetoric instead of the power of critical thinking. You need to resist 
that temptation and insert an argument instead.
Alliteration is another common rhetorical device. It occurs when an au-
thor repeats the same sound at the beginning of words. After winning a big 
battle, Julius Caesar sent a message to Rome: “Veni Vidi Vici.” (“I came, I saw, 
I conquered.”) This is alliteration in either Latin (the “v” sound at the begin-
ning of each word) or English (the “I” sound at the beginning of each phrase).
Another rhetorical device is anaphora. It occurs when someone repeats 
the same words at the beginning of series of phrases. Winston Churchill was 
prime minister of Britain when the Nazis attacked France. He gave a speech 
intended to rally British spirits. He famously said
Even though large parts of Europe and many old and famous states have 
fallen or may fall into the grip of Nazi rule, we shall not fl ag or fail. We 
shall go on to the end, we shall fi ght in France, we shall fi ght on the seas 
and oceans, we shall fi ght with growing confi dence and growing strength 
in the air, we shall defend our island, whatever the cost may be, we shall 
fi ght on the beaches, we shall fi ght on the landing grounds, we shall fi ght 
in the fi elds and in the streets, we shall fi ght in the hills; we shall never 
surrender. (Churchill 2003, 218)
Key Concept
Rhetorical questions 
are sentences that have 
the grammatical form 
of a question but are 
intended to persuade 
with emotion.
Key Concept
Alliteration occurs 
when an author repeats 
the same sound at the 
beginning of words.
Key Concept
Anaphora occurs when 
someone repeats the 
same words at the 
beginning of series of 
phrases.

Language and Emotion  143
Critical Thinkers
Jane Austen
Jane Austen (1775–1817) was an English novelist whose sharp and humorous eye, character 
portrayals, and critical social commentary have made her work as popular and relevant today 
as it was in her lifetime. She’s widely acknowledged as a master of the English language. 
Several fi lm and television adaptations have been made of her work. The quote at the 
beginning of this chapter is from one of her books.
EXERCISE 4.6
A. In each of the following passages, indicate whether emotionally charged language and/or 
rhetorical devices are used.
 1. Textbooks and professors want you to focus on the information and arguments in a 
book. 
 2. Is it really possible that someone thinks we should start using roundabouts in the 
 United States? They’re a disaster!
 3. Put that down right now!
 *4. The differently-abled tend to have lower incomes than those who are not differently-
abled.
 5. By the authority vested in me by the Board of Regents of the State of Very Cool, I pro-
nounce you all graduates of Very Cool University with all the rights, responsibilities, 
and privileges thereunto appertaining. 
The repeated use of “we shall” at the beginning of many phrases is an exam-
ple of anaphora.
Personifi cation, another rhetorical device, occurs when someone writes 
as if an inanimate object was a person. Here’s an example of personifi cation 
from the Bible:
Wisdom sings her song in the streets. In the public squares she raises her 
voice. (Proverbs 1:20)
Wisdom can’t sing but a person can. This proverb provokes more emotion 
because of the use of personifi cation.
This introductory textbook can’t provide a full study of rhetorical devices. 
You might study them in an English class. In a creative writing class, you’ll 
be encouraged to use rhetorical devices to bring out emotional responses. 
In other classes, you might use rhetorical devices sparingly to spice up your 
papers. But, in general, you should avoid using rhetorical devices and be wary 
of writing that uses them. 
Key Concept
Personifi cation occurs 
when someone writes as 
if an inanimate object 
was a person.
© Bettmann/CORBIS

144  Chapter 4 Language
 6. The box was long and thin. It was slightly damaged on one end, but I couldn’t see what 
was inside.
 7. 2 + 2 = 4
 *8. Could you tell me where I can fi nd the W.C.?
 9. Man, how long until lunch?
 10. Stop! You’re under arrest!
 11. “I have been afraid of putting air in a tire ever since I saw a tractor tire blow up and 
throw Newt Hardbine’s father over the top of the Standard Oil sign. I’m not lying. He 
got stuck up there. About nineteen people congregated during the time it took for Nor-
man Strick to walk up to the Courthouse and blow the whistle for the volunteer fi re de-
partment. They eventually did come with the ladder and haul him down, and he wasn’t 
dead but lost his hearing and in many other ways was never the same afterward. They 
said he overfi lled the tire.” (Kingsolver 2001, 1) 
 *12. “My education was dismal. I went to a series of schools for mentally disturbed teach-
ers.” (Allen 2001, 89)
 13. “Paul D. sits down in the rocking chair and examines the quilt patched in carnival 
colors. His hands are limp between his knees. There are too many things to feel about 
this woman. His head hurts. Suddenly he remembers Sixo trying to describe what he 
felt about the Thirty-Mile Woman. ‘She is a friend of my mind. She gather me, man. The 
pieces I am, she gather them and give them back to me in all the right order. It’s good, 
you know, when you got a woman who is a friend of your mind.’ He is staring at the 
quilt but he is thinking about her wrought-iron back. He wants to put his story next to 
hers.” (Morrison 2001, 314) 
 14. “I have a dream that one day this nation will rise up and live out the true meaning of 
its creed: ‘We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal.’ I have 
a dream that one day on the red hills of Georgia, the sons of former slaves and the sons 
of former slave owners will be able to sit down together at the table of brotherhood. I 
have a dream that one day even the state of Mississippi, a state sweltering with the heat 
of injustice, sweltering with the heat of oppression, will be transformed into an oasis 
of freedom and justice. I have a dream that my four little children will one day live in 
a nation where they will not be judged by the color of their skin but by the content of 
their character.” (King 1991, 219) 
 15. “‘What’s happening in these fi ltration camps is unspeakable,’ said Holly Cartner, Exec-
utive Director of the Europe and Central Asia division of Human Rights Watch. ‘We saw 
the same kind of torture and ill-treatment in fi ltration camps during the last Chechen 
war. The Russians must not get away with committing these abuses for a second time.’” 
(Human Rights Watch 2007)

Chapter Summary  145
If you don’t understand the language of a pas-
sage, you can’t do the true premises test because 
you don’t know whether the premises are true 
or false. If you don’t understand the language 
of a passage, you can’t do the proper form test 
because you can’t tell whether the premises sup-
port the conclusion. 
 
A defi nition is a statement giving the mean-
ing of a word.
 
Nouns and verbs are class terms because 
they refer to a group of things. Every defi nition 
of a class term indicates the word’s extensional 
meaning and its intensional meaning. The ex-
tension of a class term is the collection of things 
in this class. The intension of a class term is the 
collection of features that all of the members of 
the class have in common. 
 
Most defi nitions have the genus/species 
format. They defi ne a word by indicating (a) the 
genus (a group of which the thing being defi ned 
is a member) and (b) the species (the feature 
or features that set the particular thing to be 
defi ned apart from the other things in the 
group). 
 
Dictionary defi nitions are defi nitions that 
attempt to capture the common usage of a 
word. Technical defi nitions attempt to provide 
a defi nition for a special context outside of 
ordinary and common usage. Technical defi ni-
tions can serve multiple functions: providing 
convenience, increasing precision, defi ning new 
things, and helping present a theory.
 
Defi nitions are evaluated by looking at how 
accurately and clearly they describe the extension 
Chapter Summary
and intension of a word. Good defi nitions avoid 
metaphors, negations, and synonyms. They are 
neither too broad nor too narrow.
 
One key feature of language is clarity. Even 
if you know the meanings of all the words in a 
passage, you may not be able to fi gure out what 
a passage means because the words aren’t put 
together clearly. A passage is ambiguous when 
it doesn’t make clear which of two or more 
meanings it’s intended to have. The Fallacy 
of Equivocation occurs when an argument is 
ambiguous because one meaning of a word is 
used in one premise and another meaning of the 
same word is used in another premise or in the 
conclusion. Amphiboly occurs when the gram-
matical structure of the statements in a passage 
makes it ambiguous. Another clarity problem is 
inappropriate vagueness. A word is vague when 
the boundaries of its extension aren’t clear.
 
Language often has an emotional charge 
that can be used to persuade by emotion instead 
of by critical thinking. The Fallacy of Appeal 
to Emotions occurs when people attempt to 
use emotionally charged language in place 
of arguments. Emotionally charged language 
sometimes appears in defi nitions, and when it 
does the defi nition is a persuasive defi nition. 
Emotionally charged language includes not only 
words that generate emotions but also words 
that suppress them. Such words are euphe-
misms. Rhetorical devices are tools that make 
writing more emotionally powerful. In argu-
mentative writing, they’re dangerous because 
they can put emotions in place of arguments.

146
[T]here is good hope that death is a blessing, for it is one of two things: either the dead 
are nothing and have no perception of anything, or it is, as we are told, a change and a 
relocating for the soul from here to another place. If it is complete lack of perception, 
like a dreamless sleep, then death would be a great advantage . . . . If death is like this, 
I say it is an advantage, for all eternity would then seem to be no more than a single 
night. If, on the other hand, death is a change from here to another place, and what we 
are told is true and all who have died are there, what greater blessing could there be? 
[W]hat would you give to keep company with [heroes like] Homer? I am willing to die 
many times if that is true.
—Socrates, as told by Plato in his Apology (1981, 43, material omitted)
5
Propositional 
Arguments
Learning Outcomes
After studying the material in this chapter, you should be able to:
1. Identify simple and compound statements.
2. Identify a negation, a disjunction, a conjunction, and a 
conditional.
3. Distinguish inclusive disjunctions from exclusive disjunctions.
4. Identify the antecedent and the consequent of a conditional.
5. Identify eight propositional argument forms and know which 
are proper and which are improper.

Identifying Propositional Statements  147
In Chapter Two you saw that arguments can be classifi ed as either deductive 
or inductive. Many arguments, such as Socrates’ argument on the previous 
page, are deductive. In this book you’ll study the two most common kinds 
of deductive arguments: propositional arguments and categorical arguments. 
This chapter discusses propositional arguments and Chapter Six focuses on 
categorical arguments. In this chapter, you’ll look at eight propositional argu-
ment forms. One of these forms is found twice in the quote on the previous 
page. After studying this chapter, you should be able to determine the form of 
Socrates’ arguments and whether they pass the proper form test.
Identifying Propositional Statements
The fi rst key to understanding propositional arguments I believe is to recog-
nize that some statements have statements inside them and other statements 
don’t. Compare the following two statements:
(a)  The Eiffel Tower is in Paris.
(b) The Eiffel Tower is in Paris, and so is the Arc de Triomphe. 
Both (a) and (b) are statements because both are either true or false. In this 
case, both are true. But (b) is different from (a) because (b) has two statements 
inside it. They are:
(b1) The Eiffel Tower is in Paris
(b2) The Arc de Triomphe is in Paris. 
Statements like (a) are simple statements, and statements like (b) are com-
pound statements. A simple statement is a statement that doesn’t contain 
any other statement. A compound statement is a statement that contains at 
least one other statement.
Here are some simple statements:
Ceelay’s bird can fl y. 
Most birds can fl y. 
Birds are the only animals that can fl y. 
Flying buttresses are arched masonry supports for the walls of buildings. 
Flying buttresses bear weight away from the walls of the main structure. 
The statements are simple not because they’re short and not because they’re 
about easy-to-understand subjects. They’re simple because they make only one 
claim.
The defi nition of a compound statement seems a bit odd. How can a com-
pound statement contain only one other statement? Doesn’t a compound 
Key Concept
A simple statement 
is a statement that 
doesn’t contain any 
other statement. A 
compound statement 
is a statement that 
contains at least one 
other statement.

148  Chapter 5 Propositional Arguments
statement have to contain at least two other statements? The answer is “No” 
because of compound statements like this one:
(c)  The Eiffel Tower isn’t in Paris. 
Statement (a) is in statement (c). Statement (c) is a compound statement that 
contains only one other statement. You can see that (a) is contained in (c) by 
rewriting (c) like this:
(c1) 
It’s not the case that the Eiffel Tower is in Paris.
(c) and (c1) say the same thing, and the exact words of (a) are at the end of (c1). 
There are four main types of compound statements: negations, disjunc-
tions, conjunctions, and conditionals.
Negations
Negations are statements that deny another statement. Here are some 
negations:
There are some birds that can’t fl y. 
It’s not the case that all birds can fl y. 
It’s false that all birds can fl y. 
Birds don’t fl y.
As these examples show, you can express negations in different ways. 
Key Concept
Negations are 
statements that deny 
another statement.
The cassowary is a large 
fl ightless bird found in 
the tropical forests of 
New Guinea and 
northeastern Australia. 
One of the  tallest and 
heaviest living birds, the 
southern cassowary is 
smaller than the ostrich 
and the emu.
javarman, 2010/Used under license from Shutterstock.com

Identifying Propositional Statements  149
Let’s use “S1,” “S2,” “S3,” etc. as variables to stand for statements. A 
negation is a statement that can be put into this form:
Not S1
Connections
Chapter Two discusses the use of variables.
A negation is true when the statement it contains is false. The statement 
(a) The Eiffel Tower isn’t in New York.
is true. The statement it contains 
(b) The Eiffel Tower is in New York. 
is false. 
When you’re looking for negations, you have to be careful because some 
statements look like negations but aren’t. Think about the statement
(c)  Joe is taller than average.
What’s the negation of this statement? You might think it’s
(d) Joe is shorter than average.
But that isn’t correct. There are two different ways for Joe not to be taller than 
average. He could be shorter than average or he could be average. The correct 
negation of statement (c) is
(e)  Joe isn’t taller than average.
The statement that Joe isn’t taller than average tells us that Joe is either 
shorter than average or average.
 
Compare the statements about Joe’s height to the statement that
(f)  The light is on.
If the light is on a normal switch (not a dimmer switch), then the negation of 
this statement is either
(g)  The light is off.
or
(h) The light isn’t on.
Statements (g) and (h) say the same thing because a light is either on or off. Unlike 
Joe’s case, there’s no third possibility. Statements like (c) and (d) are contraries and 
statements like (f) and (g) are contradictories. When you see a negation, you need 
to be careful to look for both contradictories and contraries. 
As the cases of Joe and the light indicate, when you identify a statement 
as a contrary or contradictory, you’re relying on your background knowledge. 
You have background knowledge about height and lights that allows you to 
see that there are two possible ways for Joe not to be taller than average but 
only one way for a light not to be on. 
Connections
Chapter Six discusses contradictories and contraries in more detail. 
Key Concept
The form of a negation.
Key Concept
A negation is true when 
the statement it contains 
is false.

150  Chapter 5 Propositional Arguments
Disjunctions
Speaking roughly, disjunctions are compound statements that contain two or 
more statements joined by an “or.” The statements in a disjunction are its 
disjuncts. To defi ne a disjunction as a compound statement that uses “or” is 
only roughly correct because phrases such as “unless” and “any one of” can 
also be used to indicate a disjunction.
Here are some disjunctions:
Either Ceelay’s bird can fl y or it has lost its wings. 
Ceelay’s bird can fl y unless it has lost its wings.
Flying buttresses can have any one of the following functions: support, 
decoration, or illumination. 
Flying buttresses are supportive of buildings, or they’re decorative, or 
they’re both. 
You’ll see some complications in a moment, but for now you can say that a 
disjunction is a statement that can be put into the following form:
S1 or S2.
S1 and S2 are the disjuncts.
 
A disjunction is true when at least one of its disjuncts is true. Suppose 
that you and a friend, Bret, are talking about what another friend, Jaime, had 
for lunch yesterday. Suppose that Bret says
(a) I bet Jaime had either a bagel sandwich or a hamburger. 
This disjunction contains two other statements.
(a1) 
Jaime had a bagel sandwich. 
(a2) 
Jaime had a hamburger. 
Let’s suppose that you and Bret later discover that Jaime had a bagel sandwich. 
In that case (a1) is true and (a2) is false. But because (a1) is true, (a) is also true.
A statement may be both a negation and a disjunction. Here’s an example:
It’s false that Jaime had either a bagel sandwich or a hamburger.
This statement would be true if Jaime had a chicken salad sandwich and false 
if she had either a bagel sandwich or a hamburger.
Many disjunctions are like (a) in that they have two disjuncts. But in 
theory an infi nite number of disjuncts could be in one disjunction. 
Suppose that you wanted to make a disjunction that set out the accept-
able forms of identifi cation that you can use when you go to vote in the state 
of Georgia. In Georgia there are six different forms of acceptable identifi ca-
tion. Here’s the list from the web site of the Secretary of State of Georgia: 
Voters are required to present identifi cation at their polling place prior to cast-
ing their ballot. Proper identifi cation shall consist of any one of the following:
(1) A Georgia driver’s license which was properly issued by the appropri-
ate state agency;
(2) A valid voter identifi cation card or other valid identifi cation card issued 
by a branch, department, agency, or entity of the State of Georgia, any 
other state, or the United States authorized by law to issue personal 
identifi cation  containing a photograph;
Key Concept
The form of a 
disjunction.
Key Concept
A disjunction is true 
when at least one of its 
disjuncts is true.

Identifying Propositional Statements  151
(3) A valid United States passport;
(4) A valid employee identifi cation card containing a photograph of the 
elector and issued by any branch, department, agency, or entity of the 
United States government, this state, or any county, municipality, 
board, authority, or other entity of this state;
(5) A valid United States military identifi cation card containing a 
photograph of the elector;
(6) A valid tribal identifi cation card containing a photograph of the 
elector
 
(State of Georgia, 2009)
This long disjunction is claiming that prospective voters must have one of 
the above forms of identifi cation in order to vote.
Connections
The use of “valid” in (2)–(6) above is different from the use of “valid” when it refers 
to an argument. See the Technical Terms note on “valid” in Chapter Two.
Surprisingly, the little word “or” has two different meanings. Suppose that 
your local pizza place isn’t a very good pizza place. The menu reads
Toppings: pepperoni, mushrooms
The menu is saying
(a)  You can have pepperoni or mushrooms on your pizza.
Suppose that a game show host says to a contestant
(b)  You can have what’s in this box or what’s behind that curtain.
Compare statements (a) and (b). They both use the word “or.” But while you 
can have more than one topping on your pizza, the game show contestant 
can’t have both what’s in the box and what’s behind the curtain. In (a) “or” 
means
one or the other (or both)
But in (b) “or” means
one or the other (but not both)
When “or” is used to mean “one or the other (or both),” it’s an inclusive dis-
junction. When “or” is used to mean “one or the other (but not both),” it’s an 
exclusive disjunction. The “or” in the pizza example is inclusive. The “or” in 
the game show example is exclusive. (Later you’ll see that when it comes to 
the proper form test, the difference between inclusive and exclusive disjunc-
tions makes a big difference.)
Inclusive disjunctions are statements that have this form:
S1 or S2 (or both).
Exclusive disjunctions have this form:
S1 or S2 (but not both).
Speaking precisely, a disjunction is a statement that can be put into one of 
these two forms. The exclusive form is more common. In fact, outside of a 
pizza place, inclusive disjunctions are hard to fi nd.
Key Concept
The form of inclusive 
disjunctions. The form 
of exclusive disjuctions.

152  Chapter 5 Propositional Arguments
Conjunctions
Speaking roughly, conjunctions are compound statements that contain two or 
more statements joined by an “and.” The statements in a conjunction are its 
conjuncts. To defi ne a conjunction as a compound statement that uses “and” 
is only roughly correct because other words (such as “but,” “even though,” 
“nevertheless,” “although,” and “still”) can be used to indicate a conjunc-
tion. Here are some conjunctions:
EXERCISE 5.1
A. Indicate whether the following statements are simple or compound. If it’s a compound 
statement, indicate whether it’s a negation and/or a disjunction. If it’s a disjunction, indi-
cate whether it’s inclusive or exclusive.
 1. Josh likes Coke Zero.
 2. Dinosaurs are extinct.
 3. Joi doesn’t like Pepsi.
 *4. Francis had milk or juice with breakfast.
 5. David is either on the 11th fl oor or the 12th.
 6. It’s false to say that everyone likes baseball.
 7. “Matter can exist in three states: gas, liquid, and solid.” (Bettelheim 2007, 16)
 *8. “The rem, which stands for roentgen equivalent for man, is a measure of the effect of 
the radiation when a person absorbs 1 roentgen.” (Bettelheim 2007, 77)
 9. “All alkali metals are soft enough to be cut with a knife, and their softness increases 
in going down the column [on the periodic table of elements].” (Bettelheim 2007, 
43–44)
 10. “Unlike our stairways, the spaces between energy levels in an atom are not equal . . . .” 
(Bettelheim 2007, 47)
 11. “I am not at all tired, my dear, and would much prefer to go out.” (Dickens 1904, 47, 
material omitted) 
 *12. “I’ll wait if you make haste . . . .” (Dickens 1904, 143)
 13. “[The] music [of the horse-drawn wagon] changed as the horses came to a stand, and 
subsided to a gentle tinkling, except when a horse tossed his head or shook himself and 
sprinkled off a little shower of bell-ringing.” (Dickens 1904, 61) 
 14. “[Harriet Tubman’s] name deserves to be handed down to posterity, side by side with 
the names of Jeanne D’Arc, Grace Darling, and Florence Nightingale, for not one of 
these women, noble and brave as they were, has shown more courage, and power of 
endurance, in facing danger and death to relieve human suffering, than this poor black 
woman, whose story I am endeavoring in a most imperfect way to give You.” (Bradford 
1897, 4)
 15. “You may already know something about the world of research.” (Salkind 2006, 1, 
material omitted)

Identifying Propositional Statements  153
Birds fl y and insects fl y. 
Most birds fl y, but penguins don’t. 
Flying buttresses can be supportive even though they may be described 
as useless.
Conjunctions are usually composed of two conjuncts, although they can 
have three or more.
Many statements are compound; nevertheless, some are simple. 
The moon wasn’t full that night; still, someone or something could be 
seen moving across the lawn. 
Speaking strictly, a conjunction is a statement that can be put into the fol-
lowing form:
S1 and S2
Let’s return to the discussion you and Bret were having about what Jaime had 
for lunch. But suppose that, instead of the disjunction, Bret says
(a) I bet Jaime had a bagel sandwich and a hamburger.
This conjunction contains the same statements as Bret’s disjunction that you 
saw above.
(a1) 
Jaime had a bagel sandwich. 
(a2) 
Jaime had a hamburger. 
Once again, you and Bret later discover that Jaime only had a bagel sandwich. 
In that case (a2) is false and (a1) is true. But now statement (a) is false. State-
ment (a) is only true if Jaime was really hungry and had a bagel sandwich and 
a hamburger. A conjunction is true when all of its conjuncts are true. 
You can combine negations, disjunctions, and conjunctions in one state-
ment. Here’s an example:
Key Concept
The form of a 
conjunction.
Key Concept
A conjunction is true 
when all of its conjuncts 
are true.
Flying buttresses of the 
Cathedral of Strasbourg.
Nicolas THIBAUT/Photononstop/PhotoLibrary

154  Chapter 5 Propositional Arguments
(b)  The Eiffel Tower isn’t in Paris and Jaime had either a bagel sandwich 
or a hamburger.
This statement contains three simple statements.
S1 = The Eiffel Tower is in Paris.
S2 = Jaime had a bagel sandwich.
S3 = Jaime had a hamburger.
Here’s the form of this statement:
Not S1 and (S2 or S3 (or both))
(Why is this disjunction inclusive? Because Jaime could have had both a bagel 
sandwich and a hamburger.)
Sometimes “and” is used to indicate that one event caused another. 
Here’s an example. Suppose that Kim says
(a)  Rod had six beers and then he had a car accident.
Kim is probably trying to say that Rod’s accident was caused by having too 
much alcohol. Grammatically (a) looks like a conjunction, and you might be 
tempted to think that (a) can be put into the form of a conjunction.
Wrong: S1 = Rod had six beers.
 
S2 = Rod had an accident.
 
S1 and S2.
But “S1 and S2” isn’t an appropriate restatement of (a). What Kim’s trying to 
say is
S1 caused S2.
Connections
Chapter Nine discusses causal arguments.
Conditionals
A fourth type of compound statement is a conditional. A conditional asserts 
that if one statement in the compound is true, then the other statement in 
the compound is true. Look at this conditional: 
(a)  If it rains today, then she’ll take the bus. 
This statement asserts that if the statement 
(a1) 
It rains today. 
is true, then the statement
(a2) 
She’ll take the bus. 
is true. The “if” statement in a conditional is its antecedent, and the “then” 
statement is its consequent. In the example above, (a1) is the antecedent and 
(a2) is the consequent. Here are some more conditionals:
If birds can fl y, they have wings. 
If fl ying buttresses offer support to a building, then they aren’t just deco-
rative features.
If you aren’t too tired, you’ll go to the store.
If your eyes are open, then you’re awake unless you’re asleep or dead. 
Key Concept
A conditional asserts 
that if one statement 
in the compound is 
true, then the other 
statement in the 
compound is true.
Key Concept
The “if” statement in 
a conditional is its 
antecedent, and the 
“then” statement is its 
consequent.

Identifying Propositional Statements  155
In the fi rst of these statements, the antecedent is “Birds can fl y” and the con-
sequent is “Birds have wings.”
Punctuation helps you identify what type of statement is being made. 
In the fourth statement in the group above, the comma after “open” and the 
lack of a comma after “awake” indicate that the statement is a conditional 
whose consequent contains a disjunction with three disjuncts (you’re awake, 
you’re asleep, you’re dead).
Strictly speaking, a conditional is a statement that can be put into the 
following form:
If S1, then S2.
A conditional asserts that if the antecedent is true, then the consequent 
is true. This means that if the antecedent is true and the consequent is 
true, then the conditional is true. When the antecedent of a conditional 
is true and its consequent is false, the conditional is false. Look at this 
conditional.
If it’s snowing, then the temperature is below 40 degrees Fahrenheit. 
Suppose it’s snowing. Then the antecedent is true, the consequent is true, and 
the conditional is true. (Snow forms only where the temperature is below 32 
degrees Fahrenheit, but sometimes it’s below 32 up in the atmosphere and 
above 32 at ground level. The snow doesn’t have time to melt before it hits 
the ground.) But suppose you wanted to show that this conditional is false. 
How would you do that? You’d have to fi nd a case when it was snowing but 
the temperature wasn’t below 40, a case where the antecedent was true 
but the consequent was false. To be precise, a conditional is true when its 
consequent is true or its antecedent is false.
Conditionals: Some Complications
Conditionals appear in many different ways. This can be complicated and 
confusing. Let’s look at three complications. 
Complication 1. You can put the consequent before the antecedent. The fol-
lowing two sentences make the same statement:
If you aren’t too tired, you’ll go to the store. 
You’ll go to the store, if you aren’t too tired. 
These examples also show that you can leave the “then” out of the conditional. 
Complication 2. You can use “implies that” or “provided that” to make a 
conditional. The following two sentences make the same statement:
If all dogs are mammals, then all dogs have hair. 
That all dogs are mammals implies that all dogs have hair. 
The following two sentences also make the same statement:
If she gets a B or better on the fi nal, then she’ll pass the course. 
Provided that she gets a B or better on the fi nal, she’ll pass the course. 
You can also change the order of sentences that use “provided that.” The 
statement
She’ll pass the course, provided that she gets a B or better in the course. 
says the same thing as the other two sentences just above.
Key Concept
The form of a 
conditional.
Key Concept
A conditional is true 
when its consequent is 
true or its antecedent is 
false.

156  Chapter 5 Propositional Arguments
Complication 3. The phrase “only if” is tricky. This phrase is often used 
to make a conditional, but students can become confused. Here are the two 
crucial points to keep in mind.
1. The statement after an “if” is an antecedent.
2.  The statement after an “only if” is a consequent. 
Let’s go back to our snow case but change it a bit.
(a)  It’s snowing only if the temperature is below 40 degrees. 
If you think about it carefully, what (a) says is:
(a1) 
If it’s snowing, then the temperature is below 40 degrees. 
Statement (a) doesn’t say
(b)  If the temperature is below 40 degrees, then it’s snowing.
You can see that (a) says (a1) and not (b) because (a) and (a1) are true but (b) is 
false. The temperature often drops below 40 without it snowing.
“Only if” is also tricky because people sometimes use “if” when they 
mean “if and only if.” Suppose that one of your friends says
(c)  I’ll take you to the grocery store if you help me carry this sofa upstairs.
Your friend is using only the word “if” but she’s telling you two things. She’s 
telling you 
(c1) 
 If you help me carry this sofa upstairs, then I’ll take you to the gro-
cery store.
and she’s also telling you 
(c2) 
 I’ll take you to the grocery store only if you help me carry this sofa 
upstairs.
Statement (c2) is a bit impolite so people use “if” instead of “if and only if.” 
When you see the word “if,” you must look at the context and see whether, in 
the particular case, “if” means “if and only if.” Here’s another part of the art of 
argument. It takes practice to notice cases where people express their claims in 
polite language that you’ll need to rewrite when you standardize their arguments.
Technical Terms: Hypothetical Statements, Implications
Conditionals are also called “hypothetical statements” or “implications.” Some text-
books use “conditional” to refer to both conditionals and disjunctions.
G U I D E
Negation, Disjunction, Conjunction, and Conditional Indicator Words
Negation 
not, false
Disjunction 
or, unless, any one of
Conjunction 
and, but, even though, nevertheless, although, still
Conditional 
if,  . . .  then, if, only if,* implies that, provided that 
*The statement after an “if” is an antecedent, but the statement after an “only if” is a 
 consequent.

Identifying Propositional Statements  157
EXERCISE 5.2
A. Indicate whether the following statements are simple or compound. If it’s a compound 
statement, indicate whether it’s a negation, a disjunction, a conjunction, and/or a condi-
tional. If it’s a disjunction, indicate whether it’s inclusive or exclusive.
 1. Provided that my wife gets home on time, I’ll be able to bring my daughter to gymnastics.
 2. I’ll have a seltzer with lime.
 3. Taylor is tired and hungry.
 *4. I’ll get that for you, but only if you’re good.
 5. The sauce was composed of three ingredients: cream, white wine, thyme.
 6. If you step on a crack, you’ll break your mother’s back.
 7. Don’t touch that burner!
*8. While many people like fennel, others can’t stand it.
 9. “No pestilence had ever been so fatal, or so hideous.” (Poe 1982, 43) 
10. “Of all the gin joints in all the towns in all the world, she walks into mine.” (Said by 
Humphrey Bogart in the fi lm Casablanca; Curtis 1942)
11. “I am not at all tired, my dear, and would much prefer to go out.” (Dickens 1904, 47, 
material omitted) 
*12. “I’ll wait if you make haste.” (Dickens 1904, 143, material omitted) 
13. “[The] music [of the horse-drawn wagon] changed as the horses came to a stand, and 
subsided to a gentle tinkling, except when a horse tossed his head or shook himself and 
sprinkled off a little shower of bell-ringing.” (Dickens 1904, 61) 
 14. “No man is an island.” (Donne 1839, 575) 
15. “[S]end not to know [f]or whom the bell tolls . . . .” (Donne 1839, 575) 
B. Review the books that have been assigned for the courses you’re taking this semester or 
have taken in past semesters. Find two examples of each of the following: simple statements, 
negations, inclusive disjunctions, exclusive disjunctions, conjunctions, conditionals. Be 
sure to provide correct citations for your quotes.
Critical Thinkers
Patricia Blanchette
Patricia Blanchette is Associate Professor of Philosophy at the University of Notre Dame. 
Her research critically evaluates the role of conceptual analysis and other issues at the 
intersection of philosophical logic and the philosophy of mathematics. She’s the author 
of many articles including an article on Logical Consequence in the Blackwell Guide to 
Philosophical Logic. She is also author of an article in The Journal of Philosophy (1996) 
about the work of two other logicians (“Frege and Hilbert on Consistency”), which was 
named one of the ten best articles published in philosophy in 1996.
Courtesy of Patricia Blanchette

158  Chapter 5 Propositional Arguments
C. Determine whether each of the following sentences is a simple statement, a compound 
statement, or an argument. If it’s an argument, indicate the premise(s) and the conclu-
sion. If it’s a compound statement, indicate whether it’s a negation, a disjunction, a con-
junction, and/or a conditional. If it’s a disjunction, indicate whether it’s inclusive or 
exclusive.
 1. It’s raining, so carry an umbrella.
 2. When it’s raining, people carry umbrellas.
 3. Desks are made of wood or metal.
*4. Because wood scratches, metal is a better material for desks.
 5. My desk is made of wood.
 6. While there are many ways to make phone calls now, including standard land-lines, cell 
phones, VoIP phones, and satellite phones, there are fewer coin phones than there used 
to be.
 7. The costs of cell phone services have decreased and areas with coverage have increased, 
so that now there is less reason to ever use a coin phone. 
*8. “Elite and non-elite schools may have different cultures that shape lifestyles and habits 
of drinking, participating in athletic activities, smoking, and other behaviors that ulti-
mately affect health.” (Ross 1999, 447)
 9. “Because education develops one’s ability to gather and interpret information and to 
solve problems on many levels, it increases one’s control over events and outcomes in 
life.” (Ross 1999, 446)
 10. “Sensory impressions . . . affect our emotions.” (Norris 2001, 114)
 11. “Emotion must be included in a discussion of body intelligence because it is one of the 
means by which our bodies communicate knowledge to conscious awareness.” (Norris 
2001, 113)
*12. “Policymakers that are accountable to the public should be more responsive to civil 
society organisations since they are reliant on the public for re-election and organized 
interests represent citizen interests.” (Mahoney 2007, 338) 
 13. “We have suggested that in addition to serving domestic and ritual purposes, baskets 
were used as forms of tribute, trade, and gifts in Taino and Lucayan-Tdno economies 
and that their spatial distribution will help us defi ne and explain the social, politi-
cal, and cultural dynamics of the northern Antilles during the 15th-century. ” (Berman 
2000, 431) 
 14. “[T]he notion of cultural imperialism . . . is an unsatisfactory model for analyzing either 
cultural interaction in general or the missionary movement in world history in particu-
lar.” (Dunch 2002, 318) 
15. “[I]f the sum of angles in a triangle, ideas of ‘normal’ human physicality, youth fashions, 
and medical defi nitions of death are all products of cultural imperialism, then surely 
every defi nition is an exercise of power, and every change of mind a succumbing to 
domination.” (Dunch 2002, 307) 

Evaluating Propositional Arguments  159
Evaluating Propositional Arguments
Now that you can identify propositional statements, you’re ready to evaluate 
propositional arguments. Let’s look at eight propositional argument forms. 
There are an infi nite number of propositional argument forms. Fortunately, 
most of them will never be used by anyone. The eight forms discussed in this 
chapter cover the majority of cases.
Technical Terms: Sentential Logic, Truth-Functional Logic, Syllogism
“Sentential logic” and “truth-functional logic” are other names for propositional logic.
In addition to being the most common forms found in propositional logic, the 
eight argument forms discussed in this book all have precisely two premises and a 
conclusion. Deductive arguments with two premises and a conclusion are some-
times called “syllogisms.”
Denying a Disjunct
An argument that denies a disjunct has one of the following four forms:
1. (1) S1 or S2 (or both). 
 
2. (1) S1 or S2 (or both).
 
 (2) Not S1. 
 
 
       (2) Not S2.
 
Therefore, 
 
 
       Therefore,
 
 (3) S2.  
 
 
       (3) S1.
3. (1) S1 or S2 (but not both). 
4. (1) S1 or S2 (but not both).
 
 (2) Not S1. 
 
 
       (2) Not S2.
 
 Therefore, 
 
 
       Therefore,
 
 (3) S2.  
 
 
       (3) S1.
These forms are proper forms. One premise is a disjunction. The other prem-
ise asserts that one of the disjuncts is false. It denies one of the disjuncts. 
Forms 1 and 3 deny the fi rst disjunct (S1). Forms 2 and 4 deny the second 
disjunct (S2). Because a disjunction claims that at least one of its disjuncts 
is true, denying one disjunct means that the other is true.
Suppose that the catalog for your university says
All students must take Math 1113 or higher. 
Your friend Irene is enrolled at your university, and so she must take Math 
1113 or a math course with a number higher than 1113. Let’s call a math 
course with a number higher than 1113 “a higher-level math course.” In that 
case, the following statement is true:
(a) Irene must take Math 1113 or a higher-level math course (or both).
(This disjunction is inclusive because students can always take extra courses 
if they want to.) If 
S1 = Irene must take Math 1113.
S2 = Irene must take a higher-level math course.
then the form of (a) is
S1 or S2 (or both)
Key Concept
The four forms of 
denying a disjunct.

160  Chapter 5 Propositional Arguments
Now suppose that you know that Irene won’t take Math 1113. She’s planning 
to graduate after next semester, and Math 1113 isn’t offered next semester. 
You know
Not S1
You can conclude that Irene will take a higher-level math course. You can 
conclude
S2
You’ve made an argument that denies a disjunct. Here’s the standardization 
of the argument:
(1) Irene must take Math 1113 or a higher-level math course (or both).
(2) Irene can’t take Math 1113
Therefore, 
(3) Irene must take a higher-level math course.
This argument has form 1 above and passes the proper form test.
Technical Terms: Disjunctive Syllogism, Alternative Syllogism
“Disjunctive syllogism” and “alternative syllogism” are names sometimes used for 
an argument that denies the disjunct.
Remember from Chapter Two that there’s a technical term for proper de-
ductive argument forms. They’re called “valid” forms. Deductive arguments 
that pass the proper form test are called “valid” arguments, and deductive 
arguments that fail the proper form test are called “invalid.” Because it’s 
common to use “valid” in this way, this book will use this technical term. 
Just remember that
valid argument = a deductive argument that passes the proper form test
invalid argument = a deductive argument that fails the proper form test
And don’t forget about the true premises test. Any argument that denies a 
disjunct is valid (= has a proper form). But not all arguments that are valid 
pass the true premises test. If either premise of an argument that denies a 
disjunct is false, the argument isn’t a good argument. In Irene’s case, you 
don’t know whether the premises of this argument are true. You don’t know 
whether Irene is a real person or just someone made up by the authors of this 
book.
Fallacy: Affi rming an Inclusive Disjunct
Here are the two forms of an argument that affirms an inclusive disjunct:
 
1. (1) S1 or S2 (or both). 
 
2. (1) S1 or S2 (or both).
 
 
(2) S1.  
 
 
       (2) S2.
 
 
Therefore, 
 
 
       Therefore,
 
 
(3) Not S2. 
 
 
       (3) Not S1.
These forms are invalid. This form differs from denying a disjunct because it 
puts the negation in the conclusion instead of the premises. 
Key Concept
The distinction between 
a valid and an invalid 
argument.
Key Concept
The forms of affi rming 
an inclusive disjunct.

Evaluating Propositional Arguments  161
Habits of a Critical Thinker
Knowing the Power of History
This chapter has a lot of strange-sounding words like 
“disjunction” and “conditional.” Later you’ll see that 
many propositional arguments have names that aren’t 
even in English. They’re in Latin. Why all these strange 
words? It’s the power of history. 
Take something as simple as driving on the right 
side of the road. Why do we do that? Have studies 
shown that it’s safer? No, it’s the power of history. 
In the late 1700s, workers in the United States and 
France started using big wagons pulled by several 
pairs of horses. To save weight, these wagons didn’t 
have a driver’s seat. The drivers used whips on the 
horses, and most drivers were right-handed and held 
their whips in their right hand. People who are right-
handed mount horses from the left side of the horse. 
For these reasons, they sat on the left rear horse. Once 
on the left rear horse, they wanted to drive on the 
right so that wagons coming the other way would 
be on their left so that they could look down and 
make sure that their wagon’s wheels didn’t hit the 
oncoming wagon’s wheels. That’s why they drove on 
the right side of the road. This practice spread due 
to conquest and one country’s desire to drive on the 
same side as its neighbors. (For details on right- and 
left-hand driving, see Peter Kincaid’s The Rule of the 
Road: An International Guide to History and Practice 
(Santa Barbara, CA: Greenwood Press, 1986).)
This example is pretty trivial but history shapes 
important things like the borders and cultures of 
countries. A good critical thinker knows that there 
may not be a good contemporary reason for every-
thing. Some things are the result of history.
A Conestoga wagon 
had no seat in the 
front of the wagon. 
The draft animals 
were controlled by 
a teamster who 
either walked along 
side the wagon 
or rode the wheel 
horse, the animal 
immediately in 
front of the wagon 
on the left side. 
The State Museum of Pennsylvania, Pennsylvania Historical and State Commission

162  Chapter 5 Propositional Arguments
Remember your local pizza place that has only two toppings, pepperoni 
and mushroom. Look at the following argument.
(1) You can have pepperoni or mushrooms on your pizza (or both).
(2) You’ve ordered pepperoni on your pizza.
Therefore,
(3) You can’t order mushrooms on your pizza.
If
S1 = You have pepperoni on your pizza.
S2 = You have mushrooms on your pizza.
You can see that this argument is an example of form 1 of affirming an inclu-
sive disjunct.
This argument says that if you order pepperoni on your pizza, then this 
guarantees that you won’t order mushrooms. But you could have a pep-
peroni and mushroom pizza, so this argument has an invalid (= improper) 
form.
Affi rming an Exclusive Disjunct
While affirming an inclusive disjunct is an invalid form, affirming an exclu-
sive disjunct is a valid form. An argument affirms an exclusive disjunct when 
it has one of the following forms:
 
1. (1) S1 or S2 (but not both). 
2. (1) S1 or S2 (but not both).
 
 
(2) S1.  
 
 
       (2) S2.
 
 
Therefore, 
 
 
       Therefore,
 
 
(3) Not S2. 
 
 
       (3) Not S1.
These forms are valid. The fi rst premise of these forms is the statement of an 
exclusive disjunction. Let’s suppose that there are only two political parties, 
the Democrats and the Republicans. Then suppose that someone made the 
following argument:
(1) Either a Democrat or a Republican won the election.
(2) A Democrat won the election.
Therefore, 
(3) A Republican didn’t win the election.
Elections aren’t like pizza. Only one person can win. The “or” in the fi rst 
premise is an exclusive disjunction. If 
S1 = A Democrat won the election.
S2 = A Republican won the election.
You can see that this argument is an example of form 1 of affirming an exclu-
sive disjunct. This form is a valid (= proper) form.
Now you can see why the distinction between inclusive and exclusive 
disjunction is important. If a disjunction is exclusive, then affirming a dis-
junct is a valid form. If a disjunction is inclusive, then affirming a disjunct 
is an invalid form. You need to read carefully to determine which “or” the 
author is using.
Key Concept
The two forms of 
affi rming an exclusive 
disjunct.

Evaluating Propositional Arguments  163
Fallacy: False Dichotomy
Our focus in this chapter is on the proper form test for propositional argu-
ments. But one fallacy involving the true premises test comes up in argu-
ments with disjunctions. The Fallacy of False Dichotomy occurs when a 
premise of an argument with a disjunction is false because there are other 
alternatives besides the two presented in the premise.
 
Look at the following argument:
(1) Dwight is either a biology major or a fi nance major (or both).
(2) Dwight isn’t a biology major.
Therefore,
(3) Dwight is a fi nance major.
This argument is valid (= has a proper form) because it’s denying a disjunct. 
But it fails the true premises test. The fi rst premise is false. At most colleges, 
students can choose from many different majors. The disjunctive premise 
is mentioning only two options when there are lots of others. The fact that 
Dwight isn’t a biology major isn’t enough to conclude that he’s a fi nance 
major.
Technical Terms: False Dilemma, False Alternatives
The Fallacy of False Dichotomy is sometimes called a “False Dilemma” or “The 
 Fallacy of False Alternatives.”
Key Concept
The Fallacy of False 
Dichotomy occurs 
when a premise of 
an argument with a 
disjunction is false 
because there are other 
alternatives besides the 
two presented in the 
premise. 
EXERCISE 5.3
A. Indicate whether the following passages contain an argument(s). If one or more arguments 
are present, indicate its form: denying a disjunct, affirming an inclusive disjunct, affirming 
an exclusive disjunct, or some other form. If a disjunction is present, indicate whether or 
not it’s a false dichotomy.
 1. What do you think we should do about this candidate?
 2. If you step on a crack, you’ll break your mother’s back. And you’re sure to step on a 
crack. Your mother’s back is toast.
 3. That’s either Mozart or Bach. It can’t be Bach because there’s an electric guitar. It must 
be Mozart.
 *4. Where are my keys? They’re either in the car or on the table in the kitchen. They aren’t 
in the kitchen, so I’d better check the car.
 5. Emily had milk or juice with breakfast, and she always has milk. So she didn’t have 
juice.
 6. What should we do tonight? Read Chapter 5 or go to a café?
 7. The Catalog says that to graduate you have to take Biology 101 or Chemistry 101. I saw 
Ceelay’s Bio book so I know she took Biology 101. She didn’t take Chemistry 101.
 *8. The Catalog says that to graduate you have to take Biology 101 or Chemistry 101. Laura 
didn’t take Biology so she must have taken Chemistry.
 9. “Either this man is dead or my watch has stopped.” (Marx 1937)

164  Chapter 5 Propositional Arguments
 10. The following is a comment about who should administer U.S. aid to Pakistan. “The 
Pakistani authorities have ruled out using foreign nonprofi t groups, known as NGOs, 
shorthand for nongovernmental organizations. But neither do they approve the Amer-
ican choice of private contractors. They [think that] the money [should] go through 
them.” (Perlez 2007, A10) 
 11. “Officials at Cornell, which operates Arecibo, said that with the repainting, the 44-year-
old instrument, the most sensitive radio telescope on the planet, should be good for 30 
or 40 more years.” (Fountain 2007, D3) 
 *12. “This is no time for ceremony. The question before the house is one of awful moment 
to this country. For my own part, I consider it as nothing less than a question of freedom 
or slavery.” (Henry 1901, 2475) Assume that this passage is part of an argument for the 
conclusion that the American colonies should take up arms against the British.
 13. In 1896, Henri Becquerel exposed uranium salts to light for several hours. Afterwards, 
they gave off light. This is an example of phosphorescence, a process in which a sub-
stance absorbs energy and then slowly releases it as light. He then placed the glowing 
uranium salts on some photographic plates covered in thick paper. Photographic plates 
are the material then used to take pictures. He observed that if he placed a coin between 
the uranium salts and the paper-wrapped photographic plate, he could create a photo of 
the coin. Becquerel was surprised to note that he could still take “photos” of the coins 
even after the uranium salts had stopped glowing. He concluded that the salts must be 
giving off some other sort of “light” that was triggering the photographic plate. Bec-
querel had discovered what we now call radioactivity. (Written by the authors of this 
book from information found in Bettelheim 2007, 63–64.) 
 14. “[Holmes leaned] back luxuriously in his armchair, and sending up thick blue wreaths 
from his pipe, [said: ‘I see] that you have been to the Wigmore Street Post-Office this 
morning [and] that when there you dispatched a telegram.’ 
‘Right!’ said [Watson]. ‘Right on both points! But I confess that I don’t see how you ar-
rived at it. It was a sudden impulse upon my part, and I have mentioned it to no one.’
‘It is simplicity itself,’ [Holmes] remarked, chuckling at my surprise,— ‘so ab-
surdly simple that an explanation is superfl uous . . . . Observation tells me that you 
have a little reddish [dirt] adhering to your instep. Just opposite the [Wigmore] Street 
Office they have taken up the pavement and thrown up some earth which lies in such 
a way that it is difficult to avoid treading in it in entering. The earth is of this peculiar 
reddish tint which is found, as far as I know, nowhere else in the neighborhood . . . .’
‘How, then, did you deduce the telegram?’
‘Why, of course I knew that you had not written a letter, since I sat opposite to 
you all morning. I see also in your open desk there that you have a sheet of stamps 
and a thick bundle of post-cards. What could you go into the post-office for, then, 
but to send a [telegram]? Eliminate all other factors, and the one which remains 
must be the truth.’ (Doyle 2004, 10–11) 
 
15.  Background information: An alkene is an unsaturated hydrocarbon that contains a 
carbon–carbon double bond. “The fi rst structure for benzene was proposed by Fried-
rich August Kekulé in 1872 and consisted of a six-membered ring with alternating 
single and double bonds, with one hydrogen bonded to each carbon. Although Kekulé’s 
proposal was consistent with many of the chemical properties of benzene, it was con-
tested for years. [ . . . ] If benzene contains three double bonds, Kekulé’s critics asked, 
why doesn’t it undergo reactions typical of alkenes?” (Bettelheim 2007, 359) 

Evaluating Propositional Arguments  165
Affi rming the Antecedent
An argument that affirms the antecedent has one premise that’s a conditional 
and a second premise that affirms the antecedent of the conditional. The 
conclusion affirms the consequent of the conditional. Here’s the form of an 
argument that affirms the antecedent:
(1) If S1, then S2.
(2) S1.
Therefore,
(3) S2.
This is a valid (proper) form. Let’s look again at our example about snow. 
(1) If it’s snowing, then the temperature is below 40 degrees Fahrenheit.
(2) It’s snowing.
Therefore,
(3) The temperature is below 40 degrees Fahrenheit.
This argument affirms the antecedent.
Rodrigo Enrique Elizondo-Omaña and three other researchers recently 
did an experiment to determine whether the pace of a course had any ef-
fect on student learning in anatomy courses. (Anatomy is the study of the 
structure and organs of living things.) The experiment was conducted on 
two groups of anatomy students who were given an anatomy test before 
and after they took the course. One group took the course in one-hour class 
periods over twenty weeks. The other group took the same course in two-
hour class periods over nine weeks. The same material was covered, and the 
same tests were administered. The researchers reasoned that if a difference 
emerged in the groups’ scores, there’d be reason to think that pace was a fac-
tor in learning. It turned out that there was a signifi cant difference in scores. 
The group of students in the twenty-week course scored signifi cantly higher 
than the group who took the course in nine weeks. Elizondo-Omaña con-
cluded that the pace of a course is an infl uential factor in how well students 
learn anatomy in anatomy courses. His argument may be paraphrased as 
follows:
(1)  If there’s a signifi cant difference in test scores of groups of students 
who took the course for different lengths of time, then the pace at 
which the students took the course must have been a factor in their 
learning.
(2)  There was a signifi cant difference in test scores of groups of students 
who took the course for different lengths of time.
Therefore, 
(3)  The pace at which the students took the course must have been a fac-
tor in their learning.
Let “S1” stand for the antecedent of the conditional (1), and let “S2” stand for 
the consequent of this conditional. Elizondo-Omaña’s argument affirms the 
antecedent and so has a valid form. (This argument is a simplifi ed version of 
Elizondo-Omaña’s 2006.)
Technical Term: Modus Ponens
Affi rming the antecedent is often called by its Latin name, modus ponens.
Key Concept
The form of affi rming 
the antecedent. 

166  Chapter 5 Propositional Arguments
Fallacy: Denying the Antecedent
Suppose that the results of Elizondo-Omaña’s study had been different. Sup-
pose that there was no signifi cant difference among the students’ group 
scores. The researchers might then have made the following argument:
(1)  If there’s a signifi cant difference in test scores of groups of students who 
took the course for different lengths of time, then the pace at which the 
students took the course must have been a factor in their learning.
(2)  There was not a signifi cant difference in test scores of groups of stu-
dents who took the course for different lengths of time.
Therefore, 
(3)  The pace at which the students took the course must not have been a 
factor in their learning.
Using S1 and S2 as above, this argument has the form of denying the antecedent:
(1) If S1, then S2.
(2) Not S1.
Therefore,
(3) Not S2.
This form is invalid. Arguments with this form have one premise that’s a con-
ditional and another premise that denies the antecedent of the conditional. 
The conclusion denies the consequent of the conditional.
In order to understand why this argument form is invalid (improper), re-
member our example about snow. Suppose that someone were to deny the 
antecedent like this:
(1) If it’s snowing, then the temperature is below 40 degrees Fahrenheit.
(2) It isn’t snowing.
Therefore,
(3) The temperature isn’t below 40 degrees.
Just because it isn’t snowing doesn’t show that the temperature is 40 degrees 
Fahrenheit or higher. Comparing the snow argument and our modifi ed ver-
sion of Elizondo-Omaña’s argument illustrates the value of standardization. 
Until you standardize the modifi ed version of Elizondo-Omaña’s argument, 
it’s hard to see that it’s invalid. But once the argument is standardized, you 
Key Concept
The form of denying the 
antecedent.
Critical Thinkers
Rodrigo Enrique Elizondo-Omaña
Rodrigo Enrique Elizondo-Omaña is Professor of Anatomy and Secretary of Educational 
Research at the School of Medicine, Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León, Monterrey, 
Nuevo León, Mexico. In addition to his research on the pace of student learning, 
Professor Elizondo-Omaña has argued that medical students become better doctors if 
they learn clinical reasoning skills while gaining the content knowledge of science. See 
his “The Development of Clinical Reasoning Skills: A Major Objective of the Anatomy 
Course” (Anatomical Sciences Education 1 (2008), pp. 267–268). 
Courtesy of Rodrigo Elizondo

Evaluating Propositional Arguments  167
can see that it’s an example of denying the antecedent. (Important: Elizondo-
Omaña did not make this bad argument.)
Denying the Consequent
Arguments that deny the consequent have this form:
(1) If S1, then S2.
(2) Not S2.
Therefore,
(3) Not S1.
This form is valid. In this form one premise is a conditional. The other prem-
ise denies the consequent of that conditional. The conclusion is that the an-
tecedent of the fi rst premise is false. Let’s look at our snow example again.
(1) If it’s snowing, then the temperature is below 40 degrees Fahrenheit.
(2) The temperature isn’t below 40 degrees.
Therefore,
(3) It isn’t snowing.
This has a valid (= proper) form. If the premises are true, then the conclusion 
must be true.
Here’s an example from an editorial that Knight Steel and T. Franklin Wil-
liams wrote in the Journal of the American Geriatrics Society. They’re con-
cerned “that so little has been accomplished in the fi eld of geriatric medicine” 
(Steel 2006, 1142). They’re also concerned about the fact that few doctors are 
being trained as geriatric specialists. They believe that the lack of specialists in 
geriatrics is the reason that there has been little progress in the fi eld. Paraphras-
ing part of their reasoning yields the following argument with a valid form:
(1)  In order for us to make good progress in the fi eld of geriatric medicine, 
there needs to be a sufficient number of geriatric specialists trained to 
conduct research.
(2)  There isn’t a sufficient number of new geriatric specialists being 
trained to conduct research.
Therefore, 
(3) We aren’t making good progress in the fi eld of geriatric medicine.
(This is a simplifi ed version of an argument presented by Steel 2006, 1142.)
Technical Term: Modus Tollens
Denying the consequent is often called by its Latin name, modus tollens.
Fallacy: Affi rming the Consequent
Arguments that affirm the consequent have the following form:
(1) If S1, then S2.
(2) S2.
Therefore,
(3) S1.
This form is invalid. In this form one premise is a conditional. The other 
premise affirms the consequent of the conditional and the conclusion affirms 
the antecedent of the conditional. 
Key Concept
The form of denying the 
consequent.
Key Concept
The form of affi rming 
the consequent.

168  Chapter 5 Propositional Arguments
Imagine that the call for more geriatric specialists was answered. Say that in 
the next fi ve years, a signifi cant number of new doctors trained in that specialty. 
Would that necessarily solve the problem that occupied Steel and Williams? 
Think about the following modifi ed version of Steel and Williams’ argument:
(1)  In order for us to make good progress in the fi eld of geriatric medicine, 
there needs to be a sufficient number of geriatric specialists trained to 
conduct research.
(2)  There’s a sufficient number of new geriatric specialists being trained 
to conduct research.
Therefore, 
(3) We’re making good progress in the fi eld of geriatric medicine.
Does this argument have a valid form? Let’s look again at our snow example. 
(1) If it’s snowing, then the temperature is below 40 degrees Fahrenheit.
(2) The temperature is below 40 degrees.
Therefore,
(3) It’s snowing.
This argument form is invalid. You’ve seen days when the temperature was 
below 40 degrees Fahrenheit but it didn’t snow. The modifi ed version of Steel 
and Williams’ argument also has an invalid form. Both of the previous two 
arguments are examples of affirming the consequent. (Important: Steel and 
Williams did not make this bad argument.)
Tri-Conditional
A tri-conditional argument has this form:
(1) If S1, then S2.
(2) If S2, then S3.
Therefore,
(3) If S1, then S3.
This form is valid. Both premises are conditionals, and so is the conclusion. 
The consequent in one premise is the antecedent in the other. The anteced-
ent of the conditional in the conclusion is the antecedent of one of the prem-
ises, and its consequent is the consequent of the other premise.
A recent article in Prevention magazine argued that older people should 
go back to school. Experts cited there made the following argument:
(1)  If people go back to school, then they’ll get more exercise and stimu-
lation.
(2)  If they get more exercise and stimulation, then they experience im-
provements in overall health.
Therefore,
(3)  If people go back to school, they’ll experience improvements in over-
all health. 
If you make 
S1 = People go back to school.
S2 = People get more exercise and stimulation.
S3 = People experience improvements in overall health.
you’ll see that this argument is an example of the tri-conditional form. (This 
is a simplifi ed version of an argument presented by Borysenko 2006, 117–119.)
Key Concept
The form of a  
tri-conditional 
argument. 

Evaluating Propositional Arguments  169
Technical Terms: Hypothetical Syllogism, Pure Hypothetical Syllogism, 
Pure Conditional
Other names for the tri-conditional argument form include “the hypothetical syl-
logism,” “the pure hypothetical syllogism,” and the “pure conditional argument.” 
Habits of a Critical Thinker
Carefulness, Attentiveness
A critical thinker is a careful, attentive thinker. The 
eight propositional argument forms look a lot like 
each other. The patterns of affirming and denying 
 disjuncts, antecedents, and consequents can start 
to spin in your head. You have to be careful and 
 attentive to get the form right. Carefully reviewing 
the differences between the eight forms is another 
part of the art of argument. One small difference, 
like where a “not” is located, can make all the 
difference in how you’ll standardize an argument 
and whether it’s valid or invalid. Don’t try to take 
things too quickly. When you think you know an 
argument’s form, go back to the passage and check 
to be sure. 
If you look at the Guide for Finding, Standard-
izing, and Evaluating Propositional Arguments at the 
end of this chapter, you’ll see another reason why 
critical thinkers have to be careful and attentive. It 
has fi fteen steps! And you have to do them in the 
right order. 
EXERCISE 5.4
A. Indicate whether the following passages contain an argument(s). If one or more arguments 
are present, indicate its form: denying a disjunct, affirming an inclusive disjunct, affirming 
an exclusive disjunct, affirming the antecedent, denying the antecedent, denying the conse-
quent, affirming the consequent, tri-conditional, or some other form. Indicate whether the 
argument is valid. If a disjunction is present, indicate whether or not it’s a false dichotomy.
 1. If Tyler gets an A on the fi nal, he’ll pass the course, and I’m sure he’ll get an A on the 
fi nal. So Tyler will pass the course.
 2. If Bobby doesn’t come to class, Laura will be upset. But Bobby will come to class, so 
Kartik won’t be upset. 
 3. If Anthony takes the job as a fi nancial consultant, he’ll have to move to New Jersey. 
He’ll never move to New Jersey, so he’ll never take the job.
*4. If hell freezes over, then the Atlanta Falcons will win the Super Bowl and if they win the 
Super Bowl, then I’m a monkey. That means that if hell freezes over, then I’m a monkey.
 5. If Bobby doesn’t come to class, Laura will be upset. But Bobby will come to class, so 
Laura won’t be upset.
 6. That dome must be made of gold or bronze and gold is way too expensive to be used to 
cover such a large surface so it must be made of bronze.
 7. If Keela gets a set of Volrath pans for Christmas she’ll be thrilled. And I bet she’d cook 
us up some really good stuff to eat. We should get her those pans.
*8. If ’twas brillig, and the slithy toves did gyre and gimble in the wabe, then Jay has slain 
the Jabberwock. ’Twas brillig, and the slithy toves did gyre and gimble in the wabe. 
Come to my arms, my beamish boy! O frabjous day! Callooh! Callay! Jay slew the Jab-
berwock! (This example is drawn with modifi cations from Carroll 2004, 220.)

170  Chapter 5 Propositional Arguments
 9. “Federal prosecutors will probably call a former doctor for Barry Bonds as a witness if 
Bonds’s perjury and obstruction of justice case goes to trial, according to court docu-
ments made public Thursday.” (Schmidt 2007, C13) 
10. “1. We are sometimes mistaken in our perceptual beliefs.
 
 
2.  If we are sometimes mistaken in our perceptual beliefs, then it is always logically 
possible that our perceptual beliefs are false.
 
 
3.  If it is always logically possible that our perceptual beliefs are false, then we never 
know that any of our perceptual beliefs are true.
 
  
Therefore
 
 
4. We never know that any of our perceptual beliefs are true.” (Cornman 1992, 48) 
11. “Opponents of channelizing natural streams emphasize that the practice is antithetical 
to the production of fi sh and wetland wildlife and, furthermore, the stream suffers from 
extensive aesthetic degradation.” (Keller 2005, 225) 
*12. “If Bonds and Clemens had not been linked to performance-enhancing drugs, they 
would sail through the voting process [for election to the Baseball Hall of Fame] and 
maybe challenge Tom Seaver’s record of being named on 98.84 percent of the ballots. 
But because they have been accused of using illegal drugs to enhance their perfor-
mances, the path to Cooperstown, N.Y., will be littered with endless debates.” (Curry 
2007, C12) 
13. U.S. citizens will not need passports to enter the United States by land from Canada 
until mid-2009, if a bill passed by Congress is signed by President George W. Bush. A 
provision of the bill postpones plans by the Department of Homeland Security to re-
quire passports. Senator Patrick J. Leahy said that he expected Mr. Bush to sign the bill. 
Citizens living in border states have objected to the requirement.
14. “Walk down the hall in any building on your campus where professors have their of-
fi ces. Do you see any bearded, disheveled men wearing rumpled pants and smoking 
pipes, hunched over their computers and mumbling to themselves? How about dishev-
eled women wearing rumpled shirts, smoking pipes, hunched over their computers and 
mumbling to themselves? Researchers hard at work? No. Stereotypes of what [profes-
sors] look like and do? Yes. What you are more likely to see in the halls of your class-
room building are men and women hard at work. They are committed to fi nding the 
answer to just another piece of the great puzzle that helps us understand [things] a little 
bit better than the previous generation.” (Salkind 2006, 1, material omitted) 
15. “I venture to affirm, that the rule here holds without any exception, and that every 
simple idea has a simple impression, which resembles it, and every simple impression 
a correspondent idea. That idea of red, which we form in the dark, and that impression 
which strikes our eyes in sun-shine, differ only in degree, not in nature. That the case 
is the same with all our simple impressions and ideas, it is impossible to prove by a 
particular enumeration of them. Every one may satisfy himself in this point by run-
ning over as many as he pleases. But if any one should deny this universal resemblance, 
I know no way of convincing him, but by desiring him to shew a simple impression, 
that has not a correspondent idea, or a simple idea, that has not a correspondent im-
pression. If he does not answer this challenge, as it is certain he cannot, we may from 
his silence and our own observation establish our conclusion.” (Hume 1896, 3)
B. Look for examples of affirming the antecedent, denying the antecedent, denying the conse-
quent, affirming the consequent, or the tri-conditional in Exercise 5.3 above.

Propositional statements can be simple or 
compound. Simple statements are those that 
don’t contain another statement. Compound 
statements contain at least one other statement. 
The four compound statements studied in 
this chapter are negations, disjunctions, 
conjunctions, and conditionals.
 
Disjunctions are two or more statements 
that can be joined by “or.” Disjunctions are 
inclusive or exclusive. In exclusive disjunctions 
only one of the disjuncts can be true. In 
inclusive disjunctions more than one of the 
disjuncts can be true.
 
Conjunctions are two or more statements 
that can be joined by “and.” Conjunctions 
claim that all of the conjuncts are true. If 
a conjunction has nineteen conjuncts and 
eighteen of them are true but one of them is 
false, then the conjunction is false.
Chapter Summary
 
Conditionals are compound statements that 
can be connected with “if . . . then.” There are 
lots of different ways to express conditionals. 
The “if” part of a conditional is the antecedent, 
and the “then” part is the consequent. A 
conditional is true when its consequent is true 
or its antecedent is false.
 
There are eight common propositional 
argument forms. A proper deductive argument 
form is a called a “valid” form, and an improper 
deductive argument form is called an “invalid” 
form. Denying a disjunct, affirming an exclusive 
disjunct, affirming an antecedent, denying 
a consequent, and tri-conditionals are valid 
forms. Affirming an inclusive disjunct, denying 
an antecedent, and affirming a consequent are 
invalid forms.
G U I D E
Finding, Standardizing, and Evaluating Propositional Arguments
This Guide is an amplifi cation of the “Guide for Finding, Standardizing, and Evaluating Ar-
guments” from Chapter Two. The numbered sentences are copies from the Guide in Chap-
ter Two. The paragraphs with “Prop” (for “Propositional”) in front of them are additional 
materials that apply only to propositional arguments.
Finding Arguments
 1. Look for an attempt to convince.
 
 Prop. Look for an attempt to convince that relies on the logical relationships between 
statements.
 2. Find the conclusion.
 3. Find the premises.
 4. Review the following to make sure that you’ve correctly identifi ed the conclusion and 
the premises: imperfect indicator words, sentence order, premises and/or conclusion 
not in declarative form, and unstated premises and/or conclusion.
 5. Review the following to make sure that you haven’t incorrectly identifi ed something as 
a premise or a conclusion when in fact it isn’t part of an argument: assertions,  questions, 
instructions, descriptions, and explanations.
Chapter Summary  171

172  Chapter 5 Propositional Arguments
Standardizing Arguments
 6. Rewrite the premises and the conclusion as declarative sentences. Make sure that each 
premise and the conclusion is a grammatically correct declarative sentence. Rewrite 
the premises and conclusion as necessary to make them clearer, but don’t change the 
meaning of the passage. Remove pronouns from the sentences and replace them with 
the nouns or noun phrases to which they refer. Remove emotionally charged language.
 7. Review any phrases you’ve omitted to be sure that they aren’t premises or a conclusion.
 8. Number the premises and the conclusion. Put [ ] around the number of an unstated prem-
ise or conclusion. Place the premises before their conclusion and insert “Therefore,” 
between the premises and the conclusion. Use blank lines to indicate subarguments.
 9. Compare your standardization to the original passage to make sure that you haven’t 
omitted any arguments found in the passage and to be sure that you’ve correctly identi-
fi ed the premises and the conclusion. 
Evaluating Arguments: The True Premises Test
 10. Check to see whether the premises are accurate descriptions of the world. 
 11. Consider whether the premises are appropriate for the argument’s audience.
 12. Review the assumed premises to be sure that the assumptions are reasonable. Make 
sure that all assumed premises are uncontroversially true empirical statements, uncon-
troversially true defi nitional statements, or appropriate statements by experts. Make 
sure the defi nitions are good ones. 
Prop. If the argument contains a disjunction, check for a False Dichotomy.
Evaluating Arguments: The Proper Form Test
 13. Determine whether the argument is a deductive argument or inductive argument.
 14. Determine whether the premises are relevant to the conclusion. Look at each premise 
individually to see whether the truth of the premise provides some evidence for the 
truth of the conclusion. Look at the premises as a group to see whether the truth of all 
of them provides some evidence for the truth of the conclusion.
Prop. Determine the form of the propositional argument. Compare it to the eight propo-
sitional argument forms discussed in this section. See the next page.
Evaluating Arguments: Checking for Fallacies
 15. Compare the argument to the list of fallacies on page 410 to see whether the argument 
commits any of the fallacies.
Propositional Argument Forms
Denying a Disjunct
 1. (1) S1 or S2 (or both). 
2. (1) S1 or S2 (or both).
 
 (2) Not S1.  
 
       (2) Not S2.
 
 Therefore,  
 
       Therefore,
 
 (3) S2. 
 
 
       (3) S1.
 3. (1) S1 or S2 (but not both). 4. (1) S1 or S2 (but not both).
 
 (2) Not S1.  
 
       (2) Not S2.
 
 Therefore,  
 
       Therefore,
 
 (3) S2. 
 
 
       (3) S1.

Chapter Summary  173
Fallacy: Affi rming an Inclusive Disjunct
 1. (1) S1 or S2 (or both). 
2. (1) S1 or S2 (or both).
 
 (2) S1. 
 
 
       (2) S2.
 
 Therefore,  
 
       Therefore,
 
 (3) Not S2.  
 
       (3) Not S1.
Affi rming an Exclusive Disjunct
 1. (1) S1 or S2 (but not both). 2. (1) S1 or S2 (but not both).
 
 (2) S1. 
 
 
       (2) S2.
 
 Therefore,  
 
       Therefore,
 
 (3) Not S2.  
 
       (3) Not S1.
Affi rming the Antecedent 
Fallacy: Denying the Antecedent
 
 (1) If S1, then S2.  
       (1) If S1, then S2.
 
 (2) S1. 
 
 
       (2) Not S1.
 
 Therefore,  
 
       Therefore,
 
 (3) S2. 
 
 
       (3) Not S2.
Denying the Consequent 
Fallacy: Affi rming the Consequent
 
 (1) If S1, then S2.  
       (1) If S1, then S2.
 
 (2) Not S2.  
 
       (2) S2.
 
 Therefore,  
 
       Therefore,
 
 (3) Not S1.  
 
       (3) S1.
Tri-Conditional
 
 (1) If S1, then S2.
 
 (2) If S2, then S3.
 
 Therefore,
 
 (3) If S1, then S3.

174
It is believed that the aorta is capable of undergoing passive stretching, because 
elastic arteries are the large arteries capable of undergoing passive stretching, and the 
aorta is an elastic artery. 
—Paraphrased from Fritz (1999, 472)
6
Categorical 
Arguments
Learning Outcomes
After studying the material in this chapter, you should be able to:
1. Recognize the four standard categorical statement forms: 
universal affi rmative, universal negative, particular 
affi rmative, and particular negative.
2. Put ordinary sentences into the standard categorical 
statement forms.
3. Illustrate the four standard categorical statement forms 
using Venn diagrams. 
4. Recognize, standardize, and evaluate categorical arguments 
with one premise.
5. Recognize, standardize, and evaluate categorical arguments 
with two premises.

Identifying Categorical Statements  175
The argument on the previous page is a deductive argument, but it isn’t 
an example of one of the eight propositional deductive forms discussed in 
Chapter Five. It’s a categorical deductive argument. This chapter will look 
at some categorical argument forms. It will help you determine the form of 
the argument above and whether it passes the proper form test.
Identifying Categorical Statements
Categorical arguments focus on statements about categories of things. A cate-
gory is a group, a collection of things with a shared characteristic. Categorical 
statements say that things of one category either are or aren’t in some other 
category. Here’s a categorical statement:
Some apples are red.
It says that some of the members of the category of apples are also in the 
category of red things.
There are lots of ways to make categorical statements. But they can all be 
put into four standard categorical statement forms. Because categorical state-
ments assert that things in one group either are or aren’t in some other group, 
we’ll use the variables G1 and G2.
Connections
Chapter Two introduces the use of variables.
The Four Standard Categorical Statement Forms
Form
Name
Abbreviation
Example
All G1 are G2.
Universal Affi rmative
UA
All apples are red.
All G1 are not G2.
Universal Negative
UN
All apples are not red.
Some G1 are G2.
Particular Affi rmative
PA
Some apples are red.
Some G1 are not G2.
Particular Negative
PN
Some apples are not red.
The four categorical statement forms have four parts. (1) They begin either 
with the word “all” or with the word “some.” (2) Then they refer to one 
group, G1. (3) Then they have either “are” or “are not.” (4) Finally, they refer 
to the second group, G2.
Key Concept
Categorical statements 
say that things of one 
category either are or 
aren’t in some other 
category.
Key Concept
The four standard 
categorical statement 
forms.

176  Chapter 6 Categorical Arguments 
Part 1
Part 2
Part 3
Part 4
All/Some
G1
are/are not 
G2
Part 1 is the quantity of the statement. If the quantity of a statement is “all,” 
the statement is a universal statement. If the quantity of a statement is 
“some,” the statement is a particular statement. Part 2 is the subject of the 
statement. Part 3 is the quality of the statement. If the quality of a statement 
is “are,” the statement is an affirmative. If the quality of a statement is “are 
not,” then the statement is a negative. Part 4 is the predicate of the state-
ment. If the two groups are “college students” and “brilliant people,” then 
the four forms are below. You can make these four forms for any two groups.
Quantity
Subject
Quality
Predicate
Universal Affi rmative
UA
All
college students
are
brilliant people.
Universal Negative
UN
All
college students
are not
brilliant people.
Particular Affi rmative
PA
Some
college students
are
brilliant people.
Particular Negative 
PN
Some
college students
are not
brilliant people.
Technical Terms: A, E, I, O
Some textbooks use the letters A, E, I, O instead of the abbreviations used in this book. 
A = UA  E = UN  I = PA  O = PN 
Why do you need categorical logic? Because some arguments have a proper 
form, but they don’t seem to have a proper form if you treat them as proposi-
tional arguments. Look at this argument:
(a) (1) All apples are fruits.
 
(2) Some apples are red.
 
Therefore,
 
(3) Some fruits are red.
Argument (a) has a proper form. But if you treat it as a propositional argu-
ment, it would look like this:
 
S1 = All apples are fruits. 
 
S2 = Some apples are red.
 
S3 = Some fruits are red.
(a1) (1) S1
 
(2) S2
 
Therefore,
 
(3) S3
The propositional argument (a1) has an improper form. Propositional logic is 
the logic of relationships between statements but categorical logic is the logic of 
relationships within statements. The logic of argument (a) isn’t captured by (a1). 
Key Concept
The four parts of 
categorical statements.

Identifying Categorical Statements  177
You can correctly capture the form of (a) like this:
 
G1 = apples
 
G2 = fruits
 
G3 = red things
(a2) (1) All G1 are G2.
 
(2) Some G1 are G3. 
 
Therefore,
 
(3) Some G2 are G3.
(a2) has a proper form. This is why you need categorical logic.
Remember from Chapters Two and Five that proper deductive argument 
forms are called “valid” arguments, and deductive arguments that fail the 
proper form test are called “invalid.”
valid argument = a deductive argument that passes the proper form test
invalid argument = a deductive argument that fails the proper form test
Technical Terms: Aristotelian Logic, Classical Logic, Class Logic, Predi-
cate Logic, First-Order Logic
Some texts call categorical logic “Aristotelian deductive logic.” Other texts call it 
“classical logic” or “class logic.” If you take an advanced logic class you’ll learn that 
categorical logic and propositional logic can be combined into a more complex 
system that is called “predicate logic” or “fi rst-order logic.”
EXERCISE 6.1
A. For each of the following: (a) identify which of the four types of categorical statements it is 
(UA, UN, PA, PN), (b) if necessary, put it in one of the four standard categorical forms, and 
(c) identify its quantity, quality, subject, and predicate.
 1. All people under 65 years of age are people who need health insurance.
 2. All people 65 years old and older are people covered by Medicare.
 3. All able-bodied people younger than 65 years old are not people covered by Medicare.
 *4. Some people who work are not people covered by health insurance.
 5. Some airline pilots are people in favor of extra screening of passengers who carry liquids 
on board the airplane.
 6. All people who fl y are people who are willing to undergo extra screening to increase 
airport security.
 7. Some airport personnel are temporary employees without benefi ts.
 *8. All broadcast media are recently developed technologies whose long-term effects are 
good and ill.
 9. All of James’ friends are people he has met at school.
 10. Some of Theresa’s friends are people she works with at the credit union.
 11. Some of the people who work at the credit union are people who go to school with James.
 *12. Not all Americans have health insurance.

178  Chapter 6 Categorical Arguments 
Universal Affi rmative: All G1 Are G2
People don’t talk using the four categorical statement forms. They are tech-
nical terms defi ned by logicians. Don’t try to fi gure them out as if they were 
something your friends would say. Think of them as words in a foreign lan-
guage. Let’s look at each one in more detail.
A universal affirmative (UA) statement is a statement that can be put into 
this form:
 
All G1 are G2.
Speaking roughly, the UA statement
 
All college students are brilliant.
says that every member of the category of college students is also a member 
of the category of brilliant people. Here are some other ways to make a UA 
statement.
 
Every college student is brilliant.
 
Each college student is brilliant.
 
Any college student is brilliant.
 
A college student is a brilliant person.
 
Only brilliant people can be college students.
 
College students are brilliant.
People often leave off the “all” and use words other than “are” and “is” to 
make a UA statement. Here are more examples:
Original
In Standard Categorical Form
Dogs have tails.
All dogs are things with tails.
Computers often break down.
All computers are things that break down 
often.
Toyotas get good mileage.
All Toyotas are cars that get good mileage.
Offi cial baseballs weigh 5 to 5.25 ounces.
All offi cial baseballs are things that weigh 
between 5 and 5.25 ounces.
Recessions lead to unemployment.
All recessions are things that lead to 
unemployment.
Key Concept
The form of a universal 
affi rmative (UA) 
statement.
 13. “Those who are without insurance don’t benefi t much from advances in cancer care 
that are predicated on early discovery and treatment.” (Boston Globe 2007) 
 14. “Many healthcare advocates would prefer one in which the state provides insurance for 
everybody.” (Boston Globe 2007)
 15. “People on Medicaid, the federal/state system for poor Americans, do not have as high 
survival rates as those with employer-sponsored insurance.” (Boston Globe 2007)

Identifying Categorical Statements  179
Categorical Statements: Important Details
Detail 1: Venn Diagrams
The philosopher John Venn invented diagrams to make the meaning of the 
standard statement forms clearer. Venn diagrams begin with two overlapping 
circles, one for each of the categories in a categorical statement.
G1
G2
1
2
3
4
The circle on the left represents the G1 category. Things that are members of 
G1 are inside the G1 circle, and things that aren’t members of G1 are outside 
the G1 circle. Things that are members of G2 are inside the G2 circle, and 
things that aren’t G2 are outside the G2 circle. Area 1 represents those things 
that are G1 and are not G2. Area 2 represents those things that are both G1 
and G2. Area 3 represents those things that are G2 and are not G1. Area 4 
represents those things that are neither G1 nor G2.
If G1 = apples and G2 = red things, then a Venn diagram looks like this:
Apples
Red Things
1
2
3
4
Area 1 represents things that are apples but aren’t red. Golden Delicious apples 
are in Area 1. Area 2 represents things that are apples and are red. Red Delicious 
apples are in Area 2. Area 3 represents red things that aren’t apples. Red sports 
cars and red hats are in Area 3. Area 4 represents things that aren’t apples and 
aren’t red. A white pickup truck, the Leaning Tower of Pisa, and you are in Area 4. 
Venn Diagram 6.1
Venn Diagram 6.2

180  Chapter 6 Categorical Arguments 
To represent the four categorical statements on a Venn diagram, you 
shade an area when it’s empty, put an “X” in an area when it has something 
in it, and leave an area blank when a statement doesn’t tell you whether the 
area is empty or it has something in it. Don’t fall into the trap of thinking that 
a blank area is empty. A shaded area is empty. When an area is blank, that 
means that you don’t know what’s in that area because the statement doesn’t 
say anything about it.
Let’s look at this universal affirmative (UA):
(c) All apples are red.
This statement is false, but you can still represent it on a Venn diagram.
Apples
Red Things
1
2
3
4
UA: All apples are red.
Area 1 is shaded because if “All apples are red,” then there’s nothing in Area 
1. Area 1 represents those things that are apples and aren’t red. But if all 
apples are red, then Area 1 is empty.
Detail 2: Empty Categories
When you look at “All apples are red” you might think that in addition to 
Area 1 being shaded out, there should be an “X” in Area 2 instead of it being 
blank. After all, you know that there are some red apples. Hold that thought 
and look at this UA statement:
(d) All werewolves are howlers.
You know that there aren’t any werewolves. It’s an empty category. You might 
think that the entire werewolf circle should be shaded. You might think that the 
Venn diagram of this statement should look like this:
Key Concept
The rules for 
representing the four 
categorical statements 
with a Venn diagram.
Key Concept
You can still represent a 
statement that is false 
on a Venn diagram.
Venn Diagram 6.3
Key Concept
The representation of 
a UA statement with a 
Venn diagram.

Identifying Categorical Statements  181
Werewolves
Things that howl
1
2
3
4
UA: All werewolves are howlers.             WRONG
Now look at this UA statement. 
(e) All écureuils are things with tails.
Are there any écureuils? You don’t know. (“écureuil” is a word in French. If 
you speak French, pretend that you don’t know what “écureuil” means.) But 
even though you don’t know whether there are any écureuils, you still know 
that if statement (e) were true, nothing without a tail could be an écureuil. 
You know that there’s nothing in Area 1 of this Venn:
Écureuils
Things with tails
1
2
3
4
UA: All écureuils are things with tails.
But because you don’t know whether there are any écureuils, you don’t know 
whether there’s anything in Area 2. You have to leave it blank.
“All apples are red,” “All werewolves are howlers,” and “All écureuils are 
things with tails” show that sometimes the subject category has members, 
Venn Diagram 6.4
Venn Diagram 6.5

182  Chapter 6 Categorical Arguments 
sometimes it doesn’t, and sometimes you don’t know whether it has mem-
bers. But you always know that, if there’s anything in the subject category, 
then it’s also in the predicate category. This is the precise meaning of a UA 
statement. What is common to Venn Diagrams 6.3, 6.4, and 6.5 is that Area 1 
is shaded. The Venn diagram of a UA statement represents the meaning that 
is common to
cases where the subject category has members 
 
(All apples are red), 
cases where the subject category doesn’t have any members 
 
(All werewolves are howlers), and 
cases where you don’t know whether the subject category has any members 
 
(All écureuils are things with tails). 
Later in this chapter, it will be important that the UA statement is defi ned 
with a conditional, an if … then statement.
Connections
Chapter Five discusses conditionals.
Technical Terms: The Assumption of Existence, Traditional/Aristotelian 
Interpretation, Modern/Boolean Interpretation
When they talk about categorical statements in which the subject category is empty, 
logicians distinguish between a modern (or Boolean) interpretation and a traditional (or 
Aristotelian) interpretation. The traditional interpretation (offered by the philosopher 
Aristotle) leaves open the possibility that at least one member exists for every subject 
category. The modern interpretation (offered by the mathematician George Boole) 
doesn’t make this assumption of existence for members of UA and UN statements. 
 
On the traditional interpretation, the UA statement “All werewolves are 
howlers” is false (because there aren’t any werewolves), but on the modern 
interpretation it’s true (because the UA statement is taken to mean “if there were 
any werewolves, they would be howlers”). In this chapter, we’ll use the modern 
interpretation. But the traditional interpretation is also useful. Some versions of 
this book include a chapter that uses the traditional interpretation.
Detail 3: Category Variables
To make things easier, instead of using the variables G1 and G2, let’s use 
meaningful capital letters in italics to stand for categories. These capital let-
ters are called “category variables.” You should use letters that help you re-
member the categories, like “C” to stand for “college students” and “B” to 
stand for “brilliant people.” In that case, you can write the UA sentences 
about college students like this:
C = college students
B  = brilliant people
All C are B.
The letters you choose don’t matter. When you take a statement in standard 
categorical form and replace the groups with variables, you have formalized 
the statement (because what you have done illustrates the statement’s form).
Key Concept
The precise meaning of 
a UA statement is: If 
there’s anything in the 
subject category, then 
it’s also in the predicate 
category.
Key Concept
When you take a 
statement in standard 
categorical form and 
replace the groups 
with variables, you 
have formalized the 
statement.

Identifying Categorical Statements  183
Whenever you formalize a statement, you must indicate what the vari-
ables mean. Students sometimes forget and put something like this on a test:
Wrong: All C are B.
Also, variables have to stand for a group of things. They can’t stand for an 
adjective or an adverb. 
Wrong: C = college students
 
B  = brilliant
 
All C are B.
B has been assigned to an adjective. “Brilliant” doesn’t clearly refer to a cat-
egory. Brilliant what? Brilliant stars? Brilliant colors? Brilliant arguments? 
The statement 
 
UA All college students are brilliant.
is referring to brilliant people, not brilliant stars, colors, or arguments.
Detail 4: Complex Categories
Statements about complex categories can be put in categorical form. Look at 
this sentence:
 
(a)  Every major fi eld has at least one guide to the resources that experi-
enced researchers commonly use. (Booth 2003, 81)
By changing the verb, and recognizing that “every” means “all,” you can 
standardize this statement into UA form and then formalize it.
 
(b)  All major fi elds are fi elds that have at least one guide to the resources 
that experienced researchers commonly use. 
 
 
M = Major fi elds
 
 
G  =  Fields that have at least one guide to the resources that experi-
enced researchers commonly use
 
 
All M are G.
Statement (b) captures, in a more precise way, the meaning of (a).
Technical Term: Universal Assertion
“Universal assertion” is another name for UA statements.
Critical Thinkers
John Venn
John Venn (1834–1923) was a British logician and philosopher who taught moral 
sciences at Cambridge University in England. He’s famous for developing the Venn 
diagrams used today in logic, computer science, and statistics. You can read the 
Cambridge Philosophical Society Proceedings article where Venn fi rst introduced 
the diagrams in 1880, “On the Employment of Geometrical Diagrams for the Sensible 
Representation of Logical Propositions,” at http://books.google.com/books?id=GpI1AAAAI
AAJ&pg=PA47&dq=john+venn&as_brr=1#PPA47,M1.
Cambridge University

184  Chapter 6 Categorical Arguments 
Universal Negative: All G1 Are Not G2
A universal negative (UN) statement is a statement that can be put into this 
form:
 
All G1 are not G2.
There are many different ways to make a UN statement.
 
No college students are brilliant.
 
Nobody who is a college student is brilliant.
 
If anybody is a college student, that person isn’t brilliant.
 
 There never was a college student who was brilliant, and there never 
 will be.
 
College students aren’t brilliant.
Each of these statements would be correctly formalized as 
 
C = college students
 
B  = brilliant people
 
All C are not B.
Here’s another UN statement:
None of us has been to Venus, but we believe that it’s hot, dry, and moun-
tainous. (Booth 2003, 10)
This statement doesn’t use “are” or “are not,” and it might look like it doesn’t 
have a subject category. But “us” refers to people. You could standardize and 
formalize the statement like this:
All people who believe that Venus is hot, dry, and mountainous are peo-
ple who haven’t been to Venus.
B  = People who believe that Venus is hot, dry, and mountainous 
V = People who have been to Venus
All B are not V.
Make sure that your category variables stand for categories without nega-
tives. “V” refers to “People who have been to Venus.” It doesn’t stand for 
“People who have not been to Venus.”
Wrong: B  = People who believe that Venus is hot, dry, and mountainous 
 
 
V = People who have not been to Venus
 
All B are not V.
This isn’t correct because the “not” appears twice. The assignment of the 
category variable “V” and the UN statement both contain “not.” When you 
formalize a passage, you shouldn’t put a negative in the meaning of a category 
variable. The negative appears in the quality of the statement, not in the 
assignment of variables.
Remember that the precise defi nition of a UA statement is the con-
ditional “if there’s anything in the subject category, then it’s also in the 
predicate category.” The precise defi nition of a UN statement is also a con-
ditional: if there’s anything in the subject category, then it isn’t in the predi-
cate category. Think about werewolves again and look at the UN statement
(a) All werewolves are not howlers.
Key Concept
The form of a universal 
negative (UN) statement.
Key Concept
The negative appears 
in the quality of the 
statement itself, not 
in the assignment of 
variables.

Identifying Categorical Statements  185
You might think that this UN statement is false because there aren’t any 
werewolves. But remember from Chapter Five that conditional statements 
are true when the antecedent is false or the consequent is true. This means 
that (a) is true because its antecedent is false. There aren’t any werewolves.
Connections
Chapter Five discusses conditionals.
The UN statement “All apples are not red” is represented on a Venn dia-
gram like this:
Apples
Red Things
1
2
3
UN: All apples are not red.
4
Area 2 is shaded because if “All apples are not red,” then there’s nothing in 
Area 2. As with the UA statement, you might think that there should be an 
“X” in Area 1 because you know that there are some apples, and if none of 
them are red then that means that there are some that aren’t red. But look at 
All écureuils are not things with tails.
Écureuils
Things with tails
1
2
3
4
UN: All écureuils are not things with tails.
Key Concept
The precise meaning of 
a UN statement is: If 
there’s anything in the 
subject category, then 
it isn’t in the predicate 
category.
Key Concept
The representation of 
a UN statement with a 
Venn diagram.
Venn Diagram 6.6
Venn Diagram 6.7

186  Chapter 6 Categorical Arguments 
If there are écureuils, then there’s something in Area 1. But if there aren’t any 
écureuils, then there’s nothing in Area 1. You don’t know whether there are 
any écureuils, so you don’t know whether there’s anything in Area 1. That’s 
why Area 1 is blank.
Technical Term: No G1 are G2
Some critical thinking books use 
(a) No G1 are G2.
in place of 
(b)  All G1 are not G2.
Both (a) and (b) are ambiguous and you aren’t likely to hear or come across either 
of them in normal conversation. As long as you understand what a UN statement 
means, it doesn’t matter whether you use (a) or (b). We have to pick one for this 
book, and we have picked (b) to parallel the UA form.
Particular Affi rmative: Some G1 Are G2
A particular affirmative (PA) statement is a statement that can be put into this 
form:
 
Some G1 are G2.
The precise meaning of a PA statement is 
 
 There’s at least one member in the subject category that’s also in the 
predicate category. 
In deductive logic, the word “some” is a technical term. It means “at least 
one.”
 
Some apples are red.
means that there’s at least one apple that is red. On a Venn diagram it’s rep-
resented like this:
Apples
Red Things
1
3
4
2
X
PA: Some apples are red.
Key Concept
The form of a particular 
affi rmative (PA) 
statement.
Key Concept
The precise meaning of a 
PA statement is: There’s 
at least one member 
in the subject category 
that’s also in the 
predicate category.
Venn Diagram 6.8
Key Concept
The representation of 
a PA statement with a 
Venn diagram.

Identifying Categorical Statements  187
There’s an “X” in Area 2 because “Some apples are red” tells you that there’s 
at least one red apple. But it doesn’t tell you anything else, so the other three 
areas are blank.
PA statements can be made with sentences like:
1. At least one college student is brilliant.
2. Some college students are brilliant.
3. A few college students are brilliant.
4. Most college students are brilliant.
5. Almost all college students are brilliant.
6. A great number of college students are brilliant.
Any of these statements can be formalized like this:
 
(a) C = college students
 
 
B  = brilliant people
 
 
Some C are B.
When statements 2–6 are standardized with the PA form, part of the meaning 
is lost. If you asked people whether
 
Almost all college students are brilliant.
and
 
At least one college student is brilliant.
mean the same thing, most of them would say that they don’t. But both of 
these statements are written as (a) because they both mean that there’s at 
least one member in the fi rst category that’s also in the second category. 
Here’s another way in which categorical statements, like all technical terms, 
don’t match common usage. 
Why have logicians made the decision to use “some” the way they do? 
“Some,” “a few,” “most,” “almost all,” and “a great number” are vague. Logi-
cians want to make them precise and they want to be able to represent a wide 
variety of statements in PA form. What’s common to all six of the statements 
above? All of them assert that at least one college student is brilliant. This 
precise meaning captures an important part of the meaning of statements 1–6 
above. 
Connections
Chapter Four discusses vague categories.
Particular Negative: Some G1 Are Not G2
A particular negative (PN) statement is a statement that can be put into this 
form:
 
Some G1 are not G2.
The precise meaning of a PN statement is
 
 There’s at least one member in the subject category that’s not in the pred-
icate category. 
Key Concept
The form of a particular 
negative (PN) statement.

188  Chapter 6 Categorical Arguments 
“Some apples are not red” is a particular negative. On a Venn diagram it’s 
represented like this:
Apples
Red Things
2
3
4
PN: Some apples are not red.
1
X
This statement tells you that there’s at least one thing that is an apple but 
isn’t red.
The PN statement 
Some college students are not brilliant.
says that there’s at least one college student who isn’t brilliant. Claims such 
as
 
Most college students aren’t brilliant.
 
Not all college students are brilliant.
can be formalized as a PN statement. 
C = college students
B  = brilliant people
 
Some C are not B.
As was the case with universal negatives, the formalization of a particular 
negative must use category variables that are assigned to affirmative catego-
ries. If you don’t do this, you are likely to make the following mistake:
Wrong: Children don’t always remain with their family.
 
 
K = Children
 
 
R = Things that do not always remain with their family.
 
 
Some K are not R.
Key Concept
The precise meaning 
of a PN statement is: 
There’s at least one 
member in the subject 
category that’s not in 
the predicate category.
Venn Diagram 6.9
Key Concept
The representation of 
a PN statement with a 
Venn diagram.

Identifying Categorical Statements  189
It should be
Children don’t always remain with their family.
K = Children
R = Things that always remain with their family.
Some K are not R.
Don’t read anything extra into a PN statement. The statement
(a)  Some college students are not brilliant.
might be misinterpreted as meaning
(b)   Some college students are not brilliant and 
 
 some college students are brilliant.
But, speaking precisely, the PN statement
C = college students 
B = brilliant people
(c)  Some C are not B.
doesn’t say that some college students are brilliant. The PN statement (c) 
says only that there’s at least one college student who isn’t brilliant. If some-
one says (a) and the context makes it clear that he means to say (b), you have 
to use two categorical statements to express the meaning of (a).
C = college students
B  = brilliant people
 
Some C are B.
 
Some C are not B.
Technical Terms: Not all G1 are G2
Some categorical logic books write the PN form as “Not all G1 are G2.” We write it 
as “Some G1 are not G2” to parallel the PA form.
Habits of a Critical Thinker
Making Precise Distinctions
It can be hard to distinguish UA, UN, PA, and 
PN statements. A good critical thinker can see 
when a distinction is needed and can make precise 
distinctions. 
Suppose that someone says that God doesn’t 
exist because there’s evil in the world and a good God 
wouldn’t allow evil. In response, someone says that 
evil isn’t caused by God. It’s caused by people. At this 
point a good critical thinker would see that there’s 
a distinction between different kinds of evils. Some 
seem to be caused by people (stealing), but some 
don’t (earthquakes). As we have put it quickly here, 
this distinction isn’t precise. Is the collapse of a build-
ing in an earthquake caused by the earthquake or 
the people who built the building? We don’t have the 
space to go further into this complex topic. Our point 
is only that making good distinctions is important to 
thinking critically.

190  Chapter 6 Categorical Arguments 
Evaluating Categorical Arguments with One 
Premise
Categorical arguments are arguments that can be expressed with standard 
categorical statements. There’s an infi nite number of categorical argument 
forms. This textbook will focus on some of the most common categorical 
argument forms. Let’s start with categorical argument forms that have only 
one premise.
Technical Term: Immediate Inferences
Categorical arguments with one premise are also called “immediate inferences.”
Contradiction
There are two pairs of contradictories within the four standard categorical 
statement forms.
UA 
All G1 are G2 
<< Contradiction >> PN Some G1 are not G2
UN 
All G1 are not G2 << Contradiction >> PA 
Some G1 are G2
Contradictory statements can’t both be false and can’t both be true. One way 
to recognize categorical contradictories is that the pair of statements each 
Key Concept
Categorical arguments 
are arguments that 
can be expressed with 
standard categorical 
statements.
Key Concept
The two pairs of 
contradictories. 
Contradictory statements 
can’t both be false and 
can’t both be true.
EXERCISE 6.2
A. Rewrite the following as one of the four standard categorical statements forms. In some 
cases, only the material in brackets needs to be put into one of the four forms.
 1. Not all students in college are sophomores.
 2. Any students who are sophomores aren’t graduating.
 3. If the moon were destroyed, the earth would have many tidal waves.
 *4. If someone is eligible for Medicare, they don’t need their own health insurance. 
 5. Every citizen has health insurance.
 6. When it rains, it pours.
 7. Polar bears live in northern climates.
 *8. This has been a long day.
 9. When it’s raining, almost everyone carries an umbrella.
 
10.  Because wood scratches, [metal is a better material for desks]. [Focus on the material in 
brackets.]
 
11.  The costs of cell phone services have decreased and areas with coverage have increased so 
that [now there’s no reason to ever use a pay phone]. [Focus on the material in brackets.]
 *12. Some people mistakenly believe that there are no universal moral principles.
 
13. Only those who complete 120 credit hours graduate from college.
 
14. Not everyone believes that there are no universal moral principles.
 
15. At least one furlough day per month is required for all state employees.
B. Draw the correct Venn diagram for each of the exercises in 6.1 A and 6.2 A.

Evaluating Categorical Arguments with One Premise  191
have the opposite quantity and the opposite quality. If you assume that
(UA) All apples are red.
is true, it follows that
(PN) Some apples are not red.
is false. If you assume that (UA) “All apples are red” is false, then you can 
infer that (PN) “Some apples are not red.” Similarly, if you assume that (PN) 
“Some apples are not red” is true, then you can infer that (UA) “All apples are 
red” is false. If you assume that (PN) “Some apples are not red” is false, then 
you can infer that (UA) “All apples are red” is true. This gives you four valid 
(= proper) argument forms based on the fact that UA and PN are contradictories.
1. (1) UA
 
Therefore,
 
(2) It is false that PN
2. (1) It is false that UA
 
Therefore,
 
(2) PN
3. (1) PN
 
Therefore,
 
(2) It is false that UA
4. (1) It is false that PN
 
Therefore,
 
(2) UA
UN and PA statements are also contradictories. Each one has the opposite 
quantity and the opposite quality. If you know that
(UN) All apples are not red.
is true, then you know that 
(PA) Some apples are red.
is false. If you know that (UN) “All apples are not red” is false, then you 
know that (PA) “Some apples are red” is true. Similarly, if you know that (PA) 
“Some apples are red” is true, then you know that (UN) “All apples are not 
red” is false. And if you know that (PA) “Some apples are red” is false, then 
you know that (UN) “All apples are not red” is true. You’ve got four more 
valid argument forms.
5. (1) UN
 
Therefore,
 
(2) It is false that PA
6. (1) It is false that UN
 
Therefore,
 
(2) PA
7. (1) PA
 
Therefore,
 
(2) It is false that UN
8. (1) It is false that PA
 
Therefore,
 
(2) UN

192  Chapter 6 Categorical Arguments 
Suppose you know that 
All bones are made of osseous tissue.
is true. You’d also be able to conclude that the statement
Some bones are not made of osseous tissue.
is false. This is form 1 above. If scientists discovered in the future that there 
was a bone not made of osseous tissue, then you’d say
All bones are made of osseous tissue.
is false. On that basis, you could validly conclude that
Some bones are not made of osseous tissue.
is true.
If you know that any one of the four standard categorical statements is 
true, you will always be able to validly conclude that its contradictory is false 
and if you know that any one of the four statements is false, you can validly 
conclude that its contradictory is true. That’s a quick way to double your 
knowledge!
Fallacy: Confusing a Contrary and a Contradictory
Look at the following argument:
UN (1) All the rooms in this house are not hot.
 
 
Therefore,
 
 
(2) It is false that some rooms in this house are cold.
This argument commits the Fallacy of Confusing the Contrary with the 
Contradictory. Hot and cold are contraries, not contradictories. If a room is 
hot, it can’t be cold, and if it’s cold, it can’t be hot. But it could be neither. It 
could be room temperature.
Connections
The room temperature argument also commits the Fallacy of False Dichotomy. 
Chapter Five discusses this fallacy and contraries.
This table illustrates the difference between contraries and contradictories. 
Be careful not to confuse them.
Contraries
Neither
Contradictories
Hot–Cold
Room temperature
Hot–Not hot
Beautiful–Ugly
Unremarkable
Beautiful–Not beautiful
Enemy–Ally
Neutral
Enemy–Not an enemy
Democrat–Republican 
Independent
Democrat–Not a Democrat
Rich–Poor
Middle-income
Rich–Not rich
In School–On vacation 
Graduated
In School–Not in school
Key Concept
The Fallacy of 
Confusing the Contrary 
with the Contradictory 
occurs when contraries 
are confused with 
contradictories.

Evaluating Categorical Arguments with One Premise  193
EXERCISE 6.3
A. Determine which of the following arguments have valid (= proper) form. For those that have 
a valid form, indicate which of the eight categorical argument forms it has.
 1. (1) All Americans over 65 are protected by Medicare.
 
  Therefore, 
 
  (2) It is false that some Americans over 65 aren’t protected by Medicare.
 2. (1) Some people on Social Security are young people who became disabled in a car ac-
cident.
 
  Therefore, 
 
  (2) It is false that all people on Social Security aren’t young.
 3. (1) All students who are freshmen are students who live on campus.
 
  Therefore, 
 
  (2) It is false that some students who are freshmen aren’t students who live on campus.
*4. (1) It is false that all students who are freshmen are students who live on campus.
 
  Therefore, 
 
  (2) Some students who are freshmen are students who don’t live on campus.
 5. (1) All students who attend college are people who have paid fees to use the library.
 
  Therefore, 
 
  (2)  It is false that some students who attend college aren’t people who have paid fees to 
use the library.
 6. (1) Some college students are football players.
 
  Therefore, 
 
  (2) It is false that some college students aren’t football players.
 7. (1) Some college students aren’t football players.
 
  Therefore, 
 
  (2) Some college students are football players.
*8. (1) It is false that all college students aren’t in the military.
 
  Therefore, 
 
  (2) Some college students are in the military.
 9. (1) Some food in the dining hall is organic.
 
  Therefore, 
 
  (2) It is false that all food in the dining hall isn’t organic.
10. (1) Some food that is good for you is organic.
 
  Therefore, 
 
  (2) It is false that all food that is good for you isn’t organic.
11. (1) It’s not true that all salespeople are not capable of selling products they don’t believe in.
 
  Therefore, 
 
  (2) Some salespeople are capable of selling products they don’t believe in.

194  Chapter 6 Categorical Arguments 
*12. (1) Many people suffer from the common cold each year.
 
   Therefore, 
 
   (2) If it false that no one suffers from the common cold each year.
 13. (1) There’s no vaccination for the common cold.
 
   Therefore, 
 
   (2) Some vaccines are for the common cold.
 14. (1)  Antibiotics are prescribed for individuals with cold symptoms only if a doctor be-
lieves an individual has a bacterial infection.
 
  
Therefore, 
 
  
(2)  It is false that some antibiotics prescribed for cold symptoms aren’t for people be-
lieved to have a bacterial infection.
 15. (1) All pandas live in zoos throughout the world.
 
 
Therefore, 
 
 
(2) Some pandas don’t live in zoos throughout the world.
Conversion
Conversions are carried out by switching the subject and predicate of a 
statement. Here’s how each of the four categorical statement forms can be 
converted. 
Original Statement
Converse
Valid
UA
All G1 are G2
All G2 are G1
No
UN
All G1 are not G2
All G2 are not G1
Yes
PA
Some G1 are G2
Some G2 are G1
Yes
PN
Some G1 are not G2
Some G2 are not G1
No
The conversions of UN and PA lead to valid (= proper) forms. 
9.  UN (1) All G1 are not G2.
 
  
Therefore,
 
  
(2) All G2 are not G1.
10. PA 
(1) Some G1 are G2.
 
  
Therefore,
 
  
(2) Some G2 are G1.
If you know that
All bookworms are not invertebrates.
then you can conclude by conversion that
All invertebrates are not bookworms.
Key Concept
Conversions are carried 
out by switching the 
subject and predicate of 
a statement. 
The conversions of 
the four categorical 
statement forms.

Evaluating Categorical Arguments with One Premise  195
And if you know that
Some carpetbaggers are people who carry suitcases.
then you can conclude by conversion that 
Some people who carry suitcases are carpetbaggers.
The conversions of UA and PN lead to invalid (= improper) forms.
Invalid: UA (1) All G1 are G2.
 
 
Therefore,
 
 
(2) All G2 are G1.
Invalid: PN (1) Some G1 are not G2.
 
 
Therefore,
 
 
(2) Some G2 are not G1.
Even if you know that
All stockbrokers are people who take risks.
you shouldn’t conclude that
All people who take risks are stockbrokers. After all, scuba divers, sky 
divers, and ordinary automobile drivers also take risks.
In a similar way, even though you know that 
Some dogs are not collies.
you can’t conclude that
Some collies are not dogs.
Distribution
One way to understand why conversion leads to a valid form for UN and PA 
statements but doesn’t for UA and PN statements is to think about what 
logicians call “distribution.” The subject and predicate categories of each 
of the four forms are either distributed or undistributed. Remember that a 
categorical statement says that members of the subject category are either 
in or not in the predicate category. Each categorical statement makes this 
claim about either all or some of the members in each category. A category 
is distributed when the statement says something about all members of that 
category.
Suppose that you brought pizza to class one day, and you brought in 
enough for everyone in your class to have a slice. You could say that you dis-
tributed pizza to all members of your class. But if you only brought one pizza, 
there probably wouldn’t be enough to go around. You could say that you 
hadn’t distributed pizza to all members of your class. Similarly, logicians say 
that if the statement says something about all members of the category, then 
that category is distributed. If the statement doesn’t say something about all 
members, then that category isn’t distributed.
Both universal statements (UA and UN) distribute their subject catego-
ries because they say “All” of the members of the subject are either in or not 
in the predicate category.
Key Concept
A category is 
distributed when 
the statement says 
something about 
all members of that 
category.

196  Chapter 6 Categorical Arguments 
(UA) All logicians are primates.
and 
(UN) All logicians are not amoebas.
tell you something about all logicians (either that they are all primates or that 
all of them are not amoebas).
Both particular statements (PA and PN) don’t distribute their subject cat-
egories because they both say “Some” (not all) of the members in the subject 
are in or not in the predicate. Both
(PA) Some apples are red.
and 
(PN) Some apples are not red.
don’t tell you anything about all apples.
The predicates of affirmative statements (UA and PA) aren’t distributed 
but the predicates of negative statements (UN and PN) are. The UA state-
ment above (“All logicians are primates”) doesn’t tell you anything about all 
primates. Similarly, the PA statement above (“Some apples are red”) doesn’t 
tell you anything about all red things. The UN statement above (“All logi-
cians are not amoebas”) tells you something about all amoebas. It tells you 
that all amoebas are not logicians. The PN statement above (“Some apples 
are not red”) tells you something about all red things, but what it tells you 
is a bit odd. It tells you that all red things are not one of the apples to which 
“some apples” refers. Here’s a chart to help you remember distribution. The 
distributed categories are in red.
Distributed Categories (in bold)
UA
All G1 are G2
UN
All G1 are not G2
PA
Some G1 are G2
PN
Some G1 are not G2
A rule for helping you to remember which categories are distributed is “sub-
jects of universals and predicates of negatives.”
If you know which categories are distributed, you can quickly fi gure out 
which ones will lead to a valid (= proper) form when converted. If the dis-
tribution stays the same in the conversion, reasoning from one statement 
to its converse is a valid form. If the distribution is changed in the conver-
sion, then the conversion doesn’t produce a valid form. You can see this most 
easily with UA. It distributes its subject category but doesn’t distribute its 
predicate category. This is because a UA says all members of the subject are 
in the predicate category, but it doesn’t say that all members in the predicate 
category are in the subject category. So when you convert a UA statement, 
you change which categories are distributed and change the meaning of the 
statement. This is why converting a UA produces an invalid form. (As you’ll 
see later, distribution is also important when you evaluate categorical argu-
ments with two premises.)
Key Concept
The distributed 
categories.

Evaluating Categorical Arguments with One Premise  197
Complements
Before you can understand some more categorical argument forms with one 
premise, you have to understand the idea of a complement. The complement of 
a category is the category of all things that don’t have that feature. The comple-
ment of the category of apples is non-apples. Non-apples include grapes, cars, 
computers, and pencils. The complement of the category of non-apples is apples. 
The complement often looks odd because the prefi x “non” isn’t used as fre-
quently as “in,” “un,” “ir,” or “a.” Here are some examples of complements: vis-
ible and invisible, locked and unlocked, regular and irregular, theist and atheist.
Contraposition
Contraposition is a two-step operation. You begin by switching the subject 
and predicate, just as you do for conversion. Then you complement both the 
subject and the predicate.
Original Statement
Contrapositive
Valid
UA
All G1 are G2
All non-G2 are non-G1
Yes
UN
All G1 are not G2
All non-G2 are not non-G1
No
PA
Some G1 are G2
Some non-G2 are non-G1
No
PN
Some G1 are not G2
Some non-G2 are not non-G1
Yes
Reasoning from a UA statement to its contrapositive produces a valid (= proper) 
form.
11. (1) All G1 are G2.
 
Therefore,
 
(2) All non-G2 are non-G1.
The UA statement
All engineers are faced with decisions that require ethical refl ection.
can be formalized like this:
E = Engineers
F  =  People faced with decisions that require ethical refl ection
All E are F.
The contrapositive of this statement is 
All non-F are non-E.
or
All those who are not faced with decisions that require ethical refl ection 
are not engineers.
The contrapositive of a PN statement also produces a valid form.
12. (1) Some G1 are not G2
 
Therefore,
 
(2) Some non-G2 are not non-G1.
If you know that 
Some birds are not eagles.
then you know that 
Some non-eagles are not non-birds. 
Key Concept
The complement of a 
category is the category 
of all things that don’t 
have that feature.
Key Concept
The two steps of 
contraposition and 
the contrapositives of 
the four categorical 
statement forms.

198  Chapter 6 Categorical Arguments 
In more natural English, if you know that some birds aren’t eagles, then you 
know that some things that aren’t eagles are birds. 
The reasoning from a UN or a PA statement to its contrapositive is in-
valid. You can tell this because the distribution of the categories is altered. 
From the UN statement
All cars are not birds.
you can’t conclude that
All non-birds are not non-cars.
Some things that aren’t birds are cars. And from the PA statement
Some dogs are non-collies.
you can’t conclude that
Some collies are non-dogs.
It’s true that some dogs are non-collies. Some are German Shepherds. But all 
collies are dogs.
Obversion
Like contraposition, obversion is a two-step operation: First, you change the 
quality of the statement. Then you complement the predicate. Changing the 
quality means that if the original statement is affirmative, you make it nega-
tive. If the original statement is negative, make it affirmative. Don’t change 
the subject. Here’s the obverse of the four standard categorical statement 
forms.
Original Statement
Obverse
Valid
UA
All G1 are G2
All G1 are not non-G2
Yes
UN
All G1 are not G2
All G1 are non-G2
Yes
PA
Some G1 are G2
Some G1 are not non-G2
Yes
PN
Some G1 are not G2
Some G1 are non-G2
Yes
Obversion produces a valid form for all four statements.
13. UA 
(1) All G1 are G2.
 
 
Therefore,
 
 
(2) All G1 are not non-G2.
14. UN 
(1) All G1 are not G2.
 
 
Therefore,
 
 
(2) All G1 are non-G2.
15. PA 
(1) Some G1 are G2.
 
 
Therefore,
 
 
(2) Some G1 are not non-G2.
16. PN 
(1) Some G1 are not G2.
 
 
Therefore,
 
 
(2) Some G1 are non-G2.
Key Concept
The two steps of 
obversion. The obverses 
of the four categorical 
statement forms.

Evaluating Categorical Arguments with One Premise  199
The UN statement 
All short bones are not irregular bones.
is a UN statement, and the predicate is a complement. Taking “irregular” as 
“non-regular,” using S for the subject and R for the predicate, the statement 
would be formalized as 
S  = Short bones
R = Regular bones
All S are not non-R.
(Remember that category variables are assigned to affirmative categories.) 
The obverse of 
All S are not non-R.
is
All S are R. (All short bones are regular bones.)
If you know the fi rst statement is true, you can conclude that the obverse is 
true as well.
Here’s an example of how you can use and misuse one-premise categori-
cal arguments. Suppose that a study found that
All people who no longer smoke are people with increased lung cancer 
survival rates.
S  = People who smoke
R =  People with increased lung cancer survival rates
All non-S are R.
If you’re a smoker, you might want to know what’s true about smokers. To 
fi nd out, you might be tempted to make this argument: 
(a) (1) All non-S are R.
 
Therefore,
 
(2) All S are non-R. 
 
(2) says that
 
(2) All smokers are people with non-increased lung cancer survival rates.
But argument (a) has an invalid form. It might be that some smokers have a 
genetic immunity to lung cancer. Argument (a) complemented the subject 
and predicate. But just complementing the subject and predicate isn’t one of 
the valid forms for categorical one-premise arguments. It isn’t an example of 
obversion because the quality isn’t changed. It isn’t an example of contraposi-
tion because the subject and predicate aren’t switched. 
But you can use contraposition to make this valid argument:
(b) (1) All non-S are R.
 
Therefore,
 
(2) All non-R are S.
 
This says that
 
(3) All people with non-increased lung cancer survival rates are smokers.
Arguments (a) and (b) have the same premise. But argument (b) is an example 
of valid form 11 above. If you’re a smoker, this is a pretty good reason to quit!

200  Chapter 6 Categorical Arguments 
EXERCISE 6.4
A. For each of the following given statements, provide: (a) the contradictory, (b) the converse, 
(c) the complement of the predicate category, (d) the obverse, (e) the complement of the 
subject category, and (f) the contrapositive. You may fi rst need to put the statement into 
standard categorical form.
 1. Some pandas are animals that live in the wild.
 2. Some vaccines are not for the common cold.
 3. All cultural minorities are groups that need special rights.
*4. All bones are not made of cardiac tissue.
 5. All learned behavior is the result of experience.
G U I D E
Some Valid (= Proper) Categorical Argument Forms with One Premise
Contradiction
 1. (1) UA.
 
 Therefore,
 
 (2) It is false that PN.
 2. (1) It is false that UA.
 
 Therefore,
 
 (2) PN.
 3. (1) PN.
 
 Therefore,
 
 (2) It is false that UA.
 4. (1) It is false that PN.
 
 Therefore,
 
 (2) UA.
 5. (1) UN.
 
 Therefore,
 
 (2) It is false that PA.
 6. (1) It is false that UN.
 
 Therefore,
 
 (2) PA.
 7. (1) PA.
 
 Therefore,
 
 (2) It is false that UN.
 8. (1) It is false that PA.
 
 Therefore,
 
 (2) UN.
Conversion
 9. UN (1) All G1 are not G2.
 
   
Therefore,
 
   
(2) All G2 are not G1.
 10. PA (1) Some G1 are G2.
 
   
Therefore,
 
   
(2) Some G2 are G1.
Contraposition
 11. (1) All G1 are G2.
 
 Therefore,
 
 (2) All non-G2 are non-G1.
 12. (1) Some G1 are not G2.
 
 Therefore,
 
 (2) Some non-G2 are not non-G1.
Obversion
 13. UA (1) All G1 are G2.
 
   
Therefore,
 
   
(2) All G1 are not non-G2.
 14. UN (1) All G1 are not G2.
 
   
Therefore,
 
   
(2) All G1 are non-G2.
 15. PA (1) Some G1 are G2.
 
   
Therefore,
 
   
(2) Some G1 are not non-G2.
 16. PN (1) Some G1 are not G2.
 
   
Therefore,
 
   
(2) Some G1 are non-G2.

Evaluating Categorical Arguments with One Premise  201
B . For each of the exercises in A, determine whether the reasoning from the original statement 
to the one you produced is an example of a valid form. If it is, indicate the number (1–16) 
of the form.
C. Determine whether the following arguments are valid (= pass the proper form test). If it is, 
indicate the number (1–16) of the form.
 1. (1) Some Democratic candidates for the U.S. presidency in 2008 were women.
  Therefore, 
  (2) Some women were Democratic candidates for the U.S. presidency in 2008.
 2. (1) All African American candidates for the 2008 presidential race were Democrats.
  Therefore, 
  (2) All non-Democrats were not non–African American candidates for the 2008 
presidential race.
 3. (1) All candidates for the 2008 presidential race were U.S. citizens.
  Therefore, 
  (2) All candidates for the 2008 presidential race were not non–U.S. citizens.
*4. (1) All living beings on earth are carbon-based organisms.
  Therefore, 
  (2) All carbon-based organisms are living beings on earth.
 5. (1) All social learning is assumed to underlie traditions.
  Therefore, 
  (2) All animals that exhibit traditions will exhibit social learning.
 6. (1) In the wild, giant pandas are found in China, but a few pandas live in zoos through-
out the world.
  Therefore, 
  (2) Some pandas are not animals who live in the wild [wild = non-zoo].
 7. (1) All pandas eat bamboo. 
  Therefore, 
  (2) All bamboo eaters are pandas.
*8. (1) All pandas eat bamboo. 
  Therefore, 
  (2) All bamboo eaters are not non-pandas.
 9. (1) All pandas are animals that belong to an endangered species. 
  Therefore, 
  (2) All pandas are not animals that belong to an unendangered species.
 10. (1) All defense of cultural practices is likely to have much greater impact on the lives of 
women and girls. 
  Therefore, 
  (2) All defense of cultural practices is likely to have a lesser impact on men and boys. 
  (Simplifi ed paraphrase from Okin 1996.)

202  Chapter 6 Categorical Arguments 
Evaluating Categorical Arguments with Two 
Premises
Identifying Categorical Syllogisms
This section looks at categorical arguments with two premises. It focuses on 
categorical arguments with
1. precisely three categorical statements (two premises and a conclusion), 
2. precisely three categories, and
3. each of the categories appearing in precisely two of the three state-
ments.
Following tradition we’ll call arguments that have these three features 
 categorical syllogisms. Here’s a categorical syllogism:
(1) All fathers are not women.
(2) Some stockbrokers are women.
Therefore, 
(3) Some stockbrokers are not fathers.
Key Concept
The three features of 
categorical syllogisms.
 11. (1) All cultural minorities are groups that need special rights. 
  Therefore, 
  (2) All nonminorities are not groups that need special rights.
*12. (1) All African Americans are people who are likely to fully comprehend the helpless-
ness, loneliness, and anxieties of the unemployed. 
  Therefore, 
  (2) All people likely to fully comprehend the helplessness, loneliness, and anxieties of 
the unemployed are non–African Americans. 
 13. (1) It is contended that only infl ation engenders concern and fear. 
  Therefore, 
  (2) All issues that are non-infl ation [such as unemployment] are issues that do not en-
gender concern and fear.
  (Simplifi ed paraphrase from King 1976.) 
 14. (1) “Clearly, no one can predict the precise impact of global warming over the next 
 century.” 
  Therefore, 
  (2) All possible predictions about the impact of global warming will be imprecise at best. 
  (Simplifi ed paraphrase from Bennett 2007, 320–321.) 
 15. (1) All diseases that are classifi ed as public health disorders are treated by public policy 
and not by individual medication. 
  Therefore, 
  (2) Some diseases not classifi ed as public health disorders are not treated without public 
policy and only by individual medication.

Evaluating Categorical Arguments with Two Premises  203
The argument has precisely three statements (two premises and a conclu-
sion). It has precisely three categories: fathers, women, and stockbrokers. 
Each of the three categories appears exactly twice. You can formalize the 
argument like this:
F = Fathers
W = Women
S = Stockbrokers
(1) All F are not W.
(2) Some S are W.
Therefore, 
(3) Some S are not F.
This argument passes the true premises test and is valid (= passes the proper 
form test). 
You saw a categorical syllogism at the beginning of this chapter.
It is believed that the aorta is capable of undergoing passive stretching, 
because elastic arteries are the large arteries capable of undergoing pas-
sive stretching, and the aorta is an elastic artery.
Here’s a standardization:
(1)  Elastic arteries are the larger arteries capable of undergoing passive 
stretching.
(2) The aorta is an elastic artery.
Therefore,
(3) The aorta is capable of undergoing passive stretching. 
This argument isn’t in the form of a categorical syllogism yet because its 
statements aren’t in the four categorical statement forms.
The conclusion of the argument isn’t a UN or PN because it’s an affirma-
tive statement. But is it a UA statement or a PA statement? The four categori-
cal statement forms are precise, but the way people talk isn’t so precise. Part 
of the art of argument is determining the best way to take ordinary speech 
and formalize it into categorical statements. You might think that (3) is a 
PA statement.  After all, the aorta is only one artery and you’ve only got one 
aorta in your body. But, in spite of the word “the” at the beginning of the 
sentence, the author is making a claim about all aortas. The author is claim-
ing that all aortas (yours, your friends’, etc.) are capable of undergoing passive 
stretching. You can rewrite (3) as
(3) All aortas are things capable of undergoing passive stretching. 
Because this claim is about all aortas, it’s a UA statement. You can formalize 
(3) like this:
A = Aortas
C = Things capable of undergoing passive stretching
(3) All A are C.
Premise (2)
(2) The aorta is an elastic artery.

204  Chapter 6 Categorical Arguments 
also begins with “the.” It might fi rst appear to be about one particular aorta. 
But, on refl ection, you see that the author is again making a claim about all 
aortas.
(2) All aortas are elastic arteries.
You can formalize (2) like this:
E = Elastic arteries
(2) All A are E.
Premise (1) 
(1)  Elastic arteries are the larger arteries capable of undergoing passive 
stretching.
is clearer than the others because the misleading word “the” isn’t present. 
This is an affirmative claim about all elastic arteries. It says
(1) All elastic arteries are things capable of undergoing passive stretching.
or
(1) All E are C.
You can put all this together.
(1) All elastic arteries are capable of undergoing passive stretching.
(2) All aortas are elastic arteries.
Therefore,
(3) All aortas are capable of undergoing passive stretching.
A = Aortas 
C = Things capable of undergoing passive stretching
E = Elastic arteries
(1) All E are C.
(2) All A are E.
Therefore,
(3) All A are C.
Critical Thinkers
Christine Ladd-Franklin
Christine Ladd-Franklin (1847–1930) taught at Columbia University and published 
more than 100 articles. Ladd-Franklin’s most famous contribution is the invention of a 
technique for testing all syllogisms for validity with one formula (called the antilogism). 
Her method is still used today. You can read one of her articles, “On Some Characteristics 
of Symbolic Logic,” at http://books.google.com/books?id=4NULAAAAIAAJ&jtp=543#v=
onepage&q=&f=false.
Library of Congress

Evaluating Categorical Arguments with Two Premises  205
EXERCISE 6.5
A. For each of the following, (a) determine whether it’s a categorical syllogism. If it is, (b) put 
the argument into standard categorical form and (c) formalize it.
 1. All dogs are collies and all collies are purple; therefore, all dogs are purple.
 2. Some chickens are green because all chickens are ugly and some ugly things are green.
 3. Some apples are fruits and some oranges are fruits, so it follows that some apples are 
oranges.
*4. All freshmen are students and no students are infants, so all infants are not students.
 5. All seniors are graduating and all sophomores are not seniors, so some graduates are not 
sophomores.
 6. Some politicians are honest so politicians must be unhappy because most honest people 
are unhappy.
 7. Some New Yorkers belong to the Chinese Communist party because some people from 
China belong to the Chinese Communist party and some New Yorkers are from China.
*8. No Americans are wealthy, so Cindy is not wealthy because Cindy is an American.
 9. All able-bodied people younger than 65 years of age are in need of their own health 
insurance because all able-bodied people younger than 65 are not eligible for Medicare 
whereas all people eligible for Medicare are not in need of health insurance.
 10. Because animals cannot be moral agents, they cannot be said to have rights; therefore, 
if they are due moral consideration at all, it must be on some other basis. (Simplifi ed 
paraphrase from Machan 1991.) 
 11. Residents of the congressional district of our state do not earn more than the minimum 
wage because residents of the congressional district of our state will not be affected by 
the upcoming tax hike and residents who do not earn more than the minimum wage 
will not be affected by the upcoming tax hike.
*12. All employees are stakeholders in the company so all CEOs should act in their favor 
because all CEOs are responsible to stakeholders of the company.
 13. “All classrooms painted in non-white colors spark students’ imaginations because 
classrooms painted white are boring and bored students do not engage their imagina-
tions.” (Sunstein 2007, 110) 
 14. “Most substances offer resistance to the fl ow of electricity, and this resistance changes 
with temperature. So most substances change with temperature.” (Cutnell 2007, 363) 
 15. “All membership groups are constantly looking for new adherents to expand their re-
sources and clout. Groups that rely on ideological appeals have a special problem be-
cause the competition in most policy areas is intense.” (Janda 2008, 308) 
B. Determine whether the following passages contain an argument. If it does contain an ar-
gument, determine whether the argument is a categorical syllogism. If the arguments is a 
categorical syllogism, put it into the form of a categorical syllogism and formalize it.
 1. “People may say one thing in a focus group and do another thing in the voting booth.” 
To get beyond this, some neuromarketers are tracking not only what people say on the 
survey, but also the time it takes them to respond, since their theory is that “faster re-
sponses indicate stronger feelings.” (Alter 2007, W1 & W6, material omitted)

206  Chapter 6 Categorical Arguments 
 
  
(The next three arguments are paraphrases from Vinicor 1994, 22, material omitted.)
 
2. Because diabetes can be ameliorated in large part by loss of weight and increase in 
exercise activity, and because weight control and exercise programs involve no med-
ication and indeed can be advertised and administered publicly, it seems reasonable 
to conclude that diabetes is a public problem (not an individual’s disease).
 
3. Refl ecting on infectious conditions, it appears that disease burden, rapid change 
in disease incidence (suggesting preventability), and public concern about risk are 
three essential characteristics that defi ne a public-health disorder. [Hint: Focus on 
the implied argument in the phrase “rapid change in disease incidence (suggesting 
preventability) defi nes a public-health disorder.”]
 
*4. [M]ost would still consider diabetes primarily to be a clinical disease. In part, this 
perception is based on the fact that, in association with aging and a possible strong 
family history, diabetes and its complications may appear inevitable to many. [Hint: 
“Inevitable” means that it is not preventable.]
 5 & 6. Find two categorical arguments in the following: Because it was assumed that scien-
tifi c progress would displace people’s need for religion, it was expected that religion 
would decline in the 20th century given the growth of scientifi c achievement. This 
did not happen. In fact, religion has been on the rise in the past few decades despite 
tremendous scientifi c achievements. (Paraphrased from Haviland 2007, 290.)
 
7. If the actual price is greater than the standard price per hour, the direct labor price 
variance is a positive number. If the direct labor price is positive, then there is indi-
cation of an unfavorable variance. Therefore, if the actual price is greater than the 
standard price per hour, then there is indication of an unfavorable variance. (Para-
phrased from Ainesworth 2007, 258.)
 
*8. “‘Terrorists are cold-blooded killers,’ concluded President Bush after suicide bomb-
ers had just killed some 35 people in coordinated attacks on the Red Cross head-
quarters in Iraq, just as those years earlier were willing to kill innocent people in the 
World Trade Center.” (Janda 2008, 191)
 9 & 10. “[S]ociological theories claim to explain global inequality. The fi rst, modernization 
theory, is a variant of functionalism. According to modernization theory, global in-
equality results from various dysfunctional characteristics of poor societies them-
selves. Specifi cally, modernization theorists say the citizens of poor societies lack 
sufficient capital to invest in Western-style agriculture and industry. They lack ra-
tional, Western-style business techniques of marketing, accounting, sales, and fi -
nance. As a result, their productivity and profi tability remain low. They lack stable, 
Western-style governments that could provide a secure framework for investment. 
Finally, they lack a Western mentality: values that stress the need for savings, in-
vestment, innovation, education, high achievement, and self-control in having 
children. Societies characterized by these dysfunctions are poor.” (Brym 2005, 241, 
material omitted)
*11 & 12. Several possibilities for standardizing categorical syllogisms are contained within 
the following: 
 
 
Proponents of dependency theory, a variant of confl ict theory, have been quick to 
point out the chief fl aw in modernization. For the last 500 years, the most powerful 
countries in the world deliberately impoverished the less powerful countries. Focusing 

Evaluating Categorical Arguments with Two Premises  207
on internal characteristics blames the victim rather than the perpetrator of the 
crime. It follows that an adequate theory of global inequality should not focus on 
the internal characteristics of poor countries themselves. Instead, it ought to follow 
the principles of confl ict theory and focus on patterns of domination and submission—
specifi cally in this case on the relationship between rich and poor countries. That is 
just what dependency theory does. 
 
 
According to dependency theorists, less global inequality existed in 1500 and even in 
1750 than today. However, beginning around 1500, the armed forces of the world’s 
most powerful countries subdued and then annexed or colonized most of the rest 
of the world. Around 1780 the industrial revolution began. It enabled the Western 
European countries, Russia, Japan, and the United States to amass enormous wealth, 
which they used to extend their global reach. They forced their colonies to become a 
source of raw materials, cheap labor, investment opportunities, and markets for the 
conquering nations. The colonizers thereby prevented industrialization and locked 
the colonies into poverty. (Brym 2005, 241, footnotes omitted)
13. The famous Athenian general and statesman, Pericles, supported going to war against 
Sparta and Sparta’s allies. After several years of war, Sparta had invaded Athens twice 
and was winning. Athenians were growing demoralized. After the second invasion, 
Pericles gave a speech in which he is quoted as saying: 
 
 
It does not matter whether a man prospers as an individual: if his city is destroyed, he 
is lost with it; but if he meets with misfortune, he is far safer in a fortunate city than 
he would be otherwise. Since, therefore, a city is able to sustain its private citizens 
in whatever befalls them, while no individual is strong enough to carry his city, are 
we not all obliged to defend it and not, as you are doing now, sacrifi ce our common 
safety? (Thucydides 1993, 52–53) 
14. “Luther was anything but a fundamentalist. He did not attach equal importance to 
every [biblical] text. He boldly called Romans ‘the most important document in the 
New Testament,’ and he brushed aside the Epistle to St. James as ‘an epistle of straw.’” 
[Note: Fundamentalists attach equal importance to every biblical text.] (Dickens 1968, 
57, material omitted) 
15. More than one possible categorical relationship is contained in the following: 
 
 
Social responsibility arises from concern about the consequences of business’s acts 
as they affect the interests of others. Business decisions do have social consequenc-
es. Business people cannot make decisions that are solely economic decisions, be-
cause they are interrelated with the whole social system. This situation requires 
that business persons’ thinking be broadened beyond the company gate to the whole 
social system. Systems thinking is required. Social responsibility implies that a 
business decision maker in the process of serving his or her own business interests 
is obliged to take actions that also protect and enhance society’s interests. (Shaw 
2004, 213) 
Evaluating Categorical Syllogisms: The Test Method
A set of four tests allows you to determine whether a categorical syllogism is 
valid. You can think of them as subtests. If a categorical syllogism fails one 
of these subtests, it’s invalid (= fails the proper form test). If it passes all four 
subtests, it’s valid (= passes the proper form test).

208  Chapter 6 Categorical Arguments 
The Equal Negatives Test
This test says that for a categorical syllogism to have a valid form, the num-
ber of UNs and PNs in the premises must be the same as the number of UNs 
and PNs in the conclusion.
In the aortas argument
A = Aortas
C = Things capable of undergoing passive stretching
E = Elastic arteries
(1) All E are C.
(2) All A are E.
Therefore,
(3) All A are C.
the number of negative statements in the premises of this argument is zero 
because both of the premises are in UA form. The number of negative state-
ments in the conclusion is also zero because it’s also a UA statement. The 
aortas argument passes the equal negatives test. In general, the following 
kinds of categorical syllogisms fail the equal negatives test:
arguments with two negative premises,
arguments with one or two negative premises and an affirmative conclu-
sion, and
arguments with two affirmative premises and a negative conclusion.
Any time you see a passage standardized in any of these three ways, you’ll 
know right away that it’s invalid (= doesn’t pass the proper form test).
The Quantity Test
This test says that if both premises are particulars, then the conclusion can’t 
be a universal, and if both premises are universal, then the conclusion can’t 
be a particular. In the aortas argument, both premises are universal but so is 
the conclusion. This argument passes the quantity test. 
G U I D E
Validity of Categorical Syllogisms: The Test Method
 1. The Equal Negatives Test: The number of negative statements in the conclusion must 
equal the number of negative statements in the premises.
 2. The Quantity Test: If both premises are particulars, then the conclusion can’t be a uni-
versal and if both premises are universal, then the conclusion can’t be a particular.
 3. The Distributed Conclusion Test: If a category is distributed in the conclusion, then it 
must also be distributed in a premise.
 4. The Distributed Middle Category Test: The middle category must be distributed at least 
once.
Let’s look at each of these tests.

Evaluating Categorical Arguments with Two Premises  209
Most people quickly see that if the two premises of a syllogism are both 
particular statements (if they are both about only “some” of their subject 
category), then you can’t validly draw any conclusion about “all” of anything. 
The argument
(1) Some apples are red.
(2) Some red things are cars.
Therefore,
(3) All apples are cars.
doesn’t have a valid form.
It’s harder to see that if both premises are universal, then the conclusion 
can’t be a particular. If you look at an argument like this one:
(1) All apples are fruits.
(2) All fruits are things that are good to eat.
Therefore,
(3) Some apples are things that are good to eat.
you might think that a argument with two universal premises and a particu-
lar conclusion could have a valid form. But think again about werewolves and 
look at this argument:
(1) All werewolves are howlers.
(2) All howlers are things that make noise.
Therefore,
(3) Some werewolves are things that make noise.
Universal statements don’t say that the subject category has any mem-
bers. Remember that a UA statement is defi ned with a conditional. A UA 
statement says only that if the subject category has any members, then they 
will be included in the predicate category. This is why premise (1) of this ar-
gument is true even though there are no werewolves. And premise (2) is true. 
But remember that logicians defi ned “some” to mean “at least one mem-
ber,” so particular statements do say that the subject category has members. 
That’s why the conclusion of this argument, statement (3), is false (because 
there are no werewolves). The argument about werewolves has true premises 
and a false conclusion. The truth of the premises doesn’t guarantee that the 
conclusion is true. A categorical syllogism with two universal premises and a 
particular conclusion has an invalid form. 
The Distributed Conclusion Test
You saw above that the notion of distribution helps you understand which 
conversions produce valid argument forms. It also helps you evaluate categor-
ical syllogisms. You should go back and review the discussion of distribution 
and make sure you have it fresh in your mind.
The distributed conclusion test states that, if a category is distributed 
in the conclusion, then it must also be distributed in a premise. In the 
aortas argument, the conclusion is a UA statement, All A are C. Remem-
bering the phrase “subjects of universals and predicates of negatives,” 
you note that a UA statement distributes its subject but not its predicate. 
The conclusion distributes its subject, A. It doesn’t distribute its predicate, 

210  Chapter 6 Categorical Arguments 
C. Test 2 concerns only what’s distributed in the conclusion. Because C 
isn’t distributed in the conclusion, you don’t have to worry about whether 
C is distributed in the premises. But you need to make sure that A is dis-
tributed in a premise. 
Category A isn’t in premise (1) so it can’t be distributed in premise (1). 
Premise (2) is a UA statement, and UA statements distribute their subjects. 
So A is distributed in premise (2), and the aortas argument passes the distrib-
uted conclusion test. The only category that is distributed in the conclusion 
is A, and this category is also distributed in a premise.
G U I D E
Doing the Distributed Conclusion Test
If the conclusion is a…
then check the distribution of…
1. UA
the subject of the conclusion.
2. UN
both categories.
3. PA
neither category.
4. PN
the predicate of the conclusion.
As you can see from the third row, if the conclusion is a PA statement, the argument auto-
matically passes the distributed conclusion test. 
The Distributed Middle Category Test
The distributed middle category test states that the middle category must be 
distributed at least one time. The middle category is the category that’s not 
in the conclusion. In the aortas argument, the middle category is E. E is also 
the subject of premise (1) and the predicate of premise (2). Both premises are 
UA statements. UA statements distribute their subject, so E is distributed in 
premise (1). It isn’t distributed in premise (2). Premise (2) is a UA statement, 
and a UA statement doesn’t distribute its predicate. But the distributed mid-
dle category test only requires that the middle category be distributed once. 
The aortas argument passes the distributed middle category test. It passes all 
four tests so it’s a valid argument.
By the way, because PA statements don’t distribute either the subject or 
the predicate categories, any categorical syllogism with two PA premises au-
tomatically fails the middle category test.
Key Concept
The middle category is 
the category that’s not 
in the conclusion.

Evaluating Categorical Arguments with Two Premises  211
EXERCISE 6.6
A. For each of the following categorical argument forms, determine which test, if any, it fails.
 1. (1) All G1 are G2.
  (2) All G3 are G2.
  Therefore,
  (3) All G1 are G3.
 2. (1) All G1 are not G2.
  (2) All G2 are not G3.
  Therefore,
  (3) Some G1 are not G3.
 3. (1) All G1 are G2.
  (2) Some G1 are not G3.
  Therefore,
  (3) Some G3 are not G2.
 *4. (1) All G2 are G1.
  (2) Some G2 are G3.
  Therefore,
  (3) All G3 are G1.
 5. (1) Some G1 are G2.
  (2) Some G2 are G3.
  Therefore,
  (3) Some G1 are not G3.
B. Use the Test Method to determine whether each argument in Exercise 6.5A and 6.5B has a 
valid form. If an argument fails one or more of the tests, indicate which test(s) it fails.
Evaluating Categorical Syllogisms: The Venn Method
You can use Venn diagrams to determine whether a categorical argument has 
a valid form. But the Venn diagrams discussed earlier in this chapter can’t 
be used because they present only two categories, and categorical syllogisms 
have three categories. You need a Venn diagram with three circles to evaluate 
categorical syllogisms.
You begin by drawing the three circles. They must overlap because you 
need to be sure to represent every possible combination of the three categories.
G1
G2
1
2
3
4
8
7
6
5
G3
Venn Diagram 6.10

212  Chapter 6 Categorical Arguments 
This Venn diagram has circles for G1 and G2 just as the other Venns did. But 
now there’s a circle for a third category, G3. Let’s say that G1 = Apples, G2 = 
Red things, and G3 = Things in Montana. 
Apples
Red Things
1
2
3
4
8
7
6
5
Things in Montana
Because you have three overlapping circles instead of two, you have eight 
areas instead of four. Area 6 includes those red apples that are in Montana. 
Area 5 contains all apples that are not red but are in Montana. Area 8 includes 
things that are in Montana but are neither apples nor red (such as the town of 
Billings and Glacier National Park).
You can represent any of the four categorical statements on the Venn dia-
gram with three circles. The UA statement “All things in Montana are red” 
can be represented like this:
Apples
Red Things
1
2
3
4
8
7
6
5
Things in Montana
UA: All things in Montana are red.
Venn Diagram 6.11
Venn Diagram 6.12

Evaluating Categorical Arguments with Two Premises  213
Areas 5 and 8 are shaded to indicate that they’re empty. The statement “All things 
in Montana are red” doesn’t tell you anything about Areas 1–4 and 6–7. They are 
all blank. As you look at Venn Diagram 6.12, tilt your head to the left and pretend 
that the Apples circle isn’t there. You’ll see that Areas 5 and 8 in Venn Diagram 
6.12 are the same as Area 1 of Venn Diagram 6.3 on page 180.
A different UA statement has a different Venn diagram. Here is the Venn 
diagram of the UA statement “All red things are apples”:
Apples
Red Things
1
2
3
4
8
7
6
5
Things in Montana
UA: All red things are apples.
Here Areas 3 and 7 are fi lled in because this UA statement tells you that 
there’s nothing in these areas.
The UN statement “All apples are not in Montana” can be represented 
like this:
Apples
Red Things
1
2
3
4
8
7
6
5
Things in Montana
UN: All apples are not in Montana.
Venn Diagram 6.13
Venn Diagram 6.14

214  Chapter 6 Categorical Arguments 
Areas 5 and 6 are shaded because this UN statement tells you that there are 
no apples in Montana.
The PN statement “Some apples are not red” can be represented like this:
Apples
Red Things
1
2
3
4
8
7
6
5
Things in Montana
X
PN: Some apples are not red.
There’s an “X” on the line between Areas 1 and 5 because this PN statement 
tells you that there’s at least one thing in at least one of these two areas. It 
might be that the PN statement is true because there’s only one Golden De-
licious apple. The PN statement “Some apples are not red” doesn’t tell you 
whether this Golden Delicious apple is in Montana (Area 5) or isn’t in Mon-
tana (Area 1). So you put the “X” on the line between the two.
The PA statement “Some things in Montana are red” can be represented 
like this:
Apples
Red Things
1
2
3
4
8
7
6
5
Things in Montana
X
PA: Some things in Montana are red.
Venn Diagram 6.15
Venn Diagram 6.16

Evaluating Categorical Arguments with Two Premises  215
G U I D E
Validity of Categorical Syllogisms: Venn Method
 1. Draw three overlapping circles. Put the category that is the subject of the conclusion 
at the top left, the category that is the predicate of the conclusion at the top right, and 
the category that doesn’t appear in the conclusion in the middle under the other two 
categories.
Subject of conclusion
Predicate of conclusion
1
2
3
4
8
7
6
5
Category not in conclusion
 2. Diagram the premises. Diagram the universal premises, and then diagram the particular 
premises. 
 3. Compare the resulting diagram to the conclusion to see whether the diagram of the two 
premises has diagrammed the conclusion. If it has, the argument has a valid form. If it 
hasn’t, the argument has an invalid form.
Venn Diagram 6.17
There’s an “X” on the line between Areas 6 and 7 because this PA statement 
tells you that there must be at least one thing in at least one of these two 
areas but if this PA statement is true because there’s only one red thing in 
Montana, this PA statement doesn’t tell you whether it’s an apple (Area 6) or 
not (Area 7). 
A categorical syllogism has a valid form when the truth of the premises 
guarantees the truth of the conclusion. This means that a categorical syllo-
gism has a valid form when the Venn diagram of both premises is sufficient 
(with no more diagramming) to be a Venn diagram of the conclusion. You fi rst 
diagram each premise and then check to see whether you’ve diagrammed the 
conclusion. 

216  Chapter 6 Categorical Arguments 
 
Look at this argument:
(1) All sea lions are mammals.
(2) All mammals are animals that nurse their young with milk.
Therefore,
(3) All sea lions are animals that nurse their young with milk. 
 
You can formalize it like this:
S = sea lions
M = mammals
N = animals that nurse their young with milk
(1) All S are M.
(2) All M are N.
Therefore,
(3) All S are N.
Step 1. You set up the three-circle Venn diagram with the subject of the conclusion 
(S) on the top left, the predicate of the conclusion (N) on the top right, and the cat-
egory that doesn’t appear in the conclusion (M) in the middle below the other two.
S
N
1
2
3
4
8
7
6
5
M
Step 2. In this case, both premises are universal so it doesn’t matter which 
premise you diagram fi rst. Diagram premise (1), All S are M, like this:
S
N
1
2
3
4
8
7
6
5
M
Venn Diagram 6.18
Venn Diagram 6.19

Evaluating Categorical Arguments with Two Premises  217
You shade Areas 1 and 2 because “All S are M” tells you that those two areas 
are empty. 
You now add the shading for the second premise, “All M are N.”
S
N
1
2
3
4
8
7
6
5
M
You add shading to Areas 5 and 8 because “All M are N” tells you that these 
areas are empty. 
Step 3. Compare the resulting diagram to the conclusion to see whether 
the diagram of the two premises has diagrammed the conclusion. Look at 
Venn Diagram 6.20 and compare it to the conclusion of the argument, “All 
S are N.” “All S are N” tells you that Areas 1 and 5 should be shaded. On 
Venn Diagram 6.20, both of these areas are shaded. The diagramming of the 
premises has diagrammed the conclusion. This argument has a valid form.
Let’s look at a categorical syllogism with an invalid form.
(1) All sea lions are mammals.
(2) All wolves are mammals.
Therefore,
(3) All sea lions are wolves.
S = sea lions
M = mammals
W = wolves
(1) All S are M.
(2) All W are M.
Therefore,
(3) All S are W.
Venn Diagram 6.20

218  Chapter 6 Categorical Arguments 
You set up the circles like this:
S
W
1
2
3
4
8
7
6
5
M
Then you diagram the fi rst premise, “All S are M.”
S
W
1
2
3
4
8
7
6
5
M
Venn Diagram 6.21
Venn Diagram 6.22

Evaluating Categorical Arguments with Two Premises  219
Then you diagram the second premise, “All W are M.”
S
W
1
2
3
4
8
7
6
5
M
“All W are M” tells you to shade out Areas 2 and 3. You already shaded out 
Area 2 when you diagrammed premise (1). All you need to do is shade Area 3. 
You now compare Venn Diagram 6.23 to the conclusion “All S are W.” 
“All S are W” tells you that Areas 1 and 5 should already be shaded. But in 
Venn Diagram 6.23, Area 5 isn’t shaded. The diagramming of the premises 
doesn’t diagram the conclusion. This argument has an invalid form.
Let’s look at some arguments with particular premises.
(1) All sea lions are mammals.
(2) Some sea lions are things that live in the Pacifi c Ocean.
Therefore,
(3) Some mammals are things that live in the Pacifi c Ocean.
 S = sea lions
M = mammals
 P = things that live in the Pacifi c Ocean
(1) All S are M.
(2) Some S are P.
Therefore,
(3) Some M are P.
Venn Diagram 6.23

220  Chapter 6 Categorical Arguments 
You set up the circles with the categories in the right places.
M
P
1
2
3
4
8
7
6
5
S
This argument has one universal premise and one particular premise. Re-
member to diagram the universal premise fi rst. The universal premise is “All 
S are M.”
Venn Diagram 6.24
M
P
1
2
3
4
8
7
6
5
S
You shade out Areas 7 and 8 because “All S are M” tells you that these areas 
are empty. 
Venn Diagram 6.25

Evaluating Categorical Arguments with Two Premises  221
You now add the diagram of the particular premise “Some S are P.”
M
P
1
2
3
4
8
7
6
5
S
X
On its own, “Some S are P” would tell you that there should be an “X” 
on the line between Areas 6 and 7. “Some S are P” tells you that some sea 
lions live in the Pacifi c but it doesn’t tell you whether they are mammals 
(Area 6) or not (Area 7). But premise (1) has told you that Area 7 is empty. 
You know that the sea lion that lives in the Pacifi c is a mammal. You put 
an “X” in Area 6. This shows why you should diagram universal premises 
fi rst.
You now compare Venn Diagram 6.26 to the conclusion of the argument, 
“Some M are P.” There’s an “X” in Area 6. If there’s an “X” in Area 6, then 
there’s at least one thing that is a mammal that lives in the Pacifi c (and it 
happens to be a sea lion). The truth of the premises implies the truth of the 
conclusion, and the argument has a valid form.
Venn Diagram 6.26
Key Concept
You should diagram 
universal premises fi rst.

222  Chapter 6 Categorical Arguments 
Let’s look at an invalid argument with one particular premise and one 
universal premise.
(1) All sea lions are mammals.
(2) Some things that live in the Pacifi c Ocean are mammals.
Therefore,
(3) Some things that live in the Pacifi c Ocean are sea lions.
  S = sea lions
M = mammals
  P = things that live in the Pacifi c Ocean
(1) All S are M.
(2) Some P are M.
Therefore,
(3) Some P are S.
After correctly placing the circles, you diagram the universal premise “All 
S are M.”
P
S
1
2
3
4
8
7
6
5
M
Then you add the diagram of the particular premise, “Some P are M.”
P
S
1
2
3
4
8
7
6
5
M
X
Venn Diagram 6.27
Venn Diagram 6.28

Evaluating Categorical Arguments with Two Premises  223
In this case, the universal premise hasn’t excluded either Area 5 or Area 6. 
You put “X” on the line between these two areas. 
You now compare Venn Diagram 6.28 to the conclusion “Some P are S.” 
This conclusion says that there should be an “X” in Area 2 or an “X” in Area 
6. In Venn Diagram 6.28, Area 2 is shaded, so there’s no “X” there. And there 
isn’t an “X” in Area 6 either. There’s an “X” on the line between Areas 5 and 
6. You know that something is in Area 5 or Area 6 but you don’t know which. 
You don’t know for sure that something is in Area 6. The diagram of the 
premises hasn’t diagrammed the conclusion. This argument has an invalid 
form. 
Finally, let’s look at an argument with two particular premises.
(1) Some things that live in the Pacifi c Ocean are mammals.
(2) Some mammals are things that hibernate in the winter.
Therefore,
(3) Some things that live in the Pacifi c Ocean are things that hibernate in 
the winter.
 H = things that hibernate in the winter
M = mammals
  P = things that live in the Pacifi c Ocean
(1) Some P are M.
(2) Some M are H.
Therefore,
(3) Some P are H.
Because both premises are particular, you can diagram either one fi rst. The 
fi rst premise, “Some P are M,” is diagrammed like this:
P
H
1
2
3
4
8
7
6
5
M
X
Venn Diagram 6.29

224  Chapter 6 Categorical Arguments 
Then you add the diagram of the second premise, “Some M are H.”
P
H
1
2
3
4
8
7
6
5
M
X
X
You now compare Venn Diagram 6.30 to the conclusion “Some P are H.” You 
haven’t diagrammed “Some P are H.” The fi rst premise tells you that there 
must be something in Area 5 or Area 6. The second premise tells you that 
there must be something in Area 6 or Area 7. The conclusion tells you that 
there should be an “X” in Area 2 or an “X” in Area 6. The premises don’t put 
“X”s in Area 2 or on any of Area 2’s lines. If the “X” on the line between Ar-
eas 5 and 6 turns out to be in Area 5 and the “X” on the line between Areas 6 
and 7 turns out to be in Area 7, then there’s no “X” in Area 6. The premises 
of the argument show that the conclusion might be true but they don’t show 
that it must be true. This argument has an invalid form.
Venn Diagram 6.30
Habits of a Critical Thinker
Discipline
Many years ago, one of the authors of this book took 
the course you are now taking. He didn’t think it 
was hard. He thought that he didn’t need to prac-
tice much. He didn’t have the discipline to practice 
using the four tests and doing Venn diagrams. When 
the fi nal came along, it took him a long time to see 
if arguments had a valid form. He didn’t have time 
to complete the fi nal and he bombed the course. 
Over the summer, he spent an hour a day working 
on checking arguments for valid form. He took the 
course again and got a high A. The moral of the story 
is that a good critical thinker is disciplined. It takes 
work to think well. You need to practice and set up a 
schedule to keep yourself on track. 
EXERCISE 6.7
A. Use the Venn Method to determine whether the arguments in Exercise 6.6A have a valid 
form.
B. Use the Venn Method to determine whether the arguments in Exercise 6.5A and 6.5B have 
a valid form. 

Chapter Summary  225
Categorical arguments focus on statements that 
compare categories of things. Categorical state-
ments assert that things of one category either 
are or aren’t members of some other category. 
There are four standard categorical statement 
forms, each of which has four parts. The parts 
are: (a) the quantity (All or Some), (b) the sub-
ject category, (c) the quality (are or are not), 
and (d) the predicate category. These yield the 
four standard forms, universal affirmative (UA, 
All apples are red), universal negative (UN, All 
apples are not red), particular affirmative (PA, 
Some apples are red), and particular negative 
(PN, Some apples are not red).
 
A proper deductive argument form is called 
a “valid” form, and an improper deductive argu-
ment form is called an “invalid” form.
 
Some categorical arguments have only one 
premise. 
 
UA and PN statements are contradictories. 
If one of them is true, then the other is false. 
UN and PA statements are also contradictories. 
 
You convert a statement by switching the 
subject and predicate categories. When you 
convert a UN or PA statement, you produce an 
argument with a valid form. You contrapose a 
statement by converting the categories and then 
complementing both categories with a “non-.” 
When you contrapose a UA or a PN statement, 
Chapter Summary
you produce an argument with a valid form. You 
obvert a statement by changing the quality and 
complementing the predicate category. When 
you obvert any of the four categorical statement 
forms, you produce an argument with a valid 
form. Contradiction, conversion, contraposition, 
and obversion lead to sixteen valid argument 
forms.
 
Categorical syllogisms are arguments that 
have (a) precisely three statements (two prem-
ises and a conclusion), (b) precisely three cat-
egories, and (c) each of the categories appearing 
in precisely two of the three statements. The 
middle category of a syllogism is the category 
that doesn’t appear in the conclusion.
 
Categorical syllogisms can be evaluated by 
two methods. The Test Method evaluates cat-
egorical syllogisms by seeing whether they pass 
four tests. Any categorical syllogism that fails 
one of the four tests has an invalid form. Any 
categorical syllogism that passes all four tests 
has a valid form. The Venn Method graphically 
depicts categorical statements and arguments. 
By mapping the premises onto the circles, one 
can see whether the conclusion appears. If it 
does, the argument has a valid form. If the 
conclusion isn’t apparent, the argument has an 
invalid form.

226  Chapter 6 Categorical Arguments 
G U I D E
Finding, Standardizing, and Evaluating Categorical Arguments
This Guide is an amplifi cation of the “Guide for Finding, Standardizing, and Evaluating 
Arguments” that is in Chapter Two. The numbered sentences are merely copies from the 
Guide in Chapter Two. The paragraphs with “Cat” (for “Categorical”) in front of them are 
additional materials that apply only to categorical moral arguments.
Finding Arguments
 1. Look for an attempt to convince.
 
 Cat. Look for an attempt to convince that relies on the logical relationships within 
statements.
 2. Find the conclusion.
 3. Find the premises.
 4. Review the following to make sure that you have correctly identifi ed the conclusion 
and the premises: imperfect indicator words, sentence order, premises and/or conclu-
sion not in declarative form, and unstated premises and/or conclusion.
 5. Review the following to make sure that you haven’t incorrectly identifi ed something 
as a premise or a conclusion when in fact it’s not part of an argument: assertions, ques-
tions, instructions, descriptions, and explanations.
Standardizing Arguments
 6. Rewrite the premises and the conclusion as declarative sentences. Make sure that 
each premise and the conclusion is a grammatically correct declarative sentence. Re-
write the premises and conclusion as necessary to make them clearer but don’t change 
the meaning of the passage. Remove pronouns from the sentences and replace them 
with the nouns or noun phrases to which they refer. Remove emotionally charged 
language.
 
 Cat. Put all the statements in the argument into one of the standard categorical state-
ment forms (UA, UN, PA, or PN).
 7. Review any phrases you’ve omitted to be sure that they aren’t premises or a conclusion.
 8. Number the premises and the conclusion. Put brackets [] around the number of any un-
stated premise and/or conclusion. Place the premises before their conclusion, and insert 
“Therefore” between the premises and the conclusion.
 
Cat. Assign category variables and rewrite the argument using them.
 9. Compare your standardization to the original passage to make sure that you haven’t 
omitted any arguments found in the passage and to be sure that you have correctly 
identifi ed the premises and the conclusion. 
 
 Cat. Check to be sure that your formalization correctly captures the meaning of the 
argument as expressed in English.
Evaluating Arguments: The True Premises Test
 10. Check to see whether the premises are accurate descriptions of the world. 
 11. Consider whether the premises are appropriate for the argument’s audience.

Chapter Summary  227
 12. Review the assumed premises to be sure that the assumptions are reasonable. Make 
sure that all assumed premises are uncontroversially true empirical statements, uncon-
troversially true defi nitional statements, or appropriate statements by experts. Make 
sure the defi nitions are good ones. 
Evaluating Arguments: The Proper Form Test
 13. Determine whether the argument is a deductive argument or inductive argument. 
 14. Determine whether the premises are relevant to the conclusion. Look at each premise 
individually to see whether the truth of the premise provides some evidence for the 
truth of the conclusion. Look at the premises as a group to see whether the truth of all 
of them provides some evidence for the truth of the conclusion.
 
 Cat. Determine the form of the categorical argument. Determine whether it has one 
premise, two premises, or more than two premises.
 
 Cat. If the argument has one premise, compare it to the sixteen forms of categorical 
arguments with one premise discussed in this chapter.
 
 Cat. If the argument has two premises, verify that it meets the criteria for being a cat-
egorical syllogism. Use the test method or the Venn method to determine whether it 
passes the proper form test. 
Evaluating Arguments: Checking for Fallacies
 15. Compare the argument to the list of fallacies on page 410 to see whether the argument com-
mits any of the fallacies.

228
Look at the world. It is just one big machine subdivided into an infi nite number of 
smaller machines. All these various machines are adjusted to each other with an 
accuracy that fi lls all with wonder. This fi tting of means to ends throughout the 
natural world resembles the machines humans produce. Since the effects resemble 
each other we are led to infer, by all the rules of analogy, that the causes also 
resemble each other and that the author of nature is somewhat similar to us, although 
he has much greater powers proportionate to the greater work he has done. By this 
argument we can prove the existence of God and that his mind is similar to ours.
—David Hume, Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion (2007, 19, 
material omitted and simplifi ed)
7
Analogical 
Arguments
Learning Outcomes
After studying the material in this chapter, you should be able to:
1. Put analogical arguments into standard form.
2. Identify the analogues, the primary subject, the similarities, 
and the conclusory feature of analogical arguments.
3. Apply the true premises test to analogical arguments.
4. Apply the proper form test to analogical arguments.
5. Compose good analogical arguments.

Identifying Analogical Arguments  229
Remember from Chapter Two that inductive arguments come in at least 
three kinds: analogical, statistical, and causal. This chapter discusses 
analogical arguments. Analogical arguments are based on comparisons. 
Hume’s argument on the previous page is an analogical argument for the 
view that God exists. It compares the natural objects found in the world 
(eyes, legs, and the fi ngers on our hands) to the machines made by humans 
(cars, computers, and televisions). It argues that both natural objects and 
machines made by humans show the marks of design, the “fi tting of means 
to ends.” Because the machines made by humans have a designer, Hume 
suggests that natural objects also have a designer, God. 
Analogical arguments are the basis of much of the reasoning in the law. 
They’re also used whenever someone classifi es something. Examples of this 
use of analogical arguments include chemistry’s periodic table of elements 
and the classifi cation of living things into species. Analogies are also funda-
mental to the proper form test.
Identifying Analogical Arguments
Analogical arguments are arguments based on comparison. Suppose that 
you’re enrolled in Linguistics 101 and that you’ve never had a linguistics 
course before. The time for your fi rst paper rolls around and you’re not sure 
how to write it. What makes a good linguistics paper? Ideally, your linguistics 
professor would have given you lots of information, but let’s suppose that 
your professor wasn’t that organized. 
You happen to have kept three handouts from three previous classes 
about how to write papers. One’s from an English class, another is from 
a geology class, and the third is from an accounting class. The titles of 
these three handouts are: “How to Write a Good English Paper,” “How to 
Write a Good Geology Paper,” and “How to Write a Good Accounting Pa-
per.” Which of these three would be the most useful as a guide for writing 
your linguistics paper? As you think about this question, you’re consider-
ing three different analogical arguments: one for the view that the English 
handout is the best guide, another for the view that the geology handout 
is the best guide, and another for the view that the accounting handout is 
the best guide. You’re comparing linguistics to English, geology, and ac-
counting and trying to decide which of these three subjects is most like 
linguistics. 
It seems that the English guide would be the best one to use. Linguis-
tics is more similar to English than it is to geology or accounting. English 
and linguistics are both the study of language, but geology and accounting 
aren’t.
Key Concept
Analogical arguments 
are arguments based on 
comparison.

230  Chapter 7 Analogical Arguments 
The Form of Analogies
Here’s the standard form of analogical arguments:
(1) X1s have features F1, F2, F3, . . . , and
 
feature Fn.
(2) X2s also have features F1, F2, F3, . . . .
Therefore,
(3) X2s probably have Fn.
“X”s are variables that refer to entities, and “F”s are variables that refer to 
features. 
Connections
The use of variables is discussed in Chapter Two.
Analogical arguments aren’t usually found in this form. The order of the 
premises is often different. People often leave premises unstated.
Here’s Hume’s argument about God in standard form:
(1)  The objects made by humans have the fi tting of means to ends and 
they have a designer.
(2) Natural objects have the fi ttings of means to ends.
Therefore,
(3) Natural objects have a designer, God.
X1 is the objects made by humans, X2 is natural objects, F1 is having the fi t-
ting of means to ends, and Fn is having a designer.
Analogical arguments have four parts. The analogues, X1s, are the things 
to which the entities in the conclusion are being compared. The primary 
subjects, X2s, are the things about which a conclusion is being drawn. The 
similarities (F1, F2, F3, . . .) are the features that the premises claim are shared 
by the analogue and the primary subject. The conclusory feature, Fn, is 
the feature in the argument’s conclusion that’s claimed to be a feature of the 
primary subject. The conclusory feature appears in a premise and then again 
in the conclusion. In standard form, the conclusory feature is on its own line 
in the fi rst premise.
Giorgio Carnevale and Theodore Pietsch (2006) recently examined an 
unusual fossil that was found in Algeria (see Figure 1 below). It was the 
fossil of a fi sh. They wondered what kind of fi sh it was. On the basis of an 
analogical argument, they concluded that it was an extinct species of frog-
fi sh. Frogfi sh are small fi sh that live in shallow sea waters and spend most 
of their lives sitting immobile near the sea fl oor. They look like a rock or 
a piece of coral. They wiggle a fi n that looks like a worm as a lure to draw 
other fi sh close. When another fi sh approaches to investigate the wiggling 
lure, the frogfi sh snaps it up. Some scientists believe that the snap of a frog-
fi sh is the fastest known movement in the animal kingdom. Scientists use 
the Latin name Antennarius to refer to frogfi sh. The fossil in Figure 1 is 
unusual because it shows one fi sh inside another. Figure 2 is a picture of a 
living frogfi sh.
Key Concept
The standard form of 
analogical arguments.
Key Concept
The four parts of an 
analogical argument.

Identifying Analogical Arguments  231
 
Figure 1 Fossilized frogfi sh.
© 2006 The Zoological Society of London. Reprinted by permission of Blackwell Publishing.
 
Figure 2 Living frogfi sh.
Piero Malaer/iStockphoto

232  Chapter 7 Analogical Arguments 
Carnevale and Pietsch used an analogical argument to reach the conclu-
sion that the fossil fi sh was a frogfi sh.
The classifi cation of the specimen within the genus Antennarius is based 
on the occurrence of a combination of several diagnostic features shared 
by the living species of this genus, such as skin covered with close-set 
bifurcate dermal spinules, caudal fi n rays bifurcate, epural present and 
meristic values. (2006, 452, material omitted)
 In this argument, the similarities are
 • having skin covered with close-set bifurcate dermal spinules
 • having caudal fi n rays bifurcate, and
 • having epural present and meristic values
If you were evaluating Carnevale and Pietsch’s analogy, you’d need to know a 
lot about these three features. But at this point it’s enough to see that you can 
put their argument into the standard form of an analogy.
(1)  Some existing fi sh have skin covered with close-set bifurcate dermal 
spinules, caudal fi n rays bifurcate, and epural present and meristic 
values and 
 
 they’re frogfi sh.
(2)  The fossilized fi sh has skin covered with close-set bifurcate dermal spi-
nules, caudal fi n rays bifurcate, and epural present and meristic values.
Therefore,
(3) The fossil fi sh is probably a frogfi sh.
In this case, the analogue, X1, is existing fi sh that have the three similarities. 
The primary subject, X2, is the fossilized fi sh. The conclusory feature, Fn, is 
the feature of being a frogfi sh. 
Technical Term: Analogy
In this book, “analogy” refers to an entire argument. But sometimes “analogy” is 
used to refer to the similarities. Carnevale and Pietsch might have written: “There 
are three analogies between the specimen and existing frogfi sh: skin covered with 
close-set bifurcate dermal spinules, caudal fi n rays bifurcate, and epural present 
and meristic values.” When you see the word “analogy” you need to read care-
fully to determine whether the word refers to the entire argument or only to the 
features common to the analogue and the primary subject.
The key to identifying an analogical argument is to look for an argument that 
relies on comparison. If you suspect that a passage contains an analogical 
argument, try to fi nd the analogue, the primary subject, the similarities, and 
the conclusory feature. If one of these parts is missing, there probably isn’t 
an analogical argument. (Don’t forget that premises and conclusions can be 
unstated.) Sometimes you’ll fi nd an analogue, a primary subject, and some 
similarities but no conclusory feature. When that happens, you’re probably 
looking at an illustrative analogy.

Identifying Analogical Arguments  233
Illustrative Analogies
Illustrative analogies are used to help people understand something instead 
of being used to make an argument. Here’s an illustrative analogy from 
Hume, the philosopher who wrote the argumentative analogy at the begin-
ning of this chapter. In 1740, he published A Treatise of Human Nature. 
This long book contains many complex arguments about difficult issues. It’s 
divided into three parts. At the end of the fi rst part Hume offers an illustra-
tive analogy.
Before I go into the immense depths of philosophy that lie before me, I 
want to stop here for a moment and think about the voyage I have made 
so far. It has undoubtedly required a great deal of skill and hard work. I 
am like a man who has grounded his ship on many sandbars and nearly 
wrecked it while passing a small island but who still has the nerve to put 
out to sea again in the same leaky weather-beaten boat and even hopes 
to go around the world in it. (Hume 1985, 311, material omitted and 
simplifi ed)
Hume is drawing an analogy between working through the arguments in his 
book and traveling over the ocean in a ship. In the 1700s traveling on the 
ocean was dangerous. Many ocean voyages failed as ships got lost, sank in 
storms, or were overrun by diseases. Many long books fail because they don’t 
establish their conclusions. Hume isn’t attempting to make an argument. 
He’s only attempting to illustrate the difficulties of evaluating arguments by 
comparing evaluating arguments to traveling on the ocean.
Metaphors are a kind of illustrative analogy. They’re common in poetry. 
One reason people read poetry is to better understand themselves and the 
world. Poets often use analogies to point out overlooked or underappreciated 
features of things. Here’s the poem “Marks” by Linda Pastan (1978):*
Critical Thinkers
Giorgio Carnevale
Giorgio Carnevale (1975–still fi nding fossils) is an Assistant Professor of Paleontology in 
the Department of Earth Sciences at the University of Perugia, Italy. Professor Carnevale’s 
excellent use of analogical arguments has led to more than 50 articles that focus primarily 
on fossil fi sh.
Courtesy of Giorgio Carnevale
Text not available due to copyright restrictions

234  Chapter 7 Analogical Arguments 
Pastan draws an analogy between the grades given to students by their teach-
ers and the way that her family evaluates her. Pastan isn’t making an argu-
ment. She’s attempting to express the way that people can feel as if they’re 
being graded. Illustrative analogies aren’t argumentative analogies. They’re a 
different and perfectly appropriate way to use analogies.
Connections
Chapter Four discusses metaphors.
EXERCISE 7.1
A. Which, if any, of the following are analogies?
 1. A rose is a rose is a rose.
 2. A rose by any other name would smell as sweet.
 3. Life is like a bowl of cherries.
 *4. More primates live in North and South America compared to any other continent.
 5. Fewer primates live in North America compared to any other continent.
 6. Arguments are by nature divisive.
 7. I like Atlanta, but my friend likes Boston.
 *8. Why are astronomers like boxers? They both see stars.
 9. Researchers at Very Cool University (VCU) have been studying the nervous system. 
They have focused on the nervous systems of crayfi sh and have learned how to cure 
disorders of the nervous system in crayfi sh. In both humans and crayfi sh, calcium plays 
a crucial role in the operation of nerves. Their discoveries about the role of calcium in 
nerve cells of crayfi sh may lead to important advances in treating such diseases as mus-
cular dystrophy and Alzheimer’s disease.
 10. The Earth and the other planets such as Venus, Mars, Saturn, Jupiter, etc. have several 
things in common. They are approximately spherical, they revolve around the Sun and 
rotate around their own axis, they follow elliptical orbits, they are large, they have an 
irregular surface, and they have an atmosphere. The Earth contains several forms of life. 
It’s probable that other planets contain several forms of life.
Text not available due to copyright restrictions

Identifying Analogical Arguments  235
B. Which of the following passages contains analogies?  If the passage contains an analogy, is 
it illustrative or argumentative?
 1. The weather in Atlanta is hotter than the weather in Boston. I like the weather in At-
lanta. My best friend likes the weather in Boston.
 2. Monkeys and humans are medium-sized mammals and they live in groups. When mon-
keys are given substance X, they show reaction R. Consequently, if administered sub-
stance X, humans will show reaction R.
 3. In a New Yorker cartoon, two cats are chatting in front of a badly scratched lounge 
chair. One says to the other: “I have a couple of other projects I am excited about.” (te-
Neues 2010)
 *4. “[One way] of acquiring the notion of a being who directs the universe is by considering 
the end to which each thing appears to be directed.  [W]hen I see a watch with a hand 
marking the hours, I conclude that an intelligent being has designed the springs of this 
mechanism, so that the hand would mark the hours. So, when I see the springs of the hu-
man body, I conclude that an intelligent being has designed these organs to be received 
and nourished within the womb for nine months; for eyes to be given for seeing; hands 
for grasping, and so on. (Voltaire 1989, 69, material omitted)
 5. “A centipede was happy quite,
  Until a frog in fun
  Said, ‘Pray, which leg comes after which?’
  This raised her mind to such a pitch,
  She lay distracted in the ditch
  Considering how to run.” 
  (Kronenberger 1935, 161)*
 6. Richard Feynman, winner of the 1965 Nobel Prize in Physics, wrote as follows: “Nature 
uses only the longest threads to weave her patterns, so each small piece of her fabric 
reveals the organization of the entire tapestry.” (Feynman 2006, 9A) 
 7. The planets are attracted to the sun in inverse proportion to the square of their distance 
from the sun, and they revolve around the sun in orbits, and electrons are attracted to 
the nucleus of an atom in inverse proportion to the square of their distance from the 
nucleus, so it seems likely that electrons revolve around the nucleus in orbits.
 *8. “There is extensive evidence that permitting people to obtain clean needles will reduce the 
spread of HIV. An article in the Journal of the American Medical Association stated that 
needle exchange programs around the world, including Amsterdam, Sweden, Australia, 
Britain, and several cities in the United States, have led to reduced needle sharing among 
IDUs, as an increasing percentage of this population obtains clean needles from the pro-
gram. That this should lead to a reduction in HIV infection is to be expected, and there is 
evidence pointing to that outcome.” (Stoll 1998) 
 9. “Volcanic rocks dominate the surface of Mars. In the cold, dry conditions that prevail 
there today, these rocks can persist with little chemical alteration. But the recent 
discovery by Mars orbiters and landers of sulphate and clay deposits on the planet 
*“A centipede was happy quite” An Anthrology of Light Verse, Louis Kronenberger, ed. 
(New York: Random House, 1935).

236  Chapter 7 Analogical Arguments 
indicates that Mars’ ancient environment was different, and involved liquid water. 
Evidence that Mars was wetter before about 3.7 billion years ago comes from various 
geomorphic features. In particular, valleys with characteristic branching forms seem 
to have been eroded by water. The heavily degraded rims of ancient craters and crater 
infi lling are similarly interpreted as fl uvial features in some models.” (Catling 2007, 
31-32, material omitted)
 10. “Capacity for the nobler feelings is in most natures a very tender plant, easily killed; 
not only by hostile infl uences, but by mere want of sustenance; and in the majority of 
young persons it speedily dies away if the occupations to which their position in life 
has devoted them, and the society into which it has thrown them, are not favorable to 
keeping that higher capacity in exercise.” (Mill 1979, 10)
C. Put all of the argumentative analogies identifi ed in sections A and B above into standard 
form. Identify the primary subject, analogue, the similarities, and conclusory feature.
D. Background information: In 1976, Congress considered a Full Employment and Bal-
anced Growth Act for establishing a national policy and procedure that would guaran-
tee to all able adult Americans the availability of useful and rewarding employment. 
Many people testifi ed before the committee when it met on May 14, 17, 18, and 19, 
1976. One of those who testifi ed was founder and co-chair of the Full Employment Ac-
tion Council, Coretta Scott King, widow of Martin Luther King, Jr. Mrs. King’s testi-
mony offers many arguments in favor of full employment, including several analogies 
(as well as statistical and moral arguments). See how many analogies you can fi nd in 
the following excerpt. Which are illustrative and which are argumentative? Put all of 
her argumentative analogies into standard form. Identify the primary subject, analogue, 
and conclusory feature.
It probably requires someone who is black to fully comprehend the helplessness, lone-
liness, and anxieties of the unemployed. It requires a black, because blacks are more than 
merely deprived. They are consciously and deliberately ignored as much as possible by the 
larger society.
“For so long, being black was to be invisible.
“With the same design great effort is made to hide the unemployed; to erase them from 
visibility and to blank out the constricted lives they live. The chilling resemblance of the 
dimly seen unemployed to the leper colonies of the Dark Ages is not too extreme an analogy.
“A very intense campaign has been under way to establish that no one really cares about 
unemployment. It is contended that only infl ation engenders concern and fear. After all, it is 
said, 92.5 percent are employed and only 7.5 percent are unemployed.
“It does sound small when put in these bland, cold terms, and there are no cries of anguish 
to disturb the sleep of the vast majority. But now put it another way: 7,003,000 people—
mostly adults—are without jobs. True, they eat—but not too much; they have some sort of 
shelter; some even have health care. But many, including children, are in chronic ill health, 
or are ill nourished, and living a life of punishment and systematic abuse as if they had done 
some evil to this Nation.
“Psychologically, they are mauled even more terribly. Because they are what the English 
call “redundant,” they are struck with the sledgehammer of inferiority. To be deprived is bad, 
but to be deprived among the secure and privileged is far worse. At least 20 million Americans 
are afflicted with this tragic, crippling disease for which they bear no guilt and possess no 

Identifying Analogical Arguments  237
means of cure. It is probably much more than 20 million counting family members and the 
huge uncounted numbers who have given up looking for employment because the scarring of 
constant rejection was too unbearable. Why are the unemployed hidden and their suffering 
silenced? For the same reason, the same slickly polished device was used for blacks. If they 
were unseen, if their hurts were unheard, people could be made to believe they were contented. 
Thus, people may not be made to act about the matter of correcting a crying injustice.
“The truth is millions of jobless living among us have lives of misery, and we have the 
ability to change it. The truth is, we should change the condition out of our moral concern. 
But if that be too feeble, there is another reason. The sordid existence they endure today may 
be ours tomorrow.
“We are then told we cannot change conditions—change must trickle down slowly as a 
benevolent monarch drops coppers into the uplifted palms of a beggar. This nauseating image 
of charity from the Middle Ages is still with us, institutionalized by the Ford administration’s 
trickle-down theory. [Gerald Ford was president of the United States at the time of King’s 
testimony.]
“We should believe them no more than we should have believed them 40 years ago in 1935 
when they wailed that unemployment insurance and social security would bring an end to free 
enterprise and democracy.
“Let us put the issue sharply: We say the unemployed can be provided jobs at productive 
labor with decent wages. It has been done in other developed countries without curbing profi ts 
or liberties. Indeed, where some of the nations have encountered small increments of unem-
ployment lately, it is due to the slowdown of our economy impinging on theirs.
“Let us keep squarely in mind that youth unemployment in the ghetto has reached some 
40 percent—a horrifying fi gure. If we are to eradicate poverty, drug addiction, and crime, we 
have to offer work.
“A young person in the ghetto cannot fi nd a job for $30 a day, but they can readily fi nd 
criminal work for $100 a day and need no education nor skill. It is amazing the degree to which 
ethical barriers have held.
“Everyone today has a sense that the seams of society are under intense strain. In this cir-
cumstance, the powers that be are engaged in a substantial social gamble.
“Just as the stubborn and immoral pursuit of the Vietnam war nurtured and intensifi ed 
the disaffection of tens of millions of Americans, and fi nally made Washington an oath rather 
than a seat of government, so will mulish adherence to retaining an army of unemployed lead 
to the growing contempt of Americans in their own Government.
“Have the powers that be learned nothing from trying to keep blacks in segregation and 
inferiority? Have they learned nothing from trying to stop trade union organizing in the 1930s? 
Have they learned nothing from trying to hide crimes of high government officials and agencies?
“They are all fi nally dealt with, and the more intense the effort to repress, the more turbu-
lent the process of inevitable change. For black Americans in particular, the economic policies 
and actions of the past few years have been nothing less than a frontal assault on all the gains 
and victories of the 1960s. The legislation we black Americans struggled for, and at times died 
for, is now being literally undermined. To my mind current policies amount to nothing less 
than the repeal of the Civil Rights Acts of the 1960s, and the gutting of the promise of justice.
“What good is the legal right to sit in a restaurant if one cannot afford the price of the food? And 
what good is the promise of fair employment when there is no employment for black Americans?
“The deliberate creation of high unemployment has meant nothing less than the denial 
of the basic human right to live as full-fl edged members of the American system.” (King 1976, 
636-638, material omitted) 

238  Chapter 7 Analogical Arguments 
Uses of Analogies
The rest of this chapter looks only at argumentative analogies and uses “anal-
ogy” to refer to argumentative analogies. Argumentative analogies are used in 
an amazing variety of ways. Let’s look at some examples.
Sometimes analogies are used because people can’t or shouldn’t observe 
something. Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA) is a birth defect that affects 
both humans and purebred Briard dogs. Children or puppies with this dis-
ease either have no sight at birth or lose it within months. Guylene Le 
Meur and a group of researchers in Nantes, France, developed a treatment 
for this disease. The treatment involved injecting a genetically altered virus 
into LCA-affected eyes. Le Meur and her team hoped that the genetically 
altered virus would act to correct the birth defect. To test this treatment, 
they injected the genetically altered virus into the eyes of eight Briard dogs 
with LCA, seven puppies and one adult dog. The sight of the seven puppies 
was restored. The adult dog was unaffected. The Nantes scientists then con-
cluded that: 
[A]nalysis of our results in dogs suggests that for successful gene therapy 
to occur in humans, patients should be treated at a relatively young age. 
(Le Meur 2007, 300)
In other words, they concluded this gene therapy might work on human in-
fants. Here’s their argument in standard form:
(1)  Briard puppies with LCA have eight mutated genes that affect vision 
and 
 
they were cured of their blindness by the genetically altered virus.
(2)  Human infants with LCA also have eight mutated genes that affect 
vision.
Therefore,
(3)  Human infants with LCA will probably be cured of their blindness by 
the genetically altered virus.
We’ve simplifi ed this case by referring to only one of the many similarities 
noted by Le Meur and her team. Besides the eight mutated genes that af-
fect vision, the other similarities noted were many complex properties of the 
eyes, genes, and nervous system that are common to both dogs with LCA 
and humans with LCA. In this case the scientists observed the effect of the 
genetically altered virus on the puppies because they know that it would be 
wrong to perform this experiment on human infants.
Sometimes the reason people can’t observe something is that it’s in the 
past or the future. Take a look at another analogy from the article about frog-
fi sh. Carnevale and Pietsch named their new species Antennarius monodi.
The feeding behavior of Antennarius monodi seems to be consistent with 
that of [existing Antennarius]. A nearly complete [fi sh] can be easily ob-
served in the abdominal region of the specimen. This fi sh evidently rep-
resents the last meal of [this] Antennarius. (Carnevale 2006, 453, material 
omitted. The abbreviation “A.” that stands for Antennarius is replaced 
with the full word.)
Carnevale and Pietsch conclude that the fi sh that became a fossil had eaten 
another fi sh right before it died. They’re relying on an analogy between what 

Identifying Analogical Arguments  239
people have observed happening when living frogfi sh eat other fi sh (that they 
go into the frogfi sh’s abdominal region) and what would have happened in the 
past if the fossilized frogfi sh had eaten another fi sh.
Sometimes people draw analogies about one place from information 
about another place. Aletha Huston and a team of psychologists based at the 
University of Texas at Austin studied the effects of the New Hope Project. 
This project was conducted in Milwaukee. Working parents were given three 
benefi ts: an income supplement, assistance with childcare, and healthcare 
subsidies. The parents had to remain employed to keep these benefi ts. The 
study compared children in these families to another group of children in 
families whose parents didn’t receive the three benefi ts. The group of families 
who didn’t receive the benefi ts is the control families. Huston found that
Children in New Hope families performed better than those in control 
families on academic achievement—particularly reading—as measured 
by three independent sources: standardized test scores, parent reports, 
and teacher reports. (Huston 2005, 915)
She concluded that
The results of this evaluation suggest that the policies tested in New 
Hope may be benefi cial to large parts of the population who have low 
incomes but are able to work. (Huston 2005, 916)
Huston is using an analogy between a project done in one place (Milwaukee) 
and projects that might be done in other places (other cities).
Sometimes people use analogies to argue that things should be treated 
in the same way. Analogies are central to the debate over abortion. Some 
people use analogies to argue that human fetuses should be treated more like 
adult humans and other people use analogies to argue that there is no moral 
requirement that human fetuses be treated like adult humans. The civil 
rights movement in the United States used many analogical arguments to 
defend the view that the law should treat blacks and whites in the same way. 
Sometimes people use analogies to classify things. The Carnevale and 
Pietsch analogy about frogfi sh is an example. The periodic table of elements 
that you’ve seen in your chemistry classes is based on a large series of anal-
ogies. The classifi cation of people into races, sexes, ethnic groups, income 
groups, age groups, and many other groups is based on analogies.
Technical Terms: Temporal Analogies, Spatial Analogies, Equal 
Treatment Analogies, Classifi cation Analogies
Scholars group analogies according to their usage. A temporal analogy is an 
analogy in which the conclusion is about an unobserved event in the past or the 
future. If the conclusion of a temporal analogy is about the future, the analogy is a 
forward-looking temporal analogy. If the conclusion of a temporal analogy is about 
the past, the analogy is a backward-looking temporal analogy. A spatial analogy is 
an analogy in which someone reasons from the claim that something happens in 
one place to the claim that the same thing will happen in another place. An equal 
treatment analogy is an analogy whose conclusion is that two things should be 
treated in the same way. A classifi cation analogy is an analogy whose conclusion is 
that something should be classifi ed in a particular way.
Key Concept
Analogies are used in 
many different ways.

240  Chapter 7 Analogical Arguments 
Logical Analogies
A logical analogy is an analogical argument that compares arguments. In this 
book, you’ve seen many logical analogies. The proper form test relies on logi-
cal analogies. In Chapter Two you saw that this argument:
(1) All roses are plants.
(2) All roses have thorns.
Therefore,
(3) All plants have thorns.
has the same logical form as this argument:
(1) All Germans are Americans.
(2) All Germans are people with large feet.
Therefore,
(3) All Americans are people with large feet.
When we (the authors of this book) compared these two arguments, we were draw-
ing a logical analogy. We were pointing to a similarity between these two argu-
ments. The similarity we were pointing to was that both arguments have this form:
(1) All G1 are G2.
(2) All G1 are G3.
Therefore,
(3) All G2 are G3.
(Remember that G1, G2, and G3 are variables that stand for groups.) Let’s call 
the two arguments above the “roses argument” and the “Germans argument.” 
Let’s call the logical form above “Form M.” We argued that the Germans argu-
ment failed the proper form test. We were making this argument:
(1) The roses argument has Form M and 
 
fails the proper form test.
(2) The Germans argument has Form M.
Therefore,
(3) The Germans argument fails the proper form test.
We also argued that any argument with Form M fails the proper form test. 
We were implicitly making a long series of analogical arguments that com-
pared all arguments that have Form M. As you look at an argument to see 
whether it passes the proper form test, you’re using logical analogies to deter-
mine whether the logical form of the argument in question has a proper form. 
You’re implicitly making an argument like this:
(1) Argument X1 has Form F1 and
 
it passes/fails the proper form test.
(2) Argument X2 also has Form F1.
Therefore,
(3) Argument X2 passes/fails the proper form test.
Refutation by Logical Analogy
Logical analogies can also be used to show that an argument has a fl aw. Look 
at this argument:
It is not normal to be attracted to a member of the same sex. It violates 
the basic sexual structure which God created. It is a perversion. It is 
against nature. (Martin 1993)
Key Concept
A logical analogy is 
an analogical argument 
that compares 
arguments. 

Identifying Analogical Arguments  241
Martin’s unstated conclusion is that homosexuality is wrong. Suppose that Jay 
wanted to show that Martin’s argument was a bad argument. He might attempt 
to draw a logical analogy between Martin’s argument and this argument.
It is not normal for humans to fl y high in the sky. It violates the basic phys-
ical structure which God created. It is a perversion. It is against nature.
Jay is drawing an analogy between this argument:
(1) It is not natural to be attracted to a member of the same sex.
Therefore,
(2) It is wrong to be attracted to a member of the same sex.
and this argument:
(1) It is not natural to fl y in an airplane.
Therefore,
(2) It is wrong to fl y in an airplane.
He is making the following logical analogy:
(1)  The airplane argument has similarities, F1, F2, F3, . . . , and
 
 is a bad argument.
(2) The homosexuality argument also has similarities, F1, F2, F3, . . . .
Therefore,
(3) The homosexuality argument is a bad argument.
Let’s look at another example. Suppose that Luke offers the following argument:
(1) If someone is President, then he or she lives in the White House.
(2) Barack Obama lives in the White House.
Therefore,
(3) Barack Obama is President.
Danielle thinks that this argument isn’t a good argument. She might attempt 
to show that it isn’t a good argument by using a logical analogy. She might 
argue that Luke’s argument is analogous to this one:
(1) If someone is President, then he or she lives in the White House.
(2) Michelle Obama lives in the White House.
Therefore,
(3) Michelle Obama is President.
Danielle is offering a refutation by logical analogy.
Connections
Danielle is correct. Luke’s argument isn’t good. It commits the fallacy of Affi rming 
the Consequent. See Chapter Five.
Refutations by logical analogy are often persuasive. But they have a problem. 
Because people often use a refutation by logical analogy without explicitly 
noting the similarities they have in mind, refutations by logical analogy of-
ten don’t tell you the exact problem with an argument. If someone doesn’t 
point out the similarities between the two arguments they’re discussing, the 
refutation doesn’t tell you whether the argument fails the proper form test or 
the true premises test. It only tells you that there’s a problem somewhere in 
the argument.

242  Chapter 7 Analogical Arguments 
Habits of a Critical Thinker
Thinking Boldly
New ideas can make people uncomfortable. It 
may be that the discussions of God, abortion, and 
homosexuality in this chapter make you feel uncom-
fortable. They may raise issues and doubts. A good 
critical thinker is a bold thinker, one who isn’t afraid 
to examine new ideas and question things that most 
people assume. David Hume, who wrote the quote at 
the beginning of this chapter, considered arguments 
for and against the existence of God. When Hume 
wrote (in the 1700s) it was bold to consider this 
issue. Hume was denied teaching positions because 
he was willing to consider the idea that God didn’t 
exist. It’s partly because of his bold mind that he’s 
recognized as a great philosopher. Being bold enough 
to let your mind go where good arguments take you, 
even if it’s to places that make you feel uncomfort-
able, may lead you to discoveries about the world 
and yourself.
EXERCISE 7.2
A. Constructing analogies.
 1. Construct an analogy in favor of or against polygamy.
 2. Construct an analogy in favor of or against capital punishment.
 3. Construct a logical analogy between arguments A and B which concludes that argu-
ment B passes the proper form test.
Argument A 
Argument B
(1) If he’s a senator, he’s at least thirty. 
(1) If he lives in New York, he lives in the 
(2) He isn’t thirty. 
 
United States.
 
Therefore, 
(2) He doesn’t live in the United States.
(3) He isn’t a senator. 
 
Therefore,
 
 
(3) He doesn’t live in New York.
 *4. Use a logical analogy to refute the following argument.
 
(1)  If someone is French, she’s European.
 
(2)  George Bush isn’t French.
Therefore,
 
(3)  George Bush isn’t European.
 5. Suppose a doctor argued that cloning is to be rejected because it would be equivalent to 
“playing God.” Construct an analogy which shows that believing doctors shouldn’t be 
playing God is inconsistent with other things most doctors believe.
 6. Find a similarity (F1) and conclusory feature (Fn) that would make an analogy with 
“houses built in New Orleans” as the primary subject and “houses built on the Florida 
coast” as the analogue.
 7. Construct an analogy given the following information: Stanley and Roger are both members 
of the family owning Hilton Hotels. You are told that Stanley is wealthy and unreliable.
 *8. Using either “should be illegal” or “shouldn’t be illegal” as the conclusory feature, con-
struct an analogical argument for or against a woman’s right to have an abortion.
 9. Put the following analogy into standard form, from the child’s point of view. When 
a child learns how to speak, she’ll tend to apply the standard rules of verb formation 

Identifying Analogical Arguments  243
to irregular verbs as well. For example, the child will say “comed” rather than 
“came,” “dived” rather than “dove,” “ringed” rather than “rung,” “runned” rather 
than “run,” and so on, just as she’ll say “loved,” “helped,” “cooked,” “appeared,” 
and so forth.
 10. Construct an analogy that concludes that dinosaurs were probably killed by a giant 
meteorite. (You may need to do some research to do this exercise.)
 
For the next two exercises, consider the following background information: In the 1700s 
and 1800s, whale fi shing, or whaling, was a major industry. Whales have huge amounts 
of fat called blubber. When heated, this blubber produces whale oil, and in the 1700s and 
1800s whale oil lamps were a primary means of lighting homes. Before the invention of 
modern ships, whaling was very dangerous. Many men died hunting whales. Because of its 
economic importance and danger, whaling produced many folk songs. Here are the lyrics to 
part of one of them. It is called “The Greenland Whale Fishery”:
Oh, Greenland is a dreadful place,
A land that’s never green;
Where there’s ice and snow, and the whale fi shes blow
And the daylight’s seldom ever seen, brave boys,
And the daylight’s seldom ever seen. 
(This song has been recorded many times. One accessible recording can be found on Almanac 
Singers 1996).
In the third line, the song refers to “whale fi shes.” In the 1800s whales were classifi ed as a type 
of fi sh.
 11. Construct an analogy for the view that whales should be classifi ed as fi sh. Put your 
analogy into standard form.
 12. Construct an analogy for the view that whales should be classifi ed as mammals. Put 
your analogy into standard form.
*13.  Put the argument in this passage into the standard form of an analogy. Fossils of an am-
phibian that lived more than 245 million years ago have been found in Antarctica, sug-
gesting that the climate in Antarctica at that time was much warmer than it is today. 
The 60-centimeter piece of skull was found on Fremouw Peak in the Transantarctic 
Mountains, just six degrees from of the South Pole. Palaeontologists have identifi ed it 
as a Parotosuchus, a two-meter-long salamander-like amphibian predator. The fossil 
shows that the weather in Antarctica in the late Early or Middle Triassic period was 
warm enough to let a cold-blooded creature live there. (Written by the authors of this 
book from information found in Sidor 2008) 
 14. Put the argument in this passage into the standard form of an analogy. “We come then 
to the question presented: Does segregation of children in public schools solely on the 
basis of race, even though the physical facilities and other ‘tangible’ factors may be 
equal, deprive the children of the minority group of equal educational opportunities? 
We believe that it does. We conclude that in the fi eld of public education the doctrine 
of ‘separate but equal’ has no place. Separate educational facilities are inherently un-
equal. Therefore, we hold that the plaintiffs and others similarly situated for whom the 
actions have been brought are, by reason of the segregation complained of, deprived of 
the equal protection of the laws guaranteed by the Fourteenth Amendment.” (Brown v. 
Board of Education 1954, 493, material omitted)

244  Chapter 7 Analogical Arguments 
Evaluating Analogical Arguments
You evaluate analogies the same way you evaluate all other arguments, using 
the true premises test and the proper form test. But you need to know some 
important details about applying these tests to analogies. 
The True Premises Test
When applying the true premises test to analogies, the most important detail 
is that analogies can use imaginary cases. Let’s look at an example. 
The philosopher Judith Jarvis Thomson has used an imaginary case in an 
analogical argument for the view that women are morally permitted to have 
an abortion. Many people think that a human fetus has a right to life. They 
also think that a woman has a right to choose what happens to her body, but 
they hold that, in the case of abortion, the fetus’ right to life confl icts with 
the woman’s right to choose what happens to her body. They think that, in 
that case, the fetus’ right to life is stronger, more important, than the wom-
an’s right to choose. If the fetus’ right to life confl icts with a woman’s right 
to choose, the fetus’ right ought to be respected and abortion is wrong. This 
argument can be standardized like this:
(A) (1) A human fetus has a right to life.
 
(2) A woman has a right to choose what happens to her body.
 
(3)  The fetus’ right to life is stronger than a woman’s right to choose 
what happens to her body.
 
(4)  In the case of abortion, a woman’s right to choose what happens 
to her body confl icts with the fetus’ right to life.
 
 Therefore,
 
(5)  In the case of abortion, a woman ought to respect the fetus’ right 
to life (and not have an abortion).
Thomson uses an analogy to argue that premise (3) is false.
[L]et me ask you to imagine this. You wake up in the morning and fi nd 
yourself back to back in bed with an unconscious violinist. A famous un-
conscious violinist. He has been found to have a fatal kidney ailment, 
and the Society of Music Lovers has canvassed all the available medical 
records and found that you alone have the right blood type to help. They 
have therefore kidnapped you, and last night the violinist’s circulatory 
system was plugged into yours, so that your kidneys can be used to extract 
poisons from his blood as well as your own. The director of the hospital 
now tells you, “Look, we’re sorry the Society of Music Lovers did this to 
you—we would never have permitted it if we had known. But still, they 
did it, and the violinist is now plugged into you. To unplug you would be 
to kill him. But never mind, it’s only for nine months. By then he will have 
recovered from his ailment, and can safely be unplugged from you.” Is it 
morally incumbent on you to accede to this situation? No doubt it would 
be very nice of you if you did, a great kindness. But do you have to accede 
to it? What if it were not nine months, but nine years? Or longer still? 
What if the director of the hospital says, “Tough luck, I agree, but you’ve 
now got to stay in bed, with the violinist plugged into you, for the rest 
of your life. Because remember this. All persons have a right to life, and 
violinists are persons. Granted you have a right to decide what happens in 

Evaluating Analogical Arguments  245
and to your body, but a person’s right to life outweighs your right to decide 
what happens in and to your body. So you cannot ever be unplugged from 
him.” I imagine you would regard this as outrageous, which suggests that 
something really is wrong with [argument (A)]. (Thomson 1971, 48-49)
Thomson is drawing an analogy between the case of a person hooked to a 
famous violinist and the case of a woman who’s pregnant. Let’s call the fa-
mous violinist “Victor.” Let’s call the person hooked to the famous violinist 
“Hadia.” Here’s a standardization of Thomson’s argument:
(B) (1)  In the case of the famous violinist, Hadia’s right to choose what 
happens to her body confl icts with Victor’s right to life and
 
  
 it would not be wrong for Hadia to cause Victor to die (by unplug-
ging herself).
 
(2)  In the case of abortion, a woman’s right to choose what happens 
to her body confl icts with the fetus’ right to life.
 
 Therefore,
 
(3)  It is not wrong for a woman to cause the fetus to die (by having an 
abortion).
 
 Therefore,
 
(4)  The fetus’ right to life is not stronger than a woman’s right to 
choose. (Premise (3) of argument (A) is false.)
Thomson’s analogy is one of the most famous philosophical arguments of 
the 20th century. But when it comes to the true premises test, the fi rst 
premise of Thomson’s argument is unusual. It’s about an imaginary case. 
There never has been a person attached to a famous violinist. It seems that 
premise (1) of argument (B) is false. But it doesn’t seem that the falsity of 
premise (1) is a problem with Thomson’s argument. What’s going on here? 
People sometimes overlook that they have a good bit of knowledge about 
imaginary situations. No one reading this book has ever seen it snow at the 
mouth of the Amazon. The mouth of the Amazon is close to the equator, 
and temperatures there never come close to freezing. But let’s imagine that it 
were to snow at the mouth of the Amazon. What color would this snow be? 
The answer is obvious. If it snowed at the mouth of the Amazon, the snow 
would be white. We all know that the snow would be white, even though 
none of us has ever seen it snow there.
Knowledge about imaginary cases isn’t some sort of lesser knowledge. 
Our knowledge about imaginary cases can be very solid. Compare our knowl-
edge about the color of snow falling at the mouth of the Amazon to our 
knowledge about the effects of cholesterol. (Cholesterol is a type of fat found 
throughout our bodies and particularly in our blood.) It turns out that cho-
lesterol is a complex substance. Different kinds of cholesterol do different 
things, and cholesterol does different things in different parts of the body. Our 
views about the effects of cholesterol have changed dramatically over the past 
twenty years. On the other hand, our knowledge about the color of snow at 
the mouth of the Amazon hasn’t changed at all over that time. (These facts 
about cholesterol are from Grundy 2002.)
Of course, some examples of knowledge about imaginary cases aren’t as 
obvious as the Amazon snow knowledge. How would you react if you discov-
ered that you had an identical twin? Imagine that you thought that you had 
no twin and then your twin walked up and said “Hi.” Most of us don’t have 
good knowledge about this imaginary case. We don’t know how we’d feel. In 

246  Chapter 7 Analogical Arguments 
some cases people have good knowledge about imaginary cases and in other 
cases they don’t.
Technical Term: Counter factual
Imaginary situations are sometimes called “counter factual situations” or “counter 
factuals.” When you imagine, you’re imagining something that is counter to the 
facts. In other words, you’re imagining a case that doesn’t actually exist.
How do you apply the true premises test to analogies in which one of the 
premises relies on knowledge about imaginary cases? The audience of the 
analogy becomes crucial. For these analogies to have force, the people read-
ing the analogy must have the same views about the imaginary case as 
the person making the analogy. Thomson’s analogy includes the phrase 
“I imagine you would regard this as outrageous.” Thomson is assuming 
that people who are reading about the imaginary case of the famous violin-
ist will think that Hadia may unplug herself from Victor. Let’s look more 
closely at premise (1) of Thomson’s argument. It has two parts. The fi rst 
part is
In the case of the famous violinist, Hadia’s right to choose what happens 
to her body confl icts with Victor’s right to life 
The second part is
and it would not be wrong for Hadia to unplug herself from Victor.
It seems clear that people have good knowledge about the fi rst part of Thom-
son’s fi rst premise. If Hadia existed and was plugged into Victor, her right 
to choose what happens to her body would confl ict with Victor’s right to 
life. The more controversial point is the second part of premise (1). Thomson 
claims that we all have this knowledge about this imaginary case. Someone 
who disagreed with Thomson’s claim that it would not be wrong for Hadia 
to unplug herself from Victor would reject her claim of knowledge about this 
imaginary case and assert that her fi rst premise doesn’t pass the true premises 
test. Premises about an imaginary case pass the true premises test when the 
author and the audience have the same views about the imaginary case. If 
they don’t, the premise fails the true premises test. 
Key Concept
Premises about an 
imaginary case pass 
the true premises test 
when both author and 
audience have the 
same views about the 
imaginary case. 
Critical Thinkers
Judith Jarvis Thomson
Judith Jarvis Thomson (1929–still thinking up thought experiments) is a Professor of 
Philosophy at Massachusetts Institute of Technology. She’s best known for her creative 
and incisive thought experiments, like the violinist case in this chapter. Professor Thomson 
has published widely in moral philosophy, philosophy of law, and metaphysics for more 
than 50 years. She was President of the American Philosophical Association in 
1992–1993.
Courtesy of Judith Jarvis Thomson

Evaluating Analogical Arguments  247
The Proper Form Test
Let’s apply the proper form test to analogies. Look at this argument:
(1)  Adult humans have the genetic code of the species Homo sapiens and 
a right to life.
(2) Human fetuses also have the genetic code of the species Homo sapiens.
Therefore,
(3) Human fetuses have a right to life.
Suppose that Dusty made this argument, and Erica believes that Dusty’s argu-
ment fails the proper form test. Erica can make two different kinds of points. 
First, she can argue that just because a thing has the genetic code of the 
species Homo sapiens, that doesn’t show that it has a right to life. Erica 
might point out that when Dusty cuts his fi ngernails he throws the part of 
his fi ngernails that he has removed into a trash can. But each of those cut-
tings from his fi ngernails has the genetic code of the species Homo sapiens. 
It seems that the cuttings from Dusty’s fi ngernails don’t have a right to life 
even though they all have the genetic code of the species homo sapiens. If 
she makes this type of argument, Erica is arguing that the similarity noted 
by Dusty isn’t relevant. In this case, one of the issues that divides Dusty and 
Erica is whether having the genetic code of the species Homo sapiens is a 
relevant similarity. 
Second, Erica might say that in the fi rst trimester fetuses don’t feel pain 
while adult humans do feel pain. Then she might argue that this is an im-
portant difference between human fetuses and adult humans. If she makes 
this type of argument, Erica is arguing that there’s a relevant dissimilarity 
between Dusty’s analogue and his primary subject.
The most important issue when it comes to determining whether an 
analogy passes or fails the proper form test is the relevance of similarities 
and dissimilarities. If someone can show either that the similarities cited in 
an analogy aren’t relevant or that there are relevant dissimilarities between 
the analogue and the primary subject, then the analogy doesn’t do well on the 
proper form test.
When it comes to relevance, you need to fi rst look at the argument’s con-
clusion. Think about two computers as they roll off the assembly line at a fac-
tory. You might be tempted to say that they’re identical. Suppose that they’re 
the same model, have the same amount of memory, have equally large hard 
drives, are the same color, etc. But even in such similar objects, there’ll be 
some differences. The silicon in the chips in the two computers is made from 
different grains of sand. There’ll be small differences in the electrical proper-
ties of the silicon in the two computers. No two silicon computer chips are 
exactly alike. Each is a tiny bit faster or slower than another. 
But are any of these differences relevant? It depends. Suppose that you’re 
trying to draw a conclusion about which of the two computers to buy. It 
may be that, from your perspective, there are no relevant differences bet-
ween the two examples of the same model of computer. It may be that 
you look and look and can’t fi nd a reason to prefer one computer over the 
other. Both will do everything you want a computer to do (word processing, 
playing games, instant messaging, etc.) equally well. As you look at the two 
units of the same model of computer sitting next to each other in their iden-
tical boxes at the store, you’d probably be happy to choose between them by 
fl ipping a coin.

248  Chapter 7 Analogical Arguments 
On the other hand, suppose that you were a professor of engineering 
who studied the manufacturing techniques used in factories. You were 
seeking to draw a conclusion about the manufacturing processes in the fac-
tory where the computers were built. In that case, you might see relevant 
differences where a buyer would see none. Suppose that one computer took 
5 fewer minutes to make than the other. A person buying a computer would 
probably see this as an irrelevant difference between the two computers. But 
the engineering professor would probably see this as a relevant difference. If 
the factory produces thousands of computers per year, producing each com-
puter 5 minutes faster might substantially lower the costs of producing the 
computers. This case shows that when it comes to relevance, you should 
think about the argument’s conclusion. If you were making an argument 
intended to convince someone to buy a particular model of computer, the 
differences between the individual computers of that model are probably 
irrelevant. If you were making an argument intended to show someone that 
one manufacturing process was superior to another, differences between 
individual computers of the same model may well be relevant.
When thinking about relevance you also need to consider background 
knowledge. Remember the frogfi sh analogy. Carnevale and Pietsch are pre-
supposing that things such as “skin covered with close-set bifurcate dermal 
spinules, caudal fi n rays bifurcate, [and] epural present and meristic values” 
are relevant features when it comes to the classifi cation of a fi sh as a frogfi sh. 
They’re also presupposing that having a backbone isn’t relevant to the classifi -
cation of a fi sh as a frogfi sh. They’re presupposing that all their readers know 
that having a backbone can’t be used to classify a fi sh as a frogfi sh because this 
feature is shared by many different kinds of fi sh and many things that aren’t 
 
Figure 3 Modern silicon computer chips, quite small in size, hold about 2 billion 
tiny transistors.
Jim Sugar/CORBIS

Evaluating Analogical Arguments  249
fi sh. Part of their readers’ background knowledge about animals is that many 
of them (dogs, elephants, sharks, frogfi sh, etc.) have backbones. Having a back-
bone isn’t a relevant feature when it comes to determining the species of a 
fossilized fi sh. They’re also presupposing that their audience has background 
knowledge that all frogfi sh have “skin covered with close-set bifurcate dermal 
spinules, caudal fi n rays bifurcate, [and] epural present and meristic values.”
Chapter Two noted that the premises of an argument are relevant to the 
conclusion if the truth of the premises provides some evidence for the truth 
of the conclusion. This allows us to see the bottom line when it comes to the 
relevance of the features in an analogy. A feature is a relevant similarity when 
the fact that the analogue and the primary subject share that feature provides 
some evidence that the primary subject has the conclusory feature. A feature 
is a relevant dissimilarity when the fact that the analogue and the primary 
subject don’t share that feature provides some evidence that the primary sub-
ject doesn’t have the conclusory feature.
Chapter Two also noted that relevance is a matter of degree. The more 
evidence a relevant similarity provides, the stronger the analogy. The less evi-
dence the similarity provides, the weaker the analogy. Relevant dissimilari-
ties have the opposite effect on the strength of an analogy. The more evidence 
a relevant dissimilarity provides, the weaker the analogy. Avoid falling into 
the trap of attempting to classify all analogies as either good or bad. Analogies, 
like all inductive arguments, can be placed on a continuum of strength. Think 
of analogies not as good or bad but rather as better and worse. 
Connections
See the discussion of relevance in Chapter Two.
Technical Terms: False Analogy, Faulty Analogy
Some books refer to a weak analogy as a “false analogy” or “faulty analogy.” In 
some courses, “false analogy” or “faulty analogy” are applied to illustrative analo-
gies as well as argumentative analogies. 
Key Concept
A feature is a relevant 
similarity when the fact 
that the analogue and 
the primary subject share 
that feature provides 
some evidence that the 
primary subject has the 
conclusory feature. A 
feature is a relevant 
dissimilarity when the 
fact that the analogue 
and the primary subject 
don’t share that feature 
provides some evidence 
that the primary subject 
doesn’t have the 
conclusory feature.
Habits of a Critical Thinker
Perceptiveness
Some similarities are obvious, but many aren’t. A good 
critical thinker is perceptive and sees similarities and 
dissimilarities that others overlook. One reason Judith 
Jarvis Thomson’s case of the famous violinist is so 
well known is that Thomson is perceptive. She saw the 
similarities between abortion and the famous violinist 
case before anyone else did. 
There are no recipes for how to be perceptive. The 
bottom line is that you have to think carefully about 
situations and try many different ideas. Perception 
has led to many breakthroughs in human thought. For 
example, in the late 1800s Marie Curie was perceptive 
enough to see that the mineral pitchblende, while rich 
in uranium, gave off more radioactivity than could be 
accounted for by its uranium. Then she was perceptive 
enough to conclude that pitchblende must contain 
another radioactive element. She and her husband, 
Pierre, discovered that pitchblende contains not one 
but two radioactive elements, which they named 
“polonium” and “radium.” Her discoveries were the 
foundation for x-rays and radiation treatments for 
cancer. Curie was one of the world’s most perceptive 
scientists who made lasting contributions to human-
ity, and she won two Nobel Prizes.

250  Chapter 7 Analogical Arguments 
Analogies, Consistency, and False Beliefs
An analogy is a test of the consistency of a person’s beliefs. Thomson is point-
ing to what she sees as an inconsistency in the beliefs of someone who holds
It is wrong for a pregnant woman to have an abortion.
and
It is not wrong for Hadia to unplug herself from Victor.
Thomson is in effect saying to someone who holds these two views:
Your views aren’t consistent. When it comes to abortion, you think that 
a woman must remain attached to a fetus. But when it comes to the case 
of the famous violinist, you don’t think that Hadia must remain attached 
to Victor.
Analogies are powerful arguments because they can reveal that someone’s 
beliefs are inconsistent, and most people strongly desire to avoid inconsistent 
beliefs.
People try to avoid inconsistent beliefs because two inconsistent beliefs 
can’t both be true. Let’s suppose that Travis believes both (a) that his sister is 
in New York and (b) that she isn’t in New York. His beliefs are contradictory. 
Even though you don’t know where Travis’s sister is, you know that one of 
his beliefs is false. His sister can’t be in New York and not be in New York 
at the same time. Pointing out to people that they have inconsistent beliefs 
is important because people who have inconsistent beliefs have some false 
beliefs.
Connections
Chapter One discusses the consequences of false beliefs.
In the case of Thomson’s argument, three options are available to people who 
wish to avoid the charge of having inconsistent beliefs. (1) They can agree 
with Thomson that the case of the famous violinist and the case of abortion 
are analogous and hold that both a woman’s having an abortion and Had-
ia’s unplugging herself from Victor are permitted. (2) They can agree with 
Thomson that the case of the famous violinist and the case of abortion are 
analogous but hold that neither a woman’s having an abortion nor Hadia’s un-
plugging herself from Victor is permitted. The third option is to hold that (3) 
the two cases are not sufficiently analogous either because there’s a relevant 
dissimilarity or because the similarities between Victor and Hadia aren’t rele-
vant similarities.
In general, when presented with an analogy, you’ve got three possible ways 
to respond. (1) You can agree with the author of the analogy that the analogue 
and the primary subject are analogous and agree that both have the conclusory 
feature. (You can agree that X1s and X2s are analogous and that the similari-
ties indicate that they both have Fn.) (2) You can agree with the author of the 
analogy that the analogue and the primary subject are analogous and claim 

Evaluating Analogical Arguments  251
that neither of them has the conclusory feature. (You can agree that X1s and 
X2s are analogous but hold that the similarities indicate that neither has Fn.) 
(3) You can claim that the analogue and the primary subject aren’t sufficiently 
analogous either because there’s a relevant dissimilarity between them or 
because the similarities between them are not relevant. (You can claim that 
X1s and X2s are not analogous.)
Let’s end this chapter with a fi nal look at the analogy about the impact of 
the New Hope project that was made by Huston. Remember that her conclu-
sion was:
The results of this evaluation suggest that the policies tested in New 
Hope may be benefi cial to large parts of the population who have low 
incomes but are able to work.
Huston drew an analogy between a project done in one place (Milwaukee, 
Wisconsin) and projects that might be done in other places (that is, other 
cities). Huston hasn’t overlooked the proper form test for an analogy. She’s 
aware that there may be relevant dissimilarities between Milwaukee and 
other cities. Immediately after the sentence quoted above, she notes:
There are limitations, of course. The program was initiated with broad 
community, business, and government support in Wisconsin, a state with 
a strong tradition of social programs and an aggressive system to move 
welfare recipients into employment. With low rates of unemployment in 
the late 1990s, jobs were relatively easy to fi nd. Although programs offer-
ing some types of similar benefi ts in other northern states had positive 
effects on children’s achievement, we cannot be sure how well the effects 
would replicate in different economic and policy climates or in different 
regions of the United States. The promising results of the demonstration 
in Wisconsin suggest that wider replication of the New Hope policy pack-
age would be worth testing and might lead to important developmental 
benefi ts for children in low-income families with working parents. (Hus-
ton 2005, 916, material omitted)
In this quote Huston uses the measured tone and draws the careful con-
clusions that are found in good critical thinkers’ arguments. She points out 
some possible relevant dissimilarities between Milwaukee and other cities. 
Some other cities don’t have “a strong tradition of social programs.” Some 
other cities might not have low unemployment rates that make jobs “rela-
tively easy to fi nd.” Huston has used her analogy well. She points out both 
the strengths and the weaknesses of her analogy and draws conclusions that 
are appropriately tempered by those strengths and weaknesses. Huston shows 
that a good critical thinker doesn’t try to divide all analogies into two piles: 
the good analogies and the bad analogies. A good critical thinker sees that 
analogies can be better or worse. Few analogies are perfect and a less-than-
perfect analogy can still lead you to important conclusions as long as you’re 
careful not to reach too far.

252  Chapter 7 Analogical Arguments 
EXERCISE 7.3
A. Which of the arguments you standardized in Exercises 7.1 and 7.2 pass the true premises 
test?
B. Which of the arguments you standardized in Exercises 7.1 and 7.2 pass the proper form test?
C. In the following passages, do the following:
 (a) Put the argument into standard form, and identify the analogues, the primary subject, 
the similarities, and the conclusory feature.
 (b) Apply the true premises test. Don’t forget to check for imaginary cases.
 (c) Apply the proper form test, stating whether the purported similarities are relevant and 
whether there are any relevant dissimilarities.
 (d) If you don’t think there are any relevant dissimilarities, bring up a dissimilarity you 
think isn’t relevant and say why it’s irrelevant.
1.  The Epicureans argue that death is annihilation—i.e., that there is no afterlife, and 
when you die, you simply cease to exist for eternity—and on this basis, they further 
argue that death should not be feared, since there is nothing bad about death for the 
person who dies. One of these arguments, the “symmetry argument,” is given here: 
“Life is granted to no one for permanent ownership, to all on lease. Look back now 
and consider how the bygone ages of eternity that elapsed before our birth were noth-
ing to us. Here, then, is a mirror in which nature shows us the time to come after our 
death. Do you see anything fearful in it? Do you perceive anything grim? Does it not 
appear more peaceful than the deepest sleep?” (Lucretius 2001, 94)
2.  Some people believe that it is morally wrong to raise and kill animals for the sake 
of eating their meat and to support this practice by purchasing meat. An argument 
against the view (that purchasing meat is wrong) is that these animals would not 
have existed in the fi rst place if people did not purchase meat, and so we are doing 
them a favor by purchasing their meat. Henry Salt derides this as the “logic of the 
larder” when he points out that [the logic of the larder] must apply to mankind: “It 
has, in fact, been the plea of the slave-breeder; and it is logically just as good an ex-
cuse for slave-holding as for fl esh-eating. It would justify parents in almost any treat-
ment of their children, who owe them, for the great boon of life, a debt of gratitude 
which no subsequent services can repay. We could hardly deny the same merit to 
cannibals, if they were to breed their human victims for the table, as the early Peru-
vians are said to have done.” (Salt 1914)
3.  In 2007, New York City was thinking about implementing a “congestion pricing” 
proposal, which would require drivers to pay $8 per day to use the streets of the south-
ern half of Manhattan (excluding driving on marginal highways or during nights or 
weekends). Ken Livingston, Mayor of London, supported the proposal by pointing to 
London’s use of a congestion pricing plan, because the situations of the two cities 
are similar. He writes, “London’s business district was undergoing rapid growth, but 
it was at capacity in terms of traffic. [Lowering traffic speeds] led to business losses 
and a decrease in quality of life. Simultaneously, carbon emissions were mounting 
because of the inefficiency of engine use.” Starting in 2003, all cars entering the Lon-
don center city had to pay a charge of £5 (about $9) a day. Livingston claims, “This 
led to an immediate drop of 70,000 cars a day in the affected zone. Traffic congestion

Evaluating Analogical Arguments  253
fell by almost 20 percent. Emissions of the greenhouse gas carbon dioxide were cut 
by more than 15 percent.” Furthermore, feared negative side effects did not occur: in-
creases in retail sales in the zone “signifi cantly exceeded the national average,” and the 
theatre district “has been enjoying record audiences.” Livingston went on to cite statis-
tics showing a shift away from car travel into public transportation and bicycling, and 
public support for the program shifting from about 50/50 before it began to 2-1 in favor. 
He adds, “This success had preconditions. In London, as will be the case in New York or 
any other city, an enhanced public transportation system was critical.” He concludes, 
“Is London’s success a guarantee that congestion charging will work in New York? Of 
course not. But it is an indicator that properly executed congestion pricing works, and 
works well.” (Livingston 2007, material omitted)
 *4. “Last July, Kelly White and her boyfriend became engaged. They had a cozy picnic of 
wine and cheese on a hill before he presented her with a watermelon-fl avor Ring Pop 
and asked her to marry him. ‘I’d rather not say if he got down on one knee or not,’ she 
said. ‘It’s embarrassing.’ But they won’t end up at the altar anytime soon: they said they 
would not marry until gay and lesbian couples are also allowed to. ‘I usually explain 
that I wouldn’t go to a lunch counter that wouldn’t allow people of color to eat there, 
so why would I support an institution that won’t allow everyone to take part,’ said Ms. 
White, 24, a law student at the University of California, Davis. ‘Sometimes people don’t 
buy that analogy.’” (Schaefer 2006, ST1)
 5. “Existing frogfi sh are divided into six groups each of which has a Latin name: Anten-
narius biocellatus, Antennarius nummifer, Antennarius ocellatus, Antennarius pauci-
radiatus, Antennarius pictus, and Antennarius striatus. Each of these groups contains 
one or more species. For example, the frogfi sh whose Latin name is Antennarius ber-
mudensis is in the Antennarius nummifer group. Carnevale and Pietsch present the 
following argument for the view that the fossil they are studying is a member of the 
group Antennarius ocellatus. They have named their new species of fi sh Antennarius 
monodi. “[I]t is possible to include Antennarius monodi with the Antennarius ocella-
tus group because of the presence of a distinct caudal peduncle, 13 dorsal-fi n rays, eight 
bifurcate anal-fi n rays, and 20 vertebrae.” (Carnevale 2006, 453. Citations are omitted 
and punctuation altered to match conventions in this text.)
 6. “The skeleton of a eutherian (placental) mammal has been discovered from the Lower 
Cretaceous Yixian Formation of northeastern China. The new eutherian has limb and 
foot features that are known only from scansorial (climbing) and arboreal (tree-living) 
extant mammals, in contrast to the terrestrial or cursorial (running) features of other 
Cretaceous eutherians.” (Ji 2002, 816, material omitted) Ji and his collaborators con-
cluded that the fossilized mammal was a climbing or tree-living eutherian mammal.
 7. The Stoics Zeno and Chrysippus “affirmed that everything is fated. When a dog is tied 
to a cart, if it wants to follow it is pulled and follows, making its spontaneous act coin-
cide with necessity, but if it does not want to follow it will be compelled in any case. 
So it is with men too: even if they do not want to, they will be compelled in any case to 
follow what is destined.” (Hippolytus 1987, 386, material omitted)
 *8. “We would be the Natives if attacked by aliens. The human race is to be considered as 
one civilization with multiple factions within it. Again the Native American analogy 
holds true since there were also many various Indian Nations. The Europeans, ETs this 
time, are coming we must assume. Will they be nice or nasty? Do we wish to become 
extinct as some Natives did? Do we wish to travel our own ‘Trial of Tears’? Do we wish 

254  Chapter 7 Analogical Arguments 
to be assimilated into a European society as happened to some of the Native Ameri-
cans? Or will we fi ght back? Perhaps we should prepare for the worst and hope for the 
best. Now is the time for preparation, before it is too late!” (Taylor 2007, 14)
 9. “No one is sent down to the black pit of Tartarus. Undoubtedly it is in our life that all 
those things exist which are fabled to be in the depths of hell. No unhappy Tantalus 
quakes at the huge rock hanging over him in mid-air, numbed by an empty terror. Rath-
er, it is in life that an empty fear of the gods hounds mortals: each is afraid of the fall 
which his lot may bring him. Nor is it true that Tityos lies in hell with birds tunneling 
into him, or that they can really fi nd an everlasting food supply to forage beneath his 
great chest. But we have our own Tityos here—the man who lies lovesick, torn apart by 
winged creatures and gnawed at by nervous agony, or rent by cares through some other 
passion. Sisyphus too exists before our eyes in real life. He is the man who thirsts to run 
for the rods and cruel axes of public office, and who always returns beaten and dejected. 
For to pursue the empty and unattainable goal of power, and in its pursuit to endure 
unremittingly hard toil, that is the struggle of pushing uphill a stone which, in spite of 
all, at the very peak rolls back and hurtles downward to the level ground below. Here on 
earth the life of the foolish becomes hell.” (Lucretius 1987, 152–153, material omitted)
D. Apply the true premises and proper form tests to evaluate the analogies you constructed 
from the Coretta Scott King excerpt in Exercises 7.1 D above.
Analogical arguments are arguments based on 
comparison. But some analogies are not argu-
mentative. They only illustrate a comparison. 
Argumentative analogies have four parts. The 
analogues, X1, are the things to which the enti-
ties in the conclusion are being compared. The 
primary subjects, X2, are the things about which 
a conclusion is being drawn. The similarities 
(F1, F2, F3, . . .) are the features that the prem-
ises claim are shared by the analogue and the 
primary subject. The conclusory feature, Fn, is 
the feature in the argument’s conclusion that’s 
claimed to be a feature of the primary subject. 
The standard form for analogy is
(1) X1 has features F1, F2, . . .
 
 and Fn.
(2) X2 has features F1, F2, . . . .
Therefore,
(3) X2 probably has feature Fn.
Chapter Summary
 
Analogies have many uses. Analogies can be 
used because people can’t or shouldn’t observe 
something. Sometimes the reason people can’t 
observe something is that it’s in the past or the 
future. People can draw analogies about one 
place from information about another place. 
People can use analogies to argue that things 
should be treated in the same way. People can 
use analogies to classify things.
 
Logical analogies are analogical arguments 
about arguments. A logical analogy is the basis 
of the proper form test. If two arguments have 
the same form, and one passes the proper form 
test, then by analogy, the argument being evalu-
ated also passes the proper form test. 
 
When doing the true premises test on an 
analogy, you need to be aware of imaginary 
cases. Good analogies can use imaginary cases. 
Premises about an imaginary case pass the 
true premises test when the author and the 

audience have the same views about the imagi-
nary case.
 
When doing the proper form test on analo-
gies, you need to consider relevant similarities 
and relevant dissimilarities. A feature is a rel-
evant similarity when the fact that the ana-
logue and the primary subject share that feature 
provides some evidence for the claim that the 
primary subject has the conclusory feature. A 
feature is a relevant dissimilarity when the fact 
that the analogue and the primary subject don’t 
share that feature provides some evidence for 
the claim that the primary subject doesn’t have 
the conclusory feature.
 
One reason analogies are important is that 
they can reveal whether a person’s beliefs are 
consistent. If beliefs are inconsistent, at least 
one of them is false.
G U I D E
Finding, Standardizing, and Evaluating Analogical Arguments
This Guide is an amplifi cation of the “Guide for Finding, Standardizing, and Evaluating 
Arguments” that is in Chapter Two. The numbered sentences are copies from the Guide in 
Chapter Two. The sentences with “Analogy” in front of them are additional materials that 
apply only to analogical arguments.
Finding Arguments
 1. Look for an attempt to convince.
 
Analogy. Look to see whether there is an attempt to convince that uses a comparison. 
 
Check to see whether the analogy is argumentative or illustrative.
 2. Find the conclusion.
 
Analogy. Find the primary subject and the conclusory feature.
 3. Find the premises.
 
Analogy. Find the analogue(s) and the similarities.
 4. Review the following to make sure that you have correctly identifi ed the conclusion 
and the premises: imperfect indicator words, sentence order, premises and/or conclu-
sion not in declarative form, and unstated premises and/or conclusion.
 5. Review the following to make sure that you have not incorrectly identifi ed something 
as a premise or a conclusion when in fact it is not part of an argument: assertions, ques-
tions, instructions, descriptions, and explanations.
Standardizing Arguments
 6. Rewrite the premises and the conclusion as declarative sentences. Make sure that each 
premise and the conclusion is a grammatically correct declarative sentence. Rewrite 
the premises and conclusion as necessary to make them clearer but do not change the 
meaning of the passage. Remove pronouns from the sentences and replace them with 
the nouns or noun phrases to which they refer. Remove emotionally charged language.
 7. Review any phrases you have omitted to be sure that they are not premises or a 
conclusion.
Chapter Summary  255

256  Chapter 7 Analogical Arguments 
 8. Number the premises and the conclusion. Put brackets [] around the number of any 
unstated premise and/or conclusion. Place the premises before their conclusion and in-
sert “Therefore,” between the premises and the conclusion. Use blank lines to indicate 
subarguments.
 
Analogy. Put the standardization into the standard form of an analogical argument:
(1) X1s have features F1, F2, F3, . . . and 
 
feature Fn.
(2) X2s also have features F1, F2, F3, . . .
Therefore,
(3) X2s probably have Fn.
 9. Compare your standardization to the original passage to make sure that you have not 
omitted any arguments found in the passage and to be sure that you have correctly iden-
tifi ed the premises and the conclusion. 
Evaluating Arguments: The True Premises Test
 10. Check to see whether the premises are accurate descriptions of the world.
 
 Analogy. Check for knowledge about imaginary cases. Evaluate it if it is present.
 
 Analogy. Check to see whether the analogue and the primary subject have the features 
that the argument claims they do.
 11. Consider whether the premises are appropriate for the argument’s audience.
 12. Review the assumed premises to be sure that the assumptions are reasonable. Make 
sure that all assumed premises are uncontroversially true empirical statements, uncon-
troversially true defi nitional statements, or appropriate statements by experts. Make 
sure the defi nitions are good ones.
Evaluating Arguments: The Proper Form Test
 13. Determine whether the argument is a deductive argument or an inductive argument. 
 14. Determine whether the premises are relevant to the conclusion. Look at each premise 
individually to see whether the truth of the premise provides some evidence for the 
truth of the conclusion. Look at the premises as a group to see whether the truth of all 
of them provides some evidence for the truth of the conclusion.
 Analogy. Consider whether the similarities are relevant. Check to see whether there 
are any relevant dissimilarities. Evaluate the importance of the similarities and the 
relevant dissimilarities.
Evaluating Arguments: Checking for Fallacies
 15. Compare the argument to the list of fallacies on page 410 to see whether the argument com-
mits any of the fallacies.

This page intentionally left blank 

258
In this study we used fecal steroid analysis to examine the effects of seasonal, 
reproductive, and social factors on female testosterone in a group of free-ranging 
hybrid baboons in the Awash National Park of Ethiopia. We collected behavioral 
and hormonal data from 25 adult females across an 11-month period. The results 
indicated that female dominance rank was positively related to testosterone 
measures.
—Jacinta C. Beehner, Jane E. Phillips-Conry, and Patricia L. Whitten, “Female 
Testosterone, Dominance Rank, and Aggression in an Ethiopian Population 
of Hybrid Baboons” (Beehner 2005, 101. Material has been omitted and 
the abbreviation “T” has been replaced with its referent, “testosterone.”)
8
Statistical 
Arguments
Learning Outcomes
After studying the material in this chapter, you should be able to:
1. Calculate the mean, weighted mean, mode, midrange, and 
median of a data set.
2. Identify statistical arguments.
3. Identify the sample, the N, the relevant properties, and the 
target of statistical arguments.
4. Identify representative and biased samples.
5. Correctly evaluate statistical arguments.

Descriptive Statistics  259
Statistical arguments are arguments that draw a conclusion about all 
members of a group by looking at part of the group. The quote on the 
previous page draws a conclusion about all female baboons by looking at some 
female baboons. Statistical arguments are used to determine everything 
from what shows remain on TV to which medications a doctor can 
prescribe. You use statistical arguments every time you start your car or 
walk to your favorite restaurant. 
Descriptive Statistics
Descriptive statistics report and analyze data about things people have 
 observed. Argumentative statistics draw generalizations about things that 
haven’t been observed based on a sample of things that have been observed. 
You can’t evaluate statistical arguments unless you know the basics of 
 descriptive statistics. Mark Twain said that “there are three kinds of lies: lies, 
damn lies, and statistics” (1990, 185). Twain’s remark is funny and accurate 
because many people know that others don’t understand statistics and can be 
infl uenced by bad statistical arguments. For you to avoid falling into this trap, 
you need to understand descriptive statistics.
Technical Term: Inferential Statistics
Argumentative statistics are also called “inferential statistics.”
Statistics are about data but what are data? They’re not just numbers 
because numbers without a link to the world are meaningless. Suppose that 
someone tells you that they have “four.” Four what? Numbers are only mean-
ingful if you know what they’re describing. The number “four,” in the con-
text of discussing the grade point  average (GPA) of a student, becomes “4.0,” 
an impressive number. Or is it? What if you found out that everyone at this 
student’s college had a 4.0 GPA?
Let’s look at a data set. Jacinta Beehner has studied the relationship 
 between the amount of testosterone in female baboons and their dominance 
rank within their troop. Testosterone is a hormone usually associated with 
males, but in mammals both males and females have testosterone. To  measure 
the level of testosterone in female baboons, Beehner collected their feces. To 
determine their rank with their troop, she observed the behavior of female 
baboons. Every baboon has a dominance rank. There is a dominant male and 
a dominant female, and all the other baboons in the troop rank below the 
dominant male and female but may be higher or lower than other baboons 
in the troop. The ranking can be measured by observing which  baboons are 
aggressive, which ones retreat when confronted, and the grooming behavior 
of the baboons. If one baboon grooms another, then the baboon who does the 
grooming is ranked lower.
Key Concept
Descriptive statistics 
report and analyze 
data about things 
people have observed. 
Argumentative 
statistics draw 
generalizations about 
things that haven’t been 
observed based on a 
sample of things that 
have been observed.

260  Chapter 8 Statistical Arguments 
1. Baboon’s Name
2.  Mean Fecal Testosterone 
(nanograms/gram)
3. Relative Rank
Cecelia
1.48
0.00
Gari
1.50
0.32
Gigi
1.39
0.20
Goldilox
1.03
0.08
Handle
1.33
0.16
Jersey
1.52
0.72
Kitten
1.75
0.96
Koala
1.44
0.64
Lally
1.74
0.28
Loopy
1.61
0.80
Manx
1.30
0.24
Nicky
1.77
1.00
Pooh
1.61
0.92
Rita
1.72
0.56
Strep
1.44
0.12
Tibs
1.88
0.60
Tigger
1.64
0.36
Tripod
1.72
0.68
Wusha
1.51
0.52
(These numerical data were not in Beehner’s (2005) article. They were reported in the form of a chart. The 
numerical data were graciously provided by Dr. Beehner. We’ve simplifi ed it by changing one value.)
Column 1 indicates the name of each baboon. Column 2 indicates the amount 
of testosterone found in the feces of that baboon. Column 3 indicates the rank 
of each baboon. Nicky has a rank of 1.00. She’s the dominant female. All the 
other female baboons ranked below her. Cecelia had the lowest rank, 0.00. 
All the other female baboons ranked above her. Tibs’s rank is 0.60. Sixty per-
cent of the female baboons in this group ranked below her and 40% ranked 
above her. This chart can be used to illustrate a key point regarding descrip-
tive statistics, that “average” has many meanings.
The Many Meanings of “Average”
You probably know your GPA, but you might not have thought about the 
meaning of “average” in “grade point average.” An average is a way of 
describing the center of a set of data. You can think of the center of a data 
Key Concept
An average is a way of 
describing the center of 
a set of data.

Descriptive Statistics  261
set as its middle. The middle of something can be measured in different 
ways. Think about a car. You could measure its middle by measuring its 
length and dividing by two. Or you could fi nd the place where half the 
car’s weight is on either side. Like the middle of a car, the center of a data 
set can be measured in several ways, and all of them can be called the 
“average.”
The Mean
Sometimes “average” means “mean.” The mean of a set of numbers is calcu-
lated by adding the numbers together and dividing by the number of numbers 
in the set. A student could compute his GPA by the following method: add 
the grade points and divide by the number of courses taken.
 Course
Letter Grade
Grade Points
1. Anthropology
A
3.67
2. Biology
B
3.00
3. Business Statistics
F
0.00
4. Ceramics
B
3.33
5. French
B
3.00
Total points
13.00
The total points (13.00) divided by number of courses (5) equals 2.60, the 
student’s GPA. Strictly speaking, the GPA is the mean grade points earned. 
In the baboon data, the mean level of testosterone is 1.55 nanograms. (Check 
our math!) 
Technical Term: Arithmetic Mean
The mean is also called the “arithmetic mean.”
The Weighted Mean
At most colleges, the GPA isn’t a mean. It’s a weighted mean. A weighted 
mean is a mean in which some components have more of an effect than 
other components. Suppose that Biology is a four-hour course and Ceramics 
is a two-hour course. Biology will have a greater weight in the GPA than the 
three-hour courses, and Ceramics will have a lower weight.
Course
Letter Grade
Grade Points
Hours
Course Points
1. Anthropology
A
3.67
3
11.01
2. Biology
B
3.00
4
12.00
3. Business Statistics
F
0.00
3
0.00
4. Ceramics
B
3.33
2
6.66
5. French
B
3.00
3
9.00
Total 
15
38.67
Key Concept
The mean of a set of 
numbers is calculated 
by adding the numbers 
together and dividing by 
the number of numbers 
in the set.
Key Concept
A weighted mean is 
a mean in which some 
components have more 
of an effect than other 
components.

262  Chapter 8 Statistical Arguments 
The Course Points equals the Grade Points times the number of Hours. The 
weighted mean is the total course points (38.67) divided by the total hours 
(15) and equals 2.58. The weighted mean is lower than the unweighted mean 
because the high grade in the two-hour Ceramics class has less effect on the 
weighted mean.
The Mode
Sometimes the center of a data set is expressed by the most frequently 
occurring value in a data set, the mode. The mode of our student’s grades 
is 3.0. The student got two Bs (two 3.0s) and only one of each of the other 
grades earned (A–, B+, and F). When a data set contains a tie for the most 
frequent value, it has multiple modes. In the baboon testosterone data, 
three values (1.44, 1.61, and 1.72) each appear twice. The other values each 
appear once. This data set has three modes, one at 1.44, one at 1.61, and 
one at 1.72.
Technical Term: Modal
The adjectival form of “mode” is “modal.” Our student’s modal grade was B or 3.00.
The Midrange
Sometimes “average” refers to the midrange. The midrange is the sum of 
the highest value and the lowest value, divided by two. The midrange of 
our student’s grades is the sum of the highest grade (3.67) and the lowest 
grade (0.00), divided by two, 1.84. To get the midrange of the testosterone 
data, you add the highest value (1.88, Nicky) and the lowest value (1.03, 
Goldilox) and get 2.91. Then you divide by two and get the midrange, 
1.455.
The Median
Sometimes “average” refers to the median. You can think of the median as 
the number you get when you arrange the numbers from highest to lowest 
and pick the middle number. Strictly speaking, a data set with an even num-
ber of data points doesn’t have a median. If a data set has four points, then no 
data point has the same number of data points on either side of it. In this case, 
researchers often take the mean of the two middle values as the median. In 
other data sets, multiple points have the same value. In the grades above, the 
median is a B because the student has fi ve grades (A-, B+, B, B, and F), and two 
grades are higher than the fi rst B and two grades lower than or equal to this 
B. Speaking precisely, the median of a data set is a data point, D, such that 
at most half the set have values lower than D and at most half the set have 
values higher than D.
To see the median testosterone level of the baboons, arrange them from 
highest to lowest testosterone level. 
Key Concept
The mode is the most 
frequently occurring 
value in a data set.
Key Concept
The midrange is the sum 
of the highest value and 
the lowest value, divided 
by two.
Key Concept
The median of a data 
set is a data point, D, 
such that at most half 
the set have values lower 
than D and at most 
half the set have values 
higher than D.

Descriptive Statistics  263
1. Baboon’s Name
2.  Mean Fecal Testosterone 
(nanograms/gram)
3. Relative Rank
 1. Tibs
1.88
0.60
 2. Nicky
1.77
1.00
 3. Kitten
1.75
0.96
 4. Lally
1.74
0.28
 5. Rita
1.72
0.56
 6. Tripod
1.72
0.68
 7. Tigger
1.64
0.36
 8. Loopy
1.61
0.80
 9. Pooh
1.61
0.92
10. Jersey
1.52
0.72
11. Wusha
1.51
0.52
12. Gari
1.50
0.32
13. Cecelia
1.48
0.00
14. Koala
1.44
0.64
15. Strep
1.44
0.12
16. Gigi
1.39
0.20
17. Handle
1.33
0.16
18. Manx
1.30
0.24
19. Goldilox
1.03
0.08
There are nineteen baboons, so the median testosterone is the data point 
with nine above it and nine below it. That’s 1.52, and so Jersey is at the 
median.
Outliers and Resistance
Some data sets have outliers. Outliers are data points that are far away from 
the other points in the data set. In the baboon data, Goldilox is an outlier. Her 
testosterone level is far below the others’. Means and midranges are strongly 
affected by outliers, but medians aren’t. In the grade example, the F has a 
much greater decreasing effect on the mean than the grade of B. If the highest 
value of a data set is an outlier, the midrange won’t accurately refl ect the da-
ta’s center. When a measure of the center of a set of data is greatly infl uenced 
by outliers it has low resistance. Because medians aren’t affected in the same 
Key Concept
Outliers are data points 
that are far away from 
the other points in 
the data set. When a 
measure of the center of 
a set of data is greatly 
infl uenced by outliers it 
has low resistance.

264  Chapter 8 Statistical Arguments 
way, they have higher resistance. The low resistance of means is especially 
obvious if the data set is small. If you have ninety hours and a 3.00 GPA and 
then you get an F in a three-hour class, your GPA will drop by 0.10 to 2.90. 
But if you have fi fteen hours and a 3.00 GPA and then get an F, your GPA 
would drop by 0.50 to 2.50. You need to be careful about means when looking 
at small data sets.
Choose the measure of centrality that’s relevant to your purposes. In 
2005, U.S. mean household income was $63,344 but U.S. median household 
income was $46,326 (DeNavas-Walt 2006, 38). The mean is $17,018 (35%) 
higher than the median. In this case, median is a better measure of centrality 
than mean because of the mean’s low resistance. The income of a very few 
very rich individuals pulls up the U.S. mean income. This makes the mean a 
bad indicator of the center of U.S. income.
Centrality isn’t always relevant. Suppose that you’re trying to decide 
whether to walk across a river and someone tells you that its mean depth is 
three feet. That information isn’t very useful. What you want to know is how 
deep the river is at its deepest point. You don’t care about centrality.
G U I D E
Mean 
(N1 + N2 + N3 + . . . Nn) ÷ n
Weighted Mean 
(N1  W1 + N2  W1 + N3  W3 + . . . Nn  Wn) ÷ n 
Mode 
The most frequent value in the data set
Midrange 
(Lowest value + highest value) ÷ 2
Median 
 A data point, D, such that at most half the set have values lower than 
D and at most half the set have values higher than D.
Critical Thinkers
Jacinta Beehner
An Assistant Professor of Psychology and Anthropology at the University of 
Michigan, Jacinta Beehner researches the connections between social conditions and 
variations in individual living things. For much of her research, she gathers data on 
gelada baboons, who live in extremely large social groups (compared to most other 
primates). Smithsonian magazine published an article about her research (http://www
.smithsonianmag.com/science-nature/Ethiopias-Exotic-Monkeys.html), and she has 
published more than twenty articles. You can see those at http://sitemaker.umich.edu/
jacinta.beehner/published_research.
Courtesy of Jacinta Beehner

Descriptive Statistics  265
EXERCISE 8.1
A. For each of the following, determine whether or not an average number is reported. If an 
average is reported, identify which type of average it is (mean, median, etc.). Calculate as 
many of the following as you can given the data: (a) mean, (b) weighted mean, (c) mode, 
(d) midrange, and (e) median.
 1. The average number of credit hours for the students in the following list is 16:
Aaron 
12
Abigail 
16
Brenda 
15
Bret 
18
Charles 
19
Charlene 
18
Deborah 
15
Douglas 
16
Edward 
16
Edith 
16
 2. The average number of credit hours for the students in the list in Exercise 1 above is 
precisely 16.1.
 *3. The average income for Wall Street’s top ten income earners in 1996 was $258.7 mil-
lion, based on the following table:
George Soros, Soros Funds 
$800 million
Julian Robertson, Tiger Mgt. 
$300
Henry Kravis, KKR 
$265
George Roberts, KKR 
$265
Stanley Druckmiller, Soros Funds 
$200
Robert MacDonnell, KKR 
$200
Sam Fix, Harbour Group 
$190
Thomas Lee, Thomas H. Lee Co 
$130
Nick Roditi, Soros Funds 
$125
Jerome Kohlberg, KKR 
$112
(Philli ps 2002, 145)
 *4. The average income for Wall Street’s top ten income earners reported in Exercise 3 was 
$456 million.
 5. “Prior to 1951, birth statistics came from a complete count of records received in the 
Public Health Service (now received in NCHS). From 1951 to 1971, they were based on 
a 50 percent sample of all registered births. Beginning in 1972, they have been based on 
a complete count for states participating in the Vital Statistics Cooperative Program 
(VSCP) and on a 50 percent sample of all other areas.” (U.S. Census Bureau 2000, 63, 
material omitted)
If you were to tally the number of births from 1951 through 1971 and divide by 21, 
what kind of average number of births would result?
 6. “Three-fourths of college-educated men in these studies achieved some upward mobil-
ity, while only 12 percent of those who received no schooling did.” (Schaefer 2006, 202)

266  Chapter 8 Statistical Arguments 
 7. “A 1994 almanac showed that Judaism had almost 18 million members, Christianity 
had roughly 1.8 billion members, Islam had almost 1 billion members, Hinduism had 
almost 733 million adherents, Buddhism about 315 million, and Confucianism about 
6 million or more members.” (Deiner 1977, 11) The average number of members among 
these six religious groups is 645 million.
  
Refer to the following data for the next three passages.
   Unemployment Rate and Educational Attainment
Year
All
High-School 
Graduate
College Graduate
1992
6.7
7.7
2.9
1995
4.8
5.2
2.5
1998
4.0
4.8
1.8
1999
3.5
4.0
1.9
Data are based on civilian population 25 to 64 years of age. Total includes other catego-
ries, not shown separately (those with less than high-school diploma and those with some 
college but less than a bachelor’s degree). (U.S. Census Bureau 2010, 424)
 *8. Calculate the mean and median unemployment rates between 1992 and 1999 for those 
whose highest level of education is a high-school diploma.
 9. Calculate the mean and median unemployment rate between 1992 and 1999 for those 
who have a college degree.
 10. Calculate the mean average difference between the unemployment rates of those with 
a high-school diploma vs. those with a college degree for the years data are provided.
 11. “The ‘gender gap’ in pay is a widely recognized fact. Even as recently as 2002, women 
who worked full time year round earned only 78 percent as much as men.” (Giddens 
2005, 287, material omitted)
 *12.  “[B]efore 1980, only 43 percent of women (or their partner) used a method of birth con-
trol at their fi rst premarital intercourse. By 1999–2002, the proportion using a method 
at fi rst premarital intercourse had risen to 79 percent.” (Mosher 2004, 1)
 13. “Whereas traditionally grain was grown for human consumption, an increasing per-
centage is being grown for animal consumption. Worldwatch Paper 103 reports that 
“roughly 38 percent of the world’s grain—especially corn, barley, sorghum, and oats—is 
fed to livestock.” (Durning 1991, 14)
 14. “A survey of youth in more than fi fteen countries fi nds that 75 percent of U.S. tweens 
want to be rich, a higher percentage than anywhere else in the world except India, where 
the results were identical. Sixty-one percent want to be famous.” (Schaefer 2006, 54)
 15. “For both whites and blacks, suicide was more common among men than women. The 
suicide rate for white men (25 suicides per 100,000 people) was about four times higher 
than the rate for white women (6). Among African Americans, the rate for men (12) was 
about six times that for women (2).” (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 2009)
B. For each of the following sets of data, calculate as many of the following as you can given 
the data: (a) the mean, (b) the weighted mean, (c) the mode, (d) the midrange, and (e) the 
median.

Descriptive Statistics  267
 1. Political and economic commentator Kevin Phillips (2002, 151) points out the declin-
ing employment in the top 500 U.S. industrial corporations over the last two decades of 
the 20th century. Based on the fi gures below, what is the average number of jobs across 
the time period from 1980 to 1993?
Year
Number of Jobs at the Top 500 Corporation
1980
15.9 million
1985
14.1 million
1990
12.4 million
1993
11.5 million
 2. According to Honest Work, A Business Ethics Reader (Ciulla 2007, 166), the number of 
bankruptcies fi led increased considerably from 1997 to 2002.
Year
Total
Non-Business
Business
2002
1,504,806
1,464,961
38,845
2001
1,307,857
1,271,865
35,992
2000
1,301,205
1,263,096
38,108
1999
1,419,199
1,378,071
41,128
1998
1,423,128
1,370,490
53,638
1997
1,247,065
1,193,057
54,008
 3. Given the bankruptcy statistics in Exercise 2 above, are there any outliers?
 *4. In Exercise 2 above, what was the lowest and what was the highest number of bank-
ruptcies for business and for non-business fi lings?
 5. Was there any year in which the number of bankruptcy fi lings decreased for businesses? 
For non-business fi lings?
 *6. “Worldwatch Institute, an independent, nonprofi t research organization, reported that 
the expanding global livestock industry has hidden costs. One of those costs is the 
amount of grain that cows, pigs, sheep, and poultry eat. Whereas traditionally grain was 
Country/Region
Share of Grain Consumed by Livestock
United States
70
Eastern Europe
64
EC
57
Soviet Union
56
Brazil
55
Japan
48
Middle East
33
China
20
Southeast Asia
12
Sub-Saharan Africa
2
India
2

268  Chapter 8 Statistical Arguments 
grown for human consumption, an increasing percentage is being grown for animal con-
sumption. Worldwatch Paper 103 reports that roughly 38 percent of the world’s grain—
especially corn, barley, sorghum, and oats—is fed to livestock.” (Durning 1991, 14–15)
 *7. Which countries are outliers in Exercise 6 above?
 8. Keep track of the number of servings of vegetables and fruits you eat for fi ve days. Then 
calculate the “average” number of servings per day for each (vegetables, fruits) that you 
consume. Calculate the various types of “average” listed in the directions to this exercise.
 9. Were there any outliers in your record, or was your consumption fairly uniform across 
all fi ve days?
 10. Were the numbers similar for vegetables and fruits, or was one much higher than the other?
 11. Using an unofficial copy of your own transcript from college (or high school if this is 
your fi rst year in college), calculate what your GPA would be for all types of “average” 
listed above in the directions to this exercise.
 12. Were there any outlier semesters in your grades, or were your grades fairly uniform 
across the semesters?
 *13.  “In 1997, sales of VCRs numbered 16.7 million. In 2002, estimated sales of VCRs were 
13.3 million.” (Lial 2004, 219)
1995
World Total
Africa
Asia
Europe
Cen./S. 
America
N. America
Oceania
Population
5,686,775
719,497
3,437,791
728,034
476,641
296,644
28,168
Teachers
47,105
3,791
24,455
9,398
5,131
4,000
330
% of GNP
4.8
5.6
3.7
5.1
4.1
5.4
5.6
 14. The population numbers are in thousands, so 5,686,775 = 5,686,775,000.
Standard Deviation
Researchers are often interested in ways data deviate from the center. Stan-
dard deviation is a measure of the spread of data away from the mean. Roughly 
and non-mathematically speaking, the standard deviation is the amount that 
the numbers in a data set vary from the mean. This data set:
8, 8, 8 
has a standard deviation of zero. The mean of the three points is 8, and all 
three points are at the mean. This data set: 
0, 0, 1000, 1000 
has a standard deviation of 577.35. The points are widely spread from the 
data set’s mean (500). In the baboon data, the standard deviation of the 
testosterone level data is 0.20. The testosterone data has a narrow spread. 
This introductory text won’t cover how to calculate a standard deviation. 
Key Concept
Standard deviation is a 
measure of the spread 
of data away from the 
mean.

Descriptive Statistics  269
(But if you have your data in Microsoft Excel, it can calculate standard 
deviation.)
Standard deviations can be used to indicate where a particular data point 
falls in the spread. This data set: 
2, 2, 2, 2, 2, 2, 2, 2, 2, 2, 2, 2, 2, 2, 2, 2, 2, 2, 2, 2, 40
has twenty-one points. The mean is 3.81, and the standard deviation is 8.29. 
The data point 40 is an outlier. The data point 40 is 36.19 away from the 
mean (40 – 3.81 = 36.19). 36.19 divided by the data set’s standard deviation 
is 4.37. Data point 40 is 4.37 standard deviations away from the mean. The 
data points of 2 are much closer to the mean. They are less than one standard 
deviation from the mean. Each data points of 2 is 1.81 away from the mean 
(3.81 – 2 = 1.81) and 1.81 is less than 8.29, the data set’s standard deviation. 
Goldilox’s testosterone level is about two and a half standard deviations away 
from the mean. The mean is 1.55, and Goldilox’s level is 1.03. The difference 
is 0.52 (1.55 – 1.03). The standard deviation is 0.20. If you divide 0.52 by 0.20 
you get 2.6.
Standard deviations are also clues to misleading means. If the standard 
deviation of a data set is large, then a mean may be hiding an odd distribu-
tion. Suppose that the standard deviation of a data set is 527 and its mean is 
500. That’s a clue that the mean is misleading. The standard deviation of this 
data set 
0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1000, 1000, 1000, 1000, 1000
is 527 and its mean is 500, but this mean is misleading because there are no 
data points near 500. 
Distributions
To avoid making mistakes about measures of centrality and spread, look at 
the distribution of the data on a chart. This will often help you determine the 
best measure of centrality, whether an unusual distribution is producing the 
centrality, or whether centrality is relevant to your purposes. The shape of a 
data set can be thought of as the graphical illustration you see when you plot 
the data on a chart. 
All measures of centrality can hide different distributions. A 3.0 GPA can 
be earned in many different ways. One student could have all Bs, whereas 
another might have half As and half Cs. One example of a distribution that’s 
hidden by a measure of centrality is a bimodal distribution. Speaking roughly 
and non-mathematically, a bimodal distribution is one that, when graphed, 
has two peaks. Another often discussed type of distribution is a normal distri-
bution. Again speaking roughly and non-mathematically, a normal distribu-
tion is one that, when graphed, has one peak and smooth equal sides on either 
side of the peak. 
Suppose that the mean grade given in English 101 is 2.00 and that 
the mean grade given in Math 101 is also 2.00. You might think that the 
courses are roughly equally difficult. But then suppose you see the follow-
ing charts of the distribution of grades. These two charts are examples of 
bar charts.
Key Concept
The shape of a data set 
can be thought of as the 
graphical illustration you 
see when you plot the 
data on a chart.
Key Concept
A bimodal distribution 
is one that, when 
graphed, has two peaks. 
A normal distribution is 
one that, when graphed, 
has one peak and 
smooth equal sides on 
either side of the peak.
Key Concept
Bar charts. 

270  Chapter 8 Statistical Arguments 
Grades in English 101
45
40
35
30
25
20
Number of Students
15
10
5
0
As
Bs
Cs
Grades
Ds
Fs
Grades in Math 101
30
25
20
Number of Students
15
10
5
0
As
Bs
Cs
Grades
Ds
Fs
The bars indicate the number of students receiving each grade. There were 
100 students in each class. In English 101, 10 students got an A. In Math 101, 
25 students got an A. The grades in English 101 have a normal distribution. 
The grades in Math 101 have a bimodal distribution. Now you probably don’t 
think that the courses are equally difficult. You probably think that the Math 
course is harder for some students and easier for others.

Descriptive Statistics  271
Technical Term: Gaussian Distribution
Normal distributions are also called “Gaussian distributions.”
Plotting data on a chart can be done in several different ways. Besides the 
form of bar charts that you just saw, you can plot data in a scatter chart. 
Suppose that you think that Sallay, a college student, might be watching too 
much television. You decide to collect data to compare her GPA with the 
number of hours per week that she watched television that semester. Here 
are the data for Sallay’s freshman and sophomore years.
Semester
Hours of TV Watched 
per Week
Semester GPA
Fall 1
3
3.8
Spring 1
10
3.3
Summer 1
13
2.7
Fall 2
18
2.5
Spring 2
27
2.2
Summer 2
30
2.0
Here’s a scatter chart of this data.
Key Concept
Scatter charts.
Sallay’s GPA and Hours of Television Watched per Week
4
2.5
2
Term GPA
1.5
1
0.5
0
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Hours of Television Watched per Week
3
3.5
3, 3.8
10, 3.3
13, 2.7
18, 2.5
27, 2.2
30, 2
The numbers next to the point at the upper left are “3, 3.8” because they are 
the data collected for Fall 1. The data points fall roughly into a line. In the real 
world, data don’t usually have such an obvious shape. 

272  Chapter 8 Statistical Arguments 
Here’s a scatter plot of Beehner’s data (Beehner 2005, 111):
Mean Fecal Testosterone and Dominance Rank
1.8
1.6
Mean Fecal Testosterone
1.4
1.2
1
0.8
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00
1.20
Dominance Rank
2
Another common type of chart is a line chart. Here’s a line chart of the mean 
grades given by a particular instructor, Professor Manon, in one of her classes, 
Econ 101, over the course of the last six semesters:
Key Concept
Line charts.
Professor Manon’s Mean Grade Given in Econ 101
2.5
2
Mean Grade Given
1.5
1
0.5
0
Fall 1
2.10
2.34
2.2
2.54
2.54
2.74
Spring 1
Summer 1
Fall 2
Spring 2
Summer 2
Semester
3
A line chart is similar to a bar chart. The only difference is that the tops of 
what would be the bars are connected by a line.

Descriptive Statistics  273
Technical Terms: Bar Graph and Scatter Plot
Bar charts are also called “bar graphs.” Scatter charts are also called “scatter plots.”
Different types of charts are used for different purposes. Line charts are often 
good ways to present change over time. The line chart that presents Professor 
Manon’s grades is a good example. It indicates that over time her mean grade 
given has risen. Bar charts are often good ways to present quantities of things. 
Here are some absolute rules about charts: 
1. All charts should have a clearly labeled x axis (the horizontal axis) and a 
clearly labeled y axis (the vertical axis). In the chart of Professor Manon’s 
grade, the x axis is clearly labeled “Semester” and the y axis is clearly 
labeled “Mean Grade Given.” If we had put “Mean” on the y axis, that 
wouldn’t have been clear and specifi c enough. 
2. The units of measure on both axes should be clear. (Is a chart presenting 
the dollars of Cokes sold or the bottles of Cokes sold?)
3. The chart should have a clear title. The chart of Professor Manon’s grades 
clearly indicates the course she is teaching and what the chart reports. 
4. The source of the data presented should be correctly noted. (In this chapter 
there are some charts with no source because we invented the data.)
5. If different sets of data are put on one chart, the numbers, bars, or lines 
should be colored or shaded so that the different sets can be easily 
distinguished. If you put Professor Wilson’s grades on the same chart 
with Professor Manon’s, you should be sure that the different professors’ 
grades can be easily distinguished. 
A good chart is clear and useful. A bad chart is unclear and/or not useful. 
When you make a chart, look at it with the eyes of people who will see it. You 
need to be sure that it clearly and accurately presents the data to people who 
don’t know the data as well as you do. Seeing charts from the point of view of 
other people is another part of the art of argument.
Technical Terms: Values on x and y Axes, Abscissa, Ordinate
When comparing two sets of data on one chart, you plot one set on the x axis of 
a chart and the other on its y axis. The x axis and the y axis have lots of different 
names. Here are some: 
Names for the x-Axis Variable 
Names for the y-Axis Variable
• explanatory variable 
• response variable
• independent variable 
• dependent variable
• criterion value 
• predictor value
• domain 
• range
• input value 
• output value
• right-hand side 
• left-hand side
The lines themselves also have names. The x-axis line is the abscissa, and the y-axis 
line is the ordinate.
Regressions
Regression lines are a way of describing the shape of a data set. The regres-
sion line of a data set is the line that best fi ts the data. Speaking roughly and 
Key Concept
The regression line of a 
data set is the line that 
best fi ts the data.

274  Chapter 8 Statistical Arguments 
non-mathematically, the regression line is the line that has the smallest total dis-
tance between the line and the data points. This introductory text won’t indicate 
how to calculate a regression line. (But if you have your data in Microsoft Excel, 
it can draw the line for you.) You can use the scatter chart of Sallay’s grades and 
add a regression line. You can do the same with the chart from Beehner’s article.
Sallay’s GPA and Hours of Television Watched per Week
4
2.5
2
Term GPA
1.5
1
0.5
0
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Hours of Television Watched per Week
3
3.5
3, 3.8
10, 3.3
13, 2.7
18, 2.5
27, 2.2
30, 2
Mean Fecal Testosterone and Dominance Rank
1.8
1.6
Mean Fecal Testosterone
1.4
1.2
1
0.8
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00
1.20
Dominance Rank
2
Regression lines are more than a way of describing the shape of a data set. 
Looking at the charts above, can you make a prediction concerning Sallay’s 
semester GPA if she watched thirty-fi ve hours of television per week in that 
semester? It looks like it would be about 1.50. On the basis of a pattern in the 
data you’ve observed, you’ve made an inference about something unobserved. 

Identifying Statistical Arguments  275
What would you predict about the testosterone level of a female baboon with 
a dominance rank of 0.50? This shows the value of regressions: you can use 
them to make predictions.
But you must predict with care. If you blindly followed the regression line 
on the chart of Sallay’s GPA, you’d predict that if she watched enough televi-
sion her GPA would become a negative number. But no student can have a GPA 
below zero. And many data sets don’t have the shape of a line. One data set 
might have the shape of a wave, and you may only be seeing part of the wave. 
Learning how to use regression lines to draw conclusions is part of the art of 
evaluating statistical arguments, the topic of the last section of this chapter.
Technical Terms: Monotonic and Nonmonotonic
An increase or decrease is monotonic when it’s uninterrupted. Look back at the 
chart of Professor’s Manon’s grades. Over time, they’ve increased. But the increase 
is nonmonotonic because from Spring 1 to Summer 1 her mean grade decreased 
(from 2.34 to 2.2) and because from Fall 2 to Spring 2, her mean grade didn’t 
increase. It stayed steady at 2.54. 
EXERCISE 8.2
A. For each of the data sets in Exercise 8.1 A 1, 3, 7, 8, 15, and 8.1 B 1, 2, 6, 8, 14, and 15, plot 
the data on a bar chart and line chart to see the shape of the data. Be sure to follow the fi ve 
rules about charts discussed above. 
B. For each of the data sets in Exercises 8.1 A 1, 3, 7, 8, 15, and 8.1 B 1, 2, 6, 8, 14, and 15, use 
Microsoft Excel to fi nd the standard deviation and the regression line that fi ts the data. If 
you can fi nd a regression line, use it to predict in each case what the next data point would 
be. In some cases, one problem includes more than one data set. In that case fi nd the stan-
dard deviation for each data set in the problem.
Identifying Statistical Arguments
Here are the standard forms of statistical arguments:
General 
(1) P% of the N observed things in G have F.
 
Therefore,
 
(2) P% of all the things in G have F.
Particular (1) P% of the N observed things in G have F.
 
Therefore,
 
(2) P% of all the things in G have F.
 
(3) X is a thing in G.
 
Therefore,
 
(4) There is a P% chance that X has F.
“P” and “N” are variables that refer to a number, “G” is a variable that refers 
to a group, and “F” is a variable that refers to a feature.
Connections
The use of variables is discussed in Chapter Two.
Key Concept
The standard forms of 
statistical arguments.

276  Chapter 8 Statistical Arguments 
Here’s an example of a statistical argument with the General form:
(1)  During spring semester of 2006, 89% of 1,000 college students 
 surveyed said that statistical arguments were their favorite type of 
argument.
Therefore, 
(2)  89% of all college students would say that statistical arguments are 
their favorite type of argument.
This argument reasons from a premise about 1,000 college students whose 
views on statistical arguments have been observed (in a survey) to a conclu-
sion about all college students. This is an example of the General form be-
cause the conclusion is about all college students. 
Here’s an example of a statistical argument with the Particular form:
(1)  During spring semester of 2006, 89% of 1,000 college students sur-
veyed said that statistical arguments were their favorite type of 
argument.
Therefore, 
(2)  89% of all college students would say that statistical arguments are 
their favorite type of argument.
(3) Theo is a college student.
Therefore,
(4)  There’s an 89% chance that Theo would say that statistical argu-
ments are his favorite type of argument.
This argument reasons from a premise about 1,000 college students to a 
conclusion about all college students and then to a second conclusion about 
one particular college student, Theo. This is an example of the Particular 
form because the second conclusion is about this particular college student.
The Particular form contains the General form. And the third premise of 
a Particular statistical argument is often easy to confi rm or refute. The heart 
of a Particular statistical argument is a General statistical argument. This 
chapter focuses on the General form. 
Parts of a Statistical Argument
Looking at the General standard form you can see that every statistical argu-
ment has fi ve parts. 
1. The observed things in G are the sample. 
2. The N is the number of things in the sample.
3. The features that these things have, the F, is the relevant property. 
4. All the things in G are the target.
5. P is the percentage of the observed things that have F. 
In our argument about college students,
1. Sample = the college students surveyed
2. N = 1,000
3. F = saying that statistical arguments were their favorite type of argument
4. Target = all college students
5. P = 89
Key Concept
The fi ve parts of a 
statistical argument.

Identifying Statistical Arguments  277
Connections
Chapter Three noted that statements that report someone’s observations are 
empirical statements. The premise of a statistical argument is the report of some 
observations. This means that statistical arguments are empirical arguments.
Technical Terms: Percentage of a Population, Sample Population, 
Target Population, Universe
Some researchers use the phrase “percentage of a population” or “sample popula-
tion” to refer to the sample. Some researchers use the phrase “target population” 
to refer to the target. In some disciplines, the target is called the “universe” or the 
“universe of discourse.”
Statistical arguments aren’t usually found in standard form. The sample size 
may not be indicated. “P%” doesn’t have to be expressed with a number. 
Statistical arguments often contain no numbers at all. Instead of referring 
to “100%,” “85%,” “50%,” or “15%” of the sample, authors making a sta-
tistical argument can refer to “all,” “most,” “about half,” or “some” of the 
sample.
You’ve probably gone to an ice cream shop and asked for a sample. The 
sample of ice cream you’re given is a subset, a part, of all the ice cream of 
that fl avor found in that store. When you decide on a fl avor after sampling 
it, you’re relying on a statistical argument. You’re concluding that the unob-
served (untasted) ice cream you’re going to buy will have the same taste (the 
relevant property) as the ice cream you’ve observed (tasted).
Beehner’s work on baboons includes a statistical argument.
We know that for the Awash females, testosterone is associated with rank and 
that rank is associated with aggression. Yet the stability of the female dominance 
Frank Stober/PhotoLibrary

278  Chapter 8 Statistical Arguments 
hierarchy makes it unlikely that testosterone mediates rank in this hybrid popu-
lation. Pregnant females that were experiencing a surge in testosterone as the 
result of pregnancy did not rise in rank, and conversely, old females (with much 
lower testosterone levels than other females) did not fall in rank. Therefore, it 
seems that for baseline measures, our results are consistent with the hypothesis 
that rank determines testosterone levels, rather than the reverse. (Beehner 2005, 
115–116)
Beehner uses information about her sample of female baboons to draw a 
 conclusion about all female baboons. The conclusion that “our results are 
consistent with the hypothesis that rank determines testosterone levels, 
rather than the reverse” is about all female baboons (at least all those of the 
particular species Beehner studied). In this case,
1. Sample = the baboons observed
2. N = 19
3. F = having higher testosterone levels associated with higher rank
4. Target = all female baboons
5. P = not stated
Statistical Arguments and Analogical Arguments
What’s the difference between a statistical argument and an analogical ar-
gument? In an analogical argument, you’re comparing one group to another 
group and the fi rst group is not a subgroup of the second. In a statistical argu-
ment, you’re comparing one group (the sample) to another group (the target) 
and the fi rst group is a subgroup of the second. 
Let’s return to the Briard dogs and humans with Leber congenital amau-
rosis (LCA) discussed in Chapter Seven. Remember that children and puppies 
Habits of a Critical Thinker
Intellectual Humility
Critical thinkers are aware of their own intellectual 
limits. In letters to the editor, on cable news programs, 
and on talk radio, you hear lots of people who need 
more intellectual humility. They make their  conclusions 
as defi nitive pronouncements and suggest that anyone 
who disagrees with them is an idiot. Here’s a quote 
from Beehner that shows intellectual humility:
The data presented here are suggestive rather than 
defi nitive, and there is certainly a need for more 
primate studies that examine individual hormone-
behavior associations over time to bridge the gap 
between captive and freeranging studies. (Beehner 
2005, 115)
Beehner doesn’t say that her views are the com-
plete truth that only idiots could deny. She says 
that her conclusions “are suggestive rather than 
definitive.”
 To be a critical thinker you must remember that 
everyone (including you) makes mistakes. If you lack 
intellectual humility, you’re sure that you’re right. And 
if you’re sure that you’re right, you aren’t going to 
be open to suggestions for improvement or to good 
arguments that show that you’re wrong.

Identifying Statistical Arguments  279
with LCA either have no sight at birth or lose it very fast. Guylene Le Meur 
developed a treatment for this disease that involved injecting a genetically 
altered virus into LCA-affected eyes. She tested her technique on the eyes of 
eight dogs, seven puppies and an adult dog. The sight of the seven puppies 
was restored. The adult dog was unaffected. She concluded that this treat-
ment might work on human infants. Is her argument an analogical argument 
between dogs and humans or a statistical argument with dogs as the sample 
and humans as the target? 
Because dogs aren’t a subset of humans, Le Meur is making an analogical 
argument. But she is also making a statistical argument. Her reasoning pro-
cess has two steps. First, she uses a statistical argument to draw a conclusion 
about all Briard dogs. Because she can’t study all the Briard dogs in the world, 
she studies a sample of them and then makes a statistical argument to draw 
a conclusion about all of them. Le Meur’s sample was eight Briard dogs with 
LCA. She concluded that the therapy might restore the sight of all Briard dogs 
with LCA as long as the therapy was given while the dogs were puppies. The 
sample (the eight Briard dogs observed) is a subgroup of the target (all Briard 
dogs). Second, Le Meur makes an analogical argument to infer from the prem-
ise that the therapy restored sight to puppies with LCA (the analogues) to the 
conclusion that the therapy may restore the sight to human infants with LCA 
(the primary subjects). This is an analogical argument because dogs aren’t a 
subgroup of humans.
Small changes can make what would be an analogical argument into a 
statistical argument. The argument about LCA contains an analogy because 
dogs aren’t a subset of humans. But suppose that the scientists used the ob-
servations about Briard dogs to draw a conclusion about all mammals. In that 
case, the argument would be statistical because Briard dogs are a subset of 
mammals. (As you’ll see in a moment, this would be a bad statistical argu-
ment because the sample would lack variety. Le Meur did not make this bad 
argument.)
Technical Terms: Statistical Generalizations, Statistical Inferences, 
Inductive Generalizations Class, Set, Subclass, Subset, Individual, 
Member, Object Population Generalization, Environmental 
Generalization, Temporal Generalization
Statistical arguments are sometimes called “statistical generalizations,” “statisti-
cal inferences,” and/or “inductive generalizations.” Some disciplines use “statistical 
generalization” to refer to the conclusion of a statistical argument. Others refer to 
the inference from the premise to the conclusion as “the generalization.”
The groups in samples are often called “classes” or “sets,” and subgroups are 
often called “subclasses,” “subsets,” or “strata.” The things in samples are often 
called “individuals” (especially if the things are people), “members,” or “objects.”
Some researchers refer to “population generalizations,” “environmental gener-
alizations,” and “temporal generalizations.” While these terms are used in different 
ways, “population generalization” is usually another word for a statistical argu-
ment, whereas “environmental generalization” and “temporal generalization” are 
usually terms for analogical arguments. 
Key Concept
In an analogical 
argument, you’re 
comparing one group 
to another group and 
the fi rst group is not a 
subgroup of the second. 
In a statistical argument, 
you’re comparing one 
group (the sample) to 
another group (the 
target) and the fi rst 
group is a subgroup of 
the second.

280  Chapter 8 Statistical Arguments 
EXERCISE 8.3
A. For each of the following, determine whether there’s a statistical argument present. If 
there is, standardize it into either the General form or the Particular form. Identify the 
sample, the N, the relevant property or properties, the target, and the percentage. (In 
some cases, one or more of the fi ve parts of a statistical argument in standard form may 
be missing.)
 1. Five Green party members I have known are all French. Ralph Nader is a Green party 
member. Therefore, Ralph is probably French.
 2. The tigers in the San Diego Zoo all have stripes. Thus, all tigers probably have stripes.
 3. I ate at the new Char-Lee’s restaurant yesterday and the food was pretty good, so I in-
tend to eat there again today. It will probably be just as good today.
 *4. So far this semester, my instructor has announced all quizzes ahead of time. She’ll prob-
ably announce the next quiz ahead of time.
 5. A survey of all the students taking Phil 1000 during Summer 2005 found that 60% of 
them earned either an A or a B in the course, thus the chances of other students getting 
an A or a B are better than 50-50.
 6. Use Exercise 8.1 A 7.
 7. Use Exercise 8.1 A 13.
 *8. A line chart shows that the mean temperature increased steadily from 1955 to 2000 in 
the United States, Europe, and Antarctica. This shows that the global mean tempera-
ture probably also increased steadily during that time.
 9. “One day while treating a patient, Freud encouraged her to relax on a couch. She ram-
bled on about her physical problems and about issues that appeared to be unrelated 
to her physical complaints. Suddenly, she had a revelation that left her feeling bet-
ter. Freud theorized that encouraging patients to say whatever comes to mind allowed 
them to recall forgotten memories that seemed to underlie their problems. This pro-
cess, known today as free association, is one element of psychoanalysis, a therapy that 
Freud developed. From these experiences, Freud came to believe that the unconscious 
plays a crucial role in human behavior.” (Pastorino 2006, 10)
 10. “Contemporary American tweens and teens have emerged as the most brand-oriented, 
consumer-involved, and materialistic generations in history. And they top the list glob-
ally. A survey of youth in more than fi fteen countries fi nds that 75 percent of U.S. 
tweens want to be rich, a higher percentage than anywhere else in the world except 
India, where the results were identical. Sixty-one percent want to be famous. More chil-
dren here than anywhere else believe that their clothes and brands describe who they 
are and defi ne their social status. American kids display more brand affinity than their 
counterparts anywhere else in the world; indeed experts describe them as increasingly 
‘bonded to brands.’” (Schaefer 2006, 54)
 11. Use Exercise 8.1 A 15.
 *12. Use Exercise 8.1 B 13.
 13. “On August 1, 1981, Reagan signed the Economic Recovery Tax Act, which cut per-
sonal income taxes by 25 percent, lowered the maximum rate from 70 to 50 percent 
for 1982, cut the capital gains tax by one third, and offered a broad array of other tax 
concessions.” (Bakeman 2007, 1007)

Evaluating Statistical Arguments  281
 14. “A very intense campaign has been underway to establish that no one really cares about 
unemployment. It is contended that only infl ation engenders concern and fear. After all, 
it is said, 92.5 percent are employed and only 7.5 percent are unemployed. It does sound 
small when put in these bland, cold terms, and there are no cries of anguish to disturb 
the sleep of the vast majority. But now put it another way: 7,003,000 people—mostly 
adults—are without jobs. True, they eat—but not too much; they have some sort of 
shelter; some even have health care. But many, including children, are in chronic ill 
health, or are ill nourished, and living a life of punishment and systematic abuse as if 
they had done some evil to this Nation.” (King 1976, 636)
 15. “We say the unemployed can be provided jobs at productive labor with decent wages. It 
has been done in other developed countries without curbing profi ts or liberties.” (King 
1976, 637)
Evaluating Statistical Arguments
You evaluate statistical arguments using the true premises test and the proper 
form test. But you need to know some details about how to apply the two 
tests to statistical arguments.
The True Premises Test
The application of the true premises test to statistical arguments is 
straightforward. Look back at the General form. Statistical arguments have 
only one premise, and this premise is a claim about something that someone 
observed. In applying the true premises test, you apply the test as it was out-
lined in Chapter Two with the revisions noted in Chapter Three. To jog your 
memory, Chapter Two said that a premise is true when it’s a correct descrip-
tion of the world. But, as a report of someone’s observation, the fi rst premise 
of a statistical argument will often be an assumed premise, and you should 
use the guidelines for proper assumption from Chapter Three.
The Proper Form Test
A statistical argument with proper form can be put into the General form or 
the Particular form, but more than that is required for it to be a good argu-
ment. Think again about the ice cream shop. You ask for a sample of vanilla-
chocolate-caramel swirl. You’re relying on the following argument.
(1)  100% of 2 tablespoons in the tasted subset of the vanilla-chocolate-
caramel swirl in the shop has taste T.
Therefore,
(2)  100% of all of the vanilla-chocolate-caramel swirl in the shop has 
taste T.
But suppose that, when you ask for a sample, the salesperson reaches in 
with the little sampling spoon and gives you a sample that contains only 
caramel—no chocolate and no vanilla. You’d object. “Hey, that’s not a good 

282  Chapter 8 Statistical Arguments 
sample! Give me a sample that includes vanilla, chocolate, and caramel!” If 
the sales person gave you a sample that contained some vanilla, some choco-
late, and some caramel, that would be a good sample. A good sample is called 
“a representative sample.” 
To be more precise, a sample is perfectly representative when the propor-
tions of every subgroup in the target are exactly matched by the proportions 
of the subgroups in the sample. A sample of vanilla-chocolate-caramel is per-
fectly representative if the proportions of vanilla, chocolate, and caramel in 
the sample are precisely the same as the proportions of vanilla, chocolate, 
and caramel in the tub of ice cream. Representativeness is a matter of degree. 
A sample is more or less representative. A statistical argument passes the 
proper form test when (a) it can be put into the General or Particular form and 
(b) the sample is sufficiently representative.
A sample that isn’t representative is a biased sample. A sample is  biased 
when the proportions of every subgroup in the target do not match the pro-
portions of the subgroups in the sample. When the salesperson gives you a 
sample of vanilla-chocolate-caramel swirl that contains only caramel, that’s 
a biased sample. Bias makes a statistical argument fail the proper form test.
Any interesting target contains things with many different properties. 
In many cases, it’s almost impossible to get a sample that perfectly rep-
resents the proportions of all those properties. Think of the thousands of 
chemical properties of cancer cells. Getting a perfectly representative sam-
ple is also hard because you often don’t know all the properties of the target 
and there’s no practical way to fi nd out. Think of all the things you don’t 
know about all the different people in the world. To apply the proper form 
test, you need some guidelines to help you generate good (but not perfect) 
samples.
Guideline 1: Size 
The larger the sample, the more likely that it is representative.
In general, the larger the sample, the greater the chance it’s representative 
of the target, and therefore the stronger the argument. Beehner’s argument 
would be stronger if she had observed more baboons.
When looking at sample size, you should look at the sample and the tar-
get. If the sample is a large proportion of the target, it’s more likely to be a 
good sample. Suppose that one study has a target of all humans and another 
has a target of all 4th graders at a small elementary school. A sample of fi fty 
is too small if the target is all humans, but if there are only 200 4th graders a 
sample of fi fty is very large. 
Guideline 2: Variety
The more varied the sample, the more likely that it is representative.
In general, the greater the variety in the sample, the greater the repre-
sentativeness of the sample. Beehner’s argument would be stronger if she 
had observed baboons in more parts of Africa. Suppose that a researcher was 
studying the nesting behavior of robins. Ideally, the researcher would observe 
some robins in every location where robins are found. If the researcher only 
observed robins in the state where the researcher lived, the sample would 
lack variety.
Key Concept
A sample is perfectly 
representative when 
the proportions of every 
subgroup in the target 
are exactly matched by 
the proportions of the 
subgroups in the sample.
Key Concept
A statistical argument 
passes the proper form 
test when (a) it can be 
put into the General or 
Particular form and (b) 
the sample is suffi ciently 
representative.
Key Concept
A sample is biased 
when the proportions 
of every subgroup in 
the target do not match 
the proportions of the 
subgroups in the sample.

Evaluating Statistical Arguments  283
The amount and kind of variety necessary to get a representative sample 
is determined by background knowledge. Suppose that someone objected 
to a statistical argument made by the robin researcher on the grounds that 
the sample didn’t include robins living in cities whose names began with a 
vowel. This is a bad objection. There’s no reason to think that the charac-
teristics of the target (robins) vary according to the names of cities. On the 
other hand, because climate and other environmental conditions differ from 
state to state, you expect variation among robins living in different states.
Another way that background knowledge is relevant to sample variety 
is that you have information about the variety within different targets. A 
researcher studying the chemical properties of calcium doesn’t have to worry 
about where the calcium came from. As long as it’s pure calcium, background 
knowledge indicates that its chemical properties won’t vary according to 
where it was found. Calcium is different from robins. If a researcher has good 
reason to think that there’s little variation within a target, then he can use a 
smaller sample. 
Adding to a sample makes it more representative only if the variety the 
things added is relevant to the conclusion. If you wondered whether the ma-
jority of the people living in the United States were college educated, and 
your fi rst survey only included people from twenty-fi ve states, adding data 
from the other twenty-fi ve states would make your sample more varied and 
more representative. But if you added residents from Canada and Mexico, the 
variety of the sample would be increased but it wouldn’t be relevant variety 
because your target is people in the United States.
Sampling Techniques
Because the representativeness of a sample is crucial, the methods used to 
select a sample are also crucial. There are several different kinds of samples, 
Jupiter Unlimited

284  Chapter 8 Statistical Arguments 
and part of the art of argument is determining which ones would be best for 
each different situation. 
A simple random sample is one in which all the things in the target have 
an equal chance of being in the sample. In many cases, simple random sam-
ples are the best samples. But a simple random sample can be impractical. If 
a target is very large, it may be hard to randomly sample it. Another disad-
vantage of a simple random sample is that some random samples don’t ac-
curately refl ect the actual distribution of things in the target. This problem 
often occurs if the sample is small. A lot of research in psychology and medi-
cine uses nonrandom samples because of the great difficulty and expense of 
getting a large and varied simple random sample.
If the target contains different groups that will affect the research be-
ing conducted, a researcher might want to make sure that the sample in-
cludes things from each of the subgroups. Stratifi ed random samples allow a 
researcher to select a sample that refl ects the actual distribution in the target. 
In a stratifi ed random sample, the target is fi rst divided into subgroups and 
then a simple random sample is taken from each subgroup. These simple 
random samples are then combined to create the complete sample. A strati-
fi ed random sample is often the best way to produce a sample that accurately 
refl ects a varied target. 
When researchers use a systematic sample, they select every Nth thing 
from a list of all things in the target. If you had a list of all college students in 
the country and chose every tenth student on the list until you had a sample 
of 1,000 students, you’d generate a systematic sample. A systematic sample 
may seem random, but in fact a researcher can greatly infl uence what things 
are in the sample, either by the ordering of the list or by the way in which the 
selection is made.
Voluntary response samples are composed of people who voluntarily 
choose to respond to a call for data. This sampling method is often used in 
surveys distributed by mail. Only those who actually fi ll out and return the 
survey are included in the data. The primary disadvantage of this form of 
sample is that some respondents might choose to respond solely because 
they have a vested interest in producing a particular result. In addition, these 
surveys often suffer from the problem of nonresponse. Some people in the 
sample don’t supply data.
If someone chooses sample things for no reason at all but simply by whim, 
he has chosen a haphazard sample. Haphazard selection can result in biased 
samples in several ways. Someone might accidentally choose things that 
don’t accurately represent the target as a whole. There could be unknown fac-
tors causing these things to be more likely to be selected. They may happen 
to be nearer the person making the selection, and this may turn out to be in-
fl uential if things aren’t similar in relevant properties to the target. Although 
both haphazard and random samples appear to be similar, they are different 
sampling techniques.
Convenience samples consist of those things that are easiest for the re-
searcher to reach. Convenience samples are geographically limited, and the 
samples they produce aren’t likely to represent the entire target. But this 
method provides readily accessible data to the researcher. This advantage can 
be important. Given the cost and difficulty of getting a large random sample, 
it can be perfectly appropriate to use a convenience sample. A researcher 
Key Concept
The many different kinds 
of samples.

Evaluating Statistical Arguments  285
might use a convenience sample in a pilot project to work out the problems 
in a study before conducting a simple random sample.
In a purposive sample the researcher selects from the target based on 
fi xed proportions. The target is separated into subgroups, and a fi xed propor-
tion of the sample is taken from each subgroup to produce the fi nal sample. If 
you want a ratio of 25% freshmen, 25% sophomores, 25% juniors, and 25% 
seniors to constitute a sample of 1,000 college students, you’d choose 250 
freshman, 250 sophomores, 250 juniors, and 250 seniors. A purposive sample 
differs from a stratifi ed random sample in that no randomized selection is 
used in a purposive sample.
The disadvantage of purposive sampling is that the proportions in the 
sample may not match the target. A college might have more than 25% 
freshmen and fewer than 25% seniors. The advantage of purposive sam-
pling is that it avoids undercoverage. Undercoverage occurs when some 
groups in the target are underrepresented. If a researcher hadn’t ensured 
that an equal number of students from each of the four classes were se-
lected, the sample might include more students from one class than from 
the other three. 
The problem of undercoverage is almost impossible to eliminate entirely. 
Suppose that you wanted to conduct a survey of American households by 
home telephone. This method of contacting people will rule out the pos-
sibility of including data from anyone who doesn’t have a home phone. The 
widespread use of cell phones has led to a decrease in the number of people 
with a home phone. A researcher might contact a randomly selected group of 
home phone numbers and then add a purposive component to the sample by 
seeking out people who only have a cell phone. 
If all things in a target are known and accessible, a census may be used. In 
a census, the researcher observes each and every thing in the target. A census 
isn’t a sample because you have a sample when you observe less than every-
thing belonging to the target. A census is obviously perfectly representative 
because you’ve observed all the things in the target. 
Technical Terms: Cluster Sample, Quota Sample, Probability Sample, 
U.S. Population Census
Stratifi ed random samples are sometimes called “cluster samples.” Purposive 
samples are also called “quota samples.”
“Probability sample” is used differently across different disciplines. Some use 
“probability sample” to refer only to simple random samples. Others use it to refer 
to any sample with a random component. And there are other uses as well. When 
you see the term “probability sample,” remember to fi gure out what it means in 
that discipline. 
The U.S. government sends out surveys every ten years to all households to 
determine the number of people residing in the country. The U.S. Census Bureau 
then sends people house-to-house to contact those who haven’t responded. It also 
seeks out homeless people and people living in institutions. Because there’s no way 
of determining the exact number of people residing in the country, the U.S. Census 
might be more accurately described as a voluntary response sample of the U.S. 
population. Data from the Census is used in many ways. For example, it determines 
the distribution of congressional seats and school districts.
Key Concept
Undercoverage occurs 
when some groups in 
the target are under-
represented.
Key Concept
In a census, the researcher 
observes each and every 
thing in the target.

286  Chapter 8 Statistical Arguments 
Statistical Fallacies
This chapter discusses three statistical fallacies: Hasty Generalization, Bi-
ased Sample, and Biased Questions.
Fallacy: Hasty Generalization
The Fallacy of Hasty Generalization occurs when a statistical argument uses 
a sample that’s too small. According to Guideline 1, the larger the sample, the 
more likely that it’s representative. In some cases, the sample of a statistical 
argument is so small that the argument should simply be ignored. If someone 
draws a conclusion about all children from a sample of two of them, that’s 
an example of the Fallacy of Hasty Generalization. In this case, the statistical 
argument fails the proper form test.
Fallacy: Biased Sample
According to Guideline 2, the more varied the sample, the more likely that it’s 
representative. The Biased Sample Fallacy occurs when a sample has a serious 
lack of variety. Suppose someone argued that 100% of the 2,000 dolphins he’d 
Key Concept
The Fallacy of Hasty 
Generalization occurs 
when a statistical 
argument uses a sample 
that’s too small.
Key Concept
The Biased Sample 
Fallacy occurs when a 
sample has a serious lack 
of variety.
EXERCISE 8.4
A. For each of the statistical arguments in Exercise 8.3 A, determine which sampling tech-
nique was used.
B. Evaluate each of the statistical arguments in Exercise 8.3 A. (Don’t forget to do both the true 
premises test and the proper form test.)
C. Find three research studies using different sampling techniques, identify the technique 
used, and suggest one that would be make the argument stronger. Write a one-page essay to 
present and explain your results.
Critical Thinkers
Robert Groves
Robert Groves is an expert on sampling. He uses his critical thinking skills to pick the right 
sampling technique for the issue under consideration and to conduct sampling properly. 
He’s the author or co-author of seven books and more than fi fty articles on sampling. 
He’s also the Director of the U.S. Census Bureau. Groves had been Research Professor of 
Sociology at the University of Michigan. You can read one of his articles on the problem 
of nonresponse at http://poq.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/content/abstract/72/2/167. You can 
fi nd all sorts of interesting statistics including up to the minute world and U.S. population 
fi gures at the web site of the U.S. Census Bureau at http://www.census.gov/.
U.S. Census Bureau, Public Information Offi ce 

Statistical Fallacies  287
seen were grey; therefore, all dolphins are grey. The sample is large. But sup-
pose that this person has only seen dolphins in the Gulf of Mexico. The sample 
lacks variety. In this case, the argument commits the Biased Sample Fallacy. 
Biased samples are harder to spot than small samples.
Think again about Le Meur’s dogs with LCA. Le Meur tested her new treat-
ment on the eyes of eight Briard dogs, seven puppies and an adult dog. The sight 
of the seven puppies was restored. The adult dog was unaffected. She concluded 
that this treatment might work on human infants. Remember that Le Meur is 
using both a statistical argument and an analogical argument. Let’s focus on her 
statistical argument. Because Le Meur can’t study all the Briard dogs in the world, 
she studied a sample of them. Her sample was eight dogs. She made a statistical 
argument to draw a conclusion about all Briard dogs. Here’s her conclusion:
In conclusion, we have demonstrated that targeted gene transfer can be used to 
correct the [sight of LCA] purebred Briard dogs. (Le Meur 2006, 9, material omitted)
She says that it “can” cure LCA. In other words, she concluded that the therapy 
might restore the sight of all Briard dogs with LCA (as long as the therapy was 
given while the dogs were puppies). Le Meur shows appropriate intellectual humil-
ity. She doesn’t conclude that her new treatment will cure LCA in all Briard dogs. 
But suppose that Peyton doesn’t show proper intellectual humility. He 
reads Le Meur’s article and concludes that 
Le Meur’s treatment will cure LCA in all dogs.
Peyton has committed the Fallacy of Hasty Generalization. A sample of eight 
dogs is much too small to conclude that the treatment will cure LCA in all 
Briard dogs. And he has committed the Biased Sample Fallacy. The sample 
has a serious lack of variety if the target is all dogs because Le Meur only 
tested one breed.
Fallacy: Biased Questions
The Fallacy of Biased Questions occurs when a survey asks for information 
with questions which are worded in a way that tends to encourage a particular 
response. The error could be intentional as in cases when a particular outcome 
is desired for political reasons. The error could be unintentional. Sometimes 
questions can be biased by the context (the time and place) in which they’re 
asked. Asking people their views about gun control after they’ve seen a movie 
showing brutal murders is likely to bias the answers.
Suppose a university was thinking about a change in grading policy. They 
were thinking of changing from a letter-only grading system of A, B, C, D, or F 
to a plus/minus grading system of A+, A, A–, B+, B, etc. If students were asked 
whether they believed that a student earning an 89% on a test should get a 
higher grade than a student earning an 81% on the same test, most likely the 
majority of students would reply “Yes.” On the other hand, if students were 
asked if they were in favor of an A– counting for less on their GPA than an 
A, it wouldn’t be surprising if the majority replied “No.” Both questions are 
about parts of the new policy, but the fi rst question focuses the responders’ 
attention on the possibility of an increase in GPA whereas the second focuses 
attention on the possibility of a decrease in GPA. Both questions would be 
instances of the Fallacy of Biased Questions.
Key Concept
The Fallacy of Biased 
Questions occurs 
when a survey asks 
for information with 
questions which are 
worded in a way that 
tends to encourage a 
particular response.

288  Chapter 8 Statistical Arguments 
EXERCISE 8.5
A. In the following passages, determine whether any arguments are present. If an argument 
is present, determine whether any fallacy is committed. If a fallacy is committed, identify 
whether it’s a statistical fallacy or another type of fallacy. Don’t forget that statistical argu-
ments can commit fallacies which aren’t specifi c to statistical arguments as well as statisti-
cal fallacies. 
 1. I went to the Georgia Aquarium yesterday. All fi sh I saw there had no teeth. I bet that 
no fi sh have teeth.
 2. In the fall of 2010 a survey was sent to all 10,000 students registered for classes at Very 
Cool University (VCU). Twenty percent of them returned the survey. In response to 
one question, 73% of the respondents indicated that they thought it should be illegal to 
make hiring decisions based on a person’s sexual orientation. It seems that about three-
fourths of all college students think that this kind of hiring practice should be illegal.
 3. “Gallop surveyed people in October 2003 with the following question: ‘When a patient 
is in a persistent vegetative state caused by irreversible brain damage, do you think his 
or her spouse should or should not be allowed by law to make the fi nal decision to end 
the patient’s life by some painless means?’ Eighty percent of those surveyed said yes, the 
spouse should be allowed; 17% said no, and 3% said they had no opinion on the matter” 
(Janda 2008, 538–539). Suppose someone argued that he or she should be allowed to end 
a spouse’s life because 80% of Americans believe it is the right of the spouse to do so. 
Would such an argument commit one or more fallacies, and if so, which one(s)?
 *4. “[E]ducation plays a critical role in social mobility. The impact of formal schooling on 
adult status is even greater than that of family background (although as we have seen, 
family background infl uences the likelihood that one will receive higher education). 
Furthermore, education represents an important means of intergenerational mobility. 
Habits of a Critical Thinker
Inquisitiveness 
When you see a survey and ask these fi ve questions 
you are showing an inquisitive attitude. Being inquisi-
tive doesn’t mean being confrontational or refusing 
to see what’s good in an argument. It means asking 
probing questions. Inquisitive people don’t believe 
something just because someone says it’s true. They 
ask questions and evaluate arguments before deciding 
what to believe. 
When you see data based on a survey, you need to remember to check 
for biased questions. Here’s a list of questions you should ask about any data 
based on surveys:
1. What was the exact wording of the questions?
2. In what context were the questions asked?
3. Was there a problem of nonresponse?
4. What’s the mean, the average, and the standard deviation?
5. Are there any outliers?

Statistical Fallacies  289
Three-fourths of college-educated men in these studies achieved some upward mobility, 
while only 12% of those who received no schooling did.” (Schaefer 2006, 202)
 5. Use Exercise 8.1 A 13.
 6. Use Exercise 8.1 A 15.
 7. Use Exercise 8.1 B 13.
 *8. Use Exercise 8.3 A 9.
 9. “On election day, [then Presidential candidate Ronald] Reagan swept to a decisive vic-
tory, with 489 electoral votes to 49 for [then President Jimmy] Carter, who carried only 
six states. The popular vote proved equally lopsided: 44 million (51 percent) to 35 mil-
lion (41 percent), with 7 percent going to John Anderson, [who] ran on an independent 
ticket.” (Bakeman 2007, 1007, material omitted)
 10. “On August 1, 1981, Reagan signed the Economic Recovery Tax Act, which cut per-
sonal income taxes by 25 percent, lowered the maximum rate from 70 to 50 percent 
for 1982, cut the capital gains tax by one third, and offered a broad array of other 
tax concessions. The new legislation embodied an idea that went back to Alexander 
Hamilton, George Washington’s Treasury secretary: more money in the hands of the 
affluent would benefi t society at large, since the wealthy would engage in productive 
consumption and investment. The difference was that the Reagan tax cuts were ac-
companied by massive increases in defense spending, which generated ever-mounting 
federal defi cits. The president, who in 1980 had pledged to balance the federal budget 
by 1983, had in fact run up debts larger than those of all his predecessors combined.” 
(Bakeman 2007, 1007)
 11. “This section presents vital statistics data on births, deaths, abortions, fetal deaths, 
fertility, life expectancy, marriages, and divorces. Vital statistics are compiled for the 
country as a whole by the National Center for Health Statistics and published in its 
annual report, Vital Statistics of the United States.  Vital events occurring to U.S. resi-
dents outside the United States are not included in the data.” (U.S. Census Bureau 2000, 
63, material omitted) What effect on the enormous number of statistical arguments 
made on the basis of this data will there be, given the exclusion of residents outside the 
country? Suppose arguments using the data mentioned the qualifi cation. Would there 
still be a fallacious effect on the argument? Why or why not?
 *12.  “We [Americans] read much more now that we did in the 1950s. In 1957, 17 percent 
of people surveyed in a Gallup poll said they were currently reading a book; in 1990, 
over twice as many did. In 1953, 40 percent of people polled by Gallup could name the 
author of Huckleberry Finn; in 1990, 51 percent could. In 1950, 8,600 new titles were 
published; in 1981, almost fi ve times as many.
“In fact, Americans are buying more books now than ever before—over 2 bil-
lion in 1992. Between the early ’70s and the early ’80s, the number of bookstores in 
this country nearly doubled—and that was before the Barnes & Noble superstore and 
Amazon.com. People aren’t just buying books as status objects, either. A 1992 survey 
found that the average adult American reads 11.2 books per year, which means that 
the country as a whole reads about 2 billion—the number bought. There are more 
than 250,000 reading groups in the country at the moment, which means that some-
thing like 2 million people regularly read books and meet to discuss them.” (MacFar-
quhar 2007, 64)

290  Chapter 8 Statistical Arguments 
 13. Aid from Coalition Support Funds to Pakistan
Year 
Support in $Billions
2002 
$1.25 billion
2003 
$1.25 billion
2004 
$700 million estimate
2005 
$980 million estimate
2006 
$780 million estimate
2007 
$305 million estimate
2008 
$300 million (pending approval)
Based on the data above, the New York Times concluded that aid to Pakistan has fal-
len. The support provided, known as Coalition Support Funds, is supposed to reimburse 
Pakistan for its military operations against terrorism, although there is some evidence 
that the money is used for nonmilitary governmental expenses. Congress has put a hold 
on some of the support until [then] Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice certifi es that de-
mocratic rights have been restored (following Pakistani President Musharraf’s declaration 
of a state of emergency on December 16, 2007). Is the conclusion about aid to Pakistan 
sufficiently supported by the data? (Information drawn from Rohde 2007, A1 & A6)
 14. “The subprime mortgage crisis has been a fi nancial catastrophe for much of Wall Street. 
At Goldman Sachs Group, Inc., thanks to a tiny group of traders, it has generated one of 
the biggest windfalls the securities industry has seen in years.
“The group’s big bet that securities backed by risky home loans would fall in value 
generated nearly $4 billion of profi ts during the year ended November 30, [2007], ac-
cording to people familiar with the fi rm’s fi nances. Those gains erased $1.5 billion to $2 
billion of mortgage-related losses elsewhere in the fi rm. On Tuesday, despite a terrible 
November and some of the worst market conditions in decades, analysts expect Gold-
man to report a record net annual income of more than $11 billion. 
“Goldman has stood out on Wall Street for its penchant for rolling the dice with 
its own money. The upside of the approach was obvious in the third quarter: Despite 
credit-market turmoil, Goldman earned $2.9 billion, its second-best three-month pe-
riod ever.
“Goldman’s trading home run was blasted from an obscure corner of the fi rm’s 
mortgage department—the structured-products trading group, which now numbers 16 
traders. 
“Goldman’s success at wringing profi ts out of the subprime fi asco, however, raises 
questions about how the fi rm balances its responsibilities to its shareholders and to its 
clients. Goldman’s mortgage department underwrote collateralized debt obligations, or 
CDOs, complex securities created from pools of subprime mortgages and other debt. 
When those securities plunged in value this year, Goldman’s customers suffered major 
losses, as did units within Goldman itself. The question is now being raised: Why did 
Goldman continue to peddle CDOs to customers early this year while its own traders 
were betting that CDO values would fall? A spokesman for Goldman Sachs declined to 
comment on the issue.” (Kelly 2007, A1 & A18, material omitted)
B. Standardize each of the arguments in A. Identify the sample, the N, the relevant property or 
properties, the target, and the percentage. (In some cases, one or more of the fi ve parts of a 
statistical argument may be missing.)
C. Evaluate each argument in A by applying the true premises and proper form tests.

Chapter Summary  291
Statistical arguments are arguments that draw a 
conclusion about all members of a group by look-
ing at part of that group. Descriptive statistics 
report and analyze data about observed things.
 
One way to describe data is by looking at its 
center. This is sometimes called the “average” 
of the data and can be calculated in several ways. 
Averages include the mean, the weighted mean, 
the mode, the midrange, or the median. You 
should use the type of average that’s best for the 
issue being discussed. Data are also described by 
their spread, which is the amount the data points 
deviate from the center. Standard deviation is a 
primary measure of spread. A third way data are 
described is by looking at their shape on a chart. 
Statisticians use a method to fi nd the line that 
best fi ts the data, the regression line. It’s a useful 
tool for predicting trends or tendencies.
 
A proper statistical argument can be put 
into one of the following standard forms:
General 
(1)  P% of the N observed things 
in G have F.
Therefore,
 
(2)  P% of all the things in G 
have F.
Particular ( 1)  P% of the N observed things 
in G have F.
Therefore,
 
 
(2)  P% of all the things in G 
have F.
 
  
(3) X is a thing in G.
 
 
Therefore,
 
  
 (4)  There is a P% chance that X 
has F.
Chapter Summary
“P” and “N” are variables that refer to a num-
ber, “G” is a variable that refers to a group, and 
“F” is a variable that refers to a feature. Every 
statistical argument has fi ve parts. 
1. The observed things in G are the sample. 
2. The N is the number of things in the sample.
3. The features that these things have, the F, is 
the relevant property. 
4. All the things in G are the target.
5. P is the percentage of the observed things 
that have F. 
Evaluating statistical arguments with the true 
premises test is straightforward. A premise is 
true if it’s a correct description of the world. It 
can be assumed if the criteria for uncontrover-
sial empirical statements are met.
 
Statistical arguments have proper form when 
they can be put into the General or the Particu-
lar form and the sample is representative of the 
target. Size and variety are two guidelines for 
evaluating representativeness. Larger samples 
with greater variety increase the chance that the 
sample is representative of the target.
 
Researchers use many sampling techniques 
to produce good samples. Types of samples 
include simple random samples, stratifi ed 
random samples, systematic samples, volun-
tary response samples, haphazard samples, 
convenience samples, and purposive samples. 
Most of these types have both advantages and 
disadvantages.
 
As you evaluate statistical arguments, you 
should look for the Fallacy of Hasty Generaliza-
tion (the sample is too small), the Biased Sample 
Fallacy (the sample isn’t sufficiently varied), and 
the Biased Questions Fallacy. 

292  Chapter 8 Statistical Arguments 
G U I D E
Finding, Standardizing, and Evaluating Statistical Arguments
This Guide is an amplifi cation of the “Guide for Finding, Standardizing, and Evaluating 
Arguments” that is in Chapter Two. The numbered sentences are copies from the Guide in 
Chapter Two. The paragraphs with “Statistical” in front of them are additional materials 
that apply only to statistical arguments.
Finding Arguments
 1. Look for an attempt to convince. 
 
 Statistical. Look to see if there’s an attempt to convince that uses observations of a subset 
of a group to draw a conclusion about the entire group.
 2. Find the conclusion. 
 
 Statistical. Find the target and the relevant property.
 3. Find the premises. 
 
 Statistical. Find the sample.
 4. Review the following to make sure that you’ve correctly identifi ed the conclusion and 
the premises: imperfect indicator words, sentence order, premises and/or conclusion 
not in declarative form, and unstated premises and/or conclusion.
 5. Review the following to make sure that you haven’t incorrectly identifi ed something 
as a premise or a conclusion when in fact it’s not part of an argument: assertions, ques-
tions, instructions, descriptions, and explanations.
Standardizing Arguments
 6. Rewrite the premises and the conclusion as declarative sentences. Make sure that each 
premise and the conclusion is a grammatically correct declarative sentence. Rewrite 
the premises and conclusion as necessary to make them clearer but don’t change the 
meaning of the passage. Remove pronouns from the sentences and replace them with 
the nouns or noun phrases to which they refer. Remove emotionally charged language.
 7. Review any phrases you’ve omitted to be sure that they aren’t premises or a conclusion.
 8. Number the premises and the conclusion. Put brackets [ ] around the number of an unstated 
premise or conclusion. Place the premises before their conclusion and insert “Therefore,” 
between the premises and the conclusion. Use blank lines to indicate subarguments. 
 
 Statistical. Put the standardization in the standard form of a statistical argument:
General 
(1) P% of the N observed things in G have F.
 
 
Therefore,
 
 
(2) P% of all the things in G have F.
Particular (1) P% of the N observed things in G have F.
 
 
Therefore,
 
 
(2) P% of all the things in G have F.
 
 
(3) X is a thing in G.
 
 
Therefore,
 
 
(4) There is a P% chance that X has F.
 9. Compare your standardization to the original passage to make sure that you haven’t 
omitted any arguments found in the passage and to be sure that you’ve correctly identi-
fi ed the premises and the conclusion. 

Chapter Summary  293
Evaluating Arguments: The True Premises Test
 10. Check to see whether the premises are accurate descriptions of the world. 
Statistical. Check to see whether the sample has the relevant property that the argu-
ment claims it has.
 11. Consider whether the premises are appropriate for the argument’s audience.
 12. Review the assumed premises to be sure that the assumptions are reasonable. Make 
sure that all assumed premises are uncontroversially true empirical statements, uncon-
troversially true defi nitional statements, or appropriate statements by experts. Make 
sure the defi nitions are good ones.
Evaluating Arguments: The Proper Form Test
 13. Determine whether the argument is a deductive argument or inductive argument. 
 14. Determine whether the premises are relevant to the conclusion. Look at each premise 
individually to see whether the truth of the premise provides some evidence for the 
truth of the conclusion. Look at the premises as a group to see whether the truth of all 
of them provides some evidence for the truth of the conclusion. 
Statistical. Evaluate the representativeness of the sample. Determine the sampling 
technique. Consider whether the sample is sufficiently large and sufficiently varied.
Evaluating Arguments: Checking for Fallacies
 15. Compare the argument to the list of fallacies on page 410 to see whether the argument 
commits any of the fallacies.

294
NEW ORLEANS—Within a space of 15 hours on Aug. 29, three massive, concrete 
fl oodwalls in separate parts of the city suddenly fractured and burst under the weight 
of surging waters from Hurricane Katrina. The breaches unleashed a wall of water that 
swept entire buildings from their foundations and transformed what might have been 
a routine hurricane into the costliest storm in U.S. history. Today all three breaches are 
looking less like acts of God and more like failures of engineering that could have been 
anticipated and very likely prevented. 
—Joby Warrick and Michael Grunwald, “Investigators Link Levee Failures to 
Design Flaws.” (Warrick 2005, A01, material omittted) 
9
Causal Arguments
Learning Outcomes
After studying the material in this chapter, you should be able to:
1. Identify causal arguments and determine whether their 
conclusions are making claims about necessary, suffi cient, 
contributory, primary, remote, and/or proximate causes.
2. Evaluate causal arguments, using Mill’s Methods, checking 
for reverse or third-party causation, and considering 
coincidental correlation.
3. Identify and avoid the Hasty Cause, Causal Slippery Slope, 
and Post Hoc Fallacies.
4. Recognize and correctly use causal arguments by elimination.
5. Recognize and correctly use the scientifi c method.

The Many Meanings of “Cause”  295
Everyone wonders about causes. The passage on the previous page makes 
a claim about the cause of fl ooding in New Orleans. If you say that your 
home is chilly because your furnace pilot has gone out, you’ve made a 
causal argument. On a history exam you may have to write about events 
and conditions that led to World War I. In that case, you’ve been assigned to 
review a set of causal arguments. Causal arguments are common in science. 
The cause of global warming is currently a matter of great debate. Business 
courses rely on causal arguments when they consider causes of recessions. 
The Many Meanings of “Cause”
A cause is an event or state of affairs that produces another event or state 
of affairs, the effect. This general defi nition is accurate, but it isn’t specifi c 
enough. For one thing, what’s the difference between events and states of af-
fairs? In addition, there are at least seven different kinds of causes.
An event is something that happens at a particular time. A baseball shat-
tering a pane of glass is an event. A state of affairs is a situation that persists 
for a period of time. States of affairs are also called “conditions.” During the 
1930s, in the United States, farming practices and a drought created an envi-
ronmental state of affairs, the Dust Bowl, that caused crop failure and poverty. 
The line between an event and a state of affairs is vague. Suppose that a 
bridge isn’t built right and is slowly sinking into the sand of a river. Imagine 
that it takes a month for the bridge to fi nish sinking, and one day the bridge 
collapses and sinks. Is the sinking an event or a state of affairs? There’s no 
clear answer because “event” and “state of affairs” are somewhat vague. In 
this book, we’ll use the shorter word “event” to refer to states of affairs and 
events. 
Connections
We’ve just made “event” into a technical term. Chapter Four discusses technical 
terms. Chapter Four also discusses vagueness.
Think about the fl ooding that occurred in New Orleans after Hurricane 
Katrina. At the beginning of this chapter you saw part of an article from the 
Washington Post that reports on a debate about the cause of this fl ooding. 
The article contains several examples of causal claims. We’ve numbered the 
paragraphs so that we can refer to them more easily.
1.  NEW ORLEANS – Within a space of 15 hours on Aug. 29, three mas-
sive, concrete fl oodwalls in separate parts of the city suddenly frac-
tured and burst under the weight of surging waters from Hurricane 
Katrina. The breaches unleashed a wall of water that swept entire 
buildings from their foundations and transformed what might have 
been a routine hurricane into the costliest storm in U.S. history.
Key Concept
A cause is an event 
or state of affairs that 
produces another event 
or state of affairs, the 
effect.
Key Concept
An event is something 
that happens at a 
particular time. A state 
of affairs is a situation 
that persists for a period 
of time.

296  Chapter 9 Causal Arguments
 2.  Today all three breaches are looking less like acts of God and more 
like failures of engineering that could have been anticipated and very 
likely  prevented.
 3.  [U.S. Army Corp of Engineers] spokesman Jason Fanselau said the 
agency’s own data point to a massive surge that exceeded the height 
of the Industrial Canal fl oodwall by more than a few feet.
 4.  “Katrina fl at-out overwhelmed the system,” he said. “There was a 
huge wall of water that obliterated entire sections of the fl oodwall.”
 5.  [However,] in the case of the 17th Street and London Avenue canals, 
independent investigators believe the fl oodwalls themselves were the 
problem. The reason was the naturally soft soil made up of river silts and 
swampy peat that has been the bane of builders here for two centuries.
 6.  Investigators now believe the walls collapsed when the soils beneath 
them became saturated and began to shift under the weight of rela-
tively modest surges from the lake. And newly released documents 
show that the Corps was aware years ago that a particularly unstable 
layer of soil lay beneath both fl oodwalls.
 7.  “These levees did not overtop, yet they failed anyway,” said Peter 
Nicholson, an engineering professor at the University of Hawaii 
at Manoa. “It’s important that we fi nd out now exactly what went 
wrong, because the Corps is already starting to rebuild.”
 8.  Reports of problems with the soft underlayer began to surface even 
before the fl oodwalls were fi nished. In 1994, the now-defunct Pitt-
man Construction Co., a New Orleans fi rm involved in levee con-
struction, claimed in court documents that fl oodwall sections were 
failing to line up properly because of unstable soils. An administra-
tive law judge dismissed the complaint on technical grounds in 1998, 
without specifi cally addressing the allegations about weak soils.
 9.  Corps officials are not yet convinced. “It is important not to jump to 
conclusions,” said John Grieshaber, chief of the engineering division 
in the Corps’ New Orleans district office. “It’s hard to look at the after-
effects and say with a high level of certainty, ‘This is what happened.’”
10.  The Corps’ actions since the storm, however, suggest that at least some 
officials are worried about weaknesses in the fl oodwalls’ design. A pro-
posal for rebuilding the fl oodwalls has set far tougher standards than 
existed 15 years ago. And the steel pilings, which formerly reached a 
depth of 20 feet, must now be driven through the peat layer to 40 feet, 
twice as deep as before.  (Warrick 2005, A01, material omitted) 
Cause as Necessary Condition
Many people think that Hurricane Katrina was the cause of the fl ooding in 
New Orleans. Look at the claim made in paragraph 4.
 4.  “Katrina fl at-out overwhelmed the system,” [Corps spokesman Jason 
Fanselau] said. “There was a huge wall of water that obliterated entire 
sections of the fl oodwall.”
Why do people think that Katrina was the cause of the fl ooding? A fi rst at-
tempt to answer this question might be: 
If Hurricane Katrina hadn’t hit New Orleans, the fl ooding wouldn’t have 
occurred.

The Many Meanings of “Cause”  297
City of New Orleans
Area Map
30
20
10
0
–10
Elevations in Feet NGVD
–20
30
20
10
0
–10
–20
Floodwall Along
Mississippi River
Hurricane
Protection Levee
& Floodwall
23 FT
Avg Annual Highwater 14 FT
Gentilly
Ridge
Normal Lake 1.0 FT Level
17.5 FT
18 FT Project Flowline
SPH Design
Elevation 11.5 FT
Canal St.
at River
St. Louis
Cathedral
Esplanade at
St. Claude
Derbigny at I-10
Gentilly Blvd.
at Allen
Dillard Univ.
Campus
St. Anthony at
Wildair Dr.
Wainright Dr.
at L.C. Simon
UNO Side of
Wainright Dr.
UNO
Lake
Pontchartrain
Shoreline
Mississippi
 
Ri
ver Bank
B
A
Lake
Pontchartrain
New
Orleans
A
B
Most people think that this claim is true. After all, for many years, there wasn’t 
any fl ooding. Then Katrina arrived and the fl ooding started. The claim in para-
graph 4 is an assertion of a causal necessary condition. A causal  necessary 
 condition is an event that’s required for the production of another event. Some-
one who says that Katrina is the cause of the fl ooding may be asserting that the 
arrival of Katrina was a necessary condition for the fl ooding. Many other neces-
sary conditions also contributed to the fl ooding. New Orleans must have been 
built where it is (if it had been built farther inland, it wouldn’t have fl ooded). 
The atmosphere of the Earth must contain water vapor (if the atmosphere of 
the Earth didn’t contain water vapor, there would be no hurricanes).
Other people cited in this article claim that other conditions are neces-
sary for the fl ooding. Look at the claims made in paragraphs 5 and 6.
 5.  [However,] in the case of the 17th Street and London Avenue canals, 
independent investigators believe the fl oodwalls themselves were the 
problem. The reason was the naturally soft soil made up of river silts and 
swampy peat that has been the bane of builders here for two centuries.
 6.  Investigators now believe the walls collapsed when the soils beneath 
them became saturated and began to shift under the weight of rela-
tively modest surges from the lake. 
Key Concept
A causal necessary 
condition is an event 
that’s required for the 
production of another 
event.
Figure New Orleans Levee System, MIT Department of Architecture, 2006, http://stuff.mit.edu/
afs/athena/course/4/4.196/OldFiles/www/New_Orleans_Levee_System.gif; http://soundwaves.
usgs.gov/2006/01/NewOrleansMapLG.jpg; http://www.neworleansleveesystem.com/images/ 
bigleveemap.gif; http://img.dailymail.co.uk/i/pix/2008/05_03/bradpittlevee_468x326.jpg
City of New Orleans ground elevations from Canal Street at the Mississippi River to the lakefront at U.N.O. 

298  Chapter 9 Causal Arguments
Here the Washington Post reports that some people believe that the incor-
rect placement of the levees on soft soil was a necessary condition for the 
fl ooding. They assert that if the levees hadn’t been built on these soils, they 
wouldn’t have failed and the fl ooding wouldn’t have occurred.
Cause as Suffi cient Condition
A causal sufficient condition is an event that, all by itself, will always produce 
another event. Causal sufficient conditions are hard to fi nd. All by itself, no 
one event would have been sufficient to cause the fl ooding in New Orleans. 
Katrina isn’t a sufficient condition for the fl ooding. The fl ooding didn’t occur 
everywhere Katrina hit. In addition to the hurricane, certain local conditions 
were required in order for fl ooding to occur. 
Examples of sufficient causal conditions usually seem artifi cial. Driving 
from Quebec to Atlanta is a sufficient cause of traveling from Canada to the 
United States It isn’t necessary. You could fl y from Ontario to Chicago. It’s 
unlikely that you’d ever make causal claims like these.
Cause as Necessary and Suffi cient Condition
A causal necessary and sufficient condition is an event that’s required for the 
production of another event and will produce that event all by itself. Causal 
necessary and sufficient conditions are even harder to fi nd than causal suf-
fi cient conditions. But here’s one. The Earth can be divided into two hemi-
spheres, the northern hemisphere and the southern hemisphere. The border 
between the two is the equator. Crossing the equator is a causal necessary and 
sufficient condition for moving from one of these two hemispheres to the other.
Contributory Cause
Suppose that you’re fi lling a tank with water. To fi ll it, you’re using twenty 
small containers. You pour the water from these containers into the tank. 
Pouring the water from all the containers into the tank causes the tank to 
fi ll up and overfl ow. None of these containers holds enough water in it to fi ll 
up the tank. None of them by itself is a sufficient cause of the overfl ow of 
the tank. None of them by itself is a necessary cause of the overfl ow. If you 
picked any one of the small containers and didn’t pour it into the tank, the 
tank would still overfl ow. Of the twenty containers, any of them could be the 
one that makes the tank overfl ow. You can’t point to any container as the one 
that causes the tank to overfl ow. You can’t say that container #20 is required 
for the tank to overfl ow any more than you could say that container #1 is 
required for it to overfl ow. Yet each of the containers contributes to making 
the tank overfl ow. Each is a contributory cause.
One event is a contributory cause of other another event when the fi rst 
event has an effect on the second but is neither a necessary cause nor a suf-
fi cient cause.
Contributory causes are common. The cause of an event is often a set 
of other events none of which is sufficient and none of which is necessary. 
Key Concept
A causal suffi cient 
condition is an event 
that, all by itself, will 
always produce another 
event.
Key Concept
A causal necessary and 
suffi cient condition is 
an event that’s required 
for the production of 
another event and will 
produce that event all 
by itself.
Key Concept
One event is a 
contributory cause 
of other another event 
when the fi rst event 
has an effect on the 
second but is neither a 
necessary cause nor a 
suffi cient cause.

The Many Meanings of “Cause”  299
Suppose that you’re wondering why your friend Oksana did better in an Edu-
cational Psychology class than your friend Christopher. It’s likely that no one 
thing was a necessary cause of Oksana’s better performance. It may be that 
she did a large set of different things that helped her do better and that failure 
to do any one of them wouldn’t have made her do worse than he did. In that 
case, each of the different things is a contributory cause.
Primary Cause
In many cases, people will speak of something as the cause of an event even 
though they know that this cause was only a necessary cause or only a con-
tributory cause. While the cause of the fl ooding in New Orleans is a matter 
of debate, no one asserts that the presence of water vapor in the Earth’s atmo-
sphere is the cause of the fl ooding. Everyone would admit that it was a causal 
necessary condition but no one would refer to it as the cause. The water vapor 
in the atmosphere isn’t a relevant cause because water vapor is always pres-
ent in the atmosphere and, even if you could remove the vapor, you wouldn’t 
do that. (It would lead to the extinction of life on earth!)
When someone picks out a particular necessary, sufficient, or contrib-
utory cause for special attention, they’re identifying a primary cause. The 
Washington Post article above indicates that some people think that Hur-
ricane Katrina was the primary cause of the fl ooding but other people think 
that a fl aw in the levees was the primary cause.
The primary cause of an event is partially a matter of the observers’ inter-
ests and background. Imagine that aliens were observing Earth from another 
planet. Their planet’s atmosphere doesn’t contain water vapor. They had 
never seen a hurricane. They then observe with amazement the enormous 
storms on Earth. Their scientists study the matter. They might well conclude 
that the cause of hurricanes was the water vapor in the Earth’s atmosphere. 
Picking out a primary cause is often essential for drawing conclusions 
about what you should do to remove or produce causes for various effects. But 
you must be careful not to think that a primary cause is a sole cause. As you 
compose causal arguments, be careful not to assert that one type of event is the 
only cause of another type of event. As you evaluate causal arguments, look 
for claims that one event is the only cause of another event, when the author 
means to say that the fi rst event is either a necessary or contributory cause. 
Remote and Proximate Causes
Think about the series of events that came before the fl ooding. The breach 
of the levees occurred right before the fl ooding. Hurricane Katrina hit several 
hours before the fl ooding occurred. The supports for the 17th Street Canal 
Levee were put in years before the fl ooding occurred. Let’s assume for the 
sake of argument that each of these three events (the breach of the levees, 
the arrival of the hurricane, and the improper placement of the levees) is a 
necessary cause of the fl ooding. In cases like this, scholars often speak of re-
mote and proximate cause. The most proximate cause of the fl ooding was the 
failure of the levee. But you can then ask: What caused the levee to fail? The 
Key Concept
When someone picks 
out a particular 
necessary, suffi cient, or 
contributory cause for 
special attention, they’re 
identifying a primary 
cause.

300  Chapter 9 Causal Arguments
waters of Hurricane Katrina were a necessary cause. The levees had existed 
for years and survived many storms of lesser intensity. The hurricane was a 
more remote cause of the fl ooding than the failure of the levee. The design 
failures in the levees were a more remote cause of the fl ooding than the ar-
rival of the hurricane.
Causes are more or less proximate or remote depending on how close 
they are in time to the effect. A proximate cause is a cause that is close in 
time to its effect. A remote cause is a cause that’s far in time from its ef-
fect. As the levee case illustrates, causes aren’t either proximate or remote. 
They’re more or less proximate, more or less remote. Proximity of causation 
has nothing do to with whether a cause is a necessary cause, a sufficient 
cause, or a contributory cause. Any of these three kinds of causes can be 
more or less proximate.
Key Concept
A proximate cause is 
a cause that is close 
in time to its effect. A 
remote cause is a cause 
that’s far in time from its 
effect.
EXERCISE 9.1
A. In the following passages, identify which of the many meanings of “cause” is being used: 
cause as necessary condition, cause as sufficient condition, cause as necessary and suf-
fi cient condition, primary cause, remote cause, proximate cause. Remember that a causal 
claim can fall into more than one category. 
 1. Jack: “Let’s go to the movies at Cineplex after class. We have to get out of this building 
anyway.”
 
 What type of cause is Jack implying by saying they “have to” leave the building?
 2. Jill: “OK. If we can take the new Parkway, we can get there in half an hour.”
 
 What type of cause is Jill claiming that taking the new Parkway is?
 3. Jack: “Well, I’d rather take the old roads through town to get there, and they’ll get us 
there just as quickly.”
 
 Jill: “Maybe we can try out the new Parkway another time.”
 
 What type of cause is Jack’s claiming that taking the old roads is?
 *4. Jack: “I hope that means you agree because I don’t think the new Parkway will get us 
there, anyway. It hasn’t been completely fi nished yet, and the construction that’s open 
now stops short of where the theater is located.”
 
 What type of cause is Jack denying that the new Parkway is?
 5. Jill: “Oh, I didn’t realize that. That’s enough by itself to convince me to go on the old 
roads through town.”
 
 What type of cause is Jill saying that Jack’s last claim provides?
 6. Jack: “So what you mean is that you weren’t convinced by my claim that the old roads 
would get us there in half an hour?”
 
 Jill: Well, that helped but it wasn’t enough by itself.
 
 What type of cause is Jill saying that the timing of the old roads route played in her 
decision?

The Many Meanings of “Cause”  301
 7. Jack: “The main reason I wanted to go to the movies in the fi rst place was that 
someone told me to go see Into the Wild, and I noticed today that it’s playing at the 
Cineplex.”
What type of causal relation is implied by Jack’s reference to an earlier recommen-
dation to see the movie Into the Wild?
 *8. What type of causal relation is Jack claiming about the fact that it’s playing now at the 
Cineplex?
 9. Jill: “I also heard that was a good movie. In addition, I know someone who said she 
knew Chris McCandless, the guy in the movie, when he was in college. She said he was 
an interesting writer, even then. I bet that is at least in part why he decided to go into 
the wild, because he wanted to write to his friends while he was there.”
 
 What type of causal relation is Jill speculating about between McCandless’ practice of 
writing and his going “into the wild”?
 10. Jack: “Wait a minute. I don’t think that I can go to the movies. I have a high fever and 
feel very weak. I bet that I have the fl u.”
 
 Which type of causal relation is implied between the symptoms of high fever and weak-
ness and having the fl u?
 11. “Although many physical abilities decline over the adult years, it is not clear that these 
declines are inevitable. Life style factors such as a poor diet, smoking, drinking alcohol, 
and lack of exercise contribute to the decline in physical functioning for some people. 
Moreover, culture markedly infl uences the way we think about aging and our expecta-
tions of our physical abilities in middle and later adulthood. In Western cultures such 
as the United States, becoming old is associated with being frail, useless, and ill, so that 
many people attempt to push back the aging process.” (Postortino 2006, 443, material 
omitted)
 *12.  “The growth and intensifi cation of serfdom was a major tendency in Russian history. 
[A]t the end of the nineteenth century thirty-four million people out of a population of 
thirty-six million were reckoned as serfs.” (Chamberlain 1965, 5, material omitted) 
 
 What type of causal relation is Chamberlain claiming about the number of serfs?
 13. “After regaining independence in 1952, Japan continued to profi t from access to for-
eign raw materials, technology, and markets, including those of the United States. 
Because of popular sentiment, constitutional constraints, and the country’s reliance 
on the American ‘nuclear umbrella,’ Japan was freed from the burden of supporting 
a large and costly military establishment, releasing funds and energies for economic 
development. At the same time, business benefi ted from a probusiness political sys-
tem.” (Schirokauer 2006, 634, material omitted) [Hint: There are three different types 
of causes in this passage.]
 14. “The occurrence of hypertension in African-Americans is the highest in the world and 
plays a signifi cant role in cardiovascular complications.” (Campbell 2007, 90) 
 15. “The interaction between nicotine and alcohol, two of the most abused and co-
abused drugs, can impact a person’s ability to learn and could have implications for 
treating addiction, according to researchers at Temple University.” (Medical News 
Today 2007) 

302  Chapter 9 Causal Arguments
Identifying Causal Arguments
A causal argument is an argument whose conclusion asserts that one event(s) 
caused another event(s). A large number of words indicate the presence of a 
causal argument.
Key Concept
A causal argument is 
an argument whose 
conclusion asserts that 
one event(s)  caused 
another event(s).
Causal Argument Indicator Words
because
produced
brought about
was responsible for
led to
created
affected
was the result of
infl uenced
effect
determined by
resulted from
There’s no way to list all of the different ways people make causal claims. And 
some causal arguments have no indicator words. The statement, “She plugged 
in her microscope, and the lights in the lab went out,” implies a cause and an 
effect. To be more explicit, you might say “Plugging in the microscope caused 
the lab lights to go out.
A particular causal argument is a causal argument whose conclusion as-
serts that one particular event causes another particular event. “Plugging in 
the microscope caused the lab lights to go out” is a particular causal claim. A 
general causal argument is a causal argument whose conclusion asserts that 
one kind of event causes another kind of event. “Overloading a circuit causes 
lights to go out” is a general causal claim. Particular causal arguments rely on 
general causal arguments because asserting that one particular event causes 
another particular event assumes that, if the same causal conditions occurred 
together at other times, the same effect would be produced. General causal 
arguments are fundamental. For this reason, this chapter will focus on general 
causal arguments. 
The Form of a Causal Argument
Let’s use the variable “E” to refer to types of events (or states of affairs). “E1” 
refers to one type of event, “E2” refers to another type of event, etc. Here’s the 
standard form of a causal argument:
 
(1) E1 is correlated with E2.
 
(2) E2 is not the cause of E1.
 
(3) There is no E3 that is the cause of E1 and E2.
 
(4) E1 and E2 are not coincidentally correlated.
 
Therefore,
 
(5) E1 is a cause of E2.
Connections
Chapter Two discusses the use of variables.
Causal arguments aren’t usually found in standard form. The order of the 
premises is often different. But, as you’ve seen before, the order in which 
premises are stated makes no difference to the evaluation of an argument. 
More difficult is the fact that the people who make causal arguments often 
leave one or more premises unstated. 
Key Concept
A particular causal 
argument is a causal 
argument whose 
conclusion asserts that 
one particular event 
causes another particular 
event. A general 
causal argument is a 
causal argument whose 
conclusion asserts that 
one kind of event causes 
another kind of event.
Key Concept
The standard form of a 
causal argument.

Identifying Causal Arguments  303
Connections
Chapter One discusses unstated premises.
Premise (1). The fi rst premise of a causal argument in the standard form says 
that two events are correlated. Speaking roughly and imprecisely, two events 
are correlated when they happen together. The position of a light switch (E1) 
is correlated with the light in the room (E2). When the switch is up, the light 
is on. When the switch is down, the light is off. E1 and E2 are correlated.
Premise (2). The second premise says that the fi rst event wasn’t caused 
by the second. You know that the light doesn’t cause the switch to move. 
E2 doesn’t cause E1. 
Premise (3). The third premise says that there isn’t any third thing that 
caused both E1 and E2. When you go into a room and fi nd the light on, you 
generally assume that someone fl ipped the switch and that is what caused the 
light to be on. But some third event, E3, might have caused both the switch to 
go up and the light to come on. Perhaps a malfunction at an electrical substa-
tion caused a powerful surge of electricity that fl ipped the switch, fused it, 
and caused the light to come on. You’d discover this when you attempted to 
turn the light off and the switch didn’t work. (This actually happened to the 
bathroom light in the house of one of the authors of this book.) But in the case 
of a normal light switch, there’s no malfunction that causes both the switch 
to go up and the light to come on.
Premise (4). The fourth premise asserts that the correlation between the 
two events isn’t a coincidence. You’ve experienced coincidences. Perhaps for 
two weeks, every time you don’t brush your teeth at night, you stub your toe 
when getting out of bed. Many different events are happening all over the 
world all the time. Some of them are bound to correlate every now and then 
just by chance. But the correlation between the light and the switch isn’t like 
that. E1 and E2 aren’t coincidentally correlated.
You can put the argument into the standard form like this:
(1)   The switch being in the up position is correlated with the light 
being on.
(2)  The light being on is not the cause of the switch being in the up 
position.
(3)  There is no third event that is the cause of both the switch being in 
the up position and the light being on.
(4)  The switch being in the up position and the light being on are not 
coincidentally correlated.
Therefore,
(5) The switch being in the up position is a cause of the light being on.
EXERCISE 9.2
A. In the following passages, 
 
(a) determine which ones contain causal arguments (some contain more than one),
 
(b)  for each causal argument, determine which of the four premises are missing from the 
argument as explicitly stated in the passage, and
 
(c) if a causal argument is present, put it into standard form.

304  Chapter 9 Causal Arguments
 1. This patient has a high fever and feels very weak. The fl u gives people a high fever and 
makes them weak. So, this patient might have the fl u.
 2. Why do I insist that you should do what I say? Just because I say so, that’s why.
 3. I had trouble sleeping last night. I bet I know why. I had a Coke Zero after dinner 
and whenever I have a Coke Zero or any other soda that has caffeine, I have trouble 
sleeping.
 *4. Stefan: “Why didn’t you reply to my text?” Willa: “Because I didn’t get it. You know 
that your texts never go out when you send them from your Mom’s.”
 5. Whenever it rains, I get a headache.
 6. “Since communication can take place directly through the body, the body can be used 
to transmit information.” (Norris 2001, 116, material omitted)
 7. “The growth and intensifi cation of serfdom was a major tendency in Russian history. 
[A]t the end of the nineteenth century thirty-four million people out of a population of 
thirty-six million were reckoned as serfs.” (Chamberlain 1965, 5, material omitted)
 *8. “Manipulation [of cash-settled contracts] has numerous deleterious effects, including 
dead-weight losses attributable to temporal and spatial distortions in consumption, 
production, storage, and transportation; reductions in hedging effectiveness; increases 
in future price volatility; reductions in the informativeness of future prices; and a de-
cline in market liquidity.” (Pirrong 2001, 222)
 9. “[Alcohol] is a frequently abused, addictive drug that impairs cognitive function. It may 
disrupt cognitive processes by altering attention, short-term memory, and/or long-term 
memory. Interestingly, some research suggests that [alcohol] may enhance cognitive 
processes at lower doses. [Alcohol] enhanced short-term and long-term memory for 
contextual and cued conditioning at a low dose (0.25 g/kg) and impaired short-term 
and long-term memory for contextual and cued conditioning at a high dose (1.0 g/kg).” 
(Gulick 2007, 1528, material omitted)
 10. “One of the most remarkable revelations in the wake of the September 11 attack on 
the United States was that six months after the tragedy the U.S. government’s Im-
migration and Naturalization Service (INS) mailed a notice to a Venice, Florida, fl ight 
school informing it that Mohammed Atta and Marwan Al-Shehhi had been approved 
for student visas. Atta and Al-Shehhi were two of the hijackers who fl ew planes into the 
World Trade Center. Before the attack, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) had 
received numerous warnings and had actually issued four information circulars to com-
mercial airlines, asking them to ‘use caution.’ But these bulletins sent to the airlines do 
not require any responses, and the airlines did nothing.” (Janda 2007, 393)
 11. “In the 1960s, psychologist Albert Bandura conducted several experiments on social 
learning that are now considered to be classic psychological experiments and contributed 
to his developing social learning theory. Collectively these experiments are referred to 
as the Bobo doll experiments because the experimental procedure utilized a blow-up 
plastic ‘Bobo’ doll, a popular child’s toy. 
 
 
“In the Bobo doll experiments, children watched fi lms in which a woman beat up 
the Bobo doll. After viewing the fi lms, Bandura and his colleagues placed the children 
in a room alone with the Bobo doll and observed the children’s behavior without their 
knowledge. If the children imitated the characteristic behaviors of the model, then Ban-
dura knew that learning had occurred.

Identifying Causal Arguments  305
 
 
[There were three movies, and the children were shown one of the three; in one fi lm 
the person beating up the doll was punished; in another fi lm the person was rewarded, 
and in a third there appeared to be no consequence (positive or negative) for the person 
beating up the doll.]
 
 
“As you might expect, the children who had seen the model rewarded for beating up 
Bobo were most likely to beat up on him themselves. However, an unexpected fi nding 
of the study was that the children who had seen the no consequences fi lm were equally 
likely to beat up on Bobo! This means that seeing someone merely getting away with 
aggressive behavior is just as likely to lead to modeling as seeing aggression rewarded. 
The only thing that deterred the children’s aggression toward Bobo was having seen 
the punishment fi lm [in which the person beating up Bobo was punished].” (Pastorino 
2006, 240, material omitted)
 *12. “Clearly, global warming would mean a higher global average surface temperature for 
Earth. Beyond that simple statement, however, the issue of consequences becomes 
much more complicated and the uncertainties involved in prediction even greater.
 
 
“Changing weather patterns would ensure that different regions of Earth experi-
enced different degrees of warming. Some regions would even become colder. Other 
regions might experience more rainfall or might become deserts. The greater overall 
warmth of the atmosphere would tend to mean more evaporation from the oceans, lead-
ing to more numerous and more intense storms.
 
 
“Another potential threat comes from rising sea level. Sea level has already risen 
some 20 centimeters in the past hundred years, and could rise another meter as the 
oceans warm. Secondary effects, such as those arising from changes to ocean currents or 
ecological changes, pose an even more intractable problem. For example, it is difficult 
to know how forests and other ecosystems will respond to climate changes induced 
by global warming. As a result, we cannot easily predict the impact of such climate 
changes on food production, fresh water availability, or other issues critical to the well-
being of human populations.
 
 
“Given the current uncertainties, no one can predict the precise impact of global 
warming over the next century. However, the lesson is clear: Dramatic and deadly 
change can occur unexpectedly, and we do not know how our tampering might affect 
the fi nely balanced mechanisms that control Earth’s climate.” (Bennett 2007, 320–321, 
material omitted)
B. Refer to the following passage for these exercises.
 
“After regaining independence in 1952, Japan continued to profi t from access to foreign 
raw materials, technology, and markets, including those of the United States. Because of 
popular sentiment, constitutional constraints, and the country’s reliance on the Ameri-
can ‘nuclear umbrella,’ Japan was freed from the burden of supporting a large and costly 
military establishment, releasing funds and energies for economic development. At the 
same time, business benefi ted from a probusiness political system.” (Schirokauer 2005, 
634, material omitted) 
 1. Which event(s) is/are claimed to be correlated or causally related to the economic 
growth of Japan?
 2. Identify the fi rst premise of the causal argument found in the second sentence above, 
following the phrase “nuclear umbrella.”

306  Chapter 9 Causal Arguments
Evaluating Causal Arguments
Now that you’ve examined the standard form of causal arguments, you’re ready 
to look at how the true premises test and the proper form test apply to causal 
arguments. A causal argument passes the proper form test when it can be put 
into standard form. It passes the true premises test when each premise is true. 
Each of the premises in a causal argument in standard form is more complex 
than it looks at fi rst. Let’s look more closely at each one.
Premise (1): Correlation
The fi rst premise of a causal argument in the proper form is
(1) E1 is correlated with E2.
Speaking roughly and imprecisely, two events are correlated when they happen 
together. In most parts of the United States, the months of September, October, 
and November are correlated with falling temperatures and falling leaves. The 
sound of your alarm clock is correlated with your getting out of bed. (This ex-
ample illustrates that some correlations aren’t perfect.) Correlations are things 
that people observe. The fi rst premise of a causal argument in the proper form 
is an empirical premise, and causal arguments are empirical arguments. 
Connections
Chapter Four notes that “empirical” means “based on observation.”
Binary and Scalar Features
Two different kinds of correlations correspond to two different kinds of fea-
tures events can have. Binary features are features of events that the event 
either has or doesn’t have. Scalar features are features of events that the event 
has to a greater or lesser degree. Both the position of the switch (up or down) 
and the state of the light (on or off) are binary features. If the light was on a 
sliding dimmer switch, the light and the switch would have scalar features. 
The light can be more or less bright and the switch can be slid higher or lower. 
Other binary features include a levee being breached or not being breached 
and a door being locked or unlocked. Other scalar features include a person’s 
height and the amount of money a company makes in a year. (The root of 
“scalar” is the same as the root of the word “scale.” Your bathroom scale is 
used to measure your weight, and your weight is a scalar feature.)
Key Concept
Binary features are 
features of events that 
the event either has or 
doesn’t have. Scalar 
features are features 
of events that the event 
has to a greater or lesser 
degree.
 *3. Identify the second premise of the causal argument using the second sentence above, 
following the phrase “nuclear umbrella.”
 4. Is there a third premise for a causal argument provided or implied in the passage above?
 5. If there is no third premise offered, are there rather one or more third party causes that 
are mentioned in the passage?
 6. Is there any evidence provided in the passage above that would address the fourth prem-
ise of a causal argument?

Evaluating Causal Arguments  307
Technical Terms: Binary Variables, Dummy Variables, Indicator 
Variables, Scalar Variables, Continuous Variables, Linear Variables
In the mathematical representation of correlations, binary features are often 
represented by assigning the number 0 to one side of the feature and 1 to the 
other side. You might assign 0 to represent a state in which a light is off and a 1 
to represent the state in which it’s on. Scalar features are often represented by 
assigning a number from 0 to 1. The various levels of light output that a light on a 
dimmer switch can produce might be represented with numbers such as 0.01, 0.12, 
0.57, etc. (For an example of this, see Chapter Eight’s data on the rank of female 
baboons.) When working with binary and scalar features, researchers often talk of 
assigning variables to various features. Researchers might assign the variable “L” 
to the output of a light. They then might say, “L is a binary variable” or “L is a scalar 
variable.” Binary variables are also called “dummy variables” and “indicator vari-
ables.” Scalar variables are also called “continuous variables” and “linear variables.”
Binary Correlation
Two types of events, E1and E2, have positive binary correlation when
E1 is present when E2 is present and
E1 is absent when E2 is absent.
A regular light switch is an example of positive binary correlation. When the 
switch is up (present) the light is on (present). When the switch is down (ab-
sent) the light is off (absent). If you assume that soils are either soft or not soft 
(as the article above about Hurricane Katrina seems to do), then the levee case 
is also a case of positive binary correlation. When the soil was soft (present) 
the levees failed (present), and when the soil wasn’t soft (absent) the levees 
didn’t fail (absent).
Two types of events, E1and E2, have negative binary correlation when
E1 is present when E2 is absent and
E1 is absent when E2 is present.
You can transform any case of positive binary correlation into a case of negative 
binary correlation by changing what you call “present” and “absent.” The le-
vee case can be redescribed as a case of negative binary correlation by referring 
to fi rm soil instead of soft. When the soil was fi rm (present) the levees didn’t 
fail (absent), and when the soil wasn’t fi rm (absent) the levees failed (present).
Scalar Correlation
Scalar features can be entirely present or entirely absent (as when a light on 
a dimmer switch is turned all the way up or all the way down). But they can 
also be on a scale between present and absent. Two types of events, E1 and E2, 
have positive scalar correlation when
E1 rises as E2 rises and
E1 falls as E2 falls.
The case of a light on a dimmer switch is a case of positive scalar correla-
tion. Other examples of positive scalar correlation include the relationship 
between how much a person eats and this individual’s weight and the rela-
tionship between a person’s income and the income tax this person pays.
Key Concept
Two types of events, 
E1and E2, have positive 
binary correlation 
when E1 is present 
when E2 is present and 
E1 is absent when E2 
is absent. Two types 
of events, E1and E2, 
have negative binary 
correlation when E1 
is present when E2 is 
absent and E1 is absent 
when E2 is present.
Key Concept
Two types of events, 
E1 and E2, have positive 
scalar correlation when 
E1 rises as E2 rises and 
E1 falls as E2 falls. Two 
types of events, E1 and 
E2, have negative 
scalar correlation when 
E1 rises as E2 falls and 
E1 falls as E2 rises.

308  Chapter 9 Causal Arguments
Two types of events, E1and E2, have negative scalar correlation when
E1 rises as E2 falls and
E1 falls as E2 rises.
Just as any example of negative binary correlation can be redescribed as a 
case of positive binary correlation, any example of negative scalar correlation 
can be redescribed as a case of positive scalar correlation. If you reversed the 
dimmer switch so that the light got dimmer as the switch went up, it would 
become a case of negative scalar correlation. 
Positive Scalar Correlation
Y Axis
X Axis
Negative Scalar Correlation
Y Axis
X Axis

Evaluating Causal Arguments  309
Technical Term: Concomitant Variation
Cases of scalar correlation are also called cases of “concomitant variation.” 
Not all events are correlated. There’s no correlation between two events 
when there’s neither binary nor scalar correlation. Grades and shoe size 
aren’t correlated. The rate of infl ation in the United States and the number of 
countries in the world aren’t correlated.
The words “correlated” and “correlation” aren’t that common. More 
common correlation indicator words are “associated,” “linked,” and “re-
lated.” Various words regarding time and placement of objects can also be 
used to indicate correlation. Someone might say that E2 “occurred whenever 
E1 occurred,” “always occurred after E1,” “usually followed E1,” or similar 
phrases about time. In the example of Hurricane Katrina, the correlation is 
between the parts of the levees that failed and the soils beneath those levees. 
As you read through the article above, you’ll see that the word “correlation” 
is never used. 
Key Concept
There’s no correlation 
between two events 
when there’s neither 
binary nor scalar 
correlation.
EXERCISE 9.3
A. Which of the following features are scalar and which are binary?
 1. The degrees marked on a temperature scale.
 2. The GPAs of students who have several immediate family members who have been to 
college as compared to the GPAs of students who have no immediate family members 
who have been to college.
 3. Whether a given leopard does or doesn’t have spots.
 *4. Whether a given event occurred in the most recent Ice Age or not.
 5. The amount of nitrogen in the air in a given area.
 6. The human population density in various countries.
 7. The human population density in the world.
 *8. The annual percent of growth in the human population of the world.
 9. The age of the ocean fl oor.
 10. The number of places on Earth called “hot spots,” whose volcanic centers result from 
hot materials produced deep in the mantle of the Earth’s crust.
 11. The amount of support given to Pakistan by the U.S. Congress to reimburse Pakistan’s 
military actions against terrorism.
 *12. “Friendship has one quality that renders it indissoluble and doubles its delight, a qual-
ity that love itself does not possess: certainty [of being understood].” (Balzac 2001, 224) 
 13. The fi nancial disaster of the sub-prime mortgage crisis.
 14. The Wall Street fi rms that have gone bankrupt due to the sub-prime mortgage crisis.
 15. The “bailing out” of seven affiliated investment entities by Citigroup, Inc.
B. Provide two of your own examples of each of the following: binary correlation, scalar cor-
relation, and no correlation.

310  Chapter 9 Causal Arguments
Establishing Correlations: Mill’s Methods
The philosopher John Stuart Mill pointed to four methods that are useful in 
establishing the existence of a correlation.
The Method of Agreement
The Method of Agreement helps you fi nd binary correlations. Remember that 
two types of events, E1 and E10, have positive binary correlation when:
(a) E1 is present when E10 is present and
(b) E1 is absent when E10 is absent. 
Suppose that you’re wondering whether E10 is always present when E1 is 
present. You’re trying to see whether (a) is true. You look at two different 
situations, call them “Case 1” and “Case 2,” and see whether E1 is present in 
both. You collect some data and fi nd that
(A)  In Case 1, E1 E2 E3 E4 are present and E10 E11 E12 E13 are present.
 
 In Case 2, E1 E5 E6 E7 are present and E10 E14 E15 E16 are present.
Only E1 and E10 are present in both cases. This gives you a reason to think that 
statement (a) is true, that E1 is present when E10 is present. If you only look at 
two cases, however, you don’t have much evidence that E1 and E10 are corre-
lated. If you look at more and more cases and fi nd that E1 is present when E10 is 
present, you have more and more evidence that E1 is present when E10 is present.
You and four friends go out to dinner, and later that evening you all throw 
up. You wonder about the cause of the vomiting. All fi ve of you ordered com-
pletely different things to eat and drink except that you all had a green salad. 
You’d suspect that the salad was the cause of the illness. Given the informa-
tion you have so far, you shouldn’t conclude that the salad was the cause. You 
and your friends have many other things in common besides eating the salad. 
You all used the restaurant’s silverware. Perhaps it was all contaminated. 
The information you have doesn’t yet establish the presence of a cor-
relation between the salad and being sick. The information allows you to 
conclude that:
(a) Salad is present when the stomach illness is present.
But you only have half of what it takes to establish a correlation. You haven’t 
yet established that:
(b) Salad is absent when the stomach illness is absent.
The next method, the Method of Difference, is designed to help you establish 
that (b) is true.
The Method of Difference
You’re wondering whether E1 and E10 are correlated. You look at two differ-
ent situations, collect some data, and fi nd:
(B)  In Case 1, E1 E2 E3 E4 are present and E10 E11 E12 E13 are present.
 
 In Case 3,      E2 E3 E4 are present and        E11 E12 E13 are present.
Only E1 and E10 are absent in Case 2. This gives you a reason to think that 
E1 is absent when E10 is absent. Here’s part (b) of what you need to establish 
in order to show that E1 and E10 are correlated. As before, you’d need more 
cases to have good reason to think that E1 is absent when E10 is absent.
Key Concept
The Method of 
Agrement.
Key Concept
The Method of 
Difference.

Evaluating Causal Arguments  311
Suppose that, after you and your friends have recovered from your stom-
ach illness, you go out to dinner again. But this time you all order the exact 
same things. But after dinner is over, you decide to have dessert. None of your 
friends has dessert. Later that night, you throw up but none of your friends gets 
sick. In this case, you’d suspect that the dessert was the cause of your illness. 
The Method of Difference provides evidence for part (b) of what it takes to 
establish a correlation. As before, given the evidence you have, you shouldn’t 
do more than suspect the dessert. There were many other differences between 
you and your friends. You ate with different pieces of silverware than they did. 
Perhaps there was something on your fork that wasn’t on their forks. 
The Joint Method of Agreement and Difference
As its name indicates, the Joint Method of Agreement and Difference occurs 
when someone uses the Method of Agreement and the Method of Difference 
at the same time. Using the same format, the Joint Method of Agreement and 
Difference would look like this:
(C) In Case 1, E1 E2 E3 E4 are present and E10 E11 E12 E13 are present.
 
 In Case 2, E1 E5 E6 E7 are present and E10 E14 E15 E16 are present.
 
 In Case 3,      E2 E3 E4 are present and        E11 E12 E13 are present.
This information provides evidence that E1 is correlated with E10. Compar-
ing Cases 1 and 2 provides evidence that
E1 is present when E10 is present.
Comparing Cases 1 and 3 provides evidence that
E1 is absent when E10 is absent.
Let’s suppose that you recover from your last stomach illness. You and your 
four friends again go out to dinner. This time you and one of your friends throw 
up but your other three friends don’t get sick. You and the friend who got 
sick had only one item of food in common. You both had chicken parmesan. 
This would be the Agreement half of the Joint Method. Suppose that none of 
your other three friends had the chicken parmesan. This would be the Differ-
ence half of the Joint Method. You’d have evidence both for the view that the 
chicken parmesan was present when the illness was present and evidence for 
the view that the chicken parmesan was absent when the illness was absent.
The Method of Scalar Variation
Because the fi rst three of Mill’s Methods focus entirely on the presence and 
absence of various events, they can’t be used to establish the existence of scalar 
correlation. Mill was aware of this problem. The Method of Scalar Variation 
tells you to look for scalar correlations. It tells you to look for cases in which
E1 rises as E2 rises and
E1 falls as E2 falls.
You’re taking an economics class and are assigned to investigate the causes of 
cycles of boom and bust in the housing industry. Your professor says that the 
number of new homes built per year goes up at some times and down at other 
times. One way to begin the search for the cause of this pattern would be 
to look for other economic events that follow the same pattern. You should 
look for both positive and negative scalar correlations. You should look for 
Key Concept
The Joint Method 
of Agreement and 
Difference.
Key Concept
The Method of Scalar 
Variation.

312  Chapter 9 Causal Arguments
economic events that are more frequent or have higher levels when the num-
ber of new homes built rises. You should also look for economic events that 
are less frequent or have lower levels when the number of new homes falls. As 
you conduct your research, you’ll be using Mill’s Method of Scalar Variation.
The investigation of causal relationships can’t be done correctly without 
Mill’s Methods. But the Methods have limits. Look back at (A), (B), and (C) 
above. These lists of events might or might not be correlated with E10. Sup-
pose that the real cause of E10 was omitted from our list. In that case, you 
wouldn’t fi nd the correlation between the cause and E10 because you never 
looked for it! Mill’s Methods are a way to check to see whether something 
you think might be correlated with an event is in fact correlated. But they 
don’t help generate a list of types of events to check. 
When you draw up lists of types of events that you’ll check using Mill’s 
Methods, you’re relying on your background knowledge. When you’re think-
ing about the cause of the stomach illness, you don’t look for correlations be-
tween the styles of clothes and illness. Relying on your background knowledge 
about the ways that illnesses spread, you look for the various different ways 
that you’ve previously seen illnesses transferred from one person to another.
Correlation Is Not Causation
If there were only two things you could remember about correlation and cau-
sation, they should be:
 
1.
If there is no correlation, there can’t be causation.
Correlation
Therefore
2.
Establishing correlation doesn't show of causation. 
Correlation
Causation
Therefore
Causation
Key Concept
If there is no correlation, 
there can’t be causation. 
Establishing correlation 
doesn’t show causation.
Critical Thinkers
John Stuart Mill
In addition to developing the Methods discussed in this chapter, John Stuart Mill 
(1806–1873) is famous for his work in political and ethical theory. Mill learned Greek at 
the age of three, began his studies of Latin and algebra when he was eight, and started 
working on logic when he was twelve (by reading Aristotle’s work on logic in Greek). 
Among other political causes, he was a strong advocate for women’s rights. You can 
read more about Mill’s life, his intense depression as a young man, his belief in the 
importance of education, and his interest in scientifi c method in The Autobiography of 
John Stuart Mill. Most of his work is available free online, including On Liberty, The Subjection of Women, and 
Utilitarianism.
London Stereoscopic Company/ Hulton Archive  
/Getty Images

Evaluating Causal Arguments  313
If two events aren’t correlated, then neither event is the cause of the other. 
The color of a car isn’t correlated with the emissions of a car. This tells 
you that the color of the car doesn’t cause any increase or decrease in 
emissions. 
That two events are correlated doesn’t mean that one caused the other. 
The fact that the light switch in the up position is correlated with the light 
being on doesn’t show that the light causes the switch to move up. If E1 is 
correlated with E2, there are four possible explanations for this correlation:
 1. It could be that E1 causes E2.
 2.  It could be that E2 causes E1.
 3.  It could be that E3 causes E1 and E2.
 4.  It could be that the correlation between E1 and E2 is a coincidence.
Look back at the proper form of a causal argument. Premises (2), (3), and (4) 
require you to rule out possibilities 2, 3, and 4. If you can show that E1 and 
E2 are correlated, and you can show that E2 isn’t the cause of E1, and you can 
show that there’s no E3 that causes both E1 and E2, and you can show that 
E1 and E2 aren’t coincidentally correlated, then and only then do you have 
the evidence you need to conclude that E1 is a cause of E2. When it comes 
to causal argument, ruling out possibilities 2, 3, and 4 is an important part of 
the art of argument. 
Fallacy: Hasty Cause
The Hasty Cause Fallacy occurs when someone offers an argument with the 
following improper form:
(1) E1 is correlated with E2.
Therefore,
(5) E1 is a cause of E2.
The conclusion is numbered (5) to highlight that this argument form jumps 
from the fi rst premise of the proper form of a causal argument to the conclu-
sion without thinking about possibilities 2, 3, and 4. Someone who commits 
the Hasty Cause Fallacy moves too hastily from the claim that E1 is corre-
lated with E2 to the claim that E1 is the cause of E2.
Technical Terms: False Cause, Objectionable Cause
The Hasty Cause Fallacy is also called “The Fallacy of False Cause” and “The Fallacy 
of Objectionable Cause.”
One of the authors of this book has a computer monitor with a light in the 
bottom right-hand corner. The color of this light is correlated with whether 
the monitor is on. When the monitor is off, the light is yellow. When the 
monitor is on, the light is blue. If someone were to argue that this correlation 
shows that the light turning blue causes the monitor to come on, then that 
would be an example of the Hasty Cause Fallacy.
Key Concept
The form of a Hasty 
Cause Fallacy.

314  Chapter 9 Causal Arguments
Fallacy: Causal Slippery Slope
If a person makes a series of causal claims, one or more of which commit the 
Fallacy of Hasty Cause, that person has committed the Causal Slippery Slope 
Fallacy. In 1925, John Scopes, a high school biology teacher, was put on trial 
for violating a Tennessee law that banned teaching the theory of evolution 
in public schools. Scopes’ lawyer, a man named Clarence Darrow, made the 
following argument:
If today you can take a thing like evolution and make it a crime to teach it 
in the public school, tomorrow you can make it a crime to teach it in the 
private schools, and the next year you can make it a crime to teach it in 
the church. At the next session you may ban books and the newspapers. 
Soon you may set Catholic against Protestant and Protestant against Prot-
estant, and try to foist your own religion upon the minds of men. After [a]
while, your honor, it is the setting of man against man and creed against 
creed until with fl ying banners and beating drums we are marching back-
ward to the glorious ages of the sixteenth century when bigots lighted 
fagots to burn the men who dared to bring any intelligence and enlighten-
ment and culture to the human mind. (Darrow 1925, 87, material omitted)
Here Darrow argues, without providing any causal evidence, that if the United 
States bans the teaching of evolution in school, we’ll return to a time like that of 
the European wars of religion. He has committed Causal Slippery Slope Fallacy.
Key Concept
If a person makes a 
series of causal claims, 
one or more of which 
commit the Fallacy of 
Hasty Cause, that person 
has committed the 
Causal Slippery Slope 
Fallacy.
EXERCISE 9.4
A. In the following passages, indicate whether one of Mill’s Methods is present and, if a 
Method(s) is present, which Method(s) it is.
 1. Jack always ate beans and never ate steak and never got ill. Jake always ate steak and 
never ate beans and became ill. Jack said that the steak was the cause of Jake’s illness.
 2. Suppose Jack had argued instead that Jake became ill because he (Jake) never ate beans.
 3. Suppose Jill, a friend of Jack and Jake, said that Jake became ill because he ate steak 
AND didn’t eat beans.
 *4. Suppose that Jill ate beans, but never as many as Jack, and now and again ate steak, but 
never as much as Jake. What would you conclude if Jill never became ill?
 
 The next three exercises are excerpted from the Centers for Disease Control and Preven-
tion (2009). 
 5. “[The Food and Drug Administration] FDA has evidence to support classifying the re-
call of product distributed from the PCA [Peanut Corporation of America] Plainview, 
Texas facility from January 1, 2007 forward as a Class 1 recall. This determination 
was based upon inspectional fi ndings, epidemiological data, internal test results from 
PCA that are positive for Salmonella, test results from consumer samples that match 
the outbreak strain of Salmonella typhimurium, and FDA positive samples of fi nished 
product (post-processed peanut meal collected at the PCA Texas facility) that match the 
outbreak strain. The Texas Department of State Health Services (DSHS) also collected 
a sample of peanut meal from the same lot collected by FDA at the PCA Texas facility 
and has detected the outbreak strain of Salmonella typhimurium.”

Evaluating Causal Arguments  315
 6. “This is an ingredient-driven outbreak; that is, potentially contaminated ingredients 
affected many different products that were distributed through various channels and 
consumed in various settings. The recalled products made by PCA, such as peanut butter 
and peanut paste, are common ingredients in cookies, crackers, cereal, candy, ice cream, 
pet treats, and other foods. Consumers are advised to discard and not eat products that 
have been recalled. To help consumers identify affected products, FDA has initiated a 
searchable database of recalled products that is updated daily or as additional recalls are 
identifi ed. To date, more than 2,100 products in seventeen categories have been volun-
tarily recalled by more than 200 companies, and the list continues to grow.”
 7. “In January, the recall list was expanded to include some pet-food products that contain 
peanut paste made by PCA. Salmonella can affect animals, and humans who handle 
contaminated pet-food products also are at risk. It is important for people to wash their 
hands—and to make sure children wash their hands—with hot water and soap before 
and, especially, after handling pet-food products and utensils.”
 
 For the next three exercises, take into account the following background information: 
Diseases and illnesses are normally treated clinically by medical personnel focusing on 
each and every individual who suffers from the condition. But some diseases and illnesses 
are treated as a public health issue. The main examples are infectious epidemics, where 
treatment is not focused solely on affected individuals but rather on practices that will 
help the entire community, affected and unaffected individuals alike. The polio vaccine of 
the 1950s is an example: preventative practices were instituted and administered through-
out the country. Drs. Bowman and Vinicor, of the Centers for Disease Control and Preven-
tion (CDC), believe that we should also treat diabetes as a public health problem. Read the 
following excerpts from their work (Bowman 2005) and identify any use or potential use 
of Mill’s Methods.
 *8. “Type 2 diabetes makes a compelling case study for public health action. The disease 
respects no boundaries. It is increasingly common—occurring in both developed and 
developing countries, in men and women, at earlier ages than in past decades, and in 
persons of every race and ethnic group.”
 9. “Family history and genetic factors appear to further increase the risk for type 2 diabe-
tes in Hispanic/Latino Americans. In the United States, the prevalence of diabetes was 
estimated to be 18.2 million people (6.3% of the population) in 2002, with dramatic 
increases predicted in the future.”
 10. “The determinants of type 2 diabetes are largely understood. Two of the most impor-
tant risk factors, obesity and physical inactivity, are modifi able. The natural history 
involves progression from prediabetes, a condition in which blood glucose metabo-
lism is abnormal (although not yet in the diabetes range), to the development of type 
2 diabetes. The rate of progression from prediabetes to type 2 diabetes is between 3% 
and 10% per year. However, progression from prediabetes to diabetes can be prevented 
or delayed with sustained weight loss and increased physical activity. The magnitude 
of the change needed for primary prevention of type 2 diabetes is relatively modest: a 
7% to 10% weight loss and sustained moderate physical activity, at least 30 minutes 
per day.” 
B. Review the passages in A above. This time, look for examples of the Hasty Cause Fallacy 
and the Causal Slippery Slope Fallacy.

316  Chapter 9 Causal Arguments
Premise (2): Causation and Time
Passing fi rst grade is correlated with knowing how to do simple addition. At 
the end of fi rst grade, most children know how to add. This doesn’t tell you 
whether knowing how to add causes someone to go to fi rst grade (perhaps 
because children have been required to learn to add before they enter fi rst 
grade) or, alternatively, whether going to fi rst grade causes children to know 
how to add. But let’s then add another piece of information. Most children 
don’t know how to add before they go to fi rst grade. You’ve now got some 
evidence that entering fi rst grade is a (contributory) cause of knowing how 
to add.
The second premise of a causal argument in the proper form is 
(2) E2 is not the cause of E1.
When people think that E1 caused E2 but in fact E2 caused E1, you have a 
case of reverse causation. The direction of causation is the opposite of what 
people think it is.
Premise (2) is usually based on the fact that the cause never comes after 
the effect. This claim asserts that either (a) the cause occurs at the same 
time as the effect or (b) the cause occurs before the effect. As an example 
of (a), let’s assume that you’re now sitting in a chair. What’s causing your 
body to remain two feet above the fl oor? The molecular structure of the 
chair and the fact that the chair is under your body are the causes of your 
body remaining about two feet above the fl oor. In this case, the cause 
occurs at the same time as the effect.
Key Concept
Reverse causation 
occurs when people 
think that E1 caused E2 
but in fact E2 caused E1.
C. This passage contains a causal conclusion. Put the argument in this passage into proper 
form.
Background information: Jens Herberholz and a group of researchers at Georgia State 
University studied the response of young crayfi sh to being attacked by dragonfl ies. Here is 
part of their summary of their research.
“The neural systems that control escape behavior have been studied intensively in sev-
eral animals, including mollusks, fi sh, and crayfi sh. Surprisingly little is known, however, 
about the activation and the utilization of escape circuits during prey–predator interac-
tions. To complement the physiological and anatomical studies with a necessary behav-
ioral equivalent, we investigated encounters between juvenile crayfi sh and large dragonfl y 
nymphs in freely behaving animals using a combination of high-speed video-recordings 
and measurements of electric fi eld potentials. During attacks, dragonfl y nymphs rapidly 
extended their labium, equipped with short, sharp palps, to capture small crayfi sh. Crayfi sh 
responded to the tactile stimulus by activating neural escape circuits to generate tail-fl ips 
directed away from the predator. Tail-fl ips were the sole defense mechanism in response to 
an attack, and every single strike was answered by tail-fl ip escape behavior.” (Herberholz 
2004, 1855)

Evaluating Causal Arguments  317
That causes never occur after effects gives you a tool to rule out the possibil-
ity that E2 causes E1. You can use an argument with the following proper form. 
(T) (1) E2 came after E1.
 (2) If E2 came after E1, then E2 is not the cause of E1. 
Therefore, 
 
 (3) E2 is not the cause of E1.
The conclusion of argument (T) is the second premise of a causal argument 
in the proper form. Argument (T) is a subargument for that premise and is an 
example of affirming the antecedent.
Connections
Chapter Five notes that any argument that affi rms the antecedent has a proper form.
Fallacy: Post Hoc
The Post Hoc Fallacy occurs when someone misunderstands the relationship 
between causation and time. It has the following form:
(1) E1 occurs before E2.
Therefore,
(2) E1 is a cause of E2.
If you know that the fi rst premise of this argument is true, you’ve got good 
reason to think that E2 isn’t the cause of E1. But the fact that E1 occurs before 
E2 doesn’t allow you to conclude that E1 is the cause of E2. It only provides 
some reason to think that E1 and E2 are correlated. And, as you saw above, 
you can’t move directly from the claim that two events are correlated to the 
claim that one caused the other.
 
Here’s an example of the Post Hoc Fallacy:
The only policy that effectively reduces public shootings is right-to-carry 
laws. Allowing citizens to carry concealed handguns reduces violent crime. 
In the 31 states that have passed right-to-carry laws since the mid-1980s, 
the number of multiple-victim public shootings and other violent crimes 
has dropped dramatically. Murders fell by 7.65%, rapes by 5.2%, aggravat-
ed assaults by 7%, and robberies by 3%. (The Phyllis Schlafl y Report 2000) 
The authors of this passage move from the claim that 
the number of public shootings has fallen after people were allowed to 
carry concealed handguns 
to the claim that 
allowing people to carry concealed handguns causes a reduction in public 
shootings.
At most, the evidence indicates that these two types of events are correlated. 
The authors make no attempt to review and rule out other possible causes. 
It might be that an increase in prison sentences for shootings caused their 
number to fall. It might be that a drop in the number of young adults (who 
commit more crimes than other age groups) led to a drop in all crimes. Un-
less these possibilities (and others) are examined, you shouldn’t conclude 
that allowing people to carry concealed handguns caused the reduction in 
Key Concept
The form of the Post 
Hoc Fallacy.

318  Chapter 9 Causal Arguments
Habits of a Critical Thinker
Avoiding Superstition
The Post Hoc Fallacy is at the root of many supersti-
tions. Suppose that a baseball player has fried chicken 
for lunch two days in a row and he hits a home run on 
both those days. This is a coincidence. The player may 
develop the superstitious belief that if he eats fried 
chicken for lunch, he’ll hit more home runs. Supersti-
tious beliefs occur when someone believes that events 
that are causally unrelated have some causal effects on 
each other. Superstitious beliefs are tempting. 
A playful superstition does no damage. Per-
haps you always sing a silly song before you start 
a long car trip and joke to others that it keeps you 
from being in an accident. There’s no harm in that. 
But if you really believed that singing the song pre-
vented accidents, this would be dangerous. It might 
lead you to drive recklessly. A good critical thinker 
doesn’t take superstitions seriously.
shootings. (Another problem with this argument is that it provides no evi-
dence for the view that right-to-carry laws are the only policies that effec-
tively reduce public shootings. But this second problem with the argument 
isn’t an example of the Post Hoc Fallacy.)
Technical Terms: Post Hoc, Ergo Propter Hoc
The name of the Post Hoc Fallacy comes from the Latin phrase “post hoc, ergo 
propter hoc.” This translates as “after this, therefore because of this.” This book 
usually avoids Latin, but we don’t do that in this case because the name “Post Hoc 
Fallacy” has become common. 
Premise (3): Third-Party Causation
In most homes, the furnace coming on is correlated with the lights coming 
on. The furnace tends to come on in the evening and so do the lights. Later 
at night, many people’s furnaces drop to a lower temperature and their lights 
go out. Then in the morning, the furnace comes on again and so do the lights. 
After people leave for work, their furnaces again drop to a lower temperature 
and their lights go out. Do furnaces cause lights to go on? Do lights com-
ing on cause furnaces to come on? Neither of these is the case. Some third 
thing besides lights and furnaces causes the correlation between furnaces and 
lights. In this case, the third thing is people. People turn on lights when it 
gets dark. They turn on furnaces when it gets cold and they aren’t asleep. 
When it gets dark, it gets colder. People tend to turn on lights at the same 
time they turn up their furnace and then tend to turn off lights at the same 
time as they turn down their furnace. You have a case of third-party causa-
tion. Third-party causation occurs when one kind of event is the cause of two 
other kinds of events.
 
The third premise of the form of a causal argument in the proper form 
asserts that there’s no third-party causation. 
(3) There is no E3 that is the cause of E1 and E2.
Third-party causation can be hard to discover. Smoking and car accidents are 
correlated. Smokers have more car accidents than nonsmokers. Does smok-
ing cause car accidents? When people light a cigarette, they aren’t watching 
the road. They might be more likely to have an accident. When a person is 
Key Concept
Third-party causation 
occurs when one kind of 
event is the cause of two 
other kinds of events.

Evaluating Causal Arguments  319
holding a cigarette, they might not be able to control a car well if an emer-
gency maneuver is required. On the other hand, this may be a case of third-
party causation. Smoking is risky, and people have different personalities. 
Some people avoid taking risks, but other people enjoy taking risks. Some 
people seek out risky activities such as hang gliding, climbing cliffs, and deep 
sea diving. It may be that the correlation between smoking and car accidents 
is the result of a third-party cause: people who are less concerned about risk 
are smokers, and they engage in risky actions when driving. This might be 
why people who smoke have more car accidents. Moreover, these two causal 
explanations could both be true. It could be that distraction and attitudes 
toward risk are both contributory causes of car accidents. (For more on this 
issue, see Jonahl 1997.)
Don’t confuse third-party causation with chains of causation. You might 
have one of those programmable thermostats in your home. You can set it 
so that the temperature varies at different times of the day. Suppose that in 
the summer you mistakenly set the thermostat to go from 72 degrees to 68 
degrees at 4 a.m. This may well set off a chain of causation. The thermostat 
causes the AC to come on, the AC causes the temperature to drop, and this 
causes you to wake up and pull a blanket over yourself. This is a chain of 
causation because E1 causes E2 and then E2 causes E3. In a case of third-party 
causation, E3 causes both E1 and E2 but E1 doesn’t cause E2.
Chain Causation
Third-Party Causation
E1
causes
E2
causes
E3
E1
causes
E2 & E3
Causal Arguments by Elimination
Third-party causation is another case in which background knowledge is cru-
cial. The only way to determine whether third-party causation exists is to 
come up with a list of possible third-party causes and check to see whether 
each of them is actually a cause. You use your background knowledge to 
Critical Thinkers
Ida B. Wells
Ida B. Wells (1862–1931) was a journalist, editor, political activist, and leader of the civil 
rights movement. Wells published Southern Horrors: Lynch Law in All Its Phases in 1892 
and A Red Record: Tabulated Statistics and Alleged Causes of Lynchings in the United 
States in 1895. She presented brilliantly documented research in order to disprove a 
popular view that lynching was caused by accusations of rape. Wells showed that the 
correlation between lynchings and accusations of rape were not as high as was believed 
and that the majority of lynching cases did not involve rape accusations. Wells argued 
that there was a third-party cause—fear of African-American economic progress—which was the primary cause 
of both lynchings and accusations of rape. You can read about her amazing life and work in the biography by 
Paula Giddings, Ida: A Sword among Lions: Ida B. Wells and the Campaign against Lynching.
Library of Congress

320  Chapter 9 Causal Arguments
develop a list of third-party causes and use a set of causal arguments by elimi-
nation to attempt to show that they aren’t third party causes. 
Showing that one type of event is not the cause of another type of event 
is easier than showing that one type of event is the cause of another type of 
event. There are two ways to show that there’s no causal link between two 
types of events: elimination by correlation and elimination by time. 
Elimination by correlation begins with the premise that there’s no corre-
lation between two types of events and concludes that there’s no causal link 
between them. As you saw above, if two types of events aren’t correlated, 
neither event causes the other.
Elimination by time begins with the premise that one type of event, E2, 
occurs after another type of event, E1, and concludes that E2 isn’t a cause of 
E1. As noted above, causation doesn’t work backwards in time. If E3 occurs 
after E1 and E2, E3 isn’t a third-party cause of E1 and E2. 
Premise (4): Coincidental Correlation
The National Football League (NFL) is divided into two conferences: the 
National Football Conference (NFC) and the American Football Conference 
(AFC). Some have noted that if a team from the AFC wins the Super Bowl, the 
stock market has tended to fall and if a team from the NFC wins the Super 
Bowl, the stock market has tended to rise. This legend has proved accurate 
30 of 37 times, an accuracy rate of more than 80%. Is there a causal link 
between the Super Bowl and the stock market? Our background knowledge 
doesn’t provide any reason to think that a winning performance by an NFC 
team causes the stock market to rise. This correlation is just a coincidence. 
(For more on this correlation, see Hendrick 1999.)
Coincidences occur because billions of events are occurring in the world. 
By chance, some of these events will be correlated. If enough monkeys took 
the SAT, one of them would get a perfect score. This wouldn’t mean that 
this monkey is any smarter than any other monkey. The fourth premise of a 
causal argument in the standard form 
(4) E1 and E2 are not coincidentally correlated.
asserts that a correlation isn’t a coincidence. One can provide a subargument 
for this premise in two ways.
First, for a causal claim to be justifi ed, it must cohere with our background 
knowledge. You can tell that a particular team winning the Super Bowl–stock 
market correlation is coincidental because your background knowledge about 
football and the stock market indicates that there’s no plausible causal link be-
tween these two events. Again you see that background knowledge is crucial.
Second, a coincidental correlation is unlikely to persist over time. If you 
wanted to see whether the monkey who got a perfect score on the SAT was 
actually smarter than other monkeys or whether its performance was only a 
coincidence, you could have the monkey take the SAT three, four, or more 
times. The monkey probably won’t do as well the next time it took the test. 
But suppose this monkey consistently scored over 1400. Imagine that the 
monkey scored over 1400 on twenty consecutive tests. In that case, you’d 
have good reason to think that this particular monkey was actually smarter 
than other monkeys, that this correlation wasn’t coincidental.
Key Concept
Elimination by 
correlation begins with 
the premise that there’s 
no correlation between 
two types of events and 
concludes that there’s 
no causal link between 
them. Elimination by 
time begins with the 
premise that one type of 
event, E2, occurs after 
another type of event, 
E1, and concludes that 
E2 isn’t a cause of E1.

Evaluating Causal Arguments  321
Technical Term: Accidental Correlation
Another term for coincidental correlation is “accidental correlation.”
Habits of a Critical Thinker
Resisting Oversimplifi cation
It’s tempting to look for simple causal stories. But the 
author H. L. Mencken noted that “for every complex 
question, there is a simple answer—and it’s wrong.” 
Critical thinkers don’t look for simple answers. They 
look for good answers. When it comes to causes, the 
good answer is usually a complex answer. A good 
answer to a question such as “What was the cause 
of the Great Depression?” will distinguish necessary 
from contributing causes, see that there may be many 
contributing causes, point to cases of third-party cau-
sation, etc. A good critical thinker is suspicious when 
someone says: “It’s really very simple….”
EXERCISE 9.5
A. For each of the following passages,
 
(a)  identify whether there are one or more causal arguments present or implied,
 
(b) if there are, standardize each one,
 
(c) if premises are missing, insert them,
 
(d) construct a sub-argument for each premise,
 
(e)  explain how one could use one or more of Mill’s Methods to establish the premises.
 1. Stop it, please! Your constant bragging gives me a headache. I’m not kidding, can’t we 
just have a normal conversation with some give-and-take?
 2. The vast majority of people who get small-cell lung cancer are or were cigarette smokers.
 3. Amir loves seafood, but when Amir ate crab at the Red Lobster restaurant last night, he 
became violently ill. Amir’s mother said he also became ill when he ate crayfi sh at the 
Mardi Gras some years ago. So, Amir now believes he is allergic to shellfi sh because he 
eats fi sh dinners at fast food restaurants all the time and never gets sick.
 *4. According to my biology lab instructor, if you pour an acid on litmus paper, it will turn 
the litmus paper red.
 5. “It is a nobrainer to say that the credit crunch is making liquidity scarce. It is less clear 
why central banks are powerless to do anything to stop it contracting, and why this 
shrinkage will sabotage economic growth as economies fall prey to the credit drought 
in places as far-fl ung as the Baltic states to China, as well in the OECD countries. But 
to back up for a minute, what is liquidity? Two years ago, when confronted with fi nan-
cial-sector balance sheets and asset prices that were growing at a multiple of GDP and 
money supply that wasn’t, we at Independent Strategy found our answer. At the time, 
there was precious little correlation between money and fi nancial-asset prices. That 
seemed strange. Unless return on assets, measured by corporate return on capital, was 
rising exponentially, there was no justifi cation for asset prices to be doing so.
“Further research indicated that what was driving asset prices was the supply of 
copious and cheap credit with which to buy them. This type of asset money or credit 

322  Chapter 9 Causal Arguments
was not counted in the traditional defi nition of liquidity, which is simply broad money, 
made up of central-bank money and bank lending.
“The reason for the exponential growth in credit, but not in broad money, was sim-
ply that banks didn’t keep their loans on their books any more—and only loans on bank 
balance sheets get counted as money. No longer could central banks determine how 
much debt was created. Now that the loans didn’t stay on banks’ balance sheets, lend-
ing capacity became almost infi nite—for a while. The credit tide is now ebbing. Since 
August, the credit system has been frozen solid. Debt issuance for all sectors of the 
economy has plummeted. Banks don’t trust each other’s balance sheets. For these rea-
sons the Federal Reserve this week announced joint actions with central banks around 
the world to ease liquidity conditions.
“The Fed’s [actions] will help fulfi ll the responsibility of the central bank to ensure 
proper functioning of fi nancial markets by providing temporary liquidity. But they are 
not an additional easing of monetary policy or bailout of banks’ bad assets. 
“Therein lies the problem: [The Federal Reserve’s actions] address a liquidity short-
age but can’t address the solvency problem inherent in the balance sheets themselves. 
The junk assets that the banks moved off balance sheets will have to be fi nanced by the 
banks, and a lot of them will have to be moved back onto the balance sheets. As this 
happens, bank lending capacity gets used up reducing lending capacity. All this means 
lower liquidity expansion, particularly of asset money, and lower economic growth. 
“In a globalized system, no one is immune. The big shock of 2008 will be that the 
China bubble pops. After all, where would China be without excessive global liquidity 
fl owing into its domestic markets? We are about to fi nd out.” (Roche 2007, A21, mate-
rial omitted)
 6. See Exercise 9.2 A 8. 
 7. This is a conversation between the famous detective Sherlock Holmes and his friend 
Dr. Watson:
 “You have an extraordinary genius for minutiae,” I [Watson] remarked.
“I appreciate their importance. Here is my monograph upon the tracing of foot-
steps, with some remarks upon the uses of plaster of Paris as a preserver of impresses. 
Here, too, is a curious little work upon the infl uence of a trade upon the form of 
the hand, with lithotypes of the hands of slaters, sailors, cork cutters, compositors, 
weavers, and diamond-polishers. That is a matter of great practical interest to the 
scientifi c detective,—especially in cases of unclaimed bodies, or in discovering the 
antecedents of criminals. But I weary you with my hobby.”
“Not at all,” I answered, earnestly. “It is of the greatest interest to me, especially since 
I have had the opportunity of observing your practical application of it. But you spoke just 
now of observation and deduction. Surely the one to some extent implies the other.” 
“Why, hardly,” [Holmes] answered, leaning back luxuriously in his armchair, and 
sending up thick blue wreaths from his pipe. “For example, observation shows me 
that you have been to the Wigmore Street Post-Office this morning, but deduction 
lets me know that when there you dispatched a telegram.” 
“Right!” said I. “Right on both points! But I confess that I don’t see how you arrived 
at it. It was a sudden impulse upon my part, and I have mentioned it to no one.” 

Evaluating Causal Arguments  323
“It is simplicity itself,” he remarked, chuckling at my surprise,—“so absurdly 
simple that an explanation is superfl uous; and yet it may serve to defi ne the limits of 
observation and of deduction. Observation tells me that you have a little reddish mould 
adhering to your instep. Just opposite the Seymour Street Office they have taken up 
the pavement and thrown up some earth which lies in such a way that it is difficult to 
avoid treading in it in entering. The earth is of this peculiar reddish tint which is found, 
as far as I know, nowhere else in the neighborhood. So much is observation. The rest is 
deduction.”
“How, then, did you deduce the telegram?” 
“Why, of course I knew that you had not written a letter, since I sat opposite to 
you all morning. I see also in your open desk there that you have a sheet of stamps and 
a thick bundle of post-cards. What could you go into the post-office for, then, but to 
send a wire? Eliminate all other factors, and the one which remains must be the truth.” 
(Doyle 1994, 4–5)
 *8. “Emotion must be included in a discussion of body intelligence because it is one of the 
means by which our bodies communicate knowledge to conscious awareness.” (Norris 
2001, 113)
 9. “Malinowski’s famous study of Melanesian sexual beliefs and practices provides  evidence 
that sexual jealousy really does have a genetic rather than a purely cultural explanation. 
The tribe that he studied did not believe in physiological paternity; they thought the 
only function of sexual intercourse was to enlarge the vagina so that spirits could im-
plant the fetus in the womb. Nevertheless, men were as jealous as in societies in which 
the male role in procreation is understood. (Posner 1992, 97–98, material omitted) 
 10. “Since communication can take place directly through the body, the body can be inten-
tionally used to transmit information.” (Norris 2001, 116)
 11. In the following argument, Counselor Smart claims that the defendant, Shifty McRogue, 
is guilty of robbing a local bank. Several witnesses confi rmed that the defendant has 
been in desperate need of money ever since he lost his job at the cracker factory. And 
McRogue has the profi le of a criminal, anyway, since we know he has established a 
prior criminal record: he served thirty days in jail just last year for driving under the 
infl uence. Moreover, I have an expert witness, Dr. Quack, the famous phrenologist, who 
will testify that McRogue has a predisposition to rob banks. In fact, if found guilty, this 
would be the defendant’s third conviction; under the state’s “three strikes” legislation, 
he would automatically serve the maximum sentence for his crime. Ever since his re-
lease from jail, McRogue has been seen regularly in the company of Max Cheatem, an 
ex-convict who himself served time for armed robbery. Two weeks ago, Max Cheatem 
lent McRogue his blue two-door Ford—a car of the same make, model, and color as the 
getaway vehicle used in the robbery. And fi nally, the bank was held up by an assailant 
carrying a .22 pistol; three days before the robbery, the defendant purchased a .22 pistol. 
Therefore, McRogue is guilty of robbing the bank. 
 *12. See Exercise 9.2 A 10. 
 13. See Exercise 9.2 A 11. 
 14. See Exercise 9.2 A 12. 

324  Chapter 9 Causal Arguments
 15. For the following passage, look for any causal claims made or implied from the point of 
view of the House Committee and from the point of view of the Hollywood Ten. 
”Since 1938 the [U.S. Congressional] House [of Representatives] Un-American 
Activities Committee (HUAC) had kept up a barrage of accusations about supposed 
subversives in the federal government.
“In 1947 the HUAC subpoenaed nineteen prominent Hollywood writers, producers, 
and actors, intending to prove that the Communist party members dominated the Screen 
Actors Guild, that they injected subversive propaganda into motion pictures, and that 
President [Franklin] Roosevelt had brought improper pressure to bear upon the industry 
to produce pro-Soviet fi lms during the war [World War II]. Ten of the witnesses, the so-
called Hollywood Ten, jointly decided to use the First Amendment as a defense, and each 
of them refused to answer the question as a matter of principle, claiming that party mem-
bership was their business, especially since membership in the Communist party at that 
time was not illegal in the United States. They were all judged to be in contempt and were 
sentenced to up to a year in prison. But greater punishment awaited them. The movie 
industry blacklisted the Hollywood Ten, denying them further work.” (Tindall 2007, 893) 
B. Evaluate the arguments you standardized in A above by applying the true premises test and 
the proper form test. When applying the proper form test, determine whether any of the 
arguments commit fallacies of Hasty Cause, Post Hoc, Causal Slippery Slope, or any other 
non-causal fallacy.
C. For each of the following, determine whether the argument notes these possibilities:
 
(a) E2 could be the cause of E1,
 
(b) there might be an E3 that caused both E1 and E2, and
 
(c) the correlation is coincidental.
 1. In an article noting that hypertension is higher among African-Americans than any-
one else in the world, reporter Denise Campbell cites Elijah Saunders, M.D., Professor 
of Medicine and head of the Hypertension Section of Cardiology at the University of 
Maryland’s School of Medicine in Baltimore. Dr. Saunders points out that “in today’s 
competitive environment, a number of socioeconomic factors such as career pressure, 
unemployment or underemployment, substandard living conditions, racism, and other 
stress-related conditions also affect blood pressure. How stress contributes to hyperten-
sion and heart disease is not known, but the association is quite clear. Stress stimula-
tors often trigger the development of calcifi cation, which causes injury to the cells. The 
accumulated calcium becomes a marker for atherosclerosis, a thickening and hardening 
of artery walls that eventually blocks the arteries.” (Campbell 2007, 90)
 2. “For many years the American bald eagle was rarely seen. Consequently, the bird was 
placed on the Endangered Species List. In 1999 it was removed from the Endangered 
Species List and has been seen in greater numbers in more places. Both its removal from 
the Endangered Species List and the increased sightings are signs that bald eagles are no 
longer endangered.” (Rieke 2006, 343)
 3. “People like their names so much that they unconsciously opt for things that begin 
with their initials. Tom is more likely to buy a Toyota, move to Totowa, and marry 
Tessa than is Joe, who is more likely to buy a Jeep, move to Jonestown, and marry Jill—
and Susie sells seashells by the seashore. Even weirder, they gravitate toward things 
that begin with their initials even when those things are undesirable, like bad grades or 
a baseball strikeout.

Evaluating Causal Arguments  325
“In what they call ‘moniker maladies,’ a pair of researchers fi nd that although no 
baseball player wants to strike out, players whose names begin with K (shorthand for 
strikeout) fan more often than other players. Most students want As, but those whose 
names begin with C or D have lower grade point averages than students whose names 
begin with A and B.
“The eerie coincidences also held for law schools. Scrutinizing data on 170 law 
schools and 392,458 lawyers, the researchers found that the higher the school’s ranking 
(by U.S. News & World Report), the higher the proportion of lawyers with the initials 
A or B. Adlai and Bill are more likely to go to Stanford than Chester and Dwight. (In 
the study, people with confl icting initials—Douglas Avery—were eliminated from the 
analysis.) Clearly, the effect is not all-powerful. This SB [Sharon Begley, author of this 
passage] married an EG, lives in P, and named her children D and S. [Researcher Leif 
Nelson says he is] pretty sure they eliminated all other explanations for the weird link 
between initials and performance.” (Begley 2007, material omitted)
 *4. “A trademark must be sufficiently distinct to enable consumers to identify the manufac-
turer of the goods easily and to distinguish between those goods and competing goods.
“Fanciful, arbitrary, or suggestive trademarks are generally considered to be the 
most distinctive, (strongest) trademarks. This is because these types of marks are nor-
mally taken from outside the context of the particular product and thus provide the best 
means of distinguishing one product from another. 
“Fanciful trademarks include invented words, such as ‘Xerox’ for one manufactur-
er’s copiers and ‘Kodak’ for another company’s photographic products. Arbitrary trade-
marks include actual words used with products that have no literal connection to the 
words, such as ‘English Leather’ used as a name for an aftershave lotion (and not for 
leather processed in England). Suggestive trademarks are those that suggest something 
about a product without describing the product directly. For example, the trademark 
‘Dairy Queen’ suggests an association between the products and milk, but it does not 
directly describe ice cream.” (Cross 2007, 333)
 5. “Some animals have evolved very differently, exhibiting bright warning coloration. 
These animals are usually distasteful, and many are poisonous—such as the yellow 
jacket with its bright yellow and black stripes. Poisoning a predator is small consolation 
for an organism that has already been eaten; thus, the bright colors declare, ‘Eat me at 
your own risk!’ One unpleasant experience is enough to teach predators to avoid such 
conspicuous prey.” (Audesirk 2005, 544)
 6. “While measuring and analyzing the fi rst process of digestion (salivation), [Russian 
physiologist Ivan] Pavlov noticed that his dogs would start to salivate before he gave 
them meat powder. The salivation had initially occurred only after the dogs were giv-
en the meat powder. To further study this curious response, Pavlov performed experi-
ments to train the dogs to salivate to other non-food stimuli. Pavlov’s experiments 
were  important as examples of how behavior is the product of stimuli and responses.” 
(Pastorino 2006, 11, material omitted)
 7. “Since 1938 the [U.S. Congressional] House [of Representatives] Un-American Activi-
ties Committee (HUAC) had kept up a barrage of accusations about supposed subver-
sives in the federal government.
“In 1947 the HUAC subpoenaed nineteen prominent Hollywood writers, produc-
ers, and actors, intending to prove that the Communist party members dominated the 
Screen Actors Guild, that they injected subversive propaganda into motion pictures, 
and that President [Franklin] Roosevelt had brought improper pressure to bear upon the 

326  Chapter 9 Causal Arguments
The Scientifi c Method
The scientifi c method is a series of steps to follow to develop and confi rm 
a causal theory. To illustrate the method, think about an example that has 
probably happened to you: your computer freezes up. Let’s apply the scientifi c 
method to examine this problem.
Step 1: Identify the Question to Be Answered
The scientifi c method begins with a question to be answered. Identifying a 
specifi c causal question to study is important: in most cases, what motivates 
a person is a particular problem and the question must match that problem. 
Think about the case of your malfunctioning computer. Perhaps you’re in-
terested in fi nding a necessary cause of the malfunction so that you can take 
steps to remove it. Or you may not care about the primary cause of the mal-
function. You may only be interested in fi nding a sufficient cause of getting 
the malfunctioning to stop. One question seeks an answer to the primary 
cause of the malfunction; the other question seeks a cause of a solution to the 
malfunction. When a computer has a problem, people often reboot it. This 
often fi xes the problem. If rebooting fi xes a problem with a computer and the 
problem doesn’t reoccur, most people don’t care about the cause of the prob-
lem. They’ve found an action that caused the malfunction to stop. That’s all 
they care about.
Suppose that you call a friend who is a computer geek and ask her to 
help you fi x your malfunctioning computer. She comes over and spends three 
hours working on your computer. You have a paper due the next day, and 
you’re impatiently waiting for the computer to work. Your friend loves work-
ing on computers. You just want to fi nish your paper. Suppose that after three 
Key Concept
The steps in the scientifi c 
method.
industry to produce pro-Soviet fi lms during the war [World War II]. Ten of the witnesses, 
the so-called Hollywood Ten, jointly decided to use the First Amendment as a defense, 
and each of them refused to answer the question as a matter of principle, claiming that 
party membership was their business, especially since membership in the Communist 
party at that time was not illegal in the United States. They were all judged to be in 
contempt and were sentenced to up to a year in prison. But greater punishment awaited 
them. The movie industry blacklisted the Hollywood Ten, denying them further work.” 
(Tindall 2007, 893) 
Focus on the argument implied by the House Committee’s correlation between ac-
tors’ affiliations and President Roosevelt’s policies.
 *8. Focus on the argument implied in #7 above by the action of the Hollywood Ten’s refusal 
to admit or deny their membership in the Communist party.
 9. Focus on the argument implied in #7 above from the point of view of the movie indus-
try’s decision to blacklist the Hollywood Ten.
 10. See Exercise 9.1 A 11.

The Scientifi c Method  327
hours working you ask: “Do you think you can get it working soon?” She 
responds: “Oh, I can get it working in ten minutes. All I have to do is rein-
stall your word processing software. That will defi nitely fi x the problem. But 
I want to fi gure out what caused the problem. Isn’t it interesting to fi gure out 
the exact cause of a computer’s problem?” You and she are seeking to answer 
different causal questions. You want to know: What’s the quickest way to 
cause this problem to go away? She wants to know: What’s the primary cause 
of the problem? This shows that it’s crucial to identify the correct causal 
question.
Step 2: Formulate a Tentative Theory
When your computer malfunctions, you must start somewhere. You’ll come 
up with a tentative theory. A tentative theory is a theory that’s proposed for 
testing. You might think about the theory that your fl ash memory drive has 
gone bad or the theory that a reinstallation of the word processor will fi x the 
problem. The fi rst is a tentative theory about the cause of the problem. The 
second is a tentative theory about how to quickly fi x the problem. Your fi rst 
tentative theory is unlikely to be true. But you have to start by focusing on 
one theory or another.
The development of a tentative theory is another example of the im-
portance of background knowledge. When your computer malfunctions, you 
have many options. You could cover it with a nice warm blanket, but you 
probably won’t do this. You have background knowledge about the nature of 
electrical machines that indicates that covering them with nice warm blan-
kets isn’t likely to help. As our background knowledge increases, our tenta-
tive theories will get better. Your computer-geek friend has more background 
knowledge about computers than you do. Her tentative theories about your 
computer problem are more likely to be correct than yours. Your tentative 
theories are more likely to be correct than one offered by a person transported 
from the 1500s and placed in front of your computer.
Step 3: Check for Correlations
Once you have formulated a tentative theory, you must look for evidence of its 
truth or falsity. This requires checking for correlations. You determine what 
sort of correlations would exist if the theory were true. Scientists sometimes 
call this “deducing the consequences of a theory.” But this phrase is mis-
leading because the reasoning that tells you what sort of correlations would 
exist if the tentative theory were true is an example of inductive reasoning. 
Because of the possibility of third-party causes and coincidental correlation, 
the statement of an empirical theory about a correlation or a cause never 
deductively implies any future consequences. It would be more accurate if 
scientists said they were “inferring the consequences of a theory.”
Once you infer that if some particular theory is true, then some corre-
lations should exist, you’re in a position to see whether those correlations 
do in fact exist. At this point you’ll use Mill’s Methods. To test the nice 
warm blanket theory, you can use the computer when it has a nice warm 
blanket on it and then use it when it doesn’t have a nice warm blanket. 
You’re checking to see whether the problem is present when the blanket is 
absent and whether the problem is absent when the blanket is present. If 

328  Chapter 9 Causal Arguments
the problem is present when the blanket is absent, that would be a confi r-
mation of the tentative theory. If the problem is absent when the blanket is 
present, that would be another confi rmation of the theory. Information con-
fi rms a theory when a correlation that was inferred from the tentative theory 
has been shown to exist. But suppose, as is more likely, that the presence or 
absence of the nice warm blanket isn’t correlated with the malfunction. In 
that case, each case of non-correlation between the blanket and the malfunc-
tion is a disconfi rmation of the nice warm blanket theory. Evidence confi rms 
a theory when that evidence indicates that a correlation inferred from the 
theory is present. Evidence disconfi rms a theory when that evidence indi-
cates that a correlation inferred from the theory isn’t present. 
 
To test the theory that you have a bad fl ash memory drive, you check for 
correlations between the presence of the fl ash memory drive and the com-
puter freezing up. If the problem was present when the fl ash memory drive 
was present and absent when the fl ash memory drive was absent, that would 
be an example of Mill’s Methods providing you with evidence that the prob-
lem with your computer was correlated with the presence of the original 
fl ash memory drive. But you’d need to be careful to avoid committing the 
Fallacy of Hasty Cause. You shouldn’t draw the conclusion that the fl ash 
memory drive is the cause of the problem before checking for the other pos-
sibilities noted above. You need to follow Steps 4 and 5.
Step 4: If Necessary, Formulate a New Theory
If you’ve worked with malfunctioning computers, you know that your fi rst 
tentative theory is usually wrong. When you use Mill’s Methods to check 
for the correlations that would be present if that tentative theory were true, 
you fi nd that they don’t exist. The problem might occur when you used any 
of three fl ash memory drives. This disconfi rms the bad fl ash memory drive 
theory, and you’ll need to formulate a new theory. While you were testing 
for the correlations you inferred from your theory that you had a bad fl ash 
memory, you might have noticed something that gave you an idea for a new 
theory. You might have noticed another correlation—that the problem only 
occurs when you’re using fi les that had been e-mailed to you by one of your 
friends. You might then formulate the theory that the fi les your friend sent 
you were corrupted. 
Key Concept
Evidence confi rms 
a theory when that 
evidence indicates that a 
correlation inferred from 
the theory is present. 
Evidence disconfi rms 
a theory when that 
evidence indicates that a 
correlation inferred from 
the theory isn’t present.
Habits of a Critical Thinker
Avoid Confi rmation Bias
Humans have a psychological fl aw. Once you 
hold a view, you tend to see confi rming evidence and 
overlook or discount disconfi rming evidence. Suppose 
you think that unemployment is usually caused by 
laziness. You would be psychologically primed to see 
evidence that confi rms this theory and psychologi-
cally resist the relevance of disconfi rming evidence.
All humans are subject to confi rmation bias. 
What can you do about it? Well, forewarned is 
forearmed. If you know about confi rmation bias, 
you can try to resist it by actively looking for 
disconfi rming evidence. Those who don’t know 
about confi rmation bias are more likely to fall into 
its trap.

The Scientifi c Method  329
At this point you reach the fi rst loop in the scientifi c method. This new 
theory is now your current tentative theory, and it must be tested just as your 
fi rst tentative theory was. You return to Step 3. You’ll repeat this process un-
til you come up with a theory whose inferred correlations turn out to be true.
Step 5:  Check for Reverse Causation, Third-Party Causation, and 
Coincidental Correlation
Step 5 might be called “Avoiding the Hasty Cause Fallacy.” As noted above, 
the Hasty Cause Fallacy occurs when someone makes an argument with the 
following form:
(1) E1 is correlated with E2.
Therefore,
(5) E1 is a cause of E2.
To avoid the Fallacy of Hasty Cause, you must check for reverse causation, 
third-party causation, and coincidental causation. If you fi nd one of these 
problems, you must return to Step 4 and formulate a new theory. Here’s the 
second loop in the scientifi c method.
Suppose that the correlations predicted by your theory that your friend’s 
fi les are corrupted are present. You infer that if the problem is your friend’s 
fi les, then other fi les sent by your friend should also cause the malfunction. 
You check and they do. It would then be time for you to check for reverse 
causation, third-party causation, and coincidental causation.
Step 6: Develop New Questions
You might think that if a theory made it past Step 5, you’d be done. In many 
cases, you would be. If you just want your computer malfunctions fi xed you 
may not want to know more. But you may want to know more. The theory 
that your friend’s fi les are corrupted raises new questions. Why were they cor-
rupted? How can you keep your fi les from being corrupted again? You come 
to the third and fi nal loop in the scientifi c method. When these new ques-
tions are raised, you’ll return to Step 1 and begin the process again. The more 
you want to know, the more questions you’ll raise, and the more work you’ll 
have to do to really understand the problem. 
An Example of the Scientifi c Method
Let’s end this chapter by illustrating how the scientifi c method might be used 
in the case of Hurricane Katrina. (You should go back and look at the article 
excerpt on pp. 295-296.)
Step 1. Identify the Question to Be Answered. Precise identifi cation of the 
question is crucial. The question isn’t: Was Katrina a necessary cause of the 
fl ooding that occurred when the 17th Street Canal Levee failed? This isn’t 
the question to be asked because everyone agrees that Katrina was a neces-
sary cause. Rather, the researchers are seeking to determine whether there 
was another necessary cause, a design fl aw in the levee. They’re seeking to 

330  Chapter 9 Causal Arguments
answer the following question: What was the proximate and primary cause of 
the failure of the 17th Street Canal Levee?
Step 2. Formulate a Tentative Theory. One tentative theory is that the levee 
failed because water rose higher than the top of the levee. The water then ran 
down the backs of the levees, washed away their supports, and they failed. Let’s 
call this the high water theory. Fanselau proposes this theory in paragraph 4.
4.  “Katrina fl at-out overwhelmed the system,” he said. “There was a 
huge wall of water that obliterated entire sections of the fl oodwall.”
 
Step 3. Check for Correlations. Given this tentative theory, the next step 
is to infer some correlations from it and see whether those correlations ex-
ist. If the high water theory is true, the levees should have failed where they 
were overtopped and not failed where they weren’t overtopped. In paragraph 
7, Nicholson claims that this correlation doesn’t exist. He claims that the 
high water theory is disconfi rmed.
7. “These levees did not overtop, yet they failed anyway.”
Let’s assume that Nicholson is correct. In that case, you need to move to 
Step 4.
Step 4. Formulate a New Theory. Paragraphs 5 and 6 propose a new theory.
5.  [However,] in the case of the 17th Street and London Avenue canals, 
independent investigators believe the fl oodwalls themselves were the 
problem. The reason was the naturally soft soil made up of river silts and 
swampy peat that has been the bane of builders here for two centuries.
6.  Investigators now believe the walls collapsed when the soils beneath 
them became saturated and began to shift under the weight of rela-
tively modest surges from the lake. And newly released documents 
show that the Corps was aware years ago that a particularly unstable 
layer of soil lay beneath both fl oodwalls.
On this theory, the levees were built on soft soils and weren’t adequately 
anchored to fi rm soils underneath. You now have a new tentative theory, the 
soft soil theory, and you must return to Step 3.
Step 5. Check for Correlations (Again). You now infer some correlations 
from the soft soil theory. If this theory is true, the levees should have failed 
when built on soft soil and held when built on fi rm soil. Paragraph 8 says that 
this correlation exists.
8.  Reports of problems with the soft underlayer began to surface even 
before the fl oodwalls were fi nished. In 1994, the now-defunct Pitt-
man Construction Co., a New Orleans fi rm involved in levee con-
struction, claimed in court documents that fl oodwall sections were 
failing to line up properly because of unstable soils.
The information in paragraph 8 confi rms the soft soil theory. Let’s assume 
that all the correlations confi rm this theory. The article doesn’t mention any 
disconfi rming cases. (Disconfi rming cases would be of one of two kinds: cases 
in which levees built on fi rm soil failed and cases in which levees built on 
soft soil didn’t fail.) In that case, you move to Step 5.
Step 6. Check for Reverse Causation, Third-Party Causation, and Coinci-
dental Correlation. Reverse causation can be easily ruled out. The levees were 
built and soft soil was present long before Katrina arrived. You can rule out 
the possibility that the fl ooding caused the soft soil. But third-party causation 

The Scientifi c Method  331
and coincidental correlation are much harder to rule out. The article you’re 
reading was written only eight weeks after the hurricane. At that time, re-
searchers were only beginning to study the levees. Grieshaber’s comment in 
paragraph 9 is accurate.
9.  Corps officials are not yet convinced. “It is important not to jump to 
conclusions,” said John Grieshaber, chief of the engineering division 
in the Corps’ New Orleans district office. “It’s hard to look at the 
aftereffects and say with a high level of certainty, ‘This is what hap-
pened.’”
It’s unlikely that enough research could be done in the eight weeks after a 
hurricane to rule out third-party causation and coincidental correlation. But 
let’s pretend that over the next year or two the soft soil theory was confi rmed 
over and over again. When (and only when) that happened, it would be time 
to move to Step 6.
Step 7. Develop New Questions. The article above indicates that some 
people have already started thinking about Step 6. They’ve already started 
thinking about the new questions that would arise if the soft soil theory is 
well confi rmed. One obvious question is: How can the levees be built to 
counter the effects of soft soil? Here’s a possible answer from paragraph 10.
10.  A proposal for rebuilding the fl oodwalls has set far tougher standards 
than existed 15 years ago. And the steel pilings, which formerly 
reached a depth of 20 feet, must now be driven through the peat layer 
to 40 feet, twice as deep as before.
If the scientifi c method is followed properly and the researchers are good crit-
ical thinkers, what’s learned from Hurricane Katrina will reduce the amount 
of damage and death caused by future hurricanes.
EXERCISE 9.6
A.  For each of the passages included or referred to below, answer the questions and follow 
these instructions. 
 (a) Does it explicitly or implicitly put forth a causal hypothesis?
 (b) If so, determine which, if any, of the steps in the scientifi c method appear to have been 
considered in formulating the hypothesis.
 1. The thunder must have caused the rain and lightning, because I defi nitely heard it fi rst. 
In fact, I heard the thunder several minutes, it seemed to me, before I felt any rain or 
saw any lightning, and obviously, the cause comes before the effect.
 2. There were a couple of break-ins last spring, at the new university dormitory. So this 
fall, the university decided to hire campus police to walk around the grounds of the 
dormitory in the evenings. So far, no more break-ins have occurred.
 3. There was an end-of-term office party one semester at the university. Pizza, snacks, 
and drinks were served, and everyone appeared to be enjoying themselves. Later that 
afternoon, however, several members of the staff became violently ill. Luckily they 
hadn’t left work so they knew about each other’s illness, and they weren’t too sick to 
speculate. After consultation, they realized that they had all eaten the pepperoni pizza. 
They made a pact that next term they would eat the mushroom pizza instead.

332  Chapter 9 Causal Arguments
 *4. During an illness, a friend brought Jeri a lovely plant. She kept it in the living room 
of her apartment and it fl ourished for several months. However, at some point, it ap-
peared to be lighter than usual, and the leaves looked bedraggled. Jeri’s cousin has a 
green thumb, so Jeri asked her what could be the problem. Jeri’s cousin Zhouzhou said 
it needed transplanting because it had used up all its dirt. She took the plant to her 
home and moved it into a larger pot with new potting soil. There followed a few days in 
which the plant looked very bad, and during which time Jeri became depressed, think-
ing her plant was dying, and that it was a sign that she herself wasn’t going to get well. 
But then, one day, Zhouzhou brought the plant back to Jeri’s apartment, and it began to 
fl ourish again. Was it that the plant missed its home where the temperatures had been 
higher or was it simply that it takes a few days to get used to the new potting soil and 
shock of transplanting?
 5. Professor McX was writing out exercises one day when all of a sudden she felt a tight-
ening in her chest. Was it a heart attack coming? Indigestion? While pondering these 
two possible explanations, the Professor noticed that the people cleaning the building 
had just spilled some liquid on the rug outside her office. By this time, Professor McX 
had several other symptoms, including a headache, stomachache, and throat closing. It 
isn’t a heart attack, she thought, as she began to pack up her belongings to get out of 
the range of the now obviously toxic fumes from the liquid spilled. Upon leaving she 
noticed that the equipment said “pest control” on it, so she presumed that the spilled 
material was pesticide, perhaps not ‘spilled’ at all, but rather purposely applied. The 
symptoms were severe enough to last the night, causing difficulty sleeping, but they 
began to wane by the next morning. Professor McX decided not to venture into the hall 
that day and worked elsewhere on her exercises.
 6. (The following is part of a song heard during the childhood of one of the authors of this 
book.)
There was an old lady who swallowed a fl y.
I dunno why she swallowed that fl y,
Perhaps she’ll die.
There was an old lady who swallowed a cow.
I don’t know how she swallowed a cow!
She swallowed the cow to catch the goat…
She swallowed the goat to catch the dog…
She swallowed the dog to catch the cat…
She swallowed the cat to catch the bird…
She swallowed the bird to catch the spider
That wriggled and jiggled and wiggled inside her.
She swallowed the spider to catch the fl y.
But I dunno why she swallowed that fl y 
Perhaps she’ll die. 
There was an old lady who swallowed a horse—
She’s dead, of course.
 7. Kamuela’s dorm room shares a shower with another room. When he went to shower this 
morning, he couldn’t turn the hot water completely off. The faucet handle appeared to be 
stripped, as it just turned around and around to no effect. Kamuela called the apartment 
staff and when the maintenance engineer came, Kamuela was surprised that she fi xed the 

The Scientifi c Method  333
handle almost instantaneously. Kamuela’s theory was that the threads on the faucet were 
stripped so that the knob couldn’t get a grip. If right, that theory would mean having to 
replace the faucet itself, certainly a job which would take more than an instant. It would 
probably entail the maintenance engineer going to purchase a new part before installing 
it. Clearly this didn’t happen, so Kamuela inferred he was wrong in his hypothesis. 
After the maintenance engineer left, Kamuela went back into his bathroom and 
looked at the hot water faucet. It worked great, but how had it been fi xed so quickly? 
Upon further closer examination, he noticed that there was a tiny screw in the faucet 
handle. Aha! So the engineer had merely tightened up that screw which allowed the 
handle to grip the faucet and turn off the water. A loose screw had been the cause!
 *8. Jahai was puzzled. He went to cook dinner for a couple of his friends two weeks ago, 
and after he’d been working for a few minutes there was some water on the tile fl oor. At 
fi rst, he just fi gured he’d spilled something. But then the next night when he began fi xing 
dinner, he saw that the same thing happened, and he’d just started chopping an onion. 
There was simply no way he could have spilled something. There’s a hot water tank in 
Jahai’s apartment, just next to the stove and across from the sink. Jahai called the apart-
ment manager and said, “I think there’s a leak in my hot water tank. I have water that 
seems to be coming up through the kitchen tile.” The apartment manager sent over the 
maintenance engineer, who took the cover off and inspected the hot water heater. The 
maintenance engineer found nothing, no obvious leak, so she simply removed a few tiles, 
remarked that she’d replace them soon, and proceeded to vacuum up the water. Jahai was 
somewhat dissatisfi ed, as he was pretty sure there had to be a leak in the hot water heater. 
Where else could it come from? His apartment was on the second fl oor, so it wasn’t com-
ing in the front door from outside. Oddly enough, for the next week, or more, everything 
appeared to be ok. No water leaking out while he cooked each night. So even though Jahai 
was unconvinced that his theory was wrong, he had to admit that vacuuming up the wa-
ter and repositioning a few tiles appeared to have been sufficient to solve the problem. 
However, two nights ago, the water on the fl oor was back! What could have hap-
pened? Jahai intended to call the maintenance engineer again, but was too busy study-
ing yesterday and didn’t have time. Today there was a huge rainstorm. Jahai had time to 
call today, but chose not to do so because he was afraid that if he called today the apart-
ment staff would assume that the recent downpour had caused the situation. He knew 
this couldn’t be the case because it happened the night before the rain, but he felt sure 
that most people would assume the closely connected events would have to be causally 
related, so he decided to wait until a few days after the rain has stopped.
 9. Look again the conversation between Sherlock Holmes and his friend Dr. Watson found 
in Exercise 9.5 A 7 above. Show how Holmes uses the scientifi c method to prove where 
Watson has been and why he has been there.
 10. When sleeping, “the images evoked by the cortical activation often incorporate mem-
ories of episodes that have occurred recently or of things that a person has been think-
ing about lately. Presumably, the circuits responsible for these memories are more 
excitable because they have recently been active. Hobson and Pace-Schott (2002) sug-
gest that both slow-wave sleep and REM sleep work together. Memories that are con-
solidated during slow-wave sleep are reactivated during REM sleep and consolidated 
with other memories. The activation of this brain mechanism produces fragmentary 
images; our brains try to tie these images together and make sense of them by creating 

334  Chapter 9 Causal Arguments
or synthesizing a more or less plausible story. This theory is known as the activation-
synthesis theory, because it proposes that activation of the cortex by the pons causes 
the brain to create a subjective interpretation of what this activity means. When 
we communicate these interpretations to ourselves, we call them dreams.” (Carlson 
2006, 288)
 11. Background information: Diseases and illnesses are normally treated clinically by med-
ical personnel focusing on each and every individual who suffers from the condition. 
Some diseases and illnesses, however, are treated as a public health issue. The main 
examples are infectious epidemics, where treatment is not focused solely on affected 
individuals, but rather on practices that will help the entire community, affected and 
unaffected individuals alike. The polio vaccine of the 1950s is an example: preventa-
tive practices were instituted and administered throughout the country. This type of 
response seems obvious in cases of infectious diseases. But Dr. Frank Vinicor, of the 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, hypothesizes that we should also treat 
diabetes as a public health problem, even though diabetes is currently treated simply 
as a clinical disease. See if you can standardize the steps of the scientifi c method from 
Vinicor’s argument as found in the following passage:
“In the U.S., certain health conditions are readily accepted as ‘public-health dis-
orders, and others continue to be primarily viewed as ‘clinical diseases.’ Refl ecting on 
infectious conditions, it appears that disease burden, rapid change in disease incidence 
(suggesting preventability), and public concern about risk are three essential charac-
teristics that defi ne a public-health disorder. By any one of several criteria, diabetes is 
associated with a very high burden to individuals with the disease, as well as to society 
in general. Further, there is convincing and increasing evidence that primary, second-
ary, and tertiary prevention strategies are effective in reducing the disease burden as-
sociated with diabetes. Yet most would still consider diabetes primarily to be a clinical 
disease. In part, this perception is based on the fact that, in association with aging and 
a possible strong family history, diabetes and its complications may appear inevitable 
to many. Further, much of the burden associated with diabetes is insidious, coming on 
gradually only after a considerable number of years. Thus, the burden associated with 
diabetes has not dramatically increased in the past few months or years; it has been here 
for some time and is increasing steadily. Finally, our understanding of public concern is 
only now being systematically investigated. To effectively establish these public-health 
perspectives, public concern must be incorporated into efforts to defi ne the burden of 
diabetes and our extant ability to prevent and thereby reduce this burden.” (Vinicor 
1994, 22)
 *12. Ten years after writing the article that argued diabetes should be treated as a public 
health issue, Drs. Barbara Bowman and Frank Vinicor wrote an editorial that clearly 
shows the progress made, both in the classifi cation of diabetes as a public health issue 
and in the greater articulation given to explain that classifi cation. That is, scientists 
Bowman and Vinicor offer an improved version of Vinicor’s original argument, which 
is, in effect, providing steps four, fi ve, and six of the scientifi c method. See if you can 
standardize the steps from the passage below:
“Type 2 diabetes makes a compelling case study for public health action. The dis-
ease respects no boundaries. It is increasingly common—occurring in both developed 
and developing countries, in men and women, at earlier ages than in past decades, and 
in persons of every race and ethnic group, with a high prevalence in Hispanic/Latino 
*

The Scientifi c Method  335
Americans and in other minority groups, including non-Hispanic blacks, American 
Indians, Alaska Natives, Asian Americans, and Native Hawaiian and other Pacifi c 
Islanders. As noted by Martorell and Saldaña, family history and genetic factors ap-
pear to further increase the risk for type 2 diabetes in Hispanic/Latino Americans. In 
the United States, the prevalence of diabetes was estimated to be 18.2 million peo-
ple (6.3% of the population) in 2002, with dramatic increases predicted in the future. 
The determinants of type 2 diabetes are largely understood. Two of the most impor-
tant risk factors, obesity and physical inactivity, are modifi able. The natural history 
involves progression from prediabetes, a condition in which blood glucose metabolism 
is abnormal (although not yet in the diabetes range), to the development of type 2 dia-
betes. The rate of progression from prediabetes to type 2 diabetes is between 3% and 
10% per year. However, progression from prediabetes to diabetes can be prevented or 
delayed with sustained weight loss and increased physical activity. The magnitude of 
the change needed for primary prevention of type 2 diabetes is relatively modest: a 7% 
to 10% weight loss and sustained moderate physical activity, at least 30 minutes per 
day. Today, the number of adults with prediabetes in the United States is estimated 
to be at least 41 million. Type 2 diabetes leads to devastating health and economic 
consequences for individuals, their families, and society. The most serious complica-
tions include blindness, kidney disease, lower-limb amputations, and acceleration of 
coronary heart disease and stroke. After type 2 diabetes is diagnosed, treatment requires 
an increasingly intensive and complex regimen to control glucose, blood pressure, and 
lipids, in addition to ongoing preventive care for the eyes, kidneys, and feet. Health 
care and complications attributed to diabetes are costly: in 2002, the total cost of dia-
betes was estimated to be $132 billion, $92 billion of which was spent on direct medi-
cal costs and $40 billion of which was spent on indirect costs, including disability, 
work loss, and premature mortality. Clearly, ongoing access to high-quality health care 
is a paramount concern for preventing complications and death from diabetes. Such 
care is expensive, and much of the cost of drugs and supplies is not reimbursed, even 
for those with insurance coverage. While it is improving, the quality of clinical care 
for people with diabetes still falls short of established guidelines. Because of contin-
ued increases in the prevalence of obesity, the outlook for the future is ominous—the 
health system will likely be overwhelmed by type 2 diabetes. As detailed by Cohen 
et al in the series of articles from the Border Health Strategic Initiative, the solution 
to type 2 diabetes control must begin in the community. Extensive dialogue is a fi rst 
step in engaging communities and identifying the priorities for community action. The 
papers by Cohen and associates demonstrate how communities and researchers can—
and must—collaborate to assess targets for intervention and develop sustainable solu-
tions to control type 2 diabetes. Insights gained from these interventions also can guide 
the development of effective community-based approaches for primary prevention of 
type 2 diabetes. Improving the public’s health will require rapid translation and dis-
semination of effective, community-based strategies for diabetes prevention and con-
trol and the commitment to sustain and reinforce these interventions. As shown by 
this promising initiative, collaboration across and within national and state borders 
and communities will be essential and must involve the entire community: where 
people live, work, play, and go to school. Improved clinical care alone will not be suf-
fi cient. One strategy now being implemented uses the essential public health services 
as strategic levers to strengthen the public health response to diabetes. Development, 
implementation, and evaluation of such strategies are needed urgently.” (Bowman 2005) 

336  Chapter 9 Causal Arguments
13 & 14.  “Two main sociological theories claim to explain global inequality. The fi rst, mod-
ernization theory, is a variant of functionalism. According to modernization theory, 
global inequality results from various dysfunctional characteristics of poor societies 
themselves. Specifi cally, modernization theorists say the citizens of poor societ-
ies lack sufficient capital to invest in Western-style agriculture and industry. They 
lack rational, Western-style business techniques of marketing, accounting, sales, 
and fi nance. As a result, their productivity and profi tability remain low. They lack 
stable, Western-style governments that could provide a secure framework for invest-
ment. Finally, they lack a Western mentality: values that stress the need for savings, 
investment, innovation, education, high achievement, and self-control in having 
children. Societies characterized by these dysfunctions are poor. 
“Proponents of dependency theory, a variant of confl ict theory, have been quick 
to point out the chief fl aw in modernization. For the last 500 years, the most powerful 
countries in the world deliberately impoverished the less powerful countries. Focusing 
on internal characteristics blames the victim rather than the perpetrator of the crime. 
It follows that an adequate theory of global inequality should not focus on the internal 
characteristics of poor countries themselves. Instead, it ought to follow the principles 
of confl ict theory and focus on patterns of domination and submission—specifi cally 
in this case on the relationship between rich and poor countries. That is just what 
dependency theory does. 
“According to dependency theorists, less global inequality existed in 1500 and 
even in 1750 than today. However, beginning around 1500, the armed forces of the 
world’s most powerful countries subdued and then annexed or colonized most of the 
rest of the world. Around 1780 the industrial revolution began. It enabled the West-
ern European countries, Russia, Japan, and the United States to amass enormous 
wealth, which they used to extend their global reach. They forced their colonies to 
become a source of raw materials, cheap labor, investment opportunities, and mar-
kets for the conquering  nations. The colonizers thereby prevented industrialization 
and locked the colonies into poverty.” (Brym 2005, 241, material omitted)
 
15.  In 1995, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) created the Well 
Integrated Screening and Evaluation for Women Across the Nation (WISEWOM-
AN) program, authorized by Congress in the Breast and Cervical Cancer Mortal-
ity Prevention Act of 1990 (Public Law 101-354). WISEWOMAN, as an early 
detection program, screens for risk factors associated with cardiovascular disease 
and lifestyle intervention services for women aged 40 to 64 years. In the follow-
ing passage, CDC public health scientists Melanie Besculides, Heather Zaveri, 
Rosanne Farris, and Julie Will theorize how to decide which practices are best suit-
ed to WISEWOMAN’s goal. The scientists call their theory a “mixed-methods”
approach, aimed at minimizing the limitations of particular causal arguments 
(that are informative for only one event) while maximizing the benefi t of us-
ing different types of particular and general causal arguments, with a goal of dis-
covering what will maximize prevention of certain types of cancer. Based on 
the excerpt below of their abstract and introduction, see if you can standardize 
their approach and hypothesis according to the steps of the scientifi c method.
Introduction: Recommendations on best practices typically are drawn from unique 
settings; these practices are challenging to implement in programs already in operation. 

The Scientifi c Method  337
We describe an evaluation that identifi es best practices in implementing lifestyle 
interventions in the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s WISEWOMAN 
program and discuss our lessons learned in using the approach.
Methods: We used a mixed-methods evaluation that integrated quantitative 
and qualitative inquiry. Five state or tribal WISEWOMAN projects were included 
in the study. The projects were selected on the basis of availability of quantitative 
program performance data, which were used to identify two high-performing and 
one low-performing site within each project. We collected qualitative data through 
interviews, observation, and focus groups so we could understand the practices and 
strategies used to select and implement the interventions. Data were analyzed in a 
multi-step process that included summarization, identifi cation of themes and prac-
tices of interest, and application of an algorithm.
Results: Pilot testing data collection methods allowed for critical revisions. Con-
ducting preliminary interviews allowed for more in-depth interviews while on site. 
Observing the lifestyle intervention being administered was key to understanding the 
program. Conducting focus groups with participants helped to validate information 
from other sources and offered a more complete picture of the program.
Conclusion: Using a mixed-methods evaluation minimized the weaknesses inher-
ent in each method and improved the completeness and quality of data collected. A 
mixed-methods evaluation permits triangulation of data and is a promising strategy 
for identifying best practices.
Introduction to Report: There is no doubt that public health programs should 
follow best practices. In the programmatic setting, best practices are the processes 
that lead to the implementation of the most appropriate intervention for a given 
location and population. Identifying and applying best practices is complex—largely 
because recommendations on what works are based typically on experimental or 
other one-of-a-kind settings. As a result, the practices recommended are not likely 
to be relevant to most other settings. An alternative is to identify best practices 
by collecting data from existing programs and to use two or more complementary 
methods, or a mixed-methods approach, to data collection. A mixed-methods approach 
can be a combination of one or more qualitative methods or a mix of qualitative 
and quantitative methods. A mixed-methods approach strengthens evaluation re-
search, because no single method is without weakness or bias. Quantitative data, for 
example, may be objective, but they often lack the depth needed to elucidate how 
and why a program works. Qualitative data can enhance understanding of program 
implementation and operation but are considered less objective. By combining the 
two, research can be both objective and rich. There are several qualitative methods, 
each with strengths and weaknesses. For instance, although interviews with pro-
gram staff can provide a detailed picture of program operations, they cannot objec-
tively provide the range of participants’ perspectives. Focus group participants can 
provide information on program experiences and effects, but this information is not 
generalizable because focus group members typically do not represent all program 
participants. Although the cardiovascular screening is undoubtedly important, the 
lifestyle intervention offered through WISEWOMAN is a key service intended to 
modify the behaviors associated with increased risk for cardiovascular and other 
chronic diseases. In fact, the intervention is predicated on the notion that obesity, 
poor diet, physical inactivity, and tobacco use can be modifi ed to reduce high blood 

338  Chapter 9 Causal Arguments
pressure and elevated serum cholesterol levels at relatively low cost and with mini-
mal risk to participants. Theoretically, a reduction in risk factors leads to a decreased 
incidence of cardiovascular events such as myocardial infarction. The literature on 
lifestyle interventions suggests that a combination of diet and physical activity is 
most effective in reducing the risk factors for cardiovascular disease in women. The 
CDC not only requires all WISEWOMAN programs to offer a lifestyle intervention 
but also encourages them to use the national guidelines for heart-healthy eating, 
physical activity, and tobacco cessation in developing their interventions. Beyond 
this, the CDC does not prescribe the lifestyle intervention, preferring instead to 
have projects develop or select a culturally appropriate intervention shown by scien-
tifi c evidence to be effective either in lowering blood pressure or cholesterol levels 
or in improving diet and physical activity. Lifestyle interventions therefore vary 
among states and tribes. Although state or tribal programs often dictate which inter-
vention should be used at their local sites, they sometimes allow fl exibility in how 
sites implement the intervention. To distill a set of best practices from these highly 
variable interventions, Mathematica Policy Research, Inc (MPR) reviewed the lit-
erature on lifestyle interventions and collected qualitative data from sites through 
interviews, observation, and focus groups. The best practices identifi ed will be dis-
seminated to existing and new WISEWOMAN practitioners through a user-friendly 
toolkit. (Besculides 2006, material omitted)
Causal arguments are arguments whose conclu-
sion states that some event or state of affairs 
caused some other event or state of affairs. The 
standard form of a causal argument has four 
premises, each of which usually requires a sub-
argument.
(1) E1 is correlated with E2.
(2) E2 is not the cause of E1.
(3)  There is no E3 that is the cause of E1 and 
E2.
(4) E1 and E2 are not coincidentally related.
Therefore,
(5) E1 is a cause of E2.
Causal arguments can be made for several 
different types of causes. Necessary causes are 
required for the effect to occur. Sufficient causes 
Chapter Summary
are enough, all by themselves, to bring about 
the effect. Contributory causes are causes which 
have an effect on the event but are themselves 
neither necessary nor sufficient. Causes can be 
either proximate (meaning they happen close 
in time to the event) or remote (meaning they 
occur farther back in time from the event). A 
primary cause is the necessary, sufficient, or 
contributory cause that’s the most important 
cause for an audience.
 
The fi rst premise of a standardized causal 
argument asserts the existence of a correlation. 
Correlations can be either binary or scalar. 
There’s a positive binary correlation when E1 
and E2 are present simultaneously and absent 
simultaneously. There’s a negative binary cor-
relation when E1 is present in E2’s absence, 

Chapter Summary  339
and E2 is present in E1’s absence. There’s a 
positive scalar correlation if E1 and E2 increase 
and/or decrease together. There’s a negative 
scalar correlation if E1 increases as E2 decreas-
es or E2 increases as E1 decreases. Correlations 
can be established by Mill’s Methods. Some 
causal arguments jump from premise (1), 
establishing correlation between E1 and E2, to 
the conclusion that E1 causes E2. Because it 
omits premises (2), (3), and (4), such an argu-
ment fails the proper form test and commits 
Hasty Cause Fallacy.
 
The second premise of a standardized causal 
argument rules out reverse causation. The most 
common evidence for premise two is that E1 
didn’t happen later in time than E2. No cause can 
happen later in time than its effect. Causal argu-
ments that commit the Post Hoc Fallacy assert 
that because E1 occurred before E2, E1 caused E2.
 
The third premise rules out third-party 
causation. Establishing premise (3) requires evi-
dence that there’s no other event (E3) that’s the 
cause of the two events in question (E1 and E2). 
It isn’t possible to rule out all third-party causes. 
But ruling out several events as possible causes 
will greatly strengthen the argument. The two 
methods for doing this are to show that there’s 
no correlation and to show that E3 happened 
later in time.
 
The fourth premise rules out the possibility 
that the correlation between E1 and E2 is only a 
coincidence. The causal link between E1 and E2 
must be plausible given background knowledge. 
If there’s a plausible causal link, the correlation 
must be present a sufficient number of times to 
rule out coincidence.
 
The scientifi c method is a series of steps 
used by scientists to establish causal theories. 
After identifying the precise question of in-
terest, a tentative theory is proposed and the 
consequences of this theory are inferred. At this 
point, Mill’s Methods are used to see if the cor-
relations inferred from the theory exist. If they 
don’t, a new tentative theory is formulated. If 
they do, you must rule out reverse causation, 
third-party causation, and coincidental correla-
tion. The fi nal step is to think about questions 
for further research.
G U I D E
Finding, Standardizing, and Evaluating Causal Arguments
This Guide is an amplifi cation of the “Guide for Finding, Standardizing, and Evaluating 
Arguments” that is in Chapter Two. The numbered sentences are copies from the Guide in 
Chapter Two. The paragraphs with “Causal” in front of them are additional materials that 
apply only to causal arguments.
Finding Arguments
 1. Look for an attempt to convince.
 
 Causal. Look to see if there’s an attempt to convince someone that some event or state 
of affairs is caused by some other event or state of affairs. 
 2. Find the conclusion.
 
 Causal. Determine which kind of causal claim the conclusion is making: particular/
general cause, necessary cause, sufficient cause, contributory cause, primary cause, remote/
proximate cause.

340  Chapter 9 Causal Arguments
 3. Find the premises.
 4. Review the following to make sure that you’ve correctly identifi ed the conclusion and 
the premises: imperfect indicator words, sentence order, premises and/or conclusion 
not in declarative form, and unstated premises and/or conclusion.
 
 Causal. Identify the causes and the effects.
 5. Review the following to make sure that you haven’t incorrectly identifi ed something 
as a premise or a conclusion when in fact it isn’t part of an argument: assertions, ques-
tions, instructions, descriptions, and explanations.
Standardizing Arguments
 6. Rewrite the premises and the conclusion as declarative sentences. Make sure that each 
premise and the conclusion is a grammatically correct declarative sentence. Rewrite 
the premises and conclusion as necessary to make them clearer but don’t change the 
meaning of the passage. Remove pronouns from the sentences and replace them with 
the nouns or noun phrases to which they refer. Remove emotionally charged language.
 7. Review any phrases you’ve omitted to be sure that they aren’t premises or a conclusion.
 8. Number the premises and the conclusion. Put brackets [ ] around the number of an 
unstated premise or conclusion. Place the premises before their conclusion and insert 
“Therefore,” between the premises and the conclusion. Use blank lines to indicate sub-
arguments.
 
 Causal. Put the standardization in the standard form of a causal argument:
 
(1)  E1 is correlated with E2.
 
(2)  E2 is not the cause of E1.
 
(3)  There is no E3 that is the cause of E1 and E2.
 
(4)  E1 and E2 are not coincidentally correlated.
 
Therefore,
 
(5)  E1 is a cause of E2.
 9. Compare your standardization to the original passage to make sure that you haven’t 
omitted any arguments found in the passage and to be sure that you’ve correctly identi-
fi ed the premises and the conclusion. 
Evaluating Arguments: The True Premises Test
 10. Check to see whether the premises are accurate descriptions of the world. 
 
 Causal. Premise (1). Use Mill’s Methods to determine whether the events are correlated.
 
 Causal. Premise (2). Use information about time to check for reverse causation.
 
 Causal. Premise (3). Check for third-party causation.
 
 Causal. Premise (4). Check for coincidental correlation.
 11. Consider whether the premises are appropriate for the argument’s audience.
 12. Review the assumed premises to be sure that the assumptions are reasonable. Make 
sure that all assumed premises are uncontroversially true empirical statements, uncon-
troversially true defi nitional statements, or appropriate statements by experts. Make 
sure the defi nitions are good ones.

Chapter Summary  341
Evaluating Arguments: The Proper Form Test
 13. Determine whether the argument is a deductive argument or an inductive argument. 
 14. Determine whether the premises are relevant to the conclusion. Look at each premise 
individually to see whether the truth of the premise provides some evidence for the 
truth of the conclusion. Look at the premises as a group to see whether the truth of all 
of them provides some evidence for the truth of the conclusion.
Evaluating Arguments: Checking for Fallacies
 15. Compare the argument to the list of fallacies on page 410 to see whether the argument 
commits any of the fallacies.
 
 Causal. Check for the Hasty Cause Fallacy and the Post Hoc Fallacy.

342
The day may come when the rest of the animal creation may acquire those rights 
which never could have been [withheld] from them but by the hand of tyranny. The 
French have already discovered that the blackness of the skin is no reason why a 
human being should be abandoned without redress to the caprice of a tormentor. 
It may one day come to be recognized that the number of the legs, the [amount of 
hair on] the skin, or the [shape of the pelvic bone], are reasons equally insuffi cient for 
abandoning a sensitive being to the same fate. What else is it that should trace the 
insuperable line? Is it the faculty of reason, or perhaps the faculty of discourse? But a 
full-grown horse or dog is beyond comparison more rational, than an infant of a day, 
or a week, or even a month, old. But suppose they were otherwise, what would it avail? 
The question is not, can they reason? nor, can they talk? but, can they suffer?
—Jeremy Bentham, Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation 
(1907, 311, fi rst published in 1781, material omitted and capitalization 
modernized)
10
Moral Arguments
Learning Outcomes
After studying the material in this chapter, you should be able to:
1. Identify moral arguments.
2. Identify consequentialist moral arguments.
3. Identify deontic moral arguments.
4. Identify aretaic moral arguments.
5. Correctly evaluate moral arguments.

Identifying Moral Arguments  343
The quote on the previous page makes a moral argument that animals 
should have more legal rights than they currently have. You’ve probably 
heard moral arguments about abortion, the invasion of Afghanistan, and 
taxes. In these cases, the fact that moral arguments are being used is obvi-
ous. But moral arguments are often unstated presuppositions. In fact, 
they are presuppositions of everything you do.
Identifying Moral Arguments
A moral argument is an argument whose conclusion asserts that something 
is morally good or morally bad. Moral arguments don’t usually contain the 
words “good” or “bad.” An argument with a conclusion that a person is 
corrupt is a moral argument because it points to one way that a person can 
be morally bad. An argument with a conclusion that an action is generous 
is a moral argument because it points to one way that an action can be 
good. The many different ways a thing can be good or bad are revealed by 
the variety of moral words. Here’s a list of more than one hundred words of 
moral praise.
Moral Argument Indicator Words
accepting
contented
fair
humble
altruistic
cooperative
faithful
idealistic
appreciative
courageous
farsighted
imaginative
assertive
courteous
fl exible
impartial
autonomous
creative
focused
independent
aware
critical
forgiving
industrious
balanced
cunning
free
innocent
beautiful
curious
friendly
inventive
benefi cent
defi ant
frugal
joyful
benevolent
dependable
funny
just
brave
detached
generous
kind
caring
determined
gentle
loving
cautious
devoted
good
loyal
charitable
diligent
graceful
merciful
chaste
discerning
grateful
moderate
clean
disciplined
happy
modest
committed
discrete
helpful
moral
compassionate
empathic
honest
nonviolent
confi dent
enduring
hopeful
nurturing
considerate
enthusiastic
hospitable
obedient
Key Concept
A moral argument is 
an argument whose 
conclusion asserts that 
something is morally 
good or morally bad.
(Continued)

344  Chapter 10 Moral Arguments
open
reliable
sharing
tolerant
optimistic
respectful
simple
tough
orderly
responsible
sincere
tranquil
patient
restrained
sober
trusting
peaceful
reverent
spiritual
trustworthy
perfect
righteous
spontaneous
truthful
perseverant
self-aware
strong
understanding
pious
self-disciplined
sympathetic
unselfi sh
prudent
has self-esteem
tactful
well-mannered
pure
self-reliant
temperate
wise
purposeful
sensitive
thankful
witty
Even this list is incomplete. It only includes words that are used to indicate 
that people are morally good. There are just as many ways to say that some-
one is morally bad. Virtues are morally good features of people, and vices are 
morally bad features of people. In addition to being good or bad, features of 
people can be morally indifferent. Having a birthmark on the left arm is a 
morally indifferent feature.
Moral words are also used to say that actions and things are good or bad. 
Actions that are morally bad are sometimes called “forbidden.” Actions that 
are morally indifferent are sometimes called “permitted.” Actions that are 
morally good are sometimes called “obligatory.” “Wrong” is sometimes used 
to refer to forbidden actions. Hurting people simply for your own amusement 
is wrong, forbidden. Having chocolate ice cream is permitted. If you have 
children, raising them well is obligatory.
“Rights” is another moral argument indicator word. To say that someone 
has a right is either to say that someone is morally obligated to do something 
for that person (“I have a right that you give me my car keys”) or is morally 
obligated to let that person do something (“I have a right that you let me sit 
at this lunch counter”).
Values: Often Overlooked Presuppositions
As the philosopher Aristotle noted (2009, 5), everything you do relies on 
moral claims. The fact that you are doing something usually means that you 
value what you’re doing. When a baseball player practices hitting a baseball, 
he indicates that he thinks it’s good to hit a baseball well. Scholars rely on 
moral claims. Remember the argument made by Aletha Huston regarding the 
effects of the New Hope Project. The New Hope Project gave working parents 
an income supplement, assistance with child care, and healthcare subsidies. 
Huston’s study compared children in these families to another group of chil-
dren in families (the control families) whose parents didn’t receive these ben-
efi ts. Huston found that:
Children in New Hope families performed better than those in control 
families on academic achievement—particularly reading—as measured by 
Key Concept
Virtues are morally 
good features of 
people, and vices are 
morally bad features 
of people.

Identifying Moral Arguments  345
three independent sources: standardized test scores, parent reports, and 
teacher reports. (Huston 2005, 915)
She concluded that
The results of this evaluation suggest that the policies tested in New 
Hope may be benefi cial to large parts of the population who have low 
incomes but are able to work. (Huston 2005, 916)
Huston is relying on the moral claim that academic achievement, particu-
larly reading, is a good thing. The second quote contains the moral argu-
ment indicator word “benefi cial.” The fact that you are in college suggests 
that you are also relying on the moral claim that academic achievement is 
valuable.
Huston and the baseball player don’t explicitly make the moral claims 
on which their activities rely. They haven’t done anything wrong. It would 
be annoying if people always said that they value what they are doing. 
On the other hand, you should be aware of the values presupposed by an 
activity because those values may be controversial. Here’s an old joke: an 
economist is a person who knows the price of everything and the value of 
nothing. This joke is unfair to economists (who probably value their chil-
dren and families as much as anyone else). But it points out that economics 
assumes that the study of prices is important. Someone who makes this 
joke is hinting that he thinks that the study of prices isn’t as valuable as 
economists think it is. He hints that we should spend less time studying 
prices and more time studying other things, perhaps how to paint an amaz-
ing painting, how to speak a second language, or how to cure a terrible 
disease.
EXERCISE 10.1
A. Review the following passages. Determine whether or not they contain a moral argu-
ment. Determine whether the passage contains a moral presupposition and, if so, what 
it is.
 1. “Call me Ishmael. Some years ago—never mind how long precisely—having little or no 
money in my purse, and nothing particular to interest me on shore, I thought I would 
sail about a little and see the watery part of the world.” (Herman Melville, Moby-Dick. 
See the epigraph of Chapter One.)
 2. “[The Catholic Church] holds that it is not admissible to ordain women to the priest-
hood, for very fundamental reasons. These reasons include: the example recorded in the 
Sacred Scriptures of Christ choosing his Apostles only from among men; the constant 
practice of the Church, which has imitated Christ in choosing only men; and her living 
teaching authority which has consistently held that the exclusion of women from the 
priesthood is in accordance with God’s plan for his Church.” (Pope Paul VI, “Response 
to the Letter of His Grace the Most Reverend Dr. F. D. Coggan, Archbishop of Can-
terbury, concerning the Ordination of Women to the Priesthood.” See the epigraph of 
Chapter Two.)

346  Chapter 10 Moral Arguments
 3. “It is a truth universally acknowledged, that a single man in possession of a good for-
tune, must be in want of a wife.” (Jane Austen, Pride and Prejudice. See the epigraph of 
Chapter Four.)
 *4. “‘My dear Mr. Bennet,’ said his lady to him one day, ‘have you heard that Netherfi eld 
Park is let at last?’
 Mr. Bennet replied that he had not.
 ‘But it is,’ returned she; ‘for Mrs. Long has just been here, and she told me all about it.’
 Mr. Bennet made no answer.
 ‘Do you not want to know who has taken it?’ cried his wife impatiently.
 ‘You want to tell me, and I have no objection to hearing it.’
 This was invitation enough.”
 [Hint: This conversation illustrates that Mr. and Mrs. Bennet have different moral 
presuppositions. What are they?] (Jane Austen, Pride and Prejudice. See the epigraph of 
Chapter Four.) 
 5. “Nanuwak had a difficult time processing the salmon with the ground-slate knife. Not 
long into the fi sh cutting, the blade showed several chips at the cutting surface. At the 
start she found that the stone knife cut the fl esh more easily than the salmon’s skin. 
Eventually she was sawing at the fl esh and using ‘lots of muscle’ to cut it.” (Lisa Frink, 
Brian Hoffman, and Robert Shaw, “Ulu Knife Use in Western Alaska: A Comparative 
Ethnoarchaeological Study.” See the epigraph of Chapter Three.) 
 6. “I reasoned thus with myself: I am wiser than this man, for neither of us appears to 
know anything great and good; but he fancies he knows something, although he knows 
nothing; whereas I, as I do not know anything, so I do not fancy I do. In this trifl ing par-
ticular, then, I appear to be wiser than he, because I do not fancy I know what I do not 
know.” (Socrates, as reported in Plato 1897, 19)
 7. “It is believed that the aorta is capable of undergoing passive stretching, since elastic 
arteries are the large arteries capable of undergoing passive stretching, and the aorta is 
an elastic artery.” (Sandy Fritz, Kathleen Maison Paholsky, and M. James Grosenbach, 
Mosby’s Basic Science for Soft Tissue and Movement Therapies. See the epigraph of 
Chapter Six.)
 *8. “Look at the world. It is just one big machine subdivided into an infi nite number of 
smaller machines. All these various machines are adjusted to each other with an accu-
racy that fi lls all with wonder. This fi tting of means to ends through all of the natural 
world resembles the machines humans produce. Since the effects resemble each other 
we are led to infer, by all the rules of analogy, that the causes also resemble each other 
and that the author of nature is somewhat similar to us, although he has much greater 
powers proportionate to the greater work he has done. By this argument we can prove 
the existence of God and that his mind is similar to ours.” (David Hume, Dialogues 
Concerning Natural Religion, material omitted and simplifi ed. See the epigraph of 
Chapter Seven.) 
 9. “Studies on the relationship between female testosterone measures and behavior, 
particularly in free-ranging primate populations, remain scant. In this study we used 
fecal steroid analysis to examine the effects of seasonal, reproductive, and social factors 

Identifying Moral Arguments  347
on female testosterone in a group of free-ranging hybrid baboons in the Awash Na-
tional Park of Ethiopia. We collected behavioral and hormonal data from 25 adult 
females across an 11-month period. The results indicated that female dominance 
rank was  positively related to testosterone measures.” (Jacinta C. Beehner, Jane E. 
Phillips-Conroy, and Patricia L. Whitten, “Female Testosterone, Dominance Rank, 
and Aggression in an Ethiopian Population of Hybrid Baboons.” See the epigraph of 
Chapter Eight.)
 10. “NEW ORLEANS — Within a space of 15 hours on Aug. 29, three massive, concrete 
fl oodwalls in separate parts of the city suddenly fractured and burst under the weight 
of surging waters from Hurricane Katrina. The breaches unleashed a wall of water that 
swept entire buildings from their foundations and transformed what might have been a 
routine hurricane into the costliest storm in U.S. history.
“Today all three breaches are looking less like acts of God and more like failures of 
engineering that could have been anticipated and very likely prevented.” (Joby Warrick 
and Michael Grunwald, “Investigators Link Levee Failures to Design.” See the epigraph 
of Chapter Nine.)
 11. “As Benazir Bhutto’s body was laid to rest, violence and looting broke out across Pak-
istan, challenging President Pervez Musharraf’s control over the nation.” (Wonacott 
2007, A1) 
 *12.  “What happens where there are [only] two, three, or several fi rms? How do competitive 
forces play out when each fi rm faces only a limited number of rivals? Will prices be cut 
to (marginal) costs, or will fi rms compete instead with advertising and other promo-
tional devices?” (Pepall 2005, 4) 
 13. “It is very important that you take or use this exactly as directed. Do not skip doses 
or discontinue unless directed by your doctor.” (A warning label on some prescription 
drugs.)
 14. “The bell that measures time is ringing. Time here is measured by bells.” (Atwood 
1986, 8, material omitted) 
 15. “Anyone who works for an employer receives a paycheck that itemizes not only the 
money received but also the money deducted for various taxes. One of the big items for 
most people is FICA, which stands for Federal Insurance Contributions Act. This is the 
money taken out of your paycheck for the Social Security and Medicare systems, which 
provide income and medical care for retired and disabled Americans.
“At the time of writing, most Americans paid 7.65 percent of their earnings in 
FICA. But this is literally only the half of it: employers are required to pay an equal 
amount. 
“In fact, most economists believe that the real effect of the FICA is to reduce wages 
by the full amount of the combined employee and employer payments. 
“The reason economists think that workers, not employers, really pay the FICA is 
that the supply of labor is much less responsive to the wage rate than is the demand 
for labor. [S]ince workers are relatively unresponsive to decreases in the wage rate, em-
ployers can easily pass the burden of the [FICA] tax on to them through lower wages.” 
(Krugman 2006, 103–104, material omitted) 

348  Chapter 10 Moral Arguments
The Nature of Moral Arguments 
Before looking at the evaluation of moral arguments, you need to know two 
things about them. The fi rst is about the link between morality and truth.
Moral Arguments and Truth
Remember that an argument is an attempt to provide reasons for thinking 
that some belief is true. Every argument is composed of two or more state-
ments. A statement is a sentence that makes a claim that is either true or false. 
Connections
Chapter One discusses these defi nitions of “argument” and “statement.”
Most people think that moral judgments are statements. In other words, most 
people think that moral judgments make claims that can be true or false. 
Most people think that
(a) Slavery is wrong.
is true and that
(b) You are permitted to run over people whenever you drive your car.
is false. But some people think that there aren’t any moral statements be-
cause they think that judgments about morality don’t make claims that are 
true or false. If moral judgments aren’t true or false, they can’t be statements, 
and if there can’t be any moral statements, there can’t be any moral argu-
ments. People who think this are noncognitivists. Noncognitivists believe 
that there are no moral statements that are true or false, and therefore there 
can’t be any moral arguments.
Noncognitivists believe that (a) and (b) above aren’t statements because 
neither of them can be true and neither of them can be false. 
Noncognitivists don’t deny that people talk and write about right and 
wrong. They deny that what people say and write about right and wrong is 
true or false. Noncognitivists don’t deny that there’s moral disagreement. 
They think that this disagreement is similar to expressing emotions. One 
form of noncognitivism holds that sentences like (a) and (b) are ways of ex-
pressing emotions. On this view, (a) might better be written as
(a1) Slavery. Boo! Hiss!
and (b) might better be written as
(b1) Driving over people with your car. Yeah! Love it!
Neither (a1) nor (b1) is true or false. When someone at a football game yells “Go 
Bears!” and someone else yells “Go Packers!” they are disagreeing. But the fans 
aren’t making claims that can be true or false. They’re just expressing their feel-
ings. On this version of noncognitivism, moral disagreement is a kind of shout-
ing match with each side expressing its emotions. Just as it would make no 
sense to argue that “Go Bears!” is true, noncognitivists think that it makes no 
sense to argue about right and wrong. Cognitivists believe that there are moral 
statements that are true or false, and therefore there can be moral arguments. 
Key Concept
Noncognitivists believe 
that there are no moral 
statements that are true 
or false, and therefore 
there can’t be any moral 
arguments.
Key Concept
Cognitivists believe 
that there are moral 
statements that are true 
or false, and therefore 
there can be moral 
arguments.

The Nature of Moral Arguments   349
Critical Thinkers
David Brink
David Brink (1958–still making moral arguments) is Professor of Philosophy at the 
University of California, San Diego. He’s also an editor of the journal Legal Theory. 
Professor Brink has written several books and many articles on ethics and philosophy of 
law, but he’s most important to you because the moral arguments he made in his book 
Moral Realism and the Foundations of Ethics (New York: Cambridge University Press, 
1989) were so good that they are one of the main reasons the authors of this textbook 
are cognitivists.
Courtesy of David Brink
Some people think that abortion is immoral, and some people think that it 
isn’t. But the arguments you see in the newspaper about abortion assume that 
Abortion is wrong.
is either true or it’s false. If the people who were discussing abortion were 
noncognitivists, the debate would be much less heated. If people felt that 
they were expressing their emotions about the issue but that there was no 
correct answer, they’d probably be less concerned about the outcome of the 
abortion debate.
This introductory textbook won’t discuss the arguments for or against 
noncognitivism. If you’re interested in this issue (and we think this issue is 
fascinating), you should talk to a professor in the philosophy department of 
your college. He’ll be able to direct you to a course where this issue is dis-
cussed. Outside of a philosophy class, most people assume that cognitivism 
is true. This book will also make that assumption.
Moral Arguments, Emotion, and Self-Interest
The second thing you need to know about moral arguments is that they are 
often bound up with emotion and self-interest. Its emotional force makes 
language useful and beautiful. You need to be able to tell your family that 
you love them and to express your anger. But when it comes to choosing what 
beliefs to hold, emotion is often a distraction. You can be fooled by bad argu-
ments dressed up in emotional language. Standardization removes much of 
the emotional force and allows you to see whether an argument is providing 
good reasons or only beautiful words.
Connections
Chapters One, Three, and Four discuss the fact that standardization removes much 
of the emotional force of language.
Key Concept
Moral arguments are 
often bound up with 
emotion and self-interest.

350  Chapter 10 Moral Arguments
This warning about the danger of emotions is especially relevant when 
it comes to moral arguments. Most people want to be good people. When 
you’re discussing moral arguments, you’re frequently arguing that someone 
did something wrong or is bad person. The person is likely to react emotion-
ally. When this happens, your critical thinking skills are extremely useful. 
Try to get beyond emotional reactions to correctly evaluate the arguments 
presented.
Self-interest and self-deception can also blind people to good arguments. 
You’ve seen cases in which you’re sure that someone believes something 
based on bad arguments because those arguments support beliefs that are in 
that person’s self-interest. Because you’ve seen this in so many other people, 
you’d be guilty of a poor analogical argument if you thought that you were 
immune to the effects of self-interest. Because you care about seeing yourself 
as a good person, you’ve got self-interested motives to hold on to your moral 
views. Learning to recognize the presence and infl uence of emotions and self-
interests on composing and evaluating claims is another part of the art of 
argument.
EXERCISE 10.2
A. In the following passages: 
 
(a)  indicate whether they’d be written by a cognitivist, by a noncognitivist, or by both, 
 
(b)   indicate whether the passage indicates that the writer is too emotional (for someone 
concerned to think critically).
 1. Take the example of “You shouldn’t kill people.” All that’s going on when someone 
says this is that they are commanding someone else not to kill people.
 2. We must do this because Durga commands it. (Note: Durga is a Hindu goddess.)
 3. The killing of innocent children is a grave moral wrong.
 *4. Moral obligations are important! You can’t just ignore them! 
 5. Moral judgments are just piles of junk. I mean, look at how they are used! 
 6. Why is religion such a divisive issue?
 7. Is it right or wrong for women to drive? It depends. In societies where most people think 
that it’s okay for women to drive, it’s right. In societies where most people think it’s 
wrong for them to drive, it’s wrong.
 *8. What? You think that in some places it’s okay for women not to be allowed to drive? 
That’s nuts. Only an idiot would deny that women have a universal human right to 
drive.
 9. It’s very important to pay your taxes. If you don’t, people will suffer.
 *10. When someone says that taxation is unfair, all they mean is that they don’t like 
taxation.

Evaluating Moral Arguments  351
Evaluating Moral Arguments
For now, let’s focus on moral arguments about actions. They have a wide va-
riety of forms, but underlying all of them is one basic form. If the conclusion 
of a moral argument is about actions, it can be put into this basic form:
Action 
(1) Action A has feature F.
  
(2) It is morally good/bad to do actions that have feature F.
  
Therefore,
  
(3) H should/should not do A.
The variable “A” refers to an action, the variable “H” refers to a human be-
ing, and the variable “F” refers to a feature. 
Connections
Chapter Two discusses the use of variables.
Premise (1) of the Action form asserts that an action has a particular feature, 
F. Premise (2) asserts that it’s morally good or bad for an action to have this 
feature. The phrase “can be put” in the sentence before the Action form is 
crucial. All moral arguments that draw a conclusion about actions can be 
put into this form even though few of them are actually found in this form in 
ordinary conversation.
The second premise is often unstated. Here’s an example from Chapter 
One:
As part of their study, Dr. Frederick’s research group is considering giv-
ing the drug miconazole to a group of children. However, they should 
not do this because miconazole always has three serious side effects that 
harm children. It causes vomiting, bloody stools, and severe abdominal 
cramping.
If you look at the explicit statement of the argument, it appears that it should 
be standardized like this:
(1)  Giving miconazole to children causes vomiting, bloody stools, and 
severe abdominal cramping.
Therefore,
(3) Dr. Frederick’s research group should not give miconazole to children.
But the argument is missing a step. Here’s the missing premise:
[2]  It is morally bad to do actions that harm children by causing vomit-
ing, bloody stools, and severe abdominal cramping.
Most likely, the author of this argument can rely on the assumption that 
people shouldn’t do things that harm children by causing vomiting, bloody 
stools, and severe abdominal cramping.
Connections
Chapter One discusses unstated premises.
Key Concept
The basic form of a 
moral argument with 
a conclusion about an 
action.

352  Chapter 10 Moral Arguments
EXERCISE 10.3
A. Determine which of the following passages contain a moral argument. If the conclusion 
is about an action, put the argument into the Action form. Insert any necessary unstated 
premises or conclusions.
 1. Hang up and drive! (Seen on a bumper sticker.)
 2. If you let the ads tell you how to vote, you deserve what you get. (Seen on a bumper sticker.)
 3. Because the acid in your beakers is very strong, you must be careful not to spill it.
 *4. Because the liquid in your beaker is sulfuric acid, many minerals would dissolve if you 
dropped them into your beaker.
 5. What a jerk! He dinged my car and didn’t even stop!
 6. Galileo demonstrated that some extra-terrestrial objects do not orbit the Earth by show-
ing that Jupiter has moons.
 7. Cut it out! You can’t practice the drums at 2 a.m. You’ll wake the entire neighborhood!
 *8. I don’t think that I’d trust her. She told me that she’d help me study but then never 
came to the study session.
 9. I saw you! That was so nice. You didn’t have to stop and push that guy in the wheelchair.
 10. Murder is the taking of an innocent human life, and that’s something we should never do.
 11. Laws against homosexual conduct deprive people of control of fundamental decisions in 
their lives. Fundamental decisions such as these shouldn’t be made by the government.
 *12. “[A] housing shortage [caused by price controls] is not merely annoying: like any shortage 
induced by price controls, it can be seriously harmful because it leads to inefficiency.” 
(Krugman 2006, 86) 
 13. “In 1992, the price of Renault Company’s Clio RT Hatchback in Britain was $7,519. 
This was more than 30 percent higher than the $5,750 charged for the car in Belgium. 
The two cars were identical in most respects, but they differed in one dimension. The 
one marketed in Britain had its steering wheel on the right-hand side, the proper place-
ment for a country in which cars are driven on the left-hand side of the street.” (Pepall 
2005, 100, material omitted) 
 14. “House Speaker Glenn Richardson’s much-publicized plan to eliminate most school 
property taxes could mean higher federal income taxes for some homeowners and higher 
costs of living for senior citizens, tax experts say.
“Richardson would do away with most school taxes, the biggest part of a homeowner’s 
annual property tax bill, and replace the lost revenue with a sales tax on more goods and 
services—everything from groceries and haircuts to auto and appliance repairs.
“Tax experts point out that Richardson also would be eliminating an important 
income-tax deduction.
“‘For a homeowner, I would no longer be paying property taxes, but I would no 
longer be getting a deduction on those taxes,’ said Roger Lusby, an Atlanta CPA and 
partner in Frazier & Deeter.
“In addition, senior Georgians, who in many counties pay little or no school prop-
erty taxes because of special exemptions, could end up paying higher taxes overall be-
cause they would be paying sales taxes on more goods and services, noted Lt. Gov. 
Casey Cagle, a critic of the Richardson plan.” (Salzer 2007, A1) 
 15. “[A]ctions are right in proportion as they tend to promote happiness, wrong as they tend 
to produce the reverse of happiness.” (Mill 1906, 9)  

Evaluating Moral Arguments  353
Consequentialist Moral Arguments
When is premise (2) of the Action form true? In other words, what features of 
actions make them morally good/bad? 
Many people think that the effects of actions make them good or bad. 
Look again at the premises of the argument about miconazole. Premise (1) is 
a causal claim. It claims that miconazole causes vomiting, bloody stools, and 
severe abdominal cramping. Premise [2] says that people shouldn’t do things 
that cause a certain effect. In a consequentialist moral argument someone 
argues that some action causes a particular effect (its consequences), that 
causing this particular effect is wrong, and therefore people should not do the 
action in question. Here’s the consequentialist version of the Action form:
(1) Action A will produce C.
(2) It is morally good/bad to produce C.
Therefore,
(3) H should/should not do A.
“C” is a variable that refers to consequences. If someone were to ask you why 
it was wrong to give miconazole to children, a natural response would be to 
point to the consequences of the drug. According to consequentialist moral 
arguments, actions that have bad consequences are bad actions and actions 
that have good consequences are good actions. 
Technical Term: Consequentialism
In philosophy classes, the word “consequentialism” usually refers to the view that 
whether an action is right or wrong depends only on the consequences of the  action. 
But outside of philosophy classes, consequentialist arguments are often combined 
with the other kinds of moral arguments.
Many different moral arguments have a consequentialist form. Each of these 
different versions of consequentialism can be seen as fi lling in “C” of the basic 
consequentialist argument form in different ways. The different versions of 
consequentialism can be classifi ed by how they answer three questions: 
 
1. What sorts of consequences are morally important? 
 
2. Who is morally important?
 
3. What’s the correct amount of the morally important consequences?
Let’s look at each of these questions.
What Sorts of Consequences Are Morally Important?
Look at the second premise of the basic consequentialist argument form.
(2) It is morally good/bad to produce C.
You need to fi ll in C so that premise (2) is true. Actions have all sorts of 
different kinds of consequences. Which of these consequences are morally 
important and which are morally irrelevant? Here’s a (silly) example of a con-
sequentialist version of the Action form:
(1) Action A will produce as much Dr. Pepper as possible.
(2) It is morally good to produce as much Dr. Pepper as possible.
Therefore,
(3) H should do A.
Key Concept
The form of a 
consequentialist moral 
argument.

354  Chapter 10 Moral Arguments
The range of consequences valued by humans is enormous. Think of all the 
things that people like to do: skiing, hang gliding, sitting quietly, shopping, 
working in the yard, hanging out with friends, being alone, etc. And different 
people value different things. It seems hard to fi gure out what sorts of conse-
quences are morally important. There seem to be too many options and too 
many different points of view.
To attempt to solve this problem, philosophers distinguish between in-
strumental and inherent value. Think about fl u shots. They’re unpleasant. If 
fl u shots are unpleasant, why do you get a fl u shot? The obvious answer is 
that you get one because you don’t want to get the fl u. Flu shots are some-
thing you get because they produce something else that you value. Flu shots 
are only valuable as means, as an instrument, to getting something else. Flu 
shots have only instrumental value. 
Now think about pleasure. Why do you value pleasure? The question 
sounds funny. You just seem to value pleasure, period. Most people don’t 
value pleasure as a means to getting something else. Something is valued 
instrumentally when it’s valued as a means to getting something else. Some-
thing is valued inherently when it’s valued for its own sake. Most people 
think that fl u shots are instrumentally valuable and that pleasure is inher-
ently valuable. 
With notions of instrumental and inherent value, the question “What 
sorts of consequences are morally important?” can be reformulated as “What 
sorts of consequences are inherently morally important?” The instrumental/
inherent distinction shows that there may be less disagreement about valued 
consequences. Someone who liked skiing and hated shopping might agree 
with someone who liked shopping and hated skiing that both of these ac-
tivities are valued instrumentally and that they are both valued because they 
produce pleasure. It may be that both the skier and the shopper agree that 
pleasure has inherent value. At least three different sorts of consequences 
have been proposed as the kinds of consequences that are inherently morally 
important. 
Pleasure and the Avoidance of Pain. Many people think that one inher-
ently morally important consequence is the production of pleasure and the 
avoidance of pain. Why do most people like to eat chocolate? At least in 
part because it’s pleasurable. Why do most people prefer that others not kick 
them? At least in part because it hurts. Lots of different things are pleasur-
able. The list includes eating, sleeping, reading good books, playing sports, 
and working in the garden. Lots of different things are painful. The list in-
cludes being sick, losing a loved one, being injured, and sitting through a 
boring lecture. 
The Satisfaction of Desires. People sometimes confuse pleasure and the 
avoidance of pain with the satisfaction of desires. But they aren’t the same 
thing. People sometimes don’t feel pleasure when they get what they want. 
But the satisfaction they get is still valuable to them. In many cases, someone 
works hard for something but when he fi nally gets what he has been work-
ing for, he has a feeling of satisfaction or perhaps even disappointment. One 
of the authors of this book worked hard to write a previous book. He pulled 
all-nighters and gave up movies, dinners, and sporting events. It took him six 
Key Concept
Something is valued 
instrumentally when 
it’s valued as a means to 
getting something else. 
Something is valued 
inherently when it’s 
valued for its own sake.

Evaluating Moral Arguments  355
years and the book fi nally got published. But he didn’t feel any pleasure. He 
felt a grim but deep satisfaction. Many people think that the satisfaction of 
desires is inherently morally valuable, even when it doesn’t produce pleasure.
People often work hard to satisfy their own desires or the desires of oth-
ers. You might work hard to help a friend satisfy his desire for a new lawn. 
You undoubtedly have some desires of your own that you work to satisfy. 
Some people think that the inherent value of pleasure is overrated. They 
think that the notion that pleasure has inherent moral value rests on an over-
simplifi ed picture of human psychology. Think about how you feel when you 
complete a major project and how you feel when you have something good to 
eat. Many people think that those feelings aren’t similar enough to classify 
them both as pleasure. In addition, they think that, even if pleasure has some 
inherent value, desire satisfaction does as well, and desire satisfaction has 
more inherent value than pleasure.
The Development of Talents. Many people think that the development 
of talents and abilities is an inherently important consequence. Artists work 
to make themselves better artists. Football players work to make themselves 
better football players. Accountants work to make themselves better accoun-
tants. Many people strive to be a better mother, a better father, or a better 
friend. Some people think that the development of talents has only instru-
mental value (as a means to pleasure and/or a desire satisfaction), but others 
think that it has inherent value.
What sorts of consequences are inherently morally important? It seems 
that pleasure, desire satisfaction, and talent development are three plausi-
ble candidates. It will be useful to have one word to refer to pleasure, desire 
satisfaction, talent development, or whatever else has inherent moral value. 
Philosophers have tended to use the word “happiness” for this word. Let’s do 
that too. In light of this, the consequentialist version of the Action form can 
be reformulated like this:
(1) Action A will produce happiness.
(2) It is morally good/bad to produce happiness.
Therefore,
(3) H should/should not do A.
Technical Term: Hedonism
Hedonism is the view that the only consequence that is inherently morally impor-
tant is pleasure and the avoidance of pain. Look again at the quote from Bentham 
that begins this chapter. Bentham is a hedonist. He thinks that the only inherently 
morally important consequence is pleasure and the avoidance of pain. This explains 
why he thinks that the “question is not, can they reason? nor, can they talk? but, 
can they suffer?”
EXERCISE 10.4
A. Write a short essay in which you defend your view about what has inherent value. Your 
instructor will tell you how long your essay should be.

356  Chapter 10 Moral Arguments
Who Is Morally Important?
The formulation of the basic consequentialist argument form isn’t suffi-
ciently precise because actions have different consequences for different peo-
ple. If Sara sends a love letter to Edward, this might make Edward happy and 
make Justin unhappy. Here’s a (silly) example of a consequentialist version of 
the Action form:
(1)  Action A will produce happiness, but only for people more than six 
feet tall.
(2)  It is morally good to produce happiness, but only for people more than 
six feet tall.
Therefore,
(3)  H should do A.
Universalists hold that the answer to the question “Who is morally im-
portant?” is “Everyone.” Universalism holds that everyone is equally mor-
ally important. Look at this famous sentence from the U.S. Declaration of 
Independence:
We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal, 
that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights, 
that among these are Life, Liberty, and the pursuit of Happiness.
The claim that “all men are created equal” is usually understood to mean 
that all men and all women are created equal. If this phrase says that all 
men and women have equal physical or mental abilities, then it’s false. 
When it comes to basketball, LeBron James is a much better player than ei-
ther of the authors of this textbook. But the Declaration is claiming that all 
men and women are equally morally important. Universalistic consequen-
tialists think that the second premise of the basic consequentialist argument 
form is
(2)  It is morally good to produce happiness for everyone in the world (and 
everyone’s happiness is of equal importance).
According to this version of the consequentialist argument, you act rightly 
when your actions produce the most happiness for everyone in the world. 
You should consider your own happiness as well as everyone else’s. And you 
should consider everyone’s happiness equally. You shouldn’t give any greater 
weight to your own happiness.
As the quote that begins this chapter illustrates, some philosophers think 
that “everyone” should include every being that can feel pleasure or pain, 
every being that can “suffer.” Hedonists are particularly drawn to this view. 
If someone thinks that pleasure and pain have inherent value, it’s plausi-
ble to hold that they have inherent value whether they occur in humans or 
non-humans. Some see this as a strength of hedonism, but others see it as a 
weakness.
Key Concept
Universalism holds 
that everyone is equally 
morally important.

Evaluating Moral Arguments  357
Egoism
Most people think that universalistic consequentialism is a proper argument 
form. Most people think that another version of consequentialism, egoism, is 
an improper argument form. Egoism is the view that an action by any person 
is right when it produces the most pleasure for that person. The egoistic con-
sequentialist version of the Action form is
(1) Action A will produce happiness for H.
(2) It is inherently morally good to produce happiness for H (and nothing 
else is inherently morally good).
Therefore,
(3) H should do A.
According to this argument, you should produce as much of your own happi-
ness as you can, and everyone else should make himself as happy as possible. 
Someone who is an egoistic consequentialist won’t sacrifi ce his own happi-
ness for others. People who are egoists are selfi sh, and being selfi sh is usually 
regarded as a moral fl aw. Most people think that the second premise in the 
argument above is false. 
Technical Term: Restricted Egoism
Some business management theories discuss a technical version of egoism. In 
restricted egoism, the “ego” doesn’t refer to a person. It refers to the corporation 
or to the corporation’s owners collectively (its stockholders). The restriction on this 
form of egoism is that the corporations’ actions must not violate any law or ethical 
custom in the country in which it does business.
What’s the Correct Amount of the Morally Important Consequences? 
How much happiness should a person seek to produce? One answer that 
springs to mind is: as much as possible. Consequentialists who think that you 
should produce as much happiness as possible are maximizing consequen-
tialists. Nonmaximizing consequentialists can hold many different views. A 
nonmaximizing consequentialist might hold that an action is good if it con-
tributes to everyone’s having an equal amount of happiness. According to this 
view, you should perform actions that contribute to distributing happiness 
equally, even if that would decrease the total happiness in the world. Other 
versions of nonmaximizing consequentialism hold that happiness should be 
distributed according to merit or according to need.
Maximizing consequentialism is a common version of consequentialism. 
To get a more precise understanding of maximization, let’s pretend that hap-
piness can be measured with numbers. (This can’t really be done. You can tell 
roughly how happy and unhappy people are, but you can’t measure happiness 
with numbers. The numbers only provide a clearer understanding of what 
“maximizing” means.) On the chart below, positive numbers indicate happi-
ness, negative numbers indicate unhappiness, and zero indicates indifference. 
Suppose that six actions are possible in a certain situation and that four (and 
only four) people (including yourself) are affected by your actions.
Key Concept
Egoism is the view that 
an action by any person 
is right when it produces 
the most pleasure for 
that person.

358  Chapter 10 Moral Arguments
People
Actions
H1 (You)
H2
H3
H4
Total
A1
 -2
  -2
  -3
  -6
-13
A2
12
  10
  10
-40
  -8
A3
  2
    2
    2
    2
    8
A4
10
-10
    4
    4
    8
A5
  5
    5
    5
    5
  20
A6
  5
  20
-10
  10
  25
On this chart, each of the six actions you can do is represented by a row 
(A1–A6). Each of four people affected by your choice of action is represented 
by a column (H1–H4). From your personal perspective, Action 2 is the best. 
It produces the most happiness for you (12). The action that maximizes hap-
piness is Action 6. It produces a total of 25 units of happiness, more than the 
total of any other action. If the only options open to you decrease happiness, 
how do you maximize happiness? Suppose that you had to choose between 
Action 1 and Action 2. In that case, you maximize by choosing the action 
that produces the least unhappiness, Action 2. If the only actions open to you 
produce the same amount of happiness, how do you maximize happiness? 
Suppose that you had to choose between Action 3 and Action 4. In this case, 
maximizing consequentialism says that you may pick either action. Between 
Action 3 and Action 4, you might pick Action 4 because it produces more 
happiness for you. 
Here’s the universalistic maximizing consequentialist version of the 
Action form:
(1) Action A will maximize happiness for everyone in the world.
(2) It is morally good to maximize happiness for everyone in the world.
Therefore,
(3) H should do A.
Many people think that this is a proper argument form.
Key Concept
The universalistic 
maximizing 
consequentialist 
version of the 
Action form.
EXERCISE 10.5
A. Consequentialist views vary in three different ways. These correspond to the three ques-
tions noted on p. 353. Looking at those questions and the material above, develop fi ve 
different consequentialist moral theories. Be sure to specify how each of your fi ve theories 
answers each of the three questions.
B. Write an essay in which you argue that one of your fi ve consequentialist moral theories is 
better than the other four. Your instructor will tell you how long your essay should be.

Evaluating Moral Arguments  359
Deontic Moral Arguments
Most people think that, in addition to consequentialist forms, there are proper 
deontic argument forms. Deontic moral arguments include a premise that 
says that an action has a certain intrinsic feature. (“Deontic” is pronounced 
“dee-on-tick.”) 
What are intrinsic features? Think about mowing your lawn. Like every 
action, this one has consequences. Your grass is shorter. You’ve burned some 
calories. Here are some intrinsic features of mowing the lawn. It’s an action 
of mowing. If your lawn mower is red, it’s an action that’s done with a red 
object. If you live in Missouri, it’s an action done in Missouri. The intrinsic 
features of an action are all its features except its consequences.
Suppose Jacob tells Elisa that he’ll meet her for lunch, but he isn’t go-
ing to meet her. He just wants to get rid of her. One consequence of his 
lie is likely to be that Elisa goes to the restaurant where Jacob promised 
they’d have lunch. When Jacob doesn’t show up, Elisa is likely to be hurt. 
But not all lies have bad consequences. Perhaps Elisa’s car breaks down and 
she never makes it to the restaurant. In that case, Jacob’s lie had no bad 
consequences. But whether Elisa is hurt or not, a lie is a lie. All lies have 
the intrinsic feature of being lies. Many people think that Jacob’s lie was 
wrong even if it had no bad consequences. They endorse an argument with 
this form:
(1)  H1’s telling H2 that he would meet her for lunch (Action A) had the 
feature of being a lie (F).
(2) It is morally bad to do actions that have the feature of being a lie (F).
Therefore,
(3) H1 should not have told H2 that he would meet her for lunch.
In general, deontic versions of the Action form look like this:
(1) Action A has intrinsic feature F.
(2) It is morally good/bad to do actions with intrinsic feature F.
Therefore,
(3) H should/should not do A.
Key Concept
Deontic moral arguments 
include a premise that 
says that an action has 
an intrinsic feature.
Key Concept
The intrinsic features 
of an action are all 
its features except its 
consequences.
Key Concept
The form of a deontic 
moral argument.
Critical Thinkers
Jeremy Bentham
Jeremy Bentham (1748–1832), a British economist and social reformer, is best known as 
the fi rst advocate of utilitarianism. Utilitarianism is a consequentialist theory, or more 
specifi cally, it’s hedonist, universalistic, maximizing consequentialism. Bentham believed 
education should be available to all regardless of wealth, race, political beliefs, or religious 
affi liation. In his day, this was a radical view. Bentham was a prolifi c writer on many 
subjects including individual freedom, equal rights, separation of church and state, the 
abolition of slavery, and the end of the death penalty.
UCL Art Collections, University College London, 
UK/ The Bridgeman Art Library

360  Chapter 10 Moral Arguments
Deontic moral arguments are common. The Ten Commandments from the 
Bible are making a set of deontic claims (Exodus 20:2–17). Three of the Com-
mandments are
You shall not murder.
You shall not commit adultery.
You shall not steal.
These Commandments don’t assert that you should refrain from doing these 
things because these actions have bad consequences. 
Which intrinsic features, if inserted into premise (2) of the basic deon-
tic moral argument, will make the argument a good one? No book could 
look at all the possibilities. It seems that actions that have features such 
as being a lie, being a theft of someone else’s property, being an example 
of cheating, and being unfair (to name only a few) are morally wrong. Look 
back at the list of virtues at the beginning of this chapter. For many of 
them, you can think of a corresponding intrinsic feature that many people 
would think makes an act right. To solve this problem, philosophers have 
attempted to determine whether deontic arguments can be boiled down to 
one underlying intrinsic feature that accounts for all the others. Let’s call 
such an underlying intrinsic feature a “fundamental intrinsic feature,” and 
let’s look at two possible fundamental intrinsic features: universalizability 
and cooperation.
Universalizability
The philosopher Immanuel Kant proposed a test to determine whether there 
was a good deontic argument against doing an action. 
Do I want everyone at all times to do actions that have the same intrinsic 
features as the action I’m thinking of doing?
You’ve probably heard people using Kant’s test. Suppose that someone wants 
to do something and another person thinks it’s wrong. When this happens, 
people sometimes ask: “What if everybody did that?” On Kant’s view, to de-
termine whether an action is immoral, you should ask yourself if you’d want 
everyone to do what you’re thinking of doing. An action that passes Kant’s 
test is a universalizable action. Kant suggests the following deontic version of 
the Action form:
(1) Action A is not universalizable.
(2) It is morally bad to do actions that are not universalizable.
Therefore,
(3) H should not do A.
Whether an action is universalizable is an intrinsic feature of an action. On 
Kant’s view, universalizability is the fundamental intrinsic feature. (The 
Golden Rule, do unto others as you would have them do unto you, is a version 
of Kant’s test.)
Could Jacob really believe that he’d want everyone to lie? When you 
lie, you say something false and hope that someone else will still believe 
what you say. Why do people usually believe what other people say? Because 
people usually tell the truth. If everyone started lying, lying wouldn’t work. 
Key Concept
A  n action that 
passes Kant’s test is a 
universalizable action. 
Key Concept
The Kantian version of 
the Action form.

Evaluating Moral Arguments  361
Lying only works when it’s the exception to the rule. (Remember the story of 
the boy who cried “Wolf!”)
Here’s the question that Kant thinks Jacob should ask himself as he’s 
thinking about whether to lie to Elisa:
Do I want everyone at all times to tell lies?
Kant thinks that the answer must be “No” because it’s impossible for every-
one to lie at all times. If everyone were speaking falsehoods all the time, no 
one would be fooled and the practice of lying wouldn’t exist. This means that 
lying is not universalizable, and so it’s wrong.
Technical Term: The Categorical Imperative
Kant called his test “the Categorical Imperative.” He offered three versions of it. 
Here’s the one used as the basis for the discussion above.
I ought never to act except in such a way that I could also will that my 
maxim should become a universal law. (Kant 1997, 15) 
Immanuel Kant (1724–1804), the 18th-century German philosopher work continues to 
infl uence philosophy today. One of his most prominent works is the Critique of Practical 
Reason, a discussion of the foundations of morality that remains a classic statement of 
deontic moral views.
Lebrecht Authors/Lebrecht Music and Arts Photo Library/Alamy

362  Chapter 10 Moral Arguments
Cooperation
A second thing many people view as a fundamental intrinsic feature is coop-
eration. The value of cooperation is often illustrated with an example about 
prisoners, the prisoner’s dilemma:
Christina and Bernard rob a bank together. They are both arrested and 
placed in separate cells. Both of them were arrested in possession of an 
illegal gun. The prosecutor has plenty of evidence to convict each of them 
on the illegal gun charge, which carries a sentence of one year. However, 
the prosecutor doesn’t have enough evidence to convict them of bank 
robbery. The prosecutor goes into each of their cells and offers them the 
same deal. “If you testify against the other and the other person remains 
silent, I’ll drop the gun charge and let you go free and the other person 
will go to jail for ten years for bank robbery. If you remain silent and the 
other person testifi es, I’ll drop the gun charge and let the other person go 
free and you’ll go to jail for ten years. If you both remain silent, you’ll both 
go to jail for a year. If you both testify, you’ll both go to jail for fi ve years.
You can put this situation on a chart
Column 1
Bernard Does Not Testify
Column 2
Bernard Testifi es
Christina Does Not Testify
Outcome A
Christina serves a year.
Bernard serves a year.
Outcome B
Christina serves ten years.
Bernard goes free.
Christina Testifi es
Outcome C
Christina goes free.
Bernard serves ten years.
Outcome D
Christina serves fi ve years.
Bernard serves fi ve years.
Let’s look at the situation from Christina’s perspective. Assume that she’s 
an egoist. What will she do? She doesn’t know what Bernard will do. But she 
knows that Bernard will either keep silent or testify. Let’s look at each of 
these two possibilities. 
Suppose that Bernard doesn’t testify. That’s Column 1 on the chart. In 
that case, Christina chooses between Outcomes A and C. She’ll serve a year 
if she doesn’t testify (Outcome A). She’ll go free if she testifi es (Outcome C). 
If Bernard doesn’t testify, Christina the egoist will testify because going free 
is better than spending a year in jail.
Suppose that Bernard testifi es. That’s Column 2 on the chart. In that case, 
Christina chooses between outcomes B and D. She’ll serve ten years if she 
doesn’t testify (Outcome B). She’ll serve fi ve years if she testifi es (Outcome 
D). If Bernard testifi es, Christina the egoist will testify because serving fi ve 
years is better than serving ten years.
No matter which option Bernard picks, Christina will testify. Bernard 
is in the exact same position that Christina is in. He doesn’t know whether 
she’ll testify or not. If she doesn’t testify, he’ll go free if he testifi es or serve a 
year if he doesn’t testify. If she does testify, he’ll serve ten years if he doesn’t 
testify and fi ve years if he does testify. No matter what Christina decides, if 
Bernard is an egoist, he’ll testify.

Evaluating Moral Arguments  363
Both Christina and Bernard will go through this reasoning process. They’ll 
both decide to testify. They’ll both spend fi ve years in prison. They’ll end up 
with Outcome D. But they’d both be better off with Outcome A than they 
are with Outcome D. If they cooperated with each other and both refused to 
testify, they’d both only spend a year in prison instead of fi ve. 
Prisoner’s dilemmas may seem like odd cases. But prisoner’s dilemmas 
are common. In fact, it seems that society is one large prisoner’s dilemma. 
Think about driving laws. 
Other Person Drives 
Cooperatively
Other Person Drives 
Uncooperatively
You Drive 
Cooperatively
Outcome A
You get where you’re going in 
20 minutes.
Other person gets where she’s 
going in 20 minutes.
Outcome B
You get where you’re going in 
45 minutes.
Other person gets where she’s 
going in 15 minutes.
You Drive 
Uncooperatively
Outcome C
You get where you’re going in 
15 minutes.
Other person gets where she’s 
going in 45 minutes.
Outcome D
You get where you’re going in 
30 minutes.
Other person gets where she’s 
going in 30 minutes.
You drive cooperatively when you follow the traffic rules. You drive uncoop-
eratively if you don’t. If everyone but you follows the rules and there are no 
cops (Outcome C), you’ll be able to drive in all sorts of crazy ways and thus 
cut down on your driving times. But other people are also thinking: “If every-
one but me follows the rules, I’ll be able to drive in all sorts of crazy ways and 
get to where I’m going faster.” If everyone were to think this way and drive 
uncooperatively (Outcome D), everyone would get to their destinations more 
slowly than if everyone were to drive cooperatively (Outcome A).
You’ve seen someone driving uncooperatively, driving too fast and chang-
ing lanes abruptly without signaling. A person who drives like this is assum-
ing that others will drive cooperatively, that others will stay calmly in their 
lanes as he swerves between them. If everyone started swerving as he’s doing, 
he could no longer predict where they’d be and he could no longer use swerv-
ing to move ahead.
Society makes many rules that you have to follow. Stand in line, don’t 
punch people who annoy you, and pay your taxes. If everyone but you was 
required to follow the rules, you’d be able to go to the front of lines, punch 
people who annoyed you, and avoid paying your taxes. But if everyone does 
this, we’d all be worse off. Chaos would rule. Many people think that co-
operating is a fundamental intrinsic feature. They think that the following 
deontic version of the Action form is a proper form:
(1) Action A is uncooperative.
(2) It is morally bad to do actions that are not cooperative.
Therefore,
(3) H should not do A.
Key Concept
The cooperation version 
of the Action form.

364  Chapter 10 Moral Arguments
EXERCISE 10.6
A. Determine which of the following passages contain a moral argument. If the conclusion is 
about an action, determine whether it’s a consequentialist or deontic argument and put it 
into either the consequentialist or the deontic argument form. In some cases, no argument 
is present but the passage is a statement of a either a consequentialist or deontic moral view.
  1. Watch it! If you touch that, you will burn yourself.
  2. Step on a crack and you break your mother’s back.
  3. Don’t lie to me!
 *4. If you falsely claimed that the book they sent you was defective and asked for another, 
that would be theft. You should never steal.
  5. Careful with that PDA! I bought it, so you should be careful not to break it!
  6. You have committed a crime most foul. I sentence you to fi fteen years in prison.
  7. Evelyn’s car is old and right now it’s really dirty. But it never fails to get her where she 
wants to go.
 *8. You shouldn’t even think about climbing that boulder. If you fell, you’d really hurt 
yourself.
  9. “As members of the academic community, students are expected to recognize and 
uphold standards of intellectual and academic integrity. The university assumes as a 
basic and minimum standard of conduct in academic matters that students be honest 
and that they submit for credit only the products of their own efforts. Both the ideals 
of scholarship and the need for fairness require that all dishonest work be rejected as 
a basis for academic credit.” (Georgia State University 2007, 70)
 10. “I begin with the assumption that suffering and death from lack of food, shelter, and 
medical care are bad. My next point is this: if it is in our power to prevent something 
bad from happening, without thereby sacrifi cing anything of comparable moral im-
portance, we ought, morally, to do it. People do not feel in any way ashamed or guilty 
about spending money on new clothes or a new car instead of giving it to famine 
relief. (Indeed, the alternative does not occur to them.) This way of looking at the 
matter cannot be justifi ed.” (Singer 2007, 529–530, material omitted) 
 11. “Poland’s new government is right to be taking a skeptical second look at the Bush 
administration’s proposal to station 10 interceptor missiles there as part of a Europe-
an-based missile-defense system. The pragmatic conservatives voted into power in 
October want to make sure that the project offers real security benefi ts to Poland that 
outweigh its potential diplomatic costs.” (The New York Times, “The Poles Get Cold 
Feet” 2007, WK7)
*12. “New Year’s Eve tends to be the day of the year with the most binge drinking (based 
on drunken driving fatalities), followed closely by Super Bowl Sunday. Likewise, col-
leges have come to expect that the most alcohol-fi lled day of their students’ lives is 
their 21st birthday. So, some words of caution for those who continue to binge and 
even for those who have stopped: just as the news is not so great for former cigarette 
smokers, there is equally bad news for recovering binge-drinkers who have achieved 

Evaluating Moral Arguments  365
a sobriety that has lasted years. The more we have binged—and the younger we have 
started to binge—the more we experience signifi cant, though often subtle, effects on 
the brain and cognition.” (Steinberg 2007, A31)
 13. “After 32 years of ruling Indonesia with an iron fi st and a grabbing hand, then-Presi-
dent Suharto [of Indonesia] was forced to step down in 1998. While gone from power, 
he clearly is not forgotten. A few months ago, an Indonesian court ordered Time mag-
azine to pay the former dictator a judgment now valued at about $111 million in a 
libel case. The verdict, which Time is challenging, should not be allowed to stand. 
[The court’s decision is a threat to a free press. We hope the panel that hears Time’s 
appeal will see Suharto’s suit for what it really is—the last grasp for vindication by 
an autocrat with no legitimate case to argue.” (The New York Times, “Time and the 
Dictator” 2007, A30, material omitted)
 14. “In the course of robbing a Holiday Inn in Dallas, Texas in late 1985, Miller-El and his 
accomplices bound and gagged two hotel employees, whom Miller-El then shot, kill-
ing one and severely injuring the other. During jury selection in Miller-El’s trial for 
capital murder, prosecutors used peremptory strikes against 10 qualifi ed black venire 
members. Miller-El objected that the strikes were based on race and could not be pre-
sumed legitimate, given a history of excluding black members from criminal juries by 
the Dallas County District Attorney’s Office. The trial court received evidence of the 
practice alleged but found no ‘systematic exclusion of blacks as a matter of policy’ by 
that office and therefore no entitlement to relief under Swain v. Alabama.” (Miller-el 
2005, 544, material omitted)
 15. “The present case does not involve minors. It does not involve persons who might be 
injured or coerced or who are situated in relationships where consent might not eas-
ily be refused. It does not involve public conduct or prostitution. It does not involve 
whether the government must give formal recognition to any relationship that ho-
mosexual persons seek to enter. The case does involve two adults who, with full and 
mutual consent from each other, engaged in sexual practices common to a homosex-
ual lifestyle. The petitioners are entitled to respect for their private lives. The State 
cannot demean their existence or control their destiny by making their private sexual 
conduct a crime. Their right to liberty under the Due Process Clause gives them 
the full right to engage in their conduct without intervention of the government.” 
(Lawrence v. Texas 2003, 558)
Aretaic Moral Arguments 
So far, we’ve focused on moral arguments about actions. But this chapter be-
gan with a long list of words that are used to indicate moral praise of people. 
In English, words used to indicate moral praise of people are virtues, and the 
opposite of a virtue is a vice. Aretaic moral arguments are moral arguments 
whose conclusion is a statement about the moral evaluation of a person, a 
statement indicating that someone has a virtue or vice. (“Aretaic” is pro-
nounced “ar-eh-tay-ick.”) 
Key Concept
Aretaic moral 
arguments are 
moral arguments 
whose conclusion is a 
statement about the 
moral evaluation of a 
person, a statement 
indicating that someone 
has a virtue or vice.

366  Chapter 10 Moral Arguments
Consequentialists and deontologists tend to think that conclusions about 
virtues are based on premises about the moral status of actions. The basic 
idea is that a good person is a person who does good actions with a good mo-
tive, and good motives are motives that produce good actions. On this view, 
the evaluation of actions is more fundamental than the evaluation of people. 
According to these consequentialists and deontologists, the form of an aretaic 
moral argument is
(1) H has motives that lead to good actions.
Therefore,
(2) H has good motives.
(3) H does good actions.
Therefore,
(4) H is a good person.
Some people, called “virtue ethicists,” hold that the moral evaluation of peo-
ple is more fundamental than the moral evaluation of actions. They argue 
that instead of reasoning from premises about the moral status of actions to a 
conclusion about the moral status of a person, you should reason from prem-
ises about the moral status of people to the moral status of actions. Here’s the 
virtue ethics version of the Action form: 
(V) (1) Action A is an action that would be done by a person with virtue V.
 
 (2)  It is morally good to do actions that would be done by a person 
with virtue V.
 
 Therefore,
 
 (3) H should do A.
How do you know when premise (1) of (V) is true? There have been many dif-
ferent proposed answers to this question. Let’s look at one.
Following the philosopher Aristotle, some people argue that a virtuous per-
son is a person who’s fl ourishing. But what makes a person fl ourish? Aristotle 
thought that humans fl ourish when they reason well. On this view, a virtuous 
person is a person who does things by reasoning well. You can’t reason well 
when you’re tired or hungry. You can’t reason well unless you have an educa-
tion, some leisure time, and a wide variety of experiences, particularly experi-
ences involving contact with other people. You reason better when your life 
contains things such as being loved, learning how to do things, and having time 
in nature. On this view, all these things would be important for the creation of 
virtuous people. Some people think that the list at the beginning of this chapter 
is a list of the attributes of people who reason well. If this view is correct, then 
(V), the virtue ethics version of the Action form, should be revised like this:
(1) Action A is an action that would be done by a person who reasons well.
(2)  It is morally good to do actions that would be done by a person who 
reasons well.
Therefore,
(3) H should do A.
Key Concept
The consequentialist/
deontological form of an 
aretaic moral argument.
Key Concept
Virtue ethicists 
hold that the moral 
evaluation of people is 
more fundamental than 
the moral evaluation of 
actions.
Key Concept
The virtue ethics version 
of the Action form.
Key Concept
The Aristotelian version 
of the Action form. 

Moral Confl ict  367
Moral Confl ict
Most people use all three kinds of moral arguments: consequentialist, deon-
tic, and aretaic. Suppose that you’re in a history class and that you’re studying 
the Civil War. One day, you might read a newspaper editorial from the 1800s 
that makes a consequentialist argument for the view that slavery should be 
preserved. Another day you might read an aretaic argument by a historian 
who argues that General Ulysses Grant wasn’t very intelligent. On yet an-
other day, you might read a deontic argument in defense of the view that the 
North had a right to go to war against the South.  These three conclusions are 
different but they don’t confl ict with each other.
But things don’t always work out so nicely. Sometimes there seem to be 
good moral arguments on both sides of an issue. This happens with other 
types of arguments as well. You could have two causal arguments that appear 
to be equally good. It can be hard to tell which of two proposed analogical 
arguments with contradictory conclusions is better. But many people fi nd it 
particularly troubling when two moral arguments have contradictory con-
clusions. If you’re arguing about non-moral matters, you can sometimes set 
the issue aside for a while. But moral arguments are often about action, and 
you’re often forced to act. Think about the moral arguments for and against 
affirmative action. One reason that these debates are so sharp is that the issue 
can’t be set aside. When people apply for a job or admission to a university, 
the company or school has to make a choice between using and not using af-
fi rmative action. 
Moral confl ict occurs when there seem to be good arguments for the view 
that X is morally good and for the view that X is morally bad. Moral con-
fl ict takes different forms. In some cases, moral arguments of the same type 
confl ict with each other. Two consequentialist arguments might confl ict be-
cause people hold different views about what has inherent value or different 
views about the consequences of an action. Two deontic arguments might 
confl ict because people hold different views about intrinsic features. Perhaps 
the most difficult sorts of moral confl ict are cases in which different sorts of 
moral arguments confl ict. Let’s illustrate this with a famous example, the 
case of the southern sheriff.
In a southern town in the United States during the 1940s, a white woman 
claims that she was raped. The sheriff can’t fi nd any evidence that would 
allow him to determine whether her claim is correct or, if it’s correct, who 
attacked the woman. The white people in the town are threatening to go on a 
rampage through the black part of town, destroying homes and killing many 
black people. From past experience, the sheriff knows that they’ll carry out 
this threat and that the only way he can prevent this rampage is to arrest, 
convict, and hang a black man. He knows that the people in this town are so 
racist that they’ll convict and hang any black man that he arrests. The unhap-
piness that the rampage will cause is greater than the unhappiness that would 
be caused by killing one black man. Many innocent black people will die if 
a rampage takes place but only one will die if the sheriff frames an innocent 
black man. 
Key Concept
Moral confl ict occurs 
when there seems to be 
good arguments for the 
view that X is morally 
good and for the view 
that X is morally bad.

368  Chapter 10 Moral Arguments
The sheriff faces a confl ict between consequentialist and deontic argu-
ments. He must either frame an innocent black man or do nothing and al-
low many innocent black people to die. On the one hand, there seems to be 
a strong universalistic maximizing consequentialist argument for the view 
that he should frame an innocent black man. Because the racial atmosphere 
in this town is so poisonous, at least one black person will die. It seems plau-
sible that it would be better for one black person to die than for many black 
people to die. On the other hand, convicting an innocent person seems to be 
the kind of intrinsic feature that makes for a proper deontic moral argument. 
An action that has the intrinsic feature of being an act of convicting an in-
nocent person of a serious crime seems wrong.
Cases of moral conflict can be matters of life and death. On a per-
sonal level, they can be gut-wrenching. When faced with such cases, 
people can (and should) agonize over their decisions. The philosopher 
John Rawls has offered a description of how people should try to resolve 
cases of moral conflict. This view of moral conflict is called “reflective 
equilibrium.”
Refl ective equilibrium begins with considered moral judgments. Your 
considered moral judgments are moral judgments that you make under cir-
cumstances that make for good critical thinking. They are moral judgments 
that you’ve made when you’re well rested, not angry, and not distracted by 
emotions. They’re also judgments that you’ve made after you have a good 
understanding of the matter at hand. You know the meaning of all the words 
used in the judgment, and you’ve checked for errors in language and defi ni-
tion. You’ve checked the empirical claims. You’ve made sure that no fallacies 
are present.
Some moral judgments are about particular cases, and others are about 
principles. When you read the southern sheriff case, you probably made a 
judgment about what you thought the sheriff should do. That judgment is an 
example of a moral judgment about a particular case. When you read about 
the universalistic maximizing consequentialist argument form, you probably 
made a judgment about this form of moral argument. You made a judgment 
about a moral principle. Some moral judgments are controversial and others 
are less controversial. Think about the moral principle that racism is wrong. 
Most people think that this principle isn’t controversial (at least not today). 
Think about the moral judgment that it’s wrong to segregate swimming pools 
based on race. This judgment about a particular case isn’t controversial. But 
many moral judgments are controversial. Think about the judgment that it’s 
wrong to give fi nancial aid to college students on the basis of race. Many 
moral principles are also controversial. Some think that it’s always important 
to tell the truth. Others think that it’s important not to tell the truth in some 
cases. 
The method of refl ective equilibrium says that when faced with a case 
of moral confl ict, you should fi rst set it aside for a moment. The method 
suggests that you focus fi rst not on the confl ict but rather on your uncontro-
versial moral judgments, both about cases and about principles. You should 
see what they imply about the controversial case. Their implications about 
Key Concept
The method of refl ective 
equilibrium.

A Final Thought  369
the controversial case may be plausible. If so, this may help you see the 
resolution of the moral confl ict. But the implications of your uncontro-
versial moral judgments about controversial cases may be implausible. In 
that case you have a reason to look back at those uncontroversial moral 
judgments and see whether they are really uncontroversial. If they have im-
plausible implications, one or more of them may be fl awed. In this way, you 
work back and forth between uncontroversial judgments about cases and 
principles to views about controversial cases. Your goal in this process is to 
get all your judgments into equilibrium. When your views are in refl ective 
equilibrium, none of your considered moral judgments confl ict with any 
of your other considered moral judgments. No one is actually in refl ective 
equilibrium. Everyone is always considering new cases and thinking about 
new views. 
You see refl ective equilibrium at work in many cases of moral con-
fl ict. When people argue about abortion, one side often tries to show the 
other that their views aren’t in refl ective equilibrium. Those who think 
that abortion is wrong often argue that the view that abortion is permitted 
isn’t consistent (isn’t in refl ective equilibrium) with views about the im-
portance of human life. Those who think that abortion is permitted often 
argue that the view that abortion is wrong isn’t in refl ective equilibrium 
with views about the importance of humans making their own decisions 
about their own lives. As this case illustrates, refl ective equilibrium is 
a difficult process that isn’t guaranteed to resolve the confl ict. However, 
many people think that refl ective equilibrium is a useful way to make 
progress.
A Final Thought
As you took the course that assigned this book, you may feel that it was just 
one hard grind. Work, work, and more work. There’s a kernel of truth in that 
feeling. Becoming a good critical thinker isn’t easy. This introduction to criti-
cal thinking only pours a foundation. The house remains to be built in future 
classes and in the rest of your life. The house won’t get built unless you work 
to build it. 
But our fi nal thought isn’t about work. It’s about joy. If you see college as 
nothing more than a series of assignments to be completed in order to get a 
piece of paper, you’ll fi nd it very hard and not much fun. But we think that 
critical thinking is fun. An innovative argument is a pleasure to see. The 
interplay of the human mind with the world has important consequences for 
our lives, and there’s joy in the marvel of the human ability to think, to do 
more than simply react to the sensations the world throws at us. Our fi nal 
thought is this: your ability to think critically, to practice the art of argument, 
will make your life better in material ways, and (perhaps more importantly) 
your ability to think critically allows you to experience the joys of discovery 
and understanding.

370  Chapter 10 Moral Arguments
A moral argument is an argument whose con-
clusion asserts that something is morally good 
or morally bad. Values are often presuppositions 
of arguments. You need to be careful to cor-
rectly recognize arguments that rely on moral 
claims but don’t explicitly state them. Taking 
H to refer to human beings, A to actions, and F 
to features, the following is the standard moral 
argument form about actions:
Action (1) Action A has feature F.
 
(2)  It is morally good/bad to do actions 
that have feature F.
 
Therefore,
 
(3) H should/should not do A.
Consequentialist moral arguments hold that 
an action is good or bad because of its conse-
quences, its effects. Actions have many kinds 
of consequences, but they can be divided into 
instrumental (values that are means to another 
value) and inherent (values that are valued for 
themselves and not as a means to something 
else). Pleasure, the avoidance of pain, the 
satisfaction of desires, and the development of 
talents are the  inherent values most often seen 
in consequentialist moral arguments. In philos-
ophy classes, it’s common to refer to these col-
lectively as “ happiness.” Every consequentialist 
theory must make a claim about who’s morally 
Chapter Summary
important.  Egoism is a moral theory that says 
that a person should produce happiness only 
for himself. Most people think that the egoist 
version of the  Action form isn’t a proper form. 
The most  common form of consequentialism is 
universalistic consequentialism, which asserts 
that everyone’s happiness is equally important. 
Maximizing consequentialists argue that you 
should do those actions that produce the maxi-
mum amount of happiness.
 
Deontic moral arguments hold that actions 
are good or bad based on their intrinsic features 
(not their consequences). Two common views 
about which intrinsic features are fundamen-
tally important are universalizability and 
cooperation.
 
Aretaic moral arguments draw a conclusion 
about the moral evaluation of a person. 
 
Consequentialists and deontologists tend 
to think that the evaluation of actions is more 
fundamental than the evaluation of people, but 
virtue ethicists think that the moral evaluation 
of people is more fundamental than the moral 
evaluation of actions.
 
Moral confl ict occurs when there seem to be 
good arguments for the view that H should do 
A and for the view that H shouldn’t do A. Moral 
confl icts involve some of the thorniest problems 
in life. Refl ective equilibrium is one method for 
beginning to handle them.

G U I D E
Finding, Standardizing, and Evaluating Moral Arguments
This Guide is an amplifi cation of the “Guide for Finding, Standardizing, and Evaluating 
Arguments” that is in Chapter Two. The numbered sentences are only copies from the 
Guide in Chapter Two. The paragraphs with “Moral.” in front of them are additional materi-
als that apply only to moral arguments.
Finding Arguments
 1. Look for an attempt to convince.
 
 Moral. Look to see whether there’s an attempt to convince someone that some person or 
action is morally good or morally bad. 
 2. Find the conclusion.
 
 Moral. Determine which statement makes a moral claim about people or about actions.
 3. Find the premises.
 4. Review the following to make sure that you have correctly identifi ed the conclusion and 
the premises: imperfect indicator words, sentence order, premises and/or conclusion 
not in declarative form, and unstated premises and/or conclusion.
 5. Review the following to make sure that you haven’t incorrectly identifi ed something as 
a premise or a conclusion when in fact it isn’t part of an argument: assertions, questions, 
instructions, descriptions, and explanations.
Standardizing Arguments
 6. Rewrite the premises and the conclusion as declarative sentences. Make sure that each 
premise and the conclusion is a grammatically correct declarative sentence. Rewrite 
the premises and conclusion as necessary to make them clearer, but don’t change the 
meaning of the passage. Remove pronouns from the sentences and replace them with 
the nouns or noun phrases to which they refer. Remove emotionally charged language.
 7. Review any phrases you have omitted to be sure that they aren’t premises or a conclusion.
 8. Number the premises and the conclusion. Put brackets [ ] around the number of an 
unstated premise or conclusion. Place the premises before their conclusion and insert 
“Therefore,” between the premises and the conclusion. Use blank lines to indicate sub-
arguments.
 
 Moral. Determine whether the argument is a consequentialist, deontic, or aretaic moral 
argument.
 9. Compare your standardization to the original passage to make sure that you haven’t 
omitted any arguments found in the passage and to be sure that you have correctly iden-
tifi ed the premises and the conclusion. 
Evaluating Arguments: The True Premises Test
 10. Check to see whether the premises are accurate descriptions of the world. 
 11. Consider whether the premises are appropriate for the argument’s audience.
 12. Review the assumed premises to be sure that the assumptions are reasonable. Make sure 
that all assumed premises are uncontroversially true empirical statements, uncontro-
versially true defi nitional statements, or appropriate statements by experts. Make sure 
the defi nitions are good ones.
Chapter Summary  371

372  Chapter 10 Moral Arguments
Evaluating Arguments: The Proper Form Test
 13. Determine whether the argument is a deductive argument or inductive argument. 
 14. Determine whether the premises are relevant to the conclusion. Look at each premise 
individually to see whether the truth of the premise provides some evidence for the 
truth of the conclusion. Look at the premises as a group to see whether the truth of all 
of them provides some evidence for the truth of the conclusion.
Evaluating Arguments: Checking for Fallacies
 15. Compare the argument to the list of fallacies on page 410 to see whether the argument 
commits any of the fallacies.
Moral Argument Forms
Action (1) Action A has feature F.
 
(2) It is morally good/bad to do actions that have feature F.
 
Therefore,
 
(3) H should/should not do A. 
The Consequentialist Version of Action
 
(1) Action A will produce C.
 
(2) It is morally good/bad to produce C.
 
Therefore,
 
(3) H should/should not do A.
The Universalistic Maximizing Consequentialist Version of Action
 
(1) Action A will maximize happiness for everyone in the world.
 
(2) It is morally good to maximize happiness for everyone in the world.
 
Therefore,
 
(3) H should do A.
The Deontic Version of Action
 
(1) Action A has intrinsic feature F.
 
(2) It is morally good/bad to do actions with intrinsic feature F.
 
Therefore,
 
(3) H should/should not do A.
The Virtue Ethics Version of Action 
 
(1) Action A is an action that would be done by a person with virtue V.
 
(2) It is morally good to do actions that would be done by a person with virtue V.
 
Therefore,
 
(3) H should do A.

This page intentionally left blank 

374
Answers to Selected 
Exercises
Chapter One
EXERCISE 1.1 A
 4. Statement. This claim can be true or false. It’s true.
 8. Statement. This claim can be true or false. It’s true.
 12. Statement. It’s true or false depending on the views of the person who 
says it. Compare it to “Broccoli, uck!” which isn’t a statement.
EXERCISE 1.1 C
 4. Two. You break it. You bought it.
 8. Two. He’ll have soup. He’ll have salad.
 12. Three. I know myself as a creation of God. Everyone else and everything 
else are also God’s creation. I am obliged to remember that everyone else 
and everything else are also God’s creation.
EXERCISE 1.1 D
 4. It’s a command, not a statement. So it can’t be a premise as it stands. 
 8. This is not a statement, so it can’t be a premise.
 12. This is a statement, so it could be a premise.
EXERCISE 1.1 E
 4. This could be a conclusion. It’s a statement.
 8. This can’t be a conclusion because it isn’t a statement. It’s a question.
 12. This can’t be a conclusion because it isn’t a statement. It’s a command.
EXERCISE 1.2 B
 4. There’s an argument. The premises are (1) gas prices will rise and (2) the 
housing market will continue to slump. The conclusion is (3) the United 
States will surely fall into a recession next year.

Answers to Selected Exercises  375
 8. There’s an argument. The premise is (1) I’ve seen him at Starbucks most 
days at about this time. The conclusion is (2) he’s at Starbucks.
 12. There’s no argument.
EXERCISE 1.2 C
1.1 D 
 4.  It’s a command, not a statement. So it can’t be a premise as it stands. If 
transformed into a declarative sentence, it would be controversial and so 
is unlikely to be a premise.
 8. This is not a statement, so it can’t be a premise.
 12. This is a statement, so it could be a premise.  But it’s controversial and so 
it’s unlikely to be a premise.
1.1 E 
 4.  This is likely to be a conclusion. It’s a statement and is something about 
which people might disagree.
 8. This can’t be a conclusion because it isn’t a statement. It’s a question.
 12. This can’t be a conclusion because it isn’t a statement. It’s a command.
EXERCISE 1.3 A
 4. This isn’t an argument. There’s only one statement, and arguments must 
have at least two.
 8. This is a collection of assertions (statements), but it isn’t an argument 
because none of these statements is an attempt to provide reasons for any 
other statement.
 12. It’s possible that this author might be addressing someone who made an 
argument that everyone has a right to free speech at all times. But within 
the limited context we have here, this isn’t an argument. There are two 
statements, but the author does not intend either one to support the other.
EXERCISE 1.4 A
 4. Unstated conclusion: The U.S. should adopt a single-payer health care 
system.
 8. Unstated premise: The precipitate is either calcium or sodium.
 12. Unstated premise: (1) Amphibians can only live in climates warmer than that 
currently found in Antarctica. The argument also relies on the assumption 
that if Antarctica were warmer, the rest of the world must have been warmer 
as well. But this isn’t an unstated premise. It’s an overlooked assumption.
EXERCISE 1.5 A
Argument 1:
 
 (1) There’s a mean giant at the top of this beanstalk.
 
 Therefore,
 
 (2) We shouldn’t climb this beanstalk.
Argument 2:
 
 (1) A book said that there was a mean giant at the top of a beanstalk.
 
 Therefore,
 
 (2) There might be a mean giant at the top of this beanstalk.

376  Answers to Selected Exercises
EXERCISE 1.5 B
 4. Command.
 8. This is such a bad argument that it’s close to not being an argument at all. 
But one might say it’s an argument:
 
 (1) The works of every political thinker presuppose that people are evil.
 
 Therefore,
 
 (2) All genuine political theories presuppose that people are evil.
 12. This is a collection of assertions (statements), but it isn’t an argument 
because none of these statements is an attempt to provide reasons for any 
other statement.
EXERCISE 1.5 C
 4. This passage contains one argument and two explanations. The argument 
looks like this:
 
 (1) The dinosaur’s right foot was deformed.
 
 Therefore, 
 
 (2) This dinosaur could barely walk.
 
  
The fi rst explanation is an explanation of why the right foot was de-
formed. The explanans is that the foot was broken and healed badly. The 
explanandum is that the right foot was deformed.
 
  
The second explanation is an explanation of why the dinosaur died. 
The explanans is that the dinosaur could barely walk, and the explanan-
dum is that the dinosaur died. This explanation relies on background 
knowledge, such as the fact that dinosaurs that could not walk could not 
get food and that without food, a dinosaur would die. 
 
  
The key point that shows the presence of an argument is that whether 
a dinosaur could walk is not something that can be observed. It’s contro-
versial. But the deformation of the foot due to a break is something that 
trained people can observe in fossils. Similarly, there’s no disagreement 
about the fact that the dinosaur is dead, so what is offered is an explana-
tion for this death, not an argument that the dinosaur is dead. 
 8. There’s an explanation. The explanans is that the Cherokees believed 
they had a sacred duty to avenge the deaths of fallen comrades, and the 
explanandum is that war parties formed quickly following a death.
 12. There’s no explicit explanation here. It’s just a series of assertions. But 
the author suggests that being Protestant (the explanans) explains being a 
scientist (the explanandum).
EXERCISE 1.6 A
The arguments are in standard form in the answers above.
EXERCISE 1.6 B
The arguments are in standard form in the answers above.

Answers to Selected Exercises  377
EXERCISE 1.6 C
 4. This is a question, not an argument.
 8. This isn’t an argument. It’s a series of descriptions and assertions. It could 
also be an explanation for Holle’s conviction for murder. In that case, the 
explanandum is that Holle was convicted of murder. The explanans are: 
the felony murder law, that Holle lent his car to a friend, that this friend 
used the car to drive to commit a burglary, and that someone was mur-
dered during the course of the burglary.
 12. This is a collection of assertions (statements), but it isn’t an argument 
because none of these statements is an attempt to provide reasons for any 
other statement.
EXERCISE 1.7 B
Because each of the arguments above has one premise and a conclusion, they 
all have the same diagram.
1
2
Chapter Two
EXERCISE 2.1 A
 4. This argument passes the true premises test and fails the proper form test.
 8. This argument passes both the true premises test and the proper form test.
 12. In this argument, you don’t know for sure whether it passes the true prem-
ises test because you don’t know who “I” is. However, it’s unlikely that it 
passes the true premises test. The argument passes the proper form test.
EXERCISE 2.2 A
 4. Likely to know that it’s true: people who were schoolteachers from 1997 
through 2007.
 
 Not likely to know: people over 80 years old.
 8. Likely to know: students taking this class.
 
 Not likely to know: someone who has never had a critical thinking class.
 12. Only “they aren’t making any more of it” is a statement. “Buy land” is a 
command.
 
 Likely to know: anyone over 12 years old.
 
 Not likely to know: people under 4 years old.
EXERCISE 2.4 A
 4. Other form.
 8. Other form.
 12. Form C.

378  Answers to Selected Exercises
EXERCISE 2.5 A
 4. This argument is a deductive argument. It passes the proper form test (is 
valid) because if the premises are true, they will guarantee the truth of the 
conclusion. 
 8. This argument is inductive. It’s a bad argument because the author has 
only one observation. 
 12. This argument is a deductive argument. It passes the proper form test (is 
valid) because if the premises are true, then the conclusion must be true.
EXERCISE 2.5 B
 4. (a)  Deductive and passes the proper form test (is valid):
 
 (1)   If humans are social animals, then most people prefer to eat in the 
company of other people.
 
 (2)  Humans are social animals.
 
 Therefore,
 
 (3)  Most people prefer to eat in the company of other people.
 
 (b)  Inductive and passes the proper form test (is strong):
 
 (1)   The Gallup survey interviewed 10,000 people who said they preferred 
to eat in the company of other people.
 
 Therefore, 
 
 (2)  Most people prefer to eat in the company of other people.
 8. (a)  Deductive and passes the proper form test (is valid):
 
 (1)  If I am a hamster, then my mother is a hamster.
 
 (2)  I am a hamster.
 
 Therefore,
 
 (3)  My mother is a hamster.
 
 (b)  Inductive and passes the proper form test (is strong):
 
 (1)  The mothers of all my best friends and neighbors are hamsters.
 
 Therefore, 
 
 (2)  My mother is a hamster.
EXERCISE 2.5 C
 4. (1)  Francis had pepperoni and mushrooms on her pizza.
 
 Therefore,
 
 (2)  Francis had pepperoni on her pizza.
 8. (1)  My son started talking when he was two years old. 
 
 Therefore,
 
 (2)  All children start speaking when they are two years old.
 12. (1)  The earth is either fl at or spherical. 
 
 (2)   If the earth is fl at, it does not project a circular shadow on the moon 
during a lunar eclipse. 
 
 (3)   If the earth is round, it projects a circular shadow on the moon during 
a lunar eclipse. 
 
 (4)  The earth projects a circular shadow on the moon during a lunar eclipse. 
 
 Therefore,
 
 (5)  The earth is spherical.

Answers to Selected Exercises  379
EXERCISE 2.6 A
 4. The fi rst statement is relevant to the second.
 8. The fi rst statement is relevant to the second.
 12. The fi rst statement is relevant to the second.
EXERCISE 2.7 A
 4. There’s an argument:
 
 (1)  If you walk on the lines in the sidewalk, you’ll be eaten by bears. 
 
 (2)   Sometime in the next week, someone will walk on the lines in the 
sidewalk. 
 
 Therefore, 
 
 (3)   Sometime in the next week, someone will be eaten by bears.
 
 The premises are relevant to the conclusion. They are dependent premises.
 8. There’s an argument:
 
 (1)  Many people think that air pollution is a serious problem. 
 
 (2)  Vehicle emissions are a signifi cant cause of air pollution. 
 
 Therefore, 
 
 (3)   Most people  support laws requiring a reduction in the emissions pro-
duced by cars.
 
 The premises are relevant to the conclusion. They are dependent premises.
 12. There are two arguments:
 
 (1)   Segregation in schools that is not a part of the law has detrimental effects 
on black children.
 
 (2)   Segregation enforced by the law is taken to imply the inferiority of 
blacks.
 
 (3)  A sense of inferiority reduces children’s motivation to learn.
 
 Therefore,
 
 (4)  The impact of segregation is greater when segregation is enforced by 
the law.
 
 Therefore,
 
 (5)   Segregation enforced by the law has the tendency to retard devel-
opment of black children and deprive them of benefi ts received in 
integrated schools.
 
 In the argument (1)–(4), the premises are relevant to the conclusion. The 
premises are dependent. In the argument (4)–(5), the premise is relevant 
to the conclusion and is independent. 
EXERCISE 2.7 B
2.6 A
 4. This contains an argument. The fi rst statement is relevant to the second. 
Because there’s only one premise, it’s independent. 
 8. The context makes it difficult to determine if the author is attempting to 
convince, so it seems that this is just two assertions, without an argument.
 12. The context makes it difficult to determine if the author is attempting to 
convince, so it seems that this is just two assertions, without an argument.

380  Answers to Selected Exercises
EXERCISE 2.9 A
 4. Appeal to Novelty.
 8. Appeal to Tradition.
 12. Appeal to Tradition.
EXERCISE 2.9 B
 4. A fallacious appeal to tradition.
 
 (1) For centuries, people have believed that the earth is fl at.
 
 Therefore,
 
 (2) The earth is fl at.
 
 A fallacious appeal to novelty.
 
 (1) People only recently started to believe that the earth is fl at.
 
 Therefore,
 
 (2) The earth is fl at.
EXERCISE 2.10 A
 4. Ad Hominem.
 8. No fallacy.
 12. No argument and therefore no fallacy.
Chapter Three
EXERCISE 3.1 A
 4. Empirical.
 8. Empirical.
 12. Empirical.
EXERCISE 3.1 B
 4. This cannot be assumed.
 8. This can be assumed. It’s an uncontroversially true empirical statement.
 12. This can’t be used as a premise in an argument. It’s a question, not a 
statement.
EXERCISE 3.1 C
 4. “The potatoes were salty” is a testimonial statement.
 8. Not testimonial.
 12. “There are invisible winged horses in the dining hall” is testimonial.
EXERCISE 3.2 A
 4. Not a defi nition.
 8. Not a defi nition.
 12. Not a defi nition.
EXERCISE 3.2 B 
 4. Not a defi nition.
 8. Not a defi nition.
 12. This is a defi nition. It can be assumed to pass the true premises test as an 
uncontroversially true defi nitional statement.

Answers to Selected Exercises  381
EXERCISE 3.2 D
 4. “A star is a heavenly body capable of core fusion” would make a good 
premise because it’s an uncontroversially true defi nitional statement.
EXERCISE 3.2 F
 4. This is a testimonial statement. Dunch is reporting what he read. 
 
 The statement
Lixin defends the view that American missionaries, rather than being 
tools of cultural or other imperialism, were actually engaged in ‘cul-
tural exchange,’ making a signifi cant contribution to China’s mod-
ernization in the late Qing period.
can be assumed to pass the true premises test as a plausible statement 
made by a reliable expert on China (Dunch).
 
 The statement
American missionaries, rather than being tools of cultural or other im-
perialism, were actually engaged in ‘cultural exchange,’ making a signifi -
cant contribution to China’s modernization in the late Qing period.
 
 can’t be assumed to pass the true premises test. It’s a controversial 
empirical statement.
EXERCISE 3.3 A
 4. The claim that 
Roger Penrose (1989, 1994) has argued that creative mathematicians 
do not think in a mechanistic way, but that they often have a kind of 
insight into the Platonic realm.
is made by Brown. It can be assumed to pass the true premises test as a 
plausible statement made by a reliable individual (Brown).
 
 The claim that 
Creative mathematicians do not think in a mechanistic way, but they 
have a kind of insight into the Platonic realm.
 
 can’t be assumed to pass the true premises test. It’s a controversial empir-
ical statement that can’t be assumed based only on Penrose’s testimony. 
The sentences
[Roger Penrose] has enjoyed some of the most profound mathemati-
cal experiences of recent times. If he has nothing more than a mere 
hunch that he is glimpsing into the Platonic realm, that in itself is 
something for us all to ponder.
are an argument. Its conclusion is that we should ponder the fact that 
Penrose says he is glimpsing the Platonic realm. It isn’t making any 
claims by an expert. It’s claiming that Penrose’s expertise gives us reason 
to consider his thoughts about math.
 8. This is an argument. 
 
 (1) Communication can take place directly through the body.
 
 Therefore,
 
 (2) The body can be intentionally used to transmit information.
 
 Statement (1) isn’t clear enough to be plausible. 

382  Answers to Selected Exercises
 12. The claim that 
Raymond asserted that the number of caravanserais serves as a de-
fi nitive index of the amount of economic activity in a city and that 
the urban khan governs the level of wholesale trade in an exclusive 
fashion, thereby serving as an absolute indicator of the amount of 
large-scale commercial activity in a given city.
 
 can be assumed to pass the true premises test. There’s no reason to 
think that Um is lying about Raymond’s view. However, the claims 
that
The number of caravanserais serves as a defi nitive index of the 
amount of economic activity in a city.
 
 and that 
The urban khan governs the level of wholesale trade in an exclusive 
fashion, thereby serving as an absolute indicator of the amount of 
large-scale commercial activity in a given city.
 
 can’t be assumed to pass the true premise test. They are controversial 
empirical statements.
EXERCISE 3.3 B 
 4. Because Kelly is a reliable Wall Street Journal reporter, the statement 
that someone told her that Mr. Blankfein’s income will be $70 million 
can be assumed as an uncontroversial premise. However, the statement 
that Mr. Blankfein’s income will be $70 million cannot be assumed, be-
cause Kelly says that her source for the claim is only one person who is 
not identifi ed.
 8. Berman is a professor of anthropology specializing in the southwestern 
U.S. The statement may be assumed as an uncontroversial defi nition by 
an expert.
 12. These statements can’t be assumed to pass the true premise test based 
merely on Henderson-King’s expertise. You would need to see the data to 
evaluate this controversial empirical claim. In addition, this statement 
cannot be assumed to pass the true premises test because it’s vague. 
It appears to be a causal claim, but “is associated with” is too vague to 
know what the author is specifi cally claiming.
EXERCISE 3.4 B
 4. The scope of this conclusion isn’t sufficiently clear. “Usually” means 
more than 50% of the time, but how much more isn’t clear. The strength 
of the conclusion seems to be high. The author does not temper the con-
clusion in any way. It seems that the author is fairly certain of this con-
clusion.
 8. The author implicitly asserts that these claims about fl ax seed have broad 
scope, that all fl ax seeds have the properties indicated. Since our back-
ground knowledge about seeds indicates that fl ax seeds probably don’t 
vary that much, this scope is warranted. As for certainty, there are differ-
ent claims made with different levels of strength.

Answers to Selected Exercises  383
Alpha linolenic acid is a type of plant-derived omega 3 fatty acid, 
similar to those found in fi sh such as salmon.
 
 Stated with high strength.
Benefi ts of fl ax seed include lowering total cholesterol and LDL cho-
lesterol (the bad cholesterol) levels.
 
 Stated with high strength.
[F]lax seed may also help lower blood triglyceride and blood pressure.
 
 With the word “may,” this is stated with moderate strength. 
It may also keep platelets from becoming sticky, therefore reducing 
the risk of a heart attack.
 
 With the word “may,” this is stated with moderate strength. 
Aside from alpha linolenic acid, fl ax seed is rich in lignan.
 
 Stated with high strength.
Lignan is a type of phytoestrogen (antioxidant) and also provides 
fi ber.
Stated with high strength.
Researches reveal that lignan in fl ax seed shows a lot of promise in 
fi ghting disease—including a possible role in cancer prevention, espe-
cially breast cancer.
 
 With the phrases “shows a lot of promise” and “a possible role,” this is 
stated with moderate strength. 
You should include a moderate amount of fl ax seed in your diet.
 
 Stated with high strength.
 
  
The original passage expresses a command, but the context makes it 
clear the sentence is meant to be a statement of the conclusion. The 
strength of this conclusion is not warranted because it’s stated with 
high strength, but many of the premises are stated with only moder-
ate strength. It would be better to conclude with something like: “It 
may well be beneficial to include a moderate amount of flax seed in 
your diet.”
 12. This is a set of claims about one particular house. There’s no group, so 
there’s no scope. As for strength, the claim 
It’s possible that this upper door, rather than the front entrance to the 
house, acted as the true threshold to the domestic space.
 
 with the phrase “it’s possible” is stated with low strength. The rest of the 
statements are made with high strength. 
EXERCISE 3.4 C
 4. There are many correct answers. Here’s one: 
 
 To show that it’s certain that global warming is caused by humans, you 
would need a lot more evidence than you would need if you wanted to 
show that global warming might be caused by humans.

384  Answers to Selected Exercises
 8. (a) This scope is warranted by the information in the passage. “Some” 
might mean “more than one,” and the study reports that at least two 
children who had prenatal exposure to fi sh oil had better hand-eye coor-
dination than those without prenatal exposure to fi sh oil.
 
 (b) This scope isn’t warranted by the information in the passage. In fact, 
the study reports that “the differences were not statistically signifi cant” 
until they controlled for several variables.
 
 (c) This scope isn’t warranted by the information in the passage. In fact, 
the study reports that “the differences were not statistically signifi cant” 
until they controlled for several variables.
 
 (d) This is not correct. See the comments above. There’s enough informa-
tion in the passage to make some judgments about scope.
 12. (a) All youth exposed to alcohol advertising drink more than all youth not 
exposed.
 
 Practically speaking, it’s impossible to show that (a) is true. You would 
have to examine every youth that had ever lived!
Chapter Four
EXERCISE 4.1 A
 4. The extension is: every instance of writing. This includes a huge collec-
tion of books, papers, magazines, notes, lists, etc. The intension is: any 
collection of meaningful characters put on paper or an electronic storage 
medium. 
 8. The extension has only one thing in it: the theological view that all 
human beings will eventually be saved.
 
 The intension is: the theological view that all human beings will eventu-
ally be saved
 12. The extension is: all those instances of courage. This includes a large col-
lection of courageous actions.
 
 The intension is: the mental strength to venture, persevere, and with-
stand danger or fear.
EXERCISE 4.1 B 
 4. This passage contains a defi nition. The extension of “roof” is all roofs, 
the ones on houses, office buildings, factories, sheds, etc. The intension 
is: the cover on top of a building.
 8. This passage contains a defi nition. The extension of this use of “profes-
sor” is all assistant, associate, and full professors at any institution of 
higher education. It doesn’t include visiting professors, research profes-
sors, clinical professors, etc. The intension is: a faculty member of the 
highest academic rank at an institution of higher education who also has 
one of the three indicated titles.
 12. This passage doesn’t contain a defi nition.
EXERCISE 4.2 A
 4. This passage doesn’t contain a defi nition. (Some textbooks would call 
this an ostensive defi nition, but this book focuses on defi nitions that can 
be put in genus/species format.)

Answers to Selected Exercises  385
 8. This passage doesn’t contain a defi nition.
 12. This passage contains a defi nition. The extension is every instance of 
matter. This would be a very long list. The intension is stated in the defi -
nition itself: “anything that occupies space, displays a property known as 
mass, and possesses inertia.” It’s in genus/species format. The genus is 
“thing,” and the species is “occupies space, displays a property known as 
mass, and possesses inertia.”
EXERCISE 4.3 A
 4. This passage contains a defi nition. It’s a technical defi nition. It’s being 
used for convenience.
 8. This passage contains three defi nitions. The defi nition of “e-mail spam” 
is a dictionary defi nition. The defi nitions of “UBE” and “ICE” are techni-
cal defi nitions used for convenience.
 12. This passage contains a defi nition. It’s a technical defi nition used for 
greater precision.
EXERCISE 4.4 A
 4. This passage contains a defi nition. It isn’t a good defi nition because it 
uses synonyms. The word “concept” is part of the term being defi ned and 
part of the defi nition. In addition, the word “grasp” is metaphorical.
 8. This passage contains a definition, but it’s probably a joke defini-
tion. This isn’t a good definition because it’s both too narrow and 
too broad. It’s too narrow because many economists know the value 
of things like their family and friends, and no one knows the price of 
everything.
 12. This passage contains the dictionary defi nition of “atmosphere.” The 
defi nition is “a life-giving gaseous envelope,” which is too narrow. Some 
atmospheres aren’t life-giving. Some are poisonous. 
EXERCISE 4.5 A
 4. There’s no ambiguity in this passage. The word “yellow” is vague, but 
since there’s very little context here, it’s hard to tell if it’s inappropriately 
vague.
 8. There’s no ambiguity or inappropriate vagueness in this passage.
 12. There’s no ambiguity or inappropriate vagueness in this passage. It’s only 
a joke.
EXERCISE 4.6 A
 4. The term “differently abled” is a euphemism. There’re no rhetorical 
devices.
 8. There’s no emotionally charged language and no rhetorical devices. 
“W.C.” is an abbreviation for the euphemism “water closet,” which is an 
old-fashioned word for a room in which there’s a toilet.
 12. There’s no emotionally charged language although the alliterative use of 
‘dismal’ and ‘disturbing’ heightens the humor. 

386  Answers to Selected Exercises
Chapter Five
EXERCISE 5.1 A
 4. Compound. Inclusive disjunction.
 8. This passage contains two simple statements. Neither is a negation or a 
disjunction. (1) Rem stands for roentgen equivalent for man. (2) Rem is a 
measure of the effect of the radiation when a person absorbs 1 roentgen.
 12. This is a compound statement, but it’s neither a negation nor a disjunc-
tion. The two statements are “I’ll wait” and “you make haste.” See the 
answer to Exercise 5.2 number 12 below.
EXERCISE 5.2 A
 4. Compound. Conditional.
 8. Compound. Conjunction.
 12. Compound. Conditional.
EXERCISE 5.2 C
 4. This is an argument. 
 
 (1) Wood scratches.
 
 Therefore,
 
 (2) Metal is a better material for desks.
 
 Both premise and conclusion are simple statements.
 8. This is a compound statement. It’s long string of conjunctions.
 12. This is an argument.
 
 (1) Policymakers are reliant on the public for reelection.
 
 (2) Organized interests represent citizen interests.
 
 Therefore,
 
 (3) Policymakers that are accountable to the public should be more re-
sponsive to civil society organizations.
 
 Both premises and the conclusion are simple statements.
EXERCISE 5.3 A
 4. The passage contains an argument. It denies a disjunct. The disjunct does 
contain a false dichotomy because the person’s keys could be somewhere 
else.
 8. The passage contains an argument. It denies a disjunct. This disjunct 
doesn’t contain a false dichotomy because the catalog says you must take 
one of the two.
 12. The passage contains two arguments. 
 
 (a) Henry is arguing for choosing freedom over slavery. 
 
 
(1) We’ll be free or we’ll be slaves.
 
 
[2] We shouldn’t be slaves.
 
 
Therefore, 
 
 
[3] We should be free.
 
 
Therefore,
 
 
(4) We should take up arms against the British.

Answers to Selected Exercises  387
 
 The fi rst argument in this standardization is a denial of a disjunct. It con-
tains a false dichotomy. 
 
 (b) Henry is also arguing that there’s no time for ceremony, that rapid ac-
tion is required. 
 
 
 (1) The question before the house (the Virginia legislature) is a question 
of freedom or slavery.
 
 
 (2) If a question is a question of freedom or slavery, it’s vitally impor-
tant (it’s of awful moment).
 
 
Therefore,
 
 
(3) The question before the house is vitally important.
 
 
 (4) If a question is vitally important, then we should vote quickly 
(there’s no time for ceremony).
 
 
Therefore,
 
 
(5) We should vote quickly.
 
 This standardization contains two cases of affirming the antecedent.
EXERCISE 5.4 A
 4. The passage contains an argument. It’s a tri-conditional.
 8. The passage contains an argument. It affirms the antecedent.
 12. The passage contains an argument. It denies the antecedent.
EXERCISE 5.4 B
In Exercise 5.3 A 4, 8, and 12, there are no examples of affirming the antecedent, 
denying the antecedent, denying the consequent, affirming the consequent, or 
the tri-conditional. See the answers to Exercise 5.3 A 4, 8, and 12 above.
Chapter Six
EXERCISE 6.1 A
 4. PN. Quantity: particular. Quality: negative. Subject: people who work. 
Predicate: people covered by health insurance.
 8. UA. Quantity: universal. Quality: affirmative. Subject: broadcast media. 
Predicate: recently developed technologies whose long-term effects are 
good and ill.
 12. PN. Not all Americans have health insurance = Some Americans are 
not people who have health insurance. Quantity: particular. Quality: 
negative. Subject: Americans. Predicate: people who have health 
insurance.
EXERCISE 6.2 A
 4. All people who are eligible for Medicare are not people who need their 
own health insurance.
 8. All days that are today are days that have been long.
 12. Some people are people who mistakenly believe that there are no univer-
sal moral principles.

388  Answers to Selected Exercises
EXERCISE 6.2 B Venn for 6.1 A #4
Some people who work are not people covered by health insurance.
People who work
People covered by health insurance
1
2
3
4
X
Broadcast media
Recently developed technologies whose
long-term effects are good or ill.
1
2
3
4
EXERCISE 6.2 B Venn for 6.1 A #8
All broadcast media are recently developed technologies whose long-term 
effects are good and ill.
EXERCISE 6.2 B Venn for 6.1 A #12
Some Americans are not people who have health insurance. 
Americans
People who have health insurance 
1
2
3
4
X

Answers to Selected Exercises  389
People who are eligible
for Medicare
People who need
health insurance 
1
2
3
4
Days that are today
Days that have been long
1
2
3
4
People
People who mistakenly believe that there
are no universal moral principles
1
2
3
4
X
EXERCISE 6.2 B Venn for 6.1 B #8
All days that are today are days that have been long.
EXERCISE 6.2 B Venn for 6.1 B #12
Some people are people who mistakenly believe that there are no universal 
moral principles.
EXERCISE 6.2 B Venn for 6.1 B #4
All people who are eligible for Medicare are not people who need their own 
health insurance.

390  Answers to Selected Exercises
EXERCISE 6.3 A
 4. Valid. Form 2.
 8. Valid. Form 6.
 12. Valid. Form 7.
EXERCISE 6.4 A
 4. (a) Contradictory of statement 4: Some bones are body parts made of car-
diac tissue.
 
 (b) Converse of statement 4: All body parts made of cardiac tissue are not bones.
 
 (c) Complement of the predicate category of statement 4: Non-body-
parts-made-of-cardiac-tissue.
 
 (d) Obverse of statement 4: All bones are non-body-parts-made-of-
cardiac-tissue.
 
 (e) Complement of the subject category of statement 4: non-bones.
 
 (f)  Contrapositive of statement 4: All non-body-parts-made-of-
cardiac-tissue are not non-bones.
EXERCISE 6.4 B
 
 (a) Contradictory. Invalid.
 
 (b) Converse: Valid. Form 9.
 
 (c) Complement of the predicate category: No statement was produced.
 
 (d) Obverse: Valid. Form 14.
 
 (e) Complement of the subject category: No statement was produced.
 
 (f) Contrapositive: Invalid.
EXERCISE 6.4 C 
 4. Invalid.
 8. Invalid.
 12. Invalid. 
EXERCISE 6.5 A
 4. It isn’t a categorical syllogism. The category “freshman” is used only 
once. In a categorical syllogism, each category appears exactly twice.
 8. It’s a categorical syllogism.
 
 (1) All Americans are not wealthy.
 
 (2) All people who are Cindy are Americans.
 
 Therefore,
 
 (3) All people who are Cindy are not wealthy.
 
 A = people who are American 
 
 W = people who are wealthy 
 
 C = people who are Cindy
 
 (1) All A are not W.
 
 (2) All C are A.
 
 Therefore,
 
 (3) All C are not W.
 12. It’s a categorical syllogism.
 
 (1) All stakeholders are people within the realm of CEOs’ responsibility.
 
 (2) All employees are stakeholders.
 
 Therefore,

Answers to Selected Exercises  391
 
 (3) All employees are people within the realm of CEOs’ responsibility.
 
 E = employees 
  S = stakeholders 
 
 R = people within the CEO’s realm of responsibility
 
 (1) All S are R.
 
 (2) All E are S.
 
 Therefore,
 
 (3) All E are R.
EXERCISE 6.5 B
 4. The key to understanding this argument is to see that the use of the words 
“most” and many” are misleading. Typically, you would standardize an 
argument using “most” or “many” with particular statements, either PA 
or PN, using the word “some.” However, the actual argument in this pas-
sage isn’t about the many or most people mentioned. The passage is about 
the kind of disease that diabetes is. The passage gives an argument to ac-
count for why many or most people still consider diabetes to be a clinical 
disease. One way to standardize the argument is:
 
 (1) All cases of diabetes are cases that appear to be inevitable.
 
 (2) All cases that appear to be inevitable are clinical diseases.
 
 Therefore,
 
 (3) All cases of diabetes are clinical diseases.
 
 D = cases of diabetes 
  
I = cases of inevitable disease 
 
 C = clinical diseases
 
 (1) All D are I.
 
 (2) All I are C.
 
 Therefore, 
 
 (3) All D are C.
 8. (1) Some terrorists are people who are willing to kill innocent people.
 
 (2) All people willing to kill innocent people are cold-blooded killers.
 
 Therefore,
 
 (3) All terrorists are cold-blooded killers.
  T = terrorists (including suicide bombers) 
 
 W = people willing to kill innocent people 
 
 C = cold-blooded killers
 
 (1) Some T are W.
 
 (2) All W are C.
 
 Therefore, 
 
 (3) All T are C.
11 & 12 Problems 9, 10, 11, and 12 come from the same passage. It’s easier to un-
derstand 11 and 12 after reading 9 and 10. The entire passage is about two compet-
ing explanans for global inequality. The excerpt in  Problems 9 and 10 offers the 
modernization theory. The excerpt in 11 and 12 offers an argument against the 
modernization theory and presents a counter explanation, the dependency theory.
 11. Proponents of the dependency theory are concerned with the explanan-
dum (the global inequality in the world), and their explanans focus on 
the way in which poor societies became poor. The dependency theorists 
claim that wealthy societies used their capital, investment, and Western 
style of government to exploit colonized societies that had much material 
wealth, such as raw materials, but no capital to invest. This exploitation 
dominated the colonized societies and eventually made them poor. Based 

392  Answers to Selected Exercises
on these explanans, the dependency theorists argue that modernization 
theory isn’t an adequate theory.
 
 (1)   All modernization theories that focus on the internal characteristics of the 
poor societies are theories that blame the victim instead of the perpetrator.
 
 (2)  All theories that blame the victim instead of the perpetrator are not 
adequate theories.
 
 Therefore,
 
 (3) All modernization theories are not adequate theories.
 
 M = modernization theories 
  
B = theories that blame the victim instead of the perpetrator
  A = adequate theories
 
 (1) All M are B.
 
 (2) All B are not A.
 
 Therefore,
 
 (3) All M are not A.
 12. The dependency theory also argues that an adequate theory to explain global 
inequality must take into account patterns of domination. Dependency theo-
rists claim that patterns of domination hold between rich and poor societies.
 
 (1) All adequate theories are theories that focus on the characteristics of 
rich societies that have dominated poor societies since 1500.
 
 (2) All theories that focus on characteristics of rich societies that have 
dominated poor societies since 1500 are dependency theories.
 
 Therefore,
 
 (3) All adequate theories are dependency theories.
 
 A = adequate theories
 
 F = theories that focus on the characteristics of rich societies that have 
dominated poor societies since 1500
 
 D = dependency theories
 
 (1) All A are F.
 
 (2) All F are D.
 
 Therefore,
 
 (3) All A are D.
EXERCISE 6.6 A
 4. The Equal Negatives Test: Passes. There are no negations in the conclu-
sion and none in the premises.
 
 The Quantity Test: Passes. One premise is a universal and one is a particular.
 
 The Distributed Conclusion Test: Fails. G3 is distributed in the conclusion 
but not in either premises.
 
 The Distributed Middle Category Test: Passes. G2 is distributed in premise (1)
 
 The argument is invalid.
EXERCISE 6.6 B 
6.5 A
 4. It isn’t a categorical syllogism. 
 8. Passes all four tests. The argument is valid.
 12. Passes all four tests. The argument is valid.
6.5 B
 4. Passes all four tests. The argument is valid.
 8. Fails the distributed conclusion test because T is distributed in the con-
clusion but not in either premise. The argument is invalid. 

Answers to Selected Exercises  393
 11. The argument passes all four tests. It’s valid.
 12. The argument passes all four tests. It’s valid.
EXERCISE 6.7 A Venn for 6.6 A #4
 4. 
 
 (1)  All G2 are G1.
 
 (2)  Some G2 are G3.
 
 Therefore,
  (3)  All G3 are G1
G3
G1
1
3
4
7
2
8
6
5
G2
X
 
 The argument is invalid. To correctly diagram the conclusion, All G3 are 
G1, Areas 1 and 5 would need to be shaded. But only Area 5 is shaded.
EXERCISE 6.7 B Venn for 6.5 A #8
 4. No Venn because this argument isn’t a categorical syllogism.
 8. (1)  All A are not W.
 
 (2)  All C are A.
 
 Therefore,
 
 (3)  All C are not W.
C
1
3
4
7
2
8
6
5
A
W
 
 The argument is valid. To correctly diagram the conclusion, All C are 
not W, Areas 2 and 6 would need to be shaded. And they are shaded.

394  Answers to Selected Exercises
EXERCISE 6.7 B Venn for 6.5 A #12 
 12. (1)  All S are R.
 
 (2)  All E are S.
 
 Therefore,
 
 (3)  All E are R.
1
3
4
7
2
8
6
5
E
R
S
 
 The argument is valid. To correctly diagram the conclusion, All E are R, 
Areas 1 and 5 would need to be shaded. And they are shaded.
EXERCISE 6.7 B Venn for 6.5 B #4
 4. (1) All D are I.
 
 (2) All I are C.
 
 Therefore, 
 
 (3) All D are C.
D
1
3
4
7
2
8
6
5
I
C
The argument is valid. To correctly diagram the conclusion, All D are C, 
Areas 1 and 5 would need to be shaded. And they are shaded.

Answers to Selected Exercises  395
EXERCISE 6.7 B Venn for 6.5 B #8
 8. (1)  Some T are W.
 
 (2)  All W are C.
 
 Therefore, 
 
 (3)  All T are C.
T
1
3
4
7
2
8
6
5
W
X
C
 
 The argument is invalid. To correctly diagram the conclusion, All T are 
C, Areas 1 and 5 would need to be shaded. But Area 1 isn’t shaded.
Chapter Seven
EXERCISE 7.1 A
 4. No analogy
 8. There’s an analogy.
EXERCISE 7.1 B 
 4. There’s an analogy. It’s argumentative.
 8. There’s no analogy. But there’s a statistical argument. See Chapter Eight.
EXERCISE 7.1 C
7.1 A
 4. There’s no analogy.
 8. This analogy isn’t argumentative, so it can’t be put into standard form.
7.1 B
 4. (1) Watches have an end to which they appear to be directed, and they’re 
designed.
 
 (2) Human bodies also have an end to which they appear to be directed.
 
 Therefore,
 
 (3) Human bodies probably are designed.
 
 Primary subject: human bodies
 
 Analogue: watches
 
 Similarities: having an end to which it appears to be directed
 
 Conclusory feature: being designed
 8. There’s no analogy.

396  Answers to Selected Exercises
EXERCISE 7.2 A
 4. (1)  If someone is French, she’s European.
 
 (2)  George Bush isn’t French.
 
 Therefore,
 
 (3)  George Bush isn’t European.
 
 There’re many possible correct answers, including:
 
 (1)  If someone is French, she’s European.
 
 (2)  Queen Elizabeth of England isn’t French.
 
 Therefore,
 
 (3)  Queen Elizabeth of England isn’t European.
 
 This is a refutation by logical analogy because both premises are true, but 
the conclusion is false. 
 8. Against:
 
 (1)   Adult human beings have the genetic code of the species homo 
sapiens, and
 
  
killing adult human beings should be illegal.
 
 (2)  Human fetuses also have the genetic code of the species homo sapiens.
 
 Therefore, 
 
 (3)  Killing human fetuses should be illegal.
 
 For:
 
 (1)   A woman’s decision to have a child is a fundamental part of a wom-
an’s freedom, and 
 
  
a woman’s decision to have a child should be legal.
 
 (2)   A woman’s decision not to have a child is also a fundamental part of 
a woman’s freedom.
 
 Therefore, 
 
 (3)   A woman’s decision not to have a child, to have an abortion, should 
be legal.
 13. (1)   There’re places where amphibians live today, and 
 
  
these places are much warmer than Antarctica is today.
 
 (2)  Antarctica 245 million years ago is a place where amphibians lived.
 
 Therefore,
 
 (3)  Antarctica 245 million years ago was much warmer than it’s today.
EXERCISE 7.3 A and B
See the standardizations above.
7.1 B
 4. This argument passes the true premises test. One reason it passes is that 
“appear to” in the premises means that (2) doesn’t assert that human bod-
ies are directed. It only asserts that they appear to be.
 
 Whether this argument passes the good form test is controversial. Some 
think that there’re few relevant similarities and many relevant dissimi-
larities between watches and human bodies, but others disagree. This is a 
famous argument for the existence of God.
7.2 A 
 4. The premises pass the true premises test. As the refutation by logical 
analogy above indicates, this argument fails the proper form test.

Answers to Selected Exercises  397
 13. The argument passes the proper form test fairly well, but you’d need 
more background information to be sure. If you could rule out the pos-
sibility that the Parotosuches fossil might have come from elsewhere, 
that would strengthen the argument. For example, the fossil might have 
fl oated there from further north. It would also be a stronger argument 
if the authors had listed the similarities between the Parotosuches and 
today’s amphibians.
EXERCISE 7.3 C
 4. (a). Standard form
 
 
 (1)   The institution of lunch counters that don’t serve people of col-
or is immoral and 
 
it would be wrong to participate in that institution.
 
 
 (2)   The institution of courthouses that won’t marry gays and lesbians 
is also immoral.
 
 
Therefore,
 
 
(3)  It would be wrong to participate in that institution.
 
 
Primary subject: courthouses that won’t marry gays and lesbians.
 
 
Analogue: lunch counters that don’t serve people of color.
 
 
Similarities: being immoral.
 
 
Conclusory feature: being wrong to participate in an institution.
 
 (b). Premise (1) seems to clearly pass the true premises test, but premise 
(2) is controversial and needs the support of subargument.
 
 (c) and (d). The main issue when it comes to similarities/dissimilarities is 
whether the fact that many courthouses won’t marry gays and lesbians is 
immoral.
 8. (a) Standard form
 
 
 (1)   When Europeans arrived in the North American, the Native 
Americans were divided and unprepared, and they suffered 
greatly.
 
 
(2)  If aliens arrived on Earth now, we’d be divided and unprepared. 
 
 
Therefore,
 
 
(3)  If aliens arrived on Earth now, we’d probably suffer greatly.
 
 
Primary subject: aliens arriving on Earth. 
 
 
Analogue: Europeans arriving in North American.
 
 
Similarities: being divided and unprepared.
 
 
Conclusory feature: suffering greatly.
 
 (b) These premises pass the true premises test. They are uncontroversial 
empirical statements.
 
 (c) and (d). The purported similarities are relevant, but the author over-
looks a number of relevant dissimilarities. Even if we assumed that aliens 
arriving here would act like Europeans, our weapons technology might 
not be behind that of aliens to the extent that the Native Americans’ 
weapons technology was behind that of Europeans. In addition, another 
important factor in the suffering of Native Americans was their inability 
to fi ght off European diseases. Things might have gone differently if the 
Native Americans were able to fi ght off the European diseases but the 
Europeans weren’t able to fi ght off the diseases of the Native Americans. 
Similarly, it might be that aliens are unable to fi ght off human diseases. 

398  Answers to Selected Exercises
There’s no reason to suppose that aliens would be like Europeans since, 
after all, they are aliens. If the aliens arrived with an attitude of coopera-
tion and desire for communication, the presence of the similarities would 
be irrelevant. 
Chapter Eight
EXERCISE 8.1 A
 3. This is the mean.
 4. This is the midrange. 
 
 The mean is $258.7M. See number 3.
 
 You can’t calculate a weighted mean with the data provided.
 
 There’re two modes, one at $265M and another at $200M.
 
 Because there’re ten data points, there’s, strictly speaking, no median, but 
the mean of the fi fth and sixth points on the list is $200M.
 8. Mean: 5.425%
 
 Median: Because there’re ten data points, there’s, strictly speaking, no 
median, but the mean of the second and third place values (5.2% and 
4.8%) is 5.0%. 
 12. From the data provided, it isn’t possible to calculate (a) the mean, (b) the 
weighted mean, (c) mode, (d) the midrange, or (e) the median. 
EXERCISE 8.1 B
 4. Lowest non-business: 1,193,057
 
 Highest non-business: 1,464,961
 
 Lowest business: 35,992
 
 Highest business: 54,008
 6. Mean: 38.09
 
 Weighted mean: From the data provided, it isn’t possible to calculate the 
weighted mean.
 
 Mode: 2
 
 Midrange: 36
 
 Median: 48
 7. Sub-Saharan Africa and India. There’s a different of 10 between these 
two and Southeast Asia (between 2 and 12). No other difference is that 
great.
 13. From the data provided, it isn’t possible to calculate (a) the mean, (b) the 
weighted mean, (c) mode, (d) the midrange, or (e) the median.

Answers to Selected Exercises  399
EXERCISE 8.2B
8.1 A 
 8. 
Unemployment Rate and Educational Attainment 
0
2
4
6
8
10
1992
1995
1998
1999
Year
Unemployment Rate of
HS Grads
Unemployment Rate and Educational Attainment
0
2
4
6
8
10
1992
1995
1998
1999
Year
Unemployment Rate of
HS Grads
Unemployment Rate and Educational Attainment
0
2
4
6
8
10
1991
1993
1995
1997
1999
Year
Unemployment Rate of
HS Grads

400  Answers to Selected Exercises
8.1 B 
 6. 
Share of Grain Consumed by Livestock
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
United States
Eastern Europe
EC
Soviet Union
Brazil
Japan
Middle East
China
Southeast Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa
India
Country/Region
Share
Share of Grain Consumed by Livestock
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
United States
Eastern Europe
EC
Soviet Union
Brazil
Japan
Middle East
China
Southeast Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa
India
Country/Region
Share 
EXERCISE 8.3 A
 4. There’s a statistical argument. It has a particular conclusion.
 
 Sample: the quizzes previously given.
 
 N: the author doesn’t state the N. It’s the number of quizzes previously given.
 
 Relevant property: being announced ahead of time.
 
 Target: the next quiz.
 
 Percentage: all, 100%.
 
 (1)   100% of the N quizzes previously given in the class were announced 
ahead of time.
 
 Therefore,
 
 (2)  100% of the quizzes in the class will be announced ahead of time.
 
 (3)  The next quiz is a quiz in the class.
 
 Therefore,
 
 (4)  The next quiz will probably be announced ahead of time.

Answers to Selected Exercises  401
 8. This is a statistical argument with the General form.
 
 Sample: mean temperatures from 1955 to 2000 in the United States, Eu-
rope, and Antarctica.
 
 N: 3, the three areas where temperatures were observed.
 
 Relevant property: increasing over time.
 
 Target: Temperatures in other parts of the world.
 
 Percentage: 100%.
 
 (1) 100% of the 3 observed areas of the world (US, Europe, Antarctica) 
have had increasing mean temperatures.
 
 Therefore,
 
 (2) 100% of all areas of the world have had increasing mean temperatures. 
 12. There’s no statistical argument.
EXERCISE 8.4 A
 4. Convenience sample. 
 8. Convenience sample.
 12. There’s no statistical argument.
EXERCISE 8.4 B
 4. True premises test: It’s hard to do the true premises test because you 
don’t know who is speaking. But if the person speaking is reliable, the 
statements made are plausible.
 
 Proper form test: The sample size isn’t stated. Is it early in the semester 
and the professor has given only two quizzes, or is it late in the semester 
and the professor has given fi fteen quizzes? The more quizzes, the more 
likely that the sample is representative. The sample appears to have good 
variety because it includes all the quizzes that have been given.
 8. True premises test: The source of the information isn’t stated. Therefore, 
the premise can’t be assumed to pass the true premise test.
 
 Proper form test: As it stands, this argument is weak. The three areas 
weren’t chosen at random, and our background information indicates 
that climate varies from one part of the world to another. This argument 
fails the proper form test.
12. There’s no statistical argument.
EXERCISE 8.5 A
 4. (1)   75% of college-educated men in these studies achieved some upward 
mobility.
 
 Therefore, 
 
 (2)  75% of all college-educated men will achieve some upward mobility.
 
 (3)   College-educated men have features F1, F2, F3, etc. and 75% of col-
lege-educated men will achieve some upward mobility.
 
 (4)  College-educated women also have features F1, F2, F3, etc.
 
 Therefore, 
 
 (4)   75% of all college-educated women will also achieve upward mobility.
 
 Therefore, 
 
 (5)  Education plays a critical role in social mobility.

402  Answers to Selected Exercises
 
 The sample is unavailable. The N is unavailable. The relevant property is 
achieving some upward mobility. The target is all adults. The P% is 75.
 
 This passage has the two step statistical-then-analogical argument (like 
the Briard puppy case). If you moved immediately from the conclusion of 
the statistical argument (2) to the conclusion of the author’s main argu-
ment (5), the passage would commit the Biased Sample Fallacy because 
the main conclusion isn’t limited to men but the only data provided is 
limited to men. However, the author is drawing an implicit analogy be-
tween men and women. The author doesn’t list the relevant similarities 
and dissimilarities between men and women and that is why we’ve listed 
the undefi ned variables F1, F2, F3, etc. Whether the analogical argument 
passes the proper form test depends on the evaluation of these similari-
ties and dissimilarities. If there’re relevant dissimilarities between col-
lege-educated men and college educated women, the overall argument 
fails the proper form test.
 8. (1)   100% of the one person observed recalled forgotten memories that 
seemed to underlie their problems when encouraged to say whatever 
came to mind.
 
 Therefore,
 
 (2)   100% of all people will recall forgotten memories that seem to under-
lie their problems when encouraged to say whatever comes to mind.
 
  The sample is one patient. The N is 1. The relevant property is recalled 
forgotten memories that seemed to underlie their problems when encour-
aged to say whatever came to mind. The target is all future patients. The 
P% is 100.
 
 As recounted here, this argument commits the Fallacy of Hasty Gener-
alization and fails the proper form test. It asserts that Freud reached his 
conclusion from only one case. However, it may well be that the author 
is using a story to make the passage more lively. It’s possible that Freud 
observed many more cases. The premise can be assumed as an uncontro-
versial empirical statement by a reliable source. 
 12. This passage’s main conclusion is that Americans read more books in 
2007 than they did in the 1950s. To support this conclusion, the author re-
lies on a series of statistical sub-arguments. Sentences (1)–(4) and (7) make 
statistical arguments. The other numbered sentences are non-statistical 
premises in support of the main conclusion. None of the statistical ar-
guments appears to commit any fallacy, but it’s hard to be sure because 
the author doesn’t provide much information about the data. There isn’t 
enough information provided to put (1)–(4) and (7) into standard form. The 
premises are all uncontroversial empirical statements, so if there’s good 
reason to think that MacFarquhar is an appropriate expert, these premises 
may be assumed to pass the true premises test. It’s hard to do the proper 
form test because the author doesn’t supply enough information about 
the surveys. However, if you do research and MacFarquhar turns out to be 
an appropriate expert, then this would be good reason to think that these 
statistical arguments have proper form.

Answers to Selected Exercises  403
Chapter Nine
EXERCISE 9.1 A
 4. He’s denying that taking the new parkway is a primary cause of getting to 
the theater. In fact, he thinks that taking the new parkway is a sufficient 
cause of not getting to the theater on time.
 8. Into the Wild’s being at the Cineplex is a necessary and primary cause of 
Jack’s desire to go there.
 12. The use of the word “tendency” suggests that the author sees a positive 
correlation between the two events being compared (the role of serfdom 
in the economy and the passage of time in Russia). As time went on, 
an increasingly large percentage of the economy was dependent on serfs. 
However, since there’s no specifi c feature about Russia noted, Chamber-
lain isn’t making any clausal claim.
EXERCISE 9.2 A
 4. This passage contains a causal argument.
 
 (1)   Stefan’s being at his mother’s house is correlated with Stefan’s texts 
not getting to Willa.
 
 [2]   Stefan’s texts not getting to Willa isn’t the cause of Stefan’s being at 
his mother’s house.
 
 [3]   There’s no third thing that’s the cause of Stefan’s being at his moth-
er’s house and Stehan’s texts not getting to Willa.
 
 [4]   Stefan’s being at his mother’s house and Stefan’s texts not getting to 
Willa aren’t coincidentally correlated.
 
 Therefore,
 
 (5)   Stefan’s being at his mother’s house is a cause of Stefan’s texts not 
getting to Willa.
 8. There’s no causal argument in this passage. It makes a series of causal 
claims about the bad effects of cash-settled contracts, but there’re no 
premises offered in support of these claims.
 12. There’s no causal argument in this passage. It makes a series of causal 
claims about the possible effects of global warming, but there’re no prem-
ises offered in support of these claims. In fact, the passage makes some 
claims about why causal arguments about global warming can’t be made. 
The main point is that “no one can predict the precise impact of global 
warming” due to the complexities of the situation. In addition, the au-
thor says it would be even more difficult to predict the secondary effects 
of any potential primary effects of climate changes.
EXERCISE 9.2 B
 3. (2) (E2) Economic development in Japan since 1952 didn’t cause (E1) the free-
dom from the burden of supporting a large and costly military establishment.
EXERCISE 9.3 A
 4. Binary.
 8. Scalar.

404  Answers to Selected Exercises
 12. This passage suggests that friendship and being understood are binary 
features. It isn’t clear that this passage is correct. Friendship and being 
understood might well be scalar. The degree of friendship might be posi-
tively correlated with the degree of being understood. 
EXERCISE 9.4 A
 4. You wouldn’t be able to draw any conclusions. Since Jill never became 
ill, you’d have a small bit of evidence of a correlation between eating less 
beans and eating less steak and not getting ill. This is an example of the 
Method of Scalar Variation. But you’d need to do much more work to 
check the correlations. 
 8. No use of Mill’s Methods is present. The passage makes the claim that 
Type 2 diabetes is correlated with developing and developed countries, sex, 
race, and ethnic group. It also asserts that it’s occurring at earlier ages than 
in the past. In other words, diabetes is positively correlated with virtually 
all of the categories commonly used to identify public health disorders. 
EXERCISE 9.5 A
 4. There’s a causal claim here. The implied causal argument is here.
 
 [1]   Pouring an acid on litmus paper is correlated with the litmus paper 
turning red.
 
 [2]   The litmus paper turning red isn’t the cause of pouring an acid on 
litmus paper.
 
 [3]   There’s no third thing that’s the cause of pouring an acid on litmus 
paper and the litmus paper turning red.
 
 [4]   Pouring an acid on litmus paper and the litmus paper turning red 
aren’t coincidentally correlated.
 
 Therefore,
 
 (5)   Pouring an acid on litmus paper is a cause of the litmus paper turning 
red.
 
 The sub-arguments:
 
 Premise (1). To construct a sub-argument for this premise, you’d need 
to use Mill’s Method. The way do to this would be to repeatedly pour 
(Agreement) and not pour (Difference) acids on litmus paper and see if the 
paper’s turning red is correlated with the pouring of the acid.
 
 Premise (2). The key point for making a sub-argument in support of this 
premise is 
 
 (1) The litmus paper turning red came after pouring an acid on litmus 
paper.
 
 (2) If the litmus paper turning red came after pouring an acid on litmus 
paper, then the litmus paper turning red isn’t the cause of the pouring an 
acid on litmus paper. 
 
 Therefore, 
 
 (3) The litmus paper turning red isn’t the cause of pouring an acid on lit-
mus paper.
 
 Premise (3). To make a sub-argument for this premise, you’d need to con-
sider possible third-party causes and then rule each of the out using Mill’s 
Methods. 

Answers to Selected Exercises  405
 
 Premise (4). To make a sub-argument for this premise, you’d need to 
repeatedly pour an acid on litmus paper to see if the paper repeatedly 
turned red. If it did, that would be evidence that the correlation isn’t a 
coincidence.
 
 The premises of the implied causal argument can all be assumed to 
pass the true premise test, as they are all uncontroversial empirical 
statements.
 
 The implied causal argument can be put into standard form, so it passes 
the proper form test. It contains no fallacies.
 8. There’s an argument in this passage, but it isn’t a causal argument.
 
 (1)   Emotion is one of the means by which our bodies communicate knowl-
edge to conscious awareness.
 
 [2]  Conscious awareness is included in body intelligence.
 
 Therefore,
 
 (3) Emotion must be included in a discussion of body intelligence.
 12. There are two possible interpretations of this passage. One interpretation 
focuses on the particular action, the INS’s sending a notice to the Florida 
fl ight school. On this view, there’s no causal argument. There’s only a 
set of assertions. There’s no causal argument because the sending of the 
notice occurred after the 9/11 attack, so it can’t be a cause of the attack.
 
 The other interpretation takes the passage to be drawing the unstated 
conclusion that the general incompetence of the INS (as evidenced by the 
sending of the notice to the fl ight school) was a cause of the attack.  
 
 (1)  The INS’ incompetence is correlated with the 9/11 attack.
 
 [2]  The 9/11 attack isn’t a cause of the INS’ incompetence.
 
 [3]   There’s no third thing that’s the cause of the INS’ incompetence and 
the 9/11 attack.
 
 [4]   The INS’ incompetence and the 9/11 attack aren’t coincidentally cor-
related.
 
 Therefore,
 
 (5)  The INS’ incompetence is a cause of the 9/11 attack.
 
 Premise (1). Whether the INS was incompetent is a matter of debate. You 
could make a sub-argument for this premise by pointing to additional ex-
amples of the INS’s incompetence. It’s hard to use Mill’s Methods to show 
correlation with the 9/11 attack because that attack only occurred once.
 
 Premise (2). To make a sub-argument for this claim, you’d need to show 
that the incompetence of the INS existed before the 9/11 attack. This is a 
plausible premise because it’s hard to see how the 9/11 attack could have 
caused a change in the competence of the INS.
 
 Premise (3). To make a sub-argument for this premise, you’d need to con-
sider possible third-party causes and then rule out each of them using 
Mill’s Methods. This would be hard to do. A number of causes are likely 
to have been at least contributory causes. One would be the lack of com-
munication between federal agencies. If there’d been better communica-
tion between federal agencies, it’s possible that both this instance of INS 
incompetence and the 9/11 attackers obtaining pilot licenses could have 
been avoided.

406  Answers to Selected Exercises
 
 Premise (4). Making a sub-argument for this claim would be difficult be-
cause it would be hard for you to check for repeated instances of terrorist 
attacks. Since there’s only one 9/11 attack, it’s especially hard to prove 
that the correlation isn’t coincidental.
 
 The third and fourth premises of the implied causal argument can’t be 
assumed to pass the true premise test. They are controversial claims that 
require the support of sub-arguments, and it’s unlikely they can be pro-
vided. In fact, there’s much evidence that Premise (3) is false. This argu-
ment doesn’t do well on the true premises test.
 
 The implied causal argument can be put in standard form. It passes the 
proper form test. It contains no fallacies. But it doesn’t do well on the true 
premises test.
EXERCISE 9.5 C
 4. There’s no causal argument in this passage.
 9. There’s a causal argument.
 
 (1)   (The Hollywood Ten’s) being held in contempt by the HUAC was 
correlated with their being blacklisted by the movie industry (which 
effectively ended their careers).
 
 [2]   Being blacklisted wasn’t the cause of their being held in contempt by 
the HUAC.
 
 [3]   There’s no third party cause that caused both their being blacklisted 
and their being held in contempt by the HUAC.
 
 [4]   Their being blacklisted and being held in contempt by the HUAC 
aren’t coincidentally related.
 
 Therefore,
 
 (5)   Their being held in contempt by the HUAC was a cause of their being 
blacklisted.
 
 This is a somewhat good particular causal argument. Premise (1) is an 
uncontroversial historical claim about events. Premise (2) can be shown 
to be true with a sub-argument because it’s an uncontroversial empiri-
cal fact that they were blacklisted later in time after their being held in 
contempt. Premise (3) is more difficult. Some might argue that the anti-
communist climate of the Cold War era was sufficient to cause both their 
being held in contempt and their being blacklisted. That is, it’s plausible 
that they were blacklisted out of fear of further arrests in the movie in-
dustry, rather than blacklisted because the movie industry agreed with 
the contempt charge. Premise (4) is extremely difficult to prove since this 
is a particular causal argument.
EXERCISE 9.6 A
 4. The passage suggests the following causal hypotheses:
 
 Using up its dirt caused Jeri’s plant to struggle.
 
 The lower temperatures in Zhouzhou’s apartment caused Jeri’s plant to 
struggle.
 
 New potting soil and the shock of transplanting caused Jeri’s plant to 
struggle.

Answers to Selected Exercises  407
 
 Step One: is to identify the question to be answered: Jeri’s initial question 
is why her plant is struggling.
 
 Step Two: Zhouzhou formulates a tentative theory: that the plant is 
struggling because it has used up all of its dirt.
 
 Step Three: Zhouzhou checks for correlations by transplanting the plant 
and giving it new dirt in a bigger pot. At fi rst, Zhouzhou has discon-
fi rming evidence of her tentative theory because the plant didn’t cease 
struggling. So she can’t check for reverse causation, third-party causa-
tion, or coincidental causation. Zhouzhou returned the plant to its home, 
after which it began to thrive. This appeared to be some late-developing 
confi rming evidence for the tentative theory, but it also (Step Six) raised 
new questions about whether the plant began to recover due to its return 
home or whether the initial theory had been correct but had taken more 
time to “kick in” than expected. At this point, our passage ends, but ide-
ally, Zhouzhou should now begin checking for reverse, third-party, and 
coincidental correlation.
 8. Jahai is informally using the scientifi c method. The question to be an-
swered is: why is there water on his fl oor? He formulates a tentative 
theory (that he spilled something while cooking) but then rejects it 
because he fi nds disconfi rming evidence (the water is there when he’s 
sure he hasn’t spilled anything). He then formulates a new theory (that 
the water heater is leaking). However, that theory is also not confi rmed 
when he looks for correlations. The water doesn’t come back. He also 
rejects the theory that the water is caused by rain because that doesn’t 
correlate either. However, the reason he didn’t call the staff that day is 
that he fi gured the apartment staff, being good scientists, would assume 
that the rain was a third-party cause. Jahai knew it wasn’t a third-party 
cause because he had the leak when it didn’t rain.
 11. Step One: Identify the question: What’s the best way to treat diabetes?
 
 Step Two: Formulate tentative theory. Diabetes is better treated as a pub-
lic health disorder rather than treating affected individuals clinically.
 
 Step Three: There’s both confi rming and disconfi rming evidence. Con-
fi rming evidence is that prevention strategies are effective. (If some-
thing is preventable, it’s assumed to be best addressed as a public health 
issue.) However, there’s some disconfi rming evidence. (1) Because di-
abetes is associated “with aging and a possible strong family history, 
diabetes and its complications may appear inevitable to many. Further, 
much of the burden associated with diabetes is insidious, coming on 
gradually only after a considerable number of years.” (2) Public concern 
needed to “galvanize” investigation is only just beginning, so at this 
point there’s no evidence for “the public to demand societal or govern-
mental action.” These two facts make it appear that diabetes would be 
better treated clinically, contrary to the author’s tentative theory. The 
author needs to do more investigative work on checking correlations 
before knowing whether to come up with a new theory. (See the follow-
ing exercise.)

408  Answers to Selected Exercises
 12. Since the initial theory, much evidence has been gathered. Scientists 
have learned more about diabetes, including the fact that it develops from 
a condition now called prediabetes. So, in line with the scientifi c method, 
the scientists come up with a new hypothesis.
 
 Step Four: The new hypothesis is that we should treat prediabetes as 
a public health disorder instead of treating individuals with diabetes 
clinically.
 
 Step Five: is checking for confi rming or disconfi rming evidence. It’s now 
known that the two most important risk factors for prediabetes are obe-
sity and physical inactivity. Both of these factors can easily be addressed 
to the general public. Both of these factors are things that people can con-
trol to some extent. Therefore, prediabetes is much more easily prevented 
than diabetes. In fact, according to recent fi ndings, “It only takes a 7% 
to 10% weight loss and sustained moderate physical activity, at least 30 
minutes per day.”
 
 By contrast, once people have diabetes, they are “devastating health and 
economic consequences . . . including blindness, kidney disease, . . . and 
lower-limb amputations.” There’s little if any chance of recovering from 
these sorts of consequences, so there’s indirect evidence that it would be 
best to address the risk factors for prediabetes to the entire public, in an 
effort to ward off development of diabetes. Treating the consequences of 
diabetes is enormously expensive for patients, insurance companies, hos-
pitals, and the public. 
 
 Step Six: New questions raised: How should we best go about addressing 
the two risk factors of weight loss and increased physical activity so that 
people are informed? This leads to yet another hypothesis.
 
 Step Four: We should develop “community-based strategies . . .where peo-
ple live, work, play, and go to school.” The passage mentioned several 
agencies currently engaged in developing such community-based com-
munication and intervention strategies.
Chapter Ten
EXERCISE 10.1 A
 4. There’s an argument in this passage [Mrs. Long told me that Netherfi eld 
Park is let. Therefore, Netherfi eld Park is let.], but it isn’t a moral argu-
ment. Mrs. Bennett is relying on the moral presupposition that it’s good 
to know who has rented Netherfi eld Park, and Mr. Bennett doesn’t think 
it’s good to know this. 
 8. There’s no moral argument here. This is an analogical argument. The 
moral presupposition at work here is the view that it’s good to know 
whether God exists.
 12. There’s no argument here. It’s a series of questions. There’s a moral pre-
supposition at work, that it’s good to know how markets react when there 
are only a few fi rms.

Answers to Selected Exercises  409
EXERCISE 10.2 A
 4. (a) Both. (b) The exclamation points indicate that the author is too emo-
tional for someone concerned to think critically.
 8. (a) Cognitivist. (b) The phrasing and terms (such as “idiot”) indicate that 
the author is too emotional for someone concerned to think critically.
 10. (a) Noncognitivist. (b) The writer isn’t too emotional.
EXERCISE 10.3 A
 4. There’s no moral argument in this passage.
 8. This is a moral argument, but its conclusion is about a person, not an action. 
 12. There’s a moral argument with an unstated conclusion.
 
 (1)   Imposing price controls on housing leads to inefficiency.
 
 (2)   It’s morally bad to do actions that lead to inefficiency.
 
 Therefore,
 
 [3]   We shouldn’t impose price controls on housing.
EXERCISE 10.6 A
 4. This passage contains a moral argument about an action. It’s a deontic 
argument.
 
 (1)   Falsely claiming that a book is defective and asking for another is theft.
 
 (2)   It’s morally bad to do actions that are examples of theft.
 
 Therefore,
 
 (3)   People should not falsely claim that a book is defective and ask for 
another.
 8. There’s an argument here, but it’s not a moral argument. 
 12. There’s no moral argument in this passage. But there’s a moral presup-
position, that binge drinking is bad.

410
Reference Guide
Alphabetical List of Fallacies
Ad Hominem, 76
Affirming an Inclusive Disjunct, 160
Affirming the Consequent, 167
Appeal to an Inappropriate Authority, 101, 
see Inappropriate Expertise
Appeal to Emotions, 140
Appeal to Ignorance, 78
Appeal to Novelty, 73
Appeal to Popularity, 72
Appeal to Tradition, 73
Argumentum ad Antiquitatem, 76, 
see Appeal to Tradition
Argumentum ad Ignorantiam, 78, 
see Appeal to Ignorance
Argumentum ad Novitatem, 73, 
see Appeal to Novelty
Argumentum ad Personam, 77, 
see Ad Hominem
Argumentum ad Populum, 72, 
see Appeal to Popularity
Argumentum ad Verecundiam, 101, 
see Appeal to an Inappropriate Authority
Bandwagon Fallacy, 72, 
see Appeal to Popularity
Begging the Question, 78
Biased Questions, 287
Biased Sample, 286
Causal Slippery Slope, 314
Confusing a Contrary and a Contradictory, 192
Denying the Antecedent, 166
Easy Target, 71
Equivocation, 134
Fallacies (defi nition of), 70
False Alternatives, 163 
see False Dichotomy
False Cause, 313, see Hasty Cause
False Dichotomy, 163,
False Dilemma, 163, 
see False Dichotomy
Guilt by Association, 77
Hasty Cause, 313
Hasty Generalization, 286
Inappropriate Expertise, 101
Objectionable Cause, 313, 
see Hasty Cause
Petitio Principii, 79, 
see Begging the Question
Post Hoc, 317
Slippery Slope, 314, 
see Causal Slippery Slope
Straw Man, 71, see Easy Target

Reference Guide  411
Alphabetical List of Guides
Averages, 264
Defi nitions and Quotation Marks, 118
Dictionaries, 122
Distributed Conclusion Test, 210
Finding and Standardizing Arguments, 41
Finding, Standardizing, and Evaluating 
Analogical Arguments, 255
Finding, Standardizing, and Evaluating 
Arguments, 83
Finding, Standardizing, and Evaluating 
Categorical Arguments, 226
Finding, Standardizing, and Evaluating 
Causal Arguments, 339
Finding, Standardizing, and Evaluating 
Moral Arguments, 371
Finding, Standardizing, and Evaluating 
Propositional Arguments, 171
Finding, Standardizing, and Evaluating 
Statistical Arguments, 292
Negation, Disjunction, Conjunction, 
and Conditional Indicator Words, 156
Proper Citation of Experts, 102
Terms Used in Logic, Philosophy, and Math 
to Refer to Good and Bad Arguments, 59
Test Method (for testing the validity of 
categorical syllogisms), 208
Valid Categorical Argument Forms with 
One Premise, 200
Venn Method (for testing the validity of 
categorical syllogisms), 215
Alphabetical List of Habits of a Critical Thinker
Avoiding Confi rmation Bias, 328
Avoiding Self-Deception and Rationalization, 89
Avoiding Superstition, 318
Carefulness, Attentiveness, 169
Curiosity, 14
Discipline, 224
Giving Opposing Views Their Due, 72
Inquisitiveness, 288
Intellectual Courage, 26
Intellectual Humility, 278
Knowing the Power of History, 161
Making Precise Distinctions, 189
Not Jumping to Conclusions, 50
Perceptiveness, 249
Recognizing Bias and Prejudice, 140
Recognizing Your Own Ignorance, 50
Resisting Oversimplifi cation, 321
Resourcefulness, 101
Self-Refl ection, 6
The Principle of Charity, 136
Thinking Boldly, 242

412  Reference Guide
Index (Including Key Concepts and Technical Terms)
A
A, E, I, O statements, 176
Abscissa, 273
Accidental correlation, 321
Acronym, 125
Action argument form, 358
Ad Hominem Fallacy, 76
Affirming an exclusive disjunct, 162
Affirming an inclusive disjunct, 160
Affirming the antecedent, 165
Affirming the consequent, 167
All G1 are G2, 178
All G1 are not G2, 184
Alliteration, 142
Alternative syllogism, 160
Ambiguity, 134
Ambiguous pronoun reference, 136
Amphiboly, 136
Analogical arguments, 229
Analogues, 230
Analogy, 232
Anaphora, 142
Antecedent, 154–156
Appeal to Emotions Fallacy, 140
Appeal to Ignorance Fallacy, 78
Appeal to Inappropriate Authority 
Fallacy, 101
Appeal to Novelty Fallacy, 73
Appeal to Popularity Fallacy, 72
Appeal to Tradition Fallacy, 73
Aretaic moral argument, 365
Argument (defi nition of), 7
Argument diagrams, 39
Argumentative statistics, 259
Argumentum ad Antiquitatem, 76
Argumentum ad Ignorantiam, 78
Argumentum ad Novitatem, 73
Argumentum ad Personam, 77
Argumentum ad Populum, 72
Argumentum ad Verecundiam, 101
Aristotelian logic, 177 
Arithmetic mean, 261
Assumption of Existence, 182 
Audience, 47
Austen, Jane, 116, 143
Authority, 97
Average, 260
B
Background knowledge (importance 
of), 312, 319–320, 327
Banaji, Mahzarin, 100
Conclusory feature, 230
Concomitant variation, 309
Conditional, 154–156
Confi rmation, 328
Confusing a Contrary with a 
Contradictory Fallacy, 192
Conjunction, 152–153
Connotation, 118
Consequent, 241
Consequentialism, 353
Consequentialist moral 
argument, 353
Construct validity, 60 
Content validity, 60
Continuous variable, 307 
Contradiction, 190–200
Contradictory statements, 190
Contraposition, 197
Contributory cause, 298
Convenience sample, 284
Convergent argument, 67
Conversion, 194
Cooperation deontic version of the 
Action form, 362
Correlation, 312
Counter argument, 69
Counterfactual, 246
Criterion validity, 60
Critical thinking, 5
D
Deduction and induction, 55
Deductive argument, 55
Defi nition, 117
Defi nitional statement, 93
Denotation, 118
Denying a disjunct, 159–160
Denying the antecedent, 166
Denying the consequent, 167
Deontic moral argument, 350–361, 
364, 368, 370
Dependent premise, 65
Descriptive statistics, 259
Dictionary defi nition, 120
Disconfi rmation, 328
Disjunction, 150
Disjunctive syllogism, 160
Dissimilarities, in analogical 
arguments, 247, 249, 251–252, 
255–256
Distributed Conclusion Test, 
209
Bandwagon Fallacy, 72
Bar chart, 269
Basri, Gibor, 126
Beehner, Jacinta, 258
Begging the Question Fallacy, 78
Behavioral defi nition, 126
Bentham, Jeremy, 359
Bias, 282
Biased Questions Fallacy, 287
Biased sample Fallacy, 286
Bimodal distribution, 269
Binary correlation, 307
Binary feature, 306
Binary variable, 307
Blanchette, Patricia, 157
Brink, David, 349
Broad defi nition, 128
C
Carnevale, Giorgio, 233
Categorical arguments, 190
Categorical imperative, 361
Categorical statement forms 
(standard forms), 174–175, 
179
Categorical statement, 175, 179
Categorical syllogism, 202
Causal argument, 302
Causal necessary and sufficient 
condition, 298
Causal necessary condition, 397
Causal Slippery Slope Fallacy, 314
Causal sufficient condition, 297
Cause, 295
Census, 285
Center of a set of data, 260–264
Claim, 281
Class logic, 177
Class terms, 117
Class, 177
Classical logic, 177
Classifi cation analogy, 239
Cluster defi nition, 239
Cluster sample, 285
Cogent argument, 42, 59 
Cognitivism, 349
Coleman-Adebayo, Marsha, 91
Common usage, 187
Complement of a category, 197
Complex argument, 33
Compound statement, 147
Conclusion, 7, 108

Reference Guide  413
Distributed Middle Category 
Test, 210
Distribution of a category, 195
Dummy variable, 307
E
Easy Target Fallacy, 71
Effect, 295
Egoism, 357
Elimination by correlation and 
time, 320
Elizondo-Omaña, R.E., 166  
Empirical knowledge, 87
Empirical statements, 87
Empirical theories, 87
Empirical, 86 
Enthymeme, 20
Environmental generalization, 
279
Equal Negatives Test, 208
Equal treatment analogy, 239 
Equivocating, 135
Equivocation, 134
Euphemism, 141
Event, 295
Exclusive disjunction, 151
Expert, 97–101
Explanadum and explanans, 25
Extension, 117
F
Fallacies, defi nition of, 70
False Alternatives, 163
False Analogy, 249
False Cause, 313
False Dichotomy Fallacy, 163
False dilemma, 163
Falsity, 47
Faulty analogy, 249
Figurative language, 130
First-order logic, 177
Four tests for a valid categorical 
syllogism, 207
Franklin, Rosalind, 9
Frink, Lisa, 86
Functional defi nition, 126
G
Gaussian distribution, 271
General causal argument, 302
Generalization, 279
Genus and difference, 119
Genus/species format, 119
Good argument, 43
M
Main argument, 33
Mean, 261
Median, 262
Melville, Herman, 4
Member, 279
Method of Agreement, 310
Method of Difference, 310
Method of refl ective equilibrium, 368
Method of Scalar Variation, 311
Middle category, 208, 210
Midrange, 262
Mill, John Stuart, 312
Modal, 262
Mode, 262
Modern/Boolean interpretation, 182
Modus ponens, 165
Modus tollens, 167
Monotonic, 275
Moral argument, 343
Moral confl ict, 367
Moral, 344–372
N
N, of a data set, 264
Narrow defi nition, 128
Necessary condition, 297–300
Negation, 148–149
Negative binary correlation, 306
Negative scalar correlation, 306
No correlation, 309, 312, 320, 339
No G1 are G2, 186
Non sequitur, 63
Noncognitivists, 348
Nonmonotonic, 275
Nonresponse, problem of, 284, 286
Normal distribution, 269
Nosek, Brian, 100
Not all G1 are G2, 189
O
Object, 279
Objectionable cause, 313
Obversion, 198
Operational defi nition, 127
Ordinate, 273
Outlier, 263, 268–269
P
Particular affirmative (PA) 
statement, 176, 186
Particular causal argument, 302
Particular negative (PN) 
statement, 176, 187
Good defi nition, 128
Greenwald, Anthony, 100
Groves, Robert, 286
Guilt by Association Fallacy, 77
H
Haphazard sample, 284
Hasty Cause Fallacy, 313
Hasty Generalization Fallacy, 286
Hedonism, 355
Hidden bias, 99
Hume, David, 228
Hypothetical statement, 156
Hypothetical syllogism, 169
I
Imaginary cases, 246, 252, 254–256
Immediate inference, 190
Implication, 368–369
Inappropriate Authority, 101
Inclusive disjunction, 151
Independent premise, 65
Indicator variable, 307
Indicator words, 16
Individual, 279
Induction, 55
Inductive argument, 55
Inductive generalization, 279
Inferential statistics, 259
Inherent value, 354–356, 367, 370
Instrumental value, 354–355
Intension, 117
Intentional, 117
Intrinsic feature, 359
Invalid argument, 160
Irrelevant, 60
J
Joint Method of Agreement and 
Difference, 311
K
Kant, Immanuel, 361
Kantian version of the Action 
form, 360
L
Ladd-Franklin, Christine, 204
Latham, John, 57
Lexical defi nition, 120
Line chart, 272
Linear variable, 307
Linked argument, 33
Logical analogy, 240

414  Reference Guide
Percentage of a population, 277
Persuasive defi nition, 131
Petitio principii, 79
Plato, 146
Plausible statement, 90
Pope Paul VI, 42
Population generalization, 279
Positive binary correlation, 306
Positive scalar correlation, 306
Post Hoc Fallacy, 317
Post hoc, ergo propter hoc, 318
Precising defi nition, 125
Predicate logic, 177
Predicate of a categorical 
statement, 176–177, 194
Premise, 7
Pretend, 44, 56
Primary cause, 299
Primary subject, 230
Principle of Charity, 136
Probability sample, 285
Problem of ignorance, 49
Problem of nonresponse, 284
Proper form test, 247, 281
Propositions, 10
Proximate cause, 299
Pure conditional, 169 
Pure hypothetical syllogism, 169
Purposive sample, 285
Q
Quality of categorical statements, 
176, 184, 198, 199, 225
Quantity of categorical 
statements, 176
Quantity Test, 208
Quota sample, 285
R
Rationalization, 89
Rawls, John, 368
Refl ective equilibrium, 368
Refutation argument, 63, 240
Regression line, 273–275
Relevant, 63
Relevant dissimilarity, 249
Relevant property, 276
Relevant similarity, 249
Reliability, 60, 98
Reliable individual, 90
Remote cause, 299
Reportive defi nition, 120
Representative sample, 282
Resistance, 263, 264
Restricted egoism, 357
Reverse causation, 316
Test validity, 60 
Testimonial statement, 90
Third-party causation, 318
Thomson, Judith Jarvis, 246
Traditional/Aristotelian 
interpretation, 182
Transparent bias, 99 
Tri-conditional argument, 168
True premises test, 244
Truth, 8
Truth-functional logic, 159
Truth-value, 8
U
U.S. Population Census, 285
Ulu knife, 89
Uncontroversial defi nitional 
statement, 94
Uncontroversial empirical 
statement, 88
Undercoverage, problem of, 285
Universal affirmative (UA) 
statement, 176, 178
Universal assertion, 183
Universal negative (UN) 
statement, 176 184
Universalism, 277, 356
Universalistic maximizing 
consequentialism, 358
Universalizable action, 360
Universe (of discourse), 277
Unstated conclusion, 19
Unstated premise, 19
V
Vague, 136
Valid argument, 160
Valued instrumentally, 354
Valued inherently, 354
Variables, 182
Venn diagrams, 179
Venn, John, 183
Vices, 344
Virtue ethics version of the 
Action form, 366
Virtues, 344
Voluntary response sample, 284
W, X, Y, Z
Warrick, Joby, 294
Weak argument, 58
Weighted mean, 261
Wells, Ida B., 319
X axis, 273
Y axis, 273
Zola, Emile, 17
Rhetorical device, 171
Rhetorical question, 142
S
Sample, 176
Sample population, 277
Scalar correlation, 307–312, 339
Scalar feature, 306
Scalar variables, 307
Scatter chart, 271
Scatter plot, 273
Scope of a conclusion, 109
Sentential logic, 159 
Set, 207
Shading in Venn diagrams, 217
Shape of data, 269
Shoemaker, Carolyn, 48
Similarities, in analogical 
arguments, 230
Simple argument, 33
Simple random sample, 284
Simple statement, 147
Socrates, 43
Some G1 are G2, 186
Some G1 are not G2, 187
Sound argument, 42, 59
Spatial analogies, 239
Spread of data, 268
Standard deviation, 268
State of affairs, 295
Statement, 7
Statistical argument, 275
Statistical generalization, 279
Statistical inference, 279
Stipulative defi nition, 125
Stratifi ed random sample, 284
Straw Man Fallacy, 71
Strength of a conclusion, 109
Strong argument, 109
Strong conclusion, 110
Subargument, 33
Subclass, 279
Subject of a categorical 
statement, 176
Subset, 279
Sufficient condition, 298
Syllogism, 159
Systematic sample, 284
T
Target, 276
Target population, 277
Technical defi nition, 123
Technical term, 123
Temporal analogies, 239
Temporal generalization, 279

Reference Guide  415
Summary Guide for Finding, Standardizing, 
and Evaluating Arguments
This Guide is an amplifi cation of the “Guide for Finding, Standardizing, and 
Evaluating Arguments” that is in Chapter Two. The numbered sentences are 
merely copies from the Guide in Chapter Two. The paragraphs with “Prop,” 
“Cat,” “Analogy,” “Statistical,” “Causal,” and “Moral” in front of them are 
additional materials that apply only to certain types of arguments.
Prop = Propositional
Cat = Categorical
Analogy = Analogical
Statistical = Statistical
Causal = Causal
Moral = Moral
Finding Arguments
1. Look for an attempt to convince.
Prop. 
Look for an attempt to convince that relies on the logical 
relationships between statements.
Cat. 
Look for an attempt to convince that relies on the logical 
relationships within statements.
Analogy. 
 Look to see whether there is an attempt to convince that uses 
a comparison. Check to see whether the analogy is argumenta-
tive or illustrative.
Statistical. Look to see if there’s an attempt to convince that uses observations 
of a subset of a group to draw a conclusion about the entire group.
Causal. 
 Look to see if there’s an attempt to convince someone that 
some event or state of affairs is caused by some other event or 
state of affairs.
Moral. 
Look to see whether there’s an attempt to convince someone 
that some person or action is morally good or morally bad. 
 2. Find the conclusion.
Analogy. 
Find the primary subject and the conclusory feature.
Statistical. Find the target and the relevant property.
Causal. 
Determine which kind of causal claim the conclusion is mak-
ing: particular/general cause, necessary cause, sufficient cause, 
contributory cause, primary cause, remote/proximate cause.
Moral. 
Determine whether the statement makes a moral claim about 
people or actions.
 3. Find the premises.
Analogy. 
Find the analogue(s) and the similarities.
Statistical. Find the sample.

416  Reference Guide
 4. Review the following to make sure that you have correctly identifi ed the 
conclusion and the premises: imperfect indicator words, sentence order, 
premises and/or conclusion not in declarative form, and unstated prem-
ises and/or conclusion.
Causal. 
Identify the causes and the effects.
 5. Review the following to make sure that you haven’t incorrectly identifi ed 
something as a premise or a conclusion when in fact it isn’t part of an argu-
ment: assertions, questions, instructions, descriptions, and explanations.
Standardizing Arguments
 6. Rewrite the premises and the conclusion as declarative sentences. 
Make sure that each premise and the conclusion is a grammatically 
correct declarative sentence. Rewrite the premises and conclusion as 
necessary to make them clearer, but don’t change the meaning of the 
passage. Remove pronouns from the sentences and replace them with 
the nouns or noun phrases to which they refer. Remove emotionally 
charged language.
Cat. 
Put all the statements in the argument into one of the stan-
dard categorical statement forms (UA, UN, PA, or PN).
 7. Review any phrases you have omitted to be sure that they aren’t premises 
or a conclusion.
 8. Number the premises and the conclusion. Put brackets [ ] around the 
number of an unstated premise or conclusion. Place the premises before 
their conclusion and insert “Therefore,” between the premises and the 
conclusion. Use blank lines to indicate subarguments.
Prop. 
Assign the statement letters and formalize the argument.
Cat. 
Assign category variables and rewrite the argument using them.
Analogy. 
Put the standardization into the standard form of an analogi-
cal argument.
Statistical. Put the standardization in the standard form of a statistical 
argument.
Causal. 
Put the standardization in the standard form of a causal 
argument
Moral. 
Determine whether the argument is a consequentialist, deon-
tic, or aretaic moral argument.
 9. Compare your standardization to the original passage to make sure that 
you haven’t omitted any arguments found in the passage and to be sure 
that you have correctly identifi ed the premises and the conclusion. 
Prop and Cat. 
 Check to be sure that your formalization correctly cap-
tures the meaning of the argument as expressed in English.

Reference Guide  417
Evaluating Arguments: The True Premises Test
 10. Check to see whether the premises are accurate descriptions of the world. 
Analogy. 
Check for knowledge about imaginary cases. Evaluate it if it 
is present.
Analogy. 
Check to see whether the analogue and the primary subject 
have the features that the argument claims they do.
Statistical. Check to see whether the sample has the relevant property 
that the argument claims it has.
Causal. 
Premise (1). Use Mill’s Methods to determine whether the 
events are correlated.
Causal. 
Premise (2). Use information about time to check for reverse 
causation.
Causal. 
Premise (3). Check for third-party causation.
Causal. 
Premise (4). Check for coincidental correlation.
 11. Consider whether the premises are appropriate for the argument’s audience.
 12. Review the assumed premises to be sure that the assumptions are rea-
sonable. Make sure that all assumed premises are uncontroversially 
true empirical statements, uncontroversially true defi nitional state-
ments, or appropriate statements by experts. Make sure the defi nitions 
are good ones
Prop. 
If the argument contains a disjunction, check for a False 
Dichotomy.
Evaluating Arguments: The Proper Form Test
 13. Determine whether the argument is a deductive argument or inductive 
argument. 
 14. Determine whether the premises are relevant to the conclusion. Look at 
each premise individually to see whether the truth of the premise provides 
some evidence for the truth of the conclusion. Look at the premises as a 
group to see whether the truth of all of them provides some evidence for 
the truth of the conclusion.
Prop. 
Determine the form of the propositional argument. Compare 
it to the eight propositional argument forms.
Cat. 
Determine the form of the categorical argument. Determine 
whether it has one premises, two premises, or more than two 
premises.
Cat. 
If the argument has one premise, compare it to the sixteen 
forms of categorical arguments with one premise discussed in 
this chapter.
Cat. 
If the argument has two premises, verify that it meets the 
criteria for being a categorical syllogism. Use the test method 

418  Reference Guide
or the Venn method to determine whether it passes the proper 
form test. 
Analogy. 
Consider whether the similarities are relevant. Check to see 
whether there are any relevant dissimilarities. Evaluate the 
importance of the similarities and the relevant dissimilarities.
Statistical. Evaluate the representativeness of the sample. Determine the 
sampling technique. Consider whether the sample is suffi-
ciently large and sufficiently varied.
Evaluating Arguments: Checking for Fallacies
 15. Compare the argument to the list of fallacies on page 410 to see whether 
the argument commits any of the fallacies.
Disjunctive Propositional Argument Forms
Denying a Disjunct
 1. (1) S1 or S2 (or both). 
2. (1) S1 or S2 (or both).
 
 (2) Not S1. 
 (2) Not S2.
 
 Therefore, 
 Therefore,
 
 (3) S2. 
 (3) S1.
 3. (1) S1 or S2 (but not both). 
4. (1) S1 or S2 (but not both).
 
 (2) Not S1. 
 (2) Not S2.
 
 Therefore, 
 Therefore,
 
 (3) S2. 
 (3) S1.
Fallacy:  Affi rming an Inclusive Disjunct
 1. (1) S1 or S2 (or both). 
2. (1) S1 or S2 (or both).
 
 (2) S1. 
 (2) S2.
 
 Therefore, 
 Therefore,
 
 (3) Not S2. 
 (3) Not S1.
Affi rming an Exclusive Disjunct
 1. (1) S1 or S2 (but not both). 
2. (1) S1 or S2 (but not both).
 
 (2) S1. 
 (2) S2.
 
 Therefore, 
 Therefore,
 
 (3) Not S2. 
 (3) Not S1.
Conditional Propositional Argument Forms
Affi rming the Antecedent
 
 (1) If S1, then S2.
 
 (2) S1.
 
 Therefore,
 
 (3) S2.

Reference Guide  419
Fallacy: Denying the Antecedent
 
 (1) If S1, then S2.
 
 (2) Not S1.
 
 Therefore,
 
 (3) Not S2.
Denying the Consequent
 
 (1) If S1, then S2.
 
 (2) Not S2.
 
 Therefore,
 
 (3) Not S1.
Fallacy: Affi rming the Consequent
 
 (1) If S1, then S2.
 
 (2) S2.
 
 Therefore,
 
 (3) S1.
Tri-Conditional
 
 (1) If S1, then S2.
 
 (2) If S2, then S3.
 
 Therefore,
 
 (3) If S1, then S3.
Some Valid (= Proper) Categorical Argument 
Forms with One Premise
Contradiction
 1. (1) UA
 
 Therefore,
 
 (2) It is false that PN
 2. (1) It is false that UA
 
 Therefore,
 
 (2) PN
 3. (1) PN 
 
 Therefore,
 
 (2) It is false that UA
 4. (1) It is false that PN
 
 Therefore,
 
 (2) UA
 5. UN
 
 Therefore,
 
 (2) It is false that PA

420  Reference Guide
 6.  (1) It is false that UN
 
 Therefore,
 
 (2) PA
 7. (1) PA
 
 Therefore,
 
 (2) It is false that UN
 8. (1) It is false that PA
 
 Therefore,
 
 (2) UN
Conversion
 9. UN (1) All G1 are not G2.
 
  
 Therefore,
 
  
 (2) All G2 are not G1.
 10. PA (1) Some G1 are G2.
 
       Therefore,
 
       (2) Some G2 are G1.
Contraposition
 11. UA (1) All G1 are G2.
 
  
 Therefore,
 
  
 (2) All non-G2 are non-G1.
 12. PN (1) Some G1 are not G2
 
  
Therefore,
 
  
(2) Some non-G2 are not non-G1.
Obversion
 13. UA (1) All G1 are G2.
 
  
Therefore,
 
  
(2) All G1 are not non-G2.
 14. UN (1) All G1 are not G2.
 
  
Therefore,
 
  
(2) All G1 are non-G2.
 15. PA (1) Some G1 are G2.
 
  
Therefore,
 
  
(2) Some G1 are not non-G2.
 16. PN (1) Some G1 are not G2.
 
  
Therefore,
 
  
(2) Some G1 are non-G2.

Reference Guide  421
Validity of Categorical Syllogisms: The Test Method
 1. The Equal Negatives Test: The number of negative statements in the conclusion must equal the 
number of negative statements in the premises.
 2. The Quantity Test: If both premises are particulars, then the conclusion can’t be a universal and if 
both premises are universal, then the conclusion can’t be a particular.
 3. The Distributed Conclusion Test: If a category is distributed in the conclusion, then it must also 
be distributed in a premise.
 4. The Distributed Middle Category Test: The middle category must be distributed at least once.
Validity of Categorical Syllogisms: The Venn Method
 1. Draw three overlapping circles. Put the category that is the subject of the conclusion at the top 
left, the category that is the predicate of the conclusion at the top right, and the category that 
doesn’t appear in the conclusion in the middle under the other two categories.
 2. Diagram the premises. Diagram the universal premises, and then diagram the particular 
premises. 
 3. Compare the resulting diagram to the conclusion to see whether the diagram of the two premises 
has diagrammed the conclusion. If it has, the argument has a valid form. If it hasn’t, the argument 
has an invalid form.
The Standard Form of an Analogical Argument
 
 (1) X1s have features F1, F2, F3, ... and 
 
 feature Fn.
 
 (2) X2s also have features F1, F2, F3, ...
 
 Therefore,
 
 (3) X2s probably have Fn.
The Standard Form of a Statistical Argument
General 
(1) P% of the N observed entities in G have F.
 
  
 
Therefore,
 
  
 
(2) P% of all the entities in G have F.
Particular 
(1) P% of the N observed entities in G have F.
 
  
 
Therefore,
 
  
 
(2) P% of all the entities in G have F.
 
  
 
(3) X is an entity in G.
 
  
 
Therefore,
 
  
 
(4) There is a P% chance that X has F.
The Standard Form of a Causal Argument
 
 (1) E1 is correlated with E2.
 
 (2) E2 is not the cause of E1.

422  Reference Guide
 
 (3) There is no E3 that is the cause of E1 and E2.
 
 (4) E1 and E2 are not coincidentally correlated.
 
 Therefore,
 
 (5) E1 is a cause of E2.
Standard Moral Argument Forms
Action
 
 (1) Action A has feature F.
 
 (2) It is morally good/bad to do actions that have feature F.
 
 Therefore,
 
 (3) H should/should not do A.
Consequentialist Version of Action
 
 (1) Action A will produce C.
 
 (2) It is morally good/bad to produce C.
 
 Therefore,
 
 (3) H should/should not do A.
Universalistic Maximizing Consequentialist Version of Action
 
 (1) Action A will maximize happiness for everyone in the world.
 
 (2) It is morally good to maximize happiness for everyone in the world.
 
 Therefore,
 
 (3) H ought to do A.
Deontic Version of Action
 
 (1) Action A has intrinsic feature F.
 
 (2) It is morally good/bad to do actions with intrinsic feature F.
 
 Therefore,
 
 (3) H should/should not do A.
Kantian Version of Action
 
 (1) Action A is not universalizable.
 
 (2) It is morally bad to do actions that are not universalizable.
 
 Therefore,
 
 (3) H should not do A.
Cooperation Version of Action
 
 (1) Action A is uncooperative.
 
 (2) It is morally bad to do actions that are not cooperative.
 
 Therefore,
 
 (3) H should not to do A.

Reference Guide  423
Virtue Ethics Version of Action 
 
 (1) Action A is an action that would be done by a person with virtue V.
 
 (2) It is morally good to do actions that would be done by a person with virtue V.
 
 Therefore,
 
 (3) H should do A.

424
List of Citations
Adams, Natalie G. “The Power of the Preps and a Cheerleading Equity Policy.” 
Sociology of Education 76, no. 2 (2003): 128–142.
Ainsworth, Penne and Dan Deines. Introduction to Accounting: An Integrated 
Approach. 4th ed. Columbus, OH: McGraw-Hill/Irwin, 2008.
Allen, James. Thoughts. New York, NY: Cosimo, 2007.
Allen, Woody. The Complete Prose of Woody Allen. New York, NY: Random 
House, 1991.
Almanac Singers, Their Complete General Recordings, # Label: MCA, ASIN#: 
B000002P32, Reissued 1996.
Alter, Alexandra. “Reading the Mind of the Body Politic.” The Wall Street 
Journal, December 14, 2007: W1&W6.
American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research. “AEI’s Organization 
and Purposes.” http://www.aei.org/about.
Angelou, Maya. Wouldn’t Take Nothing for My Journey Now. New York, NY: 
Bantam, 1994. 
Anitei, Stefan. “Once Antarctica Was Tropical and Attached to Europe.” 
Softpedia.com. December 2007 http://news.softpedia.com/news/Once-
Antarctica-Was-Tropical-and-Attachhed-to-Europe-51095.shtml.
Anonymous.  “A Centipede Was Happy Quite,” In An Anthology of Light 
Verse, edited by Louis Kronenberger. New York, NY: Random House, 
1935: 161.
Aristotle. The Nicomachean Ethics, translated by W.D. Ross. New York, NY: 
Oxford University Press, 2009.
Aron, Arthur, Elaine Aron and Elliot J. Coups. Statistics for Psychology, 4th 
ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson/Prentice Hall, 2006.
Art and the Re-presentation of the Past. Journal of the Royal Anthropological 
Institute 6, no. 1 (2000): 35–62.
Associated Press. “Financial Shares Lead Market Lower.” The New York 
Times, December 4, 2007: C13.
Attenborough, David. Life on Earth, 4th ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson 
Prentice Hall, 2005.

List of Citations  425
Atwood, Margaret. The Handmaid’s Tale. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Co., 
1986.
Audesirk, Teresa, Gerald Audesirk and Bruce Byers. Life on Earth, 4th ed. 
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2005.
Austen, Jane. Pride and Prejudice. Rockville, MD: Arc Manor LLC, 2008 [1813].
Bakalar, Nicholas. “Fish Oil for Mom May Benefi t Her Child.” The New York 
Times, January 2, 2007: F6.
Bakeman, Karl. “Reaganomics.” In America: A Narrative History, 7th ed., 
edited by George Brown Tindall, and David Emory Shi. New York, NY: 
Norton & Company, 2007.
Balzac, Honoré de. Lost Illusions, translated by Kathleen Raines. New York, 
NY: Modern Library, 2001 [1843].
Barnes, Harry. “Revisionism and Brainwashing.” In The Right Wing Indi-
vidualist Tradition in America, edited by Murray Newton Rothbard and 
Jerome Tuccille. Manchester, NH: Ayer Company Publishers, 1972.
Barnett, Raymond A., BBC News. “Pluto Loses Status as a Planet.”
 news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/in depth/5282440.stm.
Basri, Gibor. “What is a Planet?” Mercury 32, no. 6 (Nov/Dec 2003): 27–34. 
Beehner, Jacinta C., Jane E. Phillips-Conroy and Patricia L. Whitten. “Female 
Testosterone, Dominance Rank, and Aggression in an Ethiopian Popu-
lation of Hybrid Baboons.” American Journal of Primatology 67, no. 1 
(2005): 101–119.
Begley, Sharon. “A, My Name is Alice: Moniker Madness.” Newsweek. 
November 7, 2007. http://blog.newsweek.com/blogs/labnotes/archive/
2007/11/07/a-my-name-is-alice-moniker-madness.aspx.
Bennett, Jeffrey and others. The Cosmic Perspective, 4th ed. Old Tappan, NJ: 
Pearson, 2007.
Bennett, Jeffrey and others. The Essential Cosmic Perspective Media Update, 
4th ed. San Francisco, CA: Benjamin Cummings, 2007.
Bennett, Mark. “Nexavar Extends Survival in Liver-Cancer Patients.” The 
Wall Street Journal, June 4, 2007: D1.
Bentham, Jeremy. An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation. 
New York, NY: Clarendon Press, 1907 [1789].
Berman, Jane and Charlene Dixon Hutcheson. “Impressions of a Lost Tech-
nology: A Study of Lucayan-Taino Basketry.” Journal of Field Archaeology 
27, no. 4 (2000): 417–435. 
Besculides, Melanie and others. “Identifying Best Practices for Wisewoman 
Programs Using a Mixed-methods Evaluation.” Preventing Chronic 
Disease 3, no. 1 (2006): 1–9. 
Bettelheim, Frederick and others. Introduction to General, Organic, and 
Biochemistry, 8th ed. Belmont, CA: Thomson Higher Education, 2007.
Bettis, Pamela J. and Natalie G. Adams. “The Power of the Preps and a Cheer-
leading Equity Policy.” Sociology of Education 76, no. 2 (Apr., 2003): 
128–142. 
Birtwhistle, Grete and Cayan Tsim. “Consumer Purchasing Behavior: An 
Investigation of the UK Mature Women’s Clothing Market.” Journal of 
Consumer Behavior 4 (2005): 453–464.
Blanchette, Patricia. “Frege and Hilbert on Consistency.” The Journal of Phi-
losophy 93 (1996): 317–336.

426  List of Citations
Boone, Jan. “Technological Progress, Downsizing and Unemployment.” The 
Economic Journal 110, no. 465 (2000): 581–600.
Booth, Wayne C., Joseph M. Williams and Gregory G. Colomb. The Craft of 
Research, 2nd ed. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 2003.
Borysenko, Joan. “Retrain Your Brain.” Prevention 58, no. 9 (2006): 117–119.
Bowman, Barbara A. and Frank Vinicor. “Toward Prevention and Control 
of Type 2 Diabetes: Challenges at the U.S.-Mexico Border and Beyond.” 
Preventing Chronic Disease 2, no. 1 (2005).
Bradford, Sarah. Harriet: the Moses of Her People. New York, NY: Lockwood 
& Son, 1897.
BrainyQuote. “Kurt Kobain Quotes,” http://www.brainyquote.com/quotes/
quotes/k/kurtcobain167113.html.
Breitman, George. Macolm X Speaks. New York, NY: Grove Press, 1965.
Brontë, Charlotte. Jane Eyre. London: Dent & Sons, 1908 [1847].
Brooks, David. “The Postwar Election.” The New York Times, December 11, 
2007: A33.
Brown v. Board of Education 347 U.S. 483 (1954).
Brown, J. R. Philosophy of Math: An Introduction to The World of Proofs and 
Pictures. London: Routledge, 1999, p. 78.
Brym, Robert J. and John Lie. Sociology: Your Compass for a New World, 
3rd ed. Florence, KY: Wadsworth Publishing, 2006.
Buxbaum, J. D. and others. Linkage Analysis for Autism in a Subset Families 
with Obsessive-Compulsive Behaviors: Evidence for an Autism Suscep-
tibility Gene on Chromosome 1 and Further Support for Susceptibility 
Genes on Chromosome 6 and 19. Molecular Psychiatry 9 (2004): 144–150.
Byleen, Karl E. Calculus For Business, Economics, Life Sciences, and 
Social Sciences, 10th ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice 
Hall, 2005.
Cahoon, Donald R. and others. “Mass Tree Mortality Leads to Mangrove Peat 
Collapse at Bay Islands, Honduras after Hurricane Mitch.” The Journal of 
Ecology 91, no. 6 (2003): 1093–1105.
Campbell, Denise. “Warning Signs.” Black Enterprise, May 2007: 88–91.
Carlson, Neil R. and others. Psychology: The Science of Behavior, 6th ed. 
Columbus, OH: Allyn & Bacon, 2006.
Carnevale, G. and T.W. Pietsch. “Filling the Gap: A Fossil Frogfi sh, Genus 
Antennarius (Teleostei, Lophiiformes, Antennariidae), From the Miocene 
of Algeria.” Journal of Zoology 270 (2006): 448–457.
Carroll, Lewis. “Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland,” In The Complete Illus-
trated Works of Lewis Carroll. London: Chancellor Press, 1982 [1865].
Carroll, Lewis. Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland and Through the Looking-
Glass. New York, NY: Fine Creative Media, Inc., 2004 [1865].
Catling, David C. “Mars: Ancient Fingerprints in the Clay.” Nature 448, 
no. 7149 (2007): 31–32.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “National Suicide Statistics 
at a Glance.” 2009. http://www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/suicide/sta-
tistics/rates02.html.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Peanut Products Recall.” http://
www.fda.gov/Safety/Recalls/MajorProductRecalls/Peanut/default.htm.
Chaisson, Eric and Steve McMillan. Astronomy Today, 5th ed. San Francisco, 
Calif: Benjamin Cummings, 2005.

List of Citations  427
Chamberlain, William Henry. The Russian Revolution, vol 1. New York, NY: 
Grosset & Dumlop, 1965.
Chapman, Graham and others. Monty Python and the Holy Grail. DVD. 
Directed by Terry Jones. Sony Pictures, 1999 [1975].
Cherokee Nation v. State of Georgia 30 U.S. 1 (1831).
Churchill, Winston S. Never Give In! The Best of Winston Churchill’s 
Speeches. New York, NY: Hyperon, 2003. 
Ciulla, Joanne B., Clancy Martin and Robert C. Solomon. Honest Work: A 
Business Ethics Reader. New York, NY: Oxford University Press, 2007.
Concise Oxford English Dictionary, 11th ed. New York, NY: Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 2008.
Cook, Lori A., Sonya A. Dehler and Sandra M. Barr, “Geophysical Modeling 
of Devonian Plutons in the Southern Gulf of St. Lawrence: Implications 
for Appalachian Terrane Boundaries in Maritime Canada.” Canadian 
Journal of Earth Sciences 44, no. 11 (2007): 1551–1565.
Cornman, James, Keith Lehrer and George Sotiros Pappas. Philosophical 
Problems and Arguments: An Introduction, 4th ed. Indianapolis, IN: 
Hackett Publishing Company, 1992.
Crawford, Craig. “Seeing a Disinformation Age: Bush and His Public.” The 
New York Times, September 22, 2006: E2: E31. 
Creedence Clearwater Revival, “Who’ll Stop the Rain?” on Chronicle, vol. 1: 
The 20 Greatest Hits. Fantasy 1976.
Cross, Frank B. and Roger LeRoy Miller. West’s Legal Environment of Busi-
ness, 6th ed. Eagan, MN: Thomson West, 2007.
Curry, Jack. “Election 2013 (or Later): Debates Already in Swing.” The New 
York Times. December 21, 2007: C12.
Cutnell, John D. and Kenneth W. Johnson. Physics, 7th ed. Hoboken, NJ: 
Wiley, 2007.
Dawson, Philip. The French Revolution. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice 
Hall, 1967.
DeNavas-Walt, Carmen, Bernadette D Proctor and Cheryl Hill Lee. “Income, 
Poverty, and Health Insurance Coverage in the United States: 2005.” In 
Current Population Report, Consumer Income. Washington, DC: Gov-
ernment Printing Office, 2006.
Descartes, Rene. Descartes’ Meditations and Selections from the Principles 
of Philosophy, translated by. John Veitch. Chicago, IL: Open Court, 1913 
[1644].
Diana Ross and the Supremes. “Stop in the Name of Love.” Diana Ross and 
the Supremes - The Ultimate Collection. CD. Motown, 1997 [1965]. 
Dickens, Charles. A Tale of Two Cities. London: Macmillan & Co., 1922 [1859].
Dickens, Charles. Bleak House. London: Adam and Charles Black, 1904 [1852].
Dickens, G. A. Reformation and Society. Boston, MA: Harcourt, Brace & 
World, 1968.
Diener, Paul W. Religion and Morality: An Introduction. Louisville, KY: 
Wesminster John Knox Press, 1997.
Donne, John. The Works of John Donne. London: John Parker, 1839.
Dooren, Jennifer Corbett. “Nexavar Extends Survival in Liver-Cancer 
Patients.” Wall Street Journal, June 4, 2007: D1. 
Doyle, Sir Arthur Conan. The Sign of the Four. Charleston, SC: Forgotten 
Books, 1994 [1890].

428  List of Citations
Dunch, Ryan. “Beyond Cultural Imperialism: Cultural Theory, Christian 
Missions, and Global Modernity.” History and Theory. 41, no. 3 (2002): 
301–325.
Durning, Alan B. and Holly B. Brough. Taking Stock: Animal Farming and 
the Environment. Washington, DC: Worldwatch Institute, July 1991.
Einstein, Albert. Cited in Louis L. Snyder. Encyclopedia of Nationalism. 
New York, NY: Paragon House, 1977. 
Elizondo-Omaña, Rodrigo E. and Santos Guzmán López. “The Development 
of Clinical Reasoning Skills: A Major Objective of the Anatomy Course.” 
Anatomical Sciences Education 1 (2008): 267–268.
Elizondo-Omaña, Rodrigo E. and others. “Study Pace as a Factor that Infl u-
ences Achievement in a Human Anatomy Course.” The New Anatomist 
289, no. 4 (July 2006): 134–138.
Epp, Susanna. Discrete Mathematics, 3rd ed. Belmont, CA: Thomson Learn-
ing, 2004. 
Epstein, Julius J. and Philip G. Epstein. Casablanca. DVD. Directed by 
Michael Curtiz. Los Angeles, Warner Bros. Pictures, 1942.
Fan, Xuesen and others. InCl34H2O-Promoted Green Preparation of Xan-
thenedione Derivatives in Ionic Liquids. Canadian Journal of Chemistry 
83, no. 1 (2005): 16–20.
Feinberg, Joel and Russ Shafer-Landau, eds. Reason and Responsibility, 11th 
ed., Belmont, CA: Wadsworth Press, 2002.
Feinberg, Joel. Harm to Others (Moral Limits for Criminal Law), vol 1. New 
York, NY: Oxford University Press, 1984.
Feynman, Richard. Quoted in: Anonymous. “Conservation News You Can 
Use.” Journal of Soil and Water Conservation 61, no.1 (2006): 9A. 
Firearms: Defi nitions. Title 18 U.S. Code, Pt. 921. 2009 ed.
Fountain, Henry. “Arecibo Radio Telescope Is Back in Business After 6-Month 
Spruce-Up.” The New York Times, December 25, 2007: D3.
Fredrickson, George. Racism: A Short History. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Uni-
versity Press, 2002.
Freeman, R. Edward. “A Stakeholder Theory of the Modern Corpora-
tion.” In Business Ethics, 3rd ed., edited by Milton Snoeyenbos, Robert 
Almeder and James Humber. Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 2001, 
pp. 101–114. 
Freud, Sigmund. The Interpretation of Dreams. New York, NY: Basic Books, 
1969 [1899].
Fried, Barbara H. “If You Don’t Like It, Leave It: The Problem of Exit in Social 
Contractarian Arguments.” Philosophy & Public Affairs 31, no. 1 (2003): 
40–70.
Frink, Lisa, Brian Hoffman and Robert Shaw. “Ulu Knife Use in Western 
Alaska: A Comparative Ethnoarchaeological Study.” Current Anthropol-
ogy 44, no. 1 (2003): 116–122.
Fritz, Sandy, Kathleen Maison Paholsky and M. James Grosenbach. Mos-
by’s Basic Science for Soft Tissue and Movement Therapies. Maryland 
Heights, MO: Mosby Publications, 1999.
Garrett, Laurie. “The Challenge of Global Health.” Foreign Affairs 86 (2007): 
14–38.
Georgia Secretary of State. “Voting Information.” http://sos.georgia.gov/
elections/voting_information.htm#Voting%20on%20Election%20Day.

List of Citations  429
Georgia State University Undergraduate Catalog, 2007–2008. Atlanta, GA: 
Georgia State University, 2007.
Georgia State University. “Safety Net 2006.” http://www2.gsu.edu/~wwwupo/
safetynet.pdf.
Giddens, Anthony, Mitchell Duneier and Richard P. Appelbaum. Introduc-
tion to Sociology, 5th ed. New York, NY: W. W. Norton & Company, 2005.
Gilligan, Carol. In a Different Voice. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press, 1982.
Goodall, Jane. The Chimpanzee: The Living Link between ‘Man’ and ‘Beast.’ 
Edinburgh, UK: Edingburgh University Press, 1992.
Gould, Stephen J. The Panda’s Thumb. New York, NY: WW. Norton & Com-
pany, 1992.
Grundy, Scott M. “Cholesterol-Lowering Clinical Trials: A Historical Per-
spective.” In Cholesterol-Lowering Therapy: Evaluation of Clinical Trial 
Evidence, edited by Scott M. Grundy. New York, NY: Marcel Dekker AC, 
2000: 1–44.
Gulick, Danielle and Thomas J. Gould. “Acute Ethanol Has Biphasic Effects 
on Short- and Long-Term Memory in Both Foreground and Background 
Contextual Fear Conditioning in C57BL/6 Mice.” Alcoholism, Clinical 
and Experimental Research 31, no. 9 (2007): 1528–1537.
Handwerk, Brian. “Upright Walking Started in Trees, Ape Study Suggests.” 
http://news.nationalgeographic.com/news/2007/05/070531-orangutans.
html.
Haviland, William A., Harald L. Prins, Dana Walrath. The Essence of Anthro-
pology. Florence, KY: Wadsworth Publishing, 2007.
Henderson-King, Donna and  Audra Kaleta. “Learning About Social Diver-
sity.” The Journal of Higher Education 72, no. 2 (2009): 142–143.
Hendrick, Bill. “Superstition Has Its Place on Wall Street.” The Atlanta Jour-
nal and Constitution, March 21, 1999: Business 5.
Henry, Patrick. “Give Me Liberty or Give Me Death!” In The World’s Great-
est Speeches, edited by Lewis Copeland and others. Mineola, NY: Dover 
Publications, 1999 [1775].
Henry, Patrick. “Give Me Liberty or Give Me Death.” In The World’s Best 
Orations, vol 7, edited by David Brewer. St. Louis, MO: Fred Kaiser, 1901 
[1775].
Herberholz, Jens, Marjorie M. Sen and Donald H. Edwards, “Escape Behavior 
and Escape Circuit Activation in Juvenile Crayfi sh During Prey-Predator 
Interactions.” Journal of Experimental Biology 207 (2004): 1855–1863.
Hill, Christopher. The Century of Revolutions: 1603–1714. New York: W.W. 
Norton, 1966.
Hippolytus. “Refutation of All Heresies.” In The Hellenistic Philosophers: 
Translations of the Principal Sources, With Philosophical Commentary, 
translated by A.A. Long and D. N. Sedley. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, 1987.
Human Rights Watch, Hundreds of Chechens Detained in “Filtration 
Camps.” Human Rights Watch, February 17, 2000. http://www.hrw.org/
en/node/65142
Hume, David. “Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion: And Other Writings.” 
In Cambridge Texts in the History of Philosophy, edited by Dorothy 
Coleman. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press (2007) [1779].

430  List of Citations
Hume, David. A Treatise of Human Nature, Book 1, Part 1, Section 1. Oxford: 
Clarendon Press, 1896 [1739].
Hume, David. A Treatise of Human Nature. London: Penguin Classics, 1985 
[1739].
Hurston, Zora Neal. “How It Feels to Be Colored Me.” In The Best American 
Essays of the Century, edited by Joyce Carol Oates and Robert Atwan. 
Geneva, IL: Houghton Mifflin, 2000.
Huston, Aletha C. and others. “Impacts on Children of a Policy to Promote 
Employment and Reduce Poverty for Low-Income Parents: New Hope 
After 5 Years.” Developmental Psychology 41, no. 6 (2005): 902–918.
Hutchinson, John. “What Killed the Dinosaurs?” http://www.ucmp.berkeley.
edu/diapsids/extinctheory.html.
Hyde, Henry. Forfeiting Our Property Rights: Is Your Property Safe From Sei-
zure? Washington D.C.: Cato Institute, 1995.
Janda, Kenneth, Jeffrey M. Berry and Jerry Goldman. 2008. The Challenge of 
Democracy, 9th ed. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 2008.
Ji, Quang and others. “The Earliest Known Eutherian Mammal.” Nature 416, 
no. 6883 (2002).
Jonahl, Brian A., “Sensation Seeking and Risky Driving: A Review and Synthe-
sis of the Literature.” Accident Analysis & Prevention 29 (1997): 651–665.
Kaiser, Jocelyn. “Panel Urges Further Study of Biotech Corn.” Science 290, 
no. 5498 (2000): 1867.
Kant. Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals, translated by Mary Gregor. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997 [1785].
Kaufman, Henry. “Creeping Infl ation, Monetary Tactics.” Vital Speeches of 
the Day 73.1 (2007): 23–25.
Keller, Edward. Introduction to Environmental Geology, 3rd ed. Upper 
Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall, 2005.
Kelly, Kate. “How Goldman Won Big On Mortgage Meltdown.” The Wall 
Street Journal December 14, 2007: A1 & A18.
Kennedy, John F. Presidential Inaugural Address, 1961. 
Kim, Hyun Jin and others. “Gain-of-function Mutation in TRPML3 Causes 
the Mouse Variant-Waddler Phenotype.” Journal of Biological Chemistry 
282, no. 50 (2007): 36138–36142.
Kimbrough v. United States, 552 U.S. 85 (2007).
Kincaid, Peter. The Rule of the Road: An International Guide to History and 
Practice. Santa Barbara, CA: Greenwood Press, 1986.
King, Coretta Scott. Hearings before the Subcommittee on Empoloyment, 
Poverty, and Migratory Labor of the Committee on Labor and Public Wel-
fare,” United States Senate, 94th Congress, second session on S.50 and 
S.472, May 19, 1976: 636–638.
King, Martin Luther. A Testament of Hope: The Essential Writings of Martin 
Luther King, edited by James Washington. New York, NY: Harper Collins, 
1991.
Kingsolver, Barbara. The Bean Trees. New York, NY: Harper Collins, 2001.
Kitcher, Philip. Abusing Science: The Case Against Creationism. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press, 1983).
Krugman, Paul and Robin Wells. Economics. New York, NY: Worth Publish-
ers, 2006.
Lawrence v. Texas 539 U.S. 558 (2003).

List of Citations  431
Le Meur, G. and others. “Restoration of Vision in RPE65-Defi cient Briard 
Dogs Using an AAV Serotype 4 Vector that Specifi cally Targets the Reti-
nal Pigmented Epithelium.” Gene Therapy 14, no. 4 (2007): 292–303.
Lial, Margaret L., John Hornsby and David I. Schneider. Precalculus. 3rd ed. 
Boston: Addison Wesley, 2004.
Liptak, Adam. “Serving Life for Providing Car to Killers.” The New York 
Times, December 4, 2007: A1.
Livingstone, Ken. “Clear Up the Congestion-Pricing Gridlock.” The New 
York Times, July 2, 2007. 
Logan v. United States 552 U.S. 23 (2007). 
Lucretius. Lucretius: De Rerum Natura IV Bk 4, translated by J. Godwin. 
Warminster, UK: Aris & Phillips, 1987 [circa 50 CE].
Lucretius. On The Nature of Things, translated by Martin Smith Ferguson. 
Indianapolis, IN: Hackett Publishing, 2001 [cica 50 CE].
Lutgens, Frederick K., Edward J. Tarbuck and Dennis Tasa. The Atmosphere: 
An Introduction to Meteorology, 9th ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson/
Prentice Hall, 2004.
Lymon, Frankie and the Teenagers. “Why Do Fools Fall in Love?” Why Do 
Fools Fall In Love and Other Hits. CD. Rhino Flashback, 2003 [1956]. 
MacFarquhar, Larissa. “Who Cares if Johnny Can’t Read?” In Reading 
Rhetorically, edited by John C. Bean, Virginia A. Chappell and Alice M. 
Gillam. New York, NY: Pearson/Longman, 2006.
Machan, Tibor R. “Do Animals Have Rights?” Public Affairs Quarterly, 5 
(1991): 163–173. 
Macionis, John J. Society: The Basics. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson/
Prentice Hall, 2006.
Mahoney, Christine. “Lobbying Success in the United States and the Euro-
pean Union.” Journal of Public Policy 27, no. 1 (2007): 35–56.
Martin, Harold. “Homosexuality: A Sinful Way of Life.” BRF Witness, 28, no. 3 
(May/June 1993). http://www.brfwitness.org/Articles/1993v28n3.htm. 
McKnight, Tom L. Physical Geography: A Landscape Appreciation, 8th ed. 
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2005.
Melville, Herman. Moby Dick. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008 
[1851].
Mill, John Stuart. “The Subjection of Women.” In John Stuart Mill and Har-
riet Taylor Mill: Essays on Sex Equality, edited by Alice Rossi. Chicago, 
IL: University of Chicago Press, 1970 [1878].
Mill, John Stuart. On Liberty, edited by Edward Alexander. Toronto: Broad-
view Press, 1999 [1859].
Mill, John Stuart. Utilitarianism. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 
1906 [1861].
Mill, John Stuart. Utilitarianism. Indianapolis, IN: Hackett Publishing Com-
pany, 1979 [1861].
Miller-el v. Dretke 544 U.S. 660 (2005).
Minkel, JR. “That’s Debatable: Six Debates at the Frontier of Science,” http://
www.sciam.com/article.cfm?chanID=sa027&articleID=0005726E-214A-
1514-A14A83414B7F013F. 
Moore, Kathleen Dean. Pardons: Justice, Mercy, and the Public Interest. New 
York: Oxford University Press, 1989.
Morrison, Toni. Beloved. New York, NY: Alfred A. Knopf, 2001 [1987].

432  List of Citations
Mosher, William and others. “Use of Contraception and Use of Family 
Planning Services in the United States: 1982–2002.” Advance Data 350 
(2004): 1–14.
National Center for Education Statistics, Digest of Education Statistics, 
1999. United Nations Educational, Scientifi c, and Cultural Organization 
(UNESCO). 
Nelson, Willie. Greatest Hits (& Some That Will Be). Sony Music, 2003.
New Yorker Magazine. The New Yorker Book of Cat Cartoons. New York, 
NY: Knopf, 2010.
Nice, Karim. “How Car Steering Works.” May 2001. HowStuffWorks.com. 
http://auto.howstuffworks.com/steering.htm.
Nietzsche, Friedrich. “Beyond Good and Evil,” In Reason & Responsibility, 
edited by Joel Feinberg and Russ Shafer-Landau, 11th ed., Belmont, CA: 
Wadsworth, 2002: 598–604.
Nobel Prize. http://nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/medicine/articles/cajal/.
Nolen, Joseph and others. Black’s Law Dictionary, 6th ed. St. Paul, MN: West 
Publishing Company, 1990. 
Norris, Rebecca Sachs. “Embodiment and Community.” Western Folklore. 
60, no. 2/3 (2001): 111–124.
Nussbaum, Martha, “The Future of Feminist Liberalism.” In The Subject of 
Care, edited by Eva Feder Kittay and Ellen K. Feder. Lanham, MD: Row-
man & Littlefi eld, 2002, pp. 186–214.
Nussbaum, Martha. “Poverty and Human Functioning: Capabilities as Fun-
damental Entitlements.” In Poverty and Inequality, edited by David 
Grusky and Ravi Kanbar. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2006, 
pp. 47–75.
O’Connor, Anahad. “The Claim: Brown Sugar Is Healthier Than White 
Sugar.” The New York Times, June 12, 2007: D5.
O’Hanlon, Michael. “Why China Cannot Conquer Taiwan.” International 
Security 25, no. 2 (2000): 51–86.
Okin, Susan Moller. “Is Multiculturalism Bad for Women?” International 
Herald Tribune, February 2, 1996, news section. 
Palmer, A. Richard. “Evolutionary Biology: Caught Right-Handed.” Nature 
444 (2006): 689–692.
Pascal, Blaise. Thoughts. New York, NY: Cosimo, 2007. 
Pastan, Linda. “Marks.” In An Introduction to Literature: Fiction/Poetry/
Drama. New York, NY: Harper Collins, 1994.
Pastorino, Ellen E. and Susann M. Doyle-Portillo. What Is Psychology? Bel-
mont, CA: Wadsworth Publishing, 2006.
Paul VI. “Response to the Letter of His Grace the Most Reverend Dr. F. D. 
Coggan, Archbishop of Canterbury, concerning the ordination of Women 
to the Priesthood” (30 November 1975), Acta Apostolicae Sedis 68 (1976), 
p. 599.
Pennisi, Elizabeth. “Boom Time for Monkey Research.” Science 316, no. 
5822 (2007): 216–218.
People for the American Way. “Our Mission and Vision.” http://site.pfaw.
org/site/PageServer?pagename=about_mission.
Pepall, Lynne, Daniel Richards and George Norman, Industrial Organiza-
tion, 3rd ed. Mason, OH: Thomson South-Western, 2005.

List of Citations  433
Perdue, Theda and Michael D. Green, eds. The Cherokee Removal: A Brief 
History with Documents. Bedford, MA: St. Martins, 2005.
Perlez, Jane. “Doubts Engulf an American Aid Plan for Pakistan.” The New 
York Times, December 25, 2007: A10.
Petrucci, Ralph and others. General Chemistry, 8th ed. Upper Saddle 
River, NJ: Pearson/Prentice Hall, 2005. 
Phillips, Kevin. Wealth and Democracy: A Political History of the American 
Rich. New York, NY: Broadway Books, 2002.
Pirosh, Robert and George Seaton. Groucho Marx in A Day at the Races. 
DVD. Directed by Sam Wood. Buckinghamshire, England: MGM, 1937.
Pirrong, Craig. “Manipulation of Cash-Settled Futures Contracts.” The Jour-
nal of Business 74, no. 2 (2001): 221–244.
Plato. Apology, in Five Dialogues, translated by GMA Grubes. Indianapolis, 
IN: Hackett, 1981 [circa 350 BCE].
Plato. Plato’s Apology, Crito, and Phaedo of Socrates, translated by Henry 
Cary. Philadelphia, PA: David McKay, 1897 [circa 350 BCE].
Poe, Edgar Allan. The Tell-Tale Heart and Other Writings. New York, NY: 
Bantam Books, 1982 [1843].
Pollock, John. Contemporary Theories of Knowledge. Landham, MD: Row-
man & Littlefi eld, 1986.
Porter, Eduardo. “Campaigns Like These Make It Hard to Find a Reason to 
Believe.” The New York Times, December 14, 2007: A34.
Posner, Richard A. Sex and Reason. Harvard, MA: Harvard University Press, 
1992.
Pravda. “Presidential Inaugural Address.” http://english.pravda.ru/science/
19/94/378/12182_alien.html.
Rawls, John. A Theory of Justice. Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press, 
1971.
Regan, Patrick, ed. Teachers Jokes Quotes and Anecdotes. Riverside, NJ: 
Andrews McMeel Publishing, 2001.
Rieke, Richard D., Malcolm O. Sillars and Tarla Rai Peterson. Argumentation 
and Critical Decision Making. 6th ed. Columbus, OH: Allyn & Bacon, 2005.
Roche, David. “The Global Money Machine,” The Wall Street Journal, 
December 14, 2007: A21.
Rohde, David, “U.S. Officials See Waste in Billions Sent to Pakistan.” The 
New York Times, December 24, 2007: A1 & A6.
Ross, Catherine and John Mirowsky. “Refi ning the Association Between Edu-
cation and Health: The Effects of Quantity, Credential, and Selectivity.” 
Demography 36, no. 4 (1999): 445–460.
Rovere, Richard. Senator Joe McCarthy. Los Angeles: University of Califor-
nia Press, 1996.
Rowling, J.K. Harry Potter and the Philosopher’s Stone. London: Bloomsbury 
Publishing, 1997.
Rupp, E.G., and Benjamin Drewery. Martin Luther, Documents of Modern 
History. London: Edward Arnold, 1970.
Russell, Bertand. The Problems of Philosophy. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 1912.
Salkind, Neil. Exploring Research, 6th ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson/
Prentice Hall, 2006.

434  List of Citations
Salt, Henry S. “Logic of the Larder.” Excerpted from The Humanities of Diet. 
Manchester: The Vegetarian Society, 1914. http://www.animal-rights-
library.com/texts-c/salt02.htm.
Salzer, James, “Critics: School Tax Cut Flawed.” The Atlanta Journal-
Constitution, December 29, 2007: A1.
Sankar, D. and others. “Effect of Sesame Oil on Diuretics or ß-blockers in the 
Modulation of Blood Pressure, Anthropometry, Lipid Profi le, and Redox 
Status.” The Yale Journal of Biology and Medicine 79, no. 1 (2006): 19–26.
Scalia, Antonin. “God’s Justice and Ours.” First Thing: The Journal of Reli-
gion, Culture and Public Life 123 (2002): 17–21.
Schaefer, Kayleen. “The Sit-In at the Altar: No ‘I do’ Till Gays Can Do It, 
Too.” The New York Times, December 3, 2006: A20.
Schaefer, Richard T. Sociology: A Brief Introduction, 7th ed. New York, NY: 
McGraw-Hill, 2006.
Schirokauer, Conrad. A Brief History of Chinese and Japanese Civilizations, 
3rd ed. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin, 2005.
Schlafl y, Phyllis. “The Media Campaign Against Gun Ownership.” The Phyl-
lis Schlafl y Report 33, no. 11, (2000).
Schmidt, Michael. “Bond’s Former Doctor Could Be a Prosecution Witness.” 
The New York Times, December 21, 2007: C13.
Schmitt, Carl. The Concept of the Political, translated by George Schwab. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1996 [1932].
Scopes, John Thomas and William J. Bryan. The World’s Most Famous Court 
Trial. Tennessee Evolution Case. Cincinnati, Ohio: National Book Com-
pany, 1925. 
Scott, Ellen K. “Dangerous Dependencies: The Intersection of Welfare Reform 
and Domestic Violence.” Gender and Society 16, no. 6 (2002): 878–897.
Shakespeare, William. Hamlet In The Complete Works of Shakespeare, edited 
by David Bevington. New York, NY: Longman, 1997 [1600].
Shakespeare, William. Pericles. The Complete Works of Shakespeare, edited 
by David Bevington. New York, NY: Longman, 1997 [1608].
Shakespeare, William. Macbeth. New York, NY: Oxford University Press, 
1998 [1611].
Shaw, William H. Moral Issues in Business. Florence, KY: Wadsworth, 2003.
Shermer, Michael and Alex Grobman. Denying History. Berkeley, CA: Uni-
versity of California Press, 2000.
Sidor, Christian, Molly Miller and John Isbell, “Tetrapod Burrows from the 
Triassic of Antarctica.” Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology 28, no. 2 
(2008): 277–284.
Singer, Peter. “Famine, Affluence, and Morality.” In Introduction to Philoso-
phy, 4th ed., edited by John Perry, Michael Bratman and John Fischer. 
New York, NY: Oxford University Press, 2007.
Smith, Kelley. “NCGA Partners with Retailers in Organic Fraud Detection.” 
Cooperative Grocer 133 (Nov/Dec 2007) http://www.cooperativegrocer.
coop/articles/index.php?id=762.
Smith, Randolph A. and Stephen F. Davis. The Psychologist as Detective, 
4th ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall, 2007.
Snyder, LB and others. “Effects of Alcohol Advertising Exposure on Drink-
ing among Youth.” Archives of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine 160, 
no. 1 (2006): 18–24.

List of Citations  435
Snyder, Louis L. Encyclopedia of Nationalism. New York, NY: Paragon House,
1977.
Sonders, Liz Ann. “The ABCs of CDOs, ABCP, MBSs, SIVs and NAVs.” http://
www.accessdigital.com/?p=1887
Soter, Steven. “What Is a Planet?” Scientifi c American (January 2007): 34–41.
Stanley, Jason. Review on back cover of The Elements of Philosophy: Read-
ings from Past and Present. Tamar Szabo Gendler, Susannan Siegel and 
Steven M. Cahn, eds. (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006). 
Steel, Knight and T. Franklin Williams. “It’s Time to March.” Journal of the 
American Geriatric Society 54, no. 7 (2006): 1142–1143.
Steinberg, Paul, “The Hangover That Lasts,” The New York Times, December 
29, 2007: A17.
Stoll, Matthew and Eugene Tinelli. “The General Effect of Limiting Syringe 
Availability Within the United States’ Intravenous Drug Population, and 
the Resultant Effect on the Rest of the Heterosexual Community.” http://
www.reconsider.org/issues/public_health/aids.htm.
Sunstein, Bonnie Stone and Elizabeth Chiseri-Strater. FieldWorking: Reading 
and Writing Research, 3rd ed. New York, NYC: Bedford/St. Martin’s, 2006.
Taylor, Travis S and others. An Introduction to Planetary Defense: A Study 
of Modern Warfare Applied to Extra-Terrestrial Invasion. Boca Raton, FL: 
Brown-Walker Press, 2006. 
Temple University. “Addiction Treatment May Benefi t From Nicotine-Alcohol 
Interaction Study,” http://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/87989.php.
The Beatles. “Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds.” Sgt. Pepper’s Lonely Hearts 
Club Band. Parlophone, 1967.
The Boston Globe. “The Cost of No Coverage.” The Boston Globe, 
December 29, 2007, http://www.boston.com/bostonglobe/editorial_
opinion/editorials/articles/2007/12/29/the_cost_of_no_coverage/.
The New York Times. “Counting Noses in Prison.” The New York Times, 
April 18, 2006: A26.
The New York Times. “Junking Fat Foods in Schools.” The New York Times, 
December 10, 2007: A22.
The New York Times. “The Poles Get Cold Feet.” The New York Times, 
December 30, 2007: C7.
The New York Times. “Time and the Dictator.” The New York Times, 
December 29, 2007: A16.
The Rush Limbaugh Show, January 23, 2007. Download from a Web site that 
is no longer displayed.
Thompson, Bruce. www.cuyamaca.edu/bruce.thompson/Fallacies/amphiboly.
asp.
Thomson, Judith Jarvis. “A Defense of Abortion.” Philosophy and Public 
Affairs. 1, no. 1 (1971): 47–66.
Thucydides. “Pericles’ Last Speech.” In On Justice, Power, and Human 
Nature: Selections from The History of the Peloponnesian War, translated 
by Paul Woodruff. Indianapolis, IN: Hackett Press, 1993 [circa 400 BCE].
Tilley, Christopher and others. “Art and Re-presentation of the Past.” Journal 
of the Royal Anthropological Institute 6, no. 1 (March 2000): 35–62. 
Tindall, George Brown and David Emory Shi, “Another Red Scare.” In Amer-
ica A Narrative History, edited by Karl Bakeman. New York, NY: W.W. 
Norton, 2007.

436  List of Citations
Todorov, Tzvetan. The Morals of History, translated by Alyson Waters. Min-
neapolis, MN: University of Minnesota, 1995.
Tsang, Gloria. “Benefi ts of Flax Seed in Heart Disease and Cholesterol Lower-
ing.” http://www.healthcastle.com/fl ax.shtml.
Ture, Kwamel and Charles Hamilton. Black Power. New York, NY: Random 
House: 1967.
Twain, Mark. The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn. London: Puffin Books, 
2008 [1884].
Twain, Mark. Mark Twain on Religion. Charleston, SC: Forgotten Books, 
2007.
Twain, Mark. Mark Twain’s Own Autobiography: The Chapters from the 
North American Review. Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin Press, 
1990.
Twain, Mark. Pudd’nhead Wilson. Mineloa, NY: Dover Publications, 1999 
[1894].
U.S. Census Bureau, Statistical Abstract of the United States, Washington, 
DC: Bureau of the Census, 2000.
U.S. Census Bureau, Statistical Abstract of the United States, Washington, 
DC: Bureau of the Census, 2010.
Um, Nancy. “Spatial Negotiations in a Commercial City: The Red Sea Port 
of Mocha, Yemen, during the First Half of the Eighteenth Century.” 
The Journal of the Society of Architectural Historians 62, no. 2 (2003): 
178–193.
Vinicor, Frank, “Is Diabetes a Public-health Disorder?” Diabetes Care 17 Suppl. 
1 (1994): 22–27.
Voltaire. Voltaire: Selections, translated by Paul Edwards. New York, NY: 
Macmillan, 1989.
Warrick, Joby and Michael Grunwald. “Investigators Link Levee Failures to 
Design Flaws: Three Teams of Engineers Find Weakened Soil, Navigation 
Canal Contributed to La. Collapses,” The Washington Post, October 24, 
2005: A1.
Whelan, Debra Lau. “13,000 Kids Can’t Be Wrong.” School Library Journal, 
50, no. 2 (2004): 46–50.
Wikipedia. “Spam (electronic),” http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spam_%28
electronic%29.
Winehouse, Amy. Back To Black. CD. Republic, 2007.
Wonacott, Peter and Jay Solomon, “Pakistan Violence Threatens Rule Of 
Musharraf,” The Wall Street Journal, December 29, 2007: A1.
Yakubinsky, Lev Petrovich. “On Dialogic Speech,” translated by Michael 
Eskin. PMLA 112 (1197): 243–256. 
Zola, Emile. “J’accuse!,” L’Aurore, January 13, 1898: 1.
Ziegler, Michael R. and Dana Milbank. “Making Hay Out of Straw Men.” 
The Washington Post, June 1, 2004: A21.
Zweigenhaft, Richard L. and Jessica von Ammon. “Birth Order and Civil Dis-
obedience: A Test of Sulloway’s ‘Born to Rebel’ Hypothesis.” The Journal 
of Social Psychology. 140, no. 5 (2000): 624–627.

