
 Eleventh 
Edition 
 Brooke  Noel  Moore 
Richard  Parker 
 California State University, Chico 
with help in  Chapter 12 
from  Nina  Rosenstand and  Anita  Silvers 
 Critical 
Thinking 

CRITICAL THINKING, ELEVENTH EDITION
Published by McGraw-Hill Education, 2 Penn Plaza, New York, NY 10121. Copyright © 2 015 by McGraw-Hill 
Education. All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America. Previous editions © 201 2, 2009, and 
2007. No part of this publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, or stored in 
a database or retrieval system, without the prior written consent of McGraw-Hill Education, including, but not 
limited to, in any network or other electronic storage or transmission, or broadcast for distance learning.
Some ancillaries, including electronic and print components, may not be available to customers outside the 
United States.
This book is printed on acid-free paper. 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 RJC/RJC 1 0 9 8 7 6 5 4 
ISBN: 978-0-07-811914-9
MHID: 0-07-811914-6
Senior Vice President, Products & Markets: Kurt L. Strand
Vice President, General Manager, Products & Markets: Michael Ryan
Vice President, Content Production & Technology Services: Kimberly Meriwether David
Managing Director: Bill Glass
Brand Manager: Sarah Remington
Senior Director of Development: Dawn Groundwater
Marketing Manager: Kelly Odom
Director, Content Production: Terri Schiesl
Content Project Manager: Jolynn Kilburg
Buyer: Nichole Birkenholz
Cover Designer: Tara McDermott
Content Licensing Specialist (Image): Brenda Rolwes
Content Licensing Specialist (Text): Beth Thole
Compositor: Laserwords Private Limited
Typeface: 10.5/12 Utopia Std 
Printer: R. R. Donnelley
All credits appearing on page or at the end of the book are considered to be an extension of the copyright page.
 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
 Moore, Brooke Noel.
  Critical thinking / Brooke Noel Moore, Richard Parker, California State University, Chico. — Eleventh Edition.
   pages cm
  ISBN 978-0-07-811914-9 (alk. paper)
  1.  Critical thinking.  I. Parker, Richard (Richard B.) II. Title. 
  B105.T54M66 2013
  160—dc23
                                                            2013018784
The Internet addresses listed in the text were accurate at the time of publication. The inclusion of a website does 
not indicate an endorsement by the authors or McGraw-Hill Education, and McGraw-Hill Education does not 
guarantee the accuracy of the information presented at these sites.
www.mhhe.com

 Brief Contents 
Chapter 1 
What Is Critical Thinking, Anyway? 1
Chapter 2 
Two Kinds of Reasoning 32
Chapter 3 
Clear Thinking, Critical Thinking, and 
Clear Writing 64
Chapter 4 
Credibility 96
Chapter 5 
Rhetoric, the Art of Persuasion 135
Chapter 6 
Relevance (Red Herring) Fallacies 176
Chapter 7 
Induction Fallacies 197
Chapter 8 
Formal Fallacies and Fallacies of Language 222
Chapter 9 
Deductive Arguments I Categorical Logic 243
Chapter 10 
Deductive Arguments II Truth-Functional 
Logic 284
Chapter 11 
Inductive Reasoning 331
Chapter 12 
Moral, Legal, and Aesthetic Reasoning 381

This page intentionally left blank

 Contents 
Preface 
xii
Acknowledgments 
xx
About the Authors 
xxiv
Chapter 1 
What Is Critical Thinking, Anyway? 1
Beliefs and Claims 3
Objective Claims and Subjective Claims 4
Fact and Opinion 5
Relativism 6
Moral Subjectivism 6
Issues 6
Arguments 7
Cognitive Biases 14
Truth and Knowledge 20
What Critical Thinking Can and Can’t Do 20
A Word About the Exercises 21
Recap 21
Additional Exercises 23
Chapter 2 
Two Kinds of Reasoning 32
Arguments: General Features 32
Conclusions Used as Premises 33
Unstated Premises and Conclusions 33
Two Kinds of Arguments 34
Deductive Arguments 34
Inductive Arguments 36
Beyond a Reasonable Doubt 37
Telling the Difference between Deductive and Inductive Arguments 37
Deduction, Induction, and Unstated Premises 38
Balance of Considerations 40
Inference to the Best Explanation (IBE) 41
What Are not Premises, Conclusions, or Arguments 41
Pictures 42

vi 
CONTENTS
If . . . then . . . Sentences 42
Lists of Facts 42
“A because B” 43
Ethos, Pathos, and Logos 43
Techniques for Understanding Arguments 48
Clarifying an Argument’s Structure 49
Distinguishing Arguments from Window Dressing 51
Evaluating Arguments 52
Recap 52
Additional Exercises 53
Chapter 3 
Clear Thinking, Critical Thinking, 
and Clear Writing 64
Vagueness 66
Ambiguity 68
Semantic Ambiguity 69
Grouping Ambiguity 69
Syntactic Ambiguity 70
Generality 72
Defining Terms 76
Purposes of Definitions 77
Kinds of Definitions 78
Some Tips on Definitions 79
Writing Argumentative Essays 81
Good Writing Practices 82
Essay Types to Avoid 83
Persuasive Writing 84
Writing in a Diverse Society 84
Recap 85
Additional Exercises 86
Chapter 4 
Credibility 96
The Claim and Its Source 98
Assessing the Content of the Claim 99
Does the Claim Conflict with Our Personal Observations? 99
Does the Claim Conflict with Our Background Information? 102

 
CONTENTS 
vii
The Credibility of Sources 105
Interested Parties 105
Physical and Other Characteristics 106
Expertise 107
Credibility and the News Media 112
Consolidation of Media Ownership 112
Government Management of the News 112
Bias Within the Media 113
Talk Radio 116
Advocacy Television 116
The Internet, Generally 117
Advertising 120
Recap 124
Additional Exercises 125
Chapter 5 
Rhetoric, the Art of Persuasion 135
Rhetorical Force 136
Rhetorical Devices I 137
Euphemisms and Dysphemisms 137
Weaselers 137
Downplayers 138
Rhetorical Devices II 140
Stereotypes 140
Innuendo 141
Loaded Questions 142
Rhetorical Devices III 144
Ridicule/Sarcasm 144
Hyperbole 144
Rhetorical Devices IV 145
Rhetorical Definitions and Rhetorical Explanations 146
Rhetorical Analogies and Misleading Comparisons 146
Proof Surrogates and Repetition 150
Proof Surrogates 150
Repetition 151
Persuasion through Visual Imagery 153
The Extreme Rhetoric of Demagoguery 156

viii 
CONTENTS
Recap 158
Additional Exercises 160
Chapter 6 
Relevance (Red Herring) Fallacies 176
Argumentum Ad Hominem 177
Poisoning the Well 178
Guilt by Association 178
Genetic Fallacy 178
Straw Man 179
False Dilemma (Ignoring Other Alternatives) 180
The Perfectionist Fallacy 181
The Line-Drawing Fallacy 181
Misplacing the Burden of Proof 182
Begging the Question (Assuming What You are Trying to Prove) 184
Appeal to Emotion 185
Argument from Outrage 185
Scare Tactics 186
Appeal to Pity 187
Other Appeals to Emotion 187
Irrelevant Conclusion 188
Recap 190
Exercises 191
Chapter 7 
Induction Fallacies 197
Generalizations 197
Generalizing from Too Few Cases (Hasty Generalization) 198
Generalizing from Exceptional Cases 200
Accident 201
Weak Analogy 202
Fallacious Appeal to Authority 204
Fallacious Appeal to Popularity (Fallacious Appeal to Common Belief) 204
Fallacious Appeal to Common Practice 205
Bandwagon Fallacy 205
Fallacies Related to Cause and Effect 207
Post Hoc, Ergo Propter Hoc 207
Cum Hoc, Ergo Propter Hoc 211
Slippery Slope 213
Untestable Explanation 214

 
CONTENTS 
ix
Line-Drawing Again 214
Recap 215
Exercises 215
Chapter 8 
Formal Fallacies and Fallacies of Language 222
Three Formal Fallacies: Affirming the Consequent, Denying the Antecedent, 
and Undistributed Middle 222
Affirming the Consequent 222
Denying the Antecedent 223
The Undistributed Middle 224
The Fallacies of Equivocation and Amphiboly 225
The Fallacies of Composition and Division 226
Confusing Explanations with Excuses 228
Confusing Contraries and Contradictories 230
Consistency and Inconsistency 231
Miscalculating Probabilities 232
Gambler’s Fallacy 233
Overlooking Prior Probabilities 234
Overlooking False Positives 234
Recap 235
Additional Exercises 236
Chapter 9 
Deductive Arguments I Categorical Logic 243
Categorical Claims 245
Venn Diagrams 246
Translation into Standard Form 247
The Square of Opposition 253
Three Categorical Relations 255
Conversion 255
Obversion 255
Contraposition 256
Categorical Syllogisms 263
The Venn Diagram Method of Testing for Validity 264
Categorical Syllogisms with Unstated Premises 268
Real-Life Syllogisms 268
The Rules Method of Testing for Validity 272
Recap 274
Additional Exercises 274

x 
CONTENTS
Chapter 10 Deductive Arguments II Truth-Functional 
Logic 284
Truth Tables and Logical Symbols 285
Claim Variables 285
Truth Tables 285
Symbolizing Compound Claims 293
“If” and “Only If” 293
Necessary and Sufficient Conditions 296
“Unless” 297
“Either . . . Or” 297
Truth-Functional Arguments 299
The Truth-Table Method 300
The Short Truth-Table Method 302
Deductions 308
Group I Rules: Elementary Valid Argument Patterns 308
Group II Rules: Truth-Functional Equivalences 314
Conditional Proof 321
Recap 325
Additional Exercises 325
Chapter 11 Inductive Reasoning 331
Argument from Analogy 331
Evaluation of Arguments from Analogy 332
Three Arguments from Analogy 334
Other Uses of Analogy 334
Generalizing from a Sample 339
Evaluation of Arguments That Generalize from a Sample 340
Three Arguments That Generalize from a Sample 341
Scientific Generalizing from a Sample 342
The Statistical Syllogism 343
Causal Statements and Their Support 350
Forming Causal Hypotheses 351
Weighing Evidence 353
Confirming Causal Hypotheses 363
Calculating Statistical Probabilities 368
Joint Occurrence of Independent Events 368

 
CONTENTS 
xi
Alternative Occurrences 369
Expectation Value 369
Calculating Conditional Probabilities 370
Causation in the Law 371
Recap 372
Additional Exercises 373
Chapter 12 Moral, Legal, and Aesthetic Reasoning 381
Value Judgments 382
Moral versus Nonmoral 383
Two Principles of Moral Reasoning 383
Moral Principles 385
Deriving Specific Moral Value Judgments 385
Major Perspectives in Moral Reasoning 388
Consequentialism 388
Duty Theory/Deontologism 390
Moral Relativism 391
Religious Relativism 393
Religious Absolutism 393
Virtue Ethics 393
Moral Deliberation 396
Legal Reasoning 401
Justifying Laws: Four Perspectives 402
Aesthetic Reasoning 405
Eight Aesthetic Principles 405
Using Aesthetic Principles to Judge Aesthetic Value 408
Evaluating Aesthetic Criticism: Relevance and Truth 410
Why Reason Aesthetically? 412
Recap 413
Additional Exercises 415
Appendix: Exercises from Previous Editions 418
Glossary 
442
Answers, Suggestions, and Tips for Triangle Exercises 
452
Credits 
475
Index 
477

 The first integrated program designed specifically for the critical thinking course, Moore 
& Parker’s  Critical Thinking teaches students the skills they need in order to think for 
themselves—skills they will call upon in this course, in other college courses, and in the 
world that awaits. The authors’ practical and accessible approach illustrates core con-
cepts with concrete real-world examples, extensive practice exercises, and a thought-
ful set of pedagogical features.  McGraw-Hill Connect® and  LearnSmart® for  Critical 
 Thinking coalesce in a highly adaptive learning environment where each student gets 
the targeted help he or she needs for more efficient mastery of course concepts. 
 Adaptive Learning and Reading 
 New from McGraw-Hill Education,  LearnSmart Advantage™ is a series of adaptive 
learning products fueled by  LearnSmart, the most widely used and intelligent adap-
tive learning resource proven to improve learning since 2009. 
 McGraw-Hill LearnSmart® 
 How many students  think they know everything about how to think critically but 
struggle on the first exam?  Critical Thinking helps students understand what they 
know and don’t know about critical thinking concepts.  LearnSmart Advantage, 
McGraw-Hill’s adapting learning system suite, helps students identify what they 
know—and more importantly, what they don’t know. Based on Bloom’s Taxonomy, 
 LearnSmart Advantage creates a customized study plan, unique to every student’s 
demonstrated needs. With virtually no administrative overhead, 
instructors using  LearnSmart Advantage are reporting an increase 
in student performance by one letter grade or more. Through this 
unique tool, instructors have the ability to identify struggling stu-
dents quickly and easily,  before the first exam. Regardless of indi-
vidual study habits, preparation, and approaches to the course, 
students will find that  Critical Thinking connects with them on a 
personal, individual basis and provides a road map for real success 
in the course. 
 McGraw-Hill  SmartBook ™ 
 SmartBook is the first and only adaptive reading experience avail-
able for the higher education market. Powered by an intelligent 
diagnostic and adaptive engine,  SmartBook facilitates and person-
alizes the reading process by identifying what content a student 
knows and doesn’t know through adaptive assessments. As the 
student reads,  SmartBook constantly adapts to ensure the student 
is focused on the content he or she needs the most to close any 
knowledge gaps. 
Critical Thinking . . . Skills for

 McGraw-Hill  Connect Critical Thinking 
 McGraw-Hill  Connect Critical Thinking engages students 
in the course content so they are better prepared, are more 
active in discussion, and achieve better results. 
 Assignable and Assessable Activities 
 Connect Critical Thinking offers a wealth of assignable and assessable course 
materials. Videos, interactivities, and self-assessments engage students in course 
concepts. Detailed reporting helps the students and instructors gauge compre-
hension and retention— without adding administrative load. 
 Streamlined Course Management 
and Powerful Reporting 
 Whether a class is face-to-face, hybrid, or entirely 
online,  Critical Thinking provides the tools needed 
to reduce the amount of time and energy instructors 
must expend to administer their course. Easy-to-use 
course management allows instructors to spend less 
time administering and more time teaching. 
 ■ 
 At-Risk Student Reports: The at-risk report 
provides instructors with one-click access to 
a dashboard that identifies students who are 
at risk of dropping out of a course due to low 
engagement levels. 
■ 
 Category Analysis Reports: The category analy-
sis report is the place to go to and find out how 
your students are performing relative to specific 
learning objectives and goals. 
■ 
 Item Analysis Reports: The item analysis report is the best way to get a bird’s-
eye view of a single assignment. You’ll be able to tell if students are improv-
ing or if the concepts are something you want to spend additional time on 
in class. 
■ 
 Student Performance Reports: The student performance report helps you 
search for a specific student in your class and focus on that student’s prog-
ress across your assignments. 
■ 
 Assignment Results and Statistics Reports: The assignment results report 
shows your entire class’s performance across all of your assignments. 
Assignment statistics reports will give you quick data on each assignment 
including the mean score, high score, and low scores, as well as the num-
ber of times it was submitted. 
the course. Skills for life.

 More Engaging 
 Moore & Parker are known for fresh and lively writ-
ing. They rely on their own classroom experience 
and on feedback from instructors in getting the cor-
rect balance between explication and example. 
 ■ 
 Examples and exercises are drawn from today’s 
headlines.  
■ 
 Students learn to apply critical thinking skills to 
situations in a wide variety of areas: advertising, 
politics, the media, popular culture. 
 I love the sense of humor of the authors, the very 
clear and elegant way they make critical thinking 
come alive with visuals, exercises and stories.
 — Gary  John,  Richland College
 [Before reading this chapter] most students 
don’t realize the extent of product place-
ment and other similar attempts at subtle 
manipulation. 
 — Christian  Blum,  Bryant & Stratton, Buffalo
 More Relevant 
 Moore & Parker spark student interest in 
skills that will serve them throughout their 
lives, making the study of critical thinking a 
meaningful endeavor. 
■ 
 Boxes show students how critical think-
ing skills are relevant to their day-to-
day lives. 
■ 
 Striking visuals in every chapter show 
students how images affect our judg-
ment and shape our thinking. 
 The variety [in the exercises] was outstand-
ing. [They] will provide ample opportunity 
for the students to put into practice the 
various logical principles being discussed.
 — Ray  Darr,  Southern Illinois University
difficult or the subject matter is unfamiliar. * Per-
haps some manifestation of the overconfidence 
effect explains why, in the early stages of the 
American Idol  competition, many contestants 
appear totally convinced they will be crowned 
the next American Idol—and are speechless 
when the judges inform them they cannot so 
much as carry a tune. ** 
 Closely related to the overconfidence effect 
is the  better-than-average illusion.  The illusion 
crops up when most of a group rate themselves 
as better than most of the group relative to some 
desirable characteristic, such as resourcefulness 
or driving ability. The classic illustration is the 1976 
survey of SAT takers, in which well over 50 percent 
of the respondents rated themselves as better than 
50 percent of other SAT takers with respect to such 
qualities as leadership ability.  †   The same effect has 
been observed when people estimate how their 
intelligence, memory, or job performance stacks 
up with the intelligence, memory, and job per-
formances of other members of their profession 
or workplace. In our own informal surveys, more 
than 80 percent of our students rate themselves 
in the top 10 percent of their class with respect to 
their ability to think critically. 
 Unfortunately, evidence indicates that even 
when they are informed about the better-than-
average illusion, people may  still  rate themselves 
as better than most in their ability to not be sub-
ject to it. †† 
 That beliefs are generated as much by psy-
chology and impulse as by evidence should come as no surprise. The new car 
that was well beyond our means yesterday seems entirely affordable today—
though our finances haven’t changed. If someone invited us to The Olive Garden 
we’d expect decent fare; but if they suggested we try dining at, say, The Lung 
Garden, we’d hesitate—even if we were told the food is identical. People will go 
out of their way to save $10 when buying a $25 pen, but won’t do the same to 
 * See Sarah Lichtenstein and other authors, “Calibration of Probabilities: The State of the Art to 1980,” in Daniel 
Kahneman, Paul Slovic, and Amos Tversky,  Judgment under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases (Cambridge, England: 
Cambridge University Press, 1982), 306–34. 
 ** This possibility was proposed by Gad Saad,  Psychology Today,  www.psychologytoday.com/blog/
homo-consumericus/200901/self-deception-american-idol-is-it-adaptive . 
† See Mark D. Alicke and other authors in “The Better-Than-Average Effect,” in Mark D. Alicke and others,  The Self in 
Social Judgment: Studies in Self and Identity (New York: Psychology Press, 2005, pp. 85–106. The better-than-average 
illusion is sometimes called the Lake Woebegone effect, in reference to Garrison Keillor’s story about the fictitious 
Minnesota town “where all the children are above average.” 
†† http://weblamp.princeton.edu/~psych/FACULTY/Articles/Pronin/The%20Bias%20Blind.PDF . The better-than-
average bias has not been found to hold for all positive traits. In some things, people underestimate their abilities. The 
moral is that for many abilities, we are probably not the best judges of how we compare to others. And this includes 
our ability to avoid being subject to biasing influences. 
 ■ Does P. Diddy dress 
well? The issue is 
subjective, or, as some 
people say, “a matter of 
opinion.” 
y
,
p
y
j
g
p
our ability to avoid being subject to biasing influences.
 Appealing to Tradition 
 According to Representative Steve King of Ohio (pictured here), “Equal protection [under the Constitution] is not 
equal protection for same sex couples to marry. Equal protection was for a man and a woman to be able to get mar-
ried to each other.” 
 
 
 FALLACIES RELATED TO CAUSE AND EFFECT 
  It can be difficult to prove a cause-and-effect relationship between two variables, 
which is why fallacious reasoning can occur in this context. In this section we 
explore two important fallacies that can be made in reasoning about cause and 
effect. What the two fallacies have in common is this. Both assume that the timing 
of two variables relative to each other, in and of itself, is sufficient to establish that 
one is the cause and the other is the effect. This assumption is incorrect. 
 Post Hoc, Ergo Propter Hoc 
Post Hoc, Ergo Propter Hoc    means “After this, therefore because of this.” A speaker 
or writer commits this fallacy when he or she assumes that the fact that one event 
came after another establishes that it was caused by the other. Here is an example: 
 The speaker makes a mistake to assume that Zicam caused the cold to go 
away fast. The argument is no better than this one: 
 Here is a slightly different example, a classic illustration of  post hoc, ergo 
propter hoc: 
After I took Zicam my cold went away fast. Therefore taking Zicam caused my cold 
to go away fast.
After I played poker my cold went away fast. Therefore playing poker caused my 
cold to go away fast.
Every day the sun comes up right after the rooster crows; therefore the rooster 
causes the sun to come up.

 More Student Success 
 Moore & Parker provide a path to student 
success, making students active participants 
in their own learning while teaching skills 
they can apply in all their courses. 
■   Learning objectives link to chapter sections 
and in turn to print and online activities, so 
that students can immediately assess their 
mastery of the learning objective.  
■ 
  Exercises are dispersed throughout most 
chapters, so that they link tightly with 
the concepts as they are presented. 
■ 
  Students have access to over 2,000 exer-
cises that provide practice in applying 
their skills. 
 Hands-on, practical, and one might say, even 
“patient” with the students’ learning as it 
emphatically repeats concepts and slowly pro-
gresses them step by step through the process.
 — Patricia  Baldwin,  Pitt Community College
 There are a lot of exercises, which provides nice flexibility. The . . . mix of relatively 
easy and more challenging pieces . . . is useful in providing some flexibility for 
working in class.
 — Dennis  Weiss,  York College of Pennsylvania

 Teaching with Moore & Parker’s  Critical Thinking 
 The complete content of Moore & Parker’s  Critical Thinking is available to instructors 
and students in traditional print format as well as online with integrated and time-
saving tools. 
 Blackboard® and McGraw-Hill Higher Education have teamed up! Now, all 
McGraw-Hill content (text, tools, and homework) can be accessed directly from 
within your Blackboard course—all with a single sign-on. Connect assignments 
within Blackboard automatically (and instantly) feed grades directly to your Black-
board grade center. No more keeping track of two grade books! Even if your institu-
tion is not currently using Blackboard, McGraw-Hill has a solution for you. Ask your 
sales representative for details. 
McGraw-Hill Tegrity® is a service that makes class time available all the time by 
capturing audio and computer screen shots from your lectures in a searchable format 
for students to review when they study and complete assignments. With classroom 
resources available all the time, students can study more efficiently and learn more 
successfully. 
CourseSmart, the largest provider of eTextbooks, offers students the option of 
receiving  Critical Thinking as an eBook. At CourseSmart your students can take 
advantage of significant savings off the cost of a print textbook, reduce their impact 
on the environment, and gain access to powerful web tools for learning. Cours-
eSmart eTextbooks can be viewed online or downloaded to a computer. Visit   www. 
CourseSmart.com   to learn more. 
 McGraw-Hill Create ™ allows you to create a customized print book 
or eBook tailored to your course and syllabus. You can search through 
thousands of McGraw-Hill texts, rearrange chapters, combine 
material from other content sources, and include your own 
content or teaching notes. Create even allows you to personal-
ize your book’s appearance by selecting the cover and adding 
your name, school, and course information. To register and to 
get more information, go to www.mcgrawhillcreate.com 
 
 
CourseSmart.com  to learn more. 
McGraw-Hill Create ™ allow
or eBook tailored to your cou
thousands of McGraw-H
material from other c
content or teaching 
ize your book’s appe
your name, school, 
get more informati

 Changes to the 11th Edition 
 BROAD CHANGES 
■  Fallacies have been collected together into three new chapters:
■  Chapter 6: Relevance (Red Herring) Fallacies 
■  Chapter 7: Induction Fallacies 
■  Chapter 8: Formal Fallacies and Fallacies of Language 
■  Several additional fallacies are now covered, including:
 ■ Guilt by Association 
 ■ Irrelevant Conclusion 
 ■ Equivocation  
■  Amphiboly 
 ■ Accident 
■  Generalizing from Exceptional Cases 
■  Fallacious Appeal to Authority 
 ■ Bandwagon Fallacy 
■  Overlooking the Possibility of Random Variation 
■  Overlooking the Possibility of Regression 
 ■ Overlooking Prior Probabilities 
■  Overlooking False Positives 
■  Confusing Contraries and Contradictories 
■  A new section on the extreme rhetoric of demagoguery has been added, 
including the broad rhetorical techniques of
 ■ Otherizing  
 ■ Demonizing  
 ■ Fostering xenophobia 
 ■ Fear and hate mongering 
■  The main forms of inductive reasoning have been consolidated into a newly 
written single chapter. 
■  A section on calculating probabilities has been added. 
■  Over 400 new exercises have been added, including several hundred new fal-
lacy exercises. 
■  Hundreds of exercises from previous editions have been collected in the 
appendix.     
 CHAPTERSPECIFIC CHANGES 
■  Chapter 1  (What Is  Critical Thinking, Anyway?) contains new material on 
relativism and moral subjectivism, and adds discussion of confirmation bias. 
It contains 12 new exercises. 

xviii 
CHANGES TO THE 11TH EDITION
 5 
 R
  hetoric,  the venerable art of persuasive writing and 
speaking, has been one of the twin anchors of West-
ern education since the days of Aristotle. The other, 
which also dates from Aristotle, is logic. You use rhetoric to 
win someone to your point of view; you use logic to demon-
strate a claim or support it. These are separate enterprises. 
You can use logic to persuade people, but all too often they are 
persuaded by poor logic and unmoved by good logic. This is 
why education increasingly emphasizes critical thinking, to 
help people improve their logic and to help them distinguish 
between proof and persuasion. 
 In this chapter we do three things. First, we introduce the 
important concept of rhetorical force. Then we explain several 
rhetorical devices. Good writers and speakers employ many 
of these devices to make their cases as persuasive as possible. 
None of the devices, however, have logical force or probative 
weight (“probative” means tending to prove). We, as critical 
thinkers, should be able to recognize them for what they are—
devices of persuasion. 
 Last, after we examine the various devices, we examine 
four principal techniques of demagoguery. Demagogues use 
inflammatory rhetoric to win acceptance for false and mis-
leading ideas. They appeal to the fears and prejudices of an 
 Students will learn to . . . 
 1. Explain the concepts of rhetorical 
force and emotive power 
 2. Identify and critique the use of 
euphemisms, dysphemisms, 
weaslers, and downplayers 
 3. Identify and critique the use of 
stereotypes, innuendo, and loaded 
questions 
 4. Identify and critique the use of 
ridicule, sarcasm, and hyperbole 
 5. Identify and critique the use of 
rhetorical definitions, explana-
tions, analogies, and misleading 
comparisons 
 6. Identify and critique the use of proof 
surrogates and repetition 
 7. Identify and critique the persuasive 
aspects of visual images 
 8. Detect the techniques used in the 
extreme rhetoric of demagoguery 
 Rhetoric, the Art of Persuasion 
■  Chapter 2  (Two Kinds of Reasoning) 
contains 25 new exercises and reflects 
our current thinking on inference to the 
best explanation. 
■  Chapter 3  (Clear Thinking, Critical Think-
ing, and Clear Writing) cleans up material 
on the purposes/uses of definitions. The 
chapter has 21 new exercises. 
■  Chapter 4  (Credibility) updates sections on 
news media, bias, and advocacy television 
and contains 15 new exercises. 
■  Chapter 5  (Rhetoric, the Art of Persuasion) 
more carefully distinguishes rhetoric from 
logic, and persuasion from support and 
demonstration. We have simplified cover-
age of the basic rhetorical devices and (we 
think) provided better illustrations of some 
of them. We have added a new section on 
the extreme rhetoric of demagoguery, and 
have added many new exercises. 
■  Chapters 6  (Relevance [Red Herring] Fal-
lacies) is entirely new. Most of the fallacies 
covered in this chapter were covered in  
previous editions, but the treatment here is 
new. If you have used this textbook before, we recommend you read this 
chapter before using it. The chapter also contains numerous new exercises. 
You can find most of the exercises from previous editions in the new appen-
dix at the end of this edition. 
■  Chapter 7  (Induction Fallacies) is also entirely new. As with Chapters 6 and 8, 
most of the fallacies in this chapter were covered in previous editions, but dif-
ferently. The chapter contains all new exercises, but you can find most of the 
exercises from previous editions in the new appendix to this edition. 
■  Chapter 8  (Formal Fallacies and Fallacies of Language) is the third of four 
new chapters. It too includes fallacies not covered in previous editions, as 
well as others that were. We recommend you read the new material before 
assigning it. A section on consistency may be found in this chapter, and new 
exercises. 
■  Chapter 9  (Deductive Arguments I: Categorical Logic), along with the follow-
ing chapter, is left unchanged but for minor edits, new exercises (a couple 
dozen in this chapter), and one major change in Chapter 10. 
■  Chapter 10  (Deductive Arguments II: Truth-functional Logic) has been left 
largely alone, something the great majority of our reviewers recommended. 
The exception is the removal of the section that provided a short alternative 
to treating simple deductive arguments. Most of that material is now found in 
the new Chapter 8. The chapter also has 38 new exercises. 
■  Chapter 11  (Inductive Reasoning) is the last of four new chapters. It is a com-
prehensive introduction to induction, including argument from analogy, 
generalization from samples, the statistical syllogism, causal statements, 

 
CHANGES TO THE 11TH EDITION 
xix
principles of hypothesis formation, reasoning used in hypothesis confirma-
tion, and probability calculation. Most of these topics were covered in previ-
ous editions, but were spread out over two chapters and explained differently. 
Also, we have included slightly new terminology here and there, and you 
might wish to become familiar with it before assigning the chapter. 
■  Chapter 12  (Moral, Legal, and Aesthetic Reasoning) includes a new case 
study. The Trayvon Martin/George Zimmerman case is described along with 
the Florida “stand your ground” law, and several questions relating it to mate-
rial in this chapter are posed. 
■ Students rushing to register for Moore & Parker’s course. 
Inland Valley Daily Bulletin/Thomas R. Cordova; appeared in the Sacramento Bee

 T
hese include Laura Wilk, former Brand Manager for critical thinking; 
Sarah Remington, current Brand Manager for critical thinking; Susan 
Messer, our Development Editor and worrier-in-chief, whose novel, 
 Grand River and Joy,  may move you at a deeper level than will this text; Dawn 
Groundwater, Senior Director of Development; Jolynn Kilburg, Content Project 
Manager. 
 As we have stated repeatedly, the errors you run across in this book are the 
responsibility of either Moore or Parker, depending upon whom you are talk-
ing to. Certainly our errors are not the responsibility of the excellent people at 
McGraw-Hill who have helped us. 
The guidance of the following reviewers of current and previous editions 
and others who have written to us has been invaluable:
 Keith Abney, California Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo 
 James Anderson, San Diego State University 
 Sheldon Bachus 
 Patricia Baldwin, Pitt Community College 
 Tim Black, California State University, Northridge 
 Charles Blatz, University of Toledo 
 Christian Blum, Bryant & Stratton, Buffalo 
 Leah Blum 
 K. D. Borcoman, Coastline College/CSUDH 
 Keith Brown, California State University, East Bay 
  Melissa Brown  
 Lee Carter, Glendale Community College 
  Jennifer Caseldine-Bracht, Indiana University-Purdue University, Fort Wayne  
 David Connelly 
 Anne D’Arcy, California State University, Chico 
 Michelle Darnelle, Fayetteville State University 
 Ray Darr, Southern Illinois University, Edwardsville 
 William J. Devlin, Bridgewater State University 
 Paul Dickey, Metropolitan Community College 
Sandra Dwyer, Georgia State University
 Aaron Edlin, University of California, Berkeley 
 Ellery Eells, University of Wisconsin–Madison 
 Ben Eggleston, University of Kansas 
 Geoffrey B. Frasz, Community College of Southern Nevada 
 Josh Fulcher 
 Rory Goggins 
 Geoffrey Gorham, University of Wisconsin–Eau Claire 
 Joseph Graves, North Carolina A&T University 
 Dabney Gray, Stillman College 
 Patricia Hammer, Delta College 
 Anthony Hanson, De Anza College 
 Judith M. Hill, Saginaw Valley State University 
 Steven Hoeltzel, James Madison University 
 Acknowledgments 

 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
xxi
 Steven R. Huizenga, Central Ohio Technical College 
J. F. Humphrey, North Carolina A&T University
 Amro Jayousi 
 Gary John, Richland College 
 Sunghyun Jung 
 Allyn Kahn, Champlain College 
 David Kelsey, Coastline Community College 
 David Keyt, University of Washington 
 William Krieger, California State University–Pomona 
 Michael LaBossiere, Florida A&M University 
 Sunita Lanka, Hartnell College 
Bill Lawson
 Marion Ledwig, University of Nevada–Las Vegas 
 Vern Lee, University of Phoenix 
 Terrance MacMullon, Eastern Washington University 
 Eric Parkinson, Syracuse University 
 Steven Patterson, Marygrove College 
 Jamie L. Phillips, Clarion University 
 Domenick Pinto, Sacred Heart University 
 Ayaz Pirani, Hartnell College 
 Ed Pluth, California State University, Chico 
 Scott Rappold, Our Lady of Holy Cross College 
 N. Mark Rauls, College of Southern Nevada 
 Victor Reppert, Glendale Community College 
 Matthew E. Roberts, Patrick Henry College 
 Greg Sadler, Fayetteville State University 
 Matt Schulte, Montgomery College 
 Richard Scott, Glendale Community College 
 Laurel Severino, Santa Fe Community College 
 Mehul Shah, Bergen Community College 
 Steven Silveria 
 Robert Skipper, St. Mary’s University 
 Aeon J. Skoble, Bridgewater State University 
 Taggart Smith, Purdue University–Calumet 
 Richard Sneed, University of Central Oklahoma 
 Alan Soble, Drexel University 
 Chris Soutter 
 Anne St. Germain 
 James Stump, Bethel College 
 Lou Suarez 
 Susan Vineberg, Wayne State University 
 Michael Ventimiglia, Sacred Heart University 
 Helmut Wautischer, Sonoma State University 
 Dennis Weiss, York College of Pennsylvania 
 Amy Goodman Wilson, Webster University 
 Christine Wolf 
 Wayne Yuen, Ohlone College 
 Marie G. Zaccaria, Georgia Perimeter College 
 Over the years, our Chico State colleague Anne Morrissey has given us more 
usable material than anybody else. She’s also given us more unusable material, 
but never mind. We’ve also had fine suggestions and examples from Curtis Peldo 

xxii 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
of Chico State and Butte College; Dan Barnett, also of Butte College, has helped in 
many ways over the years. 
 We thank colleagues at Chico State, who are ever ready with a suggestion, 
idea, or constructive criticism; in particular, Marcel Daguerre, Randy Larsen, 
Becky White, Wai-hung Wong, Zanja Yudell, and Greg Tropea, whose death in 
2010 left us saddened beyond words. Greg was a dear friend whose deep wisdom 
and quiet insight contributed significantly to our thinking over the course of many 
years. We are also grateful to Bangs Tapscott, Linda Kaye Bomstad, Geoff Bartells, 
and Jeffrey Ridenour for contributions both archival and recent. 
 Last, and especially, we give thanks to the two people who put up with 
us with patience, encouragement, and grace, Melinda Zerkle, and Marianne 
Moore.  

 I
n our view,  critical thinking  happens when you critique thinking. Our objective in this 
book is to set forth the fundamental criteria by which this may be accomplished—
the standards that thinking must adhere to in any context, if it is to lead to truth. 
 Among the most important changes incorporated into this edition are these. 
 In past editions, we have scattered the discussion of fallacies throughout 
the book. In this edition, we bring the discussion together in three chapters. In 
addition, we have expanded the discussion. We have also replaced every fallacy 
exercise in previous editions—though you can still find the old exercises in an 
appendix at the end of the book. 
 Further, we have consolidated discussion of inductive reasoning into a sin-
gle chapter and have included new material on calculating probability. 
 Last edition, we added a section on ethos, pathos, and logos, as well as a 
section on cognitive biases. We think these two features, as well as our chapters 
on credibility and rhetoric, set this book off from many other critical thinking text-
books. Furthermore, in this edition, we have added a discussion of techniques 
universally present in the extreme rhetoric of demagogues. Being taken in by 
demagoguery is the hallmark of someone who does not think critically; the new 
discussion is overdue. 
 The previous edition of this book was integrated with  Connect, McGraw-Hill’s 
online learning platform. This edition is as well.  Connect  is keyed to the learning 
objectives found within this edition of the text. With  Connect,  students interact 
with each other and with the instructor online. If you are called upon to offer a 
completely online version of a critical thinking course, Connect, LearnSmart, and 
SmartBook offer you the tools to do so. We ourselves are fortunate enough not to 
have to do this, but we still use these resources for homework, content delivery, 
online testing, and data management.  They may be particularly useful if you, like 
one of us, teaches a very large class.  
 We hope this edition of the text is useful to you, and we would appreciate 
your suggestions for improvement. 
 A Note to Our Colleagues 

 About the Authors 
 B
 rooke Moore and Richard Parker have 
taught philosophy at California State Uni-
versity, Chico, for almost as long as they 
can remember. Moore has been that university’s 
Outstanding Professor, and both he and Parker 
have received top academic honors on their cam-
pus. Moore has seen several terms as depart-
ment chair, and Parker has served as chair of 
the academic senate and dean of undergraduate 
education. 
 Moore has a bachelor’s degree in music 
from Antioch College and a PhD in philosophy 
from the University of Cincinnati; Parker did his 
undergraduate degree at the University of Arkan-
sas and his PhD at the University of Washington, 
both in philosophy. 
 Moore has finally given up being the world’s most serious amateur volley-
ball player. He and Marianne share their house and life with several dogs. He has 
never sold an automobile. 
 Parker gets around in a 1962 MG or on a Harley softail. He plays golf for fun, 
shoots pool for money, and plays guitar for a semiprofessional flamenco troupe. 
He gets to Spain as often as he is able. 
 The two have remained steadfast friends through it all. They are never mis-
taken for one another. 

To:
Alexander and Levi
From Richard
Sherry and Bill; and Sydney, Darby, 
Peyton Elizabeth, and Griffin
From Brooke

This is not entirely a work of nonfiction.

1
 1 
 “I
 t was all a big mistake,” he said. Chris Elam, the com-
munications director of the Republican Party of Texas, 
was referring to the statement in his party’s platform 
opposing the teaching of critical thinking. * The Republican 
Party of Texas certainly did  not oppose the development of 
critical thinking skills, he said. ** 
 Are we relieved! Count us among those who think there 
should be  more teaching of critical thinking skills rather 
than less. 
 But what exactly  is  critical thinking, anyway? It seems 
there are as many definitions of the concept as there are peo-
ple you ask to define it. 
 There is at least common ground among educators about 
critical thinking. Every educator will say that critical thinking 
aims at making wise decisions and coming to correct conclu-
sions. Most agree that jumping to conclusions and making 
ill-formed, indefensible, knee-jerk decisions is not critical 
thinking. 
 To refine this a bit, on the one hand we have good, old-
fashioned thinking. That’s what we do when we form opinions 
or judgments, make decisions, arrive at conclusions, and the 
 * http://s3.amazonaws.com/texasgop_pre/assets/original/2012Platform_Final.pdf . 
 ** http://tpmmuckraker.talkingpointsmemo.com/2012/06/texas_gops_2012_platform_
accidentally_opposes_teaching_of_critical_thinking_skills.phy?ref 5 fpb . 
 Students will learn to . . . 
 1. Define critical thinking 
 2. Explain the role of beliefs and claims 
in critical thinking 
 3. Identify issues in real-world 
situations 
 4. Recognize an argument 
 5. Define and identify the common 
cognitive biases that affect critical 
thinking 
 6. Understand the terms “truth” and 
“knowledge” as used in this book 
 What  Is Critical Thinking, 
Anyway? 

2 
CHAPTER 1: WHAT IS CRITICAL THINKING, ANYWAY?
like. On the other hand, we have critical thinking. That's what we do when we 
 critique  the first kind of thinking—subject it to rational evaluation. You might say 
that  critical thinking involves thinking about thinking.  We engage in it when we 
consider whether our thinking (or someone else’s) abides by the criteria of good 
sense and logic. 
  Possibly you’ve taken courses where all you have to do is remember stuff. 
But in other courses—and in the workplace or in the military—you will per-
haps have been asked to do more—maybe to design or evaluate something, to 
make a proposal or diagnose a situation, to explain or comment on something, 
or to do any number of other things that involve coming to conclusions. Pos-
sibly it worked this way: your instructor or colleagues or friends or supervisors 
read or listened to your findings, then  they  offered critical commentary.  They 
gave you feedback (usually, we hope, positive).  They  evaluated your reasoning. 
If you are brilliant, you may not have needed their feedback. If you are brilliant, 
perhaps you never err in your thinking or leave room for other criticism. But 
most of us do occasionally make mistakes in reasoning. We overlook impor-
tant considerations and ignore viewpoints that conflict with our own, and in 
other ways we don’t think as clearly as we might. Most of us can benefit from a 
little critical commentary—even when it comes from ourselves. Our chances of 
producing a good essay or offering a sound proposal or making a wise decision 
improve if we don’t simply write or propose or decide willy-nilly, but reflect on 
our reasoning and try to make it better. Our chances of thinking well improve, 
in other words, if we think  critically:  if we critique our own thinking as a think-
ing coach might. 
 This is a book in  critical  thinking because it offers guidance about  critiquing 
thinking. The book and the course you are using it in, if you are, explain the mini-
mum criteria of good reasoning—the requirements a piece of reasoning must 
meet,  no matter what the context,  if it is worth paying attention to. Along the way 
we will explore the most common and important impediments to good reason-
ing, as well as some of the most common mistakes people make when coming to 
conclusions. Other courses you take at the university offer refinements. In them 
you will learn what considerations are important from the perspective of indi-
vidual disciplines. But in no course anywhere, at least in no course that involves 
arriving at conclusions, will thinking that violates the standards set forth in this 
book be accepted. If it does nothing else, what you read here and learn in your 
critical thinking course should help you avoid at least a few of the more egregious 
common errors people make when they reason. If you would have otherwise 
made these mistakes, you will have become smarter. Not smarter in some par-
ticular subject, mind you, but smarter in general. The things you learn from this 
book (and from the course you may be reading it for) apply to nearly any subject 
people can talk or think or write about. 
 To a certain extent, questions we should ask when critiquing our own—or 
someone else’s—thinking depend on what is at issue. Deciding whom to vote for, 
whether to buy a house, whether a mathematical proof is sound, which tooth-
paste to buy, or what kind of dog to get involve different considerations. In all 
cases, however, we should want to avoid making or accepting weak and invalid 
arguments. We should also avoid being distracted by irrelevancies or ruled by 
emotion, succumbing to fallacies or bias, and being influenced by dubious 
authority or half-baked speculation. These are not the only criteria by which rea-
soning might be evaluated, but they are central and important, and they provide 
the main focus of this book. 

 Critical Thinking, the Long Version 
 The Collegiate Learning Assessment (CLA) Project of the Council for Aid to Education has come 
up with a list of skills that covers almost everything your authors believe is important in critical 
thinking. If you achieve mastery over all these or even a significant majority of them, you’ll be 
well ahead of most of your peers—and your fellow citizens. In question form, here is what the 
council came up with: 
 How well does the student
■ determine what information is or is not pertinent; 
■ distinguish between rational claims and emotional ones; 
■ separate fact from opinion; 
■ recognize the ways in which evidence might be limited or compromised; 
■ spot deception and holes in the arguments of others; 
■ present his/her own analysis of the data or information; 
■ recognize logical flaws in arguments; 
■ draw connections between discrete sources of data and information; 
■ attend to contradictory, inadequate, or ambiguous information; 
■ construct cogent arguments rooted in data rather than opinion; 
■ select the strongest set of supporting data; 
■ avoid overstated conclusions; 
■ identify holes in the evidence and suggest additional information to collect; 
■ recognize that a problem may have no clear answer or single solution; 
■ propose other options and weigh them in the decision; 
■ consider all stakeholders or affected parties in suggesting a course of action; 
■ articulate the argument and the context for that argument; 
■ correctly and precisely use evidence to defend the argument; 
■ logically and cohesively organize the argument; 
■ avoid extraneous elements in an argument’s development; 
■ present evidence in an order that contributes to a persuasive argument? 
 www.aacu.org/peerreview/pr_sp07_analysis1.cfm . 
 
BELIEFS AND CLAIMS
3
 BELIEFS AND CLAIMS 
  Why bother thinking critically? As we just said, the ultimate objective in thinking 
critically is to come to conclusions that are correct and to make decisions that 
are wise. Because our decisions reflect our conclusions,  we can simplify things by 
saying that the purpose of thinking critically is to come to correct conclusions. The 
method used to achieve this objective is to evaluate our thinking by the standards 
of rationality. Of course, we can also evaluate someone else’s thinking, though the 
objective there might simply be to help the person. 
 When we come to a conclusion, we have a belief. Concluding involves 
believing. If you  conclude the battery is dead, you  believe the battery is dead. 
Keeping this in mind, let’s define a few key terms. 
 A belief is, obviously, something you believe. It is important to understand 
that a belief is  propositional,  which means it can be expressed in a declarative 

4 
CHAPTER 1: WHAT IS CRITICAL THINKING, ANYWAY?
sentence—a sentence that is either true or false. A good bit of muddleheaded 
thinking can be avoided if you understand that beliefs are propositional entities, 
but more on this later. 
 As we use these words,  beliefs  are the same as  judgments  and  opinions. When 
we express a belief (or judgment or opinion) in a declarative sentence, the result 
is a  statement  or  claim  or  assertion,  and for our purposes these are the same thing. 
Claims can be used for other purposes than to state beliefs, but this is the use 
we’re primarily concerned with.
 Objective Claims and Subjective Claims 
 Before we say something more about conclusions, we should make a distinction 
between objective and subjective claims. An  objective claim  has this character-
istic: whether it is true or false is independent of whether people think it is true or 
false. “There is life on Mars” is thus an objective claim, because whether or not life 
exists there doesn’t depend on whether people think it does. If everyone suddenly 
believed there is life on Mars, that doesn’t mean that suddenly there would be life 
on Mars. Likewise, “God exists” is an objective claim because whether it is true 
doesn’t depend on whether people think it is true. 
  Beliefs and claims are  propositional:  they can be expressed in true or false declara-
tive sentences. 
 ■ The judges on  The Voice  
critique singers, but that 
doesn’t automatically 
qualify as thinking 
critically. 

 Thinking About Thinking 
 Remember, an  objective  statement is not made true by someone thinking it is true. “Wait a 
minute,” you might say. “Isn’t the statement ‘Joanie is thinking about Frank’ made true by her 
thinking that it is true?” The answer is no! It is made true by her  thinking about Frank.  
 
BELIEFS AND CLAIMS
5
 Although objective claims are either 
true or false, we may not know which a given 
claim is. “Portland, Oregon, is closer to the 
North Pole than to the equator” is a true 
objective claim. “Portland, Oregon, is closer 
to the equator than to the North Pole” is a 
false objective claim. “More stamp collectors 
live in Portland, Oregon, than in Portland, 
Maine” is an objective claim whose truth or 
falsity is not known, at least not by us.  
 Not every claim is objective, of 
course. “Barack Obama is one cool daddy” 
is not objective, for it lacks the characteris-
tic mentioned previously. That is, whether 
or not someone is one cool daddy  does
depend on whether people think he is. If 
nobody thinks Barack Obama is one cool daddy, then he isn’t. If Parker thinks 
Barack Obama is one cool daddy and Moore doesn’t, you will say that Parker and 
Moore are each entitled to an opinion. That’s because whether someone is one 
cool daddy is in the eyes of the beholder. 
 Claims of this variety are  subjective.  Whether a subjective claim is true or false 
is not independent of whether people think it is true or false. Examples of subjective 
claims would be judgments of taste, such as “Rice vinegar is too sweet.” Is rice vin-
egar too sweet? It depends on what you think. Some kinds of comparisons also are 
subjective. Is snowboarding more fun than skiing? Again, it depends on what you 
think, and there is no further “truth” to consider. However, many statements contain 
both objective and nonobjective elements, as in “Somebody stole our nifty concrete 
lawn duck.” Whether the lawn duck is  concrete  is an objective question; whether it 
is  our  lawn duck is an objective question; and whether it was  stolen  is an objective 
question. But whether the stolen concrete lawn duck is  nifty  is a subjective question.   
 Fact and Opinion 
 Sometimes people talk about the difference between “fact” and “opinion,” hav-
ing in mind the notion that  all opinions are subjective. But some opinions are 
not subjective, because their truth or falsity is independent of what people think. 
Again, in this book “opinion” is just another word for “belief.” If you believe that 
Portland, Oregon, is closer to the North Pole than to the equator, your opinion 
happens to be true, and would continue to be true even if you change your mind. 
You can refer to objective opinions as  factual  opinions or beliefs, if you want— but 
that doesn’t mean factual opinions are all true.  “Portland, Oregon, is closer to the 
equator than to the North Pole” is a factual opinion that is false. 
 ■ That could be you under 
the snow if you don’t 
think critically. 

6 
CHAPTER 1: WHAT IS CRITICAL THINKING, ANYWAY?
 So: factual opinion/belief/claim  5  objective opinion/belief/claim  5 opin-
ion/belief/claim whose truth is independent of whether anyone thinks it is true. 
 Relativism 
 Relativism  is the idea that truth is relative to the standards of a given culture. 
More precisely, relativism holds that if your culture and some other culture have 
different standards of truth or evidence, there is no independent “God’s-eye view” 
by which one culture’s standards can be seen to be more correct than the others’. 
 Whatever may be said of this as an abstract philosophical doctrine, it can-
not possibly mean that an objective statement could be made true by a culture’s 
thinking that it is true. If it is universally believed in some culture that “water” is 
not H 2 0, then either the people in that culture are mistaken or their word “water” 
does not refer to water. 
 Moral Subjectivism 
 Moral subjectivism  is the idea that moral opinions, such as “Bullfighting is mor-
ally wrong” or “Jason shouldn’t lie to his parents,” are subjective. It is the idea, 
in other words, that if you think bullfighting is morally wrong, then it is morally 
wrong for you and you don’t need to consider any further truth. It is the idea 
expressed by Hamlet in the famous passage, “There is nothing either good or bad, 
but that thinking makes it so.” 
 You should be wary of Hamlet’s dictum. Ask yourself this: If someone actu-
ally believed there is nothing wrong with torturing donkeys or stoning women to 
death for adultery, would you say, well, if that’s what he thinks, then it’s fine for 
him to torture donkeys or stone women to death? Of course you wouldn’t. Those 
ideas can’t be made true by thinking they are true anymore than drinking battery 
acid can be made good for you by thinking it is. 
 ISSUES 
 An  issue,  as we employ that concept in this book, is simply a question. Is Moore 
taller than Parker? When we ask that question, we raise the issue as to  whether 
Moore is taller than Parker. To put it differently, we are considering whether the 
claim “Moore is taller than Parker” is true. Let us note in passing that as with 
claims, some issues are objective. Is Moore taller than Parker? Whether he is 
or isn’t doesn’t depend on whether we think he is, so this is an objective issue 
(question). 
 Other issues, such as whether P. Diddy dresses well, are subjective, in the 
sense explained previously. 
 The first order of business when it comes to thinking critically about an issue 
is to determine what, exactly, the issue  is.  Unfortunately, in many real-life situa-
tions, it is difficult to identify exactly what the issue is—meaning it is difficult to 
identify exactly what claim is in question. This happens for lots of reasons, from 
purposeful obfuscation to ambiguous terminology to plain muddleheaded think-
ing. In his inaugural address President Warren G. Harding said, 
We have mistaken unpreparedness to embrace it to be a challenge of the reality 
and due concern for making all citizens fit for participation will give added 
strength of citizenship and magnify our achievement.

 
ARGUMENTS
7
 This is formidable. Do you understand what issue Harding is addressing? 
Neither does anyone else, because his statement is perfectly meaningless. 
( American satirist H. L. Mencken described it as a “sonorous nonsense driven 
home with gestures.” * ) Understanding what is meant by a claim has so many 
aspects that we’ll devote a large part of Chapter 3 to the subject. 
 However, if you have absolutely no clue as to what an issue actually is, there 
isn’t much point in considering it further—you don’t know what “it” is. There 
also isn’t much point in considering it further if you have no idea as to what 
would count toward settling it. For example, suppose someone asks, “Is there 
an identical you in a different dimension?” What sort of evidence would support 
saying either there is or isn’t? Nobody has any idea. (Almost any question about 
different “dimensions” or “planes” or “universes” would be apt to suffer from the 
same problem unless, possibly, it were to be raised from someone well educated 
in physics who used those concepts in a technical way.) “Is everything really 
one?” would also qualify as something you couldn’t begin to settle, as would 
wondering if “the entire universe was created instantly five minutes ago with all 
false memories and fictitious records.” **  
 Obscure issues aren’t always as metaphysical as the preceding examples. 
Listen carefully and you may hear more than one politician say something like, “It 
is human nature to desire freedom.” Oh, really? This sounds good, but if you look 
at it closely it’s hard to know exactly what sort of data would support the remark. 
 This isn’t to imply that only issues that can be settled through scientific test 
or via the experimental method are worth considering. Moral issues cannot be 
settled in that way, for example. Mathematical and historical questions are not 
answered by experiment, and neither are important philosophical questions. 
Does God exist? Is there free will? What difference does it make if he does or 
doesn’t or there is or isn’t? Legal questions, questions of aesthetics—the list of 
important questions not subject to purely scientific resolution—is very long. The 
point here is merely that if a question is to be taken seriously, or if you want others 
to take it seriously, or if you want others who can think critically to take it seri-
ously, you must have  some idea as to what considerations bear on the answer. 
 ARGUMENTS 
  In our experience, lots of college students seriously contemplate getting a dog or 
cat. But they are conflicted. On the one hand, it would be sweet to have a nice pet; 
but on the other, it would be extra work and cost money, and they aren’t sure what 
to do with the animal if they take a trip. 
 If you are such a student, you weigh the arguments pro and con. An  argu-
ment  presents a consideration for accepting a claim. For example, this is an 
argument: 
 And so is this: 
 *Reported on NBC News,  Meet the Press, January 16, 2005. 
 ** This famous example comes from philosopher Bertrand Russell. 
A dog would keep me company; so I should get one.
My landlord will raise my rent; so I shouldn’t get one.

 Are You Good at Reasoning? 
 Are you the kind of person who reasons well? Some people are. Unfortunately, maybe peo-
ple who  aren’t  very good at reasoning are the most likely to overestimate their reasoning 
ability. *  
*See Justin Kruger and David Dunning, ”Unskilled and Unaware of It: How Difficulties in Recognizing One’s Own 
Incompetence Lead to Inflated Self-Assessments,” Psychology 1 (2009): 30–46.
8 
CHAPTER 1: WHAT IS CRITICAL THINKING, ANYWAY?
 The first example is an argument for getting a dog. The second is an argu-
ment for not getting one. 
 As you can see from these two examples, an argument consists of two 
parts. One part gives a reason for accepting the other part. The part that pro-
vides the reason is called the  premise of the argument, * though an argument 
may have more than one premise. The other part is called the conclusion. 
The  conclusion  of an argument is what the premise supposedly supports or 
demonstrates. 
 You should always think of the conclusion of an argument as stating a posi-
tion on an issue, and of the premise or premises as giving reasons for taking that 
position. 
 Want an example? Look at the two arguments previously shown. They both 
address the issue of  whether I should get a dog.  The premise of the first example 
(“A dog would keep me company”) gives a reason for saying I  should  get a dog. 
The premise of the second example (“My landlord will raise my rent”) gives a rea-
son for saying I  should not get a dog. 
 What does this have to do with critical thinking? Everything. You want to 
make the best decision on an important issue—in this case, whether to get a dog. 
You evaluate the arguments pro and con. Being able to do this intelligently may 
not be the sum total of critical thinking, but it is an essential part of it. 
 A large part of this book is devoted to understanding how to evaluate argu-
ments, and all this will begin in Chapter 2. However, right now, two minor points 
about arguments are worth noticing:
 1. The two arguments given as examples are not very long or complicated. 
Some arguments can be very long and complicated. Einstein’s revolutionary 
theory that  E   5   mc 2 was based on complex mathematical reasoning, and that 
reasoning was his argument for saying that  E   5   mc 2 . 
 2. Not every issue requires an argument for resolution. Is your throat sore? You 
can just tell directly, and no argument is necessary. 
 We will now offer you a few exercises to help you understand these funda-
mental concepts. In the next section we will look at psychological factors that 
impede clear thought. 
 *Unfortunately, sometimes people use the word “argument” to refer only to the premise or premises of an argument. 

 
ARGUMENTS
9
 Answer the questions based on your reading to this point, including the boxes. 
—See the answers section at the back of the book.
 1. What is an argument? 
 2. T or F: A claim is what you use to state an opinion or a belief. 
 3. T or F: Critical thinking consists in attacking other people’s ideas. 
 4. T or F: Whether a passage contains an argument depends on how long it is. 
 5. T or F: When a question has been asked, an issue has been raised. 
 6. T or F: All arguments have a premise. 
 7. T or F: All arguments have a conclusion. 
 8. T or F: You can reach a conclusion without believing it is true. 
 9. T or F: Beliefs, judgments, and opinions are the same thing. 
 10. T or F: All opinions are subjective. 
 11. T or F: All factual claims are true. 
 12. “There is nothing either good or bad but that thinking makes it so” expresses 
a doctrine known as  _____________________ . 
   13. The first order of business when it comes to thinking critically about an issue is 
(a) to determine whether the issue is subjective or objective, (b) to determine 
whether the issue can be resolved, or (c) to determine what exactly the issue is.  
 14. T or F: The conclusion of an argument states a position on an issue. 
 15. T or F: Issues can be resolved only through scientific testing. 
 16. T or F: Statements, claims, and assertions are the same thing. 
 17. T or F: The claim “Death Valley is an eyesore” expresses a subjective opinion. 
 18. T or F: Every issue requires an argument for a resolution. 
 19. T or F: Relativism is the idea that if the standards of evidence or truth are 
different for two cultures, there is no independent way of saying which stan-
dards are the correct ones. 
 20. T or F: It is not possible to reason correctly if you do not think critically. 
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
 Exercise 1-1 
 Exercise 1-2 
 On the basis of a distinction covered so far, divide these 
items into two groups of five items each such that all the 
items in one group have a feature that none of the items in 
the second group have. Describe the feature on which you 
based your classifications. The items that belong in one 
group are listed at the back of the book.
    1. You shouldn’t buy that car because it is ugly.  
 2. That car is ugly, and it costs more than $25,000, too. 
 3. Rainbows have seven colors, although it’s not always 
easy to see them all. 
 4. Walking is the best exercise. It places the least stress 
on your joints. 
▲
▲
 ■ Can bears and other 
animals think critically? 
Find out by checking 
the answers section at 
the back of the book. 

10 
CHAPTER 1: WHAT IS CRITICAL THINKING, ANYWAY?
 5. The ocean on the central coast is the most beautiful shade of sky blue, but it 
gets greener as you go north. 
 6. Her favorite color is yellow because it is the color of the sun. 
 7. Pooh is my favorite cartoon character because he has lots of personality. 
 8. You must turn off the lights when you leave the room. They cost a lot of 
money to run, and you don’t need them during the day. 
 9. Television programs have too much violence and immoral behavior. Hun-
dreds of killings are portrayed every month. 
 10. You’ll be able to find a calendar on sale after the first of the year, so it is a 
good idea to wait until then to buy one. 
▲
▲
 Exercise 1-3 
 Which of the following claims are objective?
 1. Nicki Minaj can fake a great English accent. 
 2. On a baseball field, the center of the pitcher’s mound is 59 feet from home 
plate.  
 3. Staring at the sun will damage your eyes. 
 4. Green is the most pleasant color to look at. 
 5. Yellow is Jennifer’s favorite color. 
 6. With enough experience, a person who doesn’t like opera can come to 
appreciate it. 
 7. Opera would be easier to listen to if they’d leave out the singing. 
 8. Sailing is much more soothing than sputtering about in a motorboat. 
 9. Driving while drowsy is dangerous. 
 10. Pit vipers can strike a warm-blooded animal even when it is pitch dark. 
 11. P. Diddy is totally bink. 
 12. P. Diddy is totally bink to me. 
▲
▲
▲
▲
 Exercise 1-4 
 Which of the following are subjective?
 1. Fallon tells better jokes than Letterman. 
 2. In 2013 Miguel Cabrera hit the most home runs on a 3–0 count. 
 3. Your teacher will complain if you text in class. 
 4. Your teacher would be crazy not to complain if you text in class. 
 5. There is life on Mars. 
 6. Golf wastes time. 
 7.  Halloween 5 scared the you-know-what out of my sister. 
 8.  Halloween 5 is lousy. A total letdown. 
   9. Movies like  Halloween 5 lack redeeming social value. [ Hint: An assertion 
might have more than one subjective element.] 
 10. John Kerry has quite an unusual chin. 
▲
▲
▲
▲
 Exercise 1-5 
 Some of these items are arguments, and some are not. Which are which?
  1. Tipsarevic is unlikely to win the U.S. Open this year. He has a nagging leg 
injury, plus he doesn’t have the drive he once had. 
▲

 
ARGUMENTS 
11
 2. Hey there, Marco! Don’t go giving that cat top sirloin. What’s the matter with 
you? You got no brains? 
 3. If you’ve ever met a pet bird, you know they are busy creatures. 
 4. Everybody is saying the president earned the Nobel Prize. What a stupid 
idea! He hasn’t earned it at all. There’s not a lick of truth in that notion. 
 5. “Is the author really entitled to assert that there is a degree of unity among 
these essays which makes this a book rather than a congeries? I am inclined 
to say that he is justified in this claim, but articulating this justification is a 
somewhat complex task.” 
 —From a book review by Stanley Bates 
 6. As a long-time customer, you’re already taking advantage of our money 
management expertise and variety of investment choices. That’s a good rea-
son for consolidating your other eligible assets into an IRA with us. 
 7.  professor x: Well, I see where the new chancellor wants to increase class sizes. 
    professor y: Yeah, another of his bright ideas. 
    professor x: Actually, I don’t think it hurts to have one or two extra people 
in class. 
    professor y: What? Of course it hurts. Whatever are you thinking? 
    professor x: Well, I just think there are good reasons for increasing the class 
size a bit. 
 8. Yes, I charge a little more than other dentists. But I feel I give better service. 
So my billing practices are justified. 
 9. Since you want to purchase the house, you should exercise your option 
before June 30, 2014. Otherwise, you will forfeit the option price. 
 10. John Montgomery has been the Eastern Baseball League’s best closer this 
season. Unfortunately, when a closer gets shelled, as Montgomery did last 
night, it takes him a while to recover. Nobody will say he is the best closer 
after that performance. 
▲
▲
▲
 Exercise 1-6 
 Determine which of the following passages contain arguments. For any that do, 
identify the argument’s conclusion. There aren’t hard-and-fast rules for identi-
fying arguments, so you’ll have to read closely and think carefully about some 
of these.
 1. The Directory of Intentional Communities lists more than 200 groups across 
the country organized around a variety of purposes, including environmen-
tally aware living. 
 2. Carl would like to help out, but he won’t be in town. We’ll have to find some-
one else who owns a truck. 
 3. Once upon a time Washington, DC, passed an ordinance prohibiting private 
ownership of firearms. After that, Washington’s murder rate shot up 121 per-
cent. Bans on firearms are clearly counterproductive. 
 4. Computers will never be able to converse intelligently through speech. A sim-
ple example proves this. The sentences “How do you recognize speech?” and 
“How do you wreck a nice beach?” have different meanings, but they sound 
similar enough that a computer could not distinguish between the two.  
▲
▲

12 
CHAPTER 1: WHAT IS CRITICAL THINKING, ANYWAY?
  5.  The Carrie Diaries isn’t very good. It’s just a repackage of  Sex and the City. 
  6. “Like short-term memory, long-term memory retains information that is encoded 
in terms of sense modality and in terms of links with information that was learned 
earlier (that is, meaning).” 
 —Neil R. Carlson
 ■ Think you are welcome? 
Think again and think 
critically. 
 7. Fears that chemicals in 
teething rings and soft plas-
tic toys may cause cancer 
may be justified. Last week, 
the Consumer Product 
Safety Commission issued a 
report confirming that low 
amounts of DEHP, known to 
cause liver cancer in lab ani-
mals, may be absorbed from 
certain infant products. 
 8. “It may be true that people, 
not guns, kill people. But 
people with guns kill more 
people than people without 
guns. As long as the num-
ber of lethal weapons in 
the hands of the American 
people continues to grow, 
so will the murder rate.” 
 —Susan Mish’alani
▲
 9. Then: A Miami man gets thirty days in the stockade for wearing a flag patch 
on the seat of his trousers. Now: Miami department stores sell boxer trunks 
made up to look like an American flag. Times have changed. 
 10. Dockers are still in style, but skinny legs are out. 
▲
 Exercise 1-7 
 For each numbered passage, identify which lettered item best states the primary 
issue discussed in the passage. Be prepared to say why you think your choice is 
the correct one.
 1. Let me tell you why Hank ought not to take that math course. First, it’s too 
hard, and he’ll probably flunk it. Second, he’s going to spend the whole term 
in a state of frustration. Third, he’ll probably get depressed and do poorly in 
all the rest of his courses.
 a. whether Hank ought to take the math course 
 b. whether Hank would flunk the math course 
 c. whether Hank will spend the whole term in a state of frustration 
   d. whether Hank will get depressed and do poorly in all the rest of his courses     
 2. The county has cut the library budget for salaried library workers, and there 
will not be enough volunteers to make up for the lack of paid workers. There-
fore, the library will have to be open fewer hours next year.
 a. whether the library will have to be open fewer hours next year 
 b. whether there will be enough volunteers to make up for the lack of paid 
workers     
▲

 
ARGUMENTS 
13
 3. Pollution of the waters of the Everglades and of Florida Bay is due to multiple 
causes. These include cattle farming, dairy farming, industry, tourism, and 
urban development. So it is simply not true that the sugar industry is com-
pletely responsible for the pollution of these waters.
 a. whether pollution of the waters of the Everglades and Florida Bay is due to 
multiple causes 
 b. whether pollution is caused by cattle farming, dairy farming, industry, 
tourism, and urban development 
 c. whether the sugar industry is partly responsible for the pollution of these 
waters  
 d. whether the sugar industry is completely responsible for the pollution of 
these waters 
 4. It’s clear that the mainstream media have lost interest in classical music. For 
example, the NBC network used to have its own classical orchestra conducted 
by Arturo Toscanini, but no such orchestra exists now. One newspaper, the no-
longer-existent  Washington Star, used to have thirteen classical music reviewers; 
that’s more than twice as many as The  New York Times has now. H. L. Mencken 
and other columnists used to devote considerable space to classical music; 
nowadays, you almost never see it mentioned in a major column.
 a. whether popular taste has turned away from classical music 
 b. whether newspapers are employing fewer writers on classical music 
 c. whether the mainstream media have lost interest in classical music 
 5. This year’s National Football League draft lists a large number of quarter-
backs among its highest-ranking candidates. Furthermore, quite a number of 
teams do not have first-class quarterbacks. It’s therefore likely that an unusu-
ally large number of quarterbacks will be drafted early in this year’s draft.
 a. whether teams without first-class quarterbacks will choose quarterbacks 
in the draft 
 b. whether this year’s NFL draft includes a large number of quarterbacks 
 c. whether an unusually large number of quarterbacks will be drafted early 
in this year’s draft 
 6. An animal that will walk out into a rainstorm and stare up at the clouds until 
water runs into its nostrils and it drowns—well, that’s what I call the world’s 
dumbest animal. And that’s exactly what young domestic turkeys do.
 a. whether young domestic turkeys will drown themselves in the rain 
 b. whether any animal is dumb enough to drown itself in the rain 
 c. whether young domestic turkeys are the world’s dumbest animal 
 7. The defeat of the school voucher initiative was a bad thing for the country 
because now public schools won’t have any incentive to clean up their act. 
Furthermore, the defeat perpetuates the private-school-for-the-rich, public-
school-for-the-poor syndrome.
 a. whether public schools now have any incentive to clean up their act 
 b. whether the defeat of the school voucher initiative was bad for the country 
 c. whether public schools now have any incentive to clean up their act and 
whether the private-school-for-the-rich, public-school-for-the-poor syn-
drome will be perpetuated (issues are equally stressed) 
 8. From an editorial in a newspaper outside Southern California: “The people 
in Southern California who lost a fortune in the wildfires last year could have 
▲
▲

14 
CHAPTER 1: WHAT IS CRITICAL THINKING, ANYWAY?
bought insurance that would have covered their houses and practically every-
thing in them. And anybody with any foresight would have made sure there 
were no brush and no trees near the houses so that there would be a buffer 
zone between the house and any fire, as the Forest Service recommends. 
Finally, anybody living in a fire danger zone ought to know enough to have 
a fireproof or fire-resistant roof on the house. So, you see, most of the losses 
those people suffered were simply their own fault.”
 
a.  whether fire victims could have done anything to prevent their losses 
 
b.  whether insurance, fire buffer zones, and fire-resistant roofs could have 
prevented much of the loss 
 
c. whether the losses people suffered in the fires were their own fault 
 9. “Whatever we believe, we think agreeable to reason, and, on that account, 
yield our assent to it. Whatever we disbelieve, we think contrary to reason, 
and, on that account, dissent from it. Reason, therefore, is allowed to be the 
principle by which our belief and opinions ought to be regulated.” 
 —Thomas Reid, Essays on the Active Powers of Man
 
a.  whether reason is the principle by which our beliefs and opinions ought 
to be regulated 
 
b. whether what we believe is agreeable to reason 
 
c. whether what we disbelieve is contrary to reason 
 
d. both b and c 
 10. Most people you find on university faculties are people who are interested in 
ideas. And the most interesting ideas are usually new ideas. So most people 
you find on university faculties are interested in new ideas. Therefore, you 
are not going to find many conservatives on university faculties, because 
conservatives are not usually interested in new ideas.
 
a. whether conservatives are interested in new ideas 
 
b. whether you’ll find many conservatives on university faculties 
 
c.  whether people on university faculties are interested more in new ideas 
than in older ideas 
 
d. whether most people are correct 
▲
 COGNITIVE BIASES 
  Were we entirely rational, our conclusions would be grounded in logic and based 
on evidence objectively weighed. Unfortunately, belief formation is also affected 
by unconscious features of human psychology. Psychologists refer to these fea-
tures, some of which are unexpected and surprising, as cognitive biases. Cogni-
tive biases skew our apprehension of reality and interfere with our ability to think 
clearly, process information accurately, and reason objectively. 
 For example, we tend to evaluate an argument based on whether we agree with 
it rather than on the criteria of logic. Is the following specimen good reasoning?
When a poll is really, really out 
of whack with what I want to 
happen, I do have a tendency 
to disregard it.
—Rush Limbaugh, recognizing 
his own confirmation bias
People will generally accept 
facts as truth only if the facts 
agree with what they already 
believe.
—Andy Rooney, nicely explain-
ing belief bias
 All dogs are animals. 
 Some animals are German shepherds. 
 Therefore some dogs are German shepherds. 

 
COGNITIVE BIASES
15
 It isn’t. You might as well conclude some 
dogs are cats. After all, all dogs are animals 
and some animals are cats. If it took you a 
moment to see that the first argument is illogi-
cal, it’s because its conclusion is something 
you know is true. 
 The tendency to evaluate reasoning by 
the believability of its conclusion is known as 
belief bias.  A closely related cognitive bias is 
confirmation bias,  which refers to the ten-
dency to attach more weight to evidence that 
supports our viewpoint. If you are a Demo-
crat, you may embrace evidence that Fox 
News is biased; if you are a Republican, you 
might view the same evidence as weak and 
unscientific. 
 There isn’t any hard-and-fast difference 
between confirmation bias and belief bias; 
they are both unconscious expressions of the 
human tendency to think our side of an issue 
must be the correct side. Thinking critically 
means being especially critical of arguments 
that support our own points of view. 
 Some cognitive biases involve  heuristics, 
general rules we unconsciously follow in esti-
mating probabilities. *  An example is the  avail-
ability heuristic,  which involves unconsciously 
assigning a probability to a type of event on the basis of how often one thinks of 
events of that type. After watching multiple news reports of an earthquake or an air-
plane crash or a case of child abuse, thoughts of earthquakes and airplane crashes 
and child abuse will be in the front of one’s mind. Accordingly, one may overesti-
mate their probability. True, if the probability of airplane crashes were to increase, 
then one might well think about airplane crashes more often; but it does not follow 
that if one thinks about them more often, their probability has increased. 
 The availability heuristic may explain how easy it is to make the mistake known 
as generalizing from anecdote, a logical fallacy we discuss later in the book. Gener-
alizing from anecdote happens when one accepts a sweeping generalization based 
on a single vivid report. The availability heuristic is also probably related to the  false 
consensus effect, which refers to the inclination we may have to assume that our 
attitudes and those held by people around us are shared by society at large.  **   
 Another source of skewed belief is the  bandwagon effect,  which refers to 
an unconscious tendency to align one’s thinking with that of other people. The 
bandwagon effect is potentially a powerful source of cognitive distortion. In 
famous experiments, psychologist Solomon Asch found that what other people 
say  they see may actually alter what we think  we see. † We—the authors—have 
 *The field known as “heuristics and biases” was originated by Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky. 
 ** See L. Ross, “The ‘False Consensus Effect’: An Egocentric Bias in Social Perception and Attribution Processes,”  Journal 
of Experimental Social Psychology 13, no. 3 (May 1977): 279–301. 
† A copy of Asch’s own summary of his experiments can be found at  www.panarchy.org/asch/social.pressure.1955
.html . 
 ■ When Ann Coulter 
evaluates her and 
others’ reasoning, she 
is thinking critically, 
and when you evaluate 
her reasoning, you are 
thinking critically. 

16 
CHAPTER 1: WHAT IS CRITICAL THINKING, ANYWAY?
students take tests and quizzes using smartphones and clickers, with software that 
instantly displays the opinion of the class in a bar graph projected on a screen. 
Not infrequently it happens that, if opinion begins to build for one answer, almost 
everyone switches to that option—even if it is incorrect or illogical. 
 If you have wondered why consumer products are routinely advertised as 
best-sellers, you now know the answer. Marketers understand the bandwagon 
effect. They know that getting people to believe that a product is popular gener-
ates further sales. 
 Political propagandists also know we have an unconscious need to align our 
beliefs with the opinions of other people. Thus, they try to increase support for a 
measure by asserting that everyone likes it, or—and this is even more effective—by 
asserting that  nobody  likes whatever the opposition has proposed. Given alternative 
measures X and Y, “Nobody wants X!” is even more likely to generate support for Y 
than is “Everyone wants Y!” This is because of  negativity bias,  the tendency people 
have to weight negative information more heavily than positive information when 
evaluating things. Negativity bias is hard-wired into us: the brain displays more neu-
ral activity in response to negative information than to positive information.  *   A cor-
ollary to negativity bias from economics is that people generally are more strongly 
motivated to avoid a loss than to accrue a gain, a bias known as  loss aversion.  
 It also should come as no surprise that we find it easier to form negative 
opinions of people who don’t belong to our club, church, party, nationality, or 
other group. This is a part of  in-group bias,  another cognitive factor that may 
color perception and distort judgment. We may well perceive the members of our 
own group as exhibiting more variety and individuality than the members of this 
or that out-group, who we may view as indistinguishable from one another and as 
conforming to stereotypes. We may attribute the achievements of members of our 
own group to gumption and hard work and our failures to bad luck; whereas we 
may attribute  their  failures—those of the members of out-groups—to their per-
sonal shortcomings, while grudgingly discounting their achievements as mere 
good luck. The tendency to not appreciate that others’ behavior is as much con-
strained by events and circumstances as our own would be if we were in their 
position is known as the  fundamental attribution error. ** 
 Experiments suggest that people find it extraordinarily easy to forge group 
identities. When assigned to a group on the basis of something as trivial as a coin 
flip, subjects will immediately begin exhibiting in-group and attribution biases.  † 
In a famous experiment in social psychology, the Robber’s Cave Experiment, 
twenty-two 12-year-old boys who previously hadn’t known each other were 
divided  arbitrarily  into two groups. When the two groups were forced to compete, 
the members of each group instantly exhibited hostility and other indicators of 
in-group bias toward the members of the other group. †† 
 People make snap judgments about who is and who is not a member of 
their group. Students transferring into a new high school are branded swiftly. 
Once, one of the authors and his wife were walking their dogs, not necessarily 
the world’s best-behaved pooches, along a street in Carmel, an affluent town on 
 * See Tiffany A. Ito, and other authors, “Negative Information Weighs More Heavily on the Brain,”  Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology 75, no. 4 (1998): 887–900. 
 **E. E. Jones and V. A. Harris, “The Attribution of Attitudes,”  Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 3 (1967): 1–24. 
For in-group biases, see Henri Tajfel,  Human Groups and Social Categories (Cambridge, England: Cambridge University 
Press, 1981). 
 † Tajfel,  Human Groups and Social Categories. 
 †† A report of the Robber’s Cave experiment is available online at  http://psychclassics.yorku.ca/Sherif/ . 

 Rational Choice? 
 Critical thinking is aimed at coming to correct conclusions and making wise choices or deci-
sions. We know from everyday experience that desires, fears, personal objectives, and various 
emotions affect choices. As explained in the text, experimental psychologists have discovered 
other, more unexpected and surprising, influences on our thinking.
 ■ In a recent experiment, researchers at Yale and Harvard Universities asked subjects to eval-
uate a job candidate by reading an applicant’s résumé, which had been attached to a clip-
board. Some of the clipboards weighed ¾ pound; the others weighed 4½ pounds. Subjects 
holding the heavier clipboard rated the applicant as better overall. Evidently a “rational 
evaluation” of a person’s qualifications is affected by irrelevant physical cues. * 
 *Reported by Randolph E. Schmid of the Associated Press, in  The Sacramento Bee, June 23, 2010. 
 
COGNITIVE BIASES
17
California’s central coast. When the author fell a few paces behind his wife, a well-
dressed woman walked by and glanced disapprovingly at the dogs. “Did you see 
that woman?” she asked indignantly, unaware that she was referring to the wife of 
the man she was addressing. “You can tell she isn’t from around here,” she said. 
She may have assumed that the author was from the Carmel in-group, simply 
because he wasn’t connected to the misbehaving dogs. 
 In a series of famous experiments in the 1960s regarding  obedience to 
authority,  psychologist Stanley Millgram discovered that a frightening percent-
age of ordinary men and women will administer apparently lethal electrical 
shocks to innocent people, when told to do so by an experimenter in a white coat.  *   
The findings are subject to multiple interpretations and explanations, but the ten-
dency of humans to obey authority simply for the sake of doing so hardly needs 
experimental confirmation. Not long ago French researchers created a fake TV 
game show that was much like the Millgram experiment. The host instructed con-
testants to deliver electrical shocks to an individual who was said to be just 
another contestant, but who in reality was an actor. The contestants complied—
and delivered shocks right up to a level that (if the shock was really being deliv-
ered) might execute the man. Whether the subjects were blindly following the 
instructions of an authority or were responding to some other impulse isn’t com-
pletely clear, but it is impossible to think that good judgment or rational thought 
would lead them to such excess. ** 
 Yet another possible source of psychological distortion is the  overconfi-
dence effect, one of several self-deception biases that may be found in a variety 
of contexts. †  If a person estimates the percentage of his or her correct answers on 
a subject, the estimate will likely err on the high side—at least if the questions are 
 * Millgram discusses his experiments in  Obedience to Authority: An Experimental View (New York: HarperCollins, 
1974). 
 ** Jamey Keaton, Associated Press. Reported in  The Sacramento Bee, Thursday, March 18, 2010. Did the subjects 
suspect the shocks weren’t real? Their statements afterward don’t rule out the possibility but certainly seem to 
suggest they believed they truly were administering painful electrical shocks to the actor. 
†However, a universal tendency among humans to irrationally exaggerate their own competencies hasn’t been 
established. For an online quiz purportedly showing the overconfidence effect see:  www.tim-richardson.net/
joomla15/finance-articles-profmenu-70/73-over-confidence-test.html . 

18 
CHAPTER 1: WHAT IS CRITICAL THINKING, ANYWAY?
difficult or the subject matter is unfamiliar.  *   Per-
haps some manifestation of the overconfidence 
effect explains why, in the early stages of the 
American Idol  competition, many contestants 
appear totally convinced they will be crowned 
the next American Idol—and are speechless 
when the judges inform them they cannot so 
much as carry a tune. ** 
 Closely related to the overconfidence effect 
is the  better-than-average illusion.  The illusion 
crops up when most of a group rate themselves 
as better than most of the group relative to some 
desirable characteristic, such as resourcefulness 
or driving ability. The classic illustration is the 1976 
survey of SAT takers, in which well over 50 percent 
of the respondents rated themselves as better than 
50 percent of other SAT takers with respect to such 
qualities as leadership ability.  †   The same effect has 
been observed when people estimate how their 
intelligence, memory, or job performance stacks 
up with the intelligence, memory, and job per-
formances of other members of their profession 
or workplace. In our own informal surveys, more 
than 80 percent of our students rate themselves 
in the top 10 percent of their class with respect to 
their ability to think critically. 
 Unfortunately, evidence indicates that even 
when they are informed about the better-than-
average illusion, people may  still  rate themselves 
as better than most in their ability to not be sub-
ject to it. †† 
 That beliefs are generated as much by psy-
chology and impulse as by evidence should come as no surprise. The new car 
that was well beyond our means yesterday seems entirely affordable today—
though our finances haven’t changed. If someone invited us to The Olive Garden 
we’d expect decent fare; but if they suggested we try dining at, say, The Lung 
Garden, we’d hesitate—even if we were told the food is identical. People will go 
out of their way to save $10 when buying a $25 pen, but won’t do the same to 
 * See Sarah Lichtenstein and other authors, “Calibration of Probabilities: The State of the Art to 1980,” in Daniel 
Kahneman, Paul Slovic, and Amos Tversky,  Judgment under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases (Cambridge, England: 
Cambridge University Press, 1982), 306–34. 
 ** This possibility was proposed by Gad Saad,  Psychology Today,  www.psychologytoday.com/blog/
homo-consumericus/200901/self-deception-american-idol-is-it-adaptive . 
† See Mark D. Alicke and other authors in “The Better-Than-Average Effect,” in Mark D. Alicke and others,  The Self in 
Social Judgment: Studies in Self and Identity (New York: Psychology Press, 2005, pp. 85–106). The better-than-average 
illusion is sometimes called the Lake Woebegone effect, in reference to Garrison Keillor’s story about the fictitious 
Minnesota town “where all the children are above average.” 
†† http://weblamp.princeton.edu/~psych/FACULTY/Articles/Pronin/The%20Bias%20Blind.PDF . The better-than-
average bias has not been found to hold for all positive traits. In some things, people underestimate their abilities. The 
moral is that for many abilities, we are probably not the best judges of how we compare to others. And this includes 
our ability to avoid being subject to biasing influences. 
 ■ Does P. Diddy dress 
well? The issue is 
subjective, or, as some 
people say, “a matter of 
opinion.” 

 
COGNITIVE BIASES 
19
save the same amount buying a $500 suit. *  Programmed into our psyches are 
features that distort our perception, color our judgment, and impair our ability 
to think objectively. 
 The best defense? Making it a habit to think critically—and to be especially 
critical of arguments and evidence that seem to accord with what we already believe. 
 The following exercises may help you understand the cognitive biases dis-
cussed in the previous section. 
 *Daniel Ariely,  Predictably Irrational (New York: HarperCollins, 2008), 19–20. 
 The following questions are for thought or discussion. Your instructor may ask 
you to write a brief essay addressing one or more of them.
 1. Which of the cognitive biases discussed in this section do you think you 
might be most subject to? Why? 
   2. Can you think of other psychological tendencies you have that might interfere 
with the objectivity of your thinking? For example, are you unusually gener-
ous or selfish? 
 3. Think again about a student (or anyone) contemplating getting a pet. Is there 
a cognitive bias a person in that position might be especially prone to, when 
weighing the arguments on both sides? 
 4. Explain belief bias (or confirmation bias) in your own words, and give an 
example of a time when you may have been subject to it. 
   5. What might you do to compensate for a bias factor you listed in questions 1 or 
2 in this exercise? 
▲
▲
 Exercise 1-8 
 For each of the following attributes, rate yourself in comparison with other 
 students in your class. Are you
 a. in the top 10 percent? 
 b. in the top 50 to 89 percent? 
 c. in the lower 25 to 49 percent? 
 d. below the top 75 percent?
 ■ ability to think clearly 
 ■ ability to think logically 
 ■ ability to think critically 
 ■ ability to be objective 
 ■ ability to think creatively 
 ■ ability to read with comprehension 
 ■ ability to spot political bias in the evening news 
 ■ IQ 
 If you answered (a) or (b) about one of the preceding abilities, would you change 
your mind if you learned that most of the class also answered (a) or (b) about that 
ability? Why or why not? 
 Exercise 1-9 

20 
CHAPTER 1: WHAT IS CRITICAL THINKING, ANYWAY?
 Select one of the following claims you are inclined to strongly agree or disagree 
with. Then produce the best argument you can think of for the opposing side. 
When you are finished, ask someone to read your argument and tell you honestly 
whether he or she thinks you have been fair and objective.
 ■ “There is (is not) a God.” 
 ■ “Illegal immigrants should (should not) be eligible for health care benefits.” 
 ■ “Handgun owners should (should not) be required to register each handgun 
they own.” 
 ■ “The words ‘under God’ should (should not) be removed from the Pledge of 
Allegiance.”  
 ■ “Sex education should (should not) be taught in public schools.” 
 Exercise 1-10 
 TRUTH AND KNOWLEDGE 
  At the end of the day, when we are ready to turn out the lights and go to bed, we 
want the conclusions we have reached through painstaking critical thinking to 
be  true —and we want to  know  they are true. However, what are truth and knowl-
edge? Through the years, many competing theories have been offered to account 
for their real nature, but fortunately for you, we can tell you what you need to 
know for this discussion without getting mired in those controversies. 
 As for truth, the most important thing is to understand that an objective belief 
or claim is either true or false in the normal, commonsense way. Truth and falsity 
are properties of propositional entities like beliefs, opinions, judgments, statements, 
claims, and the like. As mentioned previously, when any of those entities is objec-
tive, whether it is true or false does not depend on whether we think it is true or false. 
 You can assert a claim’s truth in a number of ways. In normal conversation, 
we’d take each of the following as making the same statement:
  The concept of knowledge is another that philosophers have contested at 
a deep, theoretical level despite a general agreement that in everyday life, we 
understand well enough what we mean when we say we know something. 
 Ordinarily, you are entitled to say you  know  a book is on the table, provided 
that (1) you believe a book is on the table, (2) you have justification for this belief 
in the form of an argument beyond a reasonable doubt that a book is on the table, 
and (3) you have no reason to suspect you are mistaken, such as that you haven’t 
slept for several nights or have recently taken hallucinogenic drugs. Skeptics may 
say it is impossible to know anything, though one wonders how they know that. 
Presumably, they’d have to say they’re just guessing. 
 WHAT CRITICAL THINKING CAN AND CAN’T DO 
  We think critically when we evaluate the reasoning we and others use in com-
ing to conclusions. Perhaps this definition strikes you as restricted and narrow. 
 A book is on the table. 
 It is true a book is on the table. 
 It is a fact a book is on the table. 
 Yes, a book is on the table. 

 
A WORD ABOUT THE EXERCISES 
21
A composer, for example, thinks critically when he or she tries to find the right 
instrumentation to introduce a musical theme. A general thinks critically when 
he or she defines a military objective and weighs various strategies for achiev-
ing it. Dentists think critically when they weigh the likely duration of alterna-
tive dental repairs against a patient’s life expectancy. Mechanics think critically 
when they attempt to diagnose mechanical problems by listening to the sound 
of an engine. People in each walk of life examine considerations that are unique 
to them. 
 Yet every discipline, every walk of life, every enterprise without exception 
involves the two kinds of reasoning we will begin examining in the next chapter. 
And critical thinking anywhere can be waylaid by emotion, self-interest, wishful 
thinking, desire to be accepted, confirmation bias, and various other psychologi-
cal propensities that come with being a human being, and that also will be con-
sidered in this book. 
 Thinking critically won’t necessarily tell you whether you should get a dog 
or whom to vote for or whether there is global warming or why your car won’t 
start. It can, however, help you spot bad reasoning about all these things.   
 A WORD ABOUT THE EXERCISES 
  To get good at tennis, golf, playing a musical instrument, or most other skills, you 
have to practice, practice, and practice some more. It’s the same way with critical 
thinking, and that’s why we provide so many exercises. For some exercises in this 
book, there is no such thing as only one correct answer, just as there is no such 
thing as only one correct way to serve a tennis ball. Some answers, however—just 
like tennis serves—are better than others, and that is where your instructor comes 
in. In many exercises, answers you give that are different from your instructor’s 
are not necessarily incorrect. Still, your instructor’s answers will be well thought 
out, reliable, and worth your attention. We recommend taking advantage of his or 
her experience to improve your ability to think critically. 
 Answers to questions marked with a triangle are found in the answers sec-
tion at the back of the book. 
 We think critically when we evaluate reasoning used in coming to conclusions. 
Conclusions are beliefs; when they are expressed using true-or-false declarative 
sentences, they are claims (or statements or assertions). A belief (or opinion or 
claim or statement, etc.) whose truth is independent of whether people think it is 
true, is objective. 
 An issue is simply a question. One uses an argument to establish a position 
on an issue; the position is the conclusion of the argument. Evaluation of argu-
ments can be skewed by emotion, wishful thinking, self-interest, confirmation 
bias, and other psychological impediments to objectivity. 
 What follows is a more complete list of ideas explored in this chapter.
 ■  Claim: When a belief (judgment, opinion) is asserted in a declarative sen-
tence, the result is a claim, statement, or assertion. 
 ■  Objective claim vs. subjective claim: An objective claim is true or false 
regardless of whether people think it is true or false. Claims that lack this 
property are said to be subjective. 
 Recap 

22 
CHAPTER 1: WHAT IS CRITICAL THINKING, ANYWAY?
 ■  “Fact vs. opinion”: People sometimes refer to true objective claims as “facts,” 
and use the word “opinion” to designate any claim that is subjective. 
 ■  “Factual claim”: An objective claim. Saying that a claim is “factual” is not the 
same as saying it is true. A factual claim is simply a claim whose truth does 
not depend on our thinking it is true. 
 ■  Moral subjectivism: Moral subjectivism is the idea that moral judgments 
are subjective. “There is nothing either good or bad but that thinking makes 
it so.” 
 ■  Issue: A question. 
 ■  Argument: An argument consists of two parts—one part of which (the prem-
ise or premises) is intended to provide a reason for accepting the other part 
(the conclusion). 
 ■  “Argument”:  People sometimes use this word to refer just to an argument’s 
premise.  
 ■  Arguments and issues: The conclusion of an argument states a position on 
the issue under consideration. 
 ■  Cognitive bias: A feature of human psychology that skews belief formation. 
The ones discussed in this chapter include the following: 
 
■  Belief bias: Evaluating reasoning by how believable its conclusion is. 
 
■  Confirmation bias: A tendency to attach more weight to considerations 
that support our views. 
 
■  Availability heuristic: Assigning a probability to an event based on how 
easily or frequently it is thought of. 
 
■  False consensus effect: Assuming our opinions and those held by people 
around us are shared by society at large. 
 
■  Bandwagon effect: The tendency to align our beliefs with those of other 
people.  
 
■  Negativity bias: Attaching more weight to negative information than to 
positive information. 
 
■  Loss aversion: Being more strongly motivated to avoid a loss than to 
accrue a gain. 
 
■  In-group bias: A set of cognitive biases that make us view people who 
belong to our group differently from people who don’t. 
 
■  Fundamental attribution error: Having one understanding of the behav-
ior of people in the in-group and another for people not in the in-group. 
 
■  Obedience to authority: A tendency to comply with instructions from an 
authority.  
 
■  Overconfidence effect: A cognitive bias that leads us to overestimate 
what percentage of our answers on a subject are correct. 
 
■  Better-than-average illusion: A self-deception cognitive bias that leads 
us to overestimate our own abilities relative to those of others. 
 ■  Truth: A claim is true if it is free from error. 
 ■  Knowledge: If you believe something, have an argument beyond a reason-
able doubt that it is so, and have no reason to think you are mistaken, you can 
claim you know it. 

 
EXERCISES 
23
 Here are more exercises to help you identify objective and subjective claims, rec-
ognize arguments, identify issues, and tell when two people are addressing the 
same issue. In addition, you will find writing exercises as well as an exercise that 
will give you practice in identifying the purpose of a claim. 
 Exercise 1-11 
 Identify the conclusion of any arguments contained in the following passages.
 1. There is trouble in the Middle East, there is a recession at home, and all eco-
nomic indicators are trending downward. It seems likely, then, that the only 
way the stock market can go is down. 
 2. Lucy is too short to reach the bottom of the sign. 
 3. “Can it be established that genetic humanity is sufficient for moral human-
ity? I think there are very good reasons for not defining the moral commu-
nity in this way.” 
 —Mary Anne Warren 
 4. Pornography often depicts women as servants or slaves or as otherwise 
inferior to men. In light of that, it seems reasonable to expect to find more 
women than men who are upset by pornography. 
 5. “My folks, who were Russian immigrants, loved the chance to vote. That’s 
probably why I decided that I was going to vote whenever I got the chance. 
I’m not sure [whom I’ll vote for], but I am going to vote. And I don’t under-
stand people who don’t.” 
 —Mike Wallace 
 6. “Dynamism is a function of change. On some campuses, change is effected 
through nonviolent or even violent means. Although we too have had our 
demonstrations, change here is usually a product of discussion in the deci-
sion-making process.” 
 —Hillary Clinton, while a student at Wellesley College in the 1960s 
 7. What does it take to make a good soap? You need good guys and bad guys, 
sex, babies, passion, infidelity, jealousy, hatred, and suspense. And it must 
all be believable. Believability is the key. 
 8. We need to make clear that sexual preference, whether chosen or genetically 
determined, is a private matter. It has nothing to do with an individual’s abil-
ity to make a positive contribution to society. 
 9. The report card on charter schools is mixed. Some show better results than 
public schools, others show worse. Charter schools have this advantage 
when it comes to test scores: the kids attending them are more apt to have 
involved parents. 
 10.  American Idol may not be having its best season, but when you remember 
whose careers were launched by  AI, you know it still is the best talent show 
on TV. 
▲
▲
▲
▲
 Additional 
Exercises 

24 
CHAPTER 1: WHAT IS CRITICAL THINKING, ANYWAY?
 Exercise 1-12 
 For each numbered passage in this exercise, identify which lettered item best 
states the primary issue discussed in the passage. Be prepared to say why you 
think your choice is the correct one.
 1. In pre–civil war Spain, the influence of the Catholic Church must have been 
much stronger on women than on men. You can determine this by looking 
at the number of religious communities, such as monasteries, nunneries, 
and so forth. A total of about 5,000 such communities existed in 1931; 4,000 
of them were female, whereas only 1,000 of them were male. This proves my 
point about the Church’s influence on the sexes.
 
a.  whether the Catholic Church’s influence was stronger on women than 
on men in pre–civil war Spain 
 
b.  whether the speaker’s statistics really prove his point about the Church’s 
influence  
 
c.  whether the figures about religious communities really have anything to 
do with the overall influence of the Catholic Church in Spain 
 2.  Breaking Bad might have been a good series without all the profanity. But 
without the profanity, it would not have been believable. Those people just 
talk that way. If you have them speaking Shakespearean English, nobody will 
pay attention. Yes, like many programs with offensive features—whether it’s 
bad language, sex, or whatever—it will never appeal to the squeamish.
 
a. whether movies with offensive features can appeal to the squeamish 
 
b.  whether  Breaking Bad would have been entertaining without the bad 
language  
 
c. whether  Breaking Bad would have been believable without the profanity 
 
d. whether believable programs must always have offensive features 
 3. Siri is great, but it isn’t an encyclopedia. It will tell you where the nearest 
Round Table is, but right now it won’t tell you how late the place is open. 
 
a. whether Siri is great 
 
b. whether Siri has encyclopedic knowledge 
 
c. whether Siri will have encyclopedic knowledge 
 
d. whether Siri knows a lot about Round Table 
 4. From the way it tastes, you might think French roast has more caffeine in 
it than regular coffee, but it has less. The darker the roast, the less caffeine 
there is in it. I read this in  Consumer Reports. 
 
a. whether  Consumer Reports is a good source of information about coffee 
 
b. whether French roast has more caffeine than regular coffee 
 
c.  whether most people think French roast has more caffeine than regular 
coffee     
 5. In Miami–Dade County, Florida, schools superintendent Rudy Crew was 
inundated with complaints after a police officer used a stun gun on a six-
year-old student. As a result, Crew asked the Miami–Dade police to ban the 
use of stun guns on elementary school children. Crew did the right thing. 
More than 100 deaths have been linked to tasers.
 
a. whether a police officer used a stun gun on a six-year-old student 
 
b.  whether the superintendent did the right thing by asking the police to 
ban the use of stun guns on elementary school children 
▲
▲

 
EXERCISES 
25
 
c. whether 100 deaths have been linked to tasers 
 
d.  whether the fact that 100 deaths have been linked to tasers shows that 
the superintendent did the right thing when he asked the police not to 
use tasers on children 
 6. Letting your children surf the net is like dropping them off downtown to 
spend the day doing whatever they want. They’ll get in trouble.
 
a.  whether letting your children off downtown to spend the day doing 
whatever they want will lead them into trouble 
 
b. whether letting your children surf the net will lead them into trouble 
 
c. whether restrictions should be placed on children’s activities 
 7. The winner of this year’s spelling bee is a straight-A student whose favorite 
subject is science, which isn’t surprising, since students interested in science 
learn to pay attention to details.
 
a. whether the winner of this year’s spelling bee is a straight-A student 
 
b. whether science students learn to pay attention to details 
 
c. whether learning science will improve a student’s ability to spell 
 
d. whether learning science teaches a student to pay attention to details 
 
e. none of the above 
 8. Illinois state employees, both uniformed and nonuniformed, have been serv-
ing the state without a contract or cost-of-living pay increase for years, despite 
the fact that legislators and the governor have accepted hefty pay increases. All 
public employee unions should launch an initiative to amend the Illinois consti-
tution so it provides compulsory binding arbitration for all uniformed and non-
uniformed public employees, under the supervision of the state supreme court.
 
a.  whether Illinois state employees have been serving the state without a 
contract or cost-of-living pay increase for years 
 
b.  whether public employee unions should launch an initiative to amend 
the Illinois constitution so it provides compulsory binding arbitration for 
all uniformed and nonuniformed public employees, under the supervi-
sion of the Illinois Supreme Court 
 
c. neither of the above 
 9. In 2007, the Dominican Republic banned the sale of two brands of Chinese 
toothpaste because they contained a toxic chemical responsible for dozens 
of poisoning deaths in Panama. The company that exported the toothpaste, 
the Danyang Household Chemical Company, defended its product. “Tooth-
paste is not something you’d swallow, but spit out, and so it’s totally different 
from something you would eat,” one company manager said. The company 
manager was taking a position on which issue?
 
a.  whether the Danyang Household Chemical Company included toxic 
chemicals in its toothpaste 
 
b.  whether Danyang Household Chemical Company toothpaste prevents 
cavities.  
 
c.  whether the Danyang Household Chemical Company did anything 
wrong by exporting its toothpaste 
 
d. whether China should have better product safety controls 
 10.  you: So, what do you think of the governor?
 
 your friend: Not much, actually. 
 
 you: What do you mean? Don’t you think she’s been pretty good? 
 
 your friend: Are you serious? 
▲
▲

26 
CHAPTER 1: WHAT IS CRITICAL THINKING, ANYWAY?
 
 you: Well, yes. I think she’s been doing a fine job. 
 
 your friend: Oh, come on. Weren’t you complaining about her just a few 
 days ago? 
 
a. whether your friend thinks the governor has been a good governor  
 
b. whether you think the governor has been a good governor 
 
c. whether the governor has been a good governor 
 
d.  whether you have a good argument for thinking the governor has been a 
good governor 
 Exercise 1-13 
 On what issue is the speaker taking a position in each of the following?
 1. Police brutality does not happen very often. Otherwise, it would not make 
headlines when it does. 
 2. We have little choice but to concentrate crime-fighting efforts on enforce-
ment because we don’t have any idea what to do about the underlying 
causes of crime. 
 3. A lot of people think the gender of a Supreme Court justice doesn’t matter. 
But with three women on the bench, cases dealing with women’s issues are 
handled differently. 
 4. “The point is that the existence of an independent world explains our expe-
riences better than any known alternative. We thus have good reason to 
believe that the world—which seems independent of our minds—really is 
essentially independent of our minds.” 
 —Theodore W. Schick Jr. and Lewis Vaughn, How to Think about Weird Things 
 5. Sure, some hot-doggers get good grades in Bubacz’s class. But my guess is if 
Algernon takes it, all it’ll get him is flunked out. 
 6. It’s so dumb to think sales taxes hit poor people harder than rich people. 
The more money you have, the more you spend; and the more you spend, 
the more sales taxes you pay. And rich people spend more than poor 
people.  
 7. If you’re going to buy a synthesizer, sign up for lessons on how to use the 
thing. A synthesizer won’t work for you if you don’t know how to make it 
work. 
 8. Intravenous drug use with nonsterile needles is one of the leading causes of 
the spread of AIDS. Many states passed legislation allowing officials to dis-
tribute clean needles in an effort to combat this method of infection. But in 
eleven states, including some of the most populous, possession of hypoder-
mic syringes without a prescription is illegal. The laws in these foot-dragging 
states must be changed if we hope to end this epidemic. 
 9. The best way to avoid error is to suspend judgment about everything except 
what is certain. Because error leads to trouble, suspending judgment is the 
right thing to do. 
 10. “[Readers] may learn something about their own relationship to the earth 
from a people who were true conservationists. The Indians knew that life 
was equated with the earth and its resources, that America was a paradise, 
▲
▲
▲
▲

 
EXERCISES 
27
and they could not comprehend why the intruders from the East were deter-
mined to destroy all that was Indian as well as America itself.” 
 —Dee Brown , Bury My Heart at Wounded Knee 
 Exercise 1-14 
 Is the second person addressing the issue raised by the first person? 
 Example 
 
 elmop: 
 Toilet paper looks better unwinding from the back of 
the spool. 
 marwoof:  Get real! That is so stupid! It should unwind the other 
way.   
 Analysis 
 Marwoof addresses the issue raised by Elmop.
 1.  mr.: Next weekend, we go on standard time again. We have to set the clocks 
ahead.
 
 mrs.: It isn’t next weekend; it’s the weekend after. And you set the clocks 
back an hour. 
 2.  moore: Getting out of Afghanistan is only going to make us vulnerable to 
terrorism.
 
  parker: Yeah, right. You’re just saying that ’cause you don’t like Obama. 
 3.  she: You don’t give me enough help around the house. Why, you hardly ever 
do anything!
 
  he: What??? I mowed the lawn on Saturday, and I washed both of the 
cars on Sunday. What’s more, I clean up after dinner almost every night, 
and I hauled all that garden stuff to the dump. How can you say I don’t do 
anything?  
 
  she: Well, you sure don’t want to hear about what I do! I do a lot more than 
that! 
 4.  heedless: When people complain about what we did in Afghanistan, they 
just encourage terrorists to think America won’t fight. People who complain 
like that ought to just shut up.
 
  cautious: I disagree. Those people are reminding everyone it isn’t in our 
interest to get involved in wars abroad. 
 5.  mr. rj: If you ask me, there are too many casinos around here already. We 
don’t need more.
 
  mr. jr: Yeah? Well that’s a strange idea coming from you; you play the lottery 
all the time. 
 6.  joe fitness: Whoa, look at that! The chain on my bike is starting to jump 
around! If I don’t fix it, it’ll stop working.
 
  couch potato: What you need is to stop worrying about it. You get too 
much exercise as it is. 
 7.  young guy: Baseball players are better now than they were forty years ago. 
They eat better, have better coaching, you name it.
▲
▲
▲

28 
CHAPTER 1: WHAT IS CRITICAL THINKING, ANYWAY?
 
 old guy: They aren’t better at all. They just seem better because they get 
more publicity and play with juiced equipment. 
 8.  student one: Studying is a waste of time. Half the time, I get better grades if 
I don’t study. 
   student two: I’d like to hear you say that in front of your parents. 
 9.  philatelist: Did you know that U.S. postage stamps are now being printed 
in Canada?
   patriot: What an outrage! If there is one thing that ought to be made in the 
United States, it’s U.S. postage stamps! 
   philatelist: Oh, c’mon. If American printing companies can’t do the work, 
let the Canadians have it. 
 10.  first neighbor: See here, you have no right to make so much noise at night. 
I have to get up early for work.
 
 second neighbor: Yeah? Well, if you have the right to let your idiot dog run 
loose all day long, I have the right to make noise at night. 
 11.  study partner one: Let’s knock off for a while and go get pizza. We’ll func-
tion better if we eat something.
 
 study partner two: Not one of those pizzas you like! I can’t stand 
anchovies.     
 12.  female student: The Internet is overrated. It takes forever to find some-
thing you can actually use in an assignment.
 
 male student: Listen, it takes a lot longer to drive over to the library and 
find a place to park. 
 13.  ramon: Hey, this English course is a complete waste of time. You don’t need 
to know how to write anymore.
 
 devon: That’s ridiculous. You’re just saying that because you’re a PE major. 
 14.  culturally challenged person: A concert! You think I’m going to a con-
cert when I can be home watching football?
 
 culturally challenged person’s spouse: Yes, if you want dinner this week.  
 15.  republican: I don’t think Obama’s budget requests make sense.
 
 democrat: You just can’t stand more taxes, can you? 
 16.  moore: I’ve seen the work of both Thomas Brothers and Vernon Construc-
tion, and I tell you, Thomas Brothers does a better job.
 
 parker: Listen, Thomas Brothers is the highest-priced company in the 
whole state. If you hire them, you’ll pay double for every part of the job. 
 17.  urbanite: The new requirements will force people off septic tanks and make 
them hook up to the city sewer. That’s the only way we’ll ever get the nitrates 
and other pollutants out of the groundwater.
 
 suburbanite: You call it a requirement, but I call it an outrage! They’re 
going to charge us from five to fifteen thousand dollars each to make the 
hookups! That’s more than anybody can afford! 
 18.  critic: I don’t think it’s proper to sell junk bonds without emphasizing the 
risk involved, but it’s especially bad to sell them to older people who are 
investing their entire savings.
 
    entrepreneur:  Oh, come on. There’s nothing the matter with making money.     
 19.  one hand: What with the number of handguns and armed robberies these 
days, it’s hard to feel safe in your own home.
▲
▲
▲
▲

 
EXERCISES 
29
 
 the other hand: The reason you don’t feel safe is you don’t have a hand-
gun yourself. Criminals would rather hit a house where there’s no gun than a 
house where there is one. 
 20.  one guy: Would you look at the price they want for these computer tablets? 
They’re making a fortune on every one of these things!
 
 another: Don’t give me that. I know how big a raise you got last year—you 
can afford a truckload of those things! 
 21.  fed up: This city is too cold in the winter, too hot in the summer, and too 
dangerous all the time. I’ll be happier if I exercise my early retirement option 
and move to my place in Arkansas.
 
 friend: You’re nuts. You’ll be miserable if you don’t work, and if you move, 
you’ll be back in six months. 
 22.  katie: Hey Jennifer, I hate to say this, but you would be better off riding a 
bike to school.
 
 jennifer: What, this from someone who drives everywhere she goes? 
 23.  dezra: What are you thinking, mowing the lawn in your bare feet? That’s 
totally unsafe. 
    ken: Like you never did anything you could get hurt doing? 
 24.  yao: Nice thing about an iMac. It never gets viruses.
 
 mao: Of course you would say that; you own one. 
 25.  herr überalles: We spend too much on heating. We must show more 
fortitude.
 
 frau überalles: But you know I get cold easily. 
 Exercise 1-15 
 Which of the following claims pertain to right/wrong, good/bad, or should/
shouldn’t?
    1. We did the right thing getting rid of Saddam. He was a sadistic tyrant.  
 2. That guy is the smartest person I know. 
 3. Contributing to the Humane Society is good to do. 
 4. It’s time you starting thinking about somebody other than yourself! 
 5. Your first duty is to your family; after that, to God and country, in that order. 
 6. You know what? I always tip 15 percent. 
 7. The FBI and CIA don’t share information all that often, at least that’s what 
I’ve heard. 
 8. You might find the parking less expensive on the street. 
 9. Help him! If the situation were reversed, he would help you. 
 10. Hip hop is better than country, any day. 
 11. Rodin was a master sculptor.  
 12. Whatever happened to Susan Boyle? You don’t hear about her anymore. 
 13. If we want to stop the decline in enrollments here at Chaffee, we need to give 
students skills they can use. 
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲

30 
CHAPTER 1: WHAT IS CRITICAL THINKING, ANYWAY?
 Exercise 1-16 
 This exercise will give you another opportunity to identify when someone is offer-
ing an argument, as distinct from doing something else. 
 Decide which of the lettered options serves the same kind of purpose as the 
original remark. Then think critically about your conclusion. Do you have a rea-
son for it? Be ready to state your reasoning in class if called on. 
 Example 
   Be careful! This plate is hot.
 
a. Watch out. The roads are icy. 
 
b. Say—why don’t you get lost? 
 Conclusion: The purpose of (a) is most like the purpose of the original remark. 
Reason: Both are arguments.
 1. I’d expect that zipper to last about a week; it’s made of cheap plastic.
 
a. The wrinkles on that dog make me think of an old man. 
 
b.  Given Sydney’s spending habits, I doubt Adolphus will stick with her for 
long. 
 2. If you recharge your battery, sir, it will be almost as good as new.
 
a.  Purchasing one CD at the regular price would entitle you to buy an 
unlimited number of CDs at only $4.99. 
 
b. I will now serve dinner, after which you can play if you want. 
 3. To put out a really creative newsletter, you should get in touch with our tech-
nology people.
 
a. Do unto others as you would have them do unto you. 
 
b. To put an end to this discussion, I’ll concede your point. 
 
c. You’d better cut down on your smoking if you want to live longer. 
 4. GE’s profits during the first quarter were short of GE’s projections. Therefore, 
we can expect GE stock to fall sharply in the next day or so.
 
a.  The senator thought what he did in private was nobody’s business but 
his own. 
 
b. The dog is very hot. Probably he would appreciate a drink of water. 
 
c. The dog’s coat is unusually thick. No wonder he is hot. 
 5. How was my date with your brother? Well . . . he has a great personality.
 
a.  How do I like my steak? Not dripping blood like this thing you just 
served me. 
 
b.  How do I like the dress? Say, did you know that black is more slimming 
than white? 
 6. The wind is coming up. We’d better head for shore.
 
a. They finally arrived. I guess they will order soon. 
 
b. We shouldn’t leave yet. We just got here. 
 7. Good ties are made out of silk. That’s why they cost so much.
 
a. Belts are like suspenders. They both keep your pants up. 
 
b. Rugby has lots of injuries because rugby players don’t wear pads. 
▲
▲
▲

 
EXERCISES 
31
 8. Daphne owns an expensive car. She must be rich.
 
a. This dog has fleas. I’ll bet it itches a lot. 
 
b. This dog has fleas. That explains why it scratches a lot. 
 9. Dennis’s salary is going up. He just got a promotion.
 
a. Dennis’s salary went up after he got a promotion. 
 
b. Dennis’s salary won’t be going up; he didn’t get a promotion. 
 10. Outlawing adult websites may hamper free speech, but pornography must 
be curbed.
 
a. The grass must be mowed even though it is hot. 
 
b. The grass is getting long; time to mow. 
 Writing Exercises 
 1. Do people choose the sex they are attracted to? Write a one-page answer to 
this question, defending your answer with at least one supporting reason. 
Take about ten minutes to do this. Do not put your name on your essay. 
When everyone is finished, your instructor will collect the essays and redis-
tribute them to the class. In groups of four or five, read the essays that have 
been given to your group. Divide the drafts into two batches, those that 
contain an argument and those that do not. Your instructor will ask each 
group to read to the class a essay that contains an argument and a essay that 
does not contain an argument (assuming that each group has at least one 
of each). The group should be prepared to explain why they feel each essay 
contains or fails to contain an argument. 
 2. Is it ever okay to tell a lie? Take a position on this issue and write a short 
essay supporting it. 
▲

32
 Two Kinds of Reasoning 
 T
 ime to look more closely at arguments—the kind that 
actually show something (unlike the red herrings and 
emotional appeals and other fallacies we are going to be 
talking about later). 
 ARGUMENTS: GENERAL FEATURES 
 To repeat, an argument consists of two parts. One part, the 
premise, is intended to provide a reason for accepting the sec-
ond part, the conclusion. This statement is  not an argument:
 It’s just a statement. 
Likewise,  this is not an argument:
 It’s just a slightly more emphatic statement. 
Nor is this an argument:
 It just tries to scare us into believing God exists. 
God exists.
God exists. That’s as plain as the nose on your face.
God exists, and if you don’t believe it, you will go to hell.
 Students will learn to . . . 
 1. Recognize general features of 
arguments 
 2. Distinguish between deductive and 
inductive arguments and evalu-
ate them for validity, soundness, 
strength, and weakness 
 3. Identify unstated premises 
 4. Identify a balance of considerations 
argument and an inference to the 
best explanation (IBE) 
 5. Distinguish between ethos, pathos, 
and logos as means of persuasion 
 6. Use techniques for understanding 
and evaluating the structure and 
content of arguments 
 2 

 
ARGUMENTS: GENERAL FEATURES
33
Also not an argument:
 Yes, it looks a bit like an argument, but it isn’t. It merely explains why I 
believe in God. 
On the other hand, this  is an argument:
 The difference between this and the earlier examples? This example has a 
premise (“something had to cause the universe”) and a conclusion (“God exists”). 
 As we explained in Chapter 1 (see page 8), an argument always has two 
parts: a premise part and a conclusion part. The premise part is intended to give a 
reason for accepting the conclusion part. 
 This probably seems fairly straightforward, but one or two complications 
are worth noting.  
 Conclusions Used as Premises 
 The same statement can be the conclusion of one argument and a premise in 
another argument: 
 In this example, the statement “The car has outlived its usefulness” is the 
conclusion of one argument, and it is also a premise in the argument that we 
should get a new car. 
 Clearly, if a premise in an argument is uncertain or controversial or has been 
challenged, you might want to defend it—that is, argue that it is true. When you do, the 
premise becomes the conclusion of a new argument. However, every chain of reason-
ing must begin somewhere. If we ask a speaker to defend each premise with a further 
argument, and each premise in that argument with a further argument, and so on and 
so on, we eventually find ourselves being unreasonable, much like four-year-olds who 
keep asking “Why?” until they become exasperating. If we ask a speaker why he thinks 
the car has outlived its usefulness, he may mention that the car is hard to start. If we 
ask him why he thinks the car is hard to start, he probably won’t know what to say.  
 Unstated Premises and Conclusions 
 Another complication is that arguments can contain unstated premises. For 
example, 
 The unstated premise must be that Bill has no ID. 
 An argument can even have an unstated conclusion. Here is an example: 
I think God exists, because I was raised a Baptist.
God exists because something had to cause the universe.
Premise: The brakes aren’t working, the engine burns oil, the transmission needs 
work, and the car is hard to start.
Conclusion 1: The car has outlived its usefulness.
Conclusion 2: We should get a new car.
Premise: You can’t check out books from the library without an ID.
Conclusion: Bill won’t be able to check out any books.

 Conclusion Indicators 
 When the words in the following list are used in arguments, they usually indicate that a premise 
has just been offered and that a conclusion is about to be presented. (The three dots represent 
the claim that is the conclusion.) 
 Example: 
 Stacy drives a Porsche. This suggests that either she is rich or her parents are. 
 The conclusion is 
 Either she is rich or her parents are. 
 The premise is 
 Stacy drives a Porsche. 
Thus . . .
Consequently . . .
Therefore . . .
So . . .
Hence . . .
Accordingly . . .
This shows that . . .
This implies that . . .
This suggests that . . .
This proves that . . .
34 
CHAPTER 2: TWO KINDS OF REASONING
The political party that best reflects mainstream opinion will win the presidency 
in 2016 and the Republican Party best reflects mainstream opinion.
 If a person said this, he or she would be implying that the Republican Party 
will win the presidency in 2016; that would be the unstated conclusion of the 
argument.  
 Unstated premises are common in real life because sometimes they seem 
too obvious to need mentioning. The argument “the car is beyond fixing, so we 
should get rid of it” actually has an unstated premise to the effect that we should 
get rid of any car that is beyond fixing; but this may seem so obvious to us that we 
don’t bother stating it. 
 Unstated conclusions also are not uncommon, though they are less com-
mon than unstated premises. 
 We’ll return to this subject in a moment. 
 TWO KINDS OF ARGUMENTS 
 Good arguments come in two varieties: deductive demonstrations and inductive 
supporting arguments. 
 Deductive Arguments 
 The premise (or premises) of a good  deductive  argument, if true,  proves or demon-
strates  (these being the same thing for our purposes) its conclusion. However, 
there is more to this than meets the eye, and we must begin with the fundamental 

Premise Indicators
When the words in the following list are used in arguments, they generally introduce premises. 
They often occur just after a conclusion has been given. A premise would replace the three dots 
in an actual argument.
Since . . .
For . . .
In view of . . .
This is implied by . . .
Example:
Either Stacy is rich or her parents are, since she drives a Porsche.
The premise is the claim that Stacy drives a Porsche; the conclusion is the claim that either 
Stacy is rich or her parents are.
 
TWO KINDS OF ARGUMENTS
35
concept of deductive logic,  validity.  An argument is  valid  if it isn’t possible for the 
premise (or premises) to be true and the conclusion false.  This may sound compli-
cated, but it really isn’t. An example of a valid argument will help: 
 As you can see, it’s impossible for this premise to be true and this conclusion 
to be false. So the argument is valid. 
 However, you may have noticed that the premise contains a mistake. Jimmy 
Carter was not president immediately before Bill Clinton. George H. W. Bush was 
president immediately before Bill Clinton. Nevertheless, even though the premise 
of the preceding argument is not true, the argument is still valid, because it isn’t 
possible for the premise to be true and the conclusion false. Another way to say 
this: If the premise  were  true, the conclusion  could not  be false—and that’s what 
“valid” means. 
 Now, when the premise of a valid argument  is true, there is a word for it. In 
that case, the argument is said to be  sound.  Here is an example of a sound 
argument: 
 This argument is sound because it is valid and the premise is true. As you 
can see, if an argument is sound, then its conclusion has been demonstrated. 
Premise: Jimmy Carter was president immediately before Bill Clinton, and George 
W. Bush was president immediately after Bill Clinton.
Conclusion: Jimmy Carter was president before George W. Bush.
Premise: Bill Clinton is taller than George W. Bush, and Jimmy Carter is shorter 
than George W. Bush.
Conclusion: Therefore, Bill Clinton is taller than Jimmy Carter.

36 
CHAPTER 2: TWO KINDS OF REASONING
 Inductive Arguments 
 Again, the premise of a good deductive argument, if true, demonstrates that the 
conclusion is true. This brings us to the second kind of argument, the  inductive
argument. The premise of a good  inductive  argument doesn’t demonstrate its 
conclusion; it  supports it. For example: 
 The fact that traffic slows to a crawl after 2 pm on the Bay Bridge does not demonstrate 
or prove that it does that on the Golden Gate Bridge; it  supports  that conclusion. It 
makes it somewhat more likely that traffic on the Golden Gate Bridge slows to a crawl 
after 2 pm. 
 Here is another example of an inductive argument: 
 Like the first argument, the premise supports the conclusion but does not dem-
onstrate or prove it. 
 If you are thinking that support is a matter of degree and that it can vary 
from just a little to a whole lot, you are right. Thus, inductive arguments are better 
or worse on a scale, depending on how much support their premises provide for 
the conclusion. Logicians have a technical word to describe this situation. The 
more support the premise of an inductive argument provides for the conclusion, 
the  stronger  the argument; the less support it provides, the  weaker  the argu-
ment. Put another way, one argument for a conclusion is weaker than another if it 
fails to raise the probability of the conclusion by as much. Thus, the first argument 
given above is weaker than the following argument:
 This argument is stronger than the first argument because its premise makes the con-
clusion more likely. The more bridges in a region on which traffic slows at a given time, 
the more likely it is that that phenomenon is universal on the bridges in the region. 
 One more example of an inductive argument: 
 Once again, the premise supports but does not demonstrate or prove the conclu-
sion. The differences between texting and emailing are sufficiently significant that 
the premise does not offer a great deal of support for the conclusion, but it does 
offer some. If Alexandra rarely returned telephone calls or letters as well as texts, 
that would make the argument stronger. 
 In Chapter 11 we will explain the criteria for evaluating inductive arguments.  
After 2 PM the traffic slows to a crawl on the Bay Bridge.
Therefore, it probably does the same thing on the Golden Gate Bridge.
Nobody has ever run a mile in less than 3 minutes.
Therefore nobody will ever run a mile in less than 3 minutes.
After 2 PM the traffic slows to a crawl on the Bay Bridge, the San Mateo Bridge, the 
San Rafael Bridge, and the Dumbarton Bridge.
Therefore, it probably does the same thing on the Golden Gate Bridge.
Alexandra rarely returns texts.
Therefore she probably rarely returns emails.

 
TELLING THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN DEDUCTIVE AND INDUCTIVE ARGUMENTS  
37
 BEYOND A REASONABLE DOUBT 
 In common law, the highest standard of proof is proof “beyond a reasonable doubt.” 
If you are a juror in a criminal trial, evidence will be presented to the court—facts 
that the interested parties consider relevant to the crime. Additionally, the pros-
ecutor and counsel for the defense will offer arguments connecting the evidence to 
(or disconnecting it from) the guilt or innocence of the defendant. When the jury 
is asked to return a verdict, the judge will tell the jury that the defendant must be 
found not guilty unless the evidence proves guilt  beyond a reasonable doubt.
 Proof beyond a reasonable doubt actually is a lower standard than deductive 
demonstration. Deductive demonstration corresponds more to what, in ordinary 
English, might be expressed by the phrase “beyond any possible doubt.” Recall that 
in logic, a proposition has been demonstrated when it has been shown to be the 
conclusion of a sound argument—an argument, that is, in which (1) all premises 
are true and (2) it is impossible for the premises to be true and for the conclusion to 
be false. In this sense, many propositions people describe as having been demon-
strated or proved, such as that smoking causes lung cancer or that the DNA found 
at a crime scene was the defendant’s, have not actually been proved in the logician’s 
sense of the word. So, in real life, when people say something has been demon-
strated, they may well be speaking informally. They may not mean that something is 
the conclusion of a sound deductive argument. However, when we—the authors—
say that something has been demonstrated, that is  exactly what we mean.  
 TELLING THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN DEDUCTIVE 
AND INDUCTIVE ARGUMENTS 
 A useful strategy for telling the difference between deductive and inductive argu-
ments is to memorize a good example of each kind. Here are good examples of 
each: 
Valid Deductive Argument Juan 
lives on the equator. Therefore, 
Juan lives midway between the 
North and South poles.
Relatively Strong Inductive 
Argument Juan lives on the 
equator. Therefore, Juan lives 
in a humid climate.
 Study the two examples so that you understand the difference between 
them. In the left example, if you know the definition of “equator,” you already 
know it is midway between the poles. The right example is radically different. The 
definition of “equator” does not contain the information that it is humid. So: 
 Often it is said that a valid deductive argument is valid due to its “form.” 
Thus, consider this argument: 
 What makes this argument valid is its form: 
  If the conclusion of an argument is true  by definition  given the premise or premises, 
it is a valid deductive argument. 
If Juan is a fragglemop, then Juan is a snipette. Juan is not a snipette. Therefore 
Juan is not a fragglemop.

38 
CHAPTER 2: TWO KINDS OF REASONING
You can see, however, that ultimately what makes the argument valid, and 
makes its form a valid form, is the way the words “If . . . then” and “not” work. If 
you know the way those words work, then you already know that the conclusion 
must be true given the two premises. 
 Another way of telling the difference between a deductive argument and an 
inductive argument is this: You generally would not say of a deductive argument 
that it supports or provides evidence for its conclusion. It would be odd to say that 
Juan’s living on the equator is  evidence  that he lives midway between the poles, or 
that it supports that claim. Thus: 
 It would sound very odd to say, “The fact that Fido is a dog is evidence Fido 
is a mammal.” Fido’s being a dog isn’t  evidence  Fido is a mammal: it’s proof. “Fido 
is a dog; therefore Fido is a mammal” is a valid deductive argument. 
 DEDUCTION, INDUCTION, AND UNSTATED PREMISES 
  Somebody announces, “Rain is on its way.” Somebody else asks how he knows. 
He says, “There’s a south wind.” Is the speaker trying to  demonstrate  rain is com-
ing? Probably not. His thinking, spelled out, is probably something like this: 
 In other words, the speaker was merely trying to show that rain was a good possibility. 
 Notice, though, that the unstated premise in the argument could have been 
a universal statement to the effect that a south wind  always  is followed by rain at 
this particular location, in which case the argument would be deductive: 
 Spelled out this way, the speaker’s thinking is deductive: It isn’t possible for the 
premises to be true and the conclusion to be false. So one might wonder abstractly 
what the speaker intended—an inductive argument that supports the belief that 
rain is coming, or a deductive demonstration. 
 There is, perhaps, no way to be certain short of asking the speaker something 
like, “Are you 100 percent positive?” But experience (“background knowledge”) 
tells us that wind from a particular direction is not a surefire indicator of rain. So 
 If P then Q. 
 Not-Q. 
 Therefore not-P. 
  If it sounds odd to speak of the argument as providing evidence or support for a 
contention, that’s an indication it is a deductive argument. 
Stated premise: The wind is from the south.
Unstated premise: Around here, south winds are usually followed by rain.
Conclusion: There will be rain.
Stated premise: The wind is from the south.
Unstated premise: Around here, a south wind is always followed by rain.
Conclusion: There will be rain.

 
DEDUCTION, INDUCTION, AND UNSTATED PREMISES
39
probably the speaker did have in mind merely the first argument. He wasn’t trying 
to present a 100 percent certain, knock-down demonstration that it would rain; he 
was merely trying to establish there was a good chance of rain. 
 You can always turn an inductive argument with an unstated premise into 
a deductively valid argument by supplying the right universal premise—a state-
ment that something holds without exception or is true everywhere or in all cases. 
Is that what the speaker really has in mind, though? You have to use background 
knowledge and common sense to answer the question. 
 For example, you overhear someone saying, 
 One could turn this into a valid deductive argument by adding to it the universal 
statement “Every couple fighting is on the brink of divorce.” But such an unquali-
fied universal statement seems unlikely. Probably the speaker wasn’t trying 
to demonstrate that Stacy and Justin are on the brink of divorce. He or she was 
merely trying to raise its likelihood. He or she was presenting evidence that Stacy 
and Justin are on the brink of divorce. 
 Often it is clear that the speaker does have a  deductive  argument in mind 
and has left some appropriate premise unstated. You overhear Professor Greene 
saying to Professor Brown, 
 It would be strange to think that Professor Greene is merely trying to make it more 
likely that Professor Brown should flunk the student. Indeed, it is hard even to make 
sense of that suggestion. Professor Greene’s argument, spelled out, must be this: 
 So context and content often make it clear what unstated premise a speaker has in 
mind and whether the argument is deductive or inductive. 
 Unfortunately, though, this isn’t always the case. We might hear some-
one say, 
 If the unstated premise in the speaker’s mind is something like “In this city, the 
bars all close at 2  a.m., ” then presumably he or she is thinking deductively and is 
evidently proffering proof that it’s after 2. But if the speaker’s unstated premise is 
something like “Most bars in this city close at 2  a.m. ” or “Bars in this city usually 
close at 2  a.m., ” then we have an inductive argument that merely supports the 
conclusion. So which is the unstated premise? We really can’t say without know-
ing more about the situation or the speaker. 
Stacy and Justin are on the brink of divorce. They’re always fighting.
“Flunk her! This is the second time you’ve caught her cheating.”
Stated premise: This is the second time you’ve caught her cheating.
Unstated premise: Anyone who has been caught cheating two times should be 
flunked.
Conclusion: She should be flunked.
The bars are closed; therefore it is later than 2 A.M.

Is an Ad Photo an Argument?
The short answer: No. The longer version: Still no. An advertising photograph can “give you 
a reason” for buying something only in the sense that it can cause you to think of a reason. 
A photo is not and cannot be an argument for anything.
40 
CHAPTER 2: TWO KINDS OF REASONING
 The bottom line is this. Real-life arguments often leave a premise unstated. 
One such unstated premise might make the argument inductive; another might 
make it deductive. Usually, context or content make reasonably clear what is 
intended; other times they may not. When they don’t, the best practice is to attri-
bute to a speaker an unstated premise that at least is believable, everything con-
sidered. We’ll talk about believability in Chapter 4.   
 BALANCE OF CONSIDERATIONS 
  Should I get a dog? Miss class to attend my cousin’s wedding? Get chemo? Much 
everyday reasoning requires weighing considerations for and against thinking or 
doing something. Such reasoning, called  balance of considerations reasoning, 
often contains both deductive and inductive elements. Here is an example: 
 The first consideration mentioned in this passage—that banning assault 
weapons would violate the Second Amendment and therefore should not be 
done—is a deductive argument. The second consideration mentioned—that 
banning assault weapons would reduce the number of accidental gun deaths—is 
an inductive argument. 
 Inductive arguments can be compared as to strength and weakness; deduc-
tive arguments can be compared as to validity and soundness. Assigning weight 
to considerations can be difficult, of course, but is not hopelessly arbitrary. In 
   Should assault weapons be banned? On the one hand, doing that would violate 
the Second Amendment to the U.S. Constitution. But on the other hand, when 
guns were outlawed in Australia the number of accidental gun deaths fell 
dramatically; that would probably happen here, too. It is a tough call. 

 
WHAT ARE NOT PREMISES, CONCLUSIONS, OR ARGUMENTS
41
Chapter 12 of this book we discuss the perspectives within which moral evalu-
ations are made; you will see there that weighing considerations of the sort pre-
sented in the example above depend to a certain extent on the moral perspective 
one adheres to.   
 INFERENCE TO THE BEST EXPLANATION IBE 
 An  inference to the best explanation (IBE)  is an argument whose conclusion 
explains the cause of something. Here is an example: 
 Through this reasoning, the speaker has concluded that sleeping on the mattress 
caused his or her backache. 
 Here is another example of an IBE: 
 The speaker has concluded that the philosophy course best explains why the first 
group did better on the test. 
 One more example of an IBE: 
 The speaker has concluded that Sarah’s tattoos kept her from getting the position. 
 Sometimes reasoning like that found in the above examples, which is 
intended to show what the cause of something is, is referred to as “abduction.” We 
treat this type of reasoning as inductive reasoning, reasoning used to support a 
conclusion. In Chapter 11 we explain how to evaluate it. 
 WHAT ARE NOT PREMISES, CONCLUSIONS, OR ARGUMENTS 
  We hope you’ve noticed, when we use the word “argument,” we are not talking 
about two people having a feud or fuss about something. That use of the word has 
nothing much to do with critical thinking, though many a heated exchange could 
use some critical thinking. Arguments in our sense do not even need two people; 
we make arguments for our own use all the time. And when we evaluate them, we 
think critically. 
   I awakened this morning with a backache. The only thing that could explain it is 
the different mattress I slept on last night. 
 Therefore sleeping on that mattress caused my backache. 
   Incoming first-year students were randomly assigned to two groups. Students 
in one group took a philosophy course. Students in the other group did not. It 
was found that the students in the first group did better on a critical thinking test 
administered to all incoming first-year students after the semester was over. 
  Therefore the improvement in test scores in the first group was due to the 
philosophy course. 
   Sarah and another candidate were finalists for the teaching position. Sarah had 
better qualifications, but she had tattoos. The other candidate got the position. 
 Therefore, Sarah didn’t get the position because of her tattoos. 

42 
CHAPTER 2: TWO KINDS OF REASONING
 Speaking of what arguments are not, it’s important to realize that not every-
thing that might look like an argument, or like a premise or a conclusion, is one. 
 Pictures 
 Pictures are not premises, conclusions, or arguments. Neither are movies. Your 
iPhone can do lots of things, but it can’t create a premise, a conclusion, or an argu-
ment. Sorry. Arguments have two parts, a premise part and a conclusion part, and 
both parts are propositional entities, which means (to repeat) that both parts must 
be expressible in a declarative, true-or-false sentence. Movies and pictures can be 
moving, compelling, beautiful, complex, realistic, and so forth—but they cannot be 
either true or false. You can ask if what is depicted in a movie actually happened, or 
if the story upon which it is based is a true story, but you can’t really ask if a movie 
itself is true or false—or valid or invalid or relatively strong or weak. Such questions 
don’t make literal sense. If it doesn’t make sense to think of a thing as true or false it 
cannot be a premise or a conclusion. If it doesn’t make sense to think of it as valid or 
invalid, or as being relatively strong or weak, it cannot be an argument.  The various 
things listed in this paragraph are not premises, conclusions, or arguments. 
 The list of things that aren’t premises or conclusions or arguments therefore 
also includes emotions, feelings, landscapes, faces, gestures, grunts, groans, bribes, 
threats, amusement parks, and hip-hop. Since they may  cause  you to have an opin-
ion or to form a judgment about something or produce an argument, you might be 
tempted to think of them as premises, but causes are not premises. A cause isn’t a 
propositional entity: it is neither true nor false. So it cannot be a premise.  
 If . . . then . . . Sentences 
Sometimes sentences like the following are taken to state arguments:
 This statement might be the premise of an argument whose conclusion is 
“Therefore you shouldn’t wash your car now.” It might also be the conclusion of 
an argument whose premise is “It is raining.” But though it  could  be a premise or a 
conclusion, it is not  itself  an argument. An argument has a premise and a conclu-
sion, and, though the preceding statement has two parts, neither part by itself is 
either a premise or a conclusion. “If you wash your car now” is not a statement, 
and neither is “Then it will get spots.” Neither of these phrases qualifies as either a 
premise or a conclusion.   Bottom line: “If . . . then . . .” sentences are not arguments.  
 Lists of Facts 
 Though the following might look like an argument, it is nothing more than a list of 
facts: 
 Although they are related by being about the same subject, none of these 
claims is offered as a reason for believing another, and thus there is no argument 
If you wash your car now, then it will get spots.
Identity theft is up at least tenfold over last year. More people have learned how 
easy it is to get hold of another’s Social Security number, bank account numbers, 
and such. The local police department reminds everyone to keep close watch on 
who has access to such information.

 
ETHOS, PATHOS, AND LOGOS
43
here. But the following passage is different. See if you can spot why it makes an 
argument: 
 Here, the first claim offers a reason for accepting the second claim; we now 
have an argument. 
 “A because B” 
 Sometimes the word “because” refers to the cause of something. But other times 
it refers to a premise of an argument. Mike walks into the motel lobby, wearing a 
swimsuit and dripping wet. Consider these two statements: 
 These two sentences have the same form, “X because Y.” But the sentence 
on the left  explains why  Mike is wearing a swimsuit. The sentence on the right 
offers an argument  that  Mike was swimming. Only the sentence on the right is an 
argument. Put it this way: What follows “because” in the sentence on the left is the 
 cause. What follows “because” in the right-hand sentence is  evidence. 
 Be sure you understand the differ-
ence between these two sentences. Argu-
ments and cause/effect statements can 
both employ the phrase  “X because Y.”
But there the similarity ends. When what 
follows “because” is a  reason  for accept-
ing a contention, or evidence for it, we 
have an argument; when what follows 
“because” states the  cause  of something, 
we have a cause/effect explanation. 
These are entirely different enterprises. 
Arguing  that  a dog has fleas is different 
from explaining what  gave  it fleas. Argu-
ing  that  violent crime has increased is 
different from explaining what  caused it 
to increase.    
 ETHOS, PATHOS, AND LOGOS 
 When he was a young man,  Alexander the Great conquered the world. Alex-
ander was enormously proud of his accomplishment, and named several cit-
ies after himself.  Alexander’s teacher, the Greek philosopher Aristotle, had no 
cities named after him (there is no indication that this disappointed Aristotle). 
Nevertheless, Aristotle’s imprint on civilization turned out to be even more 
profound than Alexander’s. 
The number of people who have learned how to steal identities has doubled in 
the past year. So you are now more likely to become a victim of identity theft than 
you were a year ago.
“Mike is in his swimsuit because he 
was swimming.”
“Mike was swimming because he’s 
in his swimsuit.”
■  We guess she is 
laughing because of 
all the greenery in her 
fridge. (Note that we 
are using the word 
“because” to indicate a 
cause, not a premise.) 

44 
CHAPTER 2: TWO KINDS OF REASONING
 Aristotle, who now is regarded as the father of logic, biology, and psychol-
ogy, made enduring contributions to virtually every subject. These include (in 
addition to those just mentioned) physics, astronomy, meteorology, zoology, 
metaphysics, political science, economics, ethics, and rhetoric. 
 Among Aristotle’s contributions in the last field (rhetoric) was a theory of 
persuasion, which famously contained the idea that there are three modes by 
which a speaker may persuade an audience. Paraphrasing very loosely, Aristotle’s 
idea was that we can be persuaded, first of all, by a speaker’s personal attributes, 
including such things as his or her background, reputation, accomplishments, 
expertise, and similar things. Aristotle referred to this mode of persuasion as 
 ethos.  Second, a speaker can persuade us by connecting with us on a personal 
level, and by arousing and appealing to our emotions by a skillful use of rhetoric. 
This mode of persuasion Aristotle termed  pathos.  And third, the speaker may per-
suade us by using information and arguments—what he called  logos. 
 Unfortunately, logos—rational argumentation—is one of the least effec-
tive ways of winning someone to your point of view. That’s why advertisers rarely 
bother with it. When the sellers of the first home automatic breadmaker found 
that its new kitchen device didn’t interest people, they advertised the availability 
of a second model of the same machine, which was only slightly larger but much 
more expensive. When consumers saw that the first model was a great buy, they 
suddenly discovered they wanted one, and began snapping it up. Why try to per-
suade people by rational argument that they need a breadmaker when you can 
get them to think they do simply by making them believe they have sniffed out a 
bargain? * 
 Still, despite the general inefficacy of logos as a tool of persuasion, people 
do frequently use arguments when they try to persuade others. This might lead 
you to  define  an argument as an attempt to persuade. But that won’t do. Remem-
ber, there are two kinds of argument. Deductive arguments are either sound 
or unsound, and whether a deductive argument is one or the other doesn’t 
depend in the least on whether anyone is persuaded by it. Likewise, inductive 
arguments are in varying degrees strong or weak; their strength depends on the 
degree to which their premises elevate the probability of the conclusion, and 
that, too, is independent of whether anyone finds them persuasive. The very 
same argument might be persuasive to Parker but not to Moore, which shows 
that the persuasiveness of an argument is a subjective question of psychology, 
not of logic. Indeed, the individual who does  not  think critically is precisely 
the person who is persuaded by specious reasoning. People notoriously are 
unfazed by good arguments while finding even the worst arguments compel-
ling. If you want to persuade people of something, try propaganda. Flattery has 
been known to work, too. 
 We will be looking at alternative modes of persuasion—what Aristotle called 
ethos and pathos—in considerable detail in Chapters 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8. However, 
we do this not so you can persuade people, but so you can be alert to the influence 
of ethos and pathos on your own thinking. 
 Now, we aren’t suggesting it is a bad thing to be a persuasive writer or 
speaker. Obviously it isn’t; that’s what rhetoric courses are for—to teach you to 
write persuasively. Let’s just put it this way: Whenever you find yourself being 
persuaded by what someone says, find the “logos” in the “pathos,” and be per-
suaded by it alone. 
 * Dan Ariely,  Irrational Predictability (New York: HarperCollins, 2008), 14, 15. 

 
ETHOS, PATHOS, AND LOGOS 
45
 The following exercises will give you practice (1) identifying premises and conclu-
sions as well as words that indicate premises and conclusions, (2) telling the dif-
ference between deductive demonstrations and inductive supporting arguments, 
and (3) identifying balance of considerations arguments and inferences to the 
best explanation. 
 
—See the answers section at the back of the book.
 Indicate which blanks would ordinarily contain premises and which would ordi-
narily contain conclusions.
 1.   a  , and   b  . Therefore,   c  . 
 2.   a  . So, since   b  ,   c  . 
 3.   a  , clearly. After all,   b  . 
 4. Since   a   and   b  ,   c  . 
 5.   a  . Consequently,   b  , since   c   and   d  . 
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
 Exercise 2-1 
 Identify the premises and conclusions in each of the following arguments.
 1. Since all Communists are Marxists, all Marxists are Communists. 
 2. The Lakers almost didn’t beat the Kings. They’ll never get past Dallas. 
 3. If the butler had done it, he could not have locked the screen door. There-
fore, since the door was locked, we know the butler is in the clear. 
 4. That cat loves dogs. Probably she won’t be upset if you bring home a new 
dog for a pet. 
 5. Hey, he can’t be older than his mother’s daughter’s brother. His mother’s 
daughter has only one brother. 
 6. Mr. Hoover [Our character is Professor Stooler.] will never make it into the 
state police. They have a weight limit, and he’s over it. 
 7. Presbyterians are not fundamentalists, but all born-again Christians are. So 
no born-again Christians are Presbyterians. 
 8. I guess Thork doesn’t have a thing to do. Why else would he waste his time 
watching daytime TV? 
 9. “There are more injuries in professional football today than there were twenty 
years ago,” he reasoned. “And if there are more injuries, then today’s players suf-
fer higher risks. And if they suffer higher risks, then they should be paid more. 
Consequently, I think today’s players should be paid more,” he concluded.  
 10. Let’s see . . . since the clunk comes only when I pedal, the problem must be 
in the chain, the crank, or the pedals. 
▲
▲
▲
▲
 Exercise 2-2 
 Identify the premises and the conclusions in the following arguments.
 1. The darned engine pings every time we use the regular unleaded gasoline, 
but it doesn’t do it with super. I’d bet that there is a difference in the octane 
ratings between the two in spite of what my mechanic says. 
 2. Chances are I’ll be carded at JJ’s, since Kera, Sherry, and Bobby were all 
carded there, and they all look as though they’re about thirty. 
▲
 Exercise 2-3 

46 
CHAPTER 2: TWO KINDS OF REASONING
 3. Seventy percent of first-year students at Cal Poly San Luis Obispo come from 
wealthy families; therefore, probably about the same percentage of all Cal 
Poly San Luis Obispo students come from wealthy families. 
 4. When blue jays are breeding, they become aggressive. Consequently, scrub 
jays, which are very similar to blue jays, can also be expected to be aggres-
sive when they’re breeding. 
 5. I am sure Marietta comes from a wealthy family. She told me her parents 
benefited from the cut in the capital gains tax. 
 6. According to  Nature, today’s thoroughbred racehorses do not run any faster 
than their grandparents did. But human Olympic runners are at least 20 per-
cent faster than their counterparts of fifty years ago. Most likely, racehorses 
have reached their physical limits but humans have not. 
 7. Dogs are smarter than cats, since it is easier to train them. 
 8. “Let me demonstrate the principle by means of logic,” the teacher said, hold-
ing up a bucket. “If this bucket has a hole in it, then it will leak. But it doesn’t 
leak. Therefore, obviously, it doesn’t have a hole in it.” 
 9. We shouldn’t take a chance on this new candidate. She’s from Alamo Poly-
tech, and the last person we hired from there was incompetent. 
 10. If she was still interested in me, she would have called, but she didn’t. 
▲
▲
▲
 Which of the following items are intended to be deductive arguments?
  1. Miss Scarlet’s fingerprints were on the knife used to kill Colonel Mustard. 
Furthermore, he was killed in the pantry, and she was the only person who 
had a key to the pantry. Clearly she killed the colonel. 
  2. Outlawing guns would be a violation of the U.S. Constitution. Therefore they 
should not be outlawed. 
▲
 Exercise 2-5 
 Five of these items are best viewed as deductive arguments and five as inductive 
arguments. Which are which?
 1. No mayten tree is deciduous, and all nondeciduous trees are evergreens. It 
follows that all mayten trees are evergreens. 
 2. Mike must belong to the Bartenders and Beverage Union Local 165, since 
almost every Las Vegas bartender does. 
 3. Either Colonel Mustard or Reverend Green killed Professor Plum. But who-
ever ran off with Mrs. White did not kill the professor. Since Reverend Green 
ran off with Mrs. White, Colonel Mustard killed Professor Plum. 
 4. I’ve never met a golden retriever with a nasty disposition. I bet there aren’t any.  
 5. Since some grapes are purple, and all grapes are fruit, some fruit is purple. 
 6. Why is Shrilla so mean to Timeeda? The only thing I can think of is that she’s 
jealous. Jealousy is what’s making her mean. 
 7. Biden will make a fine president. After all, he made a fine vice president. 
 8. The figure he drew has only three sides, so it isn’t a square. 
 9. It was the pizza that made my stomach churn. What else could it be? I was 
fine until I ate it. 
 10. It’s wrong to hurt someone’s feelings, and that is exactly what you are doing 
when you speak to me like that. 
▲
▲
▲
▲
 Exercise 2-4 

 
ETHOS, PATHOS, AND LOGOS 
47
 3. There are sunfish in the water behind this dam, but none in the water released 
from it. Ordinarily this kind of thing happens only when the released water 
comes from the bottom of the dam, because then the released water is too cold 
for sunfish. Therefore the water released from this dam comes from the bottom.  
 4. Sparky is scratching again. He must either have a skin infection or flea bites. 
 5. Outlawing guns reduced gun deaths in Australia; therefore it would do the 
same here. 
 6. I’m sleepy again. I guess I didn’t get enough sleep last night. 
 7. I didn’t get enough sleep last night; therefore I should get to bed earlier tonight.  
 8. The victims’ blood was on a glove found behind Simpson’s house. This shows 
that Simpson committed the murders, because he alone had access to that area.  
 9. The indentation on the west coast of Africa is about the same size as the 
bulge on the east coast of South America, indicating that the two continents 
were once connected. 
 10. I can hear you lots better now! You must be holding the phone in a different 
position.    
▲
▲
▲
 Identify each of the following as either
 a. IBE 
 b. balance of considerations reasoning 
 c. neither of the above 
 1. Let’s go now. I know you wanted to work in the yard, but if we wait longer, 
we won’t make the movie. Plus, it’s gonna get cold if we don’t make tracks. 
 2. He said he was for the bill when it was proposed, and now he vetoes it? The 
only thing I can see is, he must be trying to get the teachers’ vote. 
 3. Yes, a card laid is a card played, but I kept my hand on it, so I didn’t actually 
lay it. 
 4. All things considered, we’d be better off taking the Suburban. Plus, let’s get 
AAA to help us make reservations. 
 5. Jackson will get an A in the course, since he aced the final. 
 6. “A gentleman goes forth on a showery and miry day. He returns immaculate 
in the evening with the gloss still on his hat and his boots. He has been a 
fixture therefore all day. He is not a man with intimate friends. Where, then, 
could he have been? Is it not obvious?” 
 —Arthur Conan Doyle, The Hound of the Baskervilles, Chapter 3 
 7. It’s longer taking the 405, but you can drive faster—though who knows what 
the traffic’s like at this hour. I would say if you want to play it safe, stay on 
the 5.  
 8. He made threats, plus he had the motive. Not only that, but who else had 
access to a gun? If Mitchell didn’t do it, I don’t know who did. 
 9. The question is, are you running a temperature? Because if you are, it can’t 
be a cold. The runny nose and the sore throat could be a cold, but not the 
temperature. Only the flu would give you a temperature. 
 10. Sherry seems right for the job to me. She speaks French, knows biology, has 
people skills, and makes a great impression. The only down side is, she can’t 
start until October. That pretty much eliminates her, unfortunately. 
▲
▲
▲
▲
 Exercise 2-6 

48 
CHAPTER 2: TWO KINDS OF REASONING
 Identify each of the following as either
 a. IBE 
 b. balance of considerations reasoning 
 c. neither of the above 
 1. These tomatoes got plenty of sunlight and water. The only thing that could 
account for their being rotten is the soil. 
 2. Should we outlaw assault weapons? No. That would be a violation of the 
Second Amendment. 
 3. Should we outlaw assault weapons? Well, that depends. The Second Amend-
ment gives us the right to bear arms, but outlawing them might make the 
country a safer place. 
 4. Priglet messed on the carpet again! Is he sick do you suppose? Or is he try-
ing to tell us something? It seems like he does that only when we leave him 
alone for a long time. I bet he just has a weak bladder. 
 5. Either God exists or He does not. By believing that He exists, you lose noth-
ing if you are wrong; but if you are right, He will reward you with happiness 
and eternal life. By believing He does not exist, you lose nothing if you are 
right; but if you are wrong, you may suffer eternal damnation. It is therefore 
prudent to believe that He exists. 
 —A paraphrase of Blaise Pascal (1623–1662) 
 6. Professor Stooler has been teaching here thirty years and he still hasn’t 
unpacked his boxes from graduate school. It seems likely he won’t ever 
unpack them. 
 7. “The man I found in the room was definitely a fighter and a smart one too. 
He hid his gun, chest rack, and hand grenades just out of reach and well 
enough for us not to see them on our initial entry into the room.” 
 —Mark Owen, No Easy Way 
 8. I don’t like Mr. Biden’s personality, but I think he may be better than 
Mrs. Clinton at working with people. Plus he has been around longer than 
she. That’s why I support him.  
 9. Susan doesn’t laugh at my jokes anymore. Maybe I’m not as funny as I think 
I am. 
 10. I am reading this sentence; therefore I am alive. 
▲
▲
▲
▲
 Exercise 2-7 
 TECHNIQUES FOR UNDERSTANDING ARGUMENTS 
 If an argument has been offered to us, before we can evaluate it we must under-
stand it. Many arguments are difficult to understand because they are spoken 
and go by so quickly we cannot be sure of the conclusion or the premises. Others 
are difficult to understand because they have a complicated structure. Still oth-
ers are difficult to understand because they are embedded in nonargumentative 
material consisting of background information, prejudicial coloring, illustrations, 

 
TECHNIQUES FOR UNDERSTANDING ARGUMENTS
49
parenthetical remarks, digressions, subsidiary points, and other window dress-
ing. And some arguments are difficult to understand because they are confused 
or because the reasons they contain are so poor that we are not sure whether to 
regard them as reasons. 
 In understanding an argument that has been given to us, the first task is to 
find the conclusion—the main point or thesis of the passage. The next step is to 
locate the reasons that have been offered for accepting the conclusion—that is, 
to find the premises. Next, we look for the reasons, if any, offered for accepting 
these premises. To proceed through these steps, you have to learn both to spot 
premises and conclusions when they occur in spoken and written passages and 
to understand the interrelationships among these claims—that is, the structure of 
the argument. 
 Clarifying an Argument’s Structure 
 Let’s begin with how to understand the relationships among the argumentative 
claims, because this problem is sometimes easiest to solve. If you are dealing with 
written material that you can mark up, one useful technique is to number the 
premises and conclusions and then use the numbers to lay bare the structure of 
the argument. Let’s start with this argument as an example: 
 We want to display the structure of this argument clearly. First, circle all 
premise and conclusion indicators. Thus: 
 Next, bracket each premise and conclusion, and number them consecu-
tively as they appear in the argument. So what we now have is this: 
 Then we diagram the argument. Using an arrow to mean “therefore” or “is 
intended as evidence [or as a reason or as a premise] for,” we diagram the first 
three claims in the argument as follows: 
1  [I don’t think we should get Carlos his own car.] 2  [He is not responsible] in 
view of the fact that 3  [he doesn’t care for his things.] And anyway, 4  [we don’t 
have enough money for a car for him], since 5  [we even have trouble making our 
own car payments.] 6  [Last week you yourself complained about our financial 
situation], and 7  [you never complain without really good reason.]
I don’t think we should get Carlos his own car. He is not responsible in view of 
the fact that he doesn’t care for his things. And anyway, we don’t have enough 
money for a car for him, since we even have trouble making our own car payments. 
Last week you yourself complained about our financial situation, and you never 
complain without really good reason.

50 
CHAPTER 2: TWO KINDS OF REASONING
 Now, 6  and 7  together support 4   ; that is, they are part of the same argument for 
4   . To show that 6  and 7  go together, we simply draw a line under them, put a 
plus sign between them, and draw the arrow from the line to 4  , like this: 
 Because 5  and 6  + 7  are separate arguments for 4  , we can represent the rela-
tionship between them and 4  as follows: 
 Finally, because 4  and 2  are separate arguments for 1   , the diagram of the entire 
passage is this: 
 So the conventions governing this approach to revealing argument structure 
are very simple: First, circle all premise- and conclusion-indicating words. 
Then, assuming you can identify the claims that function in the argument 
(a big assumption, as you will see before long), number them consecutively. 
Then display the structure of the argument, using arrows for “therefore” and 
plus signs over a line to connect two or more premises that depend on one 
another. 
 Some claims, incidentally, may constitute reasons for more than one con-
clusion. For example: 
 Structure:    
 
 
 
1  [Carlos continues to be irresponsible.] 2  [He certainly should not have his own 
car], and, as far as I am concerned, 3  [he can forget about that trip to Hawaii this 
winter, too.]
 

 
TECHNIQUES FOR UNDERSTANDING ARGUMENTS
51
 Frequently, too, we evaluate counterarguments to our positions. For example: 
 Notice that claim 3  introduces a consideration that runs counter to the conclu-
sion of the argument, which is stated in 2   . We can indicate counterclaims by 
crossing the “therefore” arrow with lines, thus: 
 This diagram indicates that item 3  has been introduced by the writer as a consid-
eration that runs counter to 2  . 
 Of course, one might adopt other conventions for clarifying argument 
 structure—for example, circling the main conclusion and drawing solid lines 
under supporting premises and wavy lines under the premises of subarguments. 
The technique we have described is simply one way of doing it; any of several 
others might work as well for you. However,  no  technique for revealing argument 
structure will work if you cannot spot the argumentative claims in the midst of a 
lot of background material. 
 Distinguishing Arguments from Window Dressing 
 It is not always easy to isolate the argument in a speech or a written piece. Often, 
speakers and writers think that because their main points are more or less clear to 
them, they will be equally apparent to listeners and readers. But it doesn’t always 
work that way. 
 If you have trouble identifying a conclusion in what you hear or read, it  could
be the passage is not an argument at all. Make sure the passage in question is not 
a report, a description, an explanation, or something else altogether, rather than 
an argument. The key here is determining whether the speaker or writer is offer-
ing reasons intended to support or demonstrate one or more claims. 
 The problem could also be that the conclusion is left unstated. Sometimes it 
helps simply to put the argument aside and ask yourself, “What is this person try-
ing to prove?” In any case, the first and essential step in understanding an argu-
ment is to spot the conclusion. 
 If you are having difficulty identifying the  premises,  consider the possibility that 
you have before you a case of rhetoric (see Chapter 5). (You can’t find premises in a 
piece of pure rhetoric because there  are  no premises.) You will have an  advantage 
over many students in having learned about rhetorical devices in  Chapters 5, 6, 7, 
and 8. By that time, you should be getting pretty good at recognizing them. 
 As you apply what you learn in this book to arguments you encounter in real 
life, you are apt to encounter arguments and argumentative essays whose orga-
nization is difficult to comprehend. When you do, you may find diagramming a 
useful technique. Also, as is obvious, what we have said in this section applies to 
 
1  We really should have more African Americans on the faculty. 2  That is why the 
new diversity program ought to be approved. True, 3  it may involve an element 
of unfairness to whites, but 4  the benefits to society of having more black faculty 
outweigh the disadvantages.

52 
CHAPTER 2: TWO KINDS OF REASONING
arguments that others give us or that we otherwise encounter. You don’t diagram 
what’s in your head, though you need to be clear on your own conclusions, tenta-
tive or otherwise, and the reasons you have for accepting them. However, the dia-
gramming technique does apply to material you write for others. If you find you 
have difficulty diagramming your arguments, it’s a good indication you should 
reorganize your essay and make the structure of your reasoning clearer. 
 EVALUATING ARGUMENTS 
  Thinking critically requires us to evaluate arguments, and evaluating arguments 
has two parts. First, there is the  logic  part: Does the argument either demonstrate 
or support its conclusion? Is this argument either deductively valid or inductively 
relatively strong? You know now what these questions mean theoretically; over 
the course of this book, you will see what they involve in fact. 
 The other part, of course, is the  truth  part. Are the premises actually true? As 
we explain in Chapter 4, it is best to be suspicious of a premise that conflicts with 
our background information or other credible claims, as well as a premise that 
comes from a source that lacks credibility. And, as we develop at length in Chap-
ters 5, 6, and 7, we want to avoid being tricked into accepting a claim by rhetoric 
or other psychological gimmickry. It also almost goes without saying that prem-
ises that are unclear require clarification before one accepts them—as we explain 
in Chapter 3. In general, determining the truth of premises requires knowledge, 
experience, a level head, and the inclination to look into things.   
 The main ideas of the chapter are these:
 ■ Arguments always have two parts, a premise (or premises) and a conclusion. 
 ■ The same statement can be a premise in one argument and a conclusion in a 
second argument. 
 ■ The two fundamental types of reasoning are deductive demonstration and 
inductive support. 
 ■ A deductive argument is used to demonstrate or prove a conclusion, which it 
does if it is sound. 
 ■ An argument is sound if it is valid and its premise (or premises) is true. 
 ■ An argument is valid if it isn’t possible for its premise or premises to be true 
and its conclusion to be false. 
 ■ An inductive argument is used to support rather than to demonstrate a 
conclusion.  
 ■ An argument supports a conclusion if it increases the likelihood that the con-
clusion is true. 
 ■ Support is a matter of degrees: An argument supports a conclusion to the 
extent its premise (or premises) makes the conclusion likely. 
 ■ An argument that offers more support for a conclusion is said to be stron-
ger than one that offers less support; the latter is said to be weaker than the 
former. 
 Recap 

 
EXERCISES 
53
 ■ Some instructors use the word “strong” in an absolute sense to denote induc-
tive arguments whose premise (or premises) makes the conclusion more 
likely than not. 
 ■ If it doesn’t make sense to think of an argument as providing evidence or sup-
port for a contention, it is probably because it is a deductive argument. 
 ■ Inductive arguments and deductive arguments can have unstated premises. 
 ■ Whether an argument is deductive or inductive may depend on what the 
unstated premise is said to be. 
 ■ If an argument is written, diagramming it may help you understand it. 
 ■ Balance of considerations reasoning often involves deductive and inductive 
elements. 
 ■ Inference to best explanation is a common type of inductive reasoning in 
which the conclusion explains the cause of something. 
 These exercises will test your comprehension of the chapter. They will also give 
you additional practice (1) distinguishing between deductive demonstrations 
and inductive supporting arguments, (2) recognizing when a passage contains 
more than a single argument, (3) recognizing the difference between arguments 
and explanations, (4) identifying unstated assumptions, and (5) diagramming 
arguments. 
 Exercise 2-8 
 Fill in the blanks where called for, and answer true or false where appropriate.
 1. Arguments that are relatively strong or weak are called  _____ arguments. 
 2. All valid arguments are sound arguments. 
   3. All sound arguments are valid arguments. 
 4. If a valid argument has a false conclusion, then not all its premises can be 
true. 
 5. A sound argument cannot have a false conclusion. 
 6. “Strong” and “weak” are absolute terms. 
 7. If you try to demonstrate a conclusion, you are using  _____ reasoning. 
 8. When a conclusion has been proved beyond a reasonable doubt, it has 
always been demonstrated. 
 9. An argument can never have an unstated conclusion. 
 10. When you try to support a conclusion, you are using  _____ reasoning. 
 11. The most effective way to convince someone is through argument. 
 12. “If . . . then . . .” sentences may be arguments. 
 13. “If . . . then . . .” sentences may be premises. 
 14. Logic should be defined as the art of persuasion. 
 15. “A because B” is always an argument. 
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
 Additional 
Exercises 

54 
CHAPTER 2: TWO KINDS OF REASONING
 16. “A because B” is never an argument. 
 17. “IBE” refers to a type of deductive argument. 
 18. Inductive and deductive arguments both may occur in balance of consider-
ations reasoning. 
 Exercise 2-9 
 Some of these passages are best viewed as attempted deductive demonstrations, 
and others are best viewed as offering inductive support. Which are which?
 1. All mammals are warm-blooded creatures, and all whales are mammals. 
Therefore, all whales are warm-blooded creatures. 
 2. The brains of rats raised in enriched environments with a variety of toys 
and puzzles weigh more than the brains of rats raised in more barren envi-
ronments. Therefore, the brains of humans will weigh more if humans are 
placed in intellectually stimulating environments. 
 3. Jones won’t plead guilty to a misdemeanor, and if he won’t plead guilty, then he 
will be tried on a felony charge. Therefore, he will be tried on a felony charge.  
 4. We’ve interviewed two hundred professional football players, and 60 percent 
of them favor expanding the season to twenty games. Therefore, 60 percent of 
all professional football players favor expanding the season to twenty games.  
 5. Jose is taller than Bill, and Bill is taller than Margaret. Therefore, Jose is taller 
than Margaret. 
 6. Exercise may help chronic male smokers kick the habit, says a study pub-
lished today. The researchers, based at McDuff University, put thirty young 
male smokers on a three-month program of vigorous exercise. One year 
later, only 14 percent of them still smoked, according to the report. An equiv-
alent number of young male smokers who did not go through the exercise 
program were also checked after a year, and it was found that 60 percent still 
smoked. Smokers in the exercise program began running three miles a day 
and gradually worked up to eight miles daily. They also spent five and a half 
hours each day in such moderately vigorous activities as soccer, basketball, 
biking, and swimming. 
 7. Believe in God? Yes, of course I do. The universe couldn’t have arisen by 
chance, could it? Besides, I read the other day that more and more physicists 
believe in God, based on what they’re finding out about the big bang and all 
that stuff. 
 8. From an office memo: “I’ve got a good person for your opening in Account-
ing. Jesse Brown is his name, and he’s as sharp as they come. Jesse has a 
solid background in bookkeeping, and he’s good with computers. He’s also 
reliable, and he’ll project the right image. He will do a fine job for you.” 
 Exercise 2-10 
 Diagram the arguments contained in the following passages.
 1. North Korea is a great threat to its neighbors. It has a million-person army 
ready to be unleashed at a moment’s notice, and it also has nuclear weapons.  
 2. Shaun is going to the party with Mary, so she won’t be going alone. 
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲

 
EXERCISES 
55
 3. Michael should just go ahead and get a new car. The one he’s driving is junk; 
also, he has a new job and can afford a new car. 
 4. If Karper goes to Las Vegas, he’ll wind up in a casino; and if he winds up in a 
casino, it’s a sure thing he’ll spend half the night at a craps table. So you can 
be sure: If Karper goes to Las Vegas, he’ll spend half the night at a craps table.  
 5. It’s going to be rainy tomorrow, and Serj doesn’t like to play golf in the 
rain. It’s going to be cold as well, and he  really doesn’t like to play when it’s 
cold. So you can be sure Serj will be someplace other than the golf course 
tomorrow.  
 6. Hey, you’re overwatering your lawn. See? There are mushrooms growing 
around the base of that tree—a sure sign of overwatering. Also, look at all the 
worms on the ground. They come up when the earth is oversaturated. 
 7. “Will you drive me to the airport?” she asked. “Why should I do that?” he 
wanted to know. “Because I’ll pay you twice what it takes for gas. Besides, 
didn’t you say you were my friend?” 
 8. If you drive too fast, you’re more likely to get a ticket, and the more likely you 
are to get a ticket, the more likely you are to have your insurance premiums 
raised. So, if you drive too fast, you are more likely to have your insurance 
premiums raised. 
 9. If you drive too fast, you’re more likely to get a ticket. You’re also more likely 
to get into an accident. So you shouldn’t drive too fast. 
 10. There are several reasons why you should consider installing a solarium. First, 
you can still get a tax credit. Second, you can reduce your heating bill. Third, if 
you build it right, you can actually cool your house with it in the summer.  
 11. From a letter to the editor: “By trying to eliminate Charles Darwin from the 
curriculum, creationists are doing themselves a great disservice. When read 
carefully, Darwin’s discoveries only support the thesis that species change, 
not that they evolve into new species. This is a thesis that most creationists 
can live with. When read carefully, Darwin actually supports the creationist 
point of view.” 
 12. Editorial comment: “The Supreme Court’s ruling, that schools may have 
a moment of silence but not if it’s designated for prayer, is sound. Nothing 
stops someone from saying a silent prayer at school or anywhere else. Also, 
even though a moment of silence will encourage prayer, it will not favor any 
particular religion over any other. The ruling makes sense.” 
 13. We must paint the house now! Here are three good reasons: (a) If we don’t, 
then we’ll have to paint it next summer; (b) if we have to paint it next sum-
mer, we’ll have to cancel our trip; and (c) it’s too late to cancel the trip. 
 Exercise 2-11 
 Which of the following instances of “because” are followed by a cause, and which 
are followed by a premise?
 1. We’ve had so much hot weather recently because the jet stream is unusually 
far north. 
   2. Ms. Mossbarger looks so tired because she hasn’t been able to sleep for three 
nights.  
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲

56 
CHAPTER 2: TWO KINDS OF REASONING
 3. It’s a bad idea to mow the lawn in your bare feet because you could be seri-
ously injured. 
 4. Ken mows the lawn in his bare feet because he doesn’t realize how danger-
ous it is. 
 5. Ryan will marry Beth because he told me he would. 
 6. I’d change before going into town because your clothes look like you slept in 
them. 
 7. You have high blood pressure because you overeat. 
 8. You’d better cut back on the salt because you could become hypertensive. 
 9. It’s a good bet Iran wants to build nuclear weapons because the UN inspec-
tors found devices for the enrichment of plutonium. 
 10. Iran wants to build nuclear weapons because it wants to gain control over 
neighboring Middle Eastern countries. 
 Exercise 2-12 
 Which of the following statements could not possibly be false?
 1. Squares have four sides. 
 2. You will not live to be 130 years old. 
 3. A cow cannot yodel. 
 4. A six-foot person is taller than a five-foot person. 
 5. If the sign on the parking meter says “Out of Order” the meter won’t work. 
 6. Nobody can be her own mother. 
 7. God exists or does not exist. 
 8. They will never get rid of all disease. 
 9. The ice caps couldn’t melt entirely. 
 10. The day two days after the day before yesterday is today. 
 Exercise 2-13 
 For each of the following, supply a universal principle (a statement that says that 
something holds without exception) that turns it into a valid deductive argument. 
 Example 
 Tay is opinionated. She should be more open-minded. 
 One universal principle that makes it valid 
  Opinionated people should all be more open-minded. ( Note:  There are 
alternative ways of phrasing this.) 
 1. Jamal keeps his word, so he is a man of good character. 
 2. Betty got an A in the course, so she must have received an A on the final. 
 3. Iraq posed a threat to us, so we had a right to invade it. 
 4. Colonel Mustard could not have murdered Professor Plum, because the two 
men were in separate rooms when the professor was killed. 
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲

 
EXERCISES 
57
 5. Avril is no liberal, since she voted against gun control. 
 6. Jimmi has a gentle soul; if there is a heaven, he should go there when he dies. 
 7. Of course that guy should be executed; he committed murder, didn’t he? 
 8. I don’t think you could call the party a success; only eight people showed up. 
 9. Mzbrynski proved Goldbach’s conjecture; that makes him the greatest math-
ematician ever. 
 10. The fan needs oil; after all, it’s squeaking. 
 Exercise 2-14 
 For each of the following arguments, supply a principle that makes it inductive 
rather than deductive. 
 Example 
 Ryder is sharp, so he will get a good grade in this course. 
 One claim that makes it inductive 
 Most sharp people get good grades in this course. 
 1. There are puddles everywhere; it must have rained recently. 
 2. The lights are dim; therefore, the battery is weak. 
 3. Simpson’s blood matched the blood on the glove found at the victim’s 
condo: He killed her. 
 4. Of course it will be cold tomorrow! It’s been cold all week, hasn’t it? 
 5. Ambramoff isn’t very good with animals. I doubt he’d make a great parent. 
 6. The dog has either fleas or dry skin; it’s scratching a lot. 
 7. Why do I say their party wasn’t a success? Remember all the leftovers? 
 8. Cheston owns a rifle; he’s sure to belong to the NRA. 
 9. The dessert contained caffeine, so you might have trouble sleeping 
tonight.  
 10. I took Zicam, and my cold disappeared like magic. Obviously, it works. 
 Exercise 2-15 
 Diagram the following “arguments.”
 1. 1  , in light of the fact that 2  and  3 . [Assume 2  and 3  are part of the same 
argument for 1  .] 
 2.  1  and 2  ; therefore  3 . [Assume 1  and 2  are separate arguments for 3  .] 
 3. Since 1  ,  2 ; and since  3 ,  4 . And since 2  and 4  ,  5 . [Assume 2  and 4  
are separate arguments for  5 .] 
 4. 1  ; therefore 2  and  3 . And in light of the fact that 2  and 3  ,  4 . Conse-
quently, 5  . Therefore,  6 . [Assume 2  and 3  are separate arguments for  4 .] 
 5.   1 ,  2 ,  3 ; therefore  4 .  5 , in view of  1 . And  6 , since  2 . Therefore  7 . 
[Assume  1 ,  2 , and 3  are part of the same argument for  4 .] 
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲

58 
CHAPTER 2: TWO KINDS OF REASONING
 Exercise 2-16 
 What does each diagram display—a or b?
1.
 
 a. 1 supports 3, as does 2. 
 b. 1 in combination with 2 demonstrates 3. 
2.
 
 a. 1 demonstrates 3, as does 2, 
 b. 1 in combination with 2 demonstrates 3. 
3.
 
3
1
2
4
 a. 3, which is supported by 1, supports two things, 2 and 4. 
 b. 3, which is supported by 1, supports 2, which in turn supports 4. 
 4. 
 
 a. In view of 5, 3 must be true, and it must also be true because of 2, which 
follows from 1 combined with 4. 
 b. 2 must be true because of 1 in combination with 4; and 2 and 5 combined 
demonstrate 3. 
 5. 
 a. 1 in combination with 2 support 5. In addition, 3 supports 5, as does 4. So 
despite the fact that 6 indicates that 5 is false, 5. 
 b. 6 follows from 3, and it follows from 4 as well. It is also supported by 5, 
which follows from 1 in combination with 2. 
 Exercise 2-17 
 Diagram the arguments contained in the following passages.
 1. Dear Jim, 
   
 Your distributor is the problem. Here’s why. There’s no current at the 
spark plugs. And if there’s no current at the plugs, then either your alterna-
tor is shot or your distributor is defective. But if the problem were in the 
▲
▲
▲

 
EXERCISES 
59
alternator, then your dash warning light would be on. So, since the light isn’t 
on, the problem must be in the distributor. Hope this helps. 
   
 Yours, 
   
 Benita Autocraft 
 2. The slide in the dollar must be stopped. It contributes to inflation and 
increases the cost of imports. True, it helps exports, but on balance it is bad 
for the economy. 
 3. It’s high time professional boxing was outlawed. Boxing almost always leads 
to brain damage, and anything that does that ought to be done away with. 
Besides, it supports organized crime. 
 4. They really ought to build a new airport. It would attract more business to the 
area, not to mention the fact that the old airport is overcrowded and dangerous.  
 5. Vote for Cuomo? No way. He’s too radical, and he’s too inexperienced, and 
those two things make him dangerous. I do like his stand on trade, but I still 
don’t think you should vote for him. 
 Exercise 2-18 
 Diagram the arguments contained in the following passages.
 1. Cottage cheese will help you be slender, youthful, and more beautiful. Enjoy 
it often. 
 2. If you want to listen to loud music, do it when we are not at home. It bothers 
us, and we’re your parents. 
 3. If you want to see the best version of  The Three Musketeers, try the 1948 ver-
sion. Lana Turner is luscious; Vincent Price is dastardly; Angela Lansbury is 
exquisitely regal; and nobody ever has or ever will portray D’Artagnan with 
the grace, athleticism, or skill of Gene Kelly. Download it. It’s a must. 
 4. From a letter to the editor: “The idea of a free press in America today is a 
joke. A small group of people, the nation’s advertisers, control the media 
more effectively than if they owned it outright. Through fear of an advertis-
ing boycott, they can dictate everything from programming to news report 
content. Politicians as well as editors shiver in their boots at the thought of 
such a boycott. This situation is intolerable and ought to be changed. I sug-
gest we all listen to National Public Radio and public television.”  
 5. Too many older Americans, veterans with disabilities, and families with chil-
dren are paying far too much of their incomes for housing. Proposition 168 will 
help clear the way for affordable housing construction for these groups. Propo-
sition 168 reforms the outdated requirement for an election before affordable 
housing can even be approved. Requiring elections for every publicly assisted 
housing venture, even when there is no local opposition, is a waste of taxpay-
ers’ money. No other state constitution puts such a roadblock in front of efforts 
to house senior citizens and others in need. Please support Proposition 168.  
 6. Decades after President John F. Kennedy’s assassination, it’s no easier to 
accept the idea that a loser like Lee Harvey Oswald committed the crime of 
the century all by himself with a $12.78 mail-order rifle and a $7.17 scope. 
Yet even though two-thousand-plus books and films about the episode 
have been made, there is no credible evidence to contradict the Warren 
▲
▲
▲

60 
CHAPTER 2: TWO KINDS OF REASONING
Commission finding that “the shots which killed President Kennedy and 
wounded Governor Connally were fired by Lee Harvey Oswald” and that 
“Oswald acted alone.” 
   
 After all these years, it’s time to accept the conclusion. The nation pays a 
heavy price for chronic doubts and mistrust. Confidence in the  government 
has declined. Participation in the voting process has steadily slid down-
ward. The national appetite for wild theories encourages peddlers to per-
sist. Evil is never easy to accept. In the case of JFK, the sooner we let it go, 
the better.  
 7. Most schools should offer single-sex classes. Single-sex classes promote 
learning. Girls do better in math and science courses when they are alone 
with other girls. Gender offers distractions that interfere with learning. 
Research also shows that in mixed classrooms most instructors will spend 
more time answering questions from boys. Schools that offer single-sex 
classes always report learning gains for students of both sexes.  
 8. “And we thought we’d heard it all. Now the National Rifle Association wants 
the U.S. Supreme Court to throw out the ban on private ownership of fully 
automatic machine guns. 
   
 “As the nation’s cities reel under staggering murder totals, as kids use 
guns simply to get even after feuds, as children are gunned down by random 
bullets, the NRA thinks it is everybody’s constitutional right to have their 
own personal machine gun. 
   
 “This is not exactly the weapon of choice for deer hunting or for a home-
owner seeking protection. It is an ideal weapon for street gangs and drug 
thugs in their wars with each other and the police. 
   
 “To legalize fully automatic machine guns is to increase the mayhem 
that is turning this nation—particularly its large cities—into a continual war 
zone. Doesn’t the NRA have something better to do?” 
 —Capital Times,  Madison, Wisconsin 
 9. From a letter to the editor: “Recently the California Highway Patrol stopped 
me at a drunk-drive checkpoint. Now, I don’t like drunk drivers any more 
than anyone else. I certainly see why the police find the checkpoint system 
effective. But I think our right to move about freely is much more important. 
If the checkpoint system continues, then next there will be checkpoints for 
drugs, seat belts, infant car seats, drivers’ licenses. We will regret it later if we 
allow the system to continue.” 
 10. “Well located, sound real estate is the safest investment in the world. It is not 
going to disappear, as can the value of dollars put into savings accounts. Neither 
will real estate values be lost because of inflation. In fact, property values tend 
to increase at a pace at least equal to the rate of inflation. Most homes have 
appreciated at a rate greater than the inflation rate (due mainly to strong buyer 
demand and insufficient supply of newly constructed homes).” 
 —Robert Bruss, The Smart Investor’s Guide to Real Estate 
 11. “The constitutional guarantee of a speedy trial protects citizens from arbi-
trary government abuse, but it has at least one other benefit, too. It prevents 
crime. 
   
 “A recent Justice Department study found that more than a third 
of those with serious criminal records—meaning three or more felony 
▲
▲

 
EXERCISES 
61
convictions—are arrested for new offenses while free on bond awaiting 
federal court trial. You don’t have to be a social scientist to suspect that the 
longer the delay, the greater the likelihood of further violations. In short, 
overburdened courts mean much more than justice delayed; they quite liter-
ally amount to the infliction of further injustice.” 
 —Scripps Howard News Service 
 12. As we enter a new decade, about 200 million Americans are producing data 
on the Internet as rapidly as they consume it. Each of these users is tracked 
by technologies ever more able to collate essential facts about them—age, 
address, credit rating, marital status, etc.—in electronic form for use in com-
merce. One website, for example, promises, for the meager sum of seven 
dollars, to scan “over two billion records to create a single comprehensive 
report on an individual.” It is not unreasonable, then, to believe that the 
combination of capitalism and technology poses a looming threat to what 
remains of our privacy. 
 —Loosely adapted from Harper’s 
 13. Having your car washed at the car wash may be the best way to go, but there 
are some possible drawbacks. The International Carwashing Association 
(ICA) has fought back against charges that automatic car washes, in recy-
cling wash water, actually dump the salt and dirt from one car onto the next. 
And that brushes and drag cloths hurt the finish. Perhaps there is some truth 
to these charges. 
   
 The ICA sponsored tests that supposedly demonstrated that the aver-
age home car wash is harder on a car than an automatic wash. Maybe. But 
what’s “the average” home car wash? And you can bet that the automatic car 
washes in the test were in perfect working order. 
   
 There is no way you or I can tell for certain if the filtration system and 
washing equipment at the automatic car wash are properly maintained. 
And even if they are, what happens if you follow some mud-caked pickup 
through the wash? Road dirt might still be caught in the bristles of the 
brushes or strips of fabric that are dragged over your car. 
   
 Here’s my recommendation: Wash your own car. 
 14. 
Argument in Favor of Measure A
  “Measure A is consistent with the City’s General Plan and City policies 
directing growth to the City’s non-agricultural lands. A ‘yes’ vote on Measure 
A will affirm the wisdom of well-planned, orderly growth in the City of Chico 
by approving an amendment to the 1982 Rancho Arroyo Specific Plan. Mea-
sure A substantially reduces the amount of housing previously approved for 
Rancho Arroyo, increases the number of parks and amount of open space, 
and significantly enlarges and enhances Bidwell Park. 
   “A ‘yes’ vote will accomplish the following: • Require the development to 
dedicate 130.8 acres of land to Bidwell Park • Require the developer to dedi-
cate seven park sites • Create 53 acres of landscaped corridors and greenways 
• Preserve existing arroyos and protect sensitive plant habitats and other 
environmental features • Create junior high school and church sites • Plan a 
series of villages within which, eventually, a total of 2,927 residential dwelling 
units will be developed • Plan area which will provide onsite job opportuni-
ties and retail services.” 
 —County of Butte sample ballot 
▲
▲

62 
CHAPTER 2: TWO KINDS OF REASONING
 15. 
 Rebuttal to Argument in Favor of Measure A 
  “Villages? Can a project with 3,000 houses and 7,000 new residents really 
be regarded as a ‘village’? The Sacramento developers pushing the Rancho 
Arroyo project certainly have a way with words. We urge citizens of Chico to 
ignore their flowery language and vote no on Measure A. 
   
“These out-of-town developers will have you believe that their project 
protects agricultural land. Hogwash! Chico’s Greenline protects valuable 
farmland. With the Greenline, there is enough land in the Chico area avail-
able for development to build 62,000 new homes. . . . 
   
 “They claim that their park dedications will reduce use of our over-
crowded Bidwell Park. Don’t you believe it! They want to attract 7,000 new 
residents to Chico by using Rancho Arroyo’s proximity to Bidwell Park to 
outsell other local housing projects. 
   
 “The developers imply that the Rancho Arroyo project will provide a 
much needed school site. In fact, the developers intend to sell the site to the 
school district, which will pay for the site with taxpayers’ money. 
   
 “Chico doesn’t need the Rancho Arroyo project. Vote no on 
   Measure A.” 
 —County of Butte sample ballot 
 16. Letter to the editor: “I recently read about a man who killed another man 
several years ago, then he made a plea-bargain with the District Attorney’s 
office and thus got a reduced charge and a shorter sentence.  He didn’t even 
serve all of that sentence, because he got some time off for good behavior.  
After being out of prison for only a few months, he killed somebody else!  
   
“I cannot understand how our so-called system of ‘justice’ allows this 
sort of thing to happen.  According to FBI statistics, not a half-hour goes 
by without there being a murder somewhere in this country.  How many 
of these murders are committed by people who have been released from 
prison?  I can answer that:  too many!
   
“The main reason there are so many people released from prisons is 
that there are not enough prisons to hold them all.  If, on average, there is 
a murder every half hour, then, on average, there should be an execution 
every half hour.  That would open up some more room in prisons and allow 
the authorities to keep both killers and non-killers off the streets.  We’d all be 
safer as a result.
   
“It isn’t like the people I’m saying should be executed don’t deserve to 
die.  They gave up their right to live the minute they pulled the trigger or 
wielded the knife or whatever means they used in their crime.  We have to 
get tough about this or none of us will be safe.”
 —Corning News & Review 
 17. Letter to the editor: “In regard to your editorial, ‘Crime bill wastes billions,’ 
let me set you straight. Your paper opposes mandatory life sentences for 
criminals convicted of three violent crimes, and you whine about how crimi-
nals’ rights might be violated. Yet you also want to infringe on a citizen’s 
right to keep and bear arms. You say you oppose life sentences for three-
time losers because judges couldn’t show any leniency toward the criminals 
no matter how trivial the crime. What is your definition of trivial, busting an 
innocent child’s skull with a hammer?” 
 —North State Record 
▲

 
EXERCISES 
63
 18. Freedom means choice. This is a truth antiporn activists always forget when 
they argue for censorship. In their fervor to impose their morality, groups 
like Enough Is Enough cite extreme examples of pornography, such as child 
porn, suggesting that they are easily available in video stores. 
   
 This is not the way it is. Most of this material portrays not actions such as 
this but consensual sex between adults. 
   
 The logic used by Enough Is Enough is that, if something can some-
how hurt someone, it must be banned. They don’t apply this logic to more 
harmful substances, such as alcohol or tobacco. Women and children are 
more adversely affected by drunken driving and secondhand smoke than by 
pornography. Few Americans would want to ban alcohol or tobacco, even 
though these substances kill hundreds of thousands of people each year. 
 Writing Exercises 
 1. Write a one-page essay in which you determine whether and why it is better 
(you get to define “better”) to look younger than your age, older than your 
age, or just your age. Then number the premises and conclusions in your 
essay and diagram it. 
 2. Should there be a death penalty for first-degree murder? On the top half of a 
sheet of paper, list considerations supporting the death penalty, and on the 
bottom half, list considerations opposing it. Take about ten minutes to com-
pile your two lists. 
   
After everyone is finished, your instructor will call on people to read 
their lists. He or she will then give everyone about twenty minutes to write 
a draft of an essay that addresses the issue “Should there be a death penalty 
for first-degree murder?” Put your name on the back of your essay. After 
everyone is finished, your instructor will collect the essays and redistribute 
them to the class. In groups of four or five, read the essays that have been 
given to your group. Do not look at the names of the authors. Select the best 
essay in each group. Your instructor will ask each group to read the essay it 
has selected as best. 
   
 As an alternative, your instructor may have each group rank-order their 
essays and ask a neighboring group which of their top-ranked essays is best. 
The instructor will read the top-ranking essays to the class, for discussion. 
 3. Is it possible to tell just by looking at someone whether he or she is telling 
the truth? Do a little Internet research and then take a position on the issue 
and defend it in a two-page essay. This assignment will help prepare you for 
Chapter 4. 
▲

64
 3 
 T
 his appeared as part of an agreement one of your authors 
was required to sign for a credit card: 
 What this turns out to mean is simply that the card-
holder will be responsible for anything he or she owes on the 
account. Now, in this case it isn’t worth your while to read this 
passage carefully enough to actually dig the meaning out of it. 
It is an example of gobbledygook, which is pretentious or 
unintelligible jargon designed as much to obfuscate and con-
fuse as to explain and inform. * 
 This chapter is about dealing with this and other obstacles 
to clear thinking, speaking, and especially writing. Here’s 
another example that fails to pass muster, from former 
  All transactions effected pursuant to this instrument shall 
be effected for the account and risk and in the name of 
the undersigned; and the undersigned hereby agrees to 
indemnify and hold harmless from, and to pay promptly on 
demand, any and all losses arising therefrom or any debit 
balance due thereon. 
 *The word “gobbledygook” was first used by Texas representative Maury Maverick in 1944 
to apply to language often used by government officials. 
 Students will learn to . . . 
 1. Determine acceptable and unaccept-
able degrees of vagueness 
 2. Understand and identify types of 
ambiguity 
 3. Identify the problems generality 
causes in language 
 4. Understand the uses and types of 
definitions 
 5. Acquire skills for writing an effective 
argumentative essay 
 Clear Thinking, Critical 
Thinking, and Clear Writing   

 Let the Weirdness Bloom 
 Allan Bloom, the famous American educator who authored  The Closing of the American Mind,
which was read (or at least purchased) by millions, wrote in that book: 
  If openness means to “go with the flow,” it is necessarily an accommodation to the pres-
ent. That present is so closed to doubt about so many things impeding the progress of its 
principles that unqualified openness to it would mean forgetting the despised alternative 
to it, knowledge of which makes us aware of what is doubtful in it. 
 Is this true? Well, that’s hard to say. The problem, of course, is that we don’t know exactly 
what Professor Bloom is asserting in this passage. It may look deadly serious and “over our 
heads,” but it may be that it simply makes no sense. At any rate, whatever he has in mind, he has 
asked us to work much too hard to understand it. 
Canadian prime minister Jean Chrétien, when asked in Parliament about old versus 
new money in the health care program: 
 We have no clue what he had in mind. 
 One of the authors noticed this as a tease on the front page of a newspaper: 
“49ers upset.” This probably means that somebody who was not supposed to beat 
the San Francisco football team did manage to beat them. On the other hand, it 
could mean that the team is dismayed about something. 
 Although obscurity can issue from various causes, four sources of confusion 
stand out as paramount: excessive vagueness, ambiguity, excessive generality, 
and undefined terms. In this chapter, we will consider vagueness, ambiguity, and 
generality in some detail and then talk about definitions. 
 Also, from time to time situations arise in which we need to think critically 
about what we write, especially when we are trying to produce an argumenta-
tive essay. In this type of writing enterprise, one takes a position on an issue and 
supports it with argument. A good argumentative essay usually consists of four 
parts: a statement of the issue, a statement of one’s position on that issue, argu-
ments that support one’s position, and rebuttals of arguments that support con-
trary positions. Obviously, an argumentative essay is weakened by statements 
that are obscure, and what we say in this chapter has direct application to writing 
clear argumentative essays. We’ll give more pointers about this important sub-
ject later in the chapter, after we discuss vagueness, ambiguity, generality, and 
definitions.  
  They say that the money we had promised three years ago to be new money this 
year is not new money. We have not paid it yet and it is old money versus new 
money. For me new money is new money if paying in $5 or $10, it’s the same 
money. * 
 If I said anything which implies 
that I think that we didn’t do 
what we should have done 
given the choices we faced 
at the time, I shouldn’t have 
said that. 
 — B ILL  C LINTON (reported by 
Larry Engelmann) 
 Those who survived the San 
Francisco earthquake said, 
“Thank God, I’m still alive.” But, 
of course, those who died—
their lives will never be the 
same again. 
 —U.S.  SENATOR  B ARBARA B OXER 
(D), California 
*Reported in the Globe and Mail, February 7, 2003.
 Has anyone put anything in 
your baggage without your 
knowledge? 
 This question was asked of our 
 colleague Becky White by an airport 
security employee. 
 
CLEAR THINKING, CRITICAL THINKING, AND CLEAR WRITING 
65

 Say What?? 
 Unclear on the concept: 
 “We don’t discriminate. We simply exclude certain types of people.” 
 — Colonel Gerard  Wellman , ROTC instructor 
 Unclear on everything: 
 “Half this game is ninety percent mental.” 
 — Danny  Ozark , Philadelphia Phillies manager 
66 
CHAPTER 3: CLEAR THINKING, CRITICAL THINKING, AND CLEAR WRITING
 VAGUENESS  
 Perhaps the most common form of unclear thinking or writing is excessive 
vagueness. Pursued to its depths, the concept of vagueness can be a knotty 
one, and it has been the focus of much philosophical attention in the past few 
decades. *  Fortunately, at a practical level the idea is not difficult to grasp. A 
word or phrase is  vague  if we cannot say with certainty what it includes and 
what it excludes. Consider the word “bald.” It’s clear that Paris Hilton is  not 
bald. It’s equally clear that Patrick Stewart  is bald. (See box on next page.) But 
there are lots of people in between (including both your authors). Many of those 
between the two extremes are borderline cases: It is not at all clear whether the 
word “bald” should apply to them—it’s the sort of thing about which reason-
able people could disagree. For this reason, it is correct to say that baldness is a 
vague concept.      
 Vagueness plays an important role in much that we do. In the law, for 
example, how we deal with vagueness is crucial. Whether the word “torture” 
applies to various types of interrogation techniques, especially including “water-
boarding,” for example, has been a serious issue for several years. Many for-
mer officials have claimed that these techniques did not count as torture, but 
many others have disagreed. Possibly more relevant to us and to you personally, 
whether a bit of driving is “reckless” or not may determine whether you pay a 
small fine or a large one—or even go to jail. Consider, too, the speed limits we 
are asked to observe on the highways. Ideally, the offense in question would be 
something like “driving too fast for the circumstances” rather than driving faster 
than a particular speed. This is because what is safe at 80 miles per hour in one 
set of circumstances (midday, no traffic, clear weather, and dry roads) might be 
dangerously unsafe at 40 miles per hour in another (dark, heavy traffic, rain or 
fog, slick roads). But we have opted for set speed limits because “driving too fast” 
is a vague term, and we do not want to put our fate in the hands of patrol officers 
and judges who are in a position to make arbitrary decisions about whether it 
applies in our case. So, because we are afraid of the consequences of the vague 
concept, we sometimes get away with driving dangerously fast under bad cir-
cumstances, and we are sometimes ticketed for driving over the posted limit 
when it is quite safe to do so.   
 Man is ready to die for an idea, 
provided that idea is not quite 
clear to him. 
 — P AUL  E LDRIDGE 
 *See, for example,  Vagueness: A Reader, by R. Keefe and P. Smith, eds. (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1996), and 
Vagueness, by T. Williamson (London and New York: Routledge, 1994). 
 Everything is vague to a degree 
you do not realize until you 
have tried to make it precise. 
 — B ERTRAND  R USSELL 

 
VAGUENESS
67
 Sometimes vagueness is just annoying. Suppose that it’s late and you’re 
looking for someone’s house and you’re given the following directions: “Go on 
down this street a ways until you get to the first major intersection, make a sharp 
right, then, when the street starts to curve to the left, you’ll be there.” The vague-
ness in these directions is more likely to get your blood pressure up than it is to 
help you find your destination. (How do you decide that a particular intersection 
is “major,” for example?) 
 Vagueness is often intentional, used as a means to avoid giving a clear, pre-
cise answer. Politicians often resort to vague statements if they don’t want their 
audience to know exactly where they stand. A vague answer to the question “Do 
you love me?” may mean there’s trouble ahead in the relationship. 
 Vagueness occurs in varying degrees, and it is difficult to the point of impos-
sibility to get rid of it entirely. Fortunately, there is no need to get rid of it entirely. 
We live very comfortably with a certain amount of vagueness in most of what we 
say. “Butte City is a very small town” presents us with no problems under ordi-
nary circumstances, despite the vagueness of “very small town.” “Darren has no 
school loans because his parents are rich” doesn’t tell us how much money the 
parents have, but it tells us enough to be useful. “Rich” and “small,” like “bald,” are 
vague concepts; there is no accepted clear line between the things to which they 
apply and those to which they don’t. Nonetheless, they are valuable notions; we 
get a lot of good use out of them. 
 Ask a man which way he is 
going to vote, and he will prob-
ably tell you. Ask him, however, 
why, and vagueness is all. 
 — B ARNARD   L EVIN 
 ■ Stewart 
 ■ . . . and without 
 ■ Hilton 
 ■ Willis, with . . .  
 Vagueness at the Border 
 As the text explains, vagueness results when the scope 
of a concept is not clear—that is, when there are border-
line cases. “Bald” is a typical example. Here, Ms.  Hilton 
is clearly  not  bald, and Mr. Stewart clearly  is  bald. But 
whether Bruce Willis is bald or not is a good question. 
He has hair—although it seems to be on the wane—
but much of the time he keeps his head shaved and thus 
appears bald. How much hair would he have to lose to 
be bald whether or not he shaved his head? The fact 
that there is no good answer  demonstrates that “bald-
ness” is a vague concept. Similarly, “blond,” “wealthy,” 
“tall,” “short”—these and many more have clear-cut 
examples, but they have very fuzzy borders. 

68 
CHAPTER 3: CLEAR THINKING, CRITICAL THINKING, AND CLEAR WRITING
 Problems arise with vagueness when there is too much of it, as in our previ-
ous direction-giving example. Similarly, if a politician claims he will “raise taxes 
on the wealthy,” what should we take that to mean? Unlike with the earlier exam-
ple of Darren’s rich parents, in this case it would be worthwhile to spend some 
effort trying to pin down just what our speaker means by “wealthy,” since where 
the borders fall here really  does make a difference. 
 So, when is a level of vagueness acceptable and when is it not? It’s difficult to 
give a general rule, aside from urging due care and common sense, but we might 
say this:
For example, if the directions we’re given are not too vague to help us find 
our destination, they pass the test. If the politician specifies enough about his 
tax plan to assure us that we understand how it would apply, then we should not 
complain of vagueness. But when a speaker or writer does indulge in excessive 
vagueness, thereby making it difficult or impossible for us to fairly assess his or 
her claim, it is our job to hold that person accountable. 
 AMBIGUITY  
 A word, phrase, or sentence is said to be  ambiguous  when it has more than one 
meaning. Does “Paul cashed a check” mean that Paul gave somebody cash, or 
that somebody gave cash to him? It could mean either. “Jessica is renting her 
house” could mean that she’s renting it  to  someone or  from  someone. Jennifer 
gets up from her desk on Friday afternoon and says, “My work here is finished.” 
She might mean that she has finished the account she was working on, or that her 
whole week’s work is done and she’s leaving for the weekend, or that she’s fed up 
with her job and is leaving the company. If you look online, you can find several 
collections of amusing headlines that are funny because of their ambiguity: “Kids 
make nutritious snacks,” for example, or “Miners refuse to work after death.”     
 Most of the time the inter-
pretation that a speaker or writer 
intends for a claim is obvious, 
as in the case of these head-
lines. But ambiguity can have 
 consequences beyond making us 
smile. 
 In discussions of gay rights, 
we’ve seen an ambiguity in the 
term “rights” that often stymies 
rational debate. The issue is 
whether laws should be passed 
to prevent discrimination against 
gays in housing, in the workplace, 
and so forth. One side claims 
that such laws would themselves 
be discriminatory because they 
would specifically grant to gay 
When a claim is not too vague to convey appropriately useful information, its 
level of vagueness is acceptable. 
 Asked why the desertion rate 
in the army had risen so much, 
director of plans and resources 
for Army personnel Roy  Wallace 
replied, “We’re asking a lot of 
soldiers these days.” 
You might at first want to know 
what   they’re asking the soldiers, 
until you see the ambiguity in 
 Wallace’s remark. 
 ■ Joe Biden is not 
pleased with this book. 
Of course, he is not 
displeased, either, since 
it’s almost certain he’s 
never heard of it. Note 
the ambiguity in the 
original statement. 

 
AMBIGUITY
69
people rights that are not specifically guaranteed to others—they would be “spe-
cial” rights. The other side claims that the laws are only to guarantee for gays the 
right to be treated the same as others under the law. When the two sides fail to 
sort out just what they mean by their key terms, the result is at best a great waste 
of breath and at worst angry misunderstanding. 
 Semantic Ambiguity 
 A claim can be ambiguous in any of several ways. The most obvious way is prob-
ably by containing an ambiguous word or phrase, which produces a case of 
 semantic ambiguity.  See if you can explain the ambiguity in each of the following 
claims:
  In the first case, it may be that it’s the right and not the left side where Collins lines 
up,  or  it may be that he always lines up on the correct side. The second example 
may be saying something about Jessica’s temperature or something about her 
personality. In the third case, it may be that Aunt Delia always had good eyes, but 
it also might mean that she drank her beer directly from the bottle (which was 
true of one of your authors’ Aunt Delia). Semantically ambiguous claims can be 
made unambiguous (“disambiguated”) by substituting a word or phrase that is 
not ambiguous for the one making the trouble. “Correct” for “right,” for example, 
in #1; “eyeglasses” for “glasses” in #3. 
 Grouping Ambiguity 
 There is a special kind of semantic ambiguity, called  grouping ambiguity, that 
results when it is not clear whether a word is being used to refer to a group collec-
tively or to members of the group individually. Consider: 
 The example is true if the speaker refers to secretaries and physicians collectively, 
since there are many more secretaries than there are physicians. But it is obvi-
ously false if the two words refer to individual secretaries and physicians. 
 “Lawn mowers create more air pollution than dirt bikes do” is something a 
dirt biker might say in defense of his hobby. And, because it is ambiguous, there 
is an interpretation under which his claim is probably true as well as one under 
which it is probably false. Taken collectively, lawn mowers doubtless create more 
pollution because there are so many more of them. Individually, we’d bet it’s the 
dirt bike that does more damage. 
 Like other types of ambiguity, grouping ambiguity can be used intentionally 
to interfere with clear thinking. A few years ago, federal taxes were increased, and 
opponents of the change referred to it as “the biggest tax increase in history.” If 
true, that makes the increase sound pretty radical, doesn’t it? And it was true, if 
you looked at the total tax revenue that was brought in by the increase. But this 
 What day is the day after three 
days before the day after 
tomorrow? 
Complicated, but neither vague nor 
ambiguous. 
 Collins, the running back, always lines up on the right side. 
 Jessica is cold. 
 Aunt Delia never used glasses. 
 The story goes that a burglar 
and his 16-year-old accomplice 
tripped a silent alarm while 
breaking into a building. The 
accomplice was carrying a 
pistol, and when police arrived 
and tried to talk him out of the 
weapon, the older burglar said, 
“Give it to him!” whereupon the 
youngster shot the policeman. 
 —Courtesy of  C OLLEN  J OHNSON,   
currently of the California State 
Prison, Tehachapi 
 Ambiguity can be dangerous! 
 Secretaries make more money than physicians do. 

70 
CHAPTER 3: CLEAR THINKING, CRITICAL THINKING, AND CLEAR WRITING
result was largely due to the numbers of people and the circumstances to which 
the increase applied. If we look at the percentage increase paid by individual tax-
payers, this was  not  the biggest increase in history. Since most of us are mainly 
interested in how much more we as individuals have to pay, it is the latter inter-
pretation that is usually more important. But the grouping ambiguity underlying 
the phrase “the biggest tax increase in history” allows one to give another inter-
pretation under which the claim is true; although the individual tax increases 
were not the biggest, the collective tax increase was. 
 Syntactic Ambiguity 
Syntactic ambiguity  occurs when a claim is open to two or more interpretations 
because of its  structure —that is, its syntax. Not long ago, one of us received infor-
mation from the American Automobile Association prior to driving to British 
Columbia. “To travel in Canada,” the brochure stated, “you will need a birth cer-
tificate or a driver’s license and other photo ID.” 
 Just what is the requirement for crossing the border? Under one interpreta-
tion, you have to have a photo ID other than a birth certificate or a driver’s license, 
and under another, you don’t. If we group by brackets, we can make the two inter-
pretations clear, we hope:
The problem with the original version of the claim is that, because of its poor con-
struction, we don’t know whether to associate the driver’s license requirement 
with the birth certificate (as in interpretation 1) or with the “other photo ID” (as in 
interpretation 2). Rewriting is the key to eliminating syntactic ambiguity. Depend-
ing on the intended interpretation, the original could have been written:
Neither of these is ambiguous. 
 In the previous example, the problem was produced by a failure to make clear 
how the logical words “or” and “and” were to apply. *  Here are some other examples 
of syntactic ambiguity, along with various possible interpretations, to help you get 
the idea.   
 In this case, we don’t know what the word “only” applies to. This word, as 
we’ll see in later chapters, is both very useful and very easy to use incorrectly. 
 Neurosis is the inability to tol-
erate ambiguity. 
 — S IGMUND  F REUD 
 Okay. But it’s still true that we 
should not have to live with too 
much of it! 
 [You will need a birth certificate or a driver’s license]  and [other photo ID]. 
 [You will need a birth certificate]  or [a driver’s license and other photo ID]. 
   You will need either a birth certificate or a driver’s license  and you will also need an 
additional photo ID. 
 Or 
  You will need either a birth certificate or  both  a driver’s license and an additional 
photo ID. 
 *This particular kind of syntactic ambiguity is analyzed further in Chapter 9, which deals with propositional logic. 
 It’s hard enough just to keep 
track of the things that are 
really happening, without 
having to worry about all 
the things that aren’t really 
happening. 
—Former secretary of defense 
Donald Rumsfeld, at a Depart-
ment of Defense news briefing 
 We suspect the problem is that 
there are just so many things that 
are not happening. 
 Players with beginners’ skills only may use Court 1. 

 
AMBIGUITY
71
Here, it might mean that beginners may use  only Court 1.  Or it might mean that 
players with  only beginners’ skills  may use Court 1. Finally, it might mean that  only 
players with beginners’ skills  may use Court 1. Obviously, whoever puts up such a 
sign needs to be more careful. (And so does the person who put up a sign in our 
university’s student union that said, “Cash only this line.” Do you see the 
ambiguity?)     
 This ambiguity results from a modifying phrase (“with binoculars”) that is not 
clear in its application. Who had the binoculars in this case? Presumably Susan, 
but it looks as though it was the farmer. “Looking through her binoculars, Susan 
saw the farmer” clears it up. 
 This is similar to the previous example: Does “often” apply to protesting or to get-
ting arrested? 
 Does “next to me” apply to a person or to a bed? One might rewrite this either as 
“There’s somebody next to me in the bed” or as “There’s somebody in the bed 
next to mine.” 
Ambiguous pronoun references  occur when it is not clear to what or whom 
a pronoun is supposed to refer. “The boys chased the girls and they giggled a lot” 
does not make clear who did the giggling. “They” could be either the boys or the 
girls. A similar example: “After their father removed the trash from the pool, the 
kids played in it.” A less amusing and possibly more trouble-making example: 
“Paul agreed that, once Gary removed the motor from the car, he could have it.” 
 Susan saw the farmer with binoculars. 
 People who protest often get arrested. 
 There’s somebody in the bed next to me. 
 Making Ambiguity Work for You 
 Have you ever been asked to write a letter of recommendation for a friend who was, well, 
incompetent? To avoid either hurting your friend’s feelings or lying, Robert Thornton of Lehigh 
University has some ambiguous statements you can use. Here are some examples:
 I most enthusiastically recommend this candidate with no qualifications whatsoever. 
 I am pleased to say that this candidate is a former colleague of mine. 
 I can assure you that no person would be better for the job. 
 I would urge you to waste no time in making this candidate an offer of employment. 
 All in all, I cannot say enough good things about this candidate or recommend the candi-
date too highly. 
 In my opinion, you will be very fortunate to get this person to work for you. 

72 
CHAPTER 3: CLEAR THINKING, CRITICAL THINKING, AND CLEAR WRITING
What does Gary have permission to take, the motor or the car? (Just imagine a 
written agreement containing this sentence. We’d predict a lawsuit.) It pays to be 
careful; a speaker or writer who is thinking critically will make clear exactly what 
he or she means to say.  
 There are other examples of ambiguity that are difficult to classify. For 
example, one of us was at lunch with the dean of a college at our university, and 
the dean said to the server, “You can bring the sauce separately, and I’ll put it on 
myself.” The ambiguity, obviously, is in  how he’ll put the sauce on versus  where 
he’ll put it. As in all cases of ambiguity, it is important to  see that  the claim is 
ambiguous rather than to be able to classify the type of ambiguity. (This one could 
be called either semantic or syntactic, by our lights.) By improving your ability to 
notice when claims are ambiguous, you will be less likely to be misled by them 
and less likely to mislead others by using them—unless, of course, you mean to 
mislead them! 
 GENERALITY  
 We turn now to the notion of generality, which is closely related to both vague-
ness and ambiguity and which can cause trouble in the same way they do. 
 From what we learned of vagueness, we realize that the word “child” is vague, 
since it is not clear where the line is drawn between being a child and no longer being 
a child. It can also be ambiguous, because it can refer not only to a person of imma-
ture years but also to a person’s offspring. As if this weren’t enough, it is also general 
because it applies to both boys and girls. Generality is lack of specificity. The more 
different kinds of Xs to which the word “X” applies, the more general it is. Regarding 
specific words and phrases, the more different kinds of Xs to which a word applies, 
the more general the word “X” is. “Moore has a dog” is more general than “Moore 
has an otterhound.” “Moore has a pet” is still more general. 
 If you learn that Clarence has an arrest record, it may well lower your esti-
mate of him and may prevent you from hiring him to do work around your house, 
for example. But if some more detail were supplied—for instance, that he had 
been arrested during a protest against a company that was polluting the local 
river—it might well make a difference in your opinion of him. The difference 
between a very general description and one with more specificity can be crucial 
to nearly any decision. 
 There has been a lot of discussion about whether the War on Terror should 
really be called a “war” at all. The phrase has continued to be used because 
“war” is both vague and general. Some believe that the word as traditionally used 
requires an enemy that is organized and identifiable, such as a country or prov-
ince, and those are difficult to identify in the War on Terror. Still less clearly a war 
is the so-called War on Drugs. This seems to be a purely metaphorical use of the 
word “war,” meant to show only that somebody is serious about the issue and to 
justify the expense of prosecuting drug cases. 
 We don’t mean to confuse you with these closely related and overlapping 
pitfalls—vagueness, ambiguity, and generality. In practical fact, it is less impor-
tant that you classify the problem that infects a claim or idea than that you see 
what’s going on and can explain it. For example, “Just what do you mean by 
‘war’?” is a good response to someone who is using the word too loosely. In some 
of the exercises that follow, we’ll ask you to identify problems in different pas-
sages in order to help you become familiar with the ideas. In others, we’ll simply 
ask you to explain what is needed for clarification. 
 The traveler must, of course, 
always be cautious of the 
overly broad generalization. 
But I am an American, and a 
paucity of data does not stop 
me from making sweeping, 
vague, conceptual statements, 
and, if necessary, following 
these statements up with 
troops. 
 — G EORGE  S AUNDERS,  The 
 Guardian, July 22, 2006 

 
GENERALITY 
73
 Anyhow, with all these potential pitfalls to clear thinking and clear commu-
nication, what is a critically thinking person to do? To start, we can do the best we 
can to be clear in what our words mean. So after the following exercises we will 
turn our attention to the definition of terms. 
 Here are several exercises to give you practice identifying precision (or lack 
thereof) in sentences. 
 The lettered words and phrases that follow each of the following fragments vary in 
their precision. In each instance, determine which is the most precise and which 
is the least precise; then rank the remainder in order of precision, to the extent 
possible. If these exercises are discussed in class, you’ll discover that many of 
them leave room for disagreement. Discussion with input from your instructor 
will help you and your classmates reach closer agreement about items that prove 
especially difficult to rank. 
 
—See the answers section at the back of the book.
 Example 
 Over the past ten years, the median income of wage earners in St. Paul
 a. nearly doubled 
 b. increased substantially 
 c. increased by 85.5 percent 
   d. increased by more than 85 percent       
 Answer 
 Choice (b) is the least precise because it provides the least information; (c) is 
the most precise because it provides the most detailed figure. In between, (d) 
is the second most precise, followed by (a).
 1. Eli and Sarah
 a. decided to sell their house and move 
 b. made plans for the future 
 c. considered moving 
   d. talked  
 e. discussed their future 
 f. discussed selling their house 
 2. Manuel
 a. worked in the yard all afternoon 
 b. spent the afternoon planting flowers in the yard 
 c. was outside all afternoon 
 d. spent the afternoon planting salvia alongside his front sidewalk 
 e. spent the afternoon in the yard 
 3. The American Civil War
    a. was the bloodiest in American history  
 b. resulted in the highest percentage of deaths of U.S. males of any war 
   c. saw 10 percent of young Northern males and 30 percent of young  Southern 
males lose their lives 
 d. resulted in the deaths of approximately 750,000 soldiers, North and South 
▲
▲
 Exercise 3-1 

74 
CHAPTER 3: CLEAR THINKING, CRITICAL THINKING, AND CLEAR WRITING
 4. The recent changes in the tax code
 
a.  will substantially increase taxes paid by those making more than 
$200,000 per year 
 
b.  will increase by 4 percent the tax rate for those making more than 
$200,000 per year; will leave unchanged the tax rate for people making 
between $40,000 and $200,000; and will decrease by 2 percent the tax 
rate for those making less than $40,000 
 
c. will make some important changes in who pays what in taxes 
 
d. are tougher on the rich than the provisions in the previous tax law 
 
e.  raise rates for the wealthy and reduce them for those in the lowest 
brackets     
 5. Smedley is absent because
 
a. he’s not feeling well 
 
b. he’s under the weather 
 
c. he has an upset stomach and a fever 
 
d. he’s nauseated and has a fever of more than 103  8  
 
e. he has flulike symptoms 
 6. Candice
 
a. had a nice trip to her home town 
 
b. took a vacation 
 
c. visited her mother back in Wichita Falls 
 
d. was out of town for a while 
 
e. visited her mother 
 7. Hurricane Sandy
 
a. was the second most costly storm to hit the United States 
 
b. took over 200 lives in seven countries along its path 
 
c. killed people in several countries 
 
d.  killed 253 people from Jamaica to Canada and did $65 million worth of 
damage  
 
e. was the most lethal storm to hit the United States since Katrina 
 8. The Miami Heat
    
a. beat the Atlanta Hawks last night  
 
b. 104, the Atlanta Hawks 101 
 
c. squeaked by the Atlanta Hawks last night 
 
d. beat the Atlanta Hawks by three points in a playoff game last night 
 
e. won last night 
 9. Roy and Jaydee are
 
a. driving less because they want to reduce auto emissions 
 
b. trying to reduce their carbon footprint 
 
c. concerned about the effects of carbon emissions on the world’s climate 
 
d.  carpooling with neighbors to keep down the amount of carbon they 
cause to be emitted 
 
e. worried about global climate change 
 10. The Tea Party
    
a. was unsuccessful in at least one Senate race  
 
b. has supported candidates who failed to win in the general election  
 
c. has caused a shift in the policies adopted by the Republican Party 
 
d. supported a candidate for the Senate in Missouri who lost the election 
▲
▲

 
GENERALITY 
75
 You do not always have to classify problematic sentences as too vague, ambigu-
ous, or too general, but practice in doing so can help you learn to spot problems 
quicker. 
 For each of the following, determine if it is too vague or too ambiguous, or 
simply not useful because of either of these faults. Explain your answer. 
 Example 
 Full implementation of the Affordable Care Act (“Obamacare”) will cause a 
serious increase in health care costs. 
 Answer 
 This claim is too vague to be very useful. The problem is the phrase 
“serious increase,” which could mean anything within a wide range of 
cost increases. What is a serious increase to one person may not be 
serious at all to another.
 1. Full implementation of the Affordable Care Act (“Obamacare”) will cause a 
noticeable decrease in health care costs. 
 2. I would not advise going to Raymond’s party; he invites all kinds of people to 
those things. 
 3. Sign in store window: Help Wanted. 
 4. He chased the girl in his car. 
 5. Remember, you have an appointment tomorrow afternoon. 
 6. The new tax plan will only affect rich people. 
 7. He gave her cat food. 
 8. Professional football needs new rules about excessive violence in the game. 
 9. She had her daughter’s family over and served them a very nice meal. 
 10. Headline: Killer sentenced to die for the second time in ten years. 
 11. You only need modest exercise to stay healthy. 
 12. Yes, I saw the robber; he looked perfectly ordinary. 
 13. Prostitutes appeal to the mayor. 
 14. Athletes have to stay in training year round. 
 15. They’re looking for teachers of Spanish, French, and German. 
▲
▲
▲
▲
 Exercise 3-2 
source: THE BORN LOSER © 2009 Art and Chip Sansom. Reprinted by permission of Universal Uclick for UFS. All rights reserved.

76 
CHAPTER 3: CLEAR THINKING, CRITICAL THINKING, AND CLEAR WRITING
 DEFINING TERMS  
 When today’s typical student hears the word “definition,” we wouldn’t be sur-
prised if the first thing to come to mind is television. “Ultra-high definition” is 
now the standard of clarity in what we see on the home screen. This is directly 
 Which of each set of claims suffers least from excessive vagueness, ambiguity, or 
excessive generality? 
 Example 
 a. The trees served to make shade for the patio. 
 b. He served his country proudly. 
 Answer 
 The use of “served” in (b) is more vague than that in (a). We know exactly 
what the trees did; we don’t know what he did.
 1.  a. Rooney served the church his entire life. 
 b. Rooney’s tennis serve is impossible to return. 
 2.  a. The window served its purpose. 
 b. The window served as an escape hatch. 
 3. a. Throughout their marriage, Alfredo served her dinner. 
 b. Throughout their marriage, Alfredo served her well. 
 4.  a. Minta turned her ankle. 
 b. Minta turned to religion. 
 5.  a. These scales will turn on the weight of a hair. 
 b. This car will turn on a dime. 
 6.  a. Fenner’s boss turned vicious. 
 b. Fenner’s boss turned out to be forty-seven. 
 7.  a. Time to turn the garden. 
 b. Time to turn off the sprinkler. 
 8.  a. The wine turned to vinegar. 
 b. The wine turned out to be vinegar. 
 9.  a. Harper flew around the world. 
 b. Harper departed around 3:00  a.m. 
 10.  a. Clifton turned out the light. 
 b. Clifton turned out the vote. 
 11.  a. The glass is full to the brim. 
 b. Mrs. Couch has a rather full figure. 
 12.  a. Kathy gave him a full report. 
 b. “Oh, no, thank you! I am full.” 
 13.  a. Oswald was dealt a full house. 
   b. Oswald is not playing with a full deck.     
 14.  a. Money is not the key to happiness. 
 b. This is not the key to the garage. 
 15.  a. Porker set a good example. 
 b. Porker set the world record for the 100-meter dash. 
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
 Exercise 3-3 

 
DEFINING TERMS 
77
analogous to the clarity and distinctness we’re looking for as critical thinkers, and 
the careful definition of terms is one of our most useful tools in pursuing this goal. 
While the business of definitions may seem straightforward (“‘carrot’ refers to a 
tapering, orange-colored root eaten as a vegetable”), you’ll soon see that there’s 
more to it than you might have thought. For example, a multitude of attempts 
have been made to construct a definition of “person” (or, if you like, “human 
being”). Everything from “rational animal” to “featherless biped” has been sug-
gested. But such important issues as whether abortion is morally permissible, 
whether fetuses have rights, whether a fetus is correctly referred to as an “unborn 
child,” and doubtless many others—all turn on how we define “person” and some 
of these other basic concepts. Indeed, if we define “abortion” as “the murder of an 
unborn child,” the debate on abortion is over before it begins. 
 Some arguments against the acceptance of rights for gay men and lesbi-
ans depend on the claim that their orientation is “unnatural.” *  But to arrive at a 
definition of “natural” (or “unnatural”) is no easy task. If you spend a few min-
utes thinking about this difficulty—even better, if you discuss it with others—we 
think you’ll see what we mean. What is “natural,” depending on who is defin-
ing the term, can mean anything from “occurs in nature” to “correct in the eyes 
of God.” 
 As you will see in Chapter 12, the definition of the word “use” by the U.S. 
Supreme Court made a difference of thirty years in the sentence of John Angus 
Smith in a recent criminal case **  Definitions matter. Now, let’s have a look at how 
to deal with them. 
 Purposes of Definitions 
 We’ll start by indicating some of the purposes that definitions serve, then go on 
to describe several different types of definitions. After that, we’ll give some rough 
and ready ideas on giving good definitions. 
 Definitions can serve several purposes, but we want to call your attention 
to three: 
   1. The first and main purpose served by definitions is to tell us what a word 
means. When we don’t know a word’s meaning, we often look it up in a diction-
ary. The definitions given there are  lexical definitions;  they tell us what the word 
ordinarily means (“ tamarin.  noun: a small, forest-dwelling South American mon-
key of the marmoset family, typically brightly colored and with tufts and crests of 
hair around the face and neck.”). You might well ask, Isn’t this what all definitions 
do? A good question, and the answer is  no. Check the following. 
  2. Sometimes the usual meaning of a word or phrase is too vague or too 
general to be useful in a given context, so a definition is needed to make the term 
more precise. For example, the word “dollars” is too general to be used in its nor-
mal sense in a sales contract, because it could apply to U.S. dollars, Canadian 
dollars, Australian dollars, and more. So we make the meaning precise by  stipu-
lating  that “In this contract, the term ‘dollars’ will refer exclusively to Canadian 
dollars.” 
 A definition is the start of an 
argument, not the end of one. 
 — N EIL  P OSTMAN, author of 
 Amusing Ourselves to Death: 
Public Discourse in the Age of 
Show Business 
 *“[W]e’re talking about a particular behavior that most American’s [ sic ] consider strange and unnatural, and many 
Americans consider deeply immoral.” “Equal Rights for Homosexuals,” by Gregory Kouki,  www.str.org/site/News2?page= 
NewsArticle&id=5226 . 
 **See Exercise 12–13, page 405, for details. 

78 
CHAPTER 3: CLEAR THINKING, CRITICAL THINKING, AND CLEAR WRITING
 We can also stipulate that a word will have a  new  meaning in a given context. 
For example, “In this environment, ‘desktop’ means the basic opening screen of 
the operating system—the one with the trash can.” Furthermore, we can assign 
meanings to words we invent. Stephen Colbert used the word “truthiness” on 
his inaugural  Colbert Report  in 2005. Its assigned meaning can be stated as “[the 
quality possessed by] those things a person claims to know intuitively or ‘from the 
gut’ without regard to evidence, logic, intellectual examination, or facts.” * 
 Definitions that make a term more precise or that stipulate new or different 
meanings for them are often referred to as  precising definitions  or  stipulative 
definitions.  But remember, these labels apply to certain  uses  of definitions, not to 
kinds of definitions. 
  3. Definitions can also be used to persuade; such use is often labeled the 
 persuasive  or  rhetorical  use of definition. Such usage can be troublesome, 
because it often distorts the real meaning of a term in order to influence someone 
either to favor or disfavor a person, policy, object, or event. 
 If a liberal friend tries to “define” a conservative as “a hidebound, narrow-minded 
hypocrite who thinks the point to life is making money and ripping off poor people,” 
you know the point here is not the clarification of the meaning of the word “conser-
vative.” It is a way of trashing conservatives. Such rhetorical uses of definitions fre-
quently make use of the  emotive meaning  (or, if you prefer, the   rhetorical force ) of 
words. This meaning consists of the positive or negative associations of a word. Con-
sider the difference between “government-guaranteed health care” and a “govern-
ment takeover of health care.” These terms might reasonably be used to refer to the 
same thing, but they clearly have different emotional associations—one positive and 
one negative. The word “connotation” is the traditional term for these associations.* *  
 Our definition of “abortion” as “the murder of an unborn child” at the begin-
ning of this section is another much-quoted example of this type of definition. 
 Kinds of Definitions 
 We’ve looked at some important purposes to which definitions can be put, and 
we must now distinguish between those purposes and the  types of definitions that 
are used to serve them. Remember that the purpose of a definition and the type 
of definition it is are different things. (Compare: The  purpose  of food is to nourish 
our bodies and please our palettes, whereas  types  of food are vegetables, meat, 
Pringles, etc.) 
 Regardless of what purpose is served by defining a term, most definitions 
are of one of the three following types:
 1.  Definition by example (also called  ostensive definition ): Pointing to,  naming, 
or otherwise identifying one or more examples of the sort of thing to which 
the term applies: “By ‘scripture,’ I mean writings like the Bible and the Koran.” 
“A mouse is this thing here, the one with the buttons.”  
 2.  Definition by synonym: Giving another word or phrase that means the same 
as the term being defined. “‘Fastidious’ means the same as ‘fussy.’” “‘Pulsatile’ 
means ‘throbbing.’” “To be ‘lubricious’ is the same as to be ‘slippery.’” 
 It’s bad poetry executed by 
people who can’t sing. That’s 
my definition of Rap. 
 — P ETER  S TEELE 
 We’re guessing he doesn’t like it. 
 * This version is due to Dick Meyer,  CBS News, December 12, 2006. Actually, the word “truthiness” had been around for a 
very long time before Colbert  re invented it. It was mentioned in the  Oxford English Dictionary as a variant of “truth.” 
 **Much more will be said about the rhetorical force of words in Chapter 5. 

 
DEFINING TERMS
79
 3.  Analytical definition: Specifying the features that a thing must possess in 
order for the term being defined to apply to it. These definitions often take 
the form of a genus-and-species classification. For example, “A samovar is 
an urn that has a spigot and is used especially in Russia to boil water for tea.” 
“A mongoose is a ferret-sized mammal native to India that eats snakes and is 
related to civets.” 
 Almost all dictionary definitions, often said to be  lexical definitions,  are of 
the analytical variety. 
 Some Tips on Definitions 
 So far, we’ve seen that definitions serve a variety of purposes and take sev-
eral different forms. Combinations can be of many sorts: a definition by syn-
onym that is precising (“minor” means under eighteen); an analytical definition 
designed just to persuade (a liberal is somebody who wants the able and willing 
to take care of both the unable and the unwilling). But what makes a definition a 
good one? 
 First, definitions should not prejudice the case against one side of a debate 
or the other. This is one form of  begging the question,  which will be discussed 
in some detail in Chapter 6. For now, just recall that one cannot usually win a 
debate simply by insisting on one’s own favored definition of key terms, since 
those who disagree with your position will also disagree with your definitions. 
Definitions are instances in which people have to try to achieve a kind of neutral 
ground. 
 Second, definitions should be clear. They are designed to clear the air, not 
muddy the water. This means they should be expressed in language that is as clear 
and simple as the subject will allow. If we define a word in language that is more 
obscure than the original word, we accomplish nothing. This includes avoiding 
emotively charged language whenever possible. 
 Realize that sometimes you must get along with incomplete definitions. 
In real life, we sometimes have to deal with claims that include such big-league 
abstractions as friendship, loyalty, fair play, freedom, rights, and so forth. If you 
have to give a  complete  definition of “freedom” or “fair play,” you’d best not plan 
on getting home early. Such concepts have subtle and complex parameters that 
 Do We Always Act Selfishly? 
Whenever you can, you act so as to satisfy your desires. Acting to satisfy your desires is acting 
selfishly. Therefore, whenever you can, you act selfishly.
Persuaded?  We hope not. If you apply a little critical thinking to this argument, it should 
be clear that hidden within it is an odd definition of acting selfishly—as acting so as to satisfy 
your desires.  Yes, under this definition, whenever you can, you act selfishly, something most of 
us don’t believe.  But a definition that better captures the ordinary understanding of what it is 
to act selfishly is to say that acting selfishly is to place your own interests above those of others. 
Under this definition, we’d expect people’s actions to include both selfish and unselfish acts, 
which is what happens.
If an argument leads to a surprising result, check definitions!

80 
CHAPTER 3: CLEAR THINKING, CRITICAL THINKING, AND CLEAR WRITING
might take a lifetime to pin down. (Plato, generally recognized as a pretty smart 
cookie, spent an entire book in an attempt to define “justice.”) For practical pur-
poses, what is usually needed for words like these is not a complete definition 
but a precise definition that focuses on one aspect of the concept and provides 
sufficient guidance for the purposes at hand: “To me, the word ‘justice’ does 
not include referring to a person’s private life when evaluating his or her work 
performance.”  
 The following exercise will give you practice with definitions: 
 In groups (or individually if your instructor prefers), determine what term in each 
of the following is being defined and whether the definition is by example or by 
synonym or an analytical definition. If it is difficult to tell which kind of definition 
is present, describe the difficulty. 
 1. A piano is a stringed instrument in which felt hammers are made to strike 
the strings by an arrangement of keys and levers. 
 2. “Decaffeinated” means without caffeine. 
 3. Steve Martin is my idea of a successful philosophy major. 
 4. The red planet is Mars. 
 5. “UV” refers to ultraviolet light. 
 6. The Cheyenne perfectly illustrate the sort of Native Americans who were 
Plains Indians. 
 7. Data, in our case, is raw information collected from survey forms, which is 
then put in tabular form and analyzed. 
 8. “Chiaroscuro” is just a fancy word for shading. 
 9. Bifocals are glasses with two different prescriptions ground into each lens, 
making it possible to focus at two different distances from the wearer. 
 10. Red is the color that we perceive when our eyes are struck by light waves of 
approximately seven angstroms. 
 11. A significant other can be taken to be a person’s spouse, lover, long-term 
companion, or just girlfriend or boyfriend. 
 12. “Assessment” means evaluation. 
 13. A blackout is “a period of total memory loss, as one induced by an accident 
or prolonged alcoholic drinking.” When your buddies tell you they loved 
your rendition of the Lambada on Madison’s pool table the other night and 
you don’t even remember being at Madison’s, that is a blackout. 
 —Adapted from the CalPoly, San Luis Obispo, Mustang Daily 
 14. A pearl, which is the only animal-produced gem, begins as an irritant inside 
an oyster. The oyster then secretes a coating of nacre around the irritating 
object. The result is a pearl, the size of which is determined by the number of 
layers with which the oyster coats the object. 
 15. According to my cousin, who lives in Tulsa, the phrase “bored person” refers 
to anybody who is between the ages of sixteen and twenty-five and lives in 
eastern Oklahoma. 
▲
▲
▲
▲
 Exercise 3-4 

 
WRITING ARGUMENTATIVE ESSAYS
81
 WRITING ARGUMENTATIVE ESSAYS  
 Not long ago, the Educational Testing Service revamped the infamous Scholastic 
Aptitude Test (SAT), which many universities use when determining whether to 
admit an applicant. The most significant change was to have test takers write an 
argumentative essay. This change in the SAT shows the importance the educators 
place on the ability to write this type of essay. That’s because writing an argumen-
tative essay is doing nothing other than thinking critically—and leaving a paper 
trail for others to follow. This isn’t a book on writing, but writing an argumenta-
tive essay is so closely related to thinking critically that we would like to take the 
opportunity to offer our recommendations. We know professors who have retired 
because they could not bear to read another student essay. As a result, we offer 
our two bits’ worth here in hopes of continuing to see familiar faces. 
 As we said back on page 65, an argumentative essay generally has four 
components:
  Ideally, your essay should begin with an introduction to the issue that demon-
strates that the issue is important or interesting. This is not always easy, but even 
when you are not excited about the subject yourself, it is still good practice to try 
to make your reader interested. Your statement of the issue should be fair; that is, 
don’t try to state the issue in such a way that your position on it is obviously the 
only correct one. This can make your reader suspicious; the burden of convincing 
him or her will come later, when you give your arguments. 
 Your position on the issue should be clear. Try to be brief. If you have stated 
the issue clearly, it should be a simple matter to identify your position. 
 Your arguments in support of your position also should be as succinct as 
you can make them, but it is much more important to be clear than to be brief. 
After all, this is the heart of your essay. The reasons you cite should be clearly 
relevant, and they should be either clearly reliable or backed up by further argu-
ments. Much of the rest of this book is devoted to how this is done; hang in there. 
 If there are well-known arguments for the other side of the issue, you should 
acknowledge them and offer some reason to believe that they are unconvincing. 
You can do this either by attacking the premises that are commonly given or by 
trying to show that those premises do not actually support the opposing conclu-
sion. More on these topics later, too. 
 Following are some more detailed hints that might be helpful in planning 
and writing your argumentative essay:
 1.  Focus.  Make clear at the outset what issue you intend to address and what 
your position on the issue will be. However, nothing is quite so boring as starting 
off with the words “In this essay, I will argue that X, Y, and Z,” and then going on 
to itemize everything you are about to say, and at the end concluding with the 
words “In this essay, I argued that X, Y, and Z.” As a matter of style, you should let 
the reader know what to expect without using trite phrases and without going on 
at length. However, you should try to find an engaging way to state your position. 
For example, instead of “In this essay, I will discuss the rights of animals to inherit 
 A statement of the issue 
 A statement of one’s position on that issue 
 Arguments that support one’s position 
 Rebuttals of arguments that support contrary positions 

82 
CHAPTER 3: CLEAR THINKING, CRITICAL THINKING, AND CLEAR WRITING
property from their masters,” you might begin, “Could your inheritance wind up 
belonging to your mother’s cat?” 
 2.  Stick to the issue.  All points you make in an essay should be connected 
to the issue under discussion and should always either (a) support, illustrate, 
explain, clarify, elaborate on, or emphasize your position on the issue or (b) serve 
as responses to anticipated objections. Rid the essay of irrelevancies and dangling 
thoughts.  
 3.  Arrange the components of the essay in a logical sequence.  This is just 
common sense. Make a point before you clarify it, for example, not the other way 
around. 
 When supporting your points, bring in examples, clarification, and the like 
in such a way that a reader knows what in the world you are doing. A reader should 
be able to discern the relationship between any given sentence and your ultimate 
objective, and he or she should be able to move from sentence to sentence and 
from paragraph to paragraph without getting lost or confused. If a reader can-
not outline your essay with ease, you have not properly sequenced your material. 
Your essay might be fine as a piece of French philosophy, but it would not pass as 
an argumentative essay. 
 4.  Be complete. Accomplish what you set out to accomplish, support your 
position adequately, and anticipate and respond to possible objections. Keep in 
mind that many issues are too large to be treated exhaustively in a single essay. 
The key to being complete is to define the issue sharply enough that you can be 
complete. Thus, the more limited your topic, the easier it is to be complete in cov-
ering it. 
 Also, be sure there is closure at every level. Sentences should be complete, 
paragraphs should be unified as wholes (and usually each should stick to a single 
point), and the essay should reach a conclusion. Incidentally, reaching a con-
clusion and summarizing are not the same thing. Short essays do not require 
summaries.     
 Good Writing Practices 
 Understanding the four principles just mentioned is one thing, but actually 
employing them may be more difficult. Fortunately, there are five practices that a 
writer can follow to improve the organization of an essay and to help avoid other 
problems. We offer the following merely as a set of recommendations within the 
broader scope of thinking critically in writing. 
 1. At some stage  after the first draft, outline what you have written. Then, make 
certain the outline is logical and that every sentence in the essay fits into 
the outline as it should. Some writers create an informal outline before they 
begin, but many do not. Our advice: Just identify the issue and your position 
on it, and start writing by stating them both. 
 Incidentally, for most people, the hardest sentence to write is the first one. 
H. L. Mencken once said, “Writing is easy. All you do is stare at a blank piece of 
paper until drops of blood form on your forehead.” We have better advice: Just 
begin using your keyboard. Say anything. You can always throw away what you 
write at first, but just the act of writing will help you get started. Eventually, you’ll 
say something relevant to your topic and then you’re off and running. 
 2. Revise your work. Revising is the secret to good writing. Even major-league 
writers revise what they write, and they revise continuously. Unless you are 
 I’m for abolishing and doing 
away with redundancy. 
 — J. C URTIS  M C K AY, of the 
 Wisconsin State Elections Board 
(reported by Ross and Petras)   
 We ourselves are also for that too. 

 
WRITING ARGUMENTATIVE ESSAYS
83
more gifted than the very best professional writers, revise, revise, revise. Don’t 
think in terms of two or three drafts. Think in terms of  innumerable  drafts.  
 3. Have someone else read your essay and offer criticisms of it. Revise as 
required.  
 4. If you have trouble with grammar or punctuation, reading your essay out 
loud may help you detect problems your eyes have missed. 
 5. After you are completely satisfied with the essay, put it aside. Then, come 
back to it later for still further revisions. 
 Essay Types to Avoid 
 Seasoned instructors know that the first batch of essays they get from a class will 
include samples of each of the following types. We recommend avoiding these 
mistakes:
 ■ The Windy Preamble. Writers of this type of essay avoid getting to the issue 
and instead go on at length with introductory remarks, often about how 
important the issue is, how it has troubled thinkers for centuries, how opin-
ions on the issue are many and various, and so on, and so on. Anything you 
write that smacks of “When in the course of human events . . . ” should go 
into the trash can immediately. 
 ■ The Stream-of-Consciousness Ramble. This type of essay results when writ-
ers make no attempt to organize their thoughts and simply spew them out in 
the order in which they come to mind. 
 ■ The Knee-Jerk Reaction. In this type of essay, writers record their first reaction 
to an issue without considering the issue in any depth or detail. It always shows.  
 And While We’re on the Subject of Writing 
 Don’t forget these rules of good style:
 1. Avoid clichés like the plague. 
 2. Be more or less specific. 
 3. NEVER generalize. 
 4. The passive voice is to be ignored. 
 5. Never, ever be redundant. 
 6. Exaggeration is a billion times worse than understatement. 
 7. Make sure verbs agrees with their subjects. 
 8. Why use rhetorical questions? 
 9. Parenthetical remarks (however relevant) are (usually) unnecessary. 
 10. Proofread carefully to see if you any words out. 
 11. And it’s usually a bad idea to start a sentence with a conjunction. 
 This list has been making the rounds on the Internet. 

84 
CHAPTER 3: CLEAR THINKING, CRITICAL THINKING, AND CLEAR WRITING
 ■ The Glancing Blow. In this type of essay, writers address an issue obliquely. 
If they are supposed to evaluate the health benefits of bicycling, they will 
bury the topic in an essay on the history of cycling; if they are supposed to 
address the history of cycling, they will talk about the benefits of riding bicy-
cles throughout history. 
 ■ Let the Reader Do the Work. Writers of this type of essay expect the reader to 
follow them through non sequiturs, abrupt shifts in direction, and irrelevant 
sidetracks.      
 Persuasive Writing 
 The primary aim of argumentation and the argumentative essay is to support a 
position on an issue. Good writers, however, write for an audience and hope their 
audience will find what they write persuasive. If you are writing for an audience of 
people who think critically, it is helpful to adhere to these principles:
  There is nothing wrong with trying to make a persuasive case for your posi-
tion. However, in this book we place more emphasis on making and recogniz-
ing good arguments than on simply devising effective techniques of persuasion. 
Some people can be persuaded by poor arguments and doubtful claims, and an 
argumentative essay can be effective as a piece of propaganda even when it is a 
rational and critical failure. One of the most difficult things you are called upon 
to do as a critical thinker is to construct and evaluate claims and arguments inde-
pendently of their power to win a following. The remainder of this book—after a 
section on writing and diversity—is devoted to this task. 
 Writing in a Diverse Society 
 In closing, it seems appropriate to mention how important it is to avoid writing in 
a manner that reinforces questionable assumptions and attitudes about  people’s 
gender, ethnic background, religion, sexual orientation, physical ability or disabil-
ity, or other characteristics. This isn’t just a matter of ethics; it is a matter of clarity 
and good sense. Careless word choices relative to such characteristics not only 
are imprecise and inaccurate but also may be viewed as biased even if they were 
not intended to be, and thus they may diminish the writer’s credibility. Worse, 
using sexist or racist language may distort the writer’s own perspective and keep 
him or her from viewing social issues clearly and objectively. 
 But language isn’t entirely  not  a matter of ethics, either. We are a society that 
aspires to be just, a society that strives not to withhold its benefits from individu-
als on the basis of their ethnic or racial background, skin color, religion, gender, or 
   Confine your discussion of an opponent’s point of view to issues rather than 
personal considerations. 
  When rebutting an opposing viewpoint, avoid being strident or insulting. Don’t 
call opposing arguments absurd or ridiculous. 
 If an opponent’s argument is good, concede that it is good. 
  If space or time is limited, be sure to concentrate on the most important 
considerations. Don’t become obsessive about refuting every last criticism of your 
position. 
 Present your strongest arguments first. 
 “Always” and “never” are two 
words you should always 
remember never to use. 
 — W ENDELL  J OHNSON 
 Another tip on writing. 

 
RECAP 
85
disability. As a people, we try to end practices and change or remove institutions 
that are unjustly discriminatory. Some of these unfair practices and institutions 
are, unfortunately, embedded in our language. 
 Some common ways of speaking and writing, for example, assume that “nor-
mal” people are all white males. It is still not uncommon, for instance, to mention 
a person’s race, gender, or ethnic background if the person is  not  a white male, 
and  not  to do so if the person  is.  Of course, it may be relevant to whatever you are 
writing about to state that this particular individual is a male of Irish descent, or 
whatever; if so, there is absolutely nothing wrong with saying so. 
 Some language practices are particularly unfair to women. Imagine a con-
versation among three people, you being one of them. Imagine that the other two 
talk only to each other. When you speak, they listen politely; but when you are fin-
ished, they continue as though you had never spoken. Even though what you say 
is true and relevant to the discussion, the other two proceed as though you were 
invisible. Because you are not being taken seriously, you are at a considerable dis-
advantage. You have reason to be unhappy. 
 In an analogous way, women have been far less visible in language than men 
and have thus been at a disadvantage. Another word for the human race is not 
“woman,” but “man” or “mankind.” The generic human has often been referred 
to as “he.” How do you run a project? You  man  it. Who supervises the depart-
ment or runs the meeting? The chair man.  Who heads the crew? The fore man. 
Picture a research scientist to yourself. Got the picture? Is it a picture of a  woman? 
No? That’s because the standard picture, or stereotype, of a research scientist is a 
picture of a man. Or, read this sentence: “Research scientists often put their work 
before their personal lives and neglect their husbands.” Were you surprised by 
the last word? Again, the stereotypical picture of a research scientist is a picture 
of a man. 
 A careful and precise writer finds little need to converse in the lazy language 
of stereotypes, especially those that perpetuate prejudice. As long as the idea pre-
vails that the “normal” research scientist is a man, women who are or who wish 
to become research scientists will tend to be thought of as out of place. So they 
must carry an  extra  burden, the burden of showing that they are  not  out of place. 
That’s unfair. If you unthinkingly always write, “The research scientist . . . he,” you 
are perpetuating an image that places women at a disadvantage. Some research 
scientists are men, and some are women. If you wish to make a claim about male 
research scientists, do so. But if you wish to make a claim about research scien-
tists in general, don’t write as though they were all males. 
 The rule to follow in all cases is this: Keep your writing free of  irrelevant 
implied evaluation  of gender, race, ethnic background, religion, or any other 
human attribute. 
 This list summarizes the topics covered in this chapter:
 ■ Clarity of language is extremely important to the ability to think critically. 
 ■ Clarity of language can often be lost as a result of multiple causes, including, 
importantly, vagueness, ambiguity, and generality. 
 ■ Vagueness is a matter of degree; what matters is not being too vague for the 
purposes at hand. 
 Recap 

86 
CHAPTER 3: CLEAR THINKING, CRITICAL THINKING, AND CLEAR WRITING
 ■ A statement is ambiguous when it is subject to more than one interpretation 
and it isn’t clear which interpretation is the correct one. 
 ■ Some main types of ambiguity are semantic ambiguity, syntactic ambiguity, 
grouping ambiguity, and ambiguous pronoun reference. 
 ■ A claim is overly general when it lacks sufficient detail to restrict its applica-
tion to the immediate subject. 
 ■ To reduce vagueness or eliminate ambiguity, or when new or unfamiliar 
words are brought into play, or familiar words are used in an unusual way, 
definitions are our best tool. 
 ■ The most common types of definitions are definition by synonym, definition 
by example, and analytical definition. 
 ■ Some “definitions” are used not to clarify meaning but to express or influence 
attitude. This is known as the rhetorical use of definition. 
 ■ The rhetorical use of definitions accomplishes its ends by means of the rhe-
torical force (emotive meaning) of terms. 
 ■ Critical thinking done on paper is known as an argumentative essay, a type of 
writing worth mastering, perhaps by following our suggestions. 
 Exercise 3-5 
 Are the italicized words or phrases in each of the following too imprecise given 
the implied context? Explain. 
 1. Please cook this steak  longer. It’s too rare. 
 2. If you get ready for bed quickly, Mommy has a  surprise for you. 
 3. This program contains language that some viewers may find offensive. It is 
recommended for  mature audiences only. 
 4.  Turn down the damned noise! Some people around here want to sleep! 
 5. Based on our analysis of your eating habits, we recommend that you  lower 
your consumption of sugar and refined carbohydrates. 
 6. NOTICE: Hazard Zone.  Small children not permitted beyond this sign.  
 7. SOFAS CLEANED: $150 &  up. MUST SEE TO GIVE  EXACT PRICES. 
 8. And remember, all our mufflers come with a  lifetime guarantee. 
 9. CAUTION:  To avoid unsafe levels of carbon monoxide, do not set the wick 
on your kerosene stove  too high. 
 10. Uncooked Frosting: Combine 1 unbeaten egg white, ½ cup corn syrup, 
½ teaspoon vanilla, and dash salt. Beat with electric mixer until of fluffy 
spreading consistency. Frost cake. Serve  within a few hours or refrigerate. 
 Exercise 3-6 
 Read the following passage, paying particular attention to the italicized words 
and phrases. Determine whether any of these expressions are too vague in the 
context in which you find them here. 
▲
▲
▲
▲
 Additional 
Exercises 

 
EXERCISES 
87
  Term paper assignment: Your paper  should be  typed,  between eight and 
twelve pages in length,  and double-spaced. You should  make use of  at least 
three  sources.  Grading will be based on  organization, use of sources, clarity 
of expression, quality of reasoning, and  grammar. 
 A  rough draft  is due  before Thanksgiving.  The final version is due  at the 
end of the semester. 
 Exercise 3-7 
 Read the following passage, paying particular attention to the italicized words 
and phrases. All of these expressions would be too imprecise for use in  some con-
texts; determine which are and which are not too imprecise in  this context. 
  In view of what can happen in twelve months to the fertilizer you apply 
at any one time, you can see why just one annual application may not be 
adequate. Here is a guide to timing the  feeding  of some of the more com-
mon types of garden flowers. 
 Feed begonias and fuchsias  frequently  with label-recommended 
amounts or less frequently with  no more than half  the recommended 
amount. Feed roses with  label-recommended amounts  as a  new year’s 
growth begins  and as  each bloom period ends.  Feed azaleas, camellias, 
rhododendrons, and  similar  plants  immediately after bloom  and again 
 when the nights begin cooling off.  Following these simple instructions can 
help your flower garden be as attractive as it can be. 
 Exercise 3-8 
 Rewrite the following claims to remedy problems of ambiguity. Do  not assume 
that common sense by itself solves the problem. If the ambiguity is intentional, 
note this fact, and do not rewrite. 
 Example 
 Former professional football player Jim Brown was accused of assaulting a 
thirty-three-year-old woman with a female accomplice. 
 Answer 
 This claim is syntactically ambiguous because grammatically it isn’t clear 
what the phrase “with a female accomplice” modifies—Brown, the woman 
who was attacked, or, however bizarre it might be, the attack itself (he might 
have thrown the accomplice at the woman). To make it clear that Brown had 
the accomplice, the phrase “with a female accomplice” should have come 
right after the word “Brown” in the original claim.
 1. The Raider tackle threw a block at the Giants linebacker. 
 2. Please close the door behind you. 
 3. We heard that he informed you of what he said in his letter. 
 4. “How Therapy Can Help Torture Victims” 
 —Headline in newspaper 
 5. Charles drew his gun. 
 6. They were both exposed to someone who was ill a week ago. 
▲
▲
▲

88 
CHAPTER 3: CLEAR THINKING, CRITICAL THINKING, AND CLEAR WRITING
 7. Chelsea has Hillary’s nose. 
 8. I flush the cooling system regularly and just put in new thermostats. 
 9. “Tuxedos Cut Ridiculously!” 
 —An ad for formal wear, quoted by Herb Caen 
 10. “Police Kill 6 Coyotes After Mauling of Girl” 
 —Headline in newspaper 
 11. “We promise nothing” 
 —Aquafina advertisement 
 12. A former governor of California, Pat Brown, viewing an area struck by a 
flood, is said to have remarked, “This is the greatest disaster since I was 
elected governor.” 
 —Quoted by Lou Cannon in the Washington Post 
 13. “Besides Lyme disease, two other tick-borne diseases, babesiosis and HGE, 
are infecting Americans in 30 states, according to recent studies. A single tick 
can infect people with more than one disease.” 
 —Self  magazine 
 14. “Don’t freeze your can at the game.” 
 —Commercial for Miller beer 
 15. Volunteer help requested: Come prepared to lift heavy equipment with con-
struction helmet and work overalls. 
 16. “GE: We bring good things to life.” 
 —Television commercial 
 17. “Tropicana 100% Pure Florida Squeezed Orange Juice. You can’t pick a 
 better juice.” 
 —Magazine advertisement 
 18. “It’s biodegradable! So remember, Arm and Hammer laundry detergent gets 
your wash as clean as can be [pause] without polluting our waters.” 
 —Television commercial 
 19. If you crave the taste of a real German beer, nothing is better than 
Dunkelbrau.  
 20. Independent laboratory tests prove that Houndstooth cleanser gets your 
bathroom cleaner than any other product. 
 21. We’re going to look at lots this afternoon. 
 22. Jordan could write more profound essays. 
 23. “Two million times a day Americans love to eat, Rice-a-Roni—the San 
 Francisco treat.” 
 —Advertisement 
   24. “New York’s first commercial human sperm-bank opened Friday with semen 
samples from 18 men frozen in a stainless steel tank.” 
 —Strunk and White, The Elements of Style 
 25. She was disturbed when she lay down to nap by a noisy cow. 
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲

 
EXERCISES 
89
 26. “More than half of expectant mothers suffer heartburn. To minimize symp-
toms, suggests Donald O. Castell, M.D., of the Graduate Hospital in Phila-
delphia, avoid big, high-fat meals and don’t lie down for three hours after 
eating.” 
 —Self magazine 
   27. “Abraham Lincoln wrote the Gettysburg address while traveling from 
 Washington to Gettysburg on the back of an envelope.” 
 —Richard Lederer 
 28. “When Queen Elizabeth exposed herself before her troops, they all shouted 
‘harrah.’” 
 —Richard Lederer 
 29. “In one of Shakespeare’s famous plays, Hamlet relieves himself in a long 
soliloquy.” 
 —Richard Lederer 
 30. The two suspects fled the area before the officers’ arrival in a white Ford 
Mustang, being driven by a third male. 
 31. “AT&T, for the life of your business.” 
 32. The teacher of this class might have been a member of the opposite sex. 
 33. “Woman gets 9 years for killing 11th husband.” 
 —Supposedly, a sign Headline in newspaper 
 34. “Average hospital costs are now an unprecedented $2,063.04 per day in 
 California. Many primary plans don’t pay 20% of that amount.” 
 —AARP Group Health Insurance Program advertisement 
 35. “I am a huge Mustang fan.” 
 —Ford Mustang advertisement 
 36. “Visitors are expected to complain at the office between the hours of 9:00 
and 11:00  a.m. daily.” 
 —Supposedly, a sign in an Athens, Greece, hotel 
 37. “Order your summers suit. Because is big rush we will execute customers in 
strict rotation.” 
 —Supposedly, a sign in a Rhodes tailor shop 
 38. “Please do not feed the animals. If you have any suitable food, give it to the 
guard on duty.” 
 —Supposedly, a sign at a Budapest zoo 
 39. “Our wines leave you with nothing to hope for.” 
 —Supposedly, from a Swiss menu 
 40. “Our Promise—Good for life.” 
 —Cheerios 
 41. Thinking clearly involves hard work. 
 42. “Cadillac—Break Through” 
▲
▲
▲
▲

90 
CHAPTER 3: CLEAR THINKING, CRITICAL THINKING, AND CLEAR WRITING
 Exercise 3-9 
 Determine which of the italicized expressions are ambiguous, which are more 
likely to refer to the members of the class taken as a group, and which are 
more likely to refer to the members of the class taken individually. 
 Example 
Narcotics are habit forming. 
 Answer 
 In this claim,  narcotics refers to individual members of the class because it 
is specific narcotics that are habit forming. (One does not ordinarily become 
addicted to the entire class of narcotics.)
 1.  Swedes eat millions of quarts of yogurt every day. 
 2.  Professors at the university make millions of dollars a year. 
 3.  Our amplifiers can be heard all across the country. 
 4. Students at Pleasant Valley High School enroll in hundreds of courses each year. 
 5.  Cowboys die with their boots on. 
 6. The  angles of a triangle add up to 180 degrees. 
 7.  The New York Giants played mediocre football last year. 
 8. On our airline,  passengers have their choice of three different meals. 
 9. On our airline,  passengers flew fourteen million miles last month without 
incident. 
 10.  Hundreds of people have ridden in that taxi. 
 11.  All our cars are on sale for two hundred dollars over factory invoice. 
 12.  Chicagoans drink more beer than  New Yorkers. 
 13.  Power lawn mowers produce more pollution than  motorcycles. 
 14.  The Baltimore Orioles  may make it to the World Series in another six or seven 
years.  
 15.  People are getting older. 
 Exercise 3-10 
 What is the ambiguity  behind the joke? 
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲

 
EXERCISES 
91
 Exercise 3-11 
 Determine which of the following definitions are more likely designed to per-
suade and which are not. 
 1. “Punk is musical freedom. It’s saying, doing and playing what you want. 
In Webster’s terms, ‘nirvana’ means freedom from pain, suffering and the 
external world, and that’s pretty close to my definition of Punk Rock.” 
 —Kurt Cobain 
 2. “Congress’s definition of torture . . . [is] the infliction of severe mental or 
 physical pain.” 
 —John Yoo 
 3. “Democrats’ definition of “rich”—always seems to be set just above whatever 
the salary happens to be for a member of Congress. Perhaps that says it all.” 
 —Steve Steckler 
 4. “That is the definition of faith—acceptance of that which we imagine to be 
true, that which we cannot prove.” 
 —Dan Brown 
 5. “Sin: That’s anything that’s so much fun it’s difficult not to do it.” 
 —Dave Kilbourne 
 Exercise 3-12 
 Make up six definitions, two of which are designed to make the thing defined 
look good, two of which are designed to make it look bad, and two of which are 
neutral.  
 Exercise 3-13 
 The sentences in this Associated Press health report have been scrambled. 
Rearrange them so that the report makes sense. 
 1. The men, usually strong with no known vices or ailments, die suddenly, 
uttering an agonizing groan, writhing and gasping before succumbing to the 
mysterious affliction. 
 2. Scores of cases have been reported in the United States during the past 
decade.  
 3. In the United States, health authorities call it “Sudden Unexplained Death 
Syndrome,” or “SUDS.” 
 4. Hundreds of similar deaths have been noted worldwide. 
 5. The phenomenon is known as “lai tai,” or “nightmare death,” in Thailand. 
 6. In the Philippines, it is called “bangungut,” meaning “to rise and moan in 
sleep.”  
 7. Health officials are baffled by a syndrome that typically strikes Asian men in 
their thirties while they sleep. 
 8. Researchers cannot say what is killing SUDS victims. 

92 
CHAPTER 3: CLEAR THINKING, CRITICAL THINKING, AND CLEAR WRITING
 Exercise 3-14 
The sentences in the following passage have been scrambled. Rearrange them so 
that the passage makes sense. You’ll find an answer in the answers section. 
 1. Weintraub’s findings were based on a computer test of 1,101 doctors twenty-
eight to ninety-two years old. 
 2. She and her colleagues found that the top ten scorers aged seventy-five to 
ninety-two did as well as the average of men under thirty-five. 
 3. “The test measures memory, attention, visual perception, calculation, and 
reasoning,” she said. 
 4. “The studies also provide intriguing clues to how that happens,” said Sandra 
Weintraub, a neuropsychologist at Harvard Medical School in Boston. 
 5. “The ability of some men to retain mental function might be related to their 
ability to produce a certain type of brain cell not present at birth,” she said. 
 6. The studies show that some men manage to escape the trend of declining 
mental ability with age. 
 7. Many elderly men are at least as mentally able as the average young adult, 
according to recent studies. 
 Exercise 3-15 
 This billboard, one of many put up across the country since 2009, was spon-
sored by the local (Butte County, California) Coalition of Reason and the national 
United Coalition of Reason. The billboards created controversy in many towns, 
and as happened in many other parts of the country, at least one local billboard 
was vandalized. (The word “Don’t” was painted over.) 
 In a brief essay of no more than two pages, present a case on one side or the 
other of this issue: Should an organization be allowed to put up billboards that 
many members of a community will find offensive? 
 Exercise 3-16 
 Rewrite each of the following claims in gender-neutral language. 
 Example 
 We have insufficient manpower to complete the task. 
▲

 
EXERCISES 
93
 Answer 
 We have insufficient personnel to complete the task.
 1. A student should choose his major with considerable care. 
 2. When a student chooses his major, he must do so carefully. 
 3. The true citizen understands his debt to his country. 
 4. If a nurse can find nothing wrong with you in her preliminary examination, 
she will recommend a physician to you. However, in this city the physician 
will wish to protect himself by having you sign a waiver. 
 5. You should expect to be interviewed by a personnel director. You should be 
cautious when talking to him. 
 6. The entrant must indicate that he has read the rules, that he understands 
them, and that he is willing to abide by them. If he has questions, then he 
should bring them to the attention of an official, and he will answer them. 
 7. A soldier should be prepared to sacrifice his life for his comrades. 
 8. If anyone wants a refund, he should apply at the main office and have his 
identification with him. 
 9. The person who has tried our tea knows that it will neither keep him awake 
nor make him jittery. 
 10. If any petitioner is over sixty, he (she) should have completed form E-7. 
 11. Not everyone has the same beliefs. One person may not wish to put himself 
on the line, whereas another may welcome the chance to make his view 
known to his friends. 
 12. God created man in his own image. 
 13. Language is nature’s greatest gift to mankind. 
 14. Of all the animals, the most intelligent is man. 
 15. The common man prefers peace to war. 
 16. The proof must be acceptable to the rational man. 
 17. The Founding Fathers believed that all men are created equal. 
 18. Man’s pursuit of happiness has led him to prefer leisure to work. 
 19. When the individual reaches manhood, he is able to make such decisions for 
himself.  
 20. If an athlete wants to play for the National Football League, he should have a 
good work ethic. 
 21. The new city bus service has hired several women drivers. 
 22. The city is also hiring firemen, policemen, and mailmen; and the city coun-
cil is planning to elect a new chairman. 
 23. Harold Vasquez worked for City Hospital as a male nurse. 
 24. Most U.S. senators are men. 
 25. Mr. and Mrs. Macleod joined a club for men and their wives. 
 26. Mr. Macleod lets his wife work for the city. 
 27. Macleod doesn’t know it, but Mrs. Macleod is a women’s libber. 
 28. Several coeds have signed up for the seminar. 
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲

94 
CHAPTER 3: CLEAR THINKING, CRITICAL THINKING, AND CLEAR WRITING
 29. A judge must be sensitive to the atmosphere in his courtroom. 
 30. To be a good politician, you have to be a good salesman. 
 Exercise 3-17 
 A riddle: A man is walking down the street one day when he suddenly recognizes 
an old friend whom he has not seen in years walking in his direction with a little 
girl. They greet each other warmly, and the friend says, “I married since I last saw 
you, to someone you never met, and this is my daughter, Ellen.” The man says to 
Ellen, “You look just like your mother.” How did he know that? 
 This riddle comes from Janice Moulton’s article “The Myth of the Neutral 
Man.” Discuss why so many people don’t get the answer to this riddle straight off. 
 Classroom/Writing Exercise 
 This exercise is designed for use in the classroom, although your instructor may 
make a different kind of assignment. Consider the often heard claim “Homosexu-
ality is not natural.” Many people agree or disagree with this statement even though 
they have only the most rudimentary idea of what it might mean. Discuss what you 
think might be meant by the claim, taking note of any vagueness or ambiguity that 
might be involved.  
 More Writing Exercises 
 Everyone, no matter how well he or she writes, can improve. And the best way to 
improve is to practice. Since finding a topic to write about is often the hardest part of a 
writing assignment, we’re supplying three subjects for you to write about. For each—
or whichever your instructor might assign—write a one- to two-page essay in which 
you clearly identify the issue (or issues), state your position on the issue (a hypotheti-
cal position if you don’t have one), and give at least one good reason in support of 
your position. Try also to give at least one reason why the opposing position is wrong. 
 1. The exchange of dirty hypodermic needles for clean ones, or the sale of 
clean ones, is legal in many states. In such states, the transmission of HIV 
and hepatitis from dirty needles is down dramatically. But bills [in the Cali-
fornia legislature] to legalize clean-needle exchanges have been stymied 
by the last two governors, who earnestly but incorrectly believed that the 
availability of clean needles would increase drug abuse. Our state, like every 
other state that has not yet done it, should immediately approve legislation 
to make clean needles available. 
 —Adapted from an editorial by Marsha N. Cohen, 
professor of law at Hastings College of Law 
 2. On February 11, 2003, the Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals ruled that the 
state of Arkansas could force death-row prisoner Charles Laverne Singleton 
to take antipsychotic drugs to make him sane enough to execute. Singleton 
was to be executed for felony capital murder but became insane while in 
prison. “Medicine is supposed to heal people, not prepare them for execu-
tion. A law that asks doctors to make people well so that the government can 
kill them is an absurd law,” said David Kaczynski, the executive director of 
New Yorkers Against the Death Penalty. 
▲
▲

 
EXERCISES 
95
 3. Some politicians make a lot of noise about how Canadians and others 
pay much less for prescription drugs than Americans do. Those who are 
constantly pointing to the prices and the practices of other nations when 
it comes to pharmaceutical drugs ignore the fact that those other nations 
lag far behind the United States when it comes to creating new medicines. 
 Canada, Germany, and other countries get the benefits of American research 
but contribute much less than the United States does to the creation of 
drugs. On the surface, these countries have a good deal, but in reality every-
one is worse off, because the development of new medicines is slower than it 
would be if worldwide prices were high enough to cover research costs. 
 —Adapted from an editorial by Thomas Sowell, 
senior fellow at the Hoover Institution 

96
 4 
 R
 aymond James Merrill was in a funk. He had broken up 
with his girlfriend, and he did not want to be alone. Then 
a website that featured “Latin singles” led him to Regina 
Rachid, an attractive woman with a seductive smile who lived 
in southern Brazil, and suddenly Merrill was in love. Desper-
ately so, it seems. He believed everything Rachid told him and 
was credulous enough to make three trips to Brazil to be with 
her, to give her thousands of dollars in cash, and to buy her a 
$20,000 automobile. He even refused to blame her when thou-
sands of dollars in unexplained charges turned up on his credit 
card account. Sadly, Rachid was more interested in  Merrill’s 
money than in his affection, and when he went to Brazil the 
third time, to get married and, he believed, begin a new life, 
he disappeared. The story ended tragically: Merrill’s strangled 
and burned body was found in an isolated spot several miles 
out of town. Rachid and two accomplices are now in jail for the 
crime. *  The moral of the story: It can be a horrible mistake to 
let our needs and desires overwhelm our critical abilities when 
we are not sure with whom or with what we’re dealing. Our 
focus in this chapter is on how to determine when a claim or a 
source of a claim is credible enough to warrant belief. 
 A second story, less dramatic but much more common, is 
about a friend of ours named Dave, who not long ago received 
 *The whole story can be found at  www.justice4raymond.org . 
 Students will learn to . . . 
 1. Evaluate the sources of claims 
 2. Evaluate the content of claims 
 3. Evaluate the credibility of sources 
 4. Understand the influences and 
biases behind media messages 
 5. Understand the impact of advertis-
ing on consumer behavior 
 Credibility 

 
CREDIBILITY 
97
an email from Citibank. It notified him that there might be a problem with his 
credit card account and asked him to visit the bank’s website to straighten things 
out. A link was provided to the website. When he visited the site, he was asked to 
confirm details of his personal information, including account numbers, Social 
Security number, and his mother’s maiden name. The website looked exactly like 
the Citibank website he had visited before, with the bank’s logo and other authen-
tic-appearing details. But very shortly after this episode, he discovered that his 
card had paid for a plasma television, a home theater set, and a couple of expen-
sive car stereos, none of which he had ordered or received. 
 Dave was a victim of “phishing,” a ploy to identify victims for identity theft 
and credit card fraud. The number of phishing scams continues to rise, with mil-
lions of people receiving phony emails alleging to be from eBay, PayPal, and other 
Internet companies as well as an assortment of banks and credit card companies. 
Some of these phishing expeditions threaten to suspend or close the individual’s 
account if no response is made. Needless to say, a person should give  no cred-
ibility  to an email that purports to be from a bank or other company and asks for 
personal identifying information via email or a website. 
 There are two grounds for suspicion in cases where credibility is the issue. 
The first ground is the claim itself. Dave should have asked himself just how likely 
it is that Citibank would notify him of a problem with his account by email and 
would ask him for his personal, identifying information. (Once again,  no bank 
will approach its customers for such information by email or telephone.) The sec-
ond ground for suspicion is the source of the claim. In this case, Dave believed 
the source was legitimate. But here’s the point, one that critical thinkers are well 
aware of these days:  On the Internet, whether by website or email, the average 
person has no idea where the stuff on the computer screen comes from. Computer 
experts have methods that can sometimes identify the source of an email, but 
most of us are very easy to mislead. 
 The Nigerian Advance Fee 4-1-9 Fraud: 
The Internet’s Longest-Running Scam Is 
Still Running Strong 
 If you have an email account, chances are you’ve received an offer from someone in Nigeria, 
probably claiming to be a Nigerian civil servant, who is looking for someone just like you who 
has a bank account to which several millions of dollars can be sent—money that results from 
“overinvoicing” or “double invoicing” oil purchases or otherwise needs laundering outside the 
country. You will receive a generous percentage of the money for your assistance, but you will 
have to help a bit at the outset by sending some amount of money to facilitate the transac-
tions, or to show  your good faith! 
 This scam, sometimes called “4-1-9 Fraud,” after the relevant section of Nigeria’s criminal 
code, is now celebrating more than thirty years of existence. (It operated by telephone and fax 
before the web was up and running.) Its variations are creative and numerous. Critical thinkers 
immediately recognize the failure of credibility such offers have, but thousands of people have 
not, and from a lack of critical thinking skills or from simple greed, hundreds of millions of dol-
lars have been lost to the perpetrators of this fraud. 
 To read more about this scam, google “419 scam.” 

98 
CHAPTER 4: CREDIBILITY
 Dave is no dummy; being fooled by such scams is not a sign of a lack of intel-
ligence. His concern that his account might be suspended caused him to overlook 
the ominous possibility that the original request might be a fake. In other cases, 
such as the one described in the “4-1-9 Fraud” box, it may be wishful thinking or 
a touch of simple greed that causes a person to lower his or her credibility guard. 
 Every time we revise and update this book, we feel obliged to make our 
warnings about Internet fraud more severe. And every time we seem to be borne 
out by events. The level of theft, fraud, duplicity, and plain old vandalism seems 
to rise like a constant tide. We’ll have some suggestions for keeping yourself, your 
records, and your money safe later in the chapter. For now, just remember that 
you need your critical thinking lights on whenever you open your browser. 
 THE CLAIM AND ITS SOURCE 
 As indicated in the phishing story, there are two arenas in which we assess cred-
ibility: the first is that of  claims  themselves; the second is the claims’  sources. If 
we’re told that ducks can communicate by quacking in Morse code, we dismiss 
the claim immediately. Such claims lack credibility no matter where they come 
from. (They have no initial plausibility, a notion that will be explained later.) But 
the claim that ducks mate for life is not at all outrageous; it might be true: it’s a 
credible claim. Whether we should believe it depends on its source; if we read it in 
a bird book or hear it from a bird expert, we are much more likely to believe it than 
if we hear it from our editor, for example. 
 There are degrees of credibility and incredibility; they are not all-or-nothing 
kinds of things, whether we’re talking about claims or sources. Consider the claim 
that a month from now everyone in the world will die in an epidemic caused by 
a mysterious form of bacteria. This is highly unlikely, of course, but it is not as 
unlikely as the claim that everyone in the world will die a month from now due to 
an invasion of aliens from outer space. Sources (i.e., people) vary in their credibil-
ity just as do the claims they offer. If the next-door neighbor you’ve always liked 
is arrested for bank robbery, his denials will probably seem credible to you. But 
he loses credibility if it turns out he owns a silencer and a .45 automatic with the 
serial numbers removed. Similarly, a knowledgeable friend who tells us about an 
investment opportunity has a bit more credibility if we learn he has invested his 
own money in the idea. (At least we could be assured he believed the information 
himself.) On the other hand, he has less credibility if we learn he will make a sub-
stantial commission from our investment in it. 
 So, there are always two questions to be asked about a claim with which 
we’re presented. First, when does a  claim itself   lack credibility—that is, when does 
its  content  present a credibility problem? Second, when does the  source  of a claim 
lack credibility? 
 We’ll turn next to the first of these questions, which deals with what a claim 
actually says. The general answer is
  Just what this answer means will be explained in the section that follows. 
After that, we’ll turn our attention to the second question we asked earlier, about 
the credibility of sources. 
 A claim lacks inherent credibility to the extent that it conflicts with what we have 
observed or what we think we know—our background information—or with 
other credible claims. 

 
ASSESSING THE CONTENT OF THE CLAIM
99
 ASSESSING THE CONTENT OF THE CLAIM 
 So, some claims stand up on their own; they tend to be acceptable regardless 
of from whom we hear them. But when they fail on their own, as we’ve said, it’s 
because they come into conflict either with our own observations or with what we 
call our “background knowledge.” We’ll discuss each of these in turn. 
 Does the Claim Conflict with Our Personal Observations? 
 Our own observations provide our most reliable source of information about the 
world. It is therefore only reasonable to be suspicious of any claim that comes into 
conflict with what we’ve observed. Imagine that Moore has just come from the 
home of Mr. Marquis, a mutual friend of his and Parker’s, and has seen his new red 
Mini Cooper automobile. He meets Parker, who tells him, “I heard that  Marquis 
has bought a new Mini Cooper, a bright blue one.” Moore does not need critical 
thinking training to reject Parker’s claim about the color of the car, because of the 
obvious conflict with his earlier observation. 
 But observations and short-term memory are far from infallible. Stories 
abound of recalled observations that turned out to be mistaken, from cases of 
Incredible Claims!
Lunatic headlines from the supermarket tabloids (as well as from “straight” newspapers) 
provide more fun than information. Most of the following are from the Weekly World News.
Statistics show that teen pregnancy drops off 
significantly after age 25.
[Amazing what you can prove with statistics.]
Homicide victims rarely talk to police.
[And even the ones who do don’t have all that much to say.]
Starvation can lead to health hazards.
[Dr. Donohue’s health column breaking new dietary ground.]
End of World Confirmed (December 20, 2012)
[Mayan archaeologists met in Guatemala and confirmed the end 
date of December 20, 2012.]
End of the World Postponed (December 21, 2012)
[Make up your mind.]
China Buys Grand Canyon
[They’re trying to figure out how to move it nearer to Beijing.]
Aliens Abduct Cheerleaders
[They say they want to learn how to make those pyramids.]

100 
CHAPTER 4: CREDIBILITY
surgeons operating on the wrong limb of a patient to, maybe most notoriously, 
cases in which witnesses misidentified the perpetrators of a crime. The box above, 
“When Personal Observation Fails . . .” gives some startling statistics about inno-
cent persons being wrongly convicted as a result of faulty eyewitness identifica-
tions. In August 2012, the Supreme Court of New Jersey ruled to make it easier for 
defendants to question the credibility of eyewitness testimony in criminal cases. 
 Our observations and our recollections of them can go wrong for all manner 
of reasons. An observer might be tired, distracted, worried about an unrelated 
matter, emotionally upset, feeling ill, and so on. Further, physical conditions can 
affect our observations such as bad lighting, noise, and the speed of events. 
 It’s also important to remember that people are not all created equal when it 
comes to making observations. We hate to say it, dear reader, but there are lots of 
people who see better, hear better, and remember better than you. Of course, that 
goes for us as well. 
 Our beliefs, hopes, fears, and expectations affect our observations. Tell 
someone that a house is infested with rats, and he is likely to believe he sees evi-
dence of rats. Inform someone who believes in ghosts that a house is haunted, 
When Personal Observation Fails . . .
According to the Innocence Project, a group in New York that investigates wrongful convictions, 
eyewitness misidentification is the single greatest cause of conviction of innocent persons. Of 
all the convictions overturned by DNA analysis, witness misidentification played a role in over 
75 percent. Of the first 239 DNA exonerations, 62 percent of the defendants were misidentified 
by one witness; in 25 percent of the cases, the defendant was misidentified by two witnesses; 
and in 13 percent of the cases the same innocent defendant was misidentified by three or more 
separate eyewitnesses. Even though eyewitness testimony can be persuasive before a judge and 
jury, it may be much more unreliable than we generally give it credit for being.

 
ASSESSING THE CONTENT OF THE CLAIM
101
and she may well believe she sees evidence of ghosts.* At séances staged by the 
Society for Psychical Research to test the observational powers of people under 
séance conditions, some observers insist that they see numerous phenomena 
that simply do not exist.* Teachers who are told that the students in a particular 
class are brighter than usual may be apt to believe that the work those students 
produce is better than average, even when it is not. 
 In Chapter 6, we discuss a very common error called  wishful thinking, which 
occurs when we allow hopes and desires to influence our judgment and color our 
beliefs. Most of the people who fall for the 4-1-9 Fraud Internet scam (see the box 
on page 97) are almost surely victims of wishful thinking. It is unlikely that some-
body, somewhere, wants to send you millions of dollars just because you have a 
bank account and that the money the person asks for really is just to facilitate the 
transaction. The most gullible victim, with no stake in the matter, would probably 
realize this. But the idea of getting one’s hands on a great pile of money can blind 
a person to even the most obvious facts. 
 Our personal interests and biases affect our perceptions and the judgments 
we base on them. We overlook many of the mean and selfish actions of the people 
we like or love—and when we are infatuated with someone, everything that per-
son does seems wonderful. By contrast, people we detest can hardly do anything 
that we don’t perceive as mean and selfish. If we desperately wish for the success 
of a project, we are likely to see more evidence for that success than is actually 
present. On the other hand, if we wish for a project to fail, we may exaggerate 
flaws that we see in it or imagine flaws that are not there at all. If a job, chore, or 
decision is one that we wish to avoid, we tend to draw worst-case implications 
from it and thus come up with reasons for not doing it. However, if we are predis-
posed to want to do the job or make the decision, we are more likely to focus on 
whatever positive consequences it might have. 
 Incredible but True 
Believe it or not, these two tables are identical in both size and shape. You’ll probably have 
to check with a ruler or other straightedge to believe this; we did. The illusion was designed 
by Roger Shepard (1990). (Reproduced with permission of W. H. Freeman and Company.) This 
illusion shows how easily our observations can be mistaken—in this case, simply because of 
perspective. As indicated in the text, many other factors can influence what we think we see.
*C. E. M. Hansel, Parapsychology, A Scientific Evaluation.

102 
CHAPTER 4: CREDIBILITY
 Finally, as we hinted earlier, above, the reliability of our observations is no 
better than the reliability of our memories, except in those cases where we have 
the means at our disposal to record our observations. And memory, as most of us 
know, can be deceptive. Critical thinkers are always alert to the possibility that 
what they remember having observed may not be what they did observe. 
 But even though firsthand observations are not infallible, they are still the 
best source of information we have. Any report that conflicts with our own direct 
observations is subject to serious doubt. 
 Does the Claim Conflict with Our Background Information? 
 Reports must always be evaluated against our  background information —that 
immense body of justified beliefs that consists of facts we learn from our own 
direct observations and facts we learn from others. Such information is “back-
ground” because we may not be able to specify where we learned it, unlike some-
thing we know because we witnessed it this morning. Much of our background 
information is well confirmed by a variety of sources. Reports that conflict with 
this store of information are usually quite properly dismissed, even if we can-
not disprove them through direct observation. We immediately reject the claim 
“Palm trees grow in abundance near the North Pole,” even though we are not in a 
position to confirm or disprove the statement by direct observation. 
 Indeed, this is an example of how we usually treat claims when we first 
encounter them: We begin by assigning them a certain  initial plausibility, a 
rough assessment of how credible a claim seems to us. This assessment depends 
on how consistent the claim is with our background information—how well it 
“fits” with that information. If it fits very well, we give the claim some reasonable 
degree of initial plausibility—there is a reasonable expectation of its being true. 
If, however, the claim conflicts with our background information, we give it low 
initial plausibility and lean toward rejecting it unless very strong evidence can be 
produced on its behalf. The claim “More guitars were sold in the United States 
last year than saxophones” fits very well with the background information most 
of us share, and we would hardly require detailed evidence before accepting it. 
However, the claim “Charlie’s eighty-seven-year-old grandmother swam across 
Lake Michigan in the middle of winter” cannot command much initial plausibil-
ity because of the obvious way it conflicts with our background information about 
eighty-seven-year-old people, about Lake Michigan, about swimming in cold 
water, and so on. In fact, short of observing the swim ourselves, it isn’t clear just 
what  could  persuade us to accept such a claim. And even then, we should con-
sider the likelihood that we’re being tricked or fooled by an illusion. 
 Obviously, not every oddball claim is as outrageous as the one about Char-
lie’s grandmother. Several years ago, we read a report about a house being sto-
len in Lindale, Texas—a brick house. This certainly is implausible—how could 
anyone steal a home? Yet there is credible documentation that it happened, *  and 
even stranger things occasionally turn out to be true. That, of course, means that 
it can be worthwhile to check out implausible claims if their being true might be 
of benefit to you. 
 Unfortunately, there are no neat formulas that can resolve conflicts between 
what you already believe and new information. Your job as a critical thinker is to 
trust your background information when considering claims that conflict with that 
 There are three types of men 
in the world. One type learns 
from books. One type learns 
from observation. And one 
type just has to urinate on the 
electric fence. 
 — D R. L AURA  S CHLESSINGER 
 (reported by Larry Englemann) 
 The authority of experience. 
 *Associated Press report, March 25, 2005. 

 
ASSESSING THE CONTENT OF THE CLAIM
103
information—that is, claims with low initial plausibility—but 
at the same time to keep an open mind and realize that further 
information may cause you to give up a claim you had thought 
was true. It’s a difficult balance, but it’s worth getting right. For 
example, let’s say you’ve been suffering from headaches and 
have tried all the usual methods of relief: aspirin, antihistamines, 
whatever your physician has recommended, and so on. Finally, 
a friend tells you that she had headaches that were very similar 
to yours, and nothing worked for her, either, until she had an 
aromatherapy treatment. Then, just a few minutes into her 
aromatherapy session, her headaches went away. Now, we 
(Moore and Parker) are not much inclined to believe that 
smelling oils will make your headache disappear, but we think 
there is little to lose and at least a small possibility of some-
thing substantial to be gained by giving the treatment a try. It may be, for example, 
that the treatment relaxes a person and relieves tension, which can cause head-
aches. We wouldn’t go into it with great expectations, however. 
 The point is that there is a scale of initial plausibility ranging from quite plau-
sible to only slightly so. Our aromatherapy example would fall somewhere between 
the plausible (and in fact true) claim that Parker went to high school with Bill Clin-
ton and the rather implausible claim that Lindsay Lohan has a PhD in physics. 
 As mentioned, background information is essential to adequately assess a 
claim. It is pretty difficult to evaluate a report if you have no background informa-
tion relating to the topic. This means the broader your background information, 
the more likely you are to be able to evaluate any given report effectively. You’d 
have to know a little economics to evaluate assertions about the dangers of a large 
federal deficit, and knowing how Social Security works can help you know what’s 
misleading about calling it a savings account. Read widely, converse freely, and 
develop an inquiring attitude; there’s no substitute for broad, general knowledge. 
 ■ This optical illusion has 
made the rounds on 
the web. It takes a very 
close look to identify 
how the illusion works, 
although it’s  certain 
that  something sneaky 
is going on here. The 
problem is solved in the 
answers section at the 
back of the book. 
From where comes
this “hole”?
The partitions
are exactly the
same as those
used above.
Below, the 
four parts are
moved around.
 Fib Wizards 
 In  The Sleeping Doll, novelist Jeffery Deaver invents a character who is incredibly adept at read-
ing what people are thinking from watching and listening to them. This is fiction, but there 
seems to be at least a bit of substance to the claim that such talents exist. 
 After testing 13,000 people for their ability to detect deception, Professor Maureen 
O’Sullivan of the University of San Francisco identified 31 who have an unusual ability to 
tell when someone is lying to them. These “wizards,” as she calls them, are especially sensi-
tive to body language, facial expressions, hesitations in speech, slips of the tongue, and 
similar clues that a person may not be telling the truth. The wizards are much better than 
the average person at noticing these clues and inferring the presence of a fib from them. 
 Professor O’Sullivan presented her findings to the American Medical Association’s 
23rd Annual Science Reporters Conference. 
 Maybe a few people can reliably tell when someone is lying. But we’d bet there are many 
more who merely  think they can do this. These are the ones we want to play poker with. 
 From an Associated Press report. 

104 
CHAPTER 4: CREDIBILITY
—See the answers section at the back of the book.
 1. The text points out that physical conditions around us can affect our obser-
vations. List at least four such conditions. 
 2. Our own mental state can affect our observations as well. Describe at least 
three of the ways this can happen, as mentioned in the text. 
 3. According to the text, there are two ways credibility should enter into our 
evaluation of a claim. What are they? 
 4. A claim lacks inherent credibility, according to the text, when it conflicts 
with what?  
 5. Our most reliable source of information about the world is  _____ . 
 6. The reliability of our observations is not better than the reliability of  _____ . 
 7. True/False: Initial plausibility is an all-or-nothing characteristic; that is, a 
claim either has it or it doesn’t. 
▲
 Exercise 4-1 
 Exercise 4-2 
 In your judgment, are any of these claims less credible than others? Discuss your 
opinions with others in the class to see if any interesting differences in back-
ground information emerge. 
 1. They’ve taught crows how to play poker. 
 2. The center of Earth consists of water. 
 3. Stevie Wonder is just faking his blindness. 
 4. The car manufacturers already can build cars that get more than 100 miles per 
gallon; they just won’t do it because they’re in cahoots with the oil industry.  
 5. If you force yourself to go for five days and nights without any sleep, you’ll be 
able to get by on less than five hours of sleep a night for the rest of your life. 
 6. It is possible to read other people’s minds through mental telepathy. 
 7. A diet of mushrooms and pecans supplies all necessary nutrients and will 
help you lose weight. Scientists don’t understand why. 
 8. Somewhere on the planet is a person who looks exactly like you. 
 9. The combined wealth of the world’s 225 richest people equals the total 
annual income of the poorest 2.5 billion people, which is nearly half the 
world’s total population. 
 10. The  Kansas City Star has reported that the Kansas Anti-Zombie Militia is 
preparing for a zombie apocalypse. A spokesperson said, “If you’re ready for 
zombies, you’re ready for anything.” 
 11. Daddy longlegs are the world’s most poisonous spider, but their mouths are 
too small to bite. 
 12. Static electricity from your body can cause your gas tank to explode if you 
slide across your seat while fueling and then touch the gas nozzle. 
 13. Japanese scientists have created a device that measures the tone of a dog’s 
bark to determine what the dog’s mood is. 
 14. Barack Obama (a) is a socialist, (b) is a Muslim, (c) was not born in the 
United States. 
 15. Hugh Hefner, eighty-seven-year-old founder of  Playboy magazine, recently 
married Crystal Harris, who is sixty years younger than her new husband. 
▲

 Not All That Glitters 
 Since the U.S. dollar began to decline seriously in about 2004, quite a few financial “experts” 
have claimed that gold is one of the few ways to protect one’s wealth and provide a hedge 
against inflation. Some of the arguments they make contain some good sense, but it’s worth 
pointing out that many of the people advocating the purchase of gold turn out to be brokers of 
precious metals themselves, or are hired by such brokers to sell their product. As we emphasize 
in the text: Always beware of interested parties! 
 
THE CREDIBILITY OF SOURCES
105
 THE CREDIBILITY OF SOURCES 
 We turn now from the credibility of claims themselves to the credibility of the 
sources from which we get them. We are automatically suspicious of certain 
sources of information. (If you were getting a divorce, you wouldn’t ordinarily 
turn to your spouse’s attorney for advice.) We’ll look at several factors that should 
influence how much credence we give to a source. 
 Interested Parties 
 We’ll begin with a very important general rule for deciding whom to trust. Our 
rule makes use of two correlative concepts, interested parties and disinterested 
parties:    
A person who stands to gain from our belief in a claim is known as an  interested 
party,  and interested parties must be viewed with much more suspicion than 
disinterested parties, who have no stake in our belief one way or another.
Gold and silver are money, 
Everything else is credit.
—J. P. MORGAN

106 
CHAPTER 4: CREDIBILITY
 It would be hard to overestimate the importance of this rule—in fact, if you were 
to learn only one thing from this book, this might be the best candidate. Of course, 
not all interested parties are out to hoodwink us, and certainly not all disinter-
ested parties have good information. But, all things considered, the rule of trust-
ing the latter before the former is a crucially important weapon in the critical 
thinking armory. 
 We’ll return to this topic later, both in the text and in some exercises. 
 Physical and Other Characteristics 
 The feature of being an interested or disinterested party is highly relevant to 
whether he, she, it, or they should be trusted. Unfortunately, we often base our 
judgments on irrelevant considerations. Physical characteristics, for example, tell 
us little about a person’s credibility or its lack. Does a person look you in the eye? 
Does he perspire a lot? Does he have a nervous laugh? Despite being generally 
worthless in this regard, such characteristics are widely used in sizing up a per-
son’s credibility. Simply being taller, louder, and more assertive can enhance a 
person’s credibility, according to a Stanford study. *  A practiced con artist can imi-
tate a confident teller of the truth, just as an experienced hacker can cobble up a 
genuine-appearing website. (“Con,” after all, is short for “confidence.”) 
*The study, conducted by Professor Lara Tiedens of the Stanford University Graduate School of Business, was reported 
in USA Today, July 18, 2007.
 Do Your Ears Stick Straight Out? 
 According to Bill Cordingley, an 
expert in psychographicology—
that’s face-reading, in case you 
didn’t know (and we certainly 
didn’t)—a person’s facial features 
reveal “the whole rainbow collec-
tion” of a person’s needs and abili-
ties. Cordingley ( In Your Face: What 
Facial Features Reveal About People 
You Know and Love ) doesn’t mean 
merely that you can infer moods 
from smiles and frowns. No, he 
means that your basic personal-
ity traits are readable from facial 
structures you were born with. 
 Do your ears stick out? That means you have a need to perform in public. The more they 
stick out, the greater the need. Other features are said to reliably predict features of your per-
sonality. It appears that President Obama is fortunate in that he (and his ears) have lots of 
opportunities to appear in public. 
 Is there any reason to believe facial features can tell us such things about people? We think not. 
The fact that Cordingley was once mayor of San Anselmo, California, adds no credibility to the claim. 

 
THE CREDIBILITY OF SOURCES
107
 Other irrelevant features we sometimes use to judge a person’s credibility 
include gender, age, ethnicity, accent, and mannerisms. People also make cred-
ibility judgments on the basis of the clothes a person wears. A friend told one of us 
that one’s sunglasses “make a statement”; maybe so, but that statement doesn’t 
say much about credibility. A person’s occupation certainly bears a relationship 
to his or her knowledge or abilities, but as a guide to moral character or truthful-
ness, it is less reliable. 
 Which considerations are relevant to judging someone’s credibility? We will 
get to these in a moment, but appearance isn’t one of them. You may have the 
idea that you can size up a person just by looking into his or her eyes. This is a 
mistake. Just by looking at someone, we cannot ascertain that person’s truthful-
ness, knowledge, or character. (Although this is generally true, there are excep-
tions. See the “Fib Wizards” box on page 103.) 
 Of course, we sometimes get in trouble even when we accept credible claims 
from credible sources. Many of us rely, for example, on credible advice from 
qualified and honest professionals in preparing our tax returns. But qualified 
and honest professionals can make honest mistakes, and we can suffer the con-
sequences. In general, however, trouble is much more likely if we accept either 
doubtful claims from credible sources or credible claims from doubtful sources 
(not to mention doubtful claims from doubtful sources). If a mechanic says we 
need a new transmission, the claim itself may not be suspicious—maybe the car 
we drive has many miles on it; maybe we neglected routine maintenance; maybe 
it isn’t shifting smoothly. But remember that the mechanic is an interested party; 
if there’s any reason to suspect he would exaggerate the problem to get work for 
himself, we’d get a second opinion about our transmission. 
 One of your authors currently has an automobile that the local dealership 
once diagnosed as having an oil leak. Because of the complexity of the repair, 
the cost was almost a thousand dollars. Because he’d not seen any oil on his 
garage floor, your cautious author decided to wait and see how serious the prob-
lem was. Well, a year after the “problem” was diagnosed, there was still no oil on 
the garage floor, and the car used less than half a quart of oil, about what one 
would have expected to add during the course of a year. What to conclude? The 
service department at the dealership is an interested party. If the service rep 
convinces your author that the oil leak is serious, the dealership makes almost a 
thousand dollars. This makes it worth a second opinion, or, in this case, the 
author’s own investigation. He now believes his car will never need this thou-
sand-dollar repair.  
 Expertise 
 Much of our information comes from people about whom we have no reason to sus-
pect prejudice, bias, or any of the other features that make interested parties such 
bad sources. However, we might still doubt a source’s actual knowledge of an issue 
in question. The state of a person’s knowledge depends on a number of factors, 
especially that person’s level of expertise and experience, either direct (through 
personal observation) or indirect (through study), with the subject at hand. 
 Just as you generally cannot tell merely by looking at someone whether he 
or she is speaking truthfully, objectively, and accurately, you can’t judge his or 
her knowledge or expertise by looking at surface features. A British-sounding 
 I looked the man in the eye. 
 I found him to be very straight-
forward and trustworthy. 
 We had a very good dialogue. 
 I was able to sense his soul. 
 — G EORGE W.  B USH,  commenting 
on his first meeting with Rus-
sian president Vladimir Putin 
 Bush later changed his mind about 
Putin, seeing him as a threat to 
democracy. So much for the “blink” 
method of judging credibility. 
Remember: Interested parties are less credible than other sources of claims.

108 
CHAPTER 4: CREDIBILITY
scientist may appear more knowledgeable than a scientist who speaks, say, with 
a Texas drawl, but his or her accent, height, gender, ethnicity, or clothing doesn’t 
have much to do with a person’s knowledge. In the municipal park in our town, it 
can be difficult to distinguish people who teach at the university from people who 
live in the park, based on physical appearance. 
 So, then, how do you judge a person’s  expertise?  Education and experience 
are often the most important factors, followed by accomplishments, reputation, 
and position, in no particular order. It is not always easy to evaluate the creden-
tials of an expert, and credentials vary considerably from one field to another. 
Still, there are some useful guidelines worth mentioning. 
 Education includes, but is not strictly limited to, formal education—the pos-
session of degrees from established institutions of learning. (Some “doctors” of 
this and that received their diplomas from mail-order houses that advertise on 
matchbook covers. The title “doctor” is not automatically a qualification.) 
 Experience—both the kind and the amount—is an important factor in 
expertise. Experience is important if it is relevant to the issue at hand, but the 
mere fact that someone has been on the job for a long time does not automatically 
make him or her good at it. 
 Accomplishments are an important indicator of someone’s expertise but, 
once again, only when those accomplishments are directly related to the ques-
tion at hand. A Nobel Prize winner in physics is not necessarily qualified to speak 
publicly about toy safety, public school education (even in science), or nuclear 
proliferation. The last issue may involve physics, it’s true, but the political issues 
are the crucial ones, and they are not taught in physics labs. 
 A person’s reputation is obviously very important as a criterion of his or her 
expertise. But reputations must be seen in a context; how much importance we 
should attach to somebody’s reputation depends on the people among whom 
the person has that reputation. You may have a strong reputation as a pool player 
among the denizens of your local pool hall, but that doesn’t necessarily put you 
in the same league with Allison Fisher. Among a group of people who know noth-
ing about investments, someone who knows the difference between a 401(k) plan 
and a Roth IRA may seem like quite an expert. But you certainly wouldn’t want to 
take investment advice from somebody simply on that basis. 
 War-Making Policies and Interested Parties 
 In the 1960s, the secretary of defense supplied carefully selected information to President 
Lyndon Johnson and to Congress. Would Congress have passed the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution, 
which authorized the beginning of the Vietnam War, if its members had known that the secre-
tary of defense was determined to begin hostilities there? We don’t know, but certainly they 
and the president should have been more suspicious if they had known this fact. Would Presi-
dent Bush and his administration have been so anxious to make war on Iraq if they had known 
that Ahmad Chalabi, one of their main sources of information about that country and its ruler, 
Saddam Hussein, was a very interested party? (He hoped to be the next ruler of Iraq if Hussein 
were overthrown, and much of his information turned out to be false or exaggerated.) We don’t 
know that either, of course. But it’s possible that more suspicion of interested parties may have 
slowed our commitment to two costly wars. 

 
THE CREDIBILITY OF SOURCES 
109
 Most of us have met people who were recommended as experts in some 
field but who turned out to know little more about that field than we ourselves 
knew. (Presumably, in such cases those doing the recommending knew even less 
about the subject, or they would not have been so quickly impressed.) By and 
large, the kind of reputation that counts most is the one a person has among other 
experts in his or her field of endeavor. 
 The positions people hold provide an indication of how well  somebody 
thinks of them. The director of an important scientific laboratory, the head of 
an academic department at Harvard, the author of a work consulted by other 
experts—in each case the position itself is substantial evidence that the individu-
al’s opinion on a relevant subject warrants serious attention. 
 But expertise can be bought. Our earlier discussion of interested parties 
applies to people who possess real expertise on a topic as well as to the rest of 
us. Sometimes a person’s position is an indication of what his or her opinion, 
expert or not, is likely to be. The opinion of a lawyer retained by the National Rifle 
Association, offered at a hearing on firearms and urban violence, should be scru-
tinized much more carefully (or at least viewed with more skepticism) than that of 
a witness from an independent firm or agency that has no stake in the outcome of 
the hearings. The former can be assumed to be an interested party, the latter not. 
It is too easy to lose objectivity where one’s interests and concerns are at stake, 
even if one is  trying to be objective. 
 Here’s a more complicated story: In the 1960s and 70s, a national concern 
arose about the relationship between the consumption of sugar and several seri-
ous conditions, including diabetes and heart disease. An artificial sweetener, 
cyclamate, was introduced to replace sugar in sodas and other products. The 
sugar industry, afraid of lost sales, countered with an assault on cyclamates, and 
Dr. John Hickson led the charge. Later, when Hickson was research director of the 
Cigar Research Council, he was described in a confidential memo as “a supreme 
scientific politician who had been successful in condemning cyclamates, on 
behalf of the Sugar Research Council, on somewhat shaky evidence.” *  The sub-
stance was banned by the FDA in 1969. A quick web search on “cyclamate ban” 
will reveal the story: By 1989, FDA officials were admitting they had made a mis-
take in issuing the ban, which was done under pressure from the U.S. Congress, 
which in turn was pressured by the sugar industry. 
 The moral of this story is that politics, and interested parties with deep pock-
ets, can and do influence findings that are supposed to be entirely scientific. 
 Experts sometimes disagree, especially when the issue is complicated and 
many different interests are at stake. In these cases, a critical thinker is obliged to 
suspend judgment about which expert to endorse, unless one expert clearly rep-
resents a majority viewpoint among experts in the field or  unless one expert can be 
established as more authoritative or less biased than the others. 
 Of course, majority opinions sometimes turn out to be incorrect, and even 
the most authoritative experts occasionally make mistakes. For example, various 
economics experts predicted good times ahead just before the Great Depression. 
The same was true for many advisers right up until the 2008 financial meltdown. 
Jim Denny, the manager of the Grand Ole Opry, fired Elvis Presley after one per-
formance, stating that Presley wasn’t going anywhere and ought to go back to 
driving a truck. A claim you accept because it represents the majority viewpoint 
or comes from the most authoritative expert may turn out to be thoroughly wrong. 
 * http://legacy.library.ucsf.edu/tid/bon57a99 . 

110 
CHAPTER 4: CREDIBILITY
Nevertheless, take heart: At the time, you were rationally justified in accepting the 
majority viewpoint as the most authoritative claim. The reasonable position is the 
one that agrees with the most authoritative opinion but allows for enough open-
mindedness to change if the evidence changes. 
 Finally, we sometimes make the mistake of thinking that whatever quali-
fies someone as an expert in one field automatically qualifies that person in other 
areas. Being a top-notch programmer, for example, surely would not be an indi-
cation of top-notch management skills. Indeed, many programmers get good at 
what they do by shying away from dealing with other people—or so the stereotype 
runs. Being a good campaigner does not always translate into being a good office-
holder, as anyone who observes politics knows. Even if the intelligence and skill 
required to become an expert in one field could enable someone to become an 
expert in any field—which is doubtful—having the ability to become an expert is 
 Not Paying Attention to Experts 
Can Be Deadly 
 David Pawlik called the fire department in Cleburne, Texas, in July to ask if the “blue 
flames” he and his wife were seeing every time she lit a cigarette were dangerous, and 
an inspector said he would be right over and for Mrs. Pawlik not to light another ciga-
rette. However, anxious about the imminent inspection, she lit up and was killed in the 
subsequent explosion. (The home was all electric, but there had been a natural gas leak 
underneath the yard.) 
 —Fort Worth Star Telegram, July 11, 2007 
 Sometimes it is  crucial that you take the word of an expert. 

 
THE CREDIBILITY OF SOURCES 
111
not the same as actually being an expert. Claims put forth by experts about sub-
jects outside their fields are not automatically more acceptable than claims put 
forth by nonexperts. 
 A. List as many irrelevant factors as you can think of that people often mis-
take for signs of a person’s truthfulness (for example, the firmness of a 
handshake).  
 B. List as many factors as you can that  are relevant to a person’s truthfulness. 
 Exercise 4-3 
 A. List as many irrelevant factors as you can think of that people often mistake 
for signs of expertise on the part of an individual (for example, appearing 
self-confident).  
 B. List as many factors as you can that  are relevant to a person’s expertise. 
 Exercise 4-4 
  
 Expertise doesn’t transfer automatically from one field to another: Being an 
expert in one area does not automatically qualify a person as an expert (or even 
as competent) in other areas. Is it the same with dishonesty? Many people think 
dishonesty does transfer, that being dishonest in one area automatically discred-
its that person in all areas. For example, when Bill Clinton lied about having sex-
ual encounters with his intern, some said he couldn’t be trusted about anything. 
  
 
 If someone is known to have been dishonest about one thing, should we 
automatically be suspicious of his or her honesty regarding other things? In a 
short paper of no more than two pages, defend your answer to this question. 
 Exercise 4-5 
 1. In a sentence, describe the crucial difference between an interested party and 
a disinterested party. 
 2. Which of the two parties mentioned in item 1 should generally be considered 
more trustworthy? Why? 
 3. Invent an issue, and then identify someone who would likely be an interested 
party regarding that issue; then identify someone who is likely  not to be an 
interested party. Explain why in each case. 
 Exercise 4-6 
 Suppose you’re in the market for a new television, and you’re looking for advice 
as to what to buy. Identify which of the following persons or subjects is likely to be 
an interested party and which is not. 
 1. a flyer from a local store that sells televisions 
 2. the  Consumer Reports website 
 3. a salesperson at a local electronics store 
 4. the Sony website 
 5. an article in a major newspaper about television, including some rankings of 
brands 
Now let’s say you’ve narrowed your search to two brands: LG and Panasonic. 
Which of the following are more likely interested parties?
▲
 Exercise 4-7 

112 
CHAPTER 4: CREDIBILITY
 CREDIBILITY AND THE NEWS MEDIA 
 You may have heard that newspapers and the print media in general have fallen 
on hard times in recent years. It’s true: many newspapers are in bankruptcy; If 
we combine circulation and advertising revenue, the newspaper industry shrank 
43 percent between 2000 and 2012. *   Newsweek,  long a big player in print news, 
folded its paper version on January 1, 2013. Since then, it produces only an elec-
tronic version, available on the web. We expect others, including  Time,  to follow 
suit before long. Consumption of news on the web continues to increase, but con-
fidence in what people see, either in print or on a screen, does not. If fact, con-
fidence has slipped to the point that the most believable news network (CNN) 
came in at less than a 30 percent rating when viewers were asked in a recent poll 
whether they believe “all or most” of what they see there. We’ll look next at why 
our level of confidence in the media is so low; there are a number of likely factors. 
 Consolidation of Media Ownership 
 Although it is not well known to most citizens, one reason the quality of news 
available has decreased is that the media have become controlled by fewer and 
fewer corporations, the result of many mergers and buyouts over the past three 
or so decades. Since 2001, when the Federal Communications Commission loos-
ened the regulations regarding ownership of newspapers, radio stations, and tele-
vision stations, the concentration of media in fewer and fewer hands has been 
accelerating. From thousands of independent media outlets in the mid-twentieth 
century, media ownership dropped to only fifty companies by 1983. As we write 
this, approximately 90 percent of all media companies in the United States were 
controlled by just five companies: Time Warner (Warner Bros., Time, Inc., HBO, 
CNN, etc.), Disney (ABC, ESPN, Miramax Films, etc.), News Corp. (Fox Televi-
sion, Wall Street Journal, New York Post, etc.), Comcast (NBC, Universal Studios, 
E! Entertainment Television, etc.), and Viacom/CBS (Paramount Pictures, MTV, 
Comedy Central, etc.). The subsidiaries listed in parentheses are only a tiny por-
tion of these companies’ holdings. **  No matter what you see on television, the 
great likelihood is that one or more of these companies had a hand in producing 
it or getting it onto your screen. The fewer hands that control the media, the easier 
it is for the news we get to be “managed”—either by the owners themselves or by 
their commercial advertisers or even, as we’ll next see, by the government. 
 Government Management of the News 
 For a while there, our only known source of  fake  news was Jon Stewart on  The 
Daily Show.  But the federal government got into the fake news business as well. 
In recent years, a number of fake news reports, paid for by the government, have 
 * The State of the News Media, the Pew Project for Excellence in Journalism, 2009 and 2012, from which we draw 
heavily in this section. 
 **For a more thorough treatment, see  www.freepress.net/ownership chart. 
 6. a friend who owns an LG 
 7. a friend who used to own a Panasonic and now owns an LG 
 8. a salesperson at a store that sells both Panasonic and LG 

 
CREDIBILITY AND THE NEWS MEDIA 
113
 © The New Yorker Collection 1991 Dana Fradon from  cartoonbank.com . All rights reserved. 
appeared on television touting the virtues of government schemes from the pre-
scription drug program to airport safety to education programs. No criticism of 
the programs was included, and no mention was made that these were not legiti-
mate independent news reports but rather were produced by the very same gov-
ernmental departments that implemented the policies in question. 
 These practices provide material for stations that cannot afford to produce 
a full plate of news themselves, which includes many, many stations across the 
country. Unfortunately, many viewers accept as news what is essentially official 
propaganda. 
 Leaving aside news reporting, problems also crop up on the op-ed page. 
Opinion and editorial pages and television commentaries are usually presumed 
to present the opinions of the writers or speakers who write or speak in them. But, 
as it turned out, some of those are bought and paid for as well. Our favorite exam-
ple turned up in 2005: Syndicated columnist Michael McManus was paid $10,000 
by the Department of Health and Human Services for writing positively about one 
of its programs. Ironically enough, his column is titled “Ethics and Religion.” 
 The military has had its own methods for managing the media, from not 
allowing photographs to be taken of the coffins of slain American soldiers when 
they were being home from Iraq to more elaborately produced examples, such as 
the highly staged rescue of Private Jessica Lynch from an Iraqi hospital in 2003. 
Sometimes management takes the form of simple suppression of news, as when it 
took a whistle-blower to finally make public the video of a 2007 helicopter attack 
that killed a news photographer, his driver, and several others. 
 Bias Within the Media 
 It is commonly said that the media are biased politically. Conservatives are con-
vinced that they have a liberal bias and liberals are convinced the bias favors 
conservatives. 
 The usual basis for the conservative assessment is that, generally speaking, 
reporters and editors are more liberal than the general population. Indeed, several 

114 
CHAPTER 4: CREDIBILITY
polls have indicated that this is the case. On the other hand, the publishers and 
owners of media outlets tend to be conservative—not surprisingly, since they have 
an orientation that places a higher value on the bottom line: They are in business 
to make a profit. A book by Eric Alterman * argues that the “liberal media” has 
always been a myth and that, at least in private, well-known conservatives like Pat-
rick Buchanan and William Kristol are willing to admit it. On the other hand, Ber-
nard Goldberg, formerly of CBS, argues that the liberal bias of the press is a fact. **    
Making an assessment on this score is several miles beyond our scope here. 
But it is important to be aware that a reporter or a columnist or a broadcaster 
who draws conclusions without presenting sufficient evidence is no more to be 
believed than some guy from down the street, even if the conclusions happen to 
correspond nicely to your own bias—indeed,  especially  if they correspond to your 
own bias!
 What is important to remember is that there are many forces at work in the 
preparation of news besides a desire to publish or broadcast the whole truth. That 
said, our view is that the major network news organizations are generally credible, 
exceptions like those noted notwithstanding. ABC, CBS, and NBC do a generally 
credible job, as does CNN, and the Public Broadcasting System and National Public 
Radio are generally excellent. Also in our view, the printed media, the  New York 
 * What Liberal Bias? (New York: Basic Books, 2003). 
 ** Bias (Washington, DC: Regnery Publishing, 2001). 
 It’s Up to Me and Fox News 
 In early 2013, as a bipartisan group of senators announced a plan for immigration reform, radio 
host Rush Limbaugh took to the air to denounce their proposal. “I don’t know that there’s any 
stopping this,” he said. “It’s up to me and Fox News.” 
 Wait. Isn’t Fox News supposed to be “fair and balanced”? 
 Bias in the universities? Accord-
ing to Lou Dobbs, former CNN 
news anchor (now with Fox 
Business News), citing a  Wash-
ington Post survey, 72 percent 
of collegiate faculty across the 
country say they are liberal; 
15 percent say they are con-
servative. At “elite” universities, 
87 percent say they are liberal, 
and 3 percent say they are 
conservative. 

 
CREDIBILITY AND THE NEWS MEDIA
115
 Media Bias? 
 Mainstream media, or “lame stream” as Sarah Palin prefers it, 
came under increased attack during the [2012] presidential 
campaign, mostly among conservatives who railed against a 
perceived liberal tilt. 
 “It goes without saying that there is definitely media 
bias,” said Paul Ryan on the stump, claiming that most people 
in media “want a left-of-center president.” Fox News com-
mentator Bill O’Reilly surmised that liberal bias in media gave 
President Obama a 3 or 4 percentage point boost, enough to 
have determined the outcome. 
  But what are today’s mainstream media? The most popular 
news channel is Fox News; the most powerful radio talk hosts 
are Rush Limbaugh and Sean Hannity; and among the Inter-
net’s loudest information voices is The Drudge Report—all 
severely conservative. In terms of audience and influence, these 
outlets are about as mainstream as it gets. 
 Newspapers are certainly in the mainstream, but they’ve 
always been divided politically, starting with two of the nation’s 
biggest dailies, the conservative Wall Street Journal and the 
liberal New York Times. In the recent election, the nation’s 100 
largest papers split almost evenly in endorsements for Obama 
and Romney. Romney even won more swing state newspaper 
endorsements, 24 to 15, according to analysis by the Poynter organization. 
 It seems reasonable to assume that any paper that endorsed Romney was not likely to be simultaneously biased in 
favor of Obama. Yet, that is what some conservatives seem to be suggesting. 
 Then there are legacy broadcast networks—specifically the news departments of CBS, NBC and ABC, and their prin-
cipal TV news anchors. Diane Sawyer of ABC once worked for Richard Nixon; neither Brian Williams of NBC nor Scott Pelley 
of CBS has ever dabbled in government or politics. In my view, having worked for two of these companies, network news 
personnel actually bend over backwards—at times too far—trying to avoid even a hint of bias. And having written for the 
nation’s three largest papers, I conclude that most bias is confined to the opinion pages, where it belongs. 
 However, the media landscape is changing in ways that do, indeed, involve bias. It’s the overt posturing of Fox 
News Channel on the right, MSNBC on the left, and dozens of opinion-based Internet sites serving both sides. What 
these outlets share is an obsessive desire to protest each other’s slanted reporting. 
 Republicans tend to distrust media more than Democrats. According to Pew polling, Republican respondents 
gave only two news sources high credibility ratings: Fox News, and local TV news. Democrats gave high marks to a 
much longer list of broadcasters and newspapers. 
  . . . 
 When it comes to actual bias, there’s significantly more of it in new media than in legacy media. Meanwhile, the 
mainstream is gradually becoming a collection of smaller streams—the most influential of which are divided politi-
cally, and even lean toward the conservative side. It’s ironic that protesting by conservatives over media bias is grow-
ing in direct proportion to the emerging power of those on the right to shape media content. 
  . . . 
 Examining media “bias,” by  Peter Funt 
 Monterey County Herald, Online 
Posted 12/7/12 

116 
CHAPTER 4: CREDIBILITY
Times,  the  Washington Post,  the  Los Angeles Times,  and other major newspapers are 
generally credible, even though mistakes are sometimes made here as well. News 
magazines fall in the same category: usually credible but with occasional flaws. 
 The rise of the cable news networks has been an influence on what gets 
broadcast as news. CNN (which stands, unsurprisingly, for “Cable News Net-
work”) began the trend in 1980 as the first twenty-four-hours-a-day news broad-
caster. Fox News and MSNBC now also compete for viewers’ attention both day 
and night. While spreading across the hours of the day, these networks have also 
spread across the political spectrum. You can now find “news” that satisfies nearly 
any political bias. What’s more, with the need to fill screens for so many hours, 
the notion of what actually counts as news has had to be expanded. The result 
has affected not just the cable networks but traditional news programs as well: 
“Feature stories” from prison life to restaurant kitchen tours take up more and 
more space that used to be devoted to so-called hard news. One of our northern 
California newspapers, the  Sacramento Bee,  did a story on how “silly news” was 
taking up more and more space in local news programs. Ben Bagdikian, author 
and former dean of the Graduate School of Journalism at the University of Califor-
nia, Berkeley, has pointed out that a commercial for Pepsi-Cola seems to connect 
better after a fluff piece or a sitcom than after a serious piece on, say, massacres in 
Rwanda or an ambush in the Middle East. 
It would be difficult to boil down our advice regarding accepting claims from 
the news media, but it would certainly include keeping the following points in mind:
 Finally, we might remember that the news media are to a great extent a 
reflection of the society at large. If we the public are willing to get by with superfi-
cial, sensationalist, or manipulated news, then we can rest assured that, eventu-
ally, that’s all the news we’ll get. 
 Talk Radio 
 On the surface, talk radio seems to offer a wealth of information not available in 
news reports from conventional sources. And many talk radio hosts scour tradi-
tional legitimate news sources for information relevant to their political agenda, 
and to the extent that they document the source, which they often do, they pro-
vide listeners with many interesting and important facts. But radio hosts from all 
sides are given to distortion, misplaced emphasis, and bias with regard to selec-
tion of which facts to report. And, really, the shouting gives us a headache. 
 Advocacy Television 
 We mentioned earlier that some cable networks have moved left while others 
have moved right on the political spectrum, so the news you can expect from 
them comes with a predictable slant. This is good insofar as it exposes peo-
ple to opinions different from their own; it is not so good insofar as it simply 
  Like the rest of us, people in the news media sometimes make mistakes; they 
sometimes accept claims with insufficient evidence or without confirming the 
credibility of a source. 
  The media are subject to pressure and sometimes to manipulation from government 
and other news sources.  
  The media, with few exceptions, are driven in part by the necessity to make a 
profit, and this can bring pressure from advertisers, owners, and managers. 

 
CREDIBILITY AND THE NEWS MEDIA 
117
reinforces what the viewer already believes, especially if there is no evidence 
offered in support of the opinions. 
 The Comedy Central channel features  The Daily Show with Jon Stewart, which 
generally approaches the news from a leftish viewpoint, and  The Colbert Report, in 
which Steve Colbert, in reality a liberal, plays the part of a right-wing host. It is ironic 
that Stewart, who conducts serious interviews when he isn't chasing a laugh, appears 
on a comedy channel. That may tell us something we didn’t really want to know. 
 MSNBC offers  All In with Chris Hayes, The Last Word with Lawrence 
O’Donnell,  and  The Rachel Maddow Show,  all of which offer a liberal perspective 
on the news of the day, and all of which editorialize from that perspective. 
 Fox News features Bill O’Reilly, Sean Hannity, and Mike Huckabee, who 
represent various conservative constituencies and do something similar from the 
other side. 
 We could write an entire chapter on this subject, and maybe, given the influ-
ence the media have on American public opinion these days, we should. We 
could discuss other channels and other organizations (e.g., Accuracy in Media 
on the right and  MoveOn.org  on the left, to name just two of a thousand), but we 
think you get the idea: We remind you to always listen with a skeptical ear (and 
maybe a jaundiced eye) to political news and commentary. We know it’s difficult, 
but it’s important to be especially careful about accepting claims (without good 
evidence), and in particular, those with which you sympathize. 
 The Internet, Generally 
 It is getting to be difficult to overestimate the importance of the Internet—that 
amalgamation of electronic lines and connections that allows nearly anyone with 
a computer and a modem to link up with nearly any other similarly equipped per-
son on the planet. Although the Internet offers great benefits, the information it 
provides must be evaluated with even  more  caution than information from the 
print media, radio, or television. We presented two stories at the beginning of the 
chapter that show just how wrong things can go. 
 There are basically two kinds of information sources on the Internet. The 
first consists of commercial and institutional sources; the second, of individual 
and group sites on the World Wide Web. In the first category, we include sources 
like the LexisNexis facility, as well as the online services provided by newsmag-
azines, large electronic news organizations, and government institutions. The 
second category includes everything else you’ll find on the web—an amazing 
assortment of good information, entertainment of widely varying quality, hot 
tips, advertisements, come-ons, fraudulent offers, and outright lies. 
 Just as the fact that a claim appears in print or on television doesn’t make 
it true, so it is for claims you run across online. Keep in mind that the informa-
tion you get from a source is only as good as that source. The LexisNexis infor-
mation collection (which is available via paid subscription) is an excellent asset 
for medium-depth investigation of a topic; it includes information gathered from 
a wide range of print sources, especially newspapers and magazines, with spe-
cial collections in areas like the law. But the editorials you turn up there are no 
more likely to be accurate, fair-minded, or objective than the ones you read in the 
newspapers—which is where they first appeared anyhow. 
Wikipedia 
Possibly the fastest-growing source of information in terms of both its size and its 
influence is the online encyclopedia Wikipedia. “Wiki” refers to a collaborative 

118 
CHAPTER 4: CREDIBILITY
voluntary association (although the word seems to have been coined by a pro-
grammer named Ward Cunningham from the Hawaiian term “wiki-wiki”—“quick-
quick”). Begun in 2001 by Larry Sanger and Jimmy Wales, the encyclopedia’s 
content and structure are determined by its users. This accounts for its major 
strengths as well as its major weaknesses. Because there are many thousands of 
contributors, the coverage is immense. There are well over four million articles 
in English alone, and more than two hundred other languages and dialects are 
also employed. Because access is available to virtually everybody who has a com-
puter and modem, coverage is often very fast; articles often appear within hours 
of breaking events. 
 But also because of this wide access, the quality of the articles varies tre-
mendously. You should be especially wary of recent articles; they are more likely 
to contain uncorrected errors that will eventually disappear as knowledgeable 
people visit the page and put right whatever mistakes are present. Not just factual 
errors, but bias and omission can affect the quality of material found on Wikipe-
dia’s pages. Occasionally, a writer will do a thorough job of reporting the side of 
an issue that he or she favors (or knows more about, or both), and the other side 
will go underreported or even unmentioned. Over time, these types of errors tend 
to get corrected after visits by individuals who favor the other side of the issue. 
But at any given moment, in any given Wikipedia entry, there is the possibility of 
mistakes, omissions, citation errors, and plain old vandalism. 
 Our advice: We think Wikipedia is an excellent starting point in a search for 
knowledge about a topic. We use it frequently. But you should always check the 
sources provided in what you find there; it should never be your sole source of 
 Evaluating Website Credibility: A Tip 
from the Professionals 
 In a study done a few years ago, *  it was determined that when it comes to evaluating the cred-
ibility of a website, experts in a field go about it much differently than do ordinary consumers. 
Since, as we’ve indicated, credibility varies hugely on the web, we must do the best job we can 
in assessing this feature of any website we consider important. Unfortunately, as was shown in 
the study just mentioned, most ordinary visitors do a much less effective job of evaluating cred-
ibility than do people knowledgeable about the field. In particular, while professionals attend 
most carefully to the information given at a website, most of the rest of us pay more atten-
tion to its visual appeal. Layout, typography, color schemes, and animation affect the general 
public’s estimate of a site’s credibility—54 percent of comments are about these  features—
whereas the professionals’ interest is more in the quality of the site’s references, the credentials 
of individuals mentioned, and so on. Only 16 percent of professional evaluators’ comments had 
to do with a website’s visual design. 
 What should we take from this? A general rule: Don’t be taken in by how visually attractive 
a website might be. A flashy design with attractive colors and design features is no substitute 
for information that is backed up by references and put forward by people with appropriate 
credentials. 
 *Experts vs. Online Consumers, a Consumer Reports WebWatch research report, October 2009 
( www.consumerwebwatch.org ). 

 
CREDIBILITY AND THE NEWS MEDIA
119
 Webcheckers 
 Along with other sites we’ve already mentioned, here are some other places where you can go 
to get to the bottom of an issue you’ve seen brought up on the web. We believe these to be 
among the most reliable sources currently available; we use them all ourselves. 
  Snopes.com  . The original site for checking out rumors, stories, urban legends, and any 
other type of strange claim that turns up on the web. Run by Daniel and Barbara Mikkel-
son since 1996, it classifies as true or false a host of claims that circulate on the Internet. 
Analysis of the history and nature of the claims under investigation is usually provided. 
  TruthorFiction.com  . A general fact-finding, debunking site. Generally up-to-date findings 
by owner Rich Buhler. Analyses tend to be less thorough than those found on Snopes, but 
a generally trustworthy site. 
  Factcheck.org  . Run by Brooks Jackson, a former CNN and  Wall Street Journal reporter out 
of the University of Pennsylvania’s Annenberg Public Policy Center. Neutral politically, the 
site attacks anybody who stretches the truth concerning any topic in politics.  
  PolitiFact.com  . Operated by the  St. Petersburg (Florida)  Times newspaper. Reporters and 
editors fact-check claims made by politicians, lobbyists, and interest groups. The website 
won a Pulitzer Prize in 2009 for its work during the presidential election of 2008. 
  ConsumerReports.org  . Evaluates consumer issues (including health care and financial 
planning) and products. Not to be confused with other organizations with similar names, 
this site, like the magazine of the same name that sponsors it, accepts no advertising and 
bends over backward to avoid bias. Careful evaluation and analysis can be expected. The 
organization buys products to be evaluated from stores, just like we do, rather than being 
given them by manufacturers. Unbiased help in shopping for electronics can also be 
found at Decide.com, a recent addition to the consumer's arsenal.  
 For the general evaluation of websites, several checklists are available. You will find Cornell 
University’s and the University of Maryland’s checklists at  www.library.cornell.edu/olinuris/ref/
research/skill26.htm and  www.lib.umd.edu/guides/evaluate.html . 
information if the topic is important to you or is to become part of an assignment 
to be turned in for a class. That said, we add that articles dealing with technical 
or scientific subjects tend to be more reliable (although errors are often more 
difficult to spot), with an error rate (according to one study) about the same as 
that found in the  Encyclopedia Britannica.  *  (Britannica announced in March 
2012 that it would no longer publish a paper version; it now exists only online.) 
Such articles and, as mentioned, articles that have been around for a while can be 
extremely helpful in whatever project you are engaged in. 
Blogs
   Now we come to blogs. Blogs are simply journals, the vast majority of them put up 
by individuals, that are left open to the public on an Internet site. Originally more 
like public diaries dealing with personal matters, they now encompass specialties 
 *“Internet Encyclopedias Go Head to Head,” by Jim Giles,  Nature, December 12, 2005. 

120 
CHAPTER 4: CREDIBILITY
 ADVERTISING 
 Advertising [is] the science of arresting the human intelligence long 
enough to get money from it. 
 —Stephen Leacock 
If there is anything in modern society besides politics that truly puts our 
sense of what is credible to the test, it’s advertising. As we hope you’ll agree after 
reading this section, skepticism is always the best policy when considering any 
kind of advertising or promotion.
 Ads are used to sell many products other than toasters, televisions, and toi-
let tissue. They can encourage us to vote for a candidate, agree with a political 
proposal, take a tour, give up a bad habit, or join the Tea Party or the army. They 
can also be used to make announcements (for instance, about job openings, lec-
tures, concerts, or the recall of defective automobiles) or to create favorable or 
unfavorable climates of opinion (for example, toward labor unions or offshore oil 
 It is estimated that about a 
half-trillion dollars are spent 
each year trying to get people 
to buy or do something. Six bil-
lion dollars were spent during 
the 2012 elections, most of it 
on advertising. 
of almost every imaginable sort. Up to three million blogs were believed to be up 
and running by the end of 2004; by July 2011, there were an estimated 164 million. *  
 You can find blogs that specialize in satire, parody, and outright fabrication. 
They represent all sides of the political spectrum, including some sides that we 
wouldn’t have thought existed at all. The Drudge Report is a standard on the right; 
the Huffington Post is equally well known on the left. On a blog site, like any other 
website that isn’t run by a responsible organization such as most of those previously 
indicated, you can find  anything that a person wants to put there,  including all kinds 
of bad information. You can take advantage of these sources, but you should always 
exercise caution, and if you’re looking for information, always consult another 
source, but be especially careful about any that are linked to your first source!  
 Before we leave the topic of web worthiness, we want to pass along a warn-
ing that comes from Barbara Mikkelson, co-founder of  Snopes.com . She reminds 
us that rumors often give people a great sense of comfort; people are quick to 
reject nuance and facts that are contrary to their own point of view, but quickly 
accept them when they are agreeable to the hearer. (This is called” confirmation 
bias.” See Chapter 1.) “When you’re looking at truth versus gossip,“ Mikkelson 
says, “truth doesn’t stand a chance.” We hope she’s being unduly pessimistic. 
 So remember, when you take keyboard and mouse in hand, be on guard. You 
have about as much reason to believe the claims you find on most sites as you would 
if they came from any other stranger, except you can’t look this one in the eye.  
 See who in the class can find the strangest news report from a credible source. 
Send it to us at McGraw-Hill. If your entry is selected for printing in our next edi-
tion, Moore might send you $100. (In the next chapter you’ll see why we call the 
word “might” a weaseler in this context.) 
 Exercise 4-8 
 Identify at least three factors that can cause inaccuracies or a distortion of reports 
in the news media. 
 Exercise 4-9 
*Rightmixmarketing.com; blogging statistics.

 
ADVERTISING 
121
drilling). A "public service announcement" may even be used surreptitiously to 
create a climate of opinion about something or someone. 
 Advertising firms understand our fears and desires at least as well as we 
understand them ourselves, and they have at their disposal the expertise to exploit 
them. *  Such firms employ trained psychologists and some of the world’s most cre-
ative artists and use the most sophisticated and well-researched theories about 
the motivation of human behavior. Maybe most important, they can afford to 
spend whatever is necessary to get each detail of an advertisement exactly right. 
(On a per-minute basis, television ads are the most expensively produced pieces 
that appear on your tube.) A good ad is a work of art, a masterful blend of word and 
image often composed in accordance with the exacting standards of artistic and 
scientific genius (other ads, of course, are just plain silly). Can untrained laypeople 
even hope to evaluate such psychological and artistic masterpieces intelligently? 
 Fortunately, it is not necessary to understand the deep psychology of an adver-
tisement to evaluate it in the way that’s most important to us. When confronted with 
an ad, we should ask simply: Does this ad give us a good reason to buy this product? 
And the answer, in general terms, can be simply put: Because the only good reason 
to buy anything in the first place is to improve our lives, the ad justifies a purchase 
only if it establishes that we’d be better off with the product than without it (or that 
we’d be better off with the product than with the money we would trade for it).   
 However, do we always know when we’ll be better off with a product than 
without it? Do we really want, or need, a bagel splitter or an exercise bike? Do 
people even recognize “better taste” in a cigarette? Do we  need  Viagra or are we 
just curious? Advertisers spend vast sums creating within us new desires and 
fears—and hence a need to improve our lives by satisfying those desires or elimi-
nating those fears through the purchase of advertised products. They are often 
successful, and we find ourselves needing something we might not have known 
existed before. That others can instill in us, through word and image, a desire for 
something we did not previously desire may be a lamentable fact, but it  is  clearly a 
fact. Still,  we  decide what would make us better off, and  we  decide to part with our 
money. So, it is only with reference to what in  our  view would make life better for 
us that we properly evaluate advertisements. 
 There are basically two kinds of ads: those that offer reasons and those that 
do not. Those that offer reasons for buying the advertised product always promise 
that certain hopes will be satisfied, certain needs met, or certain fears eliminated. 
(You’ll be more accepted, have a better image, be a better parent, and so on.) 
 People watching a sexual pro-
gram are thinking about sex, 
not soda pop. Violence and sex 
elicit very strong emotions and 
can interfere with memory for 
other things. 
 — B RAD B USHMAN  of Iowa State 
University, whose research 
indicated that people tend to 
forget the names of sponsors 
of violent or sexual TV shows 
(reported by Ellen Goodman) 
 *For an excellent treatment of this and related subjects, we recommend  Age of Propaganda: The Everyday Use and 
Abuse of Persuasion, rev. ed. by Anthony R. Pratkanis and Elliot Aronson (New York:  W. H. Freeman and Co., 1998). 
source: DILBERT © 2007 Scott Adams. Used By permission of UNIVERSAL UCLICK. All rights reserved.

122 
CHAPTER 4: CREDIBILITY
 Those ads that do not rely on reasons fall mainly into three categories: 
(1) those that bring out  feelings  in us (e.g., through humor, pretty images, scary 
images, beautiful music, heartwarming scenes); (2) those that depict the product 
being used or endorsed by  people  we admire or think of ourselves as being like 
(sometimes these people are depicted by actors, sometimes not); and (3) those 
that depict the product being used in  situations  in which we would like to find 
ourselves. Of course, some ads go all out and incorporate elements from all three 
categories—and for good measure also state a reason or two why we should buy 
the advertised product. 
 Buying a product (which includes joining a group, deciding how to vote, and 
so forth) on the basis of reasonless ads is, with one minor exception that we’ll 
explain shortly, never justified. Such ads tell you only that the product exists and 
what it looks like (and sometimes where it is available and how much it costs); if 
an ad tells you much more than this, then it begins to qualify as an ad that gives 
reasons for buying the product. Reasonless ads do tell us what the advertisers 
think of our values and sense of humor (not always a pleasant thing to notice, 
given that they have us pegged so well), but this information is irrelevant to the 
question of whether we should buy the product. 
 Ads that submit reasons for buying the product, or “promise ads,” as they 
have been called, usually tell us more than that a certain product exists—but not 
much more. The promise, with rare exception, comes with no guarantees and 
is usually extremely vague (Gilbey’s gin promises “more gin taste,” Kleenex is 
“softer”). In other words, the reasons given are almost never  good reasons. 
 Such ads are a source of information about what the  sellers of the product 
are willing to claim about what the product will do, how well it will do it, how 
it works, what it contains, how well it compares with similar products, and how 
much more wonderful your life will be once you’ve got one. However, to make an 
informed decision on a purchase, you almost always need to know more than the 
seller is willing to claim, particularly because no sellers will tell you what’s wrong 
with their products or what’s right with those of their competitors. Remember 
that they are perfect examples of  interested parties. 
 Further, the claims of advertisers are notorious not only for being vague but 
also for being ambiguous, misleading, exaggerated, and sometimes just plain 
false. Even if a product existed that was so good that an honest, unexaggerated, 
and fair description of it would justify our buying it without considering com-
peting items (or other reports on the same item), and even if an advertisement 
for this product consisted of just such a description, we would still not be justi-
fied in purchasing the product on the basis of that advertisement alone. For we 
would be unable to tell, simply by looking at the advertisement, that it was unin-
flated, honest, fair, and not misleading. Our suspicions about advertising in gen-
eral should undercut our willingness to believe in the honesty of any particular 
advertisement.  
 Thus, even advertisements that present reasons for buying an item do not 
by themselves justify our purchase of the item. This is worth repeating, in stron-
ger language: An advertisement  never justifies  purchasing something. Advertise-
ments are written to  sell something;  they are not designed to be informative except 
insofar as it will help with the sales job. Sometimes, of course, an advertisement 
can provide you with information that can clinch your decision to make a pur-
chase. Sometimes the mere existence, availability, or affordability of a product—
all information that an ad can convey—is all you need to make a decision to buy. 
But if the purchase is justifiable, you must have some reasons, apart from those 
 “Doctor recommended.” 
 This ambiguous ad slogan creates 
an illusion that many doctors, or 
doctors in general, recommend the 
product. However, a recommenda-
tion from a single doctor is all it 
takes to make the statement true. 
 “Chevy runs deep.”
Meaningless but catchy slogan for 
Chevy trucks. Being catchy is no 
substitute for being relevant or 
being true. 

 
ADVERTISING
123
offered in the ad, for making it. If, for some reason, you already know that you 
want or need and can afford an electric corkscrew that also oxygenates the wine, 
then an ad that informs you that a firm has begun marketing such a thing would 
supply you with the information you need to buy one. If you can already justify 
purchasing a particular brand of microwave oven but cannot find one anywhere 
in town, then an advertisement informing you that the local department store 
stocks them can clinch your decision to make the purchase. 
 For people on whom good fortune has smiled, those who don’t care what 
kind of whatsit they buy, or those to whom mistaken purchases simply don’t mat-
ter, all that is important is knowing that a product is available. Most of us, however, 
need more information than ads provide to make reasoned purchasing decisions. 
Of course, we all occasionally make purchases solely on the basis of advertise-
ments, and sometimes we don’t come to regret them. In such cases, though, the 
happy result is due as much to good luck as to the ad. 
 A final suggestion on this subject. We know of only one source that maintains 
a fierce independence and still does a good job of testing and reporting on prod-
ucts in general. That’s Consumers Union, the publishers of  Consumer Reports, a 
magazine (mentioned in the box on page 119) that accepts no advertising and 
that buys all the objects it tests and reports on (rather than accepting them for 
 When Is an Ad Not an Ad? When It’s a 
Product Placement! 
 When Katharine Hepburn threw all of Hum-
phrey Bogart’s Gordon’s gin overboard in 
The African Queen,  it was an early example 
of product placement, since the makers of 
Gordon’s paid to have their product tossed 
in the drink, as it were. Readers of a certain 
age may remember the 1960s television 
show  Route 66,  which starred not just Mar-
tin Milner and George Maharis but also a 
new Chevrolet Corvette that probably con-
tributed to more than a few Corvette sales. 
Reese’s Pieces were centrally placed in the 
movie  E.T.,  and the sales of Red Stripe beer 
jumped 50 percent after it appeared promi-
nently in the movie  The Firm. 
 These days, the paid placement of 
products in both movies and television 
(and possibly even in novels) is a serious 
alternative to traditional commercials, 
and it has the advantage of overcoming 
the Tivo/DVR effect: the viewer records 
programs and skips over the commercials 
when watching them.  
 ■ We suspect the Coke can is there because 
Pepsi wouldn’t pay enough. 

124 
CHAPTER 4: CREDIBILITY
 WAY Too Good to Be True! 
 Since the country fell into a serious recession in 2008, many people have found themselves 
unable to meet their mortgage payments, and many find themselves saddled with more credit 
card debt than they can manage. Easy debt-relief schemers to the rescue! Some cable TV and 
radio ads promise to help get your mortgage paid off, make your credit card debt shrink or 
disappear altogether, or make you rich by teaching you to make quick killings in real estate. 
 According to a  Consumer Reports Money Adviser  article (April 2010), these schemes tend 
more toward guaranteeing fees for the operators than for debt relief or riches, quick or other-
wise, for the client. Many clients wind up worse off than they started after signing up for these 
plans. Remember: Advertising is always designed to help the folks who pay for the ads. If it 
looks too good to be true, you can bet it  is. 
free from the manufacturers, as do several other “consumer” magazines). For reli-
able information and fair-mindedness, we recommend them. They’re also on the 
web at  www.consumersunion.org. Also on the web, decide.com does the same for 
electronic gear. They're mentioned in the same box, above .  
This list summarizes the topics covered in this chapter.
 ■ Claims lack credibility to the extent they conflict with our observations, 
experience, or background information, or come from sources that lack 
credibility.
 ■ The less initial plausibility a claim has, the more extraordinary it seems; and 
the less it fits with our background information, the more suspicious we 
should be.
 ■ Interested parties should always be viewed with more suspicion than disin-
terested parties.
 ■ Doubts about sources generally fall into two categories: doubts about the 
source’s knowledge or expertise and doubts about the source’s veracity, 
objectivity, and accuracy.
 ■ We can form reasonably reliable judgments about a person’s knowledge by 
considering his or her education, experience, accomplishments, reputation, 
and position.
 ■ Claims made by experts, those with special knowledge in a subject, are the 
most reliable, but the claims must pertain to the area of expertise and must 
not conflict with claims made by other experts in the same area.
 ■ Major metropolitan newspapers, national newsmagazines, and network news 
shows are generally credible sources of news, but it is necessary to keep an 
open mind about what we learn from them.
 ■ Governments have been known to influence and even to manipulate the news.
 ■ Sources like Wikipedia, institutional websites, and news organizations can 
be helpful, but skepticism is the order of the day when we obtain information 
from unknown Internet sources or advocacy TV/.
Recap

 
EXERCISES 
125
 ■ Advertising assaults us at every turn, attempting to sell us goods, services, 
beliefs, and attitudes. Because substantial talent and resources are employed 
in this effort, we need to ask ourselves constantly whether the products in 
question will really make the differences in our lives that their advertising 
claims or hints they will make. Advertisers are always more concerned with 
selling you something than with improving your life. They are concerned with 
improving their own lives.
 ■ What goes for advocacy television also goes for talk radio.
Exercise 4-10
In groups, decide which is the best answer to each question. Compare your 
answers with those of other groups and your instructor.
 1. “SPACE ALIEN GRAVEYARD FOUND! Scientists who found an extraterrestrial 
cemetery in central Africa say the graveyard is at least 500 years old! ‘There 
must be 200 bodies buried there and not a single one of them is human,’ Dr. 
Hugo Schild, the Swiss anthropologist, told reporters.” What is the appropri-
ate reaction to this report in the Weekly World News?
 a. It’s probably true.
 b. It almost certainly is true.
 c. We really need more information to form any judgment at all.
 d. None of the above.
 2. Is Elvis really dead? Howie thinks not. Reason: He knows three people who 
claim to have seen Elvis recently. They are certain that it is not a mere Elvis 
look-alike they have seen. Howie reasons that, since he has absolutely no 
reason to think the three would lie to him, they must be telling the truth. Elvis 
must really be alive, he concludes!
  
 
Is Howie’s reasoning sound? Explain.
 3. VOICE ON TELEPHONE: Hello, Mr. Roberts, this is HSBC calling. Have you 
recently made a credit card purchase of $347 at Macy’s in New York City?
  
MR. ROBERTS: Why, no, I haven’t . . .
  
VOICE: We thought not, Mr. Roberts. I’m sorry to report that it is very likely 
that your credit card has been compromised and is being used by another 
party. However, we are prepared to block that card and send you another 
immediately, at no expense to you.
  
MR. ROBERTS: Well, that’s fine, I suppose.
  
VOICE: Let me emphasize, you will experience very little inconvenience and 
no expense at all. Now, for authorization, just to make sure that we are calling 
the correct person, Mr. Roberts, please state the number on your credit card 
and the expiration date.
   
Question: What should Mr. Roberts, as a critical thinker, do?
 4. On Thanksgiving Day 1990, an image said by some to resemble the Virgin 
Mary was observed on a wall of St. Dominic’s Church in  Colfax, California. A 
physicist asked to investigate said the image was caused by sunlight shining 
through a stained glass window and reflecting from a newly installed hanging 
Additional 
Exercises

126 
CHAPTER 4: CREDIBILITY
light fixture. Others said the image was a miracle. Whose explanation is more 
likely true?
 a. the physicist’s
 b. the others’
 c. more information is needed before we can decide which explanation is 
more likely
 5. It is late at night around the campfire when the campers hear awful grunt-
ing noises in the woods around them. They run for their lives! Two campers, 
after returning the next day, tell others they found huge footprints around the 
campfire. They are convinced they were attacked by Bigfoot. Which explana-
tion is more likely true?
 a. The campers heard Bigfoot.
 b. The campers heard some animal and are pushing the Bigfoot explana-
tion to avoid being called chickens, or are just making the story up for 
unknown reasons.
 c. Given this information, we can’t tell which explanation is more likely.
 6. Megan’s aunt says she saw a flying saucer. “I don’t tell people about this,” 
Auntie says, “because they’ll think I’m making it up. But this really happened. 
I saw this strange light, and this, well, it wasn’t a saucer, exactly, but it was 
round and big, and it came down and hovered just over my back fence, and 
my two dogs began whimpering. And then it just, whoosh! It just vanished.”
   
Megan knows her aunt, and Megan knows she doesn’t make up stories.
 a. She should believe her aunt saw a flying saucer.
 b. She should believe her aunt was making up the story.
 c. She should believe that her aunt may well have had some unusual experi-
ence, but it was probably not a visitation by extraterrestrial beings.
 7. According to Dr. Edith Fiore, author of The Unquiet Dead, many of your per-
sonal problems are really the miseries of a dead soul who has possessed you 
sometime during your life. “Many people are possessed by earthbound spir-
its. These are people who have lived and died, but did not go into the after-
world at death. Instead they stayed on Earth and remained just like they were 
before death, with the fears, pains, weaknesses and other problems that they 
had when they were alive.” She estimates that about 80 percent of her more 
than 1,000 patients are suffering from the problems brought on by being 
possessed by spirits of the dead. To tell if you are among the possessed, she 
advises that you look for such telltale symptoms as low energy levels, char-
acter shifts or mood swings, memory problems, poor concentration, weight 
gain with no obvious cause, and bouts of depression (especially after hospi-
talization). Which of these reactions is best?
 a. Wow! I’ll bet I’m possessed!
 b. If these are signs of being possessed, how come she thinks that only 80 
percent of her patients are?
 c. Too bad there isn’t more information available, so we could form a reason-
able judgment.
 d. Dr. Fiore doesn’t know what she’s talking about.
 8. 
EOC—Engine Overhaul in a Can
  
Developed by skilled automotive scientists after years of research and labora-
tory and road tests! Simply pour one can of EOC into the oil in your crank-
case. EOC contains long-chain molecules and special thermo-active metallic 

 
EXERCISES 
127
  alloys that bond with worn engine parts. NO tools needed! NO 
need to disassemble engine.
   
Question: Reading this ad, what should you believe?
 9. ANCHORAGE, Alaska (AP)—Roped to her twin sons for safety, 
Joni Phelps inched her way to the top of Mount McKinley. The 
National Park Service says Phelps, 54, apparently is the first 
blind woman to scale the 20,300-foot peak.
   
This report is
 
a. probably true
 
b. probably false
 
c. too sketchy; more information is needed before we can judge
 10. You read rave reviews of The Life Plan, a book that promises to 
slow aging, promote strength, enhance one’s sex life, and so on 
through diet, exercise, and hormone therapy. Should you buy 
the book and expect to achieve the results described? Are there 
cautions you should heed before beginning such a program?
Exercise 4-11
Within each group of observers, are some especially credible or especially not so?
 1. Judging the relative performances of the fighters in a heavyweight boxing match
 a. the father of one of the fighters
 b. a sportswriter for Sports Illustrated magazine
 c. the coach of the American Olympic boxing team
 d. the referee of the fight
 e. a professor of physical education
 2. You (or your family or your class) are trying to decide whether you should buy 
a Mac computer or a Windows PC. You might consult
 a. a friend who owns either a Mac or a Windows machine
 b. a friend who now owns one of the machines but used to own the other
 c. a dealer for either Mac or Windows computers
 d. a computer column in a big-city newspaper
 e. reviews in computer magazines
 3. The Surgical Practices Committee of Grantville Hospital has documented an 
unusually high number of problems in connection with tonsillectomies per-
formed by a Dr. Choker. The committee is reviewing her surgical practices. 
Those present during a tonsillectomy are
 a. Dr. Choker
 b. the surgical proctor from the Surgical Practices Committee
 c. an anesthesiologist
 d. a nurse
 e. a technician
 4. The mechanical condition of the used car you are thinking of buying
 a. the used-car salesperson
 b. the former owner (who we assume is different from the salesperson)
 c. the former owner’s mechanic
 d. you
 e. a mechanic from an independent garage
▲
▲
▲

128 
CHAPTER 4: CREDIBILITY
 5. A demonstration of psychokinesis (the ability to move objects at a distance by 
nonphysical means)
 a. a newspaper reporter
 b. a psychologist
 c. a police detective
 d. another psychic
 e. a physicist
 f. a customs agent
 g. a magician
Exercise 4-12
For each of the following items, discuss the credibility and authority of each 
source relative to the issue in question. Whom would you trust as most reliable 
on the subject?
 1. Issue: Is Crixivan an effective HIV/AIDS medication?
 a. Consumer Reports
 b. Stadtlander Drug Company (the company that makes Crixivan)
 c. the owner of your local health food store
 d. the U.S. Food and Drug Administration
 e. your local pharmacist
 2. Issue: Should possession of handguns be outlawed?
 a. a police chief
 b. a representative of the National Rifle Association
 c. a U.S. senator
 d. the father of a murder victim
 3. Issue: What was the original intent of the Second Amendment to the U.S. 
Constitution, and does it include permission for every citizen to possess 
handguns?
 a. a representative of the National Rifle Association
 b. a justice of the U.S. Supreme Court
 c. a constitutional historian
 d. a U.S. senator
 e. the president of the United States
 4. Issue: Is decreasing your intake of dietary fat and cholesterol likely to reduce 
the level of cholesterol in your blood?
 a. Time magazine
 b. Runner’s World magazine
 c. your physician
 d. the National Institutes of Health
 e. the New England Journal of Medicine
 5. Issue: When does a human life begin?
 a. a lawyer
 b. a physician
 c. a philosopher
 d. a minister
 e. you
▲
▲
▲

 
EXERCISES 
129
Exercise 4-13
Each of these items consists of a brief biography of a real or imagined person, fol-
lowed by a list of topics. On the basis of the information in the biography, discuss 
the credibility and authority of the person described on each of the topics listed.
 1. Anne St. Germain teaches sociology at the University of Illinois and is the 
director of its Population Studies Center. She is a graduate of Harvard Col-
lege, where she received a BA in 1975, and of Harvard University, which 
granted her a PhD in economics in 1978. She taught courses in demography 
as an assistant professor at UCLA until 1982; then she moved to the sociology 
department of the University of Nebraska, where she was associate profes-
sor and then professor. From 1987 through 1989, she served as acting chief of 
the Population Trends and Structure Section of the United Nations Popula-
tion Division. She joined the faculty at the University of Illinois in 1989. She 
has written books on patterns of world urbanization, the effects of cigarette 
smoking on international mortality, and demographic trends in India. She is 
president of the Population Association of America.
Topics
 a. The effects of acid rain on humans
 b. The possible beneficial effects of requiring sociology courses for all stu-
dents at the University of Illinois
 c. The possible effects of nuclear war on global climate patterns
 d. The incidence of poverty among various ethnic groups in the United States
 e. The effects of the melting of glaciers on global sea levels
 f. The change in death rate for various age groups in all Third World coun-
tries between 1970 and 1990
 g. The feasibility of a laser-based nuclear defense system
 h. Voter participation among religious sects in India
 i. Whether the winters are worse in Illinois than in Nebraska
 2. Tom Pierce graduated cum laude from Cornell University with a BS in biol-
ogy in 1973. After two years in the Peace Corps, during which he worked on 
public health projects in Venezuela, he joined Jeffrey Ridenour, a mechanical 
engineer, and the pair developed a water pump and purification system that 
is now used in many parts of the world for both regular water supplies and 
emergency use in disaster-struck areas. Pierce and Ridenour formed a com-
pany to manufacture the water systems, and it prospered as they developed 
smaller versions of the system for private use on boats and motor homes. In 
1981, Pierce bought out his partner and expanded research and development 
in hydraulic systems for forcing oil out of old wells. Under contract with the 
federal government and several oil firms, Pierce’s company was a principal 
designer and contractor for the Alaskan oil pipeline. He is now a consultant 
in numerous developing countries as well as chief executive officer and chair 
of the board of his own company, and he sits on the boards of directors of 
several other companies.
Topics
 a. The image of the United States in Latin America
 b. The long-range effects of the leftward turn in Venezuela on South America
 c. Fixing a leaky faucet
▲

130 
CHAPTER 4: CREDIBILITY
 d. Technology in Third World countries
 e. The ecological effects of the Alaskan pipeline
 f. Negotiating a contract with the federal government
 g. Careers in biology
Exercise 4-14
According to certain pollsters, quite a number of people vote for candidates for 
president not because they especially like those candidates’ policies and pro-
grams or their idea of where the country should be going, but because they like 
(or dislike) the candidates personally. Discuss what features a candidate from the 
recent past may have that might cause such people to vote for (or against) him or 
her. Which of these features, if any, might be relevant to how good a job the can-
didate would do as president?
Exercise 4-15
From what you know about the nature of each of the following claims and its 
source, and given your general knowledge, assess whether the claim is one you 
should accept, reject, or suspend judgment on due to ambiguity, insufficient doc-
umentation, vagueness, or subjectivity (e.g., “Sam Claflin is cute”). Compare your 
judgment with that of your instructor.
 1. “Campbell Soup is hot—and some are getting burned. Just one day after the 
behemoth of broth reported record profits, Campbell said it would lay off 
650 U.S. workers, including 175—or 11% of the workforce—at its headquar-
ters in Camden, New Jersey.”
—Time
 2. [The claim to evaluate is the first one in this passage.] Jackie Haskew taught 
paganism and devil worship in her fourth-grade classroom in Grand Saline, 
Texas, at least until she was pressured into resigning by parents of her stu-
dents. (According to syndicated columnist Nat Hentoff, “At the town meet-
ing on her case, a parent said firmly that she did not want her daughter to 
read anything that dealt with ‘death, abuse, divorce, religion, or any other 
issue.’”)
 3. “By 1893 there were only between 300 and 1,000 buffaloes remaining in the 
entire country. A few years later, President Theodore Roosevelt persuaded 
Congress to establish a number of wildlife preserves in which the remain-
ing buffaloes could live without danger. The numbers have increased since, 
nearly doubling over the past 10 years to 130,000.”
—Clifford May, in the New York Times Magazine
 4. Lee Harvey Oswald, acting alone, was responsible for the death of President 
John F. Kennedy.
—Conclusion of the Warren Commission on the assassination 
of President Kennedy
 5. “[N]ewly released documents, including the transcripts of telephone conver-
sations recorded by President Lyndon B. Johnson in November and Decem-
ber 1963, provide for the first time a detailed . . . look at why and how the 
seven-member Warren [Commission] was put together. Those documents, 
▲

 
EXERCISES 
131
along with a review of previously released material . . . describe a process 
designed more to control information than to elicit and expose it.”
—“The Truth Was Secondary,” Washington Post National Weekly Edition
 6. “Short-sighted developers are determined to transform Choco [a large 
region of northwestern Colombia] from an undisturbed natural treasure to a 
polluted, industrialized growth center.”
—Solicitation letter from the World Wildlife Fund
 7. “Frantic parents tell shocked TV audience: space aliens stole our son.”
—Weekly World News
 8. “The manufacturer of Sudafed 12-hour capsules issued a nationwide recall of 
the product Sunday after two people in the state of Washington who had taken 
the medication died of cyanide poisoning and a third became seriously ill.”
—Los Angeles Times
 9. “In Canada, smoking in public places, trains, planes or even automobiles 
is now prohibited by law or by convention. The federal government has 
banned smoking in all its buildings.”
—Reuters
 10. “In October 2012, People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals petitioned 
Irvine, California, to create a roadside memorial for the truckload of live fish 
that perished in a recent traffic accident.”
—Orange County Register
 11. “Maps, files and compasses were hidden in Monopoly sets and smuggled 
into World War II German prison camps by MI-5, Britain’s counter-
intelligence agency, to help British prisoners escape, according to the 
British manufacturer of the game.”
—Associated Press
 12. “Cats that live indoors and use a litter box can live four to five years longer.”
—From an advertisement for Jonny Cat litter
 13. “The collapse of WTC Building 7 represents one of the worst structural fail-
ures in modern history. The official story contends that fires weakened the 
structures, resulting in a gravitational collapse. The evidence, obvious to so 
many researchers but omitted from NIST’s Final Report, supports a very dif-
ferent conclusion – one that points squarely to explosive controlled demoli-
tion. If WTC 7 was intentionally brought down, then clearly it becomes a 
‘smoking gun” that must be investigated.”
—http://www.ae911truth.org/news/41-articles/344-building-7
-implosion-the-smoking-gun-of-911.html
 14. “Because of cartilage that begins to accumulate after age thirty, by the 
time . . . [a] man is seventy his nose has grown a half inch wider and another 
half inch longer, his earlobes have fattened, and his ears themselves have 
grown a quarter inch longer. Overall, his head’s circumference increases a 
quarter inch every decade, and not because of his brain, which is shrinking. 
His head is fatter apparently because, unlike most other bones in the body, 
the skull seems to thicken with age.”
—John Tierney (a staff writer for Esquire)
▲
▲

132 
CHAPTER 4: CREDIBILITY
 15. “Gardenias . . . need ample warmth, ample water, and steady feeding. 
Though hardy to 20°F or even lower, plants fail to grow and bloom well with-
out summer heat.”
—The Sunset New Western Garden Book (a best-selling gardening reference in the West)
 16. “It’s stunningly beautiful. The weather is near perfect. The community of 
locals and expats is welcoming and friendly. The road here is good and you 
don’t want for any modern conveniences or amenities. But hardly anyone 
knows about it—and real estate is still affordable.
  “Once the word gets out about this place, the real estate market is set to 
explode. But right now . . . you can get lake view lots perched above the boat 
dock, with a down payment of $1,900 and monthly payment of just $143.”
—International Living (an online advertiser for foreign real estate), about Costa Rica
 17. “On Tuesday, Dec. 4, DJs Mel Greig and Michael Christian phoned the King 
Edward VII hospital pretending to be Prince Charles and Queen Elizabeth 
in order to get information about the Duchess of Cambridge. Saldanha, 
[a nurse] who had been tending to Middleton during her stay, fell victim 
to the prank and passed the callers on to another employee, who then pro-
ceeded to give confidential details about the pregnant royal’s condition.
  Three days later, Saldanha, known to friends and colleagues as ‘Jess,’ was 
found dead of an apparent suicide.”
—US Weekly
 18. “In our new print issue, which begins hitting newsstands today, the super-
star’s [John Travolta’s] former gay lover breaks his long silence to reveal the 
shocking details of an intimate six-year sexual relationship. In a bombshell 
world exclusive ENQUIRER interview, former pilot DOUG GOTTERBA dis-
closes that Travolta’s Hollywood image as a big-screen heartthrob through-
out the ’80s was a total sham.”
—National Enquirer, online
 19. “The Encinitas (California) Union School District is facing the threat of a 
lawsuit as it launches what is believed to be the country’s most comprehen-
sive yoga program for a public school system. Parents opposed to the pro-
gram say the classes will indoctrinate their children in Eastern religion and 
are not just for exercise.”
—Associated Press
 20. “Taliban terrorists have a secret weapon to destroy the infidel American 
enemy—monkey marksmen. According to the People’s Daily in China, the 
Taliban in Afghanistan is ‘training monkeys to use weapons to attack Ameri-
can troops.’ . . . Islamic insurgents have drafted macaques and baboons to be 
all that they can be, arming them with AK-4 rifles, machine guns and trench 
mortars in the Waziristan tribal region near the border between Pakistan 
and Afghanistan. The monkeys, being rewarded with bananas and peanuts, 
are being turned into snipers at a secret Taliban training base.”
—New York Post, July 13, 2010
Exercise 4-16
The following appeared in a local newspaper, criticizing the position on global 
warming taken by local television weather forecaster and political activist 
▲

 
EXERCISES 
133
Anthony Watts. Read it carefully and decide whether anything the newspaper 
alleges should affect the credibility of Watts or the project he endorsed. Compare 
your judgment with those of your classmates.
“[Anthony] Watts endorsed the ‘Petition Project,’ which refutes man-made 
global warming. Besides many fictitious names submitted, only about one per-
cent of the petition signers had done any climate research.
“The petition was prepared by Frederick Seitz, a scientist who, from 1975 to 
1989, was paid $585,000 by the tobacco industry to direct a $45 million scientific 
effort to hide the health impact of smoking. Does Watts agree that cigarettes are 
not harmful, as Seitz’s studies showed?”
—Chico News & Review
Exercise 4-17
Find five advertisements that give no reasons for purchasing the products they 
are selling. Explain how each ad attempts to make the product seem attractive.
Exercise 4-18
Find five advertisements that give reasons for purchasing the products they are 
selling. Which of the reasons are promises to the purchaser? Exactly what is being 
promised? What is the likelihood that the product will fulfill that promise?
Exercise 4-19
Watch Fox News, MSNBC, and CNN news programs on the same day. Compare 
the three on the basis of (1) the news stories covered, (2) the amount of air time 
given to two or three of the major stories, and (3) any difference in the slant of the 
presentations of a controversial story. Make notes. Be prepared to discuss in class 
the differences in coverage on the basis of the three criteria just mentioned.
Exercise 4-20
Find an example of a “public service announcement” that you think is really a 
piece of disguised advertising for (or against) something or someone. Explain 
why you think this.
Writing Exercises
 1. Although millions of people have seen professional magicians like David 
Copperfield and Siegfried and Roy perform in person or on television, it’s 
probably a safe assumption that almost nobody believes they accomplish 
their feats by means of real magical or supernatural powers—that is, that they 
somehow “defy” the laws of nature. But even though they’ve never had a per-
sonal demonstration, a significant portion of the population is said to believe 
that certain psychics are able to accomplish apparent miracles by exactly 
such means. How might you explain this difference in belief?
 2. In the text, you were asked to consider the claim “Charlie’s eighty-seven-
year-old grandmother swam across Lake Michigan in the middle of winter.” 
Because of the implausibility of such a claim—that is, because it conflicts 
with our background information—it is reasonable to reject it. Suppose, 

134 
CHAPTER 4: CREDIBILITY
however, that instead of just telling us about his grandmother, Charlie brings 
us a photocopy of a page of the Chicago Tribune with a photograph of a per-
son in a wet suit walking up onto a beach. The caption underneath reads, 
“Eighty-Seven-Year-Old Grandmother Swims Lake Michigan in January!” 
Based on this piece of evidence, should a critical thinker decide that the origi-
nal claim is significantly more likely to be true than if it were backed up only 
by Charlie’s word? Defend your answer.
 3. Are our schools doing a bad job educating our kids? Do research in the 
library or on the Internet to answer this question. Make a list (no more than 
one page long) of facts that support the claim that our schools are not doing 
as good a job as they should. Then list facts that support the opposite view (or 
that rebut the claims of those who say our schools aren’t doing a good job). 
Again, limit yourself to one page. Cite your sources.
  
Now, think critically about your sources. Are any stronger or weaker than the 
others? Explain why on a single sheet of paper. Come prepared to read your 
explanation, along with your list of facts and sources, to the class.
 4. Jackson says you should be skeptical of the opinion of someone who stands 
to profit from your accepting that opinion. Smith disagrees, pointing out that 
salespeople are apt to know a lot more about products of the type they sell 
than do most people.
  
 
“Most salespeople are honest, and you can trust them,” Smith argues. 
“Those who aren’t don’t stay in business long.”
  
 
Take about fifteen minutes to defend either Smith or Jackson in a short 
essay. When everyone is finished, your instructor will collect the essays and 
read three or more to the class to stimulate a brief discussion. After discussion, 
can the class come to any agreement about who is correct, Jackson or Smith?
 5. Search the Internet for answers to one or more of the following questions. 
Write an essay in which you take a position on the question and defend your 
position with an argument, and explain which Internet source you came 
across is most credible and why.
 a. Can smoking stunt bone growth?
 b. Is it safe to smoke tobacco using a hookah?
 c. Should toasters be unplugged when not in use?
 d. Will regular, vigorous exercise make you live longer?
 e. Are sea levels rising?
 f. How harmful is it to get too little sleep?
 g. Is it better to feed dogs raw meat than dog food?
 h. Are psychics really able to solve crimes?
 i. Why do hands and feet get wrinkled if you are in a bath for a long time?
 j. Do smoking laws improve public health?
 6. Raise a question you are interested in, research it on the Internet, take a posi-
tion on it and support it with an argument, and explain which Internet source 
you came across is most credible and why.

135
 5 
 R
 hetoric, the venerable art of persuasive writing and 
speaking, has been one of the twin anchors of West-
ern education since the days of Aristotle. The other, 
which also dates from Aristotle, is logic. You use rhetoric to 
win someone to your point of view; you use logic to demon-
strate a claim or support it. These are separate enterprises. 
You can use logic to persuade people, but all too often they are 
persuaded by poor logic and unmoved by good logic. This is 
why education increasingly emphasizes critical thinking, to 
help people improve their logic and to help them distinguish 
between proof and persuasion. 
 In this chapter we do three things. First, we introduce the 
important concept of rhetorical force. Then we explain several 
rhetorical devices. Good writers and speakers employ many 
of these devices to make their cases as persuasive as possible. 
None of the devices, however, have logical force or probative 
weight (“probative” means tending to prove). We, as critical 
thinkers, should be able to recognize them for what they are—
devices of persuasion. 
 Last, after we examine the various devices, we examine 
four principal techniques of demagoguery. Demagogues use 
inflammatory rhetoric to win acceptance for false and mislead-
ing ideas. They appeal to the fears and prejudices of an audience, 
and depend on its inability to see through their tricks. Famous 
 Students will learn to . . . 
 1. Explain the concepts of rhetorical 
force and emotive power 
 2. Identify and critique the use of 
euphemisms, dysphemisms, 
weaslers, and downplayers 
 3. Identify and critique the use of 
stereotypes, innuendo, and loaded 
questions 
 4. Identify and critique the use of 
ridicule, sarcasm, and hyperbole 
 5. Identify and critique the use of 
rhetorical definitions, explana-
tions, analogies, and misleading 
comparisons 
 6. Identify and critique the use of proof 
surrogates and repetition 
 7. Identify and critique the persuasive 
aspects of visual images 
 8. Detect the techniques used in the 
extreme rhetoric of demagoguery 
 Rhetoric, the Art of Persuasion 

136 
CHAPTER 5: RHETORIC, THE ART OF PERSUASION
demagogues include Adolf Hitler, Joseph McCarthy, and others. Spotting demagogu-
ery and resisting it is perhaps the most important skill a critical thinker can have.  
 RHETORICAL FORCE 
 Words and expressions have more than a literal or “dictionary” meaning. They 
also have what is known as  emotive meaning  or  rhetorical force  (these being the 
same thing). This is their power to express and elicit various psychological and 
emotional responses. For example, “elderly gentleman” and “old codger” evoke 
different emotions, the first pleasing and the second less so. To say that someone’s 
opinion is “mistaken” is one thing; to refer to it as “bull” is quite another. The two 
expressions have the same literal meaning, but the second has a negative emotive 
meaning. Read this statement from a famous speech by Barack Obama, in which 
he conceded a primary election to Hillary Clinton. Then compare it with the para-
phrase that immediately follows:
 Paraphrase:
  The message conveyed by the two passages is essentially the same. The dif-
ference between them is due entirely to the powerful rhetorical force of the first 
passage, which is inspirational and uplifting, and exhorts listeners toward a com-
mon shining goal. The passage illustrates the point made above about rhetoric: It 
may be psychologically compelling, but by itself it establishes nothing. It has no 
probative weight. If we allow our attitudes and beliefs to be formed solely by the 
rhetorical force of words, we fall short as critical thinkers. 
 Now, before we get in trouble with your English professor, let’s make it clear 
once again that there is nothing wrong with someone’s trying to make his or her 
case as persuasive as possible. Good writers use well-chosen, rhetorically effec-
tive words and phrases. But we, as critical thinkers, must be able to distinguish the 
argument (if any) contained in a passage from the rhetoric; we must distinguish 
between the logical force of a set of remarks and its psychological force. You won’t 
find much rhetoric of the sort we discuss here in science journals because it carries 
no probative weight. Scientists may hope readers accept their findings, but it’s risky 
for them to try to sell their findings by couching them in the language of persuasion. 
It’s not that rhetoric weakens an argument; it just doesn’t strengthen it.* 
 Political language is designed 
to make lies sound truthful . . .  
and to give the appearance of 
solidity to pure wind. 
 — G EORGE O RWELL 
 And so tomorrow, as we take this campaign South and West; as we learn that the 
struggles of the textile worker in Spartanburg are not so different than the plight of 
the dishwasher in Las Vegas; that the hopes of the little girl who goes to a crumbling 
school in Dillon are the same as the dreams of the boy who learns on the streets of 
LA; we will remember that there is something happening in America; that we are 
not as divided as our politics suggests; that we are one people; we are one nation; 
and together, we will begin the next great chapter in America’s story with three 
words that will ring from coast to coast; from sea to shining sea—Yes. We. Can. 
 — Barack Obama speech, January 8, 2008
 Let us continue campaigning. 
*A body of scholarly work known as the “Rhetoric of Science,” views science as a species of rhetoric. However, if you 
are looking for examples of the kind of rhetorical devices and techniques explored in this chapter, you will find better 
sources than (for instance) the Journal of Cell Biology or the Journal of the Royal Statistical Society.

 
RHETORICAL DEVICES I 
137
 RHETORICAL DEVICES I 
  The first group of  rhetorical devices  are usually single words or short phrases 
designed to give a statement a positive or negative slant. For this reason, they are 
sometimes called  slanters. 
 Euphemisms and Dysphemisms 
 A  euphemism  is a neutral or positive expression used in place of one that carries 
negative associations. “Detainee” means what most of us call “prisoner,” but it 
seems more benign. At first glance, “waterboarding” sounds like something you’d 
expect to see young people doing on a California beach, not a torture technique. 
Being given a “career enhancement opportunity” is a nice way of being told that 
you’ve been fired. 
 Euphemisms obviously can be used to whitewash wrongdoing; but they 
have positive uses as well. It would be insensitive to tell friends you were sorry 
they killed their dog. Instead, you say you were sorry they had to put their dog to 
sleep. 
 A  dysphemism  is used to produce a negative effect on someone’s attitude 
about something, or to tone down the positive associations it may have. It sounds 
worse to be obscenely rich than to be very wealthy. Eating animal flesh sounds 
worse than eating meat. The tax imposed on an inheritance is sometimes called 
a death tax, which leaves a bad taste because it suggests the deceased rather than 
the inheritors is being taxed. Dismissing a legislative proposal as a “scheme” also 
qualifies as a dsyphemism. We would be hard pressed to explain the difference 
between “conservative” and “far-right” or between “liberal” and “ultra-liberal,” 
but the second of each of these pairs sounds worse than the first, and they both 
qualify as dysphemisms. 
 You naturally expect to find a generous sprinkling of dysphemisms when a 
speaker or writer tries to get us to dislike someone or something. Of course, what 
counts as a euphemism or a dysphemism is, to some extent, in the eyes of the 
beholder. One person’s junkyard is another person’s automotive recycling busi-
ness; one person’s sanitary land fill is another person’s garbage dump. 
 Finally, there is this: Some facts are just plain repellent, and for that reason, 
even neutral reports of them sound appalling. “Lizzie killed her father with an ax” 
is not a dysphemism; it simply reports a horrible fact about Lizzie. 
 Weaselers 
 When inserted into a claim,  weaselers  help protect it from criticism by watering 
it down somewhat, weakening it, and giving the claim’s author a way out in case 
the claim is challenged. 
 Without doubt you’ve heard the words “up to” used as a weaseler a thou-
sand times, especially in advertising. “Up to five more miles per gallon.” “Up to 
twenty more yards off the tee.” “Lose up to ten pounds a week.” None of these 
guarantee anything. Sure, you might lose ten pounds, but you might lose nothing. 
The statement still stands, thanks to “up to.” 
 Let’s make up a statistic. Let’s say that 98 percent of American doctors believe 
that aspirin is a contributing cause of Reye’s syndrome in children, and that the 
other 2 percent are unconvinced. If we then claim that “some doctors are uncon-
vinced that aspirin is related to Reye’s syndrome,” we cannot be held accountable 
for having said something false, even though our claim might be misleading to 
someone who did not know the complete story. The word “some” has allowed us 
to weasel the point. 
 Euphemisms are unpleasant 
truths wearing diplomatic 
cologne. 
 — Q UENTIN C RISP,  Manners from 
Heaven 
 Great Western pays up to 
12 percent  more interest on 
checking accounts. 
 —Radio advertisement 
Even aside from the “up to” 
weaseler, this ad can be deceptive 
about what interest rate it’s promis-
ing. Unless you listen carefully, you 
might think Great Western is paying 
12 percent on checking accounts. 
The presence of the word “more” 
changes all that, of course. If you’re 
getting 3 percent now, and Great 
Western gives you “up to 12 percent 
more” than that, they’ll be giving 
you about 3½ percent—hardly the 
fortune the ad seems to promise.

138 
CHAPTER 5: RHETORIC, THE ART OF PERSUASION
 Words that sometimes weasel—such as “perhaps,” “possibly,” “maybe,” and 
“may be,” among others—can be used to produce innuendo (to be explained 
below), to plant a suggestion without actually making a claim that a person can be 
held to. We can suggest that Berriault is a liar without actually saying so (and thus 
without saying something that might be hard to defend) by saying that  Berriault 
may be  a liar. Or we can say it is  possible  that Berriault is a liar (which is true of 
all of us, after all). “ Perhaps Berriault is a liar” works nicely, too. All of these are 
examples of weaselers used to create innuendo. 
Not every use of words and phrases like these is a weaseling one,  of course. 
Words that can weasel can also bring very important qualifications to bear on a 
claim. The very same word that weasels in one context may not weasel at all in 
another. For example, a detective who is considering all the possible angles on a 
crime and who has just heard Smith’s account of events may say to an associate, 
“Of course, it is  possible  that Smith is lying.” This need not be a case of weaseling. 
The detective may simply be exercising due care. Other words and phrases that are 
sometimes used to weasel can also be used legitimately. Qualifying phrases such as 
“it is arguable that,” “it may well be that,” and so on have at least as many appropri-
ate uses as weaseling ones. Others, such as “some would say that,” are likely to be 
weaseling more often than not, but even they can serve an honest purpose in the 
right context. Our warning, then, is to be watchful when qualifying phrases turn up. 
Is the speaker or writer adding a reasonable qualification, insinuating a bit of innu-
endo, or preparing a way out? We can only warn; you need to assess the speaker, 
the context, and the subject to establish the grounds for the right judgment.  
 Downplayers 
Downplayers  attempt to make someone or something look less important or less 
significant. Stereotypes, rhetorical comparisons, rhetorical explanations, and innu-
endo (all discussed later) can all be used to downplay something. The remark “Don’t 
mind what Mr. Pierce says; he thinks he is an educator” downplays Mr. Pierce and 
his statements. (What educator doesn’t think he or she is one?) We can also down-
play by careful insertion of certain words or other devices. Let’s amend the preced-
ing example like this: “Don’t mind what Mr. Pierce says; he’s just another educator.” 
Notice how the phrase “just another” denigrates Mr. Pierce’s status still further. 
 Perhaps the words most often used as downplayers are “mere” and “merely.” 
If Kim tells you her sister has a mere green belt in Pujo (a Tibetan martial art), she 
is downplaying her sister’s accomplishment. 
The term “so-called” is another standard downplayer. We might say, for 
example, that the woman who made the diagnosis is a “so-called medical pro-
fessional,” which downplays her credentials. Quotation marks can be used to 
accomplish the same thing:
Use of quotation marks as a downplayer is somewhat different from their use to 
indicate irony, as in this remark:
 The idea in the latter example isn’t to downplay John’s borrowing the umbrella; 
it’s to indicate that it wasn’t really a case of borrowing at all. 
She got her “degree” from a correspondence school.
John “borrowed” Hank’s umbrella, and Hank hasn’t seen it since.
“Fifteen minutes could save 
you fifteen percent or more on 
car insurance.”
—GEICO car insurance 
advertisements
Then again, it might not.

 
RHETORICAL DEVICES I
139
 Many conjunctions—such as “nevertheless,” “however,” “still,” and “but”—
can be used to downplay claims that precede them. Such uses are more subtle 
than the first group of downplayers. Compare the following two versions of what 
is essentially the same pair of claims:
  The first statement downplays the leak; the second statement downplays the 
good the plant produces. 
 The context of a claim can determine whether it downplays or not. Consider 
the remark “Chavez won by only six votes.” The word “only” may or may not down-
play Chavez’s victory, depending on how thin a six-vote margin is. If ten thousand 
people voted and Chavez won by six, then the word “only” seems perfectly appro-
priate: Chavez won by just the skin of his teeth. But if the vote was in a committee 
of, say, twenty, then six is quite a substantial margin (it would be thirteen votes to 
seven, if everybody voted—almost two to one), and applying the word “only” to 
the result is clearly a slanting device designed to give Chavez’s margin of victory 
less importance than it deserves. 
 Downplayers really can’t—and shouldn’t—be avoided altogether. They can 
give our writing flair and interest. What  can  be avoided is being unduly swayed by 
them. Learning to appreciate the psychological and emotional nuances of language 
decreases your chances of being taken in by the manipulations of a writer or speaker.     
 (1) The leak at the plant was terrible, but the plant provided good jobs to 
thousands of people. 
 (2) Although the plant provided good jobs to thousands of people, the leak there 
was terrible. 
 Identify rhetorical devices you find in the following from the previous section of 
the text (euphemisms, dysphemisms, weaselers, downplayers). Not every exam-
ple may contain such a device. 
—See the answers section at the back of the book.
 1. There, there; it could be worse. 
 2. You should install solar panels. They could save you a lot of money. 
   3. Smithers might have visited a gentleman’s club once or twice, but that hardly 
could disqualify him from the race. 
 4. This president wakes up every morning and pretends to speak for the people. 
 5. Whistle-blower? Dude’s a snitch. 
 6. These self-appointed experts have nothing better to do with their time than 
tell us what we should do with ours. 
 7. Excuse me, Dear. I must powder my nose. 
 8. I suppose we could go listen to her speech. No doubt some people think she 
is an expert. 
 9. We have to take poor Fido to the animal shelter. 
 10. “It doesn’t say anywhere in the Constitution this idea of the separation of 
church and state.” 
 — Sean Hannity
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
 Exercise 5-1 

140 
CHAPTER 5: RHETORIC, THE ART OF PERSUASION
 11. You say you are in love with Oscar, but are you sure he’s right for you? Isn’t 
he a little too . . .  uh, mature for you? 
 12. He was at the bar for two hours, officer, but I know he had only four drinks 
during that time. 
 13. “The key principle is ‘responsible energy exploration.’ And remember, it’s 
NOT drilling for oil. It’s responsible energy exploration.” 
 —Republican pollster Frank Luntz 
 14. Of course, it may be that Aaron Hernandez didn’t even commit the assaults 
he was accused of. 
 15. Try the Neutron Diet for just four weeks, and you can lose as many as twenty 
pounds!  
 16. Republicans stand on principle against the schemes of the environmental 
extremists.  
 17. Despite the downplaying by pseudo scientific crackpots, climate change is 
very real. 
 18. Obama and his Democrat–Communist party have bloated the already 
bloated federal bureaucracy by 25 percent in ONE YEAR. 
 19. Charles, be sure to tinkle before we leave! 
 20. Him? Oh, that’s just my brother. 
▲
▲
▲
 RHETORICAL DEVICES II 
 These next three slanting devices rely, in one way or another, on unwarranted 
assumptions. We have to depend on unstated assumptions all the time, but as 
you’ll see, we can get into trouble when those assumptions are not trustworthy. 
 Stereotypes 
 A  stereotype  is a cultural belief or idea about a social group’s attributes, usually 
simplified or exaggerated. It can be positive or negative. Americans are sometimes 
stereotyped as friendly and generous, other times as boorish and insensitive. 
Southern Caucasian males are sometimes stereotyped as genteel or mannerly; 
other times as bigoted rednecks. Of course, a moment’s thought tells us that none 
of these characteristics could reasonably apply to all the members of these groups. 
Stereotypes are unreliable characterizations of people; and when speakers or 
writers use them to try to win us to their point of view, we must be on guard. For 
example, if someone used the idea of a “welfare queen” (a pejorative stereotype of 
a lazy mother who prefers collecting welfare checks to finding a job) to persuade 
us that taxpayers are spending too much money on welfare, we should be aware 
that the speaker is trying to persuade us with an image rather than with data. 
 But stereotyping can work in the other direction as well. If we hear that so-
and-so “tells it like it is,” we have been given a positive stereotype, that of the out-
spoken truth-teller. Linking people with a stereotype we like can create a favorable 
impression of them. 
 Stereotypes come from multiple sources, many from popular literature or 
the entertainment or recording industries, and are often supported by a vari-
ety of prejudices and group interests. Native American tribes of the Great Plains 
were portrayed favorably in the popular literature of white Americans until just 
Mention the strict 
regulations—not protocols 
or rules—governing nuclear 
power plants.
—Republican pollster 
FRANK LUNTZ, in “An Energy 
Policy for the 21st Century,” 
advising Republicans how to 
sell nuclear energy

 
RHETORICAL DEVICES II
141
 Do Blondes Make Us Dumber? 
 According to research reported by 
Shelley Emling of the Cox News 
Service, when subjects (both men 
and women) were shown photos of 
women with blonde hair, their ability 
to answer Trivial Pursuit game ques-
tions declined. This did not happen 
when they saw women with other 
hair colors. The authors of the study 
said that it confirmed other findings 
that people’s cognitive functioning is 
affected by exposure to stereotypes. 
“The mere knowledge of a stereo-
type can influence our behavior,” one 
researcher said. One example given 
for this was that, when people are 
exposed to elderly people, they tend 
to walk and talk more slowly. 
 — Shelley Emling, Cox News Service,  http://thesituationist.wordpress.com/2008/01/22/. 
■  Brittany Pierce (Heather Morris) on  Glee is a recent iteration of the dumb 
blonde stereotype. 
before the mid-nineteenth century. But as the westward expansion of the United 
States continued, and conflicts with white settlers escalated, depictions became 
increasingly pejorative. 
 Bottom line: Undeniably, some stereotypes carry much rhetorical force, but 
they have no evidentiary or probative (tendency to prove) force. Rhetoric that 
contains them may be persuasive psychologically, but it is neither strengthened 
nor weakened logically. 
 Incidentally, does the fact that members of a group utter negative stereo-
types about themselves make it okay for others to use those stereotypes? We are 
not aware of an argument to that effect that can withstand scrutiny. “They say 
bad things about themselves; therefore those things are true” is illogical; and so is 
“since they say bad things about themselves, it is okay for us to do so too.” 
 Innuendo 
Innuendo  uses the power of suggestion to disparage (say something bad about) 
someone or something. Unlike dysphemisms—expressions having obvious nega-
tive rhetorical force—innuendo relies on neutral (or even positive) phrasing to 
insinuate something derogatory. Consider for example this statement: 
 As you can see, the statement does not say that the speaker’s opponent 
makes stuff up. But it conveys that message nevertheless. Another example: 
The city voluntarily assumed 
the costs of cleaning up the 
landfill to make it safe for 
developers.
—Opponents of a local hous-
ing development
Oops, the opponents didn’t men-
tion that the law required the 
city to assume the costs. The 
omission of course suggests that 
the city was in cahoots with the 
developers.  Leaving out important 
information in order to convey a 
negative  message about someone 
or  something is another form of 
innuendo.
Ladies and gentlemen, I am proof that at least one candidate in this race doesn’t 
make stuff up.

142 
CHAPTER 5: RHETORIC, THE ART OF PERSUASION
Jim: Is Ralph is telling the truth?
Joe: Yes, this time.
 Joe is insinuating that Ralph doesn’t usually tell the truth. Yet another exam-
ple, maybe our all-time favorite, is this remark from W. C. Fields. 
 Another example would be: 
 Saying, “He may think he made a good speech” would also count as innuendo, 
because it insinuates that his speech wasn’t very good. So would, “I bet he actually 
thinks he made a good speech.” What we bet is that most people who make good 
speeches actually think they made good speeches. 
 The key to recognizing innuendo is that it relies entirely on suggestion and 
implication, rather than on wording that has overtly negative associations. “His 
speech was vaporous and stupid” is not innuendo. 
 Loaded Questions 
 A  loaded question,  like innuendo, is used to imply something without coming 
out and saying it. For example, the question “Why does the president hate rich 
people?” implies without saying it that the president hates rich people. “Have 
you always loved being in debt?” implies without saying it that you love being 
in debt. 
 Here is how this works. Every question rests on assumptions. Even an 
innocent question like “What time is it?” depends on the assumptions that 
the hearer speaks English and probably has means of finding out the time. 
 I didn’t say the meat was tough. I said I didn’t see the horse that is usually outside. 
She’s just the aerobics instructor, at least that’s what he’s telling his wife.
 Innuendo with Statistics 
  Taxpayers with incomes over $200,000 could expect on average to pay about $99,000 in 
taxes under [the proposed] plan. 
 — Wall Street Journal
 This statement plants the suggestion that any taxpayer who makes over $200,000 will pay 
almost half his or her income in taxes. But, in the words of the  New Republic  (February 3, 2003), 
“The  Journal’ s statistic is about as meaningful as asserting that males over the age of six have 
had an average of three sexual partners.” Bill Gates and many billionaires like him are among 
those who make over $200,000. 

 
RHETORICAL DEVICES II
143
 1. Watch an episode of  Big Bang Theory, Two and a Half Men, or  Hot in Cleve-
land and see how many stereotyped characters you can identify. 
 2. Watch an episode of  Good Morning America or one of the network or cable 
news programs and see how many stereotyped characters you can spot in 
the commercials. 
 Exercise 5-2 
 Identify any stereotypes, innuendo, or loaded questions you find in the following 
text. 
 1. Devon is a total jock. Don’t go making him your study partner. 
 2. Went to my philosophy class today. The professor showed up sober. 
 3. At least his wife isn’t rude. 
 4. Don’t you have anything better to wear than that? 
 5. Give the work to Brockston. He’s a real man. He’ll get it done. 
 6. You’re going to go see what?? That’s such a chick flick! 
 7. Who do like better, me or Sydney? 
 8. For some reason, President Obama has never shown his birth certificate. 
 9. An attorney questioning a witness: “So, if you were awake when you crossed 
the bridge, just when did you go to sleep at the wheel?” 
 10. No, I’m sure you’ll enjoy playing tennis with Jerome. He gets around pretty 
well for a guy his age. 
 11. Frankly, I believe that flash memory will make any kind of moving-part 
memory, such as hard drives, completely obsolete. 
 12. Larry Kudlow, on CNBC (in an  American Spectator interview): “[Former 
Treasury secretary] Bob Rubin’s a smart guy, a nice man, but he hates tax 
▲
▲
▲
▲
 Exercise 5-3 
 ■ Photographs, like rhetoric, have suggestive power. For example, what does this 
picture of President Obama suggest about him? Is it favorable or unfavorable, or 
does it depend entirely on your point of view? 
A loaded question, however, rests 
on one or more  unwarranted
(unjustified) assumptions. The 
world’s oldest example,  “Have 
you stopped beating your wife?” 
rests on the assumption that the 
person asked has beaten his wife 
in the past. If there is no rea-
son to think that this assump-
tion is true, then the question is 
loaded. 
 Loaded questions thus count 
as a form of innuendo if they 
imply something negative about 
someone. However, they can be 
used to carry a positive message 
as well, as in the example: “How 
did Melanie acquire such a won-
derful voice?”      

144 
CHAPTER 5: RHETORIC, THE ART OF PERSUASION
 RHETORICAL DEVICES III 
  Humor and a bit of exaggeration are part of our everyday speech. But they can 
also be used to sway opinions if the listener is not being careful. 
 Ridicule/Sarcasm 
 Also known as the  horse laugh,  this device includes ridicule and vicious humor of 
all kinds. Ridicule is a powerful rhetorical tool—most of us really hate being laughed 
at. So it’s important to remember that somebody who simply gets a laugh at the 
expense of another person’s position has not raised any objection to that position. 
 One may simply laugh outright at a claim (“Send aid to Egypt? Har, har, 
har!”), tell an unrelated joke, use sarcastic language, or simply laugh at the person 
who is trying to make the point. 
 The next time you watch a debate, remember that the person who has the 
funniest lines and who gets the most laughs may be the person who  seems to 
win the debate, but critical thinkers should be able to see the difference between 
argumentation on one hand and entertainment on the other. 
 Notice that we are not saying 
there’s anything  wrong  with enter-
tainment, nor with making a valid 
point in a humorous way. 
 Hyperbole 
Hyperbole  is extravagant over-
statement, or exaggeration. “The 
Democrats want everyone to be 
on welfare” is hyperbole. So is 
“Nobody in the Tea Party likes Afri-
can Americans.” Describing your 
parents as “fascists” because they 
don’t want you to major in art also 
counts. People  exaggerate—we all 
exaggerate—not only to express 
how strongly we feel about some-
thing but also, sometimes, to per-
suade our listeners of a lesser claim. 
 ■ “Good point; let’s only 
pass laws that criminals 
will immediately 
obey.” —Jon Stewart, 
making fun of a 
spokesperson for 
the National Rifle 
Association who 
objected to universal 
background checks for 
gun purchases ”because 
criminals will never 
submit to them.” 
cuts. To listen to Rubin on domestic issues, you could just die. He’s a free-
spending left-winger.” 
 13. Has Harry been a faithful husband? Well, he’s not been through a Tiger 
Woods phase. 
 14. Why is it, do you suppose, that pit bulls are all mean and vicious? 
 15. I wouldn’t worry about the train being late. This is Germany, you know. 
 16. Why did Obama fail to act swiftly to end the BP oil spill? 
 17. It goes without saying that his kid will do well in school. His kind always do. 
 18. There is no proof the president deals drugs. On the other hand, there’s no 
proof he doesn’t, either. 
▲
▲

 
RHETORICAL DEVICES IV
145
For example, to persuade your son not to text while driving, you might tell him 
he’s likely to kill half the population of Los Angeles. To convince his girlfriend he 
really loves her, a young man may state that he loves her more than anyone has 
ever loved anyone. And so on. 
 Therefore, the thing to remember when you encounter hyperbole is that, 
even if you reject it as exaggeration, you might be moved in the direction of a lesser 
claim even in the absence of argument. If a server tells you that the salmon is the 
best you will ever eat, you may end up ordering it. If somebody tells you that Clara 
thinks of nobody but herself, you might be tempted to think that Clara is a little self-
centered. If you hear somebody you respect confidently predict “ nobody  will vote 
for Jackson,” you might find yourself surprised when Jackson actually is elected. 
 It may almost go without saying that other rhetorical devices often involve 
hyperbole. For example, when we describe a member of the opposing political 
party as traitorous, we are using a dysphemism that involves hyperbole. And 
negative stereotyping always involves exaggerating how often some undesirable 
characteristic is found in the targeted social group. 
 RHETORICAL DEVICES IV 
  Definitions, explanations, analogies, and comparisons are all used in straightfor-
ward ways most of the time. But, as we’ll see, they can also be used in rhetorical 
fashion to slant a point one way or another. 
 A feminazi is a woman to 
whom the most important 
thing in life is seeing to it that 
as many abortions as possible 
are performed. 
 — RUSH L IMBAUGH 
A rhetorical definition with hyper-
bole. (A straw man, too, but that’s 
for a later chapter.)
 Legislative Misnomers 
 Several polls have reported that voters sometimes indicate approval of a measure when they 
hear its title but indicate disapproval after they’ve heard an explanation of what the measure 
actually proposes. This isn’t surprising, given the misleading proposal titles assigned by mem-
bers of Congress and state legislatures, and by authors of ballot measures. Here are a few exam-
ples of recent laws, initiatives, and so on, the names of which don’t exactly tell the whole story:
 Healthy Forests Initiative (federal)—Reduces public involvement in decision making 
regarding logging, reduces environmental protection requirements, and provides timber 
companies greater access to national forests 
 Clear Skies Act (federal)—Loosens regulation of mercury, nitrous oxide, and sulphur 
dioxide, and puts off required reductions of these substances for several years beyond the 
limits of the current Clean Air Act; allows companies to trade off “pollution credits” so that 
some communities would get cleaner air and others dirtier air 
 Limitations on Enforcement of Unfair Business Competition Laws (California)—Makes it 
impossible for consumer groups of all types to sue corporations and businesses to pre-
vent fraud, false advertising, and other deceptions before they take place 
 Support Our Law Enforcement and Safe Neighborhoods Act (Arizona)—Requires law 
enforcement officers to determine immigration status of individuals whom they reason-
ably suspect to be illegal aliens 
 Right to Work (many states)—Prevents unions from collecting fees from nonmembers of 
bargaining units 
 Prohibition of Discrimination and Preferential Treatment (California)—Weakens or elimi-
nates affirmative action programs 

146 
CHAPTER 5: RHETORIC, THE ART OF PERSUASION
 Rhetorical Definitions and Rhetorical Explanations 
 As explained in Chapter 3,  rhetorical definitions  employ rhetorically charged 
language to express or elicit an attitude about something. Defining abortion as 
“the murder of an unborn child” does this—and stacks the deck against those who 
think abortion is morally defensible. Restricting the meaning of “human being” to 
an organism to which a human has given birth stacks the deck the other way.  
 In Chapter 3, we explained that when we define a concept by providing an 
example of it, we are “defining by example.” It’s worth noting here that even defi-
nitions by example can slant a discussion if the examples are prejudicially cho-
sen. Defining “conservative” by pointing to a white supremacist would be a case 
in point. If one wants to see all sides of an issue, one must avoid definitions and 
examples that slant a discussion. 
Rhetorical explanations  use the language of standard explanations to dis-
guise their real purpose, which is to express or elicit an attitude. 
 For example, consider this “explanation” we found in a letter to an editor:
  This isn’t a dispassionate scholarly explanation of causation, but a way of 
expressing an opinion about, and trying to evoke anger at, affirmative action policies.  
 Rhetorical Analogies and Misleading Comparisons 
 A  rhetorical analogy  likens two or more things to make one of them appear better 
or worse than another. This may lead us to change our opinions about something 
even though we have not been given an argument. For example, hearing Social 
Security likened to a Ponzi scheme (a Ponzi scheme is a pyramid scheme designed 
to bilk people who fall for it) might make us suspicious of Social Security. Constant 
likening of Saddam Hussein to Adolf Hitler may have influenced some people’s atti-
tudes about the Iraq invasion. We have heard Barack Obama’s supporters liken him 
to Abraham Lincoln, and the closer we got to his reelection the more we heard it. 
 Of course, people use analogies for straightforward explanatory purposes. 
If a friend knows nothing about rugby, you might promote his understanding by 
 I am a traditional liberal who keeps asking himself, why has there been such a 
seismic shift in affirmative action? It used to be affirmative action stood for equal 
opportunity; now it means preferences and quotas. Why the change? It’s because 
the people behind affirmative action aren’t for equal rights anymore; they’re for 
handouts. 
 ■ Stereotypes.   
(DOONESBURY © G. B. 
Trudeau. Reprinted with 
permission of Universal 
Press Syndicate. All 
rights reserved.) 
source: DOONESBURY © 1988 G. B. Trudeau. Reprinted with permission of UNIVERSAL UCLICK. All rights reserved

 
RHETORICAL DEVICES IV 
147
noting its similarity to football. But when Joseph Goebbels likened intellectuals 
to “bubbles of fat that float on the surface without affecting the liquid below” (see 
page 156) it is clear his intent was to denigrate intellectuals—and lead his listen-
ers to do so as well. On the other hand, when humorist Dave Barry likens having 
kids to having a bowling alley in your brain, he is simply trying to entertain us. 
 Rhetorical analogies also include comparisons, like “You have a better chance 
of being struck by lightning than of winning the lottery.” But some comparisons can 
lead us into error if we are not careful. A female smoker has a much better chance 
of surviving lung cancer than does a male, but that would not be a good reason for 
a female smoker not to quit. Advertising sometimes offers vague comparisons, such 
as “Now 25 percent larger,” “New and improved,” and “Quietest by far.” Unless both 
sides of a comparison are made clear, the comparison isn’t worth much. 
 Here are a few questions that you could keep in mind when considering 
comparisons. They include reference to omissions and distortions, which can be 
among the more subtle forms of rhetorical devices. 
 1. Is the comparison vague? What do you mean, James is a better swimmer than 
Ray? In what way is Sarah happier than Santana? What specifically do you 
have in mind, when you assert that women are better equipped to deal with 
grief? The appropriate question for comparisons like these is not,” What 
makes you think that is true,” but rather, “What do you mean?”
 2. Is important information missing? It is nice to hear that the unemployment 
rate has gone down, but not if you learn the reason is that a larger percent of 
the workforce has given up looking for work. Or, suppose someone says that 
90 percent of heroin addicts once smoked marijuana. Without other informa-
tion, the comparison is meaningless, since 90 percent of heroin addicts no 
doubt listened to the Beatles, too. 
 3.  Is the same standard of comparison used? Are the same reporting and record-
ing practices being used? A change in the jobless rate doesn’t mean much if 
the government changes the way it calculates joblessness, as sometimes hap-
pens. In 1993, the number of people in the United States with AIDS suddenly 
increased dramatically. Had a new form of the AIDS virus appeared? No; the 
federal government had expanded the definition of AIDS to include several 
new indicator conditions. As a result, overnight 50,000 people were consid-
ered to have AIDS who had not been so considered the day before. 
 4.  Are the items comparable? It is hard to compare baseball sluggers Barry Bonds 
and Willie Mays if one but not the other used steroids, or if one had the benefit 
of improved equipment. It’s hard to derive a conclusion from the fact that this 
April’s retail business activity is way down as compared with last April’s, if Eas-
ter came early this year and the weather was especially cold. That more male 
than female drivers are involved in traffic fatalities doesn’t mean much by itself, 
since male drivers collectively drive more miles than do female drivers. Com-
paring share values of two mutual funds over the past ten years won’t be useful 
to an investor if the comparison doesn’t take into account a difference in fees.  
 5.  Is the comparison expressed as an average? The average rainfall in Seattle is 
about the same as that in Kansas City. But you’ll spend more time in the rain 
in Seattle because it rains there twice as often as in Kansas City. If Central Val-
ley Components, Inc. (CVC), reports that average salaries of a majority of its 
employees have more than doubled over the past ten years, it sounds good, 
but CVC still may not be a great place to work. Perhaps the increases were 

148 
CHAPTER 5: RHETORIC, THE ART OF PERSUASION
 Misleading Graphic Comparisons 
 Comparisons displayed on graphs should be viewed with caution, as this graph illustrates.   
 If you just glance at the bars, you might think Moore’s sales at CVC (a fictitious company) are 
many times greater than Parker’s or Messer’s. That’s because Moore’s bar is much taller than 
Parker’s or Messer’s. But if you look closely at the scale on the vertical axis, you can see that, in 
fact, the sales of all three salespeople are pretty much the same. 
2.31
2.23
2.25
2.27
2.29
2.22
2.21
2.24
2.26
2.28
2.30
2.32
Moore
Parker
Messer
January CVC Sales as Percentage of Total
Results by Individual
due to converting the majority of employees, who worked half-time, to full-
time and firing the rest. Comparisons that involve averages omit details that 
can be important, simply because they involve averages. 
  
 
 Averages are measures of central tendency, and there are different kinds of 
measures or averages. Consider, for instance, the average cost of a new house 
in your area, which may be $210,000. If that is the  mean, it is the total of the 
sales prices divided by the number of houses sold, and it may be quite different 
from the  median, which is an average that is the halfway figure (half the houses 
cost more and half cost less). The  mode, the most common sales price, may be 
different yet. If there are likely to be large or dramatic variations in what is mea-
sured, one must be cautious of figures that represent an unspecific “average.”           
 Never try to wade a river just 
because it has an average 
depth of four feet. 
 — M ARTIN F RIEDMAN 
The wrong average can put you 
under.
 Cause for Alarm? 
 According to the National Household Survey on Drug Abuse, cocaine use among Americans 
twelve to seventeen years of age increased by a whopping 166 percent between 1992 and 
1995. Wow, right? 
 Except that the increase  in absolute terms  was a little less spectacular: In 1992, 0.3 percent of 
Americans aged twelve to seventeen had used cocaine; in 1995, the percentage was 0.8 percent 
of that population. 
 Be wary of comparisons expressed as percentage changes. 

 
RHETORICAL DEVICES IV 
149
 Identify each of the following as either a rhetorical explanation, rhetorical anal-
ogy, or rhetorical definition. 
  1. “The  New York Times editorial page is like a Ouija board that has only three 
answers, no matter what the question. The answers are: higher taxes, more 
restrictions on political speech and stricter gun control.” 
 — Ann Coulter 
 2. “Listening to him is like trying to read  Playboy magazine with your wife turn-
ing the pages.” 
 — Barry Goldwater, describing fast-talking Hubert Humphrey 
 3. A Democrat is a person who likes to take your money and give it to lazy people.  
 4. Three people are dividing a pie. The Conservative is someone who takes 
all but one and then asks the other two, “Why is that guy trying to take your 
piece of pie?” 
  5. “Good Conservatives always pay their bills. And on time. Not like the Social-
ists, who run up other people’s bills.” 
 —Margaret Thatcher 
 6. “Yeah, I’m obnoxious, yeah, I cut people off, yeah, I’m rude. You know why? 
Because you’re busy.” 
 — Bill O’Reilly 
 7. “Republicans believe every day is the 4th of July, but Democrats believe 
every day is April 15.” 
 — Ronald Reagan 
 8. “Liberals would rather see a child aborted than a tree chopped down.” 
 — Ann Coulter 
 9. Philosophers love to argue because they don’t have anything better to do 
with their time. 
 10. “Liberal soccer moms are precisely as likely to receive anthrax in the mail as 
to develop a capacity for linear thinking.” 
 — Ann Coulter 
 11. “A liberal interprets the Constitution. A conservative quotes it.” 
 — Rush Limbaugh 
 12. “New Rule: Gay marriage won’t lead to dog marriage. It is not a slippery 
slope to rampant inter-species coupling. When women got the right to vote, 
it didn’t lead to hamsters voting. No court has extended the Equal Protection 
Clause to salmon.” 
 — Bill Maher 
▲
▲
▲
▲
 Exercise 5-4 
 Explain how rhetorical definitions, rhetorical comparisons, and rhetorical expla-
nations differ. Find an example of each in a newspaper, magazine, or other source.  Exercise 5-5 
 Critique these comparisons, using the questions about comparisons discussed in 
the text as guides. 
 Example 
 You get much better service on Air Atlantic. 
 Exercise 5-6 

150 
CHAPTER 5: RHETORIC, THE ART OF PERSUASION
  PROOF SURROGATES AND REPETITION 
  These last two devices don’t fit comfortably into any of the other groups, so we’ve 
made a group of just the two of them. 
 Proof Surrogates 
 A  proof surrogate  suggests there is evidence or authority for a claim without 
actually citing such evidence or authority. When someone can’t prove or support 
something, he or she may hint that proof or support is available without being 
specific as to what it is. Using “informed sources say” is a favorite way of making 
a claim seem more authoritative. “It’s obvious that” sometimes precedes a claim 
that isn’t obvious at all. “It’s clear to anyone who has thought the matter through 
carefully that blahblahblah” is another example, one that by its sheer length might 
silence push-back. 
 A more general strategy speakers and writers use to win acceptance for a 
claim without providing actual proof or evidence is to insinuate themselves into 
our confidence. Most salespersons know that if they can establish common per-
sonal ground with a client, they are more likely to make a sale, and the same is 
true in general for trying to persuade listeners that some claim is true. Speakers 
or writers may try to establish a personal connection with us by suggesting they 
belong to our group. As discussed in Chapter 1, it is a part of in-group bias to 
be more favorably disposed to a spokesperson who belongs to our own tribe; 
we naturally are inclined to assign him or her high marks for credibility. And it 
might be hard to question someone who says “As we all know” because it might 
sound disrespectful, and nobody wants to show disrespect to a fellow member 
of the club. 
In 2003, the administration 
proposed a tax cut that, it was 
said,would give the average 
taxpayer $1,083.
The “average” here is the 
mean average. However, most 
taxpayers, according to the 
Urban Institute–Brookings 
Institution Tax Policy Center, 
would have received less than 
$100 under the administra-
tion’s proposal.
 There is no other country in the 
Middle East except Israel that 
can be considered to have a 
stable government. . . .  Is Saudi 
Arabia more stable? Egypt? 
Jordan? Kuwait? Judge for 
yourself! 
 —“Facts and Logic About the 
Middle East” 
Proof surrogates often take the form 
of questions. This strategy can also 
be analyzed as switching the burden 
of proof (see Chapter 6).
 Answer 
 Better than on what? (One term of the comparison is not clear.) 
 In what way better? (The claim is much too vague to be of much use.) 
 1. New improved Morning Muffins! Now with 20 percent more real dairy butter! 
 2. The average concert musician makes less than a plumber. 
 3. Major league ballplayers are much better than they were thirty years ago. 
 4. What an arid place to live. Why, they had less rain here than in the desert. 
 5. On the whole, the mood of the country is more conservative than it was in 
the last decade. 
 6. Which is better for a person, coffee or tea? 
 7. The average GPA of graduating seniors at Georgia State is 3.25, as compared 
with 2.75 twenty years ago. 
 8. Women can tolerate more pain than men. 
 9. Try Duraglow with new sunscreening polymers. Reduces the harmful effect 
of sun on your car’s finish by up to 50 percent. 
 10. What a brilliant season! Attendance was up 25 percent over last year. 
▲
▲
▲
▲

 
PROOF SURROGATES AND REPETITION
151
Other proof surrogates are less subtle: “Studies show” crops up a lot in 
advertising. Note that this phrase tells us nothing about how many studies are 
involved, how good they are, who did them, or any other important information. 
Here’s another example, from The  Wall Street Journal: 
 There may be “every reason to believe” that U.S. voters are fed up, but 
nobody has yet told us what any of them are. 
 Bottom line: Proof surrogates are just that—surrogates. They are not proof or 
evidence. Such proof or evidence may exist, but until it has been presented, the 
claim at issue remains unsupported. 
 Repetition 
 The technique of  repetition,  simply making the same point over and over at every 
opportunity, is a widely used rhetorical device, and not just in the propaganda of 
 The Great Depression of the 
1930s was needlessly pro-
longed by government policies 
now recognized in retrospect 
as foolish and irresponsible. 
 —Syndicated columnist 
 Thomas  Sowell 
The phrase “now recognized in ret-
rospect” is a proof surrogate, which 
hides the fact that the writer has 
done nothing more than offer his 
personal opinion.
We hope politicians on this side of the border are paying close attention to 
Canada’s referendum on Quebec. . . . 
Canadians turned out en masse to reject the referendum. There’s every reason 
to believe that voters in the U.S. are just as fed up with the social engineering that 
lumps people together as groups rather than treating them as individuals.
 The most brilliant propagandist technique will yield no success unless one 
fundamental principle is borne in mind constantly—it must confine itself to a few 
points and repeat them over and over. 
 — Joseph Goebbels
 A lie told often enough becomes the truth. 
 — Vladimir Lenin
■  Putting campaign signs 
up everywhere is a form 
of repetition. Everything 
else being equal, 
we’d bet the winning 
candidate is the one 
who puts up the most 
visible signs. (Of course, 
usually everything else 
isn’t equal.) 

152 
CHAPTER 5: RHETORIC, THE ART OF PERSUASION
people like Joseph Goebbels and Vladimir Lenin. It may be found in advertis-
ing and in everyday politics. The constant repetition of a theme seems eventu-
ally to have a dulling effect on our critical faculties, and we can become lulled 
into believing something simply because we’ve become used to hearing it. This is 
attributable to the availability heuristic, discussed in Chapter 1. A critical thinker 
needs to remember: it takes evidence and argument to provide believability; if a 
claim is not likely to be true on the first hearing, simple repetition does not make 
it more likely on the hundredth.       
 List as many proof surrogates (e.g., “It is very clear that . . . ”) as you can. 
 Exercise 5-7 
 Identify these passages as ridicule/sarcasm, hyperbole, or proof surrogates. 
 1. “Everything about the Left is perception, manipulation, and lies. Everything. 
Everything is ‘Wag the Dog.’ Everything is a structured deception.” 
 — Rush Limbaugh 
 2. “Mr. Obama has an ingenious approach to job losses: He describes them as 
job gains.” 
 — Karl Rove 
 3. “How come liberals never admit that they’re liberal? They’ve now come up 
with a new word called ‘progressive,’ which I thought was an insurance com-
pany but apparently it’s a label.” 
 — Marco Rubio 
 4. “Obviously there is global warming; no responsible climate scientist disputes 
that.” 
 — Al Gore 
 5. “I might be in favor of national healthcare if it required all Democrats to get 
their heads examined.” 
 — Ann Coulter 
 6. “We had a national tragedy this week, and the President of the United States 
and Sarah Palin both made speeches on the same day. Obama came out 
against lunatics with guns, she gave the rebuttal.” 
 — Bill Maher 
 7. “Rick Santorum doesn’t like sex. He doesn’t like the pill. He really doesn’t like 
condoms. He said if men are going to pull something on to prevent procre-
ation, nothing works better that a sweater vest.” 
 — Bill Maher (Rick Santorum, a GOP presidential contender in 2008 and 2012, was 
frequently seen wearing a sweater vest) 
 8. “The idea that being black and being gay is the same is simply not true. There 
are all sorts of studies out there that suggest just the contrary and there are 
people who were gay and lived the gay life style who aren’t any more.” 
 — Rick Santorum, addressing the question whether being gay is a matter of heredity like 
being black 
▲
▲
▲
 Exercise 5-8 

 
PERSUASION THROUGH VISUAL IMAGERY 
153
 9. “So the majority of Americans are conservatives. They believe in things like 
the Constitution. I know that’s weird to some people, but they believe in it.” 
 — Marco Rubio 
 10. “You want to have two guys making out in front of your 4-year-old? It’s OK 
with them. A guy smoking a joint, blowing the smoke into your little kid’s 
face? OK with them. And I’m not exaggerating here. This is exactly what the 
secular movement stands for.” 
 — Bill O’Reilly 
▲
 Identify these passages as ridicule/sarcasm, hyperbole, or proof surrogates. 
 1. Medical school, huh? Right. You and your fancy 2.9 grade point are going to 
get into a fine medical school all right. 
 2. Laboratory tests have shown that Cloyon produces a sweeter taste than any 
other artificial sweetener. 
 3. I’ll tell you, there’s never been anybody in the entire state of Florida as 
blitzed as Tom and I were last night. 
 4. Anybody who understands how alcohol works can tell you that three drinks 
is enough to make that guy seriously impaired. 
 5. Rachet and Clank just has to be the funniest movie ever made. Go see it. You 
won’t stop laughing ever. 
 6. Cable news has gone round the bend: The only thing you hear on Fox News is 
right-wing rants, and the only thing you hear on MSNBC are left-wing rants.  
   7. That the president is a Marxist simply cannot be denied by any serious 
observer of contemporary politics. 
 8. In the 1988 U.S. presidential election, campaigners for Democrat Michael 
Dukakis took a photograph of Dukakis in an M1 Abrams Tank. The photo 
was supposed to shore up Dukakis’s credentials as strong on defense. Unfor-
tunately, Dukakis had a silly grin and was wearing a helmet too large for his 
head, and the effect of the photograph was to make him appear diminu-
tive and goofy. The photo was widely shown in the months preceding the 
 election—but not by the Dukakis people. Instead, it was picked up and 
shown by his opponent, George H. W. Bush. After looking at the photo at the 
following link, state which technique was being used by the Bush campaign: 
 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Michael_Dukakis_in_tank.jpg . 
 9. If you want to work your way up from being a host to being a server at The 
Cheesecake Factory, plan on it taking about a thousand years. 
 10. The proposal isn’t bad when you consider it comes from a group of knuckle-
dragging morons. 
▲
▲
▲
▲
 Exercise 5-9 
 PERSUASION THROUGH VISUAL IMAGERY 
  Images affect emotions profoundly. Pictures of lakes and meadows make us feel 
good. Videos of chuckling babies cause us to laugh. Pictures of kind faces soothe 
us. Photos of suffering people or animals lead us to make donations. 

154 
CHAPTER 5: RHETORIC, THE ART OF PERSUASION
 One picture is worth 1,000 interpretations 
■  This picture of Barack Obama 
shooting a gun appeared on the 
White House Twitter account 
during a national discussion of the 
president’s gun control proposals. 
Critics said the president was trying 
to curry favor among gun owners. 
Some of them thought the photo 
was staged. Others thought the 
photo had been doctored. Others 
suggested the White House posted 
the photo so that the president’s 
critics would demonstrate how 
nutty they were by claiming the 
photo was staged or doctored. 
 Imagery affects emotions, and emotions are the wellsprings of actions. 
Advertisers and political campaigners know this. They use focus groups and other 
empirical methods to find out which pictures and videos sell the most beer or 
cars, or generate the most enthusiastic response among potential voters. When it 
comes to selling a product, political candidate, or even an idea, imagery seems to 
work better than reasoned argument. At least it is more common. 
 Apparently, which images work best to motivate behavior is not fully under-
stood and may actually be surprising. Are people more apt to buy a product when 
they see a beautiful person using it or when they see someone they can relate 
to using it? Many Superbowl ads are funny visually, but it’s not clear that humor 
works well if you want to sell a laxative. 
 Adding the right music or other sounds to a video only enhances its power 
to persuade. Watch an ad produced by a presidential campaign while muting the 
soundtrack. It will not seem as compelling. 
 What, then, is the defense when imagery—with or without sound—is 
enlisted to persuade us to buy a product or vote for a candidate or enlist in the 
military? After all, nobody wants to be led blindly by emotions; we all want to 
make intelligent decisions about political candidates, ballot initiatives, and even 
household products. 
 One solution might be simply to not watch. The TV remote has made this 
easier than it used to be, except that online advertising is now pervasive and hard 
to click your way out of. 
 Our recommendation is pretty elementary, though not as foolproof as we 
would like. It begins with remembering that an image is  not  an argument (see 
Chapter 2). It is not a premise, and it is not a conclusion. A picture is  nonproposi-
tional:  it’s neither true nor false. Of course, a picture can be the basis of an argu-
ment. A surveillance camera can provide unimpeachable photographic evidence 
that a car went through a red light. Pictures of mistreated chickens might give 

 
PERSUASION THROUGH VISUAL IMAGERY
155
 Don’t Get Carried Away! 
 Once you’re familiar with the ways rhetorical devices are used to try to influence us, you may 
be tempted to dismiss a claim or argument  just because it contains strongly rhetorical language.
But true claims as well as false ones, good reasoning as well as bad, can be couched in such lan-
guage. Remember that rhetoric  itself  gives us no reason to accept a position on an issue; that 
doesn’t mean that there  are no such reasons. 
officials an excellent reason for shutting down a poultry farm. News photos keep 
us informed and help us make better decisions. Looked at in this light, a photo-
graph can be informational. And if it is, it is the  information  documented in it 
that carries weight, not the emotions it generates. Emotions may be the springs of 
actions, but information alone can be the basis of a reasoned argument. The best 
defense against being swayed by “photographic rhetoric,” if we may call it that, 
is to focus on the informational content of the photograph or video—assuming 
the photograph isn’t fraudulent. These days sophisticated photo-editing software 
makes it easy to alter photos to achieve almost any effect. But this is no different 
from written records and other forms of information, because they can be faked 
and altered, too. 
 Of course, reasonable people can disagree about what information actually 
is provided by a visual. In 2005, a Florida woman named Terri Shiavo became the 
center of a nationwide controversy regarding whether she was in a “persistent 
■  These days there are more ways than ever before to deceive us with images. It is often 
impossible to determine whether an image is Photoshopped, as this one is. If it looks unlikely, 
it may be an illusion 

156 
CHAPTER 5: RHETORIC, THE ART OF PERSUASION
vegetative state” and could ever be expected to regain consciousness. A videotape 
made by family members appeared to show her responding to the presence of her 
mother. Some doctors saw the tape and said that Schiavo seemed to be respond-
ing to visual stimuli; other doctors said that her facial expressions were not signs 
of awareness. The first group of doctors thought life support should not be with-
drawn; the second group felt that it should. But there is nothing unique about 
photographic evidence in this regard; other forms of evidence too mean differ-
ent things to different people. Thus, when you see compelling imagery—meaning 
imagery that has been used to promote an idea—focus on the information that 
may or may not be contained within the images, and evaluate it relative to the 
issue at hand. 
 THE EXTREME RHETORIC OF DEMAGOGUERY 
  No account of rhetoric in a book on critical thinking could be complete with-
out a discussion of the rhetoric of demagoguery. Demagogues fan the flames of 
fanaticism, and use extreme rhetoric to propagate false ideas and preposterous 
theories—even among people who might otherwise be generous, kind, and hon-
orable. In this section we highlight four broad rhetorical techniques that dema-
gogues persistently employ. 
Otherizing,  which is pervasive in demagoguery, divides people into two 
groups— us  and  them— and portrays  them  as suspicious, dangerous, or repulsive. 
 Them  includes ideological opponents and other social groups who can be blamed 
for  our  problems. Minorities with their “unreasonable demands” make easy tar-
gets. The following passage will illustrate the technique. It is from a speech by 
Joseph Goebbels, the head of the Nazi Ministry of Information. Goebbels, who 
had a PhD in literature, once boasted that you can convince people that 2  1  2 is 5 
if you know how to do it. In this passage Goebbels otherizes intellectuals and crit-
ics of the Nazi regime:
  If you think about it, this is pretty obvious. Reading this, whose side would 
you want to be on, the side of “the people,” or on the side of “them,” who are so 
contemptible “we” should not even “waste words on them”? The  fundamental 
attribution error  and  in-group bias,  which you read about in Chapter 1, have obvi-
ous connections with otherizing. 
 The second pervasive rhetorical technique used by demagogues is 
 demonizing —trying to induce loathing of someone or something by portraying 
the person or thing as evil. Demonizing is often used with otherizing, and the two 
 One cannot make history with such quivering people [intellectuals and dissenters]. 
They are only chaff in God’s breath. Thankfully, they are only a thin intellectual or 
social upper class, particularly in the case of Germany. They are not an upper class 
in the sense that they govern the nation, but rather more a fact of nature like the 
bubbles of fat that always float on the surface of things. 
 The people want nothing to do with them. These Philistines are the 8/10 of one 
percent of the German people who have always said “no,” who always say “no” 
now, and who will always say “no” in the future. We cannot win them over, and 
do not even want to . . .. One does not need to take them all that seriously. They 
do not like us, but they do not like themselves any better. Why should we waste 
words on them? 

 
THE EXTREME RHETORIC OF DEMAGOGUERY
157
are frequently blended together so com-
pletely that they are impossible to separate 
out. In 1962, many white Alabamans 
thought that George Wallace was insuffi-
ciently opposed to racial integration to war-
rant their vote for governor of Alabama. To 
shore up his credentials as a hardline segre-
gationist, Wallace hired the head of the Ku 
Klux Klan to write his speeches—and won 
election. In the following excerpt from his 
1963 inaugural address, referred to as his 
“Segregation Now, Segregation Forever” 
speech, Wallace demonized the U.S. 
Supreme Court and the U.S. president, 
Dwight D. Eisenhower: 
 As Wallace portrayed them, the members of the Supreme Court were athe-
istic communists who removed God from our currency and even forbade little 
school children from praying; and Eisenhower, according to Wallace, was a dic-
tator who told people when they could buy or sell their own homes. He (Eisen-
hower) even launched an assault against one of our own universities. Notice that 
Wallace demonized his targets without resorting to many dysphemisms. And 
without looking too hard, you may be able to find demonizing statements like 
these on political blogs today. 
Fostering xenophobia  is the third pervasive rhetorical strategy employed by 
demagogues, and it goes hand-in-hand with otherizing and demonizing. Xeno-
phobia is the fear or dislike of what is foreign or strange. When we are suspicious 
of people simply because they dress or talk differently from “us,” are from a for-
eign country, or simply are not “from around here,” we are being xenophobic. 
Demagogues use xenophobia to elicit the worst in human nature. Excerpts from 
people like Joseph Goebbels and Adolf Hitler are so repugnant that we decline to 
provide examples. 
 Fourth, demagogues invariably try to stimulate an audience’s fear, resent-
ment, and hatred.  Fear and hate mongering  are used in conjunction with 
otherizing, demonization, and xenophobia, and you can see how they all work 
It is this theory that led the Supreme Court for the first time in American history to 
issue an edict, based not on legal precedent, but upon a volume, the editor of which 
said our Constitution is outdated and must be changed, and the writers of which 
admitted belonging to as many as half a hundred communist-front organizations. 
It is this theory that led the same group of men to briefly bare the ungodly core 
of that philosophy, in forbidding little school children to say a prayer. And we find 
evidence of that ungodliness even in the removal of the words “In God we trust” 
from some of our dollars. . . .  It is the spirit of power thirst that caused a president in 
Washington [Eisenhower] to take up Caesar’s pen and with one stroke of it make a 
law . . .  that tells us that we can or cannot buy or sell our very homes except by HIS 
conditions and except at HIS discretion. It is the spirit of power thirst that led the 
same president to launch a full offensive of twenty-five thousand troops against a 
university of all places in his own country and against his own people.
 ■  George Wallace 
attempts to block 
the integration of the 
University of Alabama 
in 1963 . 

158 
CHAPTER 5: RHETORIC, THE ART OF PERSUASION
together. Here is a passage from another Goebbels’ speech, which uses fear and 
hate mongering to support the other demagogic techniques discussed.  
 Goebbels used fear and hate to prime his audience, something like load-
ing a gun for further use, so that at the right time they would be willing or able to 
harm the “other,” even if the “other” was a helpless old woman. 
 The four techniques we have just discussed—otherizing, demonization, fos-
tering xenophobia, and fear and hate mongering—are persistently used by dema-
gogues to manipulate the opinion of an audience. Here’s the lesson: When you feel 
yourself enthralled by a speaker, with your blood pumping and your pulse rising—
and, in particular, if you are being turned against some person or group of people 
 this is when you most need to think critically. Step back and analyze what is being 
said. Set aside the temptation to strike out at someone or something. Dial down the 
anger. Look hard for arguments. You might find there aren’t any. This is the only 
way, short of censorship, to make sure there is never another Joseph Goebbels.        
 When Mr. Bramsig or Mrs. Knöterich [names of everyday Germans] feel pity for 
an old woman wearing the Jewish star, they should also remember that a distant 
nephew of this old woman by the name of Nathan Kaufmann sits in New York and 
has prepared a plan by which all Germans under the age of 60 will be sterilized. 
They should recall that a son of her distant uncle is a warmonger named Baruch 
or Morgenthau or Untermayer who stands behind Mr. Roose velt, driving him to 
war, and that if they succeed, a fine but ignorant U.S. soldier may one day shoot 
dead the only son of Mr. Bramsig or Mrs. Knöterich. It will all be for the benefit of 
Jewry, to which this old woman also belongs, no matter how fragile and pitiable 
she may seem. 
■  The innocent-looking Joseph Goebbels, PhD, shown here accepting an 
award from a youngster, used stock propaganda techniques to sell the 
vile and malignant concepts of the Third Reich. 

 
RECAP 
159
 Things to remember from this chapter:
 ■ Persuasion attempts to win someone to one’s own point of view. 
 ■ Rhetoric seeks to persuade through the rhetorical force of language and other 
devices.  
 ■ Although it can exert a profound psychological influence, rhetoric has no 
logical force or probative value. 
 ■ There are a multitude of rhetorical devices in common use; they include:
 —   Euphemisms: seek to mute the disagreeable aspects of something or to 
emphasize its agreeable aspects 
—   Dysphemisms: seek to emphasize the disagreeable aspects of something 
—   Weaselers: seek to protect a claim by weakening it 
—   Downplayers: seek to tone down the importance of something 
—   Stereotypes: a cultural belief about a social group’s attributes, usually 
simplified or exaggerated 
—   Innuendo: using the power of suggestion to disparage someone or 
something 
—   Loaded questions: questions that depend on unwarranted 
assumptions  
—   Ridicule and sarcasm: widely used to put something in a bad light 
—   Hyperbole: overdone exaggeration 
—   Rhetorical definitions and explanations: definitions and explanations 
used to express or influence attitudes or affect behavior by invoking 
images with emotional associations. 
—   Rhetorical analogies: Analogies used to express or influence attitudes 
or affect behavior by invoking images with emotional associations. 
—   Proof surrogates suggest there is evidence or authority for a claim with-
out actually saying what the evidence or authority is 
—   Repetition: hearing or reading a claim over and over can sometimes 
mistakenly encourage the belief that it is true 
 ■ These devices can affect our thinking in subtle ways, even when we believe 
we are being objective. 
 ■ Although photographs and other images are not claims or arguments, they 
can enter into critical thinking by offering information bearing on an issue. 
They can also affect us psychologically in the same way that emotional lan-
guage affects us, and often even more powerfully. 
 ■ Demagogues use extreme rhetoric to spread false ideas and to gain power 
over people. Four rhetorical techniques persistently used by demagogues are 
otherizing, demonizing, fostering xenophobia, and fear and hate mongering. 
One of the most important tasks of critical thinking is to recognize these tech-
niques for what they are. 
 Recap 

160 
CHAPTER 5: RHETORIC, THE ART OF PERSUASION
 Exercise 5-10 
 Identify each of the following passages as otherizing, demonizing, fear or hate 
mongering, or fostering xenophia. Some passages may fit more than one cate-
gory. One passage does not fit any of these categories. 
 1. “They aren’t from around here. You know that just by looking at them.” 
 — Overheard conversation 
   2. “Whether they are defending the Soviet Union or bleating for Saddam Hussein, 
liberals are always against America. They are either traitors or idiots, and on 
the matter of America’s self-preservation, the difference is irrelevant.” 
 — Ann Coulter 
 3. “It [Poland] was a State built on force and governed by the truncheons of the 
police and the military. The fate of Germans in this State was horrible. There 
is a difference between people of low culture being governed by a culturally 
significant people and people of high cultural significance having forced 
upon them the tragic fate of being oppressed by an inferior.” 
 — Adolf Hitler 
 4. “Barack  Hussein Obama.” 
 — Emphasis on middle name, used by some Obama opponents to refer to him 
 5. The fact is that public schools in this country have become nothing bet-
ter than government indoctrination centers. Teachers look constantly for 
ways to brainwash our students and make them incapable of independent 
thought or critical judgment. Our children spend their lives in government 
prison camps where their heads are filled with propaganda. They are told 
what to think, not how to think. No wonder high school students seem so 
dumb. Why would anyone want to subject their children to this? 
 — Adapted from The American Dream http://endoftheamericandream.com/
archives/category/commentary   
 6. “These people don’t care about our country.” 
 — Charles Rangel, referring to Republicans 
 7. “Our intellectual, cultural, and political elites are today engaged in one of 
the most audacious and ambitious experiments in history. They are trying to 
transform a Western Christian republic into an egalitarian democracy made 
up of all the tribes, races, creeds, and cultures of planet Earth. They have 
dethroned our God, purged our faith from public life, and repudiated the 
Judeo-Christian moral code by which previous generations sought to live.” 
 — Patrick Buchanan 
 8. Ew. Don’t play with  her. 
   9. “Once the Republicans get rolling, they assume they’re going to win everything. 
They are zealots, and zealots assume the last five percent of whatever their plan 
is will be taken care of by their own greatness or momentum or divinity.” 
 — Keith Olbermann 
▲
▲
▲
 Additional 
Exercises 

 
EXERCISES 
161
 10. “Let us therefore brace ourselves to our duties, and so bear ourselves that, if 
the British Empire and its Commonwealth lasts for a thousand years, men 
will still say, ‘This was their finest hour!’” 
 — Winston Churchill 
 11. “What’s really funny is seeing these [gay] activists supporting Muslim gov-
ernments. They don’t want us to bomb them. . . .  Do they know what would 
happen to them outside of the United States? Do they know what would 
happen to them if Islamists took over this country? They are lucky that they 
live in a privileged country . . .  a country which gives them every right to do 
whatever they want no matter how much they happen to hate it. It’s all very 
ironic.” 
 — Sarah Palin 
 12. “As a mom, I was vigilant about food safety. Right, moms? I mean, if you 
could depend on the government for one thing, it was you had to be able to 
trust the water that our kids drank and the food that they ate. But this [the 
Republican Party] is the  E. coli club. They do not want to spend money to do 
that.” 
 — Nancy Pelosi 
 13. “They keep coming.” 
 — 1996 reelection campaign ad for California governor Pete Wilson, in reference to 
undocumented immigrants 
 14. “Mitt Romney. He’s not one of us.” 
 — 2012 Obama Ohio campaign ad 
 Exercise 5-11 
 In the first ten examples, identify which, if any, of the listed rhetorical strategies 
are being employed. In the second ten, identify which, if any, of the listed slanting 
devices are being employed. 
 1. “Yes, a lot of innocent civilians are being killed by the bombing in both 
North and South Vietnam, but do remember that Asians do not believe in 
the importance of individual lives like we do. Life just doesn’t mean as much 
to them.” 
 — Overheard conversation during the Vietnam War 
 a. demonizing 
 b. fostering xenophobia 
 c. otherizing 
 d. fear or hate mongering 
 e. no rhetorical import 
 2. No, we should not raise the minimum wage for agricultural workers. Many of 
those people are illegal, and besides, they’re happy to work for low wages or 
they would not have come to this country to begin with. 
 a. demonizing 
 b. fostering xenophobia 
 c. otherizing 
▲
▲
▲

162 
CHAPTER 5: RHETORIC, THE ART OF PERSUASION
 d. fear or hate mongering 
 e. no rhetorical import 
 3. Immigrants, legal and illegal, are coming over here by the thousands and tak-
ing jobs away from us—and jobs are already hard enough for us to find.” 
 a. demonizing 
 b. fostering xenophobia 
 c. otherizing 
 d. fear or hate mongering 
 e. no rhetorical import 
 4. About 47 percent of the American public receive benefits from the government 
and about the same percentage pay no income tax. They are takers, not like 
you and me. 
 a. demonizing 
 b. fostering xenophobia 
 c. otherizing 
 d. fear or hate mongering 
 e. no rhetorical import 
 5. The motorcycle gangs that come through here regularly are like noth-
ing you’ve ever seen. They are filthy, they dress like wild people, they are 
foul-mouthed, and their motorcycles make such a racket it drives you 
crazy. Decent folk can hardly go out in the street while they’re here. We 
have got to get the city council to do something to stop this terrible inva-
sion of our town.
 a. demonizing 
 b. fostering xenophobia 
 c. otherizing 
 d. fear or hate mongering 
 e. no rhetorical import 
 6. It is indeed an unintended consequence of the new voting laws here in our 
state that a few people who do not have government-issued photo identifica-
tion will have trouble voting. The purpose of the laws was to help discourage 
voter fraud, although nobody is certain whether that has been a problem in 
our state. 
 a. demonizing 
 b. fostering xenophobia 
 c. otherizing 
 d. fear or hate mongering 
 e. no rhetorical import 
 7. Planned Parenthood is badly named.  “Planned Population Control” is more 
like it.  The head of that outfit has said that she’d be for killing any infant that 
survived an abortion, and that’s murder!  These are true fiends, I tell you!  
And they give hundreds of presentations a year in Los Angeles schools.  They 
are insinuating their foul views of humanity into our own children! 
 a. demonizing 
 b. fostering xenophobia 
 c. otherizing 
 d. fear or hate mongering 
 e. no rhetorical import 
▲
▲

 
EXERCISES 
163
 8. An upper-class British woman around the turn of the last century: “Working 
people are supposed to work; what could they possibly want with a day off?” 
 — Paraphrase of Bertrand Russell, from In Praise of Idleness
 
a. demonizing 
 
b. fostering xenophobia 
 
c. otherizing 
 
d. fear or hate mongering 
 
e. no rhetorical import 
 9. It isn’t just the numbers of illegals that are streaming across our borders. 
It’s the fact that they are universally poor, mainly illiterate, and without real 
means of self-support. That means our welfare system, the one you and I pay 
dearly to support, will be clogged with these invaders. 
 
a. demonizing 
 
b. fostering xenophobia 
 
c. otherizing 
 
d. fear or hate mongering 
 
e. no rhetorical import 
 10. Crime is going to get nothing but worse with the growth in population, and 
neither your family nor your property is safe anymore. There have been 
break-ins, home invasions, and muggings right here in our town. Get an 
alarm system. Better yet, get a gun. 
 
a. demonizing 
 
b. fostering xenophobia 
 
c. otherizing 
 
d. fear or hate mongering 
 
e. no rhetorical import 
 11. “Making a former corporate CEO the head of the Securities and Exchange 
Commission is like putting a fox in charge of the henhouse.” This is best seen 
as an example of
 
a. rhetorical analogy 
 
b. rhetorical explanation 
 
c. innuendo 
   
d. dysphemism  
 
e. not a slanter 
 12. “Right. George Bush ‘won’ the election in 2000, didn’t he?” The use of quota-
tion marks around “won” has the effect of
 
a. a weaseler 
 
b. a dysphemism 
 
c. a downplayer 
 
d. a rhetorical explanation 
 
e. not a slanter 
 13. “The obvious truth is that bilingual education has been a failure.” In this 
statement, “the obvious truth” might best be viewed as
 
a. a proof surrogate 
 
b. a weaseler 
 
c. innuendo 
   
d. a dysphemism  
 
e. not a slanter 
▲
▲

164 
CHAPTER 5: RHETORIC, THE ART OF PERSUASION
 14. After George W. Bush announced he wanted to turn a substantial portion of the 
federal government operation over to private companies, Bobby L. Harnage 
Sr., president of the American Federation of Government Employees, said Bush 
had “declared all-out war on federal employees.” Would you say that the quoted 
passage is
 
a. a rhetorical explanation 
 
b. a euphemism 
 
c. a weaseler 
 
d. hyperbole/a rhetorical analogy 
 
e. not a slanter 
 15. “Harry and his daughter had a little discussion about her outfit . . .  one that 
left her in tears.” This statement contains
 
a. a loaded question 
 
b. a euphemism 
 
c. both a and b 
 
d. neither a nor b 
 16. “Before any more of my tax dollars go to the military, I’d like answers to 
some questions, such as why are we spending billions of dollars on weapons 
programs that don’t work.” This statement contains 
 
a. a downplayer 
 
b. a dysphemism 
 
c. a proof surrogate 
 
d. a loaded question 
 
e. hyperbole and a loaded question 
 17. “Can Governor Evans be believed when he says he will fight for the death 
penalty? You be the judge.” This statement contains
 
a. a dysphemism 
 
b. a proof surrogate 
 
c. innuendo 
 
d. hyperbole 
 
e. no slanters 
 18. President Obama promised change, but he has continued to turn govern-
ment operations over to private companies, especially in Iraq and Afghani-
stan, just like his predecessor did. 
 
a. hyperbole 
 
b. a dysphemism 
 
c. a loaded question 
 
d. a proof surrogate 
 
e. a downplayer 
 19. “Studies confirm what everyone knows: smaller classes make kids better 
learners.” 
 —Bill Clinton 
 
 This statement is
 
a. a proof surrogate 
 
b. a weaseler 
 
c. hyperbole 
 
d. an innuendo 
 
e. no slanter 
▲
▲

 
EXERCISES 
165
 20.  man selling his car: “True, it has a few dents, but that’s just normal wear 
and tear.” This statement contains 
 
a. a loaded question 
 
b. innuendo 
 
c. a dysphemism 
 
d. a euphemism 
 Exercise 5-12 
 Determine which of the numbered, italicized words and phrases are used as rhe-
torical devices in the following passage. If the item fits one of the text’s categories 
of rhetorical devices, identify it as such. 
 The National Rifle Association’s campaign to  arm every man, woman, and 
child in America (1)  received a setback when the president came out for 
gun control. But  the gun-pushers (2)  know this is only  a small skirmish in 
a big war (3)  over guns in America. They can give up some of their more 
 fanatical( 4) positions on such things as protecting the  “right” (5) to possess 
 cop-killer bullets (6)  and still win on the one that counts: regulation of man-
ufacture and sale of handguns. 
 Exercise 5-13 
 Follow the directions for Exercise 5-12. 
 The  big money guys (1) who have  smuggled (2) the Rancho Vecino develop-
ment onto the November ballot  will stop at nothing to have this town run 
just exactly as they want. (3)  It is possible (4)  that Rancho Vecino will cause 
traffic congestion on the east side of town, and  it’s perfectly clear that (5) the 
number of houses that will be built will overload the sewer system.  But (6) a 
small number of individuals have taken up the fight.  Can the developers be 
stopped in their desire to wreck our town? (7) 
 Exercise 5-14 
 Follow the directions for Exercise 5-12. 
 The U.S. Congress has cut off funds for the superconducting super-collider 
that the  scientific establishment (1)  wanted to build in Texas. The  alleged (2) 
virtues of the supercollider proved no match for the  huge (3)  cost overruns (4) 
that had piled up  like a mountain alongside a sea of red ink. (5)  Despite orig-
inal estimates of five to six billion dollars, the latest figure was over eleven 
billion and  growing faster than weeds. (6) 
 Exercise 5-15
Read the passage below, then answer the questions that follow it. Your instructor 
may have further directions.
“There is something called ‘carried-interest’ that occupies a peculiar spot 
in the U.S. tax code; it represents one of the most glaring injustices in a tax 
law that is chock full of injustice. While most of the people who make a 
substantial income—and I include here surgeons, stockbrokers, baseball 
▲
▲
▲

166 
CHAPTER 5: RHETORIC, THE ART OF PERSUASION
players, and corporate lawyers—will have to pay the new higher marginal 
rate of 39.6% on the top part of their earnings, there are a few who are 
exempted from the higher rate. 
“The beneficiaries of this tax giveaway are private equity and hedge 
fund managers, venture capitalists, and partners in real estate investment 
trusts. Their income, which comes from managing other people’s money—
they do not have to invest a dime of their own money, mind you, to get this 
benefit—is taxed as ‘carried-interest’ at a rate of only 20%. So, a tiny group 
of individuals who are already stupendously wealthy, manage to get away 
with a tax burden 19.6% lower than others who earn their money in some 
other way. For a million-a-year single filer, that could make a difference in 
taxes of almost a quarter of a million dollars, and all because one made his 
money by managing other people’s money.
“The unfairness of this loophole, which was crafted in large part by 
Senator Charles Schumer (Democrat of New York), should be obvious to 
anyone. The New York Times referred to it as ‘crony capitalism,’ since it 
favors certain kinds of work over others. Myself, I call it cheating.”
—From a speech by Joel Trajan, at the Northstate Economic Forum, March 2013
 1. What issue is the author addressing?
 2. What is the author’s position on that issue?
 3. Does the author support that position with an argument (or arguments)? If 
you think so, state that argument (or one of those arguments) in your own 
words.
 4. Are there rhetorical devises or strategies employed in the passage? If so, 
identify any that fall into the categories described in this chapter.
 Exercise 5-16 
 Follow the directions for Exercise 5-15, using the same list of questions. 
 Schools are not a microcosm of society, any more than an eye is a micro-
cosm of the body. The eye is a specialized organ which does something 
that no other part of the body does. That is its whole significance. You 
don’t use your eyes to lift packages or steer automobiles. Specialized 
organs have important things to do in their own specialties. So schools, 
which need to stick to their special work as well, should not become social 
or political gadflies. 
 —Thomas Sowell 
 Exercise 5-17 
 Follow the directions for Exercise 5-15, using the same list of questions. 
 The core of the Judeo-Christian tradition says that we are utterly and dis-
tinctly apart from other species. We have dominion over the plants and 
the animals on Earth. God gave it to us, it’s ours—as stated succinctly 
in the book of Genesis. Liberals would sooner trust the stewardship of 
the Earth to Shetland ponies and dung beetles. All their pseudoscience 
supports an alternative religion that says we are an insignificant part of 

 
EXERCISES 
167
nature. Environmentalists want mass infanticide, zero population growth, 
reduced standards of living, and vegetarianism. The core of environmen-
talism is that they hate mankind. 
 —Ann Coulter, Godless: The Church of Liberalism 
 Exercise 5-18 
 Follow the directions for Exercise 5-15, using the same list of questions. 
 Asked whether he would be resigning, [U.N. Secretary General Kofi] 
Annan replied, “Hell, no. I’ve got lots of work to do, and I’m going to go 
ahead and do it.” That’s doubtful. His term is up at the end of 2006, and 
few—after the mess he’s caused—take him seriously. He may have a lot 
of “work” he’d like to do, but he won’t be permitted to do it. All around 
Annan is the wreckage of the U.N.’s spirit of high-level cronyism. 
 —Editorial in the National Review Online,  April 1, 2005 
 Exercise 5-19 
 Follow the directions for Exercise 5-15, using the same list of questions. 
 “It is not the job of the state, and it is certainly not the job of the school, to 
tell parents when to put their children to bed,” declared David Hart of the 
National Association of Head Teachers, responding to David Blunkett’s 
idea that parents and teachers should draw up “contracts” (which you 
could be fined for breaching) about their children’s behavior, time-keeping, 
homework and bedtime. Teachers are apparently concerned that their 
five-to-eight-year-old charges are staying up too late and becoming list-
less truants the next day. 
 While I sympathize with Mr. Hart’s concern about this neo-Stalinist nan-
nying, I wonder whether it goes far enough. Is it not high time that such 
concepts as Bathtime, Storytime and Drinks of Water were subject to regu-
lation as well? I for one would value some governmental guidance as to the 
number of humorous swimming toys (especially Hungry Hippo) allowable 
per gallon of water. Adopting silly voices while reading  Spot’s Birthday or 
 Little Rabbit Foo-Foo  aloud is something crying out for regulatory guide-
lines, while the right of children to demand and receive wholly unnecessary 
glasses of liquid after lights-out needs a Statutory Minimum Allowance. 
 —John Walsh, the Independent 
 Exercise 5-20 
 Choose which answer is best from among the alternatives provided. 
 1. “Yes, there may be instances of abuse connected with the new immigration 
law. But on the whole it will help Arizona deal with a serious problem.” This 
contains
 
a. a downplayer 
 
b. a proof surrogate 
 
c. hyperbole 
▲

168 
CHAPTER 5: RHETORIC, THE ART OF PERSUASION
 2. “Liberals need to understand the global health argument for abortion is 
deeply offensive. It is like fighting disease by killing everyone who has a dis-
ease.” This contains
 
a. a euphemism 
 
b. a dysphemism 
   
c. a rhetorical definition  
 
d. none of the above 
 3. “Why does Senator Schmidt collect child pornography? Only the Senator 
can answer that.” This contains
 
a. a loaded question 
 
b. a euphemism 
 
c. a dysphemism 
 
d. none of the above 
 4. “Does Senator Schmidt collect child pornography? Only the Senator can 
answer that.” This contains
 
a. innuendo 
 
b. a downplayer 
 
c. a euphemism 
 
d. a stereotype 
 5. “Better lock up your whisky before Patrick gets here. Didn’t you know he is 
Irish?” This contains
 
a. a loaded question 
 
b. a rhetorical definition 
 
c. a stereotype 
 
d. a euphemism. 
 
e. none of the above 
 6. “Ecology? I will tell you what ecology is. Ecology is the Marxist ‘science’ that 
tries to shove bogus facts about global warming down everyone’s throat.” 
This contains
    
a. a rhetorical definition  
   
b. a rhetorical explanation  
 
c. a rhetorical analogy 
 7. “Ecology? I will tell you what ecology is. Ecology is the Marxist ‘science’ that 
tries to shove bogus facts about global warming down everyone’s throat.” 
The quotation marks around “science” are
 
a. hyperbole 
 
b. a proof surrogate 
 
c. a downplayer 
 
d. a stereotype 
 8. “Ecology? I will tell you what ecology is. Ecology is the Marxist ‘science’ that 
tries to shove bogus facts about global warming down everyone’s throat.” 
“Marxist” and “bogus” are
 
a. proof surrogates 
 
b. dysphemisms 
 
c. hyperbole 
 
d. rhetorical comparisons 
 
e. none of the above 
▲
▲

 
EXERCISES 
169
 9. “The reason Republicans oppose health care is they don’t care about anyone 
except their friends in the insurance industry.” “Don’t care about anyone 
except” is
    
a. a rhetorical definition  
   
b. a rhetorical explanation  
 
c. a rhetorical analogy 
 
d. none of these 
 10. “Rush Limbaugh doesn’t make things up? C’mon, it’s been shown over and 
over that he makes things up.” This contains
 
a. a stereotype 
   
b. hyperbole  
 
c. ridicule 
 
d. a proof surrogate 
 Exercise 5-21 
 Identify any rhetorical devices you find in the following selections, and classify 
those that fit the categories described in the text. For each, explain its function in 
the passage. 
 1. I trust you have seen Janet’s file and have noticed the “university” she gradu-
ated from. 
 2. The original goal of the Milosevic government in Belgrade was ethnic 
cleansing in Kosovo. 
 3. Obamacare: The compassion of the IRS and the efficiency of the post office, 
all at Pentagon prices. 
 4. Although it has always had a bad name in the United States, socialism is 
nothing more or less than democracy in the realm of economics. 
 5. We’ll have to work harder to get Representative Burger reelected because of 
his little run-in with the law. 
 6. It’s fair to say that, compared with most people his age, Mr. Beechler is pretty 
much bald. 
 7. During World War II, the U.S. government resettled many people of Japanese 
ancestry in internment camps. 
 8. “Overall, I think the gaming industry would be a good thing for our state.” 
 —From a letter to the editor, Plains Weekly Record 
 9. Capitalism, after all, is nothing more or less than freedom in the realm of 
economics.  
 10. I’ll tell you what capitalism is: Capitalism is Charlie Manson sitting in Folsom 
Prison for all those murders and still making a bunch of bucks off T-shirts.  
 11. Clearly, Antonin Scalia is the most corrupt Supreme Court justice in the his-
tory of the country. 
 12. If MaxiMotors gave you a good price on that car, you can bet there’s only one 
reason they did it: It’s a piece of serious junk. 
 13. It may well be that many faculty members deserve some sort of pay 
increase. Nevertheless, it is clearly true that others are already amply 
compensated.  
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲

170 
CHAPTER 5: RHETORIC, THE ART OF PERSUASION
 14. “The only people without [cable or satellite TV] are Luddites and people too 
old to appreciate it.” 
 —Todd Mitchell, industry analyst 
 15. I love some of the bulleting and indenting features of Microsoft Word. I think 
it would have been a nice feature, however, if they had made it easy to turn 
some of them off when you don’t need them. 
 Exercise 5-22 
 Identify any rhetorical devices you find in the following passages, and explain 
their purposes.  Note: Some items may contain  no rhetorical devices. 
 1. “The Obama administration is shamelessly rolling Homeland Security Sec-
retary Janet Napolitano out this week to make sure Americans everywhere 
know that terrorists will be crawling through their children’s bedroom win-
dows as early as next week if the Republicans don’t back down on this bud-
get thing.” 
 —Matt Taibbi, Rolling Stone Magazine 
 2. “If the United States is to meet the technological challenge posed by Japan, 
Inc., we must rethink the way we do everything from design to manufacture 
to education to employee relations.” 
 —Harper’s 
 3. According to UNICEF reports, several thousand Iraqi children died each 
month because of the UN sanctions. 
 4. “I did see someone sleeping through her lecture, but of course that could 
have been just a coincidence.” 
 5. I can’t find it in myself to sympathize with people with drug problems. I mean, 
I didn’t have anything to do with causing their “problem”; I don’t see why I 
should have anything to do with getting them over it. Let the do-gooders help 
these druggies. These addicts are like pets—they accept care from others but 
they can’t do anything for themselves.  
 6. Maybe Professor Stooler’s research hasn’t appeared in the first-class jour-
nals as recently as that of some of the other professors in his department; 
that doesn’t necessarily mean his work is going downhill. He’s still a terrific 
teacher, if the students I’ve talked to are to be believed. 
 7. “Let’s put it this way: People who make contributions to my campaign fund 
get access. But there’s nothing wrong with constituents having access to 
their representatives, is there?” 
 —Loosely paraphrased from an interview with a California state senator 
 8. In the 2000 presidential debates, Al Gore consistently referred to his own tax 
proposal as a “tax plan” and to George W. Bush’s tax proposal as a “tax scheme.” 
 9. “Obama was elected. Then the stock market went into the tube. I’m just 
sayin’. . . . ”  
 10. “With Governor Mitt Romney’s and Rep. Paul Ryan’s pro-Second Amend-
ment stance versus the Chicago-style gun-ban political machine of President 
▲
▲
▲
▲

 
EXERCISES 
171
Barack Obama and Vice President Joe Biden, the votes of the nation’s gun 
owners have never been more important.” 
 —Wayne Lapierre, Executive Vice President, National Rifle Association, in American 
Rifleman,  November 2012 
 11. “Wayne Lapierre? Hah! That guy gets loonier every time I hear him speak. 
He’s at the point now where he believes that the only—the  only —solution to 
the country’s problems is more guns! That the solution to  all the country’s 
problems is more guns!” 
 12. “I pulled my child out of school because I learned that his teacher is an athe-
ist. I was amazed that they’d hire an atheist to teach small children. Those 
people are not satisfied to condemn themselves in the eyes of God; they 
want to bring our children along with them with their Godless teachings. 
These are really the most dangerous people in the world, when you think 
about it. Let’s get them out of the schools!” 
 13. “All I know is that they started reporting small amounts of money missing 
not too long after she started working in their house.” 
 14. [ Note: Dr. Jack Kevorkian was instrumental in assisting a number of termi-
nally ill people in committing suicide during the 1990s.] “We’re opening the 
door to Pandora’s Box if we claim that doctors can decide if it’s proper for 
someone to die. We can’t have Kevorkians running wild, dealing death to 
people.” 
 —Larry Bunting, assistant prosecutor, Oakland County, Michigan 
 15. “LOS ANGELES—Marriott Corp. struck out with patriotic food workers at 
Dodger Stadium when the concession-holder ordered them to keep working 
instead of standing respectfully during the National Anthem. . . .  Conces-
sion stand manager Nick Kavadas . . .  immediately objected to a Marriott 
representative. 
     “Marriott subsequently issued a second memo on the policy. It read: ‘Stop 
all activities while the National Anthem is being played.’ 
     “Mel Clemens, Marriott’s general manager at the stadium, said the sec-
ond memo clarified the first memo.” 
 —Associated Press 
 16. These so-called forfeiture laws are a serious abridgment of a person’s con-
stitutional rights. In some states, district attorneys’ offices have only to claim 
that a person has committed a drug-related crime to seize the person’s 
assets. So fat-cat DAs can get rich without ever getting around to proving 
that anybody is guilty of a crime. 
 17. “A few years ago, the deficit got so horrendous that even Congress was 
embarrassed. Faced with this problem, the lawmakers did what they do best. 
They passed another law.” 
 —Abe Mellinkoff, in the San Francisco Chronicle 
 18. “[U]mpires are baseball’s designated grown-ups and, like air-traffic control-
lers, are paid to handle pressure.” 
 —George Will 
 19. “Last season should have made it clear to the moguls of baseball that some-
thing still isn’t right with the game—something that transcends residual fan 
▲
▲
▲

172 
CHAPTER 5: RHETORIC, THE ART OF PERSUASION
anger from the players’ strike. Abundant evidence suggests that baseball still 
has a long way to go.” 
 —Stedman Graham, Inside Sports 
 20. “As you know, resolutions [in the California State Assembly] are about as mean-
ingful as getting a Publishers’ Clearinghouse letter saying you’re a winner.” 
 —Greg Lucas, in the San Francisco Chronicle 
 21. The entire gain in the stock market in the first four months of the year was 
due to a mere fifty stocks. 
 22. “The climate has changed considerably over the last few decades, with the 
last two years being the hottest on record in several places around the globe 
and we’ve seen the hottest overall global temperatures recently as well. 
There is every reason to believe that this trend is going to continue, with the 
result that the planet will gradually become more and more unlivable.” 
 —Jim Holt, Slate  online magazine 
 23. “[Supreme Court Justice Antonin] Scalia’s ideology is a bald and naked con-
cept called ‘Majoritarianism.’ Only the rights of the majority are protected.” 
 —Letter to the editor of the San Luis Obispo Telegram-Tribune 
 24. When the government has finished taking over health care—and believe 
me, the so-called “Affordable Care Act” is just the first step—government 
bureaucrats will be deciding who gets treated for what. You’ll wait while 
you’re dying while some clerk with a rubber stamp figures out whether you 
get treated or not. Oh yes, and if treatment and death are the alternatives, 
there will be death squads to make that decision for you. A bunch of govern-
ment goons will be deciding whether you’re worth saving or not. It’s going to 
be wonderful, just like these “progressives” say. You betcha. 
 25. “We are about to witness an orgy of self-congratulation as the self-appointed 
environmental experts come out of their yurts, teepees, and grant-main-
tained academic groves to lecture us over the impending doom of the planet 
and agree with each other about how it is evil humanity and greedy ‘big 
business’ that is responsible for it all.” 
 —Tim Worstall, in New Times 
 26. “In the 1980s, Central America was awash in violence. Tens of thousands of 
people fled El Salvador and Guatemala as authoritarian governments seeking 
to stamp out leftist rebels turned to widespread arrests and death squads.” 
 — USA Today 
 Exercise 5-23 
 Discuss the following stereotypes in class. Do they invoke the same kind of images 
for everyone? Which are negative and which are positive? How do you think they 
came to be stereotypes? Is there any “truth” behind them?
 1. soccer mom  
 2. Religious Right 
 3. dumb blonde 
▲
▲

 
EXERCISES 
173
 4. tax-and-spend liberal 
 5. homosexual agenda 
 6. redneck 
   7. radical feminist  
 8. contented housewife 
 9. computer nerd 
 10. Tea Partier 
 11. interior decorator 
 12. Washington insider 
 13. Earth mother 
 14. frat rat 
 15. Deadhead 
 16. trailer trash 
 Exercise 5-24 
 Your instructor will give you three minutes to write down as many positive and 
negative stereotypes as you can. Are there more positive stereotypes on your list 
or more negative ones? Why do you suppose that is? 
 Exercise 5-25 
 Write two brief paragraphs describing the same person, event, or situation—that 
is, both paragraphs should have the same informative content. The first para-
graph should be written in a  purely  informative way, using language that is as 
neutral as possible; the second paragraph should be slanted as much as possible 
either positively or negatively (your choice). 
 Exercise 5-26 
 Explain the difference between a weaseler and a downplayer. Find a clear exam-
ple of each in a newspaper, magazine, or other source. Next find an example of 
a phrase that is sometimes used as a weaseler or downplayer but that is used 
appropriately or neutrally in the context of your example. 
 Exercise 5-27 
 Critique these comparisons, using the questions discussed in the text as guides. 
 1. You’ve got to be kidding. Paltrow is much superior to Blanchett as an actor. 
 2. Blondes have more fun. 
 3. The average chimp is smarter than the average monkey. 
 4. The average grade given by Professor Smith is a C. So is the average grade 
given by Professor Algers. 
 5. Crime is on the increase. It’s up by 160 percent over last year. 
 6. Classical musicians, on the average, are far more talented than rock 
musicians.  
▲
▲

174 
CHAPTER 5: RHETORIC, THE ART OF PERSUASION
 7. Long-distance swimming requires much more endurance than long-dis-
tance running. 
 8. “During the monitoring period, the amount of profanity on the networks 
increased by 45–47 percent over a comparable period from the preceding 
year. A clear trend toward hard profanity is evident.” 
 —Don Wildmon, founder of the National Federation for Decency 
 9. “Organizations such as EMILY’s List and the Women’s Campaign Fund 
encourage thousands of small contributors to participate, helping to offset 
the economic power of the special interests. The political system works bet-
ter when individuals are encouraged to give to campaigns.” 
 —Adapted from the Los Angeles Times 
 10. Which is more popular, the movie  Gone With the Wind or Bing Crosby’s ver-
sion of the song “White Christmas”? 
 Exercise 5-28 
 In groups, or individually if your instructor prefers, critique these comparisons, 
using the questions discussed in the text as guides. 
 1. A course in critical thinking will make you smarter. 
 2. Students are much less motivated than they were when I first began teaching 
at this university. 
 3. Offhand, I would say the country is considerably more religious than it was 
twenty years ago. 
 4. In addition, for the first time since 1960, a majority of Americans now attend 
church regularly. 
 5. You really should switch to a high-fiber diet. 
 6. Hire Ricardo. He’s more knowledgeable than Annette. 
 7. Why did I give you a lower grade than your roommate? Her paper contained 
more insights than yours, that’s why. 
 8. Golf is a considerably more demanding sport than tennis. 
 9. Yes, our prices are higher than they were last year, but you get more value for 
your dollar. 
 10. So, tell me, which do you like more, fried chicken or Volkswagens? 
 Writing Exercises 
 1. The illustration below is for an article on banks and bankers in  Rolling Stone 
Magazine online. After seeing the illustration but before reading the article, 
how sympathetic to bankers would you expect it to be? Try to come up with 
a couple of sentences that you think the image illustrates—you’ll probably 
need some forceful language. 
 2. Over the past decade, reportedly more than 2,000 illegal immigrants have 
died trying to cross the border into the southwestern United States. Many 
deaths have resulted from dehydration in the desert heat and from freezing 
to death on cold winter nights. A San Diego–based nonprofit humanitarian 
organization now leaves blankets, clothes, and water at stations throughout 
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲

 
EXERCISES 
175
the desert and mountain regions for the immigrants. Should the organiza-
tion do this? Its members say they are providing simple humanitarian aid, 
but critics accuse them of encouraging illegal activity. Take a stand on the 
issue and defend your position in writing. Then identify each rhetorical 
device you used. 
 3. Until recently, tiny Stratton, Ohio, had an ordinance requiring all door-to-
door “canvassers” to obtain a permit from the mayor. Presumably, the ordi-
nance was intended to protect the many senior citizens of the town from 
harm by criminals who might try to gain entry by claiming to be conduct-
ing a survey. The ordinance was attacked by the Jehovah’s Witnesses, who 
thought it violated their First Amendment right to free speech. The Supreme 
Court agreed and struck down the law in 2002. Should it have? Defend your 
position in a brief essay without using rhetoric. Alternatively, defend your 
position and use rhetorical devices, but identify each device you use. 

176
 Relevance (Red Herring) 
Fallacies 
 T
ime now to talk about fallacies. 
 A   fallacy   is a mistake in reasoning, an argument 
that doesn’t really support or prove the contention it is 
supposed to support or prove. Here is an example of a fallacy: 
 The speaker is dismissing someone’s claim that it’s dan-
gerous to drive and text. However, the fact that the other per-
son texts while he or she drives has no bearing on whether 
texting while driving is dangerous. This argument is a fallacy, 
a mistake in reasoning. It is also an example of a   relevance 
 fallacy  because its premise (I have seen you doing it) is not 
relevant to the issue in question (whether texting while driving 
is dangerous). 
 The fallacies we discuss in this chapter are all relevance 
fallacies. A relevance fallacy’s premise may seem relevant and 
may resonate psychologically, but it isn't relevant. 
 Relevance fallacies are also called   red herrings  .  A her-
ring is a smelly fish that, if dragged across the trail a hound is 
 Students will learn to . . . 
 1. Define and recognize  argumentum 
ad hominem fallacies 
 2. Define and recognize straw man 
fallacies 
 3. Define and recognize false dilemma 
fallacies 
 4. Define and recognize fallacies 
involved in misplacing the burden of 
proof. 
 5. Define and recognize fallacies 
involved in begging the question. 
 6. Define and recognize fallacies classi-
fied as appeals to emotion. 
 7. Define and recognize other fallacies 
involved in arriving at irrelevant 
conclusions.  
 6 
You tell me it’s dangerous to text when I’m driving, but I have 
seen you doing it.

ARGUMENTUM AD HOMINEM
177
tracking, might lead the hound on a wild goose chase; the fish is merely a distract-
ing irrelevancy. 
 In this chapter we will look at the most common red herrings (relevance 
fallacies).  
 ARGUMENTUM AD HOMINEM 
  The example just given about texting is a relevance fallacy (or red herring) known 
as an   Argumentum Ad Hominem   (pronounced the way it is spelled). This type 
of argument is the most common fallacy on planet Earth. The name translates as 
“argument to the person.” You commit this fallacy if you think you dismiss some-
one’s  position  (idea, proposal, claim, argument, etc.) by dismissing  him or her.
Take the example about texting and driving. Recall what was going on: the issue 
was whether it is dangerous to text and drive. But instead of discussing the other 
person’s position on the issue, the speaker (the person committing the fallacy) 
started talking about  the other person.  The speaker’s argument was directed at  the 
other person, not at what the other person said. 
 Let’s modify that example slightly: 
 This too is an  argumentum ad hominem.  Instead of addressing whether it 
is dangerous to text, the speaker (the person committing the fallacy) is still talk-
ing about the other person, apparently thinking that the fact the individual has 
changed positions on the issue somehow nullifies what he or she said. You might 
wonder how anyone could reason this way, but you hear this type of argument all 
the time. Accusations of doing a “flip-flop” are standard in political campaigns, 
despite the fact that a person’s being inconsistent or changing his or her mind has 
no bearing on the wisdom of his or her position either now or at any other time. 
 Here is different kind of example of  argumentum ad hominem: 
 The speaker is just bad-mouthing the president, which doesn’t tell us any-
thing at all about the strengths or weaknesses of the president’s proposal. If the 
speaker wants to show that the president’s proposal is ridiculous, the speaker had 
better talk about the proposal. 
 Another slightly different example: 
 The speaker in this example isn’t exactly bad-mouthing Father Hennessey, 
but he or she still isn’t talking about what Father Hennessey said. Instead, he or she 
is talking about Hennessey’s circumstances (being a priest). If someone gave you 
this argument, you wouldn’t have the faintest idea what Father Hennessey actually 
thinks the dangers of abortion are, let alone what is wrong with his thinking. 
Not only have I seen you drive and text, but just last week you were saying it isn’t 
dangerous to do that.
What do I think about the president’s proposal for immigration reform? It’s 
ridiculous. He just wants Latino votes.
You can forget what Father Hennessey said about the dangers of abortion, 
because Father Hennessey is a priest and priests are required to hold such views.

178 
CHAPTER 6: RELEVANCE RED HERRING FALLACIES
 To repeat, the  argumentum ad hominem  fallacy occurs when someone 
attempts to dismiss another person’s position on an issue by discussing the per-
son, and not by discussing the issue or that person’s position on it. The person 
committing the fallacy might discuss the other individual’s circumstances, char-
acter, motivation, lack of consistency, or any number of other attributes, but he 
or she hasn’t really commented on the strengths or weaknesses of the other indi-
vidual’s  position.  
 Poisoning the Well 
 Speakers and writers sometimes try to get us to dismiss what someone is  going to 
say by talking about the person’s consistency or character or circumstances. This 
is known as   Poisoning the Well  . An example: 
 As you can see, this is like the previous example about Father Hennessey, 
except in this example Father Hennessey hasn’t said anything yet. The person who 
made the previous statement is poisoning the well, hoping we are not thinking 
critically and will dismiss whatever Father Hennessey says when he does speak.  
 Guilt by Association 
 Outside the logic classroom, the phrase “guilt by association” refers to the con-
cept that a person is judged by the company he or she keeps. For example, if you 
hang out with unsavory people, then others may think that you too have unsavory 
qualities. We, however, mean something different by the phrase “guilt by associa-
tion.” We use the phrase to denote a very common version of the  argumentum ad 
hominem.  The fallacy   Guilt by Association   occurs when a speaker or writer tries 
to persuade us to dismiss a belief by telling us that someone we don’t like has that 
belief. For example: 
 The speaker wants listeners to dismiss the idea that waterboarding is torture. 
So he or she tries to taint that idea by associating it with “left-wing college pro-
fessors,” people he or she thinks listeners don’t like or trust. The argument isn’t a 
straightforward  argumentum ad hominem,  because the speaker doesn’t imply that 
“left-wing college professors” came up with the idea that waterboarding is torture. 
He or she is just saying that they likely have that idea. The fact that the idea is  asso-
ciated  with such people is offered as a reason for dismissing it. The belief is “guilty” 
by virtue of its alleged association with supposedly left-wing college professors.  
 Genetic Fallacy 
 One other version of the  argumentum ad hominem  deserves your attention. It’s 
known as the   Genetic Fallacy  .  A speaker or writer commits this fallacy when he 
You can forget what Father Hennessey will say this evening about abortion, 
because Father Hennessey is a priest and priests are required to think that 
abortion is a mortal sin.
 Could somebody please show 
me one hospital built by a dol-
phin? Could somebody show 
me one highway built by a 
dolphin? Could someone show 
me one automobile invented 
by a dolphin? 
 — RUSH  LIMBAUGH , responding to 
The  New York Times claim that 
dolphins’ behavior and large 
brains suggest they are as 
intelligent as human beings.
Good point. Anyone know of a hos-
pital or highway built by Rush Lim-
baugh or an automobile invented 
by him? 
(The "good point" comment is an 
argumentum ad hominem  on our 
part. We couldn’t resist.) 
You think waterboarding is torture? That sounds like something these left-wing 
college professors would say.
 We’ve arrived at a point where 
the President of the United 
States is going to lead a war on 
traditional marriage. 
 — RUSH  LIMBAUGH , on President 
Obama’s endorsement of gay 
marriage (Limbaugh’s first, 
second, third, and fourth 
wives could not be reached for 
comment.) 
The comment about the wives 
is a humorous  argumentum ad 
hominem dismissal by About.com 
of something Rush Limbaugh said. 
See the Political Humor section of 
 About.com . 

 
STRAW MAN
179
or she argues that the origin of a contention in and of itself automatically renders 
it false. Here are two examples: 
 As you can see, both examples imply that a view should be rejected simply 
because of its origin (genesis). 
 Here’s another example of the genetic fallacy: 
 The speaker is dismissing the idea of God because of its origin. 
 STRAW MAN  
 The    Straw Man   fallacy occurs when a speaker or writer attempts to dismiss a con-
tention by distorting or misrepresenting it. Here’s an example of the straw man 
fallacy: 
 As you can see, the speaker has turned the proposal to outlaw large ammu-
nition clips into something far different, a proposal to disarm everyone. He has 
set up a straw man (one that is easy to knock over). 
 The straw man fallacy is almost as common as the  argumentum ad homi-
nem. Here is another example of the straw man fallacy: 
 Your Friend has transformed your position into one that nobody would 
accept. Another example: 
 Conservative never said she wanted  more  sulfur dioxide in the atmosphere; 
Progressive is putting words into her mouth. He has misstated her position. 
 Whereas an  argumentum ad hominem  attempts to dismiss a claim on the 
basis of irrelevant considerations about the person making it, the straw man fal-
lacy attempts to dismiss a claim by misrepresenting it. 
That idea is absurd. It’s just something the Tea Party put out there.
Where on earth did you hear that? On talk radio?
God is just an idea people came up with way back before they had science.
What do I think about outlawing large ammunition clips? I think the idea of 
disarming everyone is ridiculous and dangerous.
YOU: I think we should legalize medical marijuana.
YOUR FRIEND: Maybe you think everyone should go around stoned, but I think that’s 
absurd.
CONSERVATIVE: It would be bad for the economy to tighten emission standards for 
sulfur dioxide.
PROGRESSIVE: How can you say that? Having more sulfur dioxide in the atmosphere 
is the last thing we need!

180 
CHAPTER 6: RELEVANCE RED HERRING FALLACIES
 FALSE DILEMMA IGNORING OTHER ALTERNATIVES  
 The   False Dilemma   fallacy happens when someone tries to establish a conclu-
sion by offering it as the only alternative to something we will find unacceptable, 
unattainable, or implausible.
  This is a fallacy. The speaker doesn’t present all the options. He ignores, for 
example, the alternative of cutting something other than Social Security, or rais-
ing the age of eligibility, or reducing payments to people who make a lot of money 
from other sources. 
 Here is another example: 
 This is a false dilemma. The speaker thinks oil companies should be free to 
drill in the Gulf, and tries to support his position by pretending that it’s either that 
or be at the mercy of OPEC, an alternative he assumes we will find unacceptable. 
The speaker ignores other options. Saving fuel might be one. Getting oil from 
shale is another. Going solar is possibly a third. Maybe you can think of others. 
 Here is another example. A man says to his spouse: 
 The man is pretending the only alternative to cleaning out the garage is 
being run out of house and home, an unacceptable alternative. He has ignored 
other options, such as not acquiring more junk. 
We either eliminate Social Security or the country will go bankrupt. Therefore we 
must eliminate Social Security.
Either we allow the oil companies to drill for oil in the Gulf or we will be at the mercy of 
OPEC. Therefore we shouldn’t prevent the oil companies from drilling for oil in the Gulf.
“Look, either we clean out the garage, or this junk will run us out of house and home.”
 Which Do You Want in Your Backyard? 
 ■ Or this!  
 ■ This? 
 
We’ve seen flyers advocating a position on a zoning-law proposal that imply we must choose between settings 
like these. Vote one way, you get a lush creek in your backyard; vote the other, you get a pig farm. "We bet both 
are false alternatives." 

 
FALSE DILEMMA IGNORING OTHER ALTERNATIVES
181
 The false dilemma fallacy is often referred to as the black/white fallacy, the 
either/or fallacy, the false choice fallacy, and the false alternative fallacy. Perhaps 
the best name would be “ignoring other options,” but unfortunately that name 
hasn’t caught on. 
 The Perfectionist Fallacy 
 Two false dilemma arguments are so common they have their own names. One is 
called the   Perfectionist Fallacy  .  The fallacy is committed when a speaker or 
writer ignores options between “perfection” and “nothing.” Here’s an example: 
 The speaker has presented us with a perfectionist fallacy. He has restricted 
our options. He is arguing that unless a single English course can make us great 
writers (“perfection”), we shouldn’t have to take one at all. He has ignored the 
possibility that a single English course might make us  better writers. 
 Here is another example of the perfectionist fallacy: 
 Unlike the speaker in the previous oil drilling example, this speaker tries to 
establish that we should  not  drill in the Gulf. He or she gives us a perfectionist fal-
lacy, because he or she ignores the less-than-perfect possibility that drilling for oil 
in the Gulf could make us  less dependent on OPEC. 
 The Line-Drawing Fallacy 
 The other version of the false dilemma fallacy is the   Line-Drawing Fallacy . This 
fallacy occurs when a speaker or writer assumes that either a crystal-clear line 
can be drawn between two things, or there is no difference between them. Here is 
an example: 
 The speaker has restricted our options to either being able to draw a  clear
line between violent and nonviolent videos (which is implausible to think could 
be done), or not making a distinction between them. He has ignored the possi-
bility that an imprecise line can be drawn and that it might have some value in 
assessing level of violence. 
 Here is another example of the line-drawing version of the false dilemma 
fallacy—a person trying to argue that poverty isn’t a problem: 
 The speaker would have us believe that, since there isn’t a precise line between 
being really poor and not being really poor, there is no such thing as being really poor.  
A single English course won’t make anyone a great writer, so I don’t see why we 
have to take one.
Drilling for oil in the Gulf won’t give us independence from OPEC; therefore we 
shouldn’t drill.
You can’t say exactly when a video game is too violent; therefore no video game 
is too violent.
Poverty isn’t a problem in this country; after all, when is a person really poor? You 
can’t say exactly.

182 
CHAPTER 6: RELEVANCE RED HERRING FALLACIES
 Antonin Scalia Uses the 
Line-Drawing Fallacy 
 Antonin Scalia is a justice on the United States Supreme Court. Attorney Theodore B. Olson represented those who 
sought to have the Supreme Court rule that California’s Proposition 8, which banned gay marriage, is unconstitu-
tional. The following is from the oral arguments made before the U. S. Supreme Court on Proposition 8. 
 SCALIA:   When did it become constitutional [When did gays have a constitutional right to marry?]? 
 OLSON:     When we as a culture determined that sexual orientation is a characteristic that individuals cannot control. 
 SCALIA:   I see. When did that happen? When did that happen? 
 OLSON:   There is no specific date in time. 
 SCALIA:   How am I supposed to know how to decide the case then? 
 
 MISPLACING THE BURDEN OF PROOF  
 If your doctor says you are infected with West Nile virus, you will say, “Doctor, what 
makes you think that?” If she says, “What makes you think you aren’t?” you will get 
a new doctor. Her remark is absurd because it is  her  job to tell you why she thinks 
you are infected with West Nile, not  your job to tell her why you think you aren’t. 
 As in this case, sometimes the burden of proof clearly falls more heavily on 
one side than another. When people try to support or prove their position by mis-
placing the burden of proof, they commit the fallacy called   Misplacing the Bur-
den of Proof  . Here is a less far-fetched example: 
Obviously, the president’s birth certificate is a forgery. Can you prove it isn’t?

 
MISPLACING THE BURDEN OF PROOF
183
 The burden of proof is on the speaker to give us a reason for thinking the 
president’s birth certificate was forged, and he or she has tried to transfer the bur-
den to the listener. Why is the burden of proof on the speaker? Because forging a 
birth certificate is the exception rather than the rule. If everyone normally forged 
their birth certificates, then it would be common to want proof that one wasn't
forged. But in the real world, forging a birth certificate is rare, so the person who 
makes the accusation has the burden of proof. 
 Another example: 
 The speaker has incorrectly shifted the burden of proof to the listener. In the 
United States, people have a constitutional right to own a gun, so the burden of 
proof is on the speaker to explain why the right should be removed. 
 Sometimes you have to be on your toes to spot the fallacy. Here is an exam-
ple we have used that has been discussed on the Internet: 
 With her last remark, Jill has tried to put the burden of proof on Alice. This 
tactic can put Alice in a defensive position, if she takes the bait. Alice may think 
she must show why we should not spend more on highways, when in fact it is Jill 
who has the burden of proof. We don’t even know whether Alice is against more 
highways; she might think we shouldn’t be spending any money because of bud-
get problems. 
 Which side has the burden of proof often depends on context, but speaking 
generally, if the issue is a factual one, the side making the more outlandish claim 
(the one having the lowest initial credibility) has the burden of proof. Also, other 
things being equal, the burden of proof falls on the person who wants to change 
something, rather than on the person who wants to leave things alone. That was 
the case in the last two examples. Of course, in a criminal court, the burden of 
proof always falls on the prosecution. The defense is not required to prove inno-
cence, it must only try to keep the prosecution from succeeding in its attempt to 
prove guilt. This is what is meant by the phrase “Innocent until proved guilty.” 
 When someone asserts that we should believe a claim because nobody has 
proved it false, the fallacy is a version of misplacing the burden of proof known as 
  Appeal to Ignorance  . Here is an example: 
 This is a fallacy because proof requires more than an absence of disproof. 
 Here is our recommendation: Be suspicious when somebody regards your 
inability to disprove his or her position as evidence for it. Take note of where the 
burden of proof falls in such situations; your speaker may be trying erroneously to 
place that burden on you. 
Guns should be outlawed. I’ll bet you can’t think of a single good reason they 
shouldn’t.
JILL: We should invest more money in expanding the interstate highway system.
ALICE: That would be a mistake.
JILL: How could anyone object to more highways?
Nobody has proved ghosts don’t exist; therefore they do.

184 
CHAPTER 6: RELEVANCE RED HERRING FALLACIES
 BEGGING THE QUESTION ASSUMING WHAT YOU ARE 
TRYING TO PROVE  
 In everyday language, to  beg  the question is just simply to  raise  the question. In 
logic,   Begging the Question   means something else. A speaker or writer is guilty 
of begging the question logically when he or she tries to “support” a contention 
by offering as “evidence” what amounts to a repackaging of the very contention in 
question. 
 Here is an example: 
 In essence, the reason given here for believing the president is that he 
wouldn’t lie. This isn’t  exactly  the same thing, but it is so close that it could not 
really be counted as evidence. If we aren’t sure the president told the truth, we 
can’t be sure he wouldn’t lie. 
 The classic example of begging the question is this: 
 If someone wants proof that God exists, she wouldn’t find it in the assertion 
that scripture is the word of God. 
 Here is another example: 
Obviously the president told the truth about Benghazi. He wouldn’t lie to us 
about it.
That God exists is proved by scripture, because scripture is the word of God and 
thus cannot be false.
Women should not be allowed in combat, because it is prohibited by the Defense 
Department.

 
APPEAL TO EMOTION
185
 This is merely saying that something shouldn’t be allowed because it isn’t, 
which does not explain why it shouldn’t. 
 Often loaded questions (discussed as rhetorical devices in Chapter 5) beg 
the question. This dialogue will serve as an example: 
 Bill hasn’t given a legitimate argument for his belief that Republicans hate 
women. He has simply asked a question which assumes that very point. He is 
just smuggling his belief into his question—which amounts to trying to establish 
something simply by assuming it. 
 APPEAL TO EMOTION  
 When a speaker or writer “supports” a contention by playing on our emotions 
rather than by producing a real argument, the result is the fallacy called an   Appeal 
to Emotion   .  This can happen in various ways depending on the specific emotion 
involved. We will explain the most common varieties of this fallacy. 
 Argument from Outrage 
 The    Argument from Outrage   attempts to convince us by making us angry rather 
than by giving us a relevant argument. Here is an example: 
 The passage doesn’t support the contention that Apple products aren’t any 
good. Rather, it tries to  induce that belief by making us angry. 
 Here is another example: 
 This argument has no probative weight. It tries to persuade us that BP hasn’t 
cleaned up its mess, by making us indignant, rather than by proving or supporting. 
 The argument from outrage occurs frequently in political contexts, where 
the conclusion is often just implied that we should vote against someone or 
something.  
BILL:  Do Republicans hate women because they are angry white males? Yes 
or no.
JILL: Uhhhhhh...
BILL: Well?
 The idea behind [talk radio] is 
to keep the base riled. 
 —Republican political adviser 
BRENT LAUDER, explaining what 
talk radio is for 
Do you think Apple doesn’t know it hires 12-year-old children to make its 
electronics? You think it isn’t aware it pays them slave wages and has them work 
in buildings without heat or air conditioning? It knows. Apple products can’t be 
any good.
You expect me to believe BP cleaned up its mess in the Gulf? Just look at those ads 
it runs, trying to make it sound like everything is beautiful and even better than 
before. Does the company take us for fools?

186 
CHAPTER 6: RELEVANCE RED HERRING FALLACIES
 Scare Tactics 
 The   Scare Tactics  fallacy occurs when a speaker or writer tries to scare us into 
accepting an irrelevant conclusion. 
 Here is an example: 
 This argument tries to scare you into buying a Prudential life insurance pol-
icy. Even if it is true that your spouse and children will be forced to move if you 
die, that is no reason to buy insurance from this particular company. 
 Threats too, if they substitute for argument, are regarded as scare tactics. 
Here is an example: 
 The speaker hasn’t said a thing to support the idea that Jerry Brown would 
make a terrible governor. She is just threatening the other person. Obviously, if a 
speaker issues a credible threat, it would not be a fallacy to protect yourself. “If 
you vote for Brown, I will shoot your dog” would be a compelling reason for not 
voting for Brown, if the speaker actually would carry out the threat. But no threat 
to you is related to whether Brown would make a terrible governor. 
 One final example of a scare tactic: 
 The speaker hasn’t given the listener a reason for cutting government spend-
ing. He or she is simply trying to make the listener fear being made an outcast. 
This is sometimes called the   Peer Pressure Fallacy  .   
You really should get a Prudential life insurance policy. What would happen to 
your spouse and children if you die? Remember, you are their main source of 
income. Would they be forced to move?
Jerry Brown would make a terrible governor. Do you seriously think I could be 
interested in being your girlfriend if you vote for him?
Obviously the federal government must cut spending. You agree with the rest of 
us on that, I assume.

 
APPEAL TO EMOTION
187
 Scare Tactics versus Fear Mongering 
 Speakers and writers often make inflamma-
tory or scary statements just to rile people up 
or frighten them, without pretending that the 
statements support a specific conclusion. When 
that happens, it’s just fear or hate mongering, 
as discussed in Chapter 5. Here, for example, 
is a famous fear-mongering statement from 
Joseph McCarthy, the U.S. senator from Wiscon-
sin in the 1950s who furthered his own political 
objectives by alarming people with false accu-
sations of treason and communism. 
  I have here in my hand a list of two hundred and 
five people that were known to the Secretary 
of State as being members of the Communist 
Party and who nevertheless are still working 
and shaping the policy of the State Department.  
 The statement wasn’t offered with any spe-
cific “conclusion.” So you can’t really call it an 
argument or a fallacy. It’s just scary rhetoric about Communists infiltrating the government. Obviously there is a fine line 
between the scare tactic fallacy and fear mongering, and between the argument from outrage and hate mongering. If 
there is no specific conclusion stated or implied, then you can call it fear or hate mongering. 
 Appeal to Pity 
 The   Appeal to Pity   fallacy occurs when a speaker or writer tries to convince us of 
something by arousing our pity rather than by giving a relevant argument. Here is 
an example: 
 The speaker has not given a reason for thinking that Jane is the best qualified 
candidate; he or she is just tugging on our heartstrings. 
 Other Appeals to Emotion 
 Emotions other than fear, anger, and pity are used to manipulate an audience into 
believing or doing something. Instead of providing actual support for a claim, a 
speaker or writer may issue remarks designed to make us feel envious or jealous, 
proud, guilty, or anything else, in the hope that we will then accept the claim. 
These other “arguments” have names—playing on our pride is called   Apple 
 Polishing  ,  trying to make us feel guilty is referred to as   Guilt Tripping  , arousing 
envy is called   Appeal to Envy  ,  and playing on someone’s jealousy is called   Appeal 
to Jealousy   .  What these and the other appeals to emotion all have in common is 
that they actually are pieces of  persuasion  masquerading as arguments. 
Jane is the best qualified candidate because she is out of work and desperately 
needs a job.

188 
CHAPTER 6: RELEVANCE RED HERRING FALLACIES
 This brings up the final and very important point about appeals to emotion. 
Considerations that  truly support  a contention often arouse our emotions. So you 
cannot conclude, just because someone appears to be trying to scare you or make 
you angry, or feel some other way, that he or she has committed a fallacy. If he or 
she offers evidence having probative value, then it is a mistake to consider the 
argument a fallacy. Here is an example of a legitimate (no fallacy) argument that 
might arouse a listener’s pity. 
 This is  not  the appeal to pity fallacy or any other kind of fallacy. The speaker 
has given us an excellent reason for letting the dog out of our car. 
 And here is an example of a legitimate (no fallacy) argument that might 
arouse a listener’s fear: 
 This is  not  scare tactics or any other kind of fallacy. Dangerous conditions on 
a road are relevant to whether we should drive on it. Look very carefully at what 
speakers and writers say before concluding that a fallacy has been committed. 
Seeing “fallacies” where none are present is also a breakdown in critical thinking.    
 IRRELEVANT CONCLUSION  
 Relevance fallacies that do not fit comfortably into the above categories may be 
said to commit the fallacy of   Irrelevant Conclusion  .  Here is an example from a 
student talking to a professor: 
You should let that dog out of your car, because it is suffering from heat and thirst 
and will die very soon if you don’t.
You should not drive on the 50 tonight. It is icy and dangerous and you could get 
killed.
I don’t think I missed too many classes to pass. My attendance has been much 
better lately.
 
■ Guns aren’t arguments, 
but that hardly means 
you should ignore what 
an armed man tells you 
to do.

 
IRRELEVANT CONCLUSION
189
 An improvement in attendance doesn’t show you didn’t miss too many 
classes to pass. 
 Here is a car salesperson: 
 Hooray; good for Honda. Now let’s hear figures on mileage. 
 A similar example is as follows: 
 Perhaps the speaker’s company deserves kudos for its safety controls, but 
we haven’t been given evidence that the controls work at all, let alone perfectly. 
 This is a different sort of example: 
 The speaker is trying to justify not doing anything about having been under-
charged. However, the fact that they (whoever they are) wouldn’t inform him of 
an overcharge (assuming it is even true that they wouldn’t) only supports a nega-
tive appraisal of  their  ethics, not a positive appraisal of  his.  This is an example of 
the fallacy   Two Wrongs Make a Right .
 Two other common irrelevant conclusion fallacies are   Wishful Thinking 
and   Denial .  Wishful thinking happens when we forget that wanting something 
to be true is irrelevant to whether it is true. Denial happens when we forget that 
wanting something to be false is irrelevant to whether it is false. The two fallacies 
are flip sides of the same thing, of course. 
 Here is an example of wishful thinking: 
 Do  American Idol  contestants really think this? Some at any rate seem 
stunned when they are eliminated. 
 Here is an example of denial: 
 Being “in denial” about the likely consequences of harmful behavior—
smoking, eating poorly, drinking excessively, and so forth—does not seem 
uncommon. 
This new Honda gets better mileage than any other car in its class. After all, Honda 
has completely redesigned the engine.
Fracking* won’t hurt the water around here. Don’t you know that we have invested 
millions in safety controls?
 *Hydraulic fracturing, or fracking, is the process of drilling and injecting fluid into the ground at a high pressure in 
order to fracture shale rocks to release natural gas or oil inside. 
Why should I tell them they undercharged me? You think they would say something 
if they overcharged me?
I really really hope I will be the next American Idol. Therefore I’m sure I will be.
I really really hope I did not miss class as many times as the professor says I did. 
Therefore I’m sure I didn’t miss class that many times.

190 
CHAPTER 6: RELEVANCE RED HERRING FALLACIES
 Sometimes irrelevancies are introduced into a discussion when someone 
attacks a counterargument  to  his or her position rather than offering an argument 
 for that position. Here is an example: 
 To this point the speaker has not supported his belief that people don’t like 
the president. He or she should produce evidence that the president is unpopular. 
Rather than do that, he or she attempts to explain why people lie to pollsters. This 
is logically irrelevant, at this point in the discussion. 
People don’t like the president. Granted, polls suggest he is popular, but people 
are lying because they don’t want anyone to think they are racist.
 The fallacies in this chapter are relevance fallacies—arguments that may seem rele-
vant to their conclusion but logically are not. We specifically examined the following:
 ■ Argumentum ad hominem —attempting to dismiss a source’s position by dis-
cussing the source rather than the position 
 ■  Straw man—attempting to dismiss a source’s position by misrepresenting it 
 ■  False dilemma—attempting to establish a point by pretending it is the only alter-
native to something we will find unacceptable, unattainable, or implausible.  
 ■  Misplacing the burden of proof—attempting to place the burden of proof on 
the wrong side of an issue 
 ■  Begging the question—attempting to “support” a contention by offering as 
“evidence” what amounts to a repackaging of the very contention in question 
 ■  Appeal to emotion—attempting to “support” a contention by playing on our 
emotions rather than by producing a real argument 
 ■  Irrelevant conclusion—relevance fallacies that do not fit into the previous 
categories    
 Recap 
Ducking with Irrelevancies
David Muir (of ABC News): Does Carfax report the entire 
history of the car?
Larry Gamache (Carfax communications director): Yes, we give 
people the entire Carfax history.
David Muir: Is that the entire history of the car?
Larry Gamache: You can’t give the entire history of 
anything.
■ David Muir, of ABC News

 
EXERCISES 
191
 EXERCISES 
 Here are 100 examples of the fallacies discussed in this chapter.* Match each item 
to one or more of the following categories:
 
a.  argumentum ad hominem 
 
b. straw man 
 
c. false dilemma 
 
d. misplacing the burden of proof 
 
e. begging the question 
 
f.  appeal to emotion 
 
g. irrelevant conclusion 
 Notes 
 ● Some items arguably fall into more than one category; this is true in real life as 
well. But no item in this list could plausibly be said to fall into every category. 
Your instructor will tell you if your categorization is too much of a stretch. 
 ● Your instructor may or may not ask you to further match instances of  argu-
mentum ad hominem to one or another of these categories:
 
a.  Arguments that dismiss a source’s position because of the source’s 
alleged hypocrisy or inconsistency (inconsistency  ad hominem ) 
 
b.  Arguments that dismiss a source’s position because of other alleged defi-
ciencies on the part of the source (personal attack or abusive  ad hominem ) 
 
c.  Arguments that dismiss a source’s position because of the source’s cir-
cumstances (circumstantial  ad hominem ) 
 
d.  Arguments that dismiss a source’s position before the source has pre-
sented it (poisoning the well) 
 
e.  Arguments that dismiss a claim by associating it with someone we are 
assumed to despise (guilt by association) 
 
f.   Arguing that the source of a contention in and of itself renders it false 
(genetic fallacy) 
 ● Your instructor may also ask you to identify any examples of perfectionist or 
line-drawing versions of the false dilemma fallacy. 
 ● Finally, your instructor may ask you to identify specific emotional appeals, 
including argument from outrage, appeal to pity, and scare tactics. 
 1. Save your money. Nothing will make your teeth perfectly white. 
 2. Jane complains because she doesn’t like the way I clean. Of course, she 
wants to be able to eat off the floor. 
 3. Don’t read The  New York Times. It’s filled with liberal propaganda. 
 4. Limbaugh! That pompous windbag. You can’t believe what he says about cli-
mate science. 
 5. If you don’t support same-sex marriage, then you are a homophobe who flat 
out hates gays. 
 6. It isn’t  guns that need controlling. It’s  people who need controlling!  Guns don’t 
kill people;  people kill people! I get furious when I hear people miss this point!  
▲
▲
*Exercises from previous editions may be found in the appendix at the end of the book. 

192 
CHAPTER 6: RELEVANCE RED HERRING FALLACIES
  7.  skeptic: Why is Genesis the only acceptable account of how the world came 
to be? 
   believer: Show me an explanation that makes more sense. 
 8. The prices at Starbucks? A rip-off. I get better coffee at McDonald’s. 
 9. I’m telling you, something was holding me in bed in the middle of the night. 
I didn’t see or hear anything, but there were hands—or something—on my 
chest and stomach pushing me into the bed. You can’t convince me it wasn’t 
something supernatural doing it. 
 10. Acid indigestion, if untreated, might burn a hole in your stomach lining. Get 
Pepcid AC. 
 11. Not picking up after your dog is unsanitary, since it is so unhygienic. 
 12. Baking powder is toxic. How could you doubt that? 
 13. We have every right to be late on the rent! Management won’t fix anything. 
The toilet is leaking and the doorbell doesn’t work. They won’t even let us 
paint or keep a pet! 
 14. Don’t you get sick and tired of hearing her brag? I’ll bet she expects us to 
believe her, too. 
 15.  bill: Students these days are lazy and shiftless. They don’t care about 
learning. 
   jill: Are you just saying that, or do you have evidence? 
   bill: Well, remember how hard we worked when we were students? 
 16. Portman says we ought to allow gays to marry, but he wouldn’t say that if his 
son weren’t gay. 
 17. Obama has done an excellent job, when you consider how the Republicans 
have tried to destroy him with endless attacks and  ad hominem arguments. 
 18. Their proposal is 90 percent predictable, and 90 percent bad for the country. 
But what would you expect, coming from Republicans. 
 19.  bill: Space aliens are real. 
   jill: Oh, Bill, how can you say such a thing? 
   bill: Because only space aliens would have the power to erase all evidence of 
their existence. 
 20. Sure, it sounds good in theory, but curbing violence in movies doesn’t make 
sense. It’s crazy to think they should only make movies for kids. 
 21. If you don’t align yourself a little better with conservatism you might find 
yourself facing a challenge come next primary. Just saying. 
 22. He wants to lower the drinking age? Forget about that. He owns a liquor 
store. 
 23.  anti-gun person: Most homicides are committed with guns that were origi-
nally purchased legally. 
   gun person: Where did you hear that? 
   anti-gun person: Where did you hear they weren’t? 
 24. How could God have created the world if God didn’t exist? 
 25. Sure, a cruise would be nice, but we can’t spend every last cent on vacations. 
 26. Honey, you are so understanding. Would you do the dishes this once? 
 27. The Democrats say they want the government to help all Americans. Trans-
lation: They want the government to run everything. 
▲
▲
▲
▲

 
EXERCISES 
193
 28. High-speed rail travel between here and St. Louis is something we should 
support, unless you can explain to me why we shouldn’t. 
 29. Vote for the new parking garage! If we don’t build it, people will have no 
place to park. 
 30. “You can’t believe in all three religions, because that is the same as not 
believing in any of them.” 
 —The Life of Pi 
 31. Don’t bother listening. He’s just going to give us a bunch of emotional garbage. 
 32. Look out there. See those people bent over those vegetables? Know how hot 
it is out there? Know how many hours they put in? And are you aware that 
they have a special minimum wage, lower than anyone else’s? Are you still 
going to say they take jobs away from citizens? 
 33. He wants to lower the drinking age? Since he is eighteen, I’m not surprised. 
 34. You seen what the vandals did to Sharp’s store? You need a little protection 
from that. You need a little “security insurance,” see? 
 35. Public schools are unfixable. Prove me wrong. 
 36. You can’t possibly think pot is good for you, in view of how harmful it is. 
 37. The city council says the city needs a sales tax, but I don’t buy it. Look at all 
the stuff they force down our throat—like, no plastic bags. Why, we can’t 
even cut down the trees in our own backyards. They are after our hard-
earned money and want to spend it on art projects and other so-called civic 
enhancements. 
 38. Your mom doesn’t even own a cell, and you listen to her when she tells you 
not to text and drive? 
 39. We have been very frugal of late, so it is time to get a new car. 
 40. Staring at the sun will hurt your eyes. If it weren’t for that, you could try it 
yourself and find out. 
 41. That’s ridiculous. Sounds like something Nancy Pelosi would say. 
 42. “Wholistic” or “holistic,” it doesn’t matter. The guy talking tonight probably 
believes in crystals and pyramids. Totally New Age. I wouldn’t even go, let 
alone listen. 
 43.  first guy: I’m going to buy a new Mazda. 
    second guy: Hey, I think a Honda is a better deal. 
    first guy: What makes you think so? 
   second guy: What makes you think the Mazda is better? 
 44. The CEO of BlackBerry says iPhones are passé. That’s clearly false. He 
wouldn’t say that if he worked for Apple. 
 45. The Republican budget can’t be all bad, when you consider the Democrats 
haven’t proposed a budget in four years. 
 46.  jill: I think we need a little more accountability in public schools. There 
should be sanctions for incompetent teachers. 
   bill: Oh I see. Eliminate tenure, huh? 
 47. Ashley makes me so mad! Who does she think she is, trying to tell me what I 
can do. If I want to play music loud, that’s my right! 
 48. Honey, I invested our savings in equities. I didn’t want to lose it all to 
inflation.  
▲
▲
▲
▲

194 
CHAPTER 6: RELEVANCE RED HERRING FALLACIES
 49. We don’t need to drill in the Santa Barbara Channel. It won’t solve our fuel 
problems, and the ugly rigs will ruin the beauty of our pristine coast.  
 50. This pamphlet is put out by the people who have been trying to suppress 
minority voters. You won’t find a word of truth in it. 
 51. You can’t believe that! That’s the kind of stuff you hear on Fox. 
 52.  jill: I see that the editor of the newspaper is going to retire, which is a good 
thing, because he has caused a lot of trouble for the Downtown Business 
Association.  
   bill: I don’t know about that. The paper has made a lot of money under his 
editorship.     
 53. We must honor the agreement, because it binds us. 
 54. Are you saying Candace’s voice is better than Amber’s? I disagree. You have 
to factor in how Amber went through so many hardships—illness, aban-
doned as a child. . . . Candace didn’t face anything like that. 
 55. What, more shoes? C’mon, nobody needs a thousand pairs of shoes! 
 56. Bombing the despot’s airports won’t bring his reign to an end, so why do it? 
 57. Tell me this. If you aren’t losing your hearing, then how come you can’t hear 
so well? 
 58. Do I agree with Rand’s brand of conservatism? Not entirely. He isn’t doing 
himself any favors by pushing those ideas. 
   59. He wants to raise the drinking age? Are you going to accept that coming from 
him? Isn’t he the very same person who thinks we should legalize pot?  
 60. You know, when you say things like that, I think you’ve been hanging out 
with the Sierra Club or something. 
 61. Class, when you fill out these student evaluations, I hope you remember 
how hard I have tried. 
 62. I used to think Mike Savage made a lot of sense. Then I found out he lied 
about his background. 
 63.  senator ted cruz: The question that I would pose to the senior senator 
from California is: Would she deem it consistent with the Bill of Rights for 
Congress to engage in the same endeavor that we are contemplating doing 
with the Second Amendment in the context of the First or Fourth Amend-
ment? Namely, would she consider it constitutional for Congress to specify 
that the First Amendment shall apply only to the following books and shall 
not apply to the books that Congress has deemed outside the protection of 
the Bill of Rights? 
   senator diane feinstein: I’m not a sixth grader. Senator, I’ve been on this com-
mittee for 20 years. I was a mayor for nine years. I walked in and I saw people 
shot. I’ve looked at bodies that have been shot with these weapons. After 20 
years, I’ve been up close and personal to the Constitution. It’s fine if you want 
to lecture me on the Constitution. I appreciate it. Just know I’ve been here for a 
long time. I passed on [ sic ] a number of bills. I study the Constitution myself. I 
am reasonably well educated, and I thank you for the lecture. Incidentally, this 
does not prohibit—you used the word ”prohibit.” It exempts 2,271 weapons. Isn’t 
that enough for the people in the United States? 
▲
▲
▲

 
EXERCISES 
195
 64. Estelle claims we should have the kids vaccinated, but that doesn’t persuade 
me, since she works for Amgen or one of those other drug companies. 
 65. Is the EPA trying to ruin the oil industry, or is it just plain incompetent? 
 66. You want to keep defense spending at current levels? What, you don’t think 
we should be able to defend ourselves even from a place like Iceland? 
 67. I deserved to pass. I couldn’t have missed every question! 
 68. Either we increase troop strength, or the Taliban will overrun the country. 
I know which I would choose. 
 69. Drink less? And why should I believe that coming from a chain smoker 
like you?  
 70. Hey, Professor, do you give extra credit? I missed a few classes, but I want to 
major in English. I love your class! 
   71. Pryor’s diatribe against gun control is flat-out nonsense. He probably doesn’t 
believe that stuff himself. 
 72. “Mark Pryor’s liberal record is out of touch with Arkansans, and it’s time to 
hold him accountable. Mark Pryor stood with Obama on Obamacare, the 
failed stimulus, and bailing out the Wall Street banks. While Arkansans have 
had to balance their checkbooks, Mark Pryor has joined with the liberals in 
Washington to recklessly spend our tax dollars on the Obama agenda.” 
 —Club for Growth President Chris Chocola 
 73. “Only $100? Isn’t it worth more than that? We really need the money for our 
daughter’s tuition.” 
 —A couple trying to sell a stove on Hardcore Pawn 
 74. Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, you can’t trust this witness. Counsel for 
the defense has not produced a shred of evidence that he is trustworthy. 
 75. Drinking wine is good for you? Where did that idea come from, Gallo? 
 76. Buy now while supplies last! 
 77. Forget those polls. They come from CBS. 
 78. The War on Drugs has been a disaster. It has cost us billions and hasn’t 
reduced drug use at all. Obviously the sane thing is to legalize drugs. 
 79. That’s nuts. That’s just something someone like Ayn Rand would think. 
 80. Armed guards in public schools? You think that’s a solution to gun violence? 
That’s just something the NRA put out there. 
 81. Heidegger was a mean, thoughtless, self-serving man—an ex-Nazi. He 
couldn’t have been a great philosopher. 
 82. I don’t like the idea of getting a second pet. We aren’t running a zoo. 
 83. Mold is the leading cause of illness in the home. Schedule an appointment 
with our technicians now, for peace of mind. 
 84. Accept Jesus or rot in hell. 
 85. Aryan superiority is demonstrated, if a demonstration is even needed, by the 
manifest inferiority of the other races. 
 86. He thinks we should outlaw large ammunition clips. I don’t buy it at all, 
coming from him. He also thinks we don’t need the police. 
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲

196 
CHAPTER 6: RELEVANCE RED HERRING FALLACIES
 87. You can hardly eliminate all carbs from your diet, so there is no point going 
on a low-carb diet. 
 88. All right. We have to decide who will be the final boss in this outfit. Clearly, 
the person who invested the most money ought to have the final say, and I 
invested the most. Therefore, I should have the final say. And since I have 
the final say, that’s that. 
 89. The president lied through his teeth all through the debate, and now he 
expects us to agree with his ideas? 
 90. Cutting back on salt doesn’t sound like a good idea. A person has to eat 
some salt, you know. 
 91. Not many people could appreciate the distinction, but I know it wasn’t lost 
on you. 
 92. Terry will win the raffle. That girl has worked her fingers off putting this 
event together! She and her three sick babies deserve it. 
 93. All this negative publicity has hurt the Boy Scouts. They deserve our 
support.  
 94. Jackson is at least a hundred pounds overweight. He has a simple choice: 
Lose it, or die. 
 95. The idea will never work. Of course, the mainstream media like it, but they 
are known for their liberal bias. 
 96. Why raise taxes on the richest 3 percent? It would bring in only a fraction of 
the revenue needed to balance the budget. 
 97. Professor Stooler assigned two extra paragraphs to read. Dude thinks we 
don’t have anything better to do. 
 98. The tax bill would derail the economic recovery. If you vote for it, many of 
your supporters might have difficulty contributing to your campaign. 
 99. He is so full of himself, it’s disgusting. Don’t expect me to agree with him. 
 100.    She is trustworthy; after all, she swears she is, and you can’t doubt that. 
▲
▲
▲

197
 7 
 I
 n this chapter we examine common   Fallacies of Induction  —
arguments that are supposed to raise the probability of their 
conclusions, but are so weak as to fail almost entirely to do 
so. In Chapter 11 we will discuss the basic principles of induc-
tive reasoning. However, you do not need to read Chapter 11 to 
understand the fallacies discussed here.  
 GENERALIZATIONS  
 A little background here: Speakers and writers make general 
statements all the time. 
 However, general statements are often supported by feeble, 
inadequate reasoning. In this section we look at two important 
ways this can happen. We also consider the reverse mistake, 
one that can be involved when we reason from a general state-
ment to a specific case. 
 This town is dead. 
 My aunt is so mean. 
 This country is going down the tubes. 
 Most people believe in God. 
 Students will learn to . . . 
 1. Define and recognize fallacies 
involved in generalizing 
 2. Define and recognize fallacies 
involved in arguments based on 
weak analogies 
 3. Define and recognize fallacies 
involved in citing authorities 
 4. Define and recognize fallacies 
involved in citing popular beliefs or 
customs 
 5. Define and recognize fallacies 
involved in cause-and-effect claims 
 6. Define and recognize fallacies 
involved in slippery slope arguments 
 7. Define and recognize fallacies 
involved in arguments based on 
untestable explanations 
 Induction Fallacies 

198 
CHAPTER 7: INDUCTION FALLACIES
 Generalizing from Too Few Cases (Hasty Generalization) 
 Arriving at a general statement or rule by citing too few supporting cases is the 
fallacy known as    Generalizing from Too Few Cases    ,  or more commonly,   Hasty 
Generalization  . Here is an example: 
 Assuming the speaker is dining at a restaurant, he or she has made a sweep-
ing generalization about food sold at restaurants in a very large city, based on his 
or her experience at one restaurant. This “support” is so weak as to count as non-
existent. The speaker has offered us what might be called a lonely fact; indeed 
a very appropriate alternative name for the fallacy of hasty generalization is the 
 Fallacy of the Lonely Fact .
 Here is another example of hasty generalization: 
 That you were cited for driving five miles over the speed limit in and of itself is a 
“lonely fact,” insufficient for thinking the police will stop everyone for every infraction. 
 One version of hasty generalization is known as the   Argument by Anecdote  .
An anecdote is a story. When a speaker or writer tries to support a general claim 
by offering a story, he commits this fallacy. A story is just a single incident. It may 
carry psychological weight, but it has little logical force. Here is an example of an 
argument by anecdote. 
The food in L.A. is lousy, judging from this meal.
The police stopped me for driving five miles over the speed limit. Around here 
they will stop you for anything.
Did you read where John Travolta flew his plane into LAX and parked it on 
the tarmac—right out there in everyone’s way? That’s the trouble with these 
Hollywood actors. They don’t care about anyone but themselves.
 

 
GENERALIZATIONS
199
 A story about John Travolta is just that—a story about John Travolta. Gener-
alizing from that story to all Hollywood actors is a fallacy. 
 Here is another example of argument by anecdote: 
 Often an argument by anecdote is used in the vain hope that it  disproves  a gen-
eral claim. That is what has happened here. You can’t disprove a statement about 
the unemployment rate by telling a story, no matter how interesting the story is. 
 Here is another example of an argument by anecdote used to try to disprove 
a general claim: 
 The speaker tells us a little story, a factoid. In itself it proves or disproves 
nothing about overall health care in Canada. (It sounds as if the new neighbor is 
guilty of her own hasty generalization, too.) 
 The fallacy of hasty generalization frequently occurs when someone tries to 
derive a statement about all or most members of a   population   from a statement 
about a tiny sample of the population. This is sometimes called the   Fallacy of 
Small Sample  . Here is an example: 
 The speaker provides a solitary piece of evidence for the knowledge level of 
everyone in Cincinnati. He thinks he has supported a conclusion about a large 
population by considering a sample consisting of a single person. 
They say the unemployment rate is around 8 percent but I don’t buy that at all. 
Anybody who wants a job can get one. You just have to be willing to settle for 
something less than ideal. When my husband was laid off he didn’t sit around crying 
about it. He got a job with a yard service. It didn’t pay much, but you know what? He 
learned the ropes and now he owns his own yard service and hires several employees.
They say the health care is excellent in Canada? Well, it isn’t. My new neighbor just 
moved here from Toronto, and she says the health care up there is terrible. She says 
everyone in Canada comes to the United States for any serious medical condition.
People who live in Cincinnati have no idea where Akron is. I didn’t, when I lived in 
Cincinnati.
 Good Reasoning Can Be Based 
on Small Samples 
 Generalizations based on small samples are not necessarily fallacies, if the sampled population is 
known to be homogeneous. For example, if every member of a small random sample of ball bear-
ings had the same defect, and it was known that the ball bearings were all manufactured by the 
same process, it would not be a fallacy to expect the next ball bearing to have the same defect. 
 Also, a generalization based on a small random sample from even a nonhomogeneous 
population is not fallacious if an appropriate error margin or confidence level is built into it. This 
is discussed in Chapter 11. 

200 
CHAPTER 7: INDUCTION FALLACIES
 Here is one final example of the small sample version of hasty generalization. 
 You can view the items Costco sells as a “population”; lawn fertilizer would 
then be a “sample” of that population. This argument does offer some support 
for the general conclusion it reaches, but the support is very weak. Lawn fertilizer 
might be an isolated case. 
 Generalizing from Exceptional Cases 
 Arriving at a general statement or rule by citing an atypical supporting case is the 
fallacy known as   Generalizing from Exceptional Cases  . Here is an example: 
 The speaker is generalizing about all police searches, from a premise about 
searches in exceptional circumstances. 
 Here is another example of generalizing from exceptional cases: 
 Rats may have unusual responses to calorie-restricted diets. Yes, what holds for 
rats  might  hold for other animals; the argument offers some support for its conclu-
sion. But the conclusion overstates things. That animals will live longer on calorie-
restricted diets has not been “shown” by the experiments. Further testing is called for. 
 One very important variety of generalizing from exceptional cases is known 
as the    Fallacy of Biased Sample   .  It occurs when a speaker or writer incautiously 
bases a generalization about a large population on an atypical or skewed sample. 
For example: 
 The problem here isn’t that the survey is small, because it might be large. 
Rather, the problem is that Tea Party members might have atypical opinions. 
 When logicians call a sample “biased,” they don’t mean that it is a sample of peo-
ple who have unfounded opinions about something. They mean that the sample is 
potentially atypical or skewed. Here is another example of the fallacy of biased sample: 
 It is unsafe to generalize about what most businesspeople think from what 
car dealers think, because car dealers see the economy from their own per-
spective. This is a biased sample, meaning not that car dealers’ opinions are 
unfounded, but that they do not reflect every perspective. 
Things cost less at Costco. I bought lawn fertilizer there for a ridiculously low price.
The police aren’t required to get a search warrant if they arrest a suspect while a 
robbery is in progress and search him for a weapon. Therefore they shouldn’t be 
required to get a search warrant for any kind of search.
Animals will live longer if they are on a calorie-restricted diet. This has been shown 
in experiments with rats.
Almost everyone in a large survey of Tea Party members thinks the president should 
be impeached. Therefore most Americans think the president should be impeached.
Judging from what car dealers say, most businesspeople now think the economy 
is improving.

 
GENERALIZATIONS
201
 Another version of generalizing from an exceptional case is known as the 
 Self-Selection Fallacy  .  This fallacy happens when someone generalizes 
incautiously from a self-selected sample. A self-selected sample is one whose 
members are included by their own decision. Here is an example of the self-
selection fallacy: 
 The opinions of respondents to an online survey constitute a skewed sam-
ple, because the respondents select themselves into the sample by their own 
decision. Such samples underrepresent people who don’t have the inclination or 
time or means to respond. 
 Accident 
 The fallacy of   Accident   occurs when a speaker or writer assumes that a general 
statement automatically applies to a specific case that is (or could well be) excep-
tional. This is an example: 
 The general statement that it is illegal to use a cell phone while driving does 
not automatically apply to the special circumstance mentioned. It is easy to imag-
ine situations when police business might best be conducted on a cell. In addition, 
police presumably have intensive training handling a car in challenging conditions. 
 The fallacy of accident has various unnamed varieties so we will provide 
various examples. Here is one: 
Most Americans have a favorable view of the president as a person, judging from 
an online survey conducted by CNN.
It is illegal to use a cell phone while driving; therefore that police officer committed 
a crime when he used his cell when he was driving.
Everyone should have access to a college education. Therefore anyone who 
applies should be admitted to Cal Poly.
 Whom Do You Trust? 
■  When it comes to deciding which kind of car to buy, which do you trust more—the reports 
of a few friends or the results of a survey based on a large sample? 
■  When it comes to deciding whether an over-the-counter cold remedy (e.g., vitamin C) 
works, which do you trust more—a large clinical study or the reports of a few friends? 
 Some people trust the reports of friends over more reliable statistical information. We 
hope you aren’t among ’em. (According to R. E. Nisbett and L. Ross,  Human Inference: Strat-
egies and Shortcomings of Human Social Judgment  [Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice Hall, 
1980], people may be quite insensitive to sample size when evaluating some products, 
being swayed more by the judgments of a few friends than by the results of a survey based 
on a large sample.) 

202 
CHAPTER 7: INDUCTION FALLACIES
 A general rule is being applied here to an exceptional case in which it does 
not automatically hold. Among other things, students who attend Cal Poly may 
need special skills or training that Cal Poly cannot itself provide. 
 Here is another example: 
 The right to free speech does not include the right to issue threats. Even so-
called absolute rights are subject to limitations where there is a compelling social 
interest. 
 Here is a slightly different type of example. It will sound familiar. 
 At first glance this might seem to be a good argument. However, remember 
what we said earlier. If you found that lawn fertilizer costs less at Costco than at 
other stores, you would not conclude from  that information alone  that Costco  in 
general sells for less. That would be a case of hasty generalization. The reverse 
argument also is a fallacy, the fallacy of accident. The fact that Costco  in general 
sells for less raises the probability only slightly that it will sell  this specific item 
for less. 
 One final example: 
 This is similar to the Costco example. It would be hasty generalization to 
draw a conclusion about a city’s overall crime rate from what you observed in 
one particular location, at least if the city is large. Likewise, it is the fallacy of 
accident to infer from the city’s overall high crime rate, considered in and of itself 
without regard to anything else, that a particular location in the city has a high 
crime rate.    
 WEAK ANALOGY 
  The fallacy known as   Weak Analogy   (sometimes called   False Analogy  ) is a weak 
argument based on debatable or unimportant similarities between two or more 
things. 
 The speaker offers an analogy between her mom and Adolf Hitler, presum-
ably to support the contention that she is a ruthless dictator who won’t allow her 
daughter to do something with us. The similarities between Adolf Hitler and her 
In this country we have a right to free speech. Therefore, if I want to threaten the 
mayor, that is my right.
Costco sells for less. Therefore lawn fertilizer will cost less at Costco.
This city has a very high crime rate; therefore it will be dangerous to shop in this 
neighborhood.
My mom is just like Adolf Hitler. I doubt she will let me go out with you guys.

 
WEAK ANALOGY
203
mother, if there are any, are almost certainly superficial. For one thing, Adolf Hit-
ler was a sociopath. We hope few other human beings are like him. 
 Here is another example: 
 This argument likens the federal government to a household like yours or 
mine, to support the idea that the federal government will go bankrupt if it doesn’t 
balance its budget. But the analogy is weak because the federal government has 
ways of avoiding bankruptcy indefinitely that are not available to a private house-
hold. These include being able to raise taxes, print more money, and stimulate 
economic growth and foreign investment. 
 This is another example: 
 A difference is that a surgeon’s error is accidental. If it isn’t, he or she should 
be brought up on charges. 
 Another example: 
 The conclusion may be true, but this argument is weak support. Canine 
digestive systems may have evolved differently from wolves’. * 
 One more example: 
 A difference is that the present concern is based on fifty years of additional 
and improved data, including many more monitoring stations, satellite measure-
ments of glaciers and artic sea ice, and so forth. 
 Most assuredly, not every argument based on an analogy is a fallacy. To take 
an obvious example, a court ruling based on a legal precedent draws an analogy 
between the present case and a past ruling. Such arguments are the basis of legal 
reasoning. But jurists always look for relevant differences between an alleged 
legal precedent and the case currently before them. We should be similarly cau-
tious when we are offered arguments based on analogies. 
The federal government is just like a private household. If it doesn’t balance its 
budget, it will go bankrupt.
If you knife someone to death, you will be charged with murder. Therefore, if a 
surgeon kills someone, he should be charged with murder.
In the wild, wolves eat nothing but raw meat. Therefore we should feed our dog 
nothing but raw meat.
 * www.nature.com/news/dog-s-dinner-was-key-to-domestication-1.12280 . 
In the 1960s scientists were worried about global cooling, and their worries 
turned out to be unjustified. Therefore their present concern with global warming 
will also turn out to be unjustified.

204 
CHAPTER 7: INDUCTION FALLACIES
 FALLACIOUS APPEAL TO AUTHORITY 
  A speaker or writer commits the    Fallacious Appeal to Authority    when he or she 
tries to support a contention by offering as evidence the opinion of a nonauthori-
tative source. Here is an example: 
 The fact that it is one’s father who thinks the president lied does not affect 
the probability that he did—unless, of course, the subject is something the father 
would have special knowledge about. There is no reason to suppose that is the 
case here. 
 Here is another example of a fallacious appeal to authority: 
 Everything else being equal, that your doctor thinks you have leaking heart 
valves raises the probability that you do. But everything else being equal, that 
your doctor thinks your car has leaking engine valves does not raise the probabil-
ity that it does. 
 Of course special circumstances can diminish a physician’s authoritativeness 
in regard to medical conditions, too—just as special circumstances can diminish 
any expert’s authoritativeness within his or her sphere of expertise. One of the most 
common occurrences of fallacious appeal to authority occurs when an authority in 
one field, domain, or discipline is assumed without further ado to be an author-
ity in an unrelated field, domain, or discipline. We have discussed credibility and 
authoritativeness at length in Chapter 4 and refer you to that material now.   
 FALLACIOUS APPEAL TO POPULARITY FALLACIOUS 
APPEAL TO COMMON BELIEF  
 The fallacy known as    Fallacious Appeal to Popularity   (sometimes called   Fallacious 
Appeal to Common Belief   ) happens when a speaker or writer treats an issue that 
cannot be settled by public opinion as if it can. Here is an example: 
 Even if you had a way of telling what “everyone” thinks on this subject, and 
even if everyone believed the claim in question, the argument does not provide 
much support for it. To find out if Iran has nuclear weapons, the International 
Atomic Energy Agency has technical means of investigation that do not include 
consulting popular opinion polls. 
 Here is another example: 
 Whether plastic is contaminating the oceans cannot be determined by con-
sulting popular sentiment. 
My father thinks the president lied. Therefore the president lied.
My doctor thinks my car has leaking valves. Therefore my car has leaking valves.
The Iranians have nuclear weapons. Everyone knows that.
Almost everyone knows that plastic is contaminating the oceans. Therefore plastic 
is contaminating the oceans.

 
FALLACIOUS APPEAL TO POPULARITY FALLACIOUS APPEAL TO COMMON BELIEF  
205
 
 Another example: 
 To find out whether a car gets good gas 
mileage you have to run tests, not ask peo-
ple what they think. 
 However, not every argument of the 
form  “X is true because most people think X 
is true”  is a fallacy. If most people around a 
stream say you need a fishing license to fish 
those waters, that would be a good reason for 
thinking you do. But notice that whether or 
not you need a fishing license is something 
people from around there might well know. 
You would not find out  definitively  if you 
need a fishing license by asking people—they 
might be wrong—but this is the sort of cir-
cumstance in which popular belief counts as 
evidence for the truth of a claim. 
 Let’s leave matters this way: Ask yourself, Would a scientist writing in a sci-
entific journal offer popular opinion as evidence of something’s truth or falsity? 
If not, then you would commit the fallacious appeal to popularity if you did. This 
rule of thumb won’t help in every case, but it will help to weed out egregious 
instances of the fallacy. 
 Fallacious Appeal to Common Practice 
 Sometimes speakers and writers try to justify a  practice  on the grounds that is tradi-
tional or is commonly practiced. The    Fallacious Appeal to Common Practice   
(sometimes called    Fallacious Appeal to Tradition   ) is a variant of the fallacious 
appeal to popularity. Here is an example: 
 If tradition by itself truly justified a practice, then human slavery, burning 
people at the stake, and any other extreme and deplorable behavior would have 
been justified if it happened to have been “traditional.” 
 Bandwagon Fallacy 
 Sometimes by mentioning the popularity of a proposition, a speaker or writer may 
not be trying to offer “evidence” of its truth. Instead, he or she may be dangling a 
psychological inducement to believe it. He or she may be playing on the natural 
human tendency to want to be a part of things, to be one of the group. When a 
speaker or writer uses “everyone thinks” (and other such phrases) as a psycho-
logical ploy, he or she commits the   Bandwagon Fallacy  . Here is an example. 
 The speaker wants us to jump on the bandwagon. He or she has not shown 
that Rand Paul has earned our support. 
Hondas get great gas mileage. Everyone 
knows that.
This is the right way; it’s the way it has always been done.
Rand Paul has earned your support. Everyone is endorsing him.
■ There may be many 
reasons (such as 
advertising, location, 
or pricing) why 
McDonald's is popular.

206 
CHAPTER 7: INDUCTION FALLACIES
 An Example of Appeal to Common Practice 
  “Shell [Oil Company] was charged with 
misleading advertising in its Platfor-
mate advertisements. A Shell spokes-
man said: ‘The same comment could 
be made about most good advertising 
of most products.’” 
 —S AMM S. B AKER,  The Permissible Lie 
 A perfect example of a fallacious 
appeal to common practice. 
 Here is one more example: 
 The speaker hasn’t really shown that we  need  a spa. He wants us to get on 
the bandwagon. 
 A final example: 
 If you overheard someone say this, you would have no idea what is sup-
posed to be wrong with Walmart. You would know, however, that the speaker was 
employing the bandwagon fallacy. 
 The bandwagon fallacy also can be classified as an appeal to emotion, 
but its similarity to the fallacious appeal to popularity justifies its inclusion 
here.  
Let’s get a spa. They are very popular these days.
You shouldn’t shop at Walmart. None of us does that.

 
FALLACIES RELATED TO CAUSE AND EFFECT
207
 Appealing to Tradition 
 According to Representative Steve King of Ohio (pictured here), “Equal protection [under the Constitution] is not 
equal protection for same sex couples to marry. Equal protection has always been for a man and a woman to be able 
to get married to each other.” 
 
 
 FALLACIES RELATED TO CAUSE AND EFFECT 
  It can be difficult to prove a cause-and-effect relationship between two variables, 
which is why fallacious reasoning can occur in this context. In this section we 
explore two important fallacies that can be made in reasoning about cause and 
effect. What the two fallacies have in common is this. Both assume that the timing 
of two variables relative to each other, in and of itself, is sufficient to establish that 
one is the cause and the other is the effect. This assumption is incorrect. 
 Post Hoc, Ergo Propter Hoc 
Post Hoc, Ergo Propter Hoc    means “After this, therefore because of it.” A speaker 
or writer commits this fallacy when he or she assumes that the fact that one event 
came after another establishes that it was caused by the other. Here is an example: 
 The speaker makes a mistake to assume that Zicam caused the cold to go 
away fast. The argument is no better than this one: 
 Here is a slightly different example, a classic illustration of  post hoc, ergo 
propter hoc: 
After I took Zicam my cold went away fast. Therefore taking Zicam caused my cold 
to go away fast.
After I played poker my cold went away fast. Therefore playing poker caused my 
cold to go away fast.
Every day the sun comes up right after the rooster crows; therefore the rooster 
causes the sun to come up.

208 
CHAPTER 7: INDUCTION FALLACIES
 Instant Market Advice 
 Sophisticated mathematical schemes for predicting the behavior of the stock market abound, but you don’t need 
any of them. All you need to do is watch the Super Bowl every winter. In 80% of the years since the first Super Bowl in 
1967, a win by a National Conference team has been followed by a good year in the market, and a win by an American 
Conference team has been followed by a bad year. So getting into the market after an NFC win and out of it after an 
AFC win should produce good results 80% of the time, right? 
 Not a sports fan? Another indicator of how the market will perform is known as the “hemline indicator,” first 
presented in 1926 by economist George Taylor. The idea is that when the hemlines of ladies’ skirts go up, it signals 
good economic times; and when they go down, bad times are ahead. The hemline-market correlation has held more 
frequently than chance would dictate. 
 Are you intrigued by either of these correlations? This doesn’t have anything to do with the stock market, but in 
17 out of the last 18 presidential elections, when the Washington Redskins football team won its last home game, the 
nation’s presidential election went to the party of the incumbent president. Good enough odds for a big bet on the 
next election, no? 
 Well, no. The fact is, if you look at enough  possible  correlations, you will certainly find some that look like sure 
things. Of the many, many things that go up and down in some sort of cycle,  some  of them are coincidentally going 
to match the movement of the market; and of the many, many things that either happen or don’t, some of them are 
going to match the outcome of presidential elections. 
 Remember, correlation does not equal causation! If no causal link exists between two things, then the 
 correlation is mere coincidence, and you’re best off treating it as a joke rather than the basis for making deci-
sions.  In   Chapter  11, we discuss ways of eliminating the possibility that a correlation between two things is 
coincidental.   
 http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424127887324105204578384832555959160.html. 
 As you can see from this example, the fact that one event  invariably follows 
another event  still  doesn’t establish that the first event caused the second event. 
This fact is often expressed by saying  “Correlation does not prove causation,” a 
phrase worth remembering. 

 
FALLACIES RELATED TO CAUSE AND EFFECT
209
Post hoc ergo propter hoc  often is referred to simply as  post hoc.  Here is 
another example of the  post hoc fallacy. 
 You may think this is a reasonable argument. Indeed, when an unusual 
event is followed by another unusual event and we can see how the first might 
cause the second, it is not a fallacy to think that it  might  have done that. A fallacy 
occurs only when we assume that the sequential timing of events, in and of itself, 
 establishes cause and effect between them, as in the example just given. 
Overlooking the Possibility of Coincidence
    A special case of the  post hoc  fallacy is known as    Overlooking the Possibility of 
Coincidence   . Here is an example: 
 The speaker has overlooked the possibility that the sequential events were 
coincidental. 
Overlooking a Possible Common Cause
 Another instance of the  post hoc  fallacy is known as   Overlooking a Possible 
Common Cause  . Here is an example: 
After you drove my car it was hard to start. Therefore it was something you did 
that made my car hard to start.
After Susan threw out the chain letter, she was in an automobile accident. Therefore 
throwing out the chain letter caused her to get in an automobile accident.
I left the lights on when I went to bed. Next morning I woke up with a headache. 
Therefore leaving the lights on caused the headache.
 

210 
CHAPTER 7: INDUCTION FALLACIES
 The speaker has overlooked the possibility that leaving the lights on and 
waking up with a headache may each be the effects of a common cause, such as 
having gone to bed unusually tired or intoxicated. 
Overlooking the Possibility of Random Variation
 Yet another instance of  post hoc reasoning occurs when we ignore the fact that 
values of variables fluctuate randomly. For example, the average distance that 
one randomly selected group of men can throw a football will vary randomly from 
the average distance another randomly selected group of men can throw a foot-
ball. Likewise, the average distance a randomly selected group of men can throw 
a football will vary randomly from the average distance the  same  group of men 
can throw a football on a second try. If you assume that this random fluctuation is 
due to causation, you make the mistake known as    Overlooking the Possibility of 
Random Variation  . Here is an example: 
 The speaker is implying that the magnetic bracelet caused the improvement 
in the average drive lengths. However, the improvement might simply have been 
due to random variation. Until he has eliminated that possibility, the speaker has 
committed a fallacy. (In Chapter 11 we explain what is required to reduce the like-
lihood that such changes are due to randomness.) If we performed the test again, 
the average drive length might decrease. In any case the average drive length is 
almost certain to change randomly from one trial to the next. So we should not by 
a change, or assume it must be due to something other than random fluctuation. 
Overlooking the Possibility of Regression
    A directly related fallacy is known as    Overlooking the Possibility of Regression   .
This mistake is committed when we overlook this fact : If the average value of a vari-
able is atypical on one measurement, it is likely to be less atypical on a subsequent 
measurement.  This may sound complicated, but it isn’t. If the average distance the 
randomly selected men drove a golf ball is relatively distant from the “true aver-
age” for all men, then on the second try, the average is apt to be closer to the true 
average. This phenomenon is known as regression to the statistical mean. The more 
atypical the value of a variable is on one measurement, the more likely it is that it 
will be less atypical on the next measurement. If we overlook this fact, we commit 
the fallacy of overlooking the possibility of regression. Here is an example: 
 As you now know, their average IQs were apt to be higher on the second 
measurement (closer to the “true average”) anyway. The speaker has overlooked 
In our tests, we asked randomly selected men to drive a golf ball as far as they 
could. We then had them wear our magnetic bracelet and try again. On the 
second occasion the men hit the ball an average of ten feet further. Our bracelet 
can lengthen your drive as well.
We measured the IQs of a group of students and found the average to be relatively 
low. Then we had them take a course in critical thinking, after which we measured 
their IQs again. Their IQs were higher. Therefore the course in critical thinking 
raised their IQs.

 
FALLACIES RELATED TO CAUSE AND EFFECT
211
that fact and attributed the change in IQ scores to the critical thinking course, 
which is a fallacy. 
 Here is another example—one high school basketball coach talking to 
another coach: 
 The coach has overlooked the fact that the girls’ shooting was apt to improve 
even if she had served them cookies rather than having them do pushups. 
 For obvious reasons, researchers conducting clinical trials are careful not to 
overlook the possibility of regression before they conclude that a drug works. If, 
for example, the members of a group of people have atypically high average blood 
pressure on one measurement, their average blood pressure is apt to be closer 
to the human norm on a second measurement—even if they have had nothing 
fancier than a glass of water. We go into the matter in more detail in Chapter 11. 
 For equally obvious reasons, unscrupulous makers of magnetic bracelets 
might simply run “trials” in which men hit golf balls, until a trial happened in 
which the average drive was fairly short. At that point, the manufacturer of the 
bracelet could ask the men to put on bracelets, knowing that on the next trial 
their average drive is likely to improve and could be attributed, fallaciously, to the 
bracelet. Such misuses of data are not limited to magnetic bracelet manufactur-
ers, of course. Any device that might be alleged to improve a measurement people 
are interested in could be shown to “work” by this simple technique. 
Cum Hoc, Ergo Propter Hoc 
Cum Hoc, Ergo Propter Hoc   means “With this, therefore because of it”. A speaker 
or writer commits this fallacy when he or she assumes that the fact that two events 
happen at about the same time establishes that one caused the other. This fallacy 
is so similar to  post hoc, ergo propter hoc  that not all logicians list the two as sepa-
rate fallacies. However, we have found that confusion can crop up if the two are 
not listed separately. Here, then, is an example of  cum hoc, ergo  propter hoc: 
 Now, the fact that two unusual events happen at the same time can be a 
reason for thinking that one  might  have caused the other; but it is never sufficient 
to  establish that this happened, as the speaker in the previous example implies. 
 Here is another example of  cum hoc: 
 This premise is perhaps absurd (though perhaps not!), but the conclusion 
does not follow in any case. The example is another illustration that correlation 
does not prove causation. 
The girls shot well below their average on Monday, so I made them do 50 sets of 
pushups. Guess what? Their average was much better on Tuesday. Pushups did 
the trick.
 John had a heart attack while he was saying a prayer. Therefore the prayer caused 
the heart attack. 
Children with long hair are better spellers than children with short hair. Therefore 
having long hair makes a child a better speller.

212 
CHAPTER 7: INDUCTION FALLACIES
Overlooking the Possibility of Coincidence
 Overlooking the Possibility of Coincidence   can occur as a special case of  cum 
hoc  fallacious reasoning as well as a special case of  post hoc  fallacious reasoning. 
For example, the speaker in the hair/spelling example just given overlooks the 
possibility that the correlation between having longer hair and being better spell-
ers is coincidental. 
 Here is another example of  cum hoc  in which a speaker overlooks the possi-
bility of coincidence: 
 The speaker is overlooking the possibility that the two events are coinciden-
tal. Again, when two unusual events happen at the same time it is not necessarily 
a fallacy to think that one  might  be causative. It is a fallacy, however, to think that 
the juxtaposition in and of itself  establishes that one is causative. 
Overlooking a Possible Common Cause
    It was said previously that    Overlooking a Possible Common Cause    is a special 
case of the  post hoc  fallacy. It can also be a special case of the  cum hoc fallacy. 
Here is an example: 
 The speaker in this example has ignored the possibility that the events in 
question are both the effects of a common cause, the weather turning colder. 
Overlooking the Possibility of Reversed Causation
    Sometimes a speaker or writer who commits the  cum hoc  fallacy is guilty of   Over-
looking the Possibility of Reversed Causation  . Here is an example: 
 This speaker has assumed that the walking accounts for the good health. 
Maybe he or she has it backward. Maybe being healthy accounts for the 
walking. 
 Here is another example of overlooking the possibility of reversed 
causation: 
 This speaker has overlooked the possibility that driving an expensive car is 
the  result of being successful, not a  cause of it. 
I got cancer when I lived under a high-voltage power line. Therefore the high-
voltage power line caused my cancer.
Chimney fires and long underwear purchases increase in frequency at the very 
same time. Therefore chimney fires cause people to buy long underwear.
People who walk long distances enjoy good health. Therefore walking long 
distances will make you healthy.
Successful businesspeople often drive expensive cars. Therefore driving an 
expensive car will help make you a successful businessperson.

 
SLIPPERY SLOPE
213
Argument by Anecdote (Causal Variety)
 Finally, before we leave  post hoc  and  cum hoc  fallacious reasoning, we should 
note this: Just as it is a fallacy to try to support (or disprove) a  general  claim by tell-
ing a story, it is a fallacy to try to support (or disprove) a cause-and-effect claim by 
telling a story. Attempting to do the latter is also known as the fallacy of   Argument 
by Anecdote  . Here is an example: 
 A single story like this does not establish the presence or absence of causa-
tion. The matter is treated extensively in Chapter 11. 
 SLIPPERY SLOPE 
 The   Slippery Slope   fallacy is an argument that rests on an unsupported warning 
that is controversial and tendentious, to the effect that something will progress by 
degrees to an undesirable outcome. (A tendentious assertion is one that is slanted 
toward a particular point of view.) Here is an example: 
 The speaker has made a surprising and controversial statement. This is not 
like saying that if you run your AC twenty-four hours a day, your utility bill will go 
up. The speaker should support his theory. Until he does, his argument is a slip-
pery slope fallacy. 
 Here is another example: 
 What we should say to this speaker is “Why couldn’t we stop at 20 percent?” 
We could also just say, “Give me a break.” 
 Another example: 
 The speaker needs to support this dire warning. If and when she does, we can 
evaluate her reasoning. Meanwhile she has given us a slippery slope argument. 
 For obvious reasons, some logicians treat the slippery slope fallacy as a version 
of scare tactics. You would not be wrong to regard any of these three examples in 
that light. Incidentally, a slight change in wording can convert many slippery slope 
fallacies into false dilemma fallacies (discussed in Chapter 6) and vice versa. For 
instance, the last example can be made into a false dilemma by wording it this way: 
I’ve heard doctors say eating red meat daily increases your risk of heart disease, 
but I don’t believe it. My uncle was a rancher and he lived to be 100. His entire life 
he ate red meat three times a day. He didn’t die of a heart attack, either. He died 
when he fell down a well.
We should not require gun owners to carry liability insurance, because if we do 
that, before long they will repeal the Second Amendment.
No, I don’t think we should tip servers 20 percent. The next thing you know we will 
be tipping them 25 percent, then 30 percent, then who knows what. We will be 
giving out our entire paycheck every time we eat out.
Electing that man to be president will bankrupt the country within two years.

214 
CHAPTER 7: INDUCTION FALLACIES
 Both versions have the same objective: to get a listener to oppose the man’s 
bid for the presidency. 
 UNTESTABLE EXPLANATION 
  When someone offers an explanation that could not be tested even in principle, 
he or she is said to commit the fallacy of   Untestable Explanation  .  Here is an 
example: 
 This explanation is untestable. There is no way to tell if someone is a 
 previous-life sinner. In fact we cannot even identify people who have had previous 
lives. More people are alive now “than have been alive in the past,”  therefore not 
everyone alive now has had a past life in a human form. Perhaps some of us had 
previous lives as bugs and such. We do not know if bugs are capable of sin, but we 
do know that we cannot distinguish a bug that has sinned from one that has not. 
 Some explanations are untestable because they are circular. They merely 
repackage themselves in alternative language. Here is a stock example: 
 This explanation is not quite as circular as saying that the Kings are win-
ning because they are ahead. Still, it does basically just repeat itself using different 
words. One could not test it. The only way to identify a gain in momentum is to 
look at the scoreboard. 
 Finally, some explanations are untestable because they are too vague. Here 
is an example: 
 This argument isn’t circular; moral decay, whatever it is, is not identical to 
a rising crime rate. Rather, the problem here is vagueness. We do not know what 
moral decay is exactly, and so we do not know how to test the assertion. 
 LINEDRAWING AGAIN 
  When exactly does an analogy become weak? Precisely where do you draw the 
line between a credible authority and one who lacks credibility? When exactly 
does a report cease to be a report and become an anecdote? When exactly does a 
slippery slope become tendentious or controversial? You can’t say in any of these 
cases. However, don’t forget the line-drawing fallacy discussed in Chapter 6. That 
you cannot draw a precise demarcation between a weak analogy and one that is 
not weak, does not mean that every analogy is weak or that none are, or that there 
is no such thing as the fallacy of weak analogy. Similar remarks hold for the other 
distinctions just mentioned. 
He has heart issues because of sins done in a previous life.
Hooray! The Kings are winning again. That’s because they are gaining momentum.
The crime rate has gone up because of general moral decay.
Either we defeat that man’s bid for the presidency or the country will go bankrupt 
within two years.

 
EXERCISES 
215
 The fallacies in this chapter are inductive fallacies—arguments that offer at best 
only weak support for their conclusions. We specifically examined the following:
 ■  Hasty generalization—generalizing from too few cases or from samples that 
are too small 
 ■  Generalizing from exceptional cases—generalizing from cases that are excep-
tional or from samples that are biased (skewed) 
 ■  Accident—applying a general statement to an exceptional case 
 ■  Weak analogy—offering an argument based on debatable similarities 
between two or more things 
 ■  Fallacious appeal to authority—attempting to support a claim by citing a 
source that is not really an authority 
 ■  Fallacious appeal to popularity—treating an issue that cannot be settled by 
public opinion as if it could 
 ■  Post hoc, ergo propter hoc —thinking that a temporal succession between two 
variables, in and of itself, establishes a cause-and-effect connection between 
them 
 ■  Cum hoc, ergo propter hoc —thinking that simultaneity between two variables, 
in and of itself, establishes a cause-and-effect connection between them  
 ■  Slippery slope—offering an argument resting on an unsupported warning 
that something will progress by degrees to an undesirable outcome 
 ■  Untestable explanation—an argument based on an untestable explanation 
 Recap 
 EXERCISES 
 Here are 125 examples of the fallacies discussed in this chapter.* Match each item 
to one or more of the following categories:
 a. hasty generalization/generalizing from exceptional cases 
 b. accident 
 c. weak analogy 
 d. fallacious appeal to authority 
 e. fallacious appeal to popularity 
  f.  post hoc, ergo propter hoc/cum hoc, ergo propter hoc 
 g. overlooking the possibility of random variation or regression 
 h. slippery slope 
 i. untestable explanation 
 Notes 
 ● Some items arguably fall into more than one category; this is true in real life as 
well. But no item in this exercise could plausibly be said to fall into every cate-
gory. Your instructor will tell you if your categorization is too much of a stretch.  
*Exercises from previous editions may be found in the appendix at the end of the book. 

216 
CHAPTER 7: INDUCTION FALLACIES
 ● It may be especially difficult to distinguish hasty generalization from generaliz-
ing from an exceptional case; and to distinguish  post hoc, ergo propter hoc  from 
 cum hoc, ergo propter hoc. Your instructor may or may not ask you to do so.  
 ● Your instructor may or may not ask you to further assign examples into one or 
more of the following subcategories: argument by anecdote, fallacy of small 
sample, fallacy of biased sample, overlooking the possibility of coincidence, 
overlooking the possibility of a common cause, and overlooking the possibil-
ity of reversed causation. 
  1. I’d better not eat this lemony dessert thing. If I do, there will be no end. 
Hamburgers, chips, ice cream, chocolates—you name it and I will eat all of 
it. I will explode. 
 2. Stress bad for you? That’s a myth. I know all sorts of Type A people who are 
in excellent health. 
 3. These university kids drink like crazy on Halloween and St. Patrick’s Day. 
They probably drink like crazy on Christmas, too. 
   4. I had a great time at the party last night; I’ll bet all university parties are great.  
  5. The prayer leader cured her rheumatism. She said he did, and who would 
know better than she? 
 6. Salmon is very bad for dogs. You shouldn’t let your cat eat it either, I’d guess. 
 7. You have to stand up for what you believe. Ignore it if your wife complains 
about how fast you are driving. 
 8. Most Americans watch  American Idol. That’s clear since over one million 
people cast votes on the season finale. 
 9.  one guy: The guy Paulson shot had climbed through a window and was 
coming down the darkened hallway. 
   another guy: Doesn’t matter; he still should have been charged with mur-
der because the guy he shot was unarmed. 
 10. I tried to buy a portable heater from the Saber Company last winter, and it 
was back-ordered. After a month, I just canceled and decided not to do any 
more business with them. 
 11. “In a message about discrimination in private clubs, he [Morley Safer] wrote 
that all clubs, by definition, discriminate through admissions policies and 
hefty annual dues. ‘What will be next?’ he asked. ‘Disassociation with clubs 
that do not cater to vegans on their menus? Kosher dining rooms? Special 
facilities for nudists and transsexuals?’ ” 
 —New York Times 
 12. The heart attack rate spikes the day clocks are set ahead for daylight saving 
time, demonstrating how time change can affect our health. 
 13. The professor is a fantastic teacher. He should run for Congress. 
 14. These days young people don’t like expensive cars. You hardly ever see a 
teenager driving a Maserati. 
 15. Prostate cancer is almost unheard of in countries where they don’t eat meat, 
proof positive that meat in your diet will lead to prostate cancer. 
 16. When the government bailed out General Motors it set a bad precedent. 
Now it’ll be bailing out banks and the automobile industry and any com-
pany that isn’t competent enough to stay in business on its own. 
▲
▲
▲
▲

 
EXERCISES 
217
 17. The new law says everybody who takes a firearms course can carry a con-
cealed weapon, so I don’t see why I can’t take my gun to school. 
 18. My son thinks Galaxies are better than iPhones, and he should know since 
he is a teenager. 
 19. I’m putting my money in a Vanguard account. My history teacher thinks the 
firm has the best mutual funds, and he is a smart man. 
 20. Be prepared. We are traveling to a Third World country; there won’t be good 
hotels.  
 21. You would not go into the woods if you knew there were bears there, and the 
same thing therefore holds for getting into a bear market. Hang on to your 
money until the market changes. 
 22. Given the right circumstances, humans will always revert to savages. Look at 
the Nazis. 
 23. We live in a democracy. That’s why children should be allowed to vote. 
 24. My student evaluations were better this year. I’ll bet it’s because I had to can-
cel class two times. 
 25. Statistics show that smokers disproportionately come from low-income areas. 
We are trying to figure out what it is about poverty that makes people smoke.  
 26. Global warming is not caused by human activity—and the latest polls show 
the majority of Americans agree. 
 27. Jean plays the flute beautifully. I’ll bet she could learn the guitar in no time. 
 28. Just after I started doing yoga in the mornings, my golf swing improved. Yoga 
lowered my score! 
 29. Hank has sold Subarus for years, and he knows them as well as anybody. So 
when he says they make a better car than Toyota, I believe it. 
 30. Eating fish three times a week is supposed to be good for you, but I tried it 
for several months and never noticed an improvement. 
 31. Women are still paid less than men. Look at Walmart. The company is 
always getting sued for discrimination. 
 32. I assume my doctor watched the Super Bowl, since it is the most popular TV 
program in existence. 
 33. If I can make time for a movie, you can make time for a movie. 
 34. The chancellor now requires us to post syllabi online. Before long there 
won’t be such a thing as face-to-face teaching. 
 35. In Stephen Hunter’s new novel he showed how a conspiracy was involved 
in the murder of John F. Kennedy. After reading the book, I’ve decided the 
Warren Commission was mistaken and that Lee Harvey Oswald did not act 
alone. 
 36. Over the long haul, Obamacare will cut medical expenses. Informed people 
all say that.  
 37. My blasted pen leaked and ruined my shirt. I’ll never buy another Bic. 
 38. Don’t be alarmed if the pilot seems a little tipsy. After all, flying is safer than 
driving. 
 39. The country is safer since Obama was elected. That’s why the economy is 
improving.  
▲
▲
▲
▲

218 
CHAPTER 7: INDUCTION FALLACIES
 40. The air in American cities is pretty bad. I was in Houston the other day and 
the air was foul. 
 41. If the delays in this flight are any indication, this is not an airline I want to fly 
again.  
 42. I don’t think the president’s trip to the Middle East is a good idea. It will 
lead to our sending “advisers” there, and the next thing you know we’ll have 
troops there and be involved in another war we can’t get out of. 
 43. TV is fabulous these days. Just look at  Downton Abbey. Refined, cultured, 
superb.  
 44. We don’t have freedom of religion in this country. Public schools can’t even 
lead kids in prayer. Atheism is being crammed down our throats. 
 45. Gay parents cannot raise children correctly. Reverend Jacobs says that, and 
as a man of God, he should know. 
 46. Judging from the way she carries herself, I’d say she is very self-centered. 
 47. My kindergarten class seemed unusually antsy today. I wonder if they were 
all on a sugar high. 
 48. No, I don’t want to join a hiking club. That would just be the start, and then 
we’d be doing mountaineering and rock climbing and who knows what. I’ve 
got too much to do to spend all that time in the great outdoors. 
 49. Last year student test scores at our school were lower than usual. We 
responded by having teachers emphasize spelling. This year the scores were 
higher, showing how spelling helps kids learn. 
 50. It’s well and good that Apple hired you, but don’t expect to be paid much. In 
this country women still get shafted when it comes to pay. 
 51. They say stretching before exercising reduces your chances of a sprain. I’m 
skeptical. I don’t stretch before I run and I’m perfectly healthy. 
 52. Boiled eggs are great. I’ll bet boiled salmon would be great, too. 
 53. Tom Wolfe characterized Freud’s theory of sexual repression as similar to the 
way a boiler works. A boiler builds up pressure over time, and if the steam 
isn’t let off somehow, an explosion will result. Similarly, therefore, if sexual 
“pressure” isn’t released, the result will be an emotional explosion. 
 54. “More and more, women are determining what everybody watches on TV. 
Just look at that show on HBO, starring Lena Dunham,  Girls, it’s called. 
Everybody’s watching that show. Everybody.” 
 —Rush Limbaugh 
 55. Being overweight can’t be all that bad for you. Eighty percent of the popula-
tion over twenty-five is overweight. 
 56. I didn’t pray hard enough. That’s why my prayers weren’t answered. 
 57. Yawns are contagious. Ask anyone. 
 58. Well I’ll be! Look at the great gas mileage we got on this trip! Not a whole 
lot better than usual, but still nothing to sneeze at. Shows what a tune-up 
will do.  
 59. Hey, it works! After I sprinkled Arm & Hammer around the sink, the ants 
disappeared.  
 60. Attendance is up today. They must think there is a test. 
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲

 
EXERCISES 
219
 61. Sex before marriage is the road to perdition. You will end up in hell. 
 62. I find it very hard to lie; therefore I bet Casanova here isn’t lying when he 
says he wants to marry me. 
 63. The average temperature in Arizona is much hotter than what you’re used to. 
So I wouldn’t plan on taking my vacation at the Grand Canyon. If I were you.  
 64. Secondhand smoke isn’t harmful. My parents both smoked and I am per-
fectly healthy. 
 65. Amber isn’t very good. After all, she was voted off  The X Factor. 
 66. They make us come home by ten! Our parents don’t let us do anything! 
 67. God displays his love by making Earth a paradise. 
 68. The park seems almost deserted today. Must be something going on 
downtown.  
 69. Siri, are there snakes around here? 
 70. After my granddad had his heart attack, his hair turned completely white. I 
didn’t know a heart attack could cause that. 
 71. Low-fat milk has a lot of sugar in it. You want to stay away from those low-fat 
frozen dinners unless you want extra sugar in your diet. 
 72. It’s not dangerous to tube here. Look at all the people doing it. 
 73. Most people here in Stockton think the recession will last several more years, 
judging from the call-in survey on Channel 5. 
 74. My father died at a young age. God’s will. 
 75. I took Psych 100 last semester and it was terrible. The instructor went on and 
on about stuff that never turned up on any of the quizzes or exams. I’m glad I 
never have to take another psychology class. 
 76. Watts has been doing the weather on the local channel for over ten years. I 
put more stock in what he says about global warming than on somebody I 
never heard of. 
 77. Look at Bill Gates. He didn’t go to college, and he’s a millionaire. College is 
such a waste of time. 
 78. Some skin products must help a person’s skin look and feel better. After 
all,  Vogue did a poll of its readers and found that most American women 
use them.  
 79. Don’t start messing around with Facebook. Once you get involved with one 
of those social media traps you’ll wind up living your whole life online. 
 80. There’s no freedom of speech in this country. Look at how country radio 
wouldn’t play the Dixie Chicks after they criticized George W. Bush. 
 81. My son loves the Boy Scouts; your son will too. 
 82. Facebook has to be a positive force in the world. Billions of people are signed 
up for it. 
 83. My students’ scores have improved dramatically since I started giving tests 
online, which indicates that students learn more on online courses. 
 84. A person should defend his principles. Farley did the right thing slugging 
Wonderson during the debate last night. 
 85. The first time I played that golf course, I shot an 82. It must have affected my 
mental state, because I didn’t score that well again for almost a year. 
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲

220 
CHAPTER 7: INDUCTION FALLACIES
 86. Since the SEC is the strongest conference in the country, Vanderbilt, long 
an SEC member, will doubtless beat whomever it plays in a bowl game. 
 87. We did a poll in my math class and found that most people believe there 
is sufficient tutoring help for students. So I don’t think there’s that much 
demand for more tutoring services. 
 88. Shoot, millions of people sunbathe. It can’t hurt you. 
 89. Whenever I go to Kroger I’m hungry; do you suppose going to Kroger 
makes me hungry? 
 90. Obesity is more prevalent among people who live below the poverty line. It 
is paradoxical that a low-income level can make you fat, but it’s the truth. 
 91. This student isn’t good at math. Therefore she won’t be good at writing, 
either. 
 92. What’s all this fuss about airport delays? I arrived at the airport this morn-
ing, and fifteen minutes later I had checked my bag, passed through secu-
rity, and was at my gate, where I had to wait another hour to board my 
flight. It was dumb to have to arrive so early. 
 93. How can you deny global warming? This was the hottest summer on record.  
 94. A lot more people are near-sighted these days. Check out those kids over 
there on their computers. They all wear glasses. 
 95. It took years for Jennifer to get pregnant the first time, but it took only eigh-
teen months after the first child for her to get pregnant again. Clearly, hav-
ing one child raises the odds of having another. 
 96. Fatal accidents have decreased in recent years despite the fact speed limits 
are gradually being raised. The only conclusion you can draw from this is 
that driving fast makes people more careful. 
 97. I had severe arthritis until—thank goodness—I started taking glucosamine. 
 98. According to studies, people who live in poverty are much more likely to 
take drugs, showing how taking drugs can have economic consequences. 
 99. There’s no unemployment in this country. I had no problem finding a job. 
 100. I have every right to burn tires in my backyard. It’s a free country. 
 101.  We wouldn’t let the government force people to eat broccoli; therefore we 
should not let the government make people carry medical insurance.  
 102.  I failed the final. But then I didn’t get much sleep the night before. That 
explains it. 
 103.  The police report said there were four arrests involving alcohol over the 
weekend near the university. Student drinking is now an epidemic. 
 104.  Liquid egg whites are good for your health. It says so right here on the web 
page of this outfit that sells liquid egg whites. 
 105.  Bad luck brought the airplane down. 
 106.  People don’t like Southwest Air. Check it out on Yelp. You will find several 
negative reviews. 
 107.  Retailers have declared a war on Christmas. Walmart has replaced the tra-
ditional “Merry Christmas” greeting with “Happy Holidays.” 
 108.  Once  American Idol started to lose its popularity, nothing could reverse the 
trend. Therefore if our restaurant starts to lose its popularity, we will have a 
hard time stopping the trend. 
▲
▲
▲
▲

 
EXERCISES 
221
 109.  It isn’t legal to text when you drive. I’ll bet it’s not legal to text when you 
ride a bike. 
 110.  They want to make it illegal for a running back to hit someone with his hel-
met? Next thing you know they won’t even allow tackling. 
 111.  You can’t walk fifty feet down the Las Vegas Strip without somebody hand-
ing you a card advertising call girls. The economy of this town must be built 
on prostitution. 
 112.  I’ve always known that wine was good for your health. Do you think 
40 million French people can be wrong? 
 113.  You know about the  SI jinx, don’t you? Players who appear on the cover of 
 Sports Illustrated almost always have a poorer showing shortly afterward. 
Probably the extra attention affects their game. 
 114.  In the nineties, the United States helped out in Bosnia. We should use the 
same strategy in Syria. 
 115.  When I retake this stupid physiology course, I’ll get an athlete to tutor me. 
He’s bound to know the subject. 
 116.  People have no right to keep vicious animals. Therefore my neighbors have 
no right to keep a dog that snarls at me through the fence. 
 117.  Protein power builds muscle mass, according to my weight trainer. Obvi-
ously she would be someone who knows. 
 118.  You shouldn’t break your word. Therefore you shouldn’t break your word 
to save someone’s life. 
 119.  I signed up for one of those car giveaways at a casino, and bam! My inbox 
started to fill up with spam within a week. Don’t sign up for one of those 
things, ever. 
 120.  Alicia doesn’t think it would be illegal, and she played an attorney in the 
senior play. That’s good enough for me. 
 121.  TV is garbage these days. Just look at  2 Broke Girls. Pornographic garbage. 
 122.  Everyone should have access to a college education. Therefore there 
should be no entrance requirements here at Cal Poly. 
 123.  There they go again, the Democrats smearing us conservatives with a sin-
gle brush. They all do that. Just look at this left-wing editorial in the  Wash-
ington Post, pretending the congressperson from Missouri speaks for us all. 
 124.  I just read about a study of obese people who went on a low-carb diet? 
After a year, almost none had achieved a normal weight. Shows me that this 
low-carb business doesn’t really do the job for most folks. 
 125.  There are about three million Muslims in England today, and it has been 
the fastest-growing religion in the country so far this century. If something 
isn’t done soon, the English are all going to be facing Mecca and praying 
five times a day. 
▲
▲
▲
▲

222
 8 
 I
 n this chapter we’ll turn our attention to fallacies that result 
either from a failure of form—which refers to the way the 
argument is set up—or from certain misuses of language. 
 THREE FORMAL FALLACIES: AFFIRMING THE 
CONSEQUENT, DENYING THE ANTECEDENT, 
AND UNDISTRIBUTED MIDDLE 
 We’ll take these three in order. 
 Affirming the Consequent 
 Let’s start with an example: 
 The structure, or “form,” of this argument is what makes 
it invalid rather than its content. (Notice that if we switch the 
places of claims 2 and 3, we’d have a valid argument.) 
 Students will learn to . . . 
 1. Define and recognize the three for-
mal fallacies of affirming the conse-
quent, denying the antecedent, and 
the undistributed middle 
 2. Define and recognize the fallacies of 
equivocation and amphiboly 
 3. Define and recognize the fallacies of 
composition and division 
 4. Define and recognize the fallacies of 
confusing explanations with excuses 
 5. Define and recognize the falla-
cies of confusing contraries with 
contradictories 
 6. Define and recognize  fallacies 
related to consistency and 
inconsistency 
 7. Define and recognize the fallacy of 
miscalculating probabilities 
 8. Define and recognize the fallacy of 
overlooking prior probabilities 
 Formal Fallacies and Fallacies 
of Language 
(1) If Jane is a member of a sorority, then Jane is female.
(2) Jane is female.
Therefore (3), Jane is a member of a sorority.

 
THREE FORMAL FALLACIES: AFFIRMING THE CONSEQUENT, DENYING THE ANTECEDENT, AND UNDISTRIBUTED MIDDLE
223
 Here is the form of the argument presented previously: 
 “P” and “Q” stand for independent clauses—parts of claims that are true or 
false. (The part of the first premise after the “if” is the   antecedent   of the claim; the 
part after the “then” is the  consequent. ) Whatever clauses the two letters might 
stand for, if they are arranged according to the previous form, the result is an 
invalid argument.* Any argument of this form commits the fallacy of   Affirming 
the Consequent  . Do you see why the following is also an example of this form? 
 This form is so called because one premise affirms the consequent of the 
other premise. Remember, the consequent of an “if . . . then . . .” sentence like our 
first premise ( If this dog is pregnant, then it is a female ) is the part after the word 
“then.” And that’s all the second premise affirms. 
 Here is another example: 
 However valid this argument might look, it isn’t—the second premise 
merely affirms the consequent of the first premise. The argument’s form is exactly 
that of the previous example. One more: 
 Again, the argument is invalid. There may have been more than one way 
for Sandy to pass the course, for example, either by passing the final or by doing 
extra work. If she passed by doing extra work, the premises are both true and the 
conclusion is false. 
 Denying the Antecedent 
 Just as we get an invalid argument when one premise affirms the consequent of 
the other, the same thing happens when one premise denies the antecedent of 
the other. 
If P then Q.
Q.
Therefore, P.
If this dog is pregnant, then it is a female.
This dog is female.
Therefore, this dog is pregnant.
If the theory is correct, then the specimen is acidic.
The specimen is acidic.
Therefore, the theory is correct.
If Sandy passed the final, then she passed the course.
She did pass the course.
Therefore, she passed the final.
*An exception occurs if the conclusion is a necessary truth or the premises are inconsistent. This is a technical matter 
and occurs only in very rare circumstances. 

224 
CHAPTER 8: FORMAL FALLACIES AND FALLACIES OF LANGUAGE
 For example: 
 Here, the second premise is   Denying the Antecedent   of the first premise 
(the antecedent is the part after the “if”). The form of the argument is: 
 The circumstances that showed the previous example invalid do the same 
for this one: It may be that Sandy could  either  have passed the final  or  done extra 
work in order to pass the course, and she did the extra work and passed. In that 
case the premises are true and the conclusion is false. 
 The Undistributed Middle 
 The fallacy of   Undistributed Middle*  happens when a speaker or writer (or you!) 
assumes that two things related to a third thing are otherwise related to each 
other. Here is an example: 
 The fact that cats and dogs are both mammals does not mean they are 
otherwise related. 
 Here is another example: 
 This is just a more complicated version of the cats and dogs argument. The 
fact that Aaron and the sniper are both great shots, had access, have the right kind of 
rifle, and could go through the crowd in the ballroom without being noticed doesn’t 
 prove  that Aaron is the sniper. These facts make Aaron look suspicious, but they 
don’t deductively demonstrate that Aaron and the sniper are one and the same. 
If Sandy passed the final, then she passed the course.
Sandy did not pass the final.
Therefore, Sandy did not pass the course.
If P then Q.
Not-P.
Therefore, not-Q.
 *The precise meaning of  “undistributed middle” is explained in Chapter 9. 
All cats are mammals.
All dogs are mammals.
Therefore all cats are dogs.
The sniper had to be a great shot, have access to the roof, have a high-powered 
rifle and scope, and be able to get through the crowd in the ballroom without 
being noticed.
Aaron is a great shot, had access to the roof, had a high-powered rifle and scope, 
and was wearing a tux so he would not have been noticed going through the 
crowd in the ballroom.
Therefore Aaron was the sniper.

 
THE FALLACIES OF EQUIVOCATION AND AMPHIBOLY
225
 Here is one kind of schema for this kind of invalid argument: 
 Here is another schema: 
 Another schema: 
 And there is one more way to do it: 
 An example of the last version: If Bill wins the lottery, then he’ll be happy. 
If Bill buys a new car, then he’ll be happy. Therefore, if Bill wins the lottery, then 
he’ll be happy. 
As you can see, these are all basically the same kind of fallacy, just packaged 
differently.
 THE FALLACIES OF EQUIVOCATION AND AMPHIBOLY 
 Ambiguous claims can produce a fallacy. Here is a simple example: 
 The fallacy in this example is called   Equivocation  .  It is related to semantic 
ambiguity, which was discussed in Chapter 3, and occurs when a sentence contains 
a word or phrase that is open to more than one interpretation. Clearly, the word 
“bank” is used in two different senses in the premises of the argument, and this 
makes the argument invalid. Here’s a somewhat more sophisticated example: 
X has features a, b, c, etc.
Y has features a, b, c, etc.
Therefore, X is Y.
All Xs are Ys.
a (some individual) is a Y.
Therefore a is an X.
X is a Z.
Y is a Z.
Therefore X is a Y.
If P is true, then Q is true.
If R is true then Q is true.
Therefore if P is true, then R is true.
All banks are alongside rivers, and the place where I keep my money is a bank. 
Therefore the place where I keep my money is alongside a river.
The Washington Times engaged in censorship by refusing to publish controversial 
authors.
Censorship is a violation the First Amendment.
Therefore, the Washington Times violated the First Amendment.

226 
CHAPTER 8: FORMAL FALLACIES AND FALLACIES OF LANGUAGE
 The word “censorship” is used equivocally in the premises. For the second 
premise to be true, the word must mean that some governmental agency has pre-
vented publication by threats of punishment. But that is not the meaning of the 
term required to make the first premise true. In that case, all it means is that the 
Times decided not to publish something that it could have published. 
 The fallacy of equivocation does not crop up too often, but when it does it can 
be very slippery. In Chapter 3 we noted that clear definitions are crucial to argumen-
tation, and one way they can fail is to be equivocal. For example, we saw that if one 
defines a selfish action as any action performed because we desire to perform it, we 
could conclude that all our actions are selfish. But if we then conclude that all our 
actions are selfish  in the ordinary sense, we commit the fallacy of equivocation. 
 Just as equivocation makes use of semantic ambiguity, the fallacy known as 
  Amphiboly   makes use of syntactic ambiguity. In these cases, it is the structure of 
the sentence that causes the ambiguity rather than a single word or phrase. Recall 
examples like these from Chapter 3: 
 The sentence’s structure does not make it clear enough whether “it” refers to 
the motor or the car. 
 And here is another example:  
 The agent meant that a birth certificate was required,  plus either a license 
or a passport; the applicant understood that either a birth certificate and license 
were required  or  a passport. This kind of problem crops up now and then when 
people are not careful enough about punctuation in their directions. 
 THE FALLACIES OF COMPOSITION AND DIVISION 
 The fallacy known as   Composition  occurs when a feature of the parts of some-
thing is erroneously attributed to the whole. Here is a simple example: 
 The fallacy is also related to the grouping ambiguity covered in Chapter 3: It 
is fallacious to reason from a claim about members of a group taken individually 
to a conclusion about the group taken collectively. For example: 
 This is fallacious reasoning, because what is true of individual members of 
Congress may not be true of the whole collective. 
If you want to take the motor out of the car, I’ll sell it to you cheap.
AGENT:  You must show a birth certificate and a driver’s license or a passport in order 
to apply to the program.
APPLICANT: Okay. I have my passport.
AGENT: And a birth certificate?
APPLICANT: You said or a passport, and that’s what I have here.
This building is built from rectangular bricks; therefore, it must be rectangular.
The public thinks highly of individual members of Congress.
Therefore, the public thinks highly of Congress as a whole.

 
THE FALLACIES OF COMPOSITION AND DIVISION
227
No, what was just said of the individuals on the team does not follow. What 
is true of the whole may not be true of the individual parts. To turn our earlier 
example around: The fact that a building is round does not mean it must be made 
of round bricks.
You’ll find other examples of these two fallacies in a nearby box.
 The fallacy known as   Division   is the same as composition but going the 
other direction. An example: 
 The fact that the speaker’s portfolio as a whole increased in value during 
the recovery does not show that any particular investment within it increased in 
value during the recovery. 
 Like the fallacy of composition, division also can hinge on the grouping 
ambiguity. Here’s an example. 
 Obviously, in the first sentence it was letter carriers taken collectively, not 
individually, who are said to walk hundreds of miles. So one cannot conclude 
from that premise that any single carrier walks so far. 
 Another example of division: 
During the recent recovery my financial portfolio gained considerably in value.
Therefore Microsoft stock, which is in my portfolio, gained considerably in value.
Letter carriers in this town walk hundreds of miles each day. Cheryl, who delivers 
letters to my block and doesn’t look very athletic, must be exhausted every day 
after walking that far.
Never try to wade across a river 
just because it has an average 
depth of four feet.
—Martin Friedman
The Miami Dolphins are the only team that ever went an entire NFL season, all the 
way through the Super Bowl, without suffering a tie or defeat. Clearly, they were 
the best team in the league that year. Therefore, that year the team’s quarterback, 
Bob Griese, was the best in the league at his position, and running back Larry 
Csonka and wide receiver Mercury Morris likewise were the best at their positions.
■ Do you need curved 
bricks to build a curved 
wall?

228 
CHAPTER 8: FORMAL FALLACIES AND FALLACIES OF LANGUAGE
 Confusing Fallacies II: Division 
versus Accident 
 The fallacy of division is also easily confused with the fallacy of accident. If we jump from a 
fact about the members of a collection taken collectively (It is a large senate) to a conclusion 
about the members taken individually (Therefore, the senators are large), that’s division. Acci-
dent occurs when we jump from a generalization about the individual members of a collection 
(Senators are wealthy) to a conclusion about this or that member of the collection (Therefore, 
Senator Brown is wealthy). 
 CONFUSING EXPLANATIONS WITH EXCUSES 
  Back in Chapters 1 and 2 we made a careful distinction between arguments and 
explanations. We reason fallaciously when we take the one to be the other, as in 
this case:  
 Not necessarily. The speaker may simply be trying to explain why things 
happened as they did, which is not the same thing as  excusing,  never mind  justify-
ing those actions. 
 After the September 1, 2001, suicide attacks on the World Trade Center, a 
speaker at our university attempted to explain possible causes of the attacks. Some 
assumed him to be excusing or justifying the attacks; Rush  Limbaugh invited him 
to move to Afghanistan. 
SPEAKER:  The young man who killed all those people at Sandy Hook Elementary 
School was suffering from a half dozen mental disorders.
HECKLER:  Oh, so now you’re going to tell us he had an excuse for the horrible things 
he did!
 Confusing Fallacies I: Composition versus 
Hasty Generalization 
 The fallacy of composition is easily confused with hasty generalization (covered in Chapter 7). When 
we jump from a fact about the individual members of a collection (The senators are all large) to a 
conclusion about the members taken collectively (Therefore, the senate is large), we have a case of 
composition. But when we jump from a fact about an individual member of a collection (Senator 
Brown is overweight) to a conclusion about all the members of the collection taken individually 
(Therefore, all the senators are overweight), it’s hasty generalization. 

 
CONFUSING EXPLANATIONS WITH EXCUSES
229
Money to Burn
Inflation in Germany was so severe in the 1920s that what could be 
purchased for four marks very quickly required 8000 marks. Marks were 
soon worth so little people used them for fuel in their stoves. Such facts 
are usually cited as part of the explanation for German discontent and 
belligerence after World War I. But it would be a mistake to assume 
that someone who cites them is trying to excuse or justify German 
belligerence. 
 It is one thing to  explain  why or how something may have happened, and it 
is another thing entirely to  justify  or  excuse  the event. To mistake the first for the 
others is to commit a fallacy we’ll call    Confusing Explanations with Excuses   . An 
attempt to excuse or justify a thing or event requires an argument the conclusion 
of which is that the thing or event is justifiable or excusable. *  But an attempt to 
explain the thing or event requires a story—an account of a causal chain—show-
ing how the thing or event may have come to be. 
 Here is another example: 
 It is one thing to seek to understand how Hitler came to power in Germany, 
but it is quite another thing to excuse or justify its happening. To assume with-
out further reason that a person (or a television show) that explains an event is 
thereby trying to excuse or justify it is to commit this fallacy. One  can  propose an 
explanation for something  and then go on  to use this explanation as part of an 
excuse or justification, but that is going beyond the explanation itself.   
 Several excuses are always less 
convincing than one. 
 — Aldous  Huxley 
 * Although they are similar, justifications and excuses are not the same. To justify an action is to show that it was a 
reasonable thing to do under the circumstances; to excuse an action is to relieve the actor of blame or criticism even 
though it was not a reasonable thing to do. The latter actions are actions we discourage, but not the former. 
I heard on the History Channel about how the weak German economy after World 
War I contributed to the rise of Adolf Hitler. What’s that about? Why would the 
History Channel try to excuse the Germans?
 He that is good for making 
excuses is seldom good for 
anything else. 
 — Benjamin  Franklin 

230 
CHAPTER 8: FORMAL FALLACIES AND FALLACIES OF LANGUAGE
 CONFUSING CONTRARIES AND CONTRADICTORIES 
 Here is how contraries and contradictories can be confused: 
 The visitor’s conclusion does not follow. “None are carp” is not the opposite 
of “All are carp.” A pair of claims that are exact opposites of each other are   contra-
dictories    ,  meaning they  never  have the same truth value. But two claims that can-
not both be true but can both be  false are not exact opposites: they are   contraries  .
“None are carp” and “All are carp” are contraries, not contradictories. 
 Two terms—“alive” and “dead,” for example—may seem to be the exact 
opposite of each other. If that frog isn’t alive, then it must be dead. But that doesn’t 
follow about just any old object, as can be seen from this example: 
 The speaker here does not understand how “alive” and “dead” relate to one 
another. Being dead implies that the thing in question was once alive. Thus, it is 
not correct to say that rocks are dead. The point is that “X is alive” and “X is dead” 
VISITOR: I understand that all the fish in this pond are carp.
CURATOR: No, quite the opposite, in fact.
VISITOR: What? No carp?
The instructions for the scavenger hunt said to bring back something dead. So 
I brought this rock. Now you’re telling me it doesn’t count? Do you think maybe 
it’s alive?
 ■ Confusion at the putter 
factory? If we take these 
markings to mean “This 
is a heavy putter” and 
“This is a mid-weight 
putter,” then clearly 
something is wrong. 
Are these two claims 
contradictories or 
contraries? 

 
CONSISTENCY AND INCONSISTENCY 
231
 CONSISTENCY AND INCONSISTENCY 
  How many times have you heard a politician accused of doing a “flip-flop”? The 
term is used when the politician changes his or her mind on an issue and now 
supports a position he or she did not support earlier. Barack Obama was accused 
of flip-flopping on gay marriage and on support for coal-fired electricity-generat-
ing plants. Mitt Romney, his opponent in the 2012 election, was accused of flip-
flopping on several issues over the course of his political career, including health 
care and abortion rights. But what is so bad about flip-flopping? Isn’t it just a case 
of changing one’s mind? And isn’t one allowed to do that after confronting new 
evidence or rethinking an issue? We’ll look at that question in a moment, but first 
 For each of the following pairs of sentences, determine whether they are contrar-
ies, contradictories, or neither. 
 
—See the answers section at the back of the book.
 1.  a. Some of the exercises are difficult. 
 b. None of the exercises are difficult. 
 2.  a. All kangaroos are marsupials. 
   b. No kangaroos are marsupials.     
 3.  a. There is only a little gas in the tank. 
 b. There is a lot of gas in the tank. 
 4. a. John comes here every Tuesday. 
 b. John comes here every day. 
 5.  a. Today is Friday. 
 b. Today is not Friday. 
 6.  a. Many over-the-counter medicines are expensive. 
 b. Many over-the-counter medicines are not expensive. 
 7. a. Hillary Clinton will be the next president. 
 b. Marco Rubio will be the next president. 
 8.  a. The Bible is divinely inspired writing. 
 b. The Koran is divinely inspired writing. 
 9.  a. The Bible is the only divinely inspired writing. 
 b. The Koran is the only divinely inspired writing. 
 10.   a. All Dobermans are aggressive. 
 b. My dog is a Doberman and he is not aggressive. 
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
 Exercise 8-1 
can both be false (as in the case of the rocks). They are contraries. Now consider 
the two sentences “X is alive” and “It is not true that X is alive.” These sentences 
really  are  exact opposites in that they cannot both be true (of the same X)  and 
they cannot both be false. Such sentences are contradictories. To take a pair of 
contraries and treat them as if they were contradictories can produce  fallacious 
reasoning.  

232 
CHAPTER 8: FORMAL FALLACIES AND FALLACIES OF LANGUAGE
let’s get a couple of simple concepts clear. A group of beliefs is said to be consis-
tent if, and only if, it is possible that each and every one of them is true at the same 
time. A group of beliefs is inconsistent if it is not possible for all of them to be true 
at the same time. (Given what was said in the last section, we could also say that a 
group of beliefs is inconsistent if it contains beliefs that are or imply contraries or 
contradictories.) 
 An individual claim is also consistent or inconsistent. It is consistent if it is at 
least  possible  for it to be true (whether it is in fact true or not), and it is inconsistent 
if it simply cannot be true—in which case it is said to be self-contradictory. “It is 
raining on my window as I write this” is a consistent statement. It is false, but it at 
least could be true. But “it is raining on my window as I write this and it is not rain-
ing on my window as I write this” is self-contradictory. Regardless of the weather, 
it cannot both be raining and not be raining at the same place at the same time 
(given a precise definition of “raining”; see Chapter 3). A claim like that contra-
dicts itself and thus must be false. 
 Now, with that bit of terminology under our belts, let’s remind ourselves 
that knowing that a  person  has been inconsistent does not tell us a thing about 
his  position.  A person’s position must be evaluated on  its  merits, not on alleged 
defects on the part of the person. To think otherwise is to commit the fallacy  argu-
mentum ad hominem,  discussed in Chapter 6. The fact that a politician flip-flops 
or waffles or goes back and forth (these being the same thing, really) may be a 
reason for  voting  against him or her, if we don’t like our officeholders to change 
their minds in light of evolving conditions—or just don’t like his or her current 
take on things. But flip-flopping is  never  a reason for thinking that the person’s 
position, argument, or proposal, and so on is defective. An inconsistent position 
cannot of course be accepted, but the position of an inconsistent person may well 
be, depending on its merits. 
 MISCALCULATING PROBABILITIES 
  In this section we examine common mistakes people make when they calculate 
probabilities. For example: 
 The conclusion is incorrect. The two events—Bill’s becoming a professional 
football player and Hal’s becoming a professional hockey player—are independent 
Bill’s chances of becoming a professional football player are about 1 in 1,000, and 
Hal’s chances of becoming a professional hockey player are about 1 in 5,000. So 
the chance of both of them becoming professionals in their respective sports is 1 
in 6,000.
 In early 2013, Senator Rand Paul was questioning Kathleen Hogan in a Sen-
ate Energy and Natural Resources hearing. Among his remarks was a charge of 
inconsistency: “You favor choice in the matter of a woman’s right to an abortion, 
but you don’t favor a woman’s or a man’s right to choose what kind of light bulb, 
what kind of dishwasher or washing machine [they will buy].” Evaluate whether 
the inconsistency charge is reasonable. 
 Exercise 8-2 

 
MISCALCULATING PROBABILITIES
233
 Gun Owners and the Second Amendment 
 Possibly 100% of gun owners support the 
right to bear arms.  What is the probability 
that someone who supports the right to bear 
arms own a gun?  Probability calculations like 
this are complicated, and miscalculations are 
prone to overlook either the prior probability 
of the attribute of interest (gun ownership) 
or false positives (percentage of people who 
support the right to bear arms who don’t 
own a gun). These mistakes are explained in 
the text below.  
 Another example of the same mistake: 
 Nope. These events are independent, so we multiply 1/6 times 1/6 and we get 
1/36. The chances of two consecutive snake eyes are 1 in 36, or a little less than 
3 percent. 
 The principles behind combining probabilities will be further explained in 
Chapter 11. 
 Gambler’s Fallacy 
 The  Gambler’s Fallacy  is a common and seductive mistake that happens when 
we don’t realize that independent events  really are independent.  Like this 
speaker: 
Since there are six sides on a die, the chances of rolling a 1 (a “snake eye”) are 1 in 
6. Therefore, the chances of rolling two of them in a row are 2 in 6.
The last three coin flips have all been heads, so the next flip is more likely to come 
up tails.
events. One  independent event  cannot affect the outcome of another; whether one 
happens does not change the probability of the other. When we gauge the prob-
ability of two independent events, we multiply their two individual probabilities. 
So, to find the probability of Bill and Hal both becoming professionals, we multi-
ply 1/1,000 times 1/5,000. The probability of both making pro teams is thus 1 in 
5,000,000. We hope they have backup plans. 

234 
CHAPTER 8: FORMAL FALLACIES AND FALLACIES OF LANGUAGE
 It’s true that four heads in a row is fairly unlikely (½ × ½ × ½ × ½ = 1/16 or 6.25 
percent), but once the first three heads have come up, the odds of the fourth flip 
coming up heads is still 1 in 2, that is, 50 percent. Remember when dealing with 
independent events: past history has no effect. 
 Overlooking Prior Probabilities 
 The   prior probability   of something is its probability everything else being equal. 
(What that last phrase means should be clear in a moment.) The prior probability 
of a coin flip coming up heads is 1 in 2, or .5. The prior probability of a given new-
born baby’s being male is also .5, since about 50 percent of newborns are male. If 
20 percent of the students at your college are business majors, then the prior prob-
ability of any given student at your college being a business major is .2, or 2 in 10. 
 The fallacy of   Overlooking Prior Probabilities   occurs when someone fails 
to take these underlying probabilities into account. Here’s an example: 
 What is overlooked here is that the prior probability of someone’s becoming 
a professional football player is much greater than the prior probability of some-
one’s becoming a professional hockey player. Now you can see what we meant 
earlier by “everything else being equal.” Bill has a 1/1,000 chance to play pro ball, 
let’s say, presuming he has the same chance as any other player at his level. If 
Bill were a high school All-American, that would improve his chances, but then 
“everything else” would not be equal—he would have an odds advantage over 
other players. Similarly, if the dice we are rolling are loaded, the prior probabili-
ties of a given number coming up will change, since not all the numbers will have 
an equal chance of coming up. 
 Overlooking False Positives 
 The idea of a false positive is pretty easy to grasp: it’s simply a false alarm. Let’s 
say that the “check engine” light on your car comes on, but it turns out there is 
nothing wrong with the engine. That’s a false positive. If a woman takes a home 
pregnancy test and it comes up positive when she is not really pregnant, that’s 
also a false positive. 
 As was the case in the preceding section, the fallacy of   Overlooking False 
Positives   occurs when the probabilities of something’s happening are calculated. 
Here is an example: 
 Our speaker is fearful of Olsen’s vegetables. He thinks that because most 
Hayfork citizens who fell ill ate them, his chances of falling ill will increase if he eats 
them. But he has overlooked some false alarms here, in particular the percentage 
Bill is the best football player in our high school, and Hal is the best hockey player 
in our high school. So it appears that Bill’s chances of becoming a professional 
football player and Hal’s chances of becoming a professional football player are 
equally good.
Ten percent of the people living in Hayfork have come down with a stomach 
ailment, and most of these people ate vegetables from Olsen’s stand in the public 
market. It seems wise to steer clear of Olsen’s stand.

 
RECAP 
235
of Hayforkians who ate Olsen’s vegetables who did not become ill. Let’s presume 
the following numbers: Hayfork has 1,000 inhabitants, and 100 people came down 
with the stomach ailment. Of those 100 who fell ill, 60 percent of them ate Olsen’s 
vegetables. Of the remaining 900 Hayfork residents, 80 percent also ate Olsen’s 
vegetables. Notice now that the total number of Hayforkians who came down sick 
after eating Olsen’s vegetables is only about 7 percent! It’s  not  eating Olsen’s veg-
etables that should cause one to worry! (You reach the 7 percent figure by dividing 
the number of people who ate Olsen’s vegetables and fell ill by the total number of 
people who ate the vegetables: 60/780.) 
 So, we can calculate the proportion of Xs that are Ys from the proportion of 
Ys that are Xs. If we know how many Ys there are and what proportion of them 
are Xs, and we know how many non-Ys there are and how many of them are Xs, 
then we know what proportion of Xs are Ys and what proportion of Xs are non-Ys. 
Looking back at our example: If we know how many victims of the illness there are 
in Hayfork and what percentage of them ate Olsen’s vegetables, and we also know 
how many other people there are in Hayfork and what percentage of them ate 
Olsen’s vegetables, then we know what proportion of Hayforkians who ate Olsen’s 
vegetables fell ill. And  that  is the number that Hayforkians concerned about eat-
ing Olsen’s vegetables need to be concerned with. 
 Show that the reasoning in the next paragraph is unsound based on what you’ve 
read in this section. 
 The test said I was allergic to cats. It says “yes” 90 percent of the time when 
people really do have the allergy and it says “yes” 10 percent of the time when 
people really do not have it. So more than likely I have the allergy, which is 
unlucky since only 1 percent of the population has this affliction. 
 Exercise 8-3 
 In this chapter we examined fallacies and mistakes in reasoning that generally 
are based on a faulty argument structure or a careless use of language. Specifi-
cally, we discussed the following:
 ■ Affirming the consequent—affirming the consequent of an “if . . . then . . .” 
claim and attempting to infer its antecedent 
 ■ Denying the antecedent—denying the antecedent of an “if . . . then . . .” claim 
and attempting to infer the denial of its consequent 
 ■ Undistributed middle—assuming that two things that are related to a third 
thing must be related to each other 
 ■ Equivocation—the use of claims as premises and/or conclusions that contain 
words or phrases that are interpreted in more than one way 
 ■ Amphiboly—the use of claims as premises and/or conclusions that contain 
ambiguity because of their grammatical structure 
 ■ Composition—assuming that what is true of a group of things taken individu-
ally must also be true of those same things taken collectively; or assuming 
that what is true of the parts of a thing must be true of the thing itself. 
 Recap 

236 
CHAPTER 8: FORMAL FALLACIES AND FALLACIES OF LANGUAGE
 ■ Division—assuming that what is true of a group of things taken collectively 
must also be true of those same things taken individually; or assuming that 
what is true of a whole is also true of its parts. 
 ■ Confusing explanations and excuses—presuming that, because someone is 
explaining how or why some event came to pass, he or she is attempting to 
excuse or justify that event 
 ■ Confusing contraries and contradictories—to fail to notice that two conflict-
ing claims can be either contraries (cannot both be true but can both be false) 
or contradictories (cannot both be true and cannot both be false) 
 ■ Consistency and inconsistency—consistency in one’s beliefs is a requirement 
of rationality, but the inconsistency of a person (in changing from one belief 
to another inconsistent with the first) does not impugn either the previously 
held belief or the current one 
 ■ Incorrectly combining probabilities—failing to realize that the probability of 
several independent events is determined by multiplying the probabilities of 
the various events 
 ■ Gambler’s fallacy—believing that the past performance of independent 
events will have an effect on a further independent event 
 ■ Overlooking prior probabilities—failing to take into consideration the likeli-
hood of an event all other things being equal; that is, its likelihood apart from 
any outside influences 
 ■ Overlooking false positives—when deriving the proportion of Xs that are Ys 
from the proportion of Ys that are Xs, failing to take into consideration the 
proportion of non-Ys that are Xs. 
 Exercise 8-4 
 Here are 107 examples of the fallacies discussed in this chapter. Match each item 
to one or more of the following categories or otherwise answer as indicated:
 a. affirming the consequent 
 b. denying the antecedent 
 c. undistributed middle fallacy 
 d. confusing explanations with excuses 
 e. equivocation 
 f. composition 
 g. division 
 h. miscalculating probabilities 
 Note 
 Your instructor may or may not ask you to further assign miscalculating proba-
bilities into the following subcategories: Incorrectly combining probabilities, the 
gambler’s fallacy, overlooking prior probabilities, and overlooking false positives. 
  1. Professor Parker can tell you if you are sick; after all, he is a doctor. 
 2. If this man is the president, then he believes in immigration reform. If this 
man is vice president, then he believes in immigration reform. Therefore, if 
this man is president, then he is vice president. 
▲
 Additional 
Exercises 

 
EXERCISES 
237
 3. If global warming is for real, then the mean global temperature will have 
risen over the past ten years. And that is what happened. Therefore global 
warming is for real. 
 4. My chance of being born on December 25 was the same as yours. So the 
chances we were both born on December 25 have to be twice as good. 
 5. Sodium is deadly poisonous, and so is chlorine. Salt consists of sodium and 
chlorine, which must be why we’re told not to eat too much of it. 
 6. The Bible commands you to leave life having made the world a better place. 
And therefore it commands you to make the world a better place each and 
every day. 
 7. A dialogue:
   JILL: Helen has her mother’s eyes. 
   BILL: Good lord! Can the woman still see? 
 8. Is an explanation clearly being offered as an excuse/justification? I didn’t 
buy tickets to see Chris Angel’s show because I heard that he spends half his 
act with his shirt off strutting around in front of the ladies in the audience. 
 9. If Congress changes marijuana from a Class 1 drug to something lesser, next 
year the penalties for possession will be much less than they are now. But 
Congress is not going to declassify marijuana anytime soon. So we’ll have to 
live with the drastic penalties for at least another year. 
 10. If you are rich, then your car is something like a Mercedes or a Bentley. Oh! 
Is that your Bentley, you rich old thing, you? 
 11. Man! Three sons in a row? Your next kid is bound to be a girl. 
 12. The design team for the new project is made up of the best designer from 
each division of the company. So you know it is the best design team ever. 
 13. I like cranberry juice and I like beer. So I’m going to buy a case of this new 
thing, cranberry beer. 
 14. Voters overwhelmingly approved the reelection of Barack Obama. Therefore, 
Sean Hannity overwhelmingly approved the reelection of Barack Obama. 
 15. Anybody who is serious about losing weight will go on a low-carbohydrate 
diet. Since Jerry is now on such a diet, that tells me he’s serious about losing 
weight.  
 16. You will have only a small probability of Alzheimer’s disease if you study a 
language, play a musical instrument, or work puzzles. Unfortunately, you 
don’t do any of these things, so you aren’t going to lower your chances of 
Alzheimer’s.  
 17. If bankers were honest, they’d turn back the bonuses they got when their 
companies were going broke. But they’re not honest, so you know they won’t 
turn back those bonuses. 
 18. If you filed before the first, then we received your taxes on time, which we 
did. See how nice it is to file before the first? 
 19. I’ll bet the Baltimore Ravens lose the coin toss today. The last Super Bowl 
they were in, they won it, remember? 
 20. Tyrannosaurs probably ate more of their fellow creatures than any other 
dinosaurs. After all, they were the largest carnivores on the planet during the 
Cretaceous period. 
▲
▲
▲
▲

238 
CHAPTER 8: FORMAL FALLACIES AND FALLACIES OF LANGUAGE
 21. If anybody in the race can raise their speed by four miles per hour, they will 
surely win the race. So, if everybody in the race can raise their speed by four 
miles per hour, they can all win the race! 
 22. I know I gave more in taxes this year! The federal government collected about 
$2.4 trillion in taxes this year, and that’s more than ever before in history.  
 23. Child molesters are inhuman. So I think it’s perfectly acceptable to punish 
them any way we want because they are not really human.  
 24. Is an explanation clearly being offered as an excuse/justification? Under 
pressure from members of Congress, the administration said it uses drones 
against some American citizens in the Middle East because they present a 
terrorist threat to this country. “An American who has gone over to the other 
side, and who wants to harm us and our allies, is just as much an enemy as a 
foreign national would be,” a spokesperson said. “When he agreed to attack or 
plan to attack this country, he gave up his rights as a citizen.”  
 25. All the hotels in the Southwest chain are known for their elaborate lobbies 
and spectacular lobby bars. The Arlington has a fantastic lobby and a great 
lobby bar, which makes me believe it’s a Southwest hotel. 
 26. Joel will automatically be accepted provided he got his forms in on time. 
Unfortunately, though, he did not get his forms in on time, so he won’t be 
automatically accepted. 
 27. If a Mosquito Magnet actually works, then there won’t be any bugs around 
here, and there aren’t. So it works. 
 28. I need more insurance. Chances are I won’t get in a car accident, and 
chances are my house won’t burn down, but between the two of them the 
odds are one might happen. 
 29. A couple dozen great singers came to the audition. Just think of what a great 
chorus they would make. 
 30. Mercedes-Benz is the most expensive car line in the world, on average. 
Therefore its top-of-the-line model will be more expensive than the top-of-
the-line Bentley. 
 31. Sucrose is a necessary nutrient. Without it the body cannot generate energy. 
So, since sucrose is sugar, it is important to have a sufficient amount of sugar 
in your diet. 
 32. Is an explanation clearly being offered as an excuse/justification? Billy 
behaves poorly in restaurants because he’s a little kid. What would you expect?  
 33. Dooley wants to conserve clean air and water. If that doesn’t make him a 
conservative, I don’t know what does. 
 34. All German shepherds are dogs, and some dogs are trained to attack people. 
Therefore some German shepherds are trained to attack people. 
 35. If the government response to Hurricane Sandy is large enough and fast 
enough, then New Jersey and the surrounding area will avoid years of economic 
hard times. But there is no chance its response will be both big enough and fast 
enough. Therefore there will be years of hard times in that part of the country.  
 36. Is this an explanation or an excuse/justification? You shouldn’t condemn 
bullfighting on account of the bulls’ well-being. After all, the bulls that enter 
the ring have had lives that are many times better than the cattle that are 
raised to be killed in slaughterhouses. 
▲
▲
▲

 
EXERCISES 
239
 37. With college board scores like these, Charles can probably get into Princeton 
as easily as State. 
 38. Is an explanation clearly being offered as an excuse/justification? Tiger 
Woods isn’t winning tournaments like he once was because he has messed 
with his golf swing too many times. 
 39. Small pieces of litter are barely visible; therefore, as long as you throw out 
only small pieces of litter, there shouldn’t be a problem. 
 40. Rare diseases are very common and hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis is 
a rare disease. Therefore you should be on the lookout for it. 
 41. The paint store is the best place to work on your diet. You can get thinner 
there. 
 42. Is an explanation clearly being offered as an excuse/justification? When 
former candidate for vice president John Edwards was asked why he did not 
favor gay marriage, he replied, “I don’t know. It was just the way I was raised, 
I guess.” 
 43. All feral cats are wild creatures, and many wild creatures cannot be success-
fully socialized. Therefore, many feral cats cannot be successfully socialized. 
 44. If she hates her parents as much as she says, she has her own apartment. She 
doesn’t hate her parents as much as she says. Therefore she does not have 
her own apartment. 
 45. Everybody who can legally drink in this state is twenty-one or older. Sally is 
twenty-one or older. Therefore she can legally drink. 
 46. Most Parkinson’s disease victims were once wine drinkers; therefore drink-
ing wine is a risk factor for having Parkinson’s disease. 
 47. Lightning struck that barn a year ago, and everybody knows lightening never 
strikes twice in the same spot.  So the barn is safe. 
 48. Each individual has the right to be heard. Therefore our group has the right 
to be heard. 
 49. Sandra has had some bad arthritis in her left hand. But, on the other hand, 
she’s just fine. 
 50. Is an explanation clearly being offered as an excuse/justification? It’s true, 
Geoffrey said some very unpleasant things to some of the people at the table 
last night. But that’s because he’s had a lot to drink and he really doesn’t hold 
his liquor all that well. He’s a completely different person when he’s sober.  
 51. Is an explanation clearly being offered as an excuse/justification? Well, yes, I 
read Christine’s diary—but that’s because, good grief, she read mine! 
 52. All members of the club have strong views, and all the men in this community 
have strong views. So all the men in this community are members of the club.  
   53. If you are not twenty-one or older, then it is not legal for you to drink. You are 
twenty-one. Therefore it is legal for you to drink. 
 54. If Sally is over twenty-one, then she can legally drink. Sally can legally drink. 
Therefore she is over twenty-one. 
   55. If it is legal for Sally to drink, then she is twenty-one or older. It is not legal for 
Sally to drink. Therefore she is not twenty-one or older. 
 56. If Sally is over twenty-one, then it is legal for her to drink. Sally is not over 
twenty-one. Therefore it is not legal for her to drink. 
▲
▲
▲
▲

240 
CHAPTER 8: FORMAL FALLACIES AND FALLACIES OF LANGUAGE
 57. Posey hit two home runs in the last game, so you know he’s on track to hit at 
least one today. 
 58. Is the speaker viewing an explanation as an excuse/justification? Her car 
broke down is why she says she isn’t here?  Why does she try to duck her 
responsibilities all the time? 
 59. Each of these sweaters is 50 percent off. You want to bet they still won’t give 
me money if I buy three? 
 60. Water is liquid. Water consists of hydrogen and oxygen molecules. Therefore 
hydrogen and oxygen molecules are liquid. 
 61. Somebody drilled a hole in the nudist camp wall. The police are looking 
into it.  
 62. Is an explanation clearly being offered as an excuse/justification? Monica 
was unable to take the test today because she was very ill with the flu and a 
high fever. 
 63. Jackson believes in democracy—you know, let the voters decide. And as a 
Democrat he will support whomever the party decides to nominate. 
 64. If she passed the course, she is very bright. If she did well on the final, she is 
very bright. Therefore if she did well on the final, she passed the course. 
 65. If you dropped out of college, you will not make much money. Chris doesn’t 
make much money. Therefore he dropped out of college. 
 66. Is an explanation clearly being offered as an excuse/justification? Dinner is 
late because I had to work late is why, so don’t get on my case. 
 67. Don’t worry about your recital tonight. Every note sounds great on a Steinway.  
 68. Laura’s physics class came out with an A-minus average on the exam. She 
has to be a smart cookie to do so well in such a difficult class. 
 69. The sign at the drug rehabilitation center said “Keep off the grass.” They’re 
even doing propaganda out in the yard! 
 70. In my child’s class there are thirty students, and ten of them got flu shots this 
year. Five of the kids who got shots wound up getting the flu. The shots were 
a bad idea: kids were just as likely to get the flu as not, even after their shots!  
 71. You say he’s had his fill of flies? Gross. Does he eat rats, too? 
 72. She wouldn’t have said it if she didn’t believe it. And she didn’t do it if she 
didn’t believe it. Therefore she wouldn’t have said it if she didn’t do it. 
 73. This zinfandel would have a smooth finish if it came from very old vines. In 
fact, it does have a smooth finish, so it came from very old vines. 
   74. Nearly all advanced prostate cancer victims have elevated PSA levels. Therefore 
if you have an elevated PSA level, you probably have advanced prostate cancer.  
 75. Is SUE clearly offering an explanation as an excuse/justification?
   sue: I’m sorry, Mom. I really didn’t know I was supposed to be home by ten. 
   sue’s mom: Stop making excuses, Sue! 
 76. I read somewhere that Ford owners buy lots more gas than Chrysler and 
Jeep owners put together. So Chryslers and Jeeps must get better mileage. 
 77. “The sign said ‘Fine for parking here’ so I parked there. And damned if I 
didn’t get a ticket. Don’t they follow their own rules?”
 —Steven’s Guide 
▲
▲
▲
▲

 
EXERCISES 
241
 78. The menu said, “Soup or salad and dessert.”  So I asked for salad and desert. 
 79. If you like Ayn Rand, you are a libertarian. And, of course, if you’re an anarchist, 
you’re a libertarian. Therefore, if you like Ayn Rand, you are an anarchist.  
 80. It’s true, if Ms. Presson is accepted into law school, then you know she had 
to have very good grades. And I’m telling you, you should see her transcript; 
she’s made straight As for the past two years. So I wouldn’t worry about her 
being accepted into law school; she’ll be accepted without a doubt. 
 81. Most straight-A students own cell phones. Obviously owning a cell enhances 
learning. 
 82. They told me their computers were down, but I am sick and tired of people 
blaming everything on computer issues. 
 83. If you aren’t wealthy, adding a single dollar to your bank account won’t 
change things. Therefore single dollars cannot make you wealthy. 
 84. Councilman Smith says he thinks we should make liberal payouts to local 
organizations. I knew he was a liberal in conservative’s clothing! 
 85. Of course he couldn’t see your point. Dude’s blind. 
 86. Everybody who took the exam passed the course, and everybody who did 
an outside project passed the course too. So everybody who did an outside 
project took the exam. 
 87. If global warming is for real, then the mean global temperature would have 
risen over the past ten years. Global warming is not for real. Therefore the 
mean global temperature didn’t rise over the past ten years. 
 88. Don’t play that number. It won the lottery last week! 
 89. He can lift every weight in that stack; therefore he can lift the entire stack. 
 90. The chance of rain tomorrow is 50% and it’s 50% the next day too. So we’re 
pretty much 100% sure to get rain during the next 48 hours. 
 91. Well, as you know, if you take aspirin daily, it makes your blood thinner. 
According to your latest blood test, you have no problem in that department, 
so I conclude that you’ve been taking aspirin. 
 92. marina: But why would we even support an evil despot like the Shah in 
the first place? Is OLIVIA clearly offering an explanation as an excuse/
justification?
  olivia: Because he was our staunchest ally in the Middle East.
  marina: You call that a good reason? 
 93. I’ve always wondered how they could breathe, there on the Underground 
Railway.  
 94. All mammals bear their young live. Guppies also bear their young live. So, 
surprisingly, guppies must be mammals. 
 95. When James gets the paper on the porch every day, Mr. Fields gives him a 
small tip at the end of the month. I noticed he gave him a tip yesterday, so 
James was doing a good job of getting the paper on the porch. 
 96. The chances of my bus to the airport being late is about 50 percent, but the 
chance of my flight taking off late is also about 50 percent. So these should 
balance out and I’m pretty certain to make my flight. 
 97. The San Francisco Giants won the World Series. No way the San Francisco 
49ers won the Super Bowl the same year! 
▲
▲
▲
▲

242 
CHAPTER 8: FORMAL FALLACIES AND FALLACIES OF LANGUAGE
 98. Smoke from a single fireplace can hardly pollute the air; therefore people 
should be able to use their fireplaces anytime they want. 
 99. That field of flowers is really colorful. Some of the plants in there are hos-
tas; they must be quite colorful. 
 100.  I’ll tell you right now, Horace. No daughter of mine is going to work in a 
strip mall. 
 101.  Is an explanation clearly being offered as an excuse/justification? No sur-
prise that pitbulls are involved in more attacks on people than most other 
breeds. I mean, after all, those dogs are bred to be aggressive and to fight. 
That was the whole point of the breed. 
 102.  If it weren’t for a gerrymandered district, our local congressperson would 
never be reelected. Therefore, since the district is gerrymandered, our per-
son will be elected again. 
 103.  If you had cooked this meat for at least three hours, it would be tender 
enough to go in the stew. But you cooked it for only two hours, so it won’t 
be tender enough. 
 104.  Given the number of tickets I bought, I have a 33 percent chance of win-
ning a raffle prize, and Bill also has a 33 percent chance, and Juanita has a 
33 percent chance too. So one of us is bound to win something! 
 105.  I read that tiger mosquitos are spreading across the country more rapidly 
than any other type. I’m thinking they must be able to fly faster than other 
mosquitos.  
 106. A dialogue:
 jill: Professor Heinz is delivering a paper to a scientific meeting. 
 bill: The  Post or the  Times? 
 107.  Steve Wozniak always picks the numbers 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 on his lottery 
ticket. Can you believe that such a smart guy would pick such an unlikely 
selection of numbers? 
▲
▲

243
 9 
  The Science of Deduction and Analysis is one which 
can only be acquired by long and patient study, nor is 
life long enough to allow any mortal to attain the high-
est possible perfection in it. 
 —From an article by Sherlock Holmes, 
in A Study in Scarlet  by Sir Arthur Conan Doyle 
 Students will learn to . . . 
  1.  Recognize the four types of categori-
cal claims and the Venn diagrams 
that represent them 
  2.  Translate claims into standard form 
  3.  Use the square of opposition to iden-
tify logical relationships between 
corresponding categorical claims 
  4.  Use conversion, obversion, and 
contraposition with standard form 
to make valid arguments 
  5.  Recognize and evaluate the validity 
of categorical syllogisms 
 Deductive Arguments I 
 Categorical Logic 
 F
 ortunately, the greatest detective was doing some serious 
exaggerating in this quotation. While it may be that few of 
us mortals will attain “the highest possible perfection” in 
“the Science of Deduction,” most of us can learn quite a bit in a 
fairly short time if we put our minds to it. In fact, you already have 
an understanding of the basics from Chapter 2. *  In this chapter 
and the next, you’ll learn two kinds of techniques for making and 
evaluating deductive inferences—in other words, arguments.  
  If you flip through the pages of these two chapters, you’ll 
see diagrams with circles and Xs, and in Chapter 10, page after 
page of weird symbols that remind some people of mathemat-
ics. These pages may look intimidating, but there’s nothing all 
 * An understanding that’s somewhat better than Sir Arthur’s, as a matter of fact. Many 
instances of what he has Sherlock Holmes referring to as “deduction” turn out to be 
 inductive arguments, not deductive ones, as was mentioned in Chapter 2. We mean no 
disrespect, of course; one of your authors is a dyed-in-the-wool Holmes fanatic. 

244 
CHAPTER 9: DEDUCTIVE ARGUMENTS I
that complicated about them if you approach them in the right way. Nearly any-
body can catch on  if  they take one of Sherlock Holmes’s points seriously: Most 
people need to apply themselves conscientiously to understand this material. The 
reason is that, both here and in Chapter 10, almost everything builds on what goes 
before; if you don’t understand what happens at the beginning of the chapter, most 
of what happens later won’t make much sense. So take our advice (and you’ll prob-
ably hear this from your instructor, too): Keep up! Don’t get behind. This stuff is not 
easy to learn the night before an exam. But if you apply yourself regularly, it really 
isn’t all that hard. In fact, many of our students find this part of the book the most 
fun, because practicing the subject matter is like playing a game. So, be prepared 
to put in a little time on a regular basis, pay close attention to the text and your 
instructor’s remarks, and just maybe you’ll have a good time with this. 
 You may remember from Chapter 2 that deductive arguments depend on 
the meanings of the words that occur in their premises for their validity. In par-
ticular, it is words like “all,” “and,” “or,” “if . . . then . . .” that carry this burden. We’ll 
see how this works as we go along. Recall also that valid deductive arguments 
actually  prove  or  demonstrate  their conclusion—that is, if the premises of such an 
argument are true, the conclusion cannot fail to be true as well. That said, we’ll 
move on to our treatment of the first general type of deductive argument. 
 The first topic we’ll take up is  categorical logic.  Categorical logic is logic 
based on the relations of inclusion and exclusion among classes (or “categories”) 
as stated in categorical claims. Its methods date back to the time of Aristotle, and 
it was the principal form that logic took among most knowledgeable people for 
more than two thousand years. During that time, all kinds of bells and whistles 
were added to the basic theory, especially by monks and other scholars during 
the medieval period. So as not to weigh you down with unnecessary baggage, 
we’ll just set forth the basics of the subject in what follows. 
 ■ For over a hundred 
years, the symbol of “the 
Science of Deduction.” 
(Although, we might 
point out, the Dr. 
Watson here portrayed 
by Nigel Bruce as a bit 
of a dunderhead was 
not the Watson of the 
original stories; the 
version played by Jude 
Law in recent movies is 
closer to Arthur Conan 
Doyle’s original.) 

 
CATEGORICAL CLAIMS
245
 Like propositional logic, the subject of the next chapter, categorical logic is 
useful in clarifying and analyzing deductive arguments. But there is another rea-
son for studying the subject:  There is no better way to understand the underlying 
logical structure of our everyday language than to learn how to put it into the kinds 
of formal terms we’ll introduce in these chapters. 
 To test your analytical ability, take a look at these claims. Just exactly what is 
the difference between them? 
 Here’s another pair of claims: 
 You might be surprised at how many college students have a hard time trying to 
determine whether the claims in each pair mean the same thing or something dif-
ferent. In this chapter and the next, you’ll learn a foolproof method for determining 
how to unravel the logical implications of such claims and for seeing how any two 
such claims relate to each other. (Incidentally, claims 1 and 2 do not mean the same 
thing at all, and neither do 3 and 4.) If you’re signing a lease or entering into a con-
tract of any kind, it pays to be able to figure out just what is said in it and what is not; 
those who have trouble with claims like the ones above risk being left in the dark. 
 Studying categorical and truth-functional logic can teach us to become more 
careful and precise in our own thinking. Getting comfortable with this type of thinking 
can be helpful in general, but for those who will someday apply to law school, medical 
school, or graduate school, it has the added advantage that many admission exams 
for such programs deal with the kinds of reasoning discussed in these chapters. 
 Let’s start by looking at the four basic kinds of claims on which categorical 
logic is based. 
 CATEGORICAL CLAIMS 
  In logic, a  category  is a group or a class or a population; any bunch of things can 
serve as a category for our purposes.  Terms  are noun phrases, like “dogs,” “cats,” 
“Christians,” “Arabs,” “people who read logic books,” and so on. These terms are 
labels for categories or classes. There are all kinds of ways to express claims about 
categories, but we are interested in four standard-form types of sentences, sen-
tences that result from putting terms in the blanks of the following: 
(1) Everybody who is ineligible for Physics 1A must take Physical Science 1.
(2) No students who are required to take Physical Science 1 are eligible for 
Physics 1A.
(3) Harold won’t attend the meeting unless Vanessa decides to go.
(4) If Vanessa decides to go, then Harold will attend the meeting.
A: All _____ are _____.
(Example: All Presbyterians are Christians.)
E: No _____ are _____.
(Example: No Muslims are Christians.)
I: Some _____ are _____.
(Example: Some Christians are Arabs.)

246 
CHAPTER 9: DEDUCTIVE ARGUMENTS I
 The phrases that go in the blanks are  terms;  the one that goes into the first blank 
is the  subject term  of the claim, and the one that goes into the second blank is the 
predicate term.  Thus, “Christians” is the predicate term of the first example and 
the subject term of the third example. In many of the examples and explanations 
that follow, we’ll use the letters S and P (for “subject” and “predicate”) to stand for 
terms in categorical claims. And we’ll talk about the subject and predicate  classes,
which are just the classes that the terms refer to. 
 But first, a caution: Only nouns and noun phrases will work as terms. An 
adjective alone, such as “red,” won’t do. “All fire engines are red” does  not produce 
a standard-form categorical claim, because “red” is not a noun or noun phrase. 
To see that it is not, try switching the places of the terms: “All red are fire engines.” 
This doesn’t make sense, right? But “red vehicles” (or even “red things”) will do 
because “All red vehicles are fire engines” makes sense (even though it’s false). 
 Looking back at the standard-form structures just given, notice that each one 
has a letter to its left. These are the traditional names of the four types of standard-
form categorical claims. The claim “All Presbyterians are Christians” is an A-claim, 
and so are “All idolators are heathens,” “All people born between 1946 and 1964 are 
baby boomers,” and any other claim of the form “All S are P.” The same is true for 
the other three letters, E, I, and O, and the other three kinds of claims. 
 Venn Diagrams 
 Each of the standard forms has its own graphic illustration in a  Venn diagram,
as shown in  Figures 1  through  4 . Named after British logician John Venn, these 
 FIGURE 1 
 A-claim: All S are P.  
S
P
 FIGURE 2 
 E-claim: No S are P.  
S
P
 FIGURE 3 
 I-claim: Some S are P.  
S
P
X
 FIGURE 4 
 O-claim: Some S are not P.  
S
P
X
O: Some _____ are not _____.
(Example: Some Muslims are not Sunnis.)

 
CATEGORICAL CLAIMS 
247
diagrams exactly represent the four standard-form categorical claim types. In the 
diagrams, circles represent the classes named by the terms, colored areas repre-
sent areas that are empty, and areas containing Xs represent areas that are not 
empty—that contain at least one item. An area that is blank is one that the claim 
says nothing about; it may be occupied, or it may be empty. * 
 Notice that in the diagram for the A-claim, the area that would contain any 
members of the S class that were  not  members of the P class is colored—that is, 
it is empty. Thus, that diagram represents the claim “All S are P,” since there is no 
S left that isn’t P. Similarly, in the diagram for the E-claim, the area where S and P 
overlap is empty; any S that is also a P has been eliminated. Hence: “No S are P.” 
 For our purposes in this chapter, the word “some” means “at least one.” So, 
the third diagram represents the fact that at least one S is a P, and the X in the 
area where the two classes overlap shows that at least one thing inhabits this area. 
Finally, the last diagram shows an X in the area of the S circle that is outside the P 
circle, representing the existence of at least one S that is not a P. 
 We’ll try to keep technical jargon to a minimum, but here’s some terminol-
ogy we’ll need: The two claim types that  include  one class or part of one class 
within another, the A-claims and I-claims, are  affirmative claims;  the two that 
 exclude  one class or part of one class from another, the E-claims and O-claims, are 
 negative claims. 
 Although there are only four standard-form claim types, it’s remarkable 
how versatile they are. A large portion of what we want to say can be rewritten, or 
“translated,” into one or another of them. Because this task is sometimes easier 
said than done, we’d best spend a little while making sure we understand how 
to do it. And we warn you in advance: A lot of standard-form translations are not 
very pretty—but it’s accuracy we seek here, not style. 
 Translation into Standard Form 
 The main idea is to take an ordinary claim and turn it into a standard-form cat-
egorical claim that is exactly equivalent. We’ll say that two claims are  equivalent 
claims  if, and only if, they would be true in all and exactly the same circum-
stances—that is, under no circumstances could one of them be true and the other 
false. (You can think of such claims as “saying the same thing” more or less.) 
 Lots of ordinary claims in English are easy to translate into standard form. A 
claim of the sort “Every X is a Y,” for example, more or less automatically turns into 
the standard-form A-claim “All Xs are Ys.” And it’s easy to produce the proper term 
to turn “Minors are not eligible” into the E-claim “No minors are eligible people.” 
 All standard-form claims are in the present tense, but even so, we can use 
them to talk about the past. For example, we can translate “There were creatures 
weighing more than four tons that lived in North America” as “Some creatures 
that lived in North America are creatures that weighed more than four tons.” 
 What about a claim like “Only sophomores are eligible candidates”? It’s good to 
have a strategy for attacking such translation problems. First, identify the terms. In 
this case, the two classes in question are “sophomores” and “eligible candidates.” 
Now, which do we have on our hands, an A-, E-, I-, or O-claim? Generally speaking, 
nothing but a careful reading can serve to answer this question. So, you’ll need to 
think hard about just what relation between classes is being expressed and then 
decide how that relation is best turned into a standard form. Fortunately, we can pro-
vide some general rules that help in certain frequently encountered problems, 
 *There is one exception to this, but we needn’t worry about it for a few pages yet. 

248 
CHAPTER 9: DEDUCTIVE ARGUMENTS I
including one that applies to our current example. If you’re like most people, you 
don’t have too much trouble seeing that our claim is an A-claim, but  which A-claim? 
There are two possibilities: 
 and 
 If we make the wrong choice, we can change the meaning of the claim signifi-
cantly. (Notice that “All sophomores are students” is very different from “All 
students are sophomores.”) In the present case, notice that we are saying some-
thing about  every  eligible candidate—namely, that he or she must be a sopho-
more. ( Only  sophomores are eligible—i.e., no one else is eligible.) In an 
A-claim, the class so restricted is always the subject class. So, this claim should 
be translated into 
 In fact,  all claims of the sort “Only Xs are Ys” should be translated as “All Ys are Xs.”
 But there are other claims in which the word “only” plays a crucial role and 
that have to be treated differently. Consider, for example, this claim: “The only 
people admitted are people over twenty-one.” In this case, a restriction is being 
put on the class of people admitted; we’re saying that  nobody else is admitted
except those over twenty-one. Therefore, “people admitted” is the subject term: 
“All people admitted are people over twenty-one.” And, in fact,  all claims of the 
sort “The only Xs are Ys” should be translated as “All Xs are Ys.”
 The two general rules that govern most translations of claims that hinge on 
the word “only” are these:
The word “only,” used by itself, introduces the predicate term of an 
A-claim.
The phrase “the only” introduces the subject term of an A-claim.
 Note that, in accordance with these rules, we would translate both of these claims 
 and 
 as 
All sophomores are eligible candidates.
All eligible candidates are sophomores.
All eligible candidates are sophomores.
Only matinees are half-price shows
Matinees are the only half-price shows
All half-price shows are matinees.

 
CATEGORICAL CLAIMS
249
 The kind of thing a claim directly concerns is not always obvious. For example, 
if you think for a moment about the claim “I always get nervous when I take logic 
exams,” you’ll see that it’s a claim about  times.  It’s about getting nervous and about 
logic exams indirectly, of course, but it pertains directly to times or occasions. The 
proper translation of the example is “All times I take logic exams are times I get ner-
vous.” Notice that the word “whenever” is often a clue that you’re talking about times 
or occasions, as well as an indication that you’re going to have an A-claim or an 
E-claim. “Wherever” works the same way for places: “He makes trouble wherever he 
goes” should be translated as “All places he goes are places he makes trouble.” 
The Most Versatile Word in English
Only one word can be placed anywhere 
in the following sentence (at the begin-
ning, at the end, or between any other 
two words) and still make sense:
I gave my son the money he needed 
yesterday.
That word is “only,” the most versatile 
word in the English language. Each 
placement, with a hint as to the different 
meanings produced, is given below:
 1.  Only I gave my son the money he needed yesterday.
 
   (Nobody else gave him any.)
 2.  I only gave my son the money he needed yesterday.
    (He wanted the car, too, but I would not give it to him.)
 3.  I gave only my son the money he needed yesterday.
 
   (His friend wanted money too, but I refused.)
 4.  I gave my only son the money he needed yesterday.
 
   (I have a daughter, but only the one son.)
 5.  I gave my son only the money he needed yesterday.
 
   (He’ll need more for tomorrow.)
 6.  I gave my son the only money he needed yesterday.
 
   (He didn’t need much….)
 7.  I gave my son the money only he needed yesterday.
 
   (Everybody else must have had their money.)
 8.  I gave my son the money he only needed yesterday.
 
   (He won’t need any money the rest of the week.)
 9.  I gave my son the money he needed only yesterday.
 
   (And already he’s needing more?)
10.  I gave my son the money he needed yesterday only.
 
   (And I told him that was the first and last time.)
—Based on an idea from Marilyn Vos Savant, author of the “Ask Marilyn” column 
in Parade Magazine

250 
CHAPTER 9: DEDUCTIVE ARGUMENTS I
 There are two other sorts of claims that are a bit tricky to translate into standard 
form. The first is a claim about a single individual, such as “Aristotle is a logician.” It’s 
clear that this claim specifies a class, “logicians,” and places Aristotle as a member of 
that class. The problem is that categorical claims are always about  two  classes, and 
Aristotle isn’t a class. (We certainly don’t talk about  some  of Aristotle being a logician.) 
What we want to do is treat such claims as if they were about classes with exactly one 
member—in this case, Aristotle. One way to do this is to use the term “people who 
are identical with Aristotle,” which of course has only Aristotle as a member. (Every-
body is identical with himself or herself, and nobody else is.) The important thing to 
remember about such claims can be summarized in the following rule:
 Claims about single individuals should be treated as A-claims or E-claims. 
So our example
can be translated
Which is an A-claim.  Similarly, “Aristotle is not left-handed” becomes the E-claim 
“No people identical with Aristotle are left-handed people.” (Your instructor may 
prefer to leave the claim in its original form and simply  treat  it as an A-claim or an 
E-claim. This avoids the awkward “people identical with Aristotle” wording and is 
certainly okay with us.) 
 It isn’t just people that crop up in individual claims. Often, this kind of treat-
ment is called for when we’re talking about objects, occasions, places, and other 
kinds of things. For example, the preferred translation of  
Is
Aristotle is a logician
All people identical with Aristotle are logicians
St. Louis is on the Mississippi.
All cities identical with St. Louis are cities on the Mississippi.
More on Individual Claims
We treat claims about individuals as A- and E-claims for purposes of diagramming. But they are not 
the same as A- and E-claims. This is clear from the fact that a false individual claim implies the truth of 
its negation. This will be clear from an example. If the claim “Socrates is Italian” is false, then, provid-
ing there is such a person as Socrates,* the claim “Socrates is not Italian” is true. So, a false A implies a 
true E and vice versa, but only when the claims are individual claims being treated as A- and E-claims.
*The assumption that the subject class is not empty is always necessary for this inference, just as it is for all inferences 
between contraries; we’ll explain this point a few pages later.

 
CATEGORICAL CLAIMS
251
 Translate each of the following into a standard-form claim. Make sure that each 
answer follows the exact form of an A-, E-, I-, or O-claim and that each term you 
use is a noun or noun phrase that refers to a class of things. 
 1. Every one of the senators is a politician. 
 2. Not all senators are politicians. 
 3. If somebody is a senator, then that person must be a politician. 
 4. You can be a senator only if you’re a politician. 
 5. The only politicians I know are senators. 
 6. Being a senator is all it takes to be a politician. 
 7. Being a politician is not enough to make you a senator. 
 8. You can be a senator only if you’re a politician. 
 9. Nobody who is a politician is also a senator. 
10. A few senators are not politicians. 
 11. There are scholars who are philosophers. 
 12. There are no philosophers who are not scholars. 
13. Philosophers are not the only scholars. 
 14. Philosophers are the only scholars. 
 15. Not every scholar is a philosopher. 
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
 Exercise 9-1 
We warned you that some of these translations would not be pretty.
Other claims that cause translation difficulty contain what are called mass 
nouns.  Consider this example
This claim is about a kind of stuff.  The best way to deal with it is to treat it as a 
claim about examples of this kind of stuff.  The present example translates into an 
A-claim about all examples of the stuff in question:
An example such as
Translates into the I-claim,
 As we noted, it’s not possible to give rules or hints about every kind of prob-
lem you might run into when translating claims into standard-form categorical 
versions. Only practice and discussion can bring you to the point where you can 
handle this part of the material with confidence. The best thing to do now is to 
turn to some exercises. 
Boiled okra is too ugly to eat.
All examples of boiled okra are things that are too ugly to eat.
Most boiled okra is too ugly to eat.
Some examples of boiled okra are things that are too ugly to eat.

252 
CHAPTER 9: DEDUCTIVE ARGUMENTS I
 Follow the directions for the previous exercises. 
  1. Students who wrote poor exams didn’t get admitted to the program. 
 2. None of my students are failing. 
 3. If you live in the dorms, you can’t own a car. 
  4. There are a few right-handed first basemen. 
 5. People make faces every time Joan sings. 
 6. The only tests George fails are the ones he takes. 
  7. Nobody passed who didn’t make at least 50 percent. 
 8. You can’t be a member unless you’re over fifty. 
 9. Nobody catches on without studying. 
 10. I’ve had days like this before. 
 11. Roofers aren’t millionaires. 
 12. Not one part of Joan Rivers’ face is original equipment. 
 13. A few holidays fall on Saturday. 
 14. Only outlaws own guns. 
 15. You have nothing to lose but your chains. 
 16. Unless you pass this test you won’t pass the course. 
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
 Exercise 9-3 
 Follow the directions for the previous exercise. Remember that you’re trying to 
produce a claim that’s equivalent to the one given; it doesn’t matter whether the 
given claim is actually true. 
  1. Every salamander is a lizard. 
 2. Not every lizard is a salamander. 
 3. Only reptiles can be lizards. 
 4. Snakes are the only members of the suborder Ophidia. 
 5. The only members of the suborder Ophidia are snakes. 
 6. None of the burrowing snakes are poisonous. 
  7. Anything that’s an alligator is a reptile. 
 8. Anything that qualifies as a frog qualifies as an amphibian. 
 9. There are frogs wherever there are snakes. 
 10. Wherever there are snakes, there are frogs. 
 11. Whenever the frog population decreases, the snake population decreases. 
 12. Nobody arrived except the cheerleaders. 
 13. Except for vice presidents, nobody got raises. 
 14. Unless people arrived early, they couldn’t get seats. 
 15. Most home movies are as boring as dirt. 
 16. Socrates is a Greek. 
 17. The bank robber is not Jane’s fiancé. 
 18. If an automobile was built before 1950, it’s an antique. 
 19. Salt is a meat preservative. 
 20. Most corn does not make good popcorn. 
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
 Exercise 9-2 

 
CATEGORICAL CLAIMS 
253
 17. If you cheat, your prof will make you sorry. 
 18. If you cheat, your friends couldn’t care less. 
 19. Only when you’ve paid the fee will they let you enroll. 
 20. Nobody plays who isn’t in full uniform. 
▲
 The Square of Opposition 
 Two categorical claims  correspond  to each other if they have the same subject 
term and the same predicate term. So, “All Methodists are Christians” corre-
sponds to “Some Methodists are Christians”: In both claims, “Methodists” is the 
subject term, and “Christians” is the predicate term. Notice, though, that “Some 
Christians are not Methodists” does  not  correspond to either of the other two; it 
has the same terms but in different places. 
 We can now exhibit the logical relationships between corresponding A-, E-, I-, 
and O-claims. The  square of opposition,  in  Figure 5 , does this very concisely. The 
A- and E-claims, across the top of the square from each other, are  contrary claims —
they can both be false, but they cannot both be true. The I- and O-claims, across 
the bottom of the square from each other, are  subcontrary claims —they can both 
be true, but they cannot both be false. The A- and O-claims and the E- and I-claims, 
which are at opposite diagonal corners from each other, respectively, are  contradic-
tory claims —they never have the same truth values.  
 Notice that these logical relationships are reflected on the Venn diagrams 
for the claims (see  Figures 1  through  4 , p. 246). The diagrams for corresponding A- 
and O-claims say exactly opposite things about the left-hand area of the diagram, 
namely, that the area  has  something in it and that it  doesn’t;  those for correspond-
ing E- and I-claims do the same about the center area. Clearly, exactly one claim 
of each pair is true no matter what—either the relevant area is empty, or it isn’t. 
 The diagrams show clearly how both subcontraries can be true: There’s no 
conflict in putting Xs in both left and center areas. Now, if you’re paying close atten-
tion, you may have noticed that it’s possible to diagram an A-claim and the corre-
sponding E-claim on the same diagram; we just have to color the entire subject class 
circle. This amounts to saying that  both  an A-claim and its corresponding E-claim 
can be true  as long as there are no members of the subject class.  We get an analogous 
result for subcontraries: They can both be false as long as the subject class is empty. *  
We can easily avoid this result by making an assumption:  When making inferences 
from one contrary (or subcontrary) to another, we’ll assume that the classes we’re talk-
ing about are not entirely empty—that is, that each has at least one member.  On this 
assumption, the A-claim or the corresponding E-claim (or both) must be false, and 
the I-claim or the corresponding O-claim (or both) must be true. 
 If we have the truth value of one categorical claim, we can often deduce the 
truth values of the three corresponding claims by using the square of opposition. 
For instance, if it’s true that “All serious remarks by Lindsay Lohan are hopeless 
clichés,” then we can immediately infer that its contradictory claim, “Some serious 
remarks by Lindsay Lohan are not hopeless clichés,” is false; the corresponding 
 *It is quite possible to interpret categorical claims this way. Allowing both the A- and the E-claims to be true and 
both the I- and the O-claims to be false reduces the square to contradiction alone. We’re going to interpret the 
claims differently, however; at the level at which we’re operating, it seems much more natural to see “All Cs are Ds” as 
conflicting with “No Cs are Ds.” 

 Translate the following into standard-form claims, and determine the three cor-
responding standard-form claims. Then, assuming the truth value in parentheses 
for the given claim, determine the truth values of as many of the other three as 
you can. 
 Example 
 Most snakes are harmless. (True) 
 Translation (I-claim): Some snakes are harmless creatures. (True) 
 Corresponding A-claim: All snakes are harmless creatures. (Undetermined) 
 Corresponding E-claim: No snakes are harmless creatures. (False) 
 Corresponding O-claim: Some snakes are not harmless creatures. 
(Undetermined)   
  1. Not all anniversaries are happy occasions. (True) 
 2. There’s no such thing as a completely harmless drug. (True) 
 3. There have been such things as just wars. (True) 
▲
 Exercise 9-4 
254 
CHAPTER 9: DEDUCTIVE ARGUMENTS I
E-claim, “No serious remarks by Lindsay Lohan 
are hopeless clichés,” is also false because it is the 
contrary claim of the original A-claim and cannot 
be true if the A-claim is true. The corresponding 
I-claim, “Some serious remarks by Lindsay Lohan 
are hopeless clichés,” must be true because we 
just determined that  its contradictory claim, the 
E-claim, is false. 
 However, we cannot  always  determine the 
truth values of the remaining three standard-form 
categorical claims. For example, if we know only 
that the A-claim is false, all we can infer is the 
truth value (true) of the corresponding O-claim. 
Nothing follows about either the E- or the I-claim. 
Because the A- and the E-claim can both be false, 
knowing that the A-claim is false does not tell us 
anything about the E-claim—it can still be either 
true or false. And if the E-claim remains undeter-
mined, then so must its contradictory, the I-claim. 
 So, here are the limits on what can be 
inferred from the square of opposition: Beginning 
with a  true  claim at the top of the square (either A 
or E), we can infer the truth values of all three of 
the remaining claims. The same is true if we begin with a  false  claim at the bottom 
of the square (either I or O): We can still deduce the truth values of the other three. 
But if we begin with a false claim at the top of the square or a true claim at the bot-
tom, all we can determine is the truth value of the contradictory of the claim in 
hand; the other three remain undetermined. 
 On a first reading, the preceding may sound like a lot of complicated stuff. 
But believe us, it’s not as difficult as it sounds. Take it slowly, and you’ll find it isn’t 
all that difficult. 
 FIGURE 5 
 The square of 
opposition.  
Contraries
(Not both true)
Contradictories
(Never the same truth value)
Subcontraries
(Not both false)
I
O
A
E

  4. There are allergies that can kill you. (True) 
 5. Woodpeckers sing really well. (False) 
 6. Mockingbirds can’t sing. (False) 
  7. Some herbs are medicinal. (False) 
 8. Logic exercises are easy. (False) 
 9. Some Central American countries have no standing army. (True) 
10. Not all colorful frogs are poisonous. (True) 
▲
▲
▲
 
THREE CATEGORICAL RELATIONS
255
 THREE CATEGORICAL RELATIONS 
  The square of opposition allows us to make inferences from one claim to another, 
as you were doing in the last exercise. We can think of these inferences as simple 
valid arguments, because that’s exactly what they are. (Recall from Chapter 2 
that an argument is valid just in case the truth of its premises makes it impos-
sible for its conclusion to be false. In other words, true premises guarantee a 
true conclusion.) We’ll turn next to three operations that can be performed on 
standard-form categorical claims. They, too, will allow us to make simple valid 
arguments and, in combination with the square, some not-quite-so-simple valid 
arguments.  
 Conversion 
 You find the  converse  of a standard-form claim by switching the positions of the 
subject and predicate terms. The E- and I-claims, but not the A- and O-claims, 
contain just the same information as their converses; that is,
All E- and I-claims, but not A- and O-claims, are equivalent to their 
converses. 
 Each member of the following pairs is the converse of the other: 
 Notice that the claims that are equivalent to their converses are those with 
symmetrical Venn diagrams. 
 Obversion 
 The next categorical relation is between a claim and its obverse. In order to arrive 
at a claim’s obverse, we first need to introduce a couple of auxiliary notions. 
First, there’s the notion of a  universe of discourse.  With rare exceptions, we make 
claims within contexts that limit the scope of the terms we use. For example, if 
your instructor walks into class and says, “Everybody passed the last exam,” the 
word “everybody” does not include everybody in the world. Your instructor is 
not claiming, for example, that your mother and the Queen of England passed 
the exam. There is an unstated but obvious restriction to a smaller universe of 
E:  No Norwegians are Slavs.
   No Slavs are Norwegians.
 I:  Some state capitals are large cities.
   Some large cities are state capitals.
“You should say what you 
mean,” the March Hare went 
on.
“I do,” Alice hastily replied; 
“at least—at least I mean what 
I say—that’s the same thing, 
you know.”
“Not the same thing a 
bit!” said the Hatter. “Why, you 
might just as well say that ‘I see 
what I eat’ is the same thing as 
‘I eat what I see!’ ”
—LEWIS CARROLL, Alice’s Adven-
tures in Wonderland
The Mad Hatter is teaching Alice not
to convert A-claims.
Lewis Carroll, incidentally, was an 
accomplished logician.

256 
CHAPTER 9: DEDUCTIVE ARGUMENTS I
people—in this case, the people in your class who  took  the exam. Now, for every 
class within a universe of discourse, there is a  complementary class  that con-
tains everything in the universe of discourse that is  not  in the first class. Terms 
that name complementary classes are complementary terms. So “students” and 
“nonstudents” are  complementary terms.  Indeed, putting the prefix “non” in 
front of a term is often the easiest way to produce its complement. Some terms 
require different treatment, though. The complement of “people who took the 
exam” is probably best stated as “people who did not take the exam” because 
the universe is pretty clearly restricted to people in such a case. (We wouldn’t 
expect, for example, the complement of “people who took the exam” to include 
 everything  that didn’t take the exam, including your Uncle Bob’s hairpiece.) 
 Now, we can get on with it: To find the  obverse  of a claim, (a) change it from 
affirmative to negative, or vice versa (i.e., go horizontally across the square—an 
A-claim becomes an E-claim; an O-claim becomes an I-claim; and so on); then 
(b) replace the predicate term with its complementary term. 
 Here are some examples; each claim is the obverse of the other member of 
the pair: 
 Contraposition 
 You find the  contrapositive  of a categorical claim by (a) switching the places of 
the subject and predicate terms, just as in conversion and (b) replacing both 
terms with complementary terms. Each of the following is the contrapositive of 
the other member of the pair: 
 The operations of conversion, obversion, and contraposition are important 
to much of what comes later, so make sure you can do them correctly and that you 
know which claims are equivalent to the results. 
All categorical claims of all four types, A, E, I, and O, are equivalent to their obverses.
A:  All Presbyterians are Christians.
  No Presbyterians are non-Christians.
E:  No fish are mammals.
  All fish are nonmammals.
 I:  Some citizens are voters.
  Some citizens are not nonvoters.
O: Some contestants are not winners.
  Some contestants are nonwinners.
A: All Mongolians are Muslims.
   All non-Muslims are non-Mongolians.
O: Some citizens are not voters.
Some nonvoters are not noncitizens.
All A- and O-claims, but not E- and I-claims, are equivalent to their contrapositives.

 
THREE CATEGORICAL RELATIONS
257
Venn Diagrams for the Three Relations
Conversion: 
 
  Venn diagrams can help us see how these categorical relations work. 
Here’s a two-circle diagram, which is all we need to explain conversion:
 
Imagine an I-claim, “Some S are P,” diagrammed on the above. It would 
 
 have an X in the central (green) area labeled SP, where S and P overlap. But 
its converse, “Some P are S,” would also have an X in that area, since that’s 
where P and S overlap. So, the symmetry of the diagram shows that con-
version works for I-claims. The same situation holds for E-claims, except 
we’re coloring the central area in both cases rather than placing Xs.
 
 
 Now, let’s imagine an A-claim, “All S are P,” the diagram for which 
requires us to color all the subject term that’s not included in the 
predicate term—i.e., the yellow area above. But its converse, “All P are 
S,” would require that we color the blue area of the diagram, since the 
subject term is now over there on the right. So, the claims with asym-
metrical diagrams cannot be validly converted.
 
 
 We need a somewhat more complicated diagram to explain the 
other two operations. Let’s use a rectangular box to represent the uni-
verse of discourse (see page 255 for an explanation of the universe of 
discourse) within which our classes and their complements fall. In addi-
tion to the S and P labels, we’ll add S anywhere we would not find S, and 
P anywhere we would not find P. Here’s the result (make sure you under-
stand what’s going on here—it’s not all that complicated):
Obversion: 
 
  Now let’s look at obversion. Imagine an A-claim, “All S are P,” dia-
grammed on the above. We’d color in the area labeled SP (the yellow 
area), wouldn’t we? (All the subject class that’s not part of the predi-
cate class.) Now consider its obverse, “No S are P.” Since it’s an E-claim, 
S
SP
P
Venn 1
SP
SP
SP
SP
Venn 2

258 
CHAPTER 9: DEDUCTIVE ARGUMENTS I
 Find the claim described, and determine whether it is equivalent to the claim you 
began with. 
1. Find the contrapositive of “No Sunnis are Christians.” 
 2. Find the obverse of “Some Arabs are Christians.” 
 3. Find the obverse of “All Sunnis are Muslims.” 
4. Find the converse of “Some Kurds are not Christians.” 
▲
▲
 Exercise 9-5 
we color where the subject (S) and predicate (P) overlap (the yellow 
area). And that turns out to be exactly the same area we colored for its 
obverse! So these two are equivalent: They produce the same diagram. 
If you check, you’ll find you get the same result for each of the other 
three types of claim, since obversion is valid for all four types.
Contraposition:  Finally, we’ll see how contraposition works out on the diagram. The 
A-claim “All S are P” once again is made true by coloring in the SP (yel-
low) area of the diagram. But now consider this claim’s contrapositive, 
“All P are S.” Coloring in all the subject class that’s outside the predicate 
class produces the same diagram as the original, thus showing that they 
are equivalent. Try diagramming an O-claim and its contrapositive, and 
you’ll find yourself putting an X in exactly the same area for each.
 
 
 But if you diagram an I-claim, “Some S are P,” putting an X in the cen-
tral SP area, and then diagram its contrapositive, “Some P are S”, you’ll 
find that the X would have to go entirely outside both circles, since 
that’s the only place P and S overlap! Clearly, this says something dif-
ferent from the original I-claim. You’ll find a similarly weird result if you 
consider an E-claim, since contraposition does not work for either I- or 
E-claims.
Some mosquitoes carry West Nile virus. So it must be 
that there are some that don’t.The conclusion of this 
type of argument (“Some don’t”), while it may be true, 
does not follow from the premise, because it could just 
as easily be false.
You sometimes hear arguments like this worked in 
reverse: “Some mosquitoes don’t carry West Nile; there-
fore, some do.” Equally invalid. The only way to get an 
I-claim from an O-claim is by obverting the O-claim.
Some Do, So Some Don’t?

 
THREE CATEGORICAL RELATIONS 
259
 For each of the following, find the claim that is described. 
 Example 
 Find the contrary of the contrapositive of “All Greeks are Europeans.” 
First, find the contrapositive of the original claim. It is “All non-
Europeans are non-Greeks.” Now, find the contrary of that. Going 
across the top of the square (from an A-claim to an E-claim), you get 
“No non-Europeans are non-Greeks.” 
 1. Find the contradictory of the converse of “No clarinets are percussion 
instruments.”  
 2. Find the contradictory of the obverse of “Some encyclopedias are definitive 
works.” 
   3. Find the contrapositive of the subcontrary of “Some English people are Celts.”  
 4. Find the contrary of the contradictory of “Some sailboats are not sloops.” 
 5. Find the obverse of the converse of “No sharks are freshwater fish.” 
▲
▲
 Exercise 9-7 
 Follow the directions given in the preceding exercise. 
 1. Find the obverse of “Some students who scored well on the exam are stu-
dents who wrote poor essays.” 
 2. Find the obverse of “No students who wrote poor essays are students who 
were admitted to the program.” 
 3. Find the contrapositive of “Some students who were admitted to the pro-
gram are not students who scored well on the exam.” 
 4. Find the contrapositive of “No students who did not score well on the exam 
are students who were admitted to the program.” 
 5. Find the contrapositive of “All students who were admitted to the program 
are students who wrote good essays.” 
 6. Find the obverse of “No students of mine are unregistered students.” 
 7. Find the contrapositive of “All people who live in the dorms are people 
whose automobile ownership is restricted.” 
 8. Find the contrapositive of “All commuters are people whose automobile 
ownership is unrestricted.” 
 9. Find the contrapositive of “Some students with short-term memory prob-
lems are students who do poorly in history classes.” 
 10. Find the obverse of “No first basemen are right-handed people.” 
▲
▲
▲
▲
 Exercise 9-6 
 5. Find the converse of “No Hindus are Muslims.” 
 6. Find the contrapositive of “Some Indians are not Hindus.” 
  7. Find the converse of “All Shiites are Muslims.” 
 8. Find the contrapositive of “All Catholics are Christians.” 
 9. Find the converse of “All Protestants are Christians.” 
 10. Find the obverse of “No Muslims are Christians.” 
▲
▲

260 
CHAPTER 9: DEDUCTIVE ARGUMENTS I
 Try to make the claims in the following pairs correspond to each other—that 
is, arrange them so that they have the same subject and the same predicate 
terms. Use only those operations that produce equivalent claims; for example, 
don’t convert A- or O-claims in the process of trying to make the claims corre-
spond. You can work on either member of the pair or both. (The main reason 
for practicing on these is to make the problems in the next two exercises easier 
to do.) 
 Example 
 a. Some students are not unemployed people. 
 b. All employed people are students. 
 Exercise 9-10 
 For each of the numbered claims below, determine which of the lettered claims 
that follow is equivalent. You may use letters more than once if necessary. ( Hint: 
This is a lot easier to do after all the claims are translated, a fact that indicates at 
least one advantage of putting claims into standard form.)
 1. Some people who have not been tested can give blood. 
 2. People who have not been tested cannot give blood. 
 3. Nobody who has been tested can give blood. 
 4. Nobody can give blood except those who have been tested. 
 
a. Some people who have been tested cannot give blood. 
 
b. Not everybody who can give blood has been tested. 
 
c. Only people who have been tested can give blood. 
 
d. Some people who cannot give blood are people who have been tested. 
 
e. If a person has been tested, then he or she cannot give blood. 
▲
▲
 Exercise 9-8 
Follow the directions given in the preceding exercise. (Presume that the 
universe of discourse consists of people who signed either before or after the 
first of the year.)
 1. None of the people who signed before the first of the year are bound by the 
terms of the lease. 
 2. Some of the people who are bound by the terms of the lease are not people 
who signed before the first of the year. 
 3. Everybody who signed after the first of the year is bound by the terms of the 
lease.  
  4. You are not bound by the terms of the lease unless you signed before the first 
of the year. 
 a. Some people who are not bound by the terms of the lease are not people 
who signed after the first of the year. 
 b. The only people who are bound by the terms of the lease are those who 
signed after the first of the year. 
 c. None of the people who are not bound by the terms of the lease are people 
who signed after the first of the year. 
 d. If you did not sign before the first of the year, you are not bound by the 
terms of the lease. 
▲
▲
 Exercise 9-9 

 
THREE CATEGORICAL RELATIONS 
261
 These two claims can be made to correspond by obverting claim (a) and then 
converting the result (which is legitimate because the claim has been turned into 
an I-claim before conversion). We wind up with “Some employed people are stu-
dents,” which corresponds to (b). 
  1.  a. Some Slavs are non-Europeans. 
   b. No Slavs are Europeans. 
  2. a. All Europeans are Westerners. 
   b. Some non-Westerners are non-Europeans. 
  3.  a. All Greeks are Europeans. 
   b. Some non-Europeans are Greeks. 
  4. a. No members of the club are people who took the exam. 
   b. Some people who did not take the exam are members of the club. 
  5. a.  All people who are not members of the club are people who took the exam. 
   b. Some people who did not take the exam are members of the club. 
  6.  a. Some cheeses are not products high in cholesterol. 
   b. No cheeses are products that are not high in cholesterol. 
  7.  a. All people who arrived late are people who will be allowed to perform. 
   b.  Some of the people who did not arrive late will not be allowed to perform. 
  8.  a. No nonparticipants are people with name tags. 
   b. Some of the people with name tags are participants. 
 9.   a. Some perennials are plants that grow from tubers. 
  b. Some plants that do not grow from tubers are perennials. 
 10.  a.  Some flash drives that can be reformatted are not capable of 
defragmentation.  
  b.  All devices capable of defragmentation are drives that cannot be 
reformatted.       
▲
▲
▲
▲
 Which of the following arguments is valid? (Remember, an argument is valid 
when the truth of its premises guarantees the truth of its conclusion.)
 1. Whenever the battery is dead, the screen goes blank; that means, of course, 
that whenever the screen goes blank, the battery is dead. 
 2. For a while there, some students were desperate for good grades, which 
meant some weren’t, right? 
 3. Some players in the last election weren’t members of the Reform Party. 
Obviously, therefore, some members of the Reform Party weren’t players in 
the last election. 
 4. Since some of the students who failed the exam were students who didn’t 
attend the review session, it must be that some students who weren’t at the 
session failed the exam. 
 5. None of the people who arrived late were people who got good seats, so 
none of the good seats were occupied by latecomers. 
 6. Everybody who arrived on time was given a box lunch, so the people who 
did not get a box lunch were those who didn’t get there on time. 
  7. None of the people who gave blood are people who were tested, so every-
body who gave blood must have been untested. 
▲
▲
▲
 Exercise 9-11 

262 
CHAPTER 9: DEDUCTIVE ARGUMENTS I
 For each pair of claims, assume that the first has the truth value given in paren-
theses. Using the operations of conversion, obversion, and contraposition along 
with the square of opposition, decide whether the second claim is true, is false, or 
remains undetermined. 
 Example 
 a. No aardvarks are nonmammals. (True) 
 b. Some aardvarks are not mammals. 
 Claim (a) can be obverted to “All aardvarks are mammals.” Because all cat-
egorical claims are equivalent to their obverses, the truth of this claim follows 
from that of (a). Because this claim is the contradictory of claim (b), it follows that 
claim (b) must be false. 
 Note:  If we had been unable to make the two claims correspond without 
performing an illegitimate operation (such as converting an A-claim), then the 
answer is automatically  undetermined. 
  1.  a. No mosquitoes are poisonous creatures. (True) 
  b. Some poisonous creatures are mosquitoes. 
 2.  a. Some students are not ineligible candidates. (True) 
  b. No eligible candidates are students. 
   3.    a. Some sound arguments are not invalid arguments. (True) 
  b. All valid arguments are unsound arguments. 
 4.  a. Some residents are nonvoters. (False) 
  b. No voters are residents. 
 5.  a. Some automobile plants are not productive factories. (True) 
  b. All unproductive factories are automobile plants. 
 Many of the following will have to be rewritten as standard-form categorical 
claims before they can be answered.
 6.  a. Most opera singers take voice lessons their whole lives. (True) 
  b. Some opera singers do not take voice lessons their whole lives. 
 7.  a. The hero gets killed in some of Gary Brodnax’s novels. (False) 
  b. The hero does not get killed in some of Gary Brodnax’s novels. 
 8.  a. None of the boxes in the last shipment are unopened. (True) 
  b. Some of the opened boxes are not boxes in the last shipment. 
 9.  a. Not everybody who is enrolled in the class will get a grade. (True) 
  b. Some people who will not get a grade are enrolled in the class. 
 10. a.  Persimmons are always astringent when they have not been left to ripen. 
(True) 
  b. Some persimmons that have been left to ripen are not astringent. 
▲
▲
▲
▲
 Exercise 9-12 
 8. Some of the people who were not tested are people who were allowed to give 
blood, from which it follows that some of the people who were  not allowed 
to give blood must have been people who were tested. 
 9. Everybody who was in uniform was able to play, so nobody who was out of 
uniform must have been able to play. 
 10. Not everybody in uniform was allowed to play, so some people who were 
not allowed to play must not have been people in uniform. 
▲

 
CATEGORICAL SYLLOGISMS
263
 CATEGORICAL SYLLOGISMS 
 A  syllogism  is a two-premise deductive argument. A  categorical syllogism (in 
standard form) is a syllogism whose every claim is a standard-form categorical 
claim and in which three terms each occur exactly twice and in exactly two of the 
claims. Study the following example: 
 Notice how each of the three terms “Americans,” “consumers,” and “Demo-
crats” occurs exactly twice in exactly two different claims. The  terms of a syllogism
are sometimes given the following labels:
Major term:  the term that occurs as the predicate term of the syllogism’s 
conclusion 
Minor term:  the term that occurs as the subject term of the syllogism’s 
conclusion 
Middle term:  the term that occurs in both of the premises but not at all in 
the conclusion 
 The most frequently used symbols for these three terms are  P  for major 
term,  S  for minor term, and  M  for middle term. We use these symbols throughout 
to simplify the discussion. 
 In a categorical syllogism, each of the premises states a relationship between 
the middle term and one of the other terms, as shown in  Figure 6 . If both prem-
ises do their jobs correctly—that is, if the proper connections between S and P are 
established via the middle term, M—then the relationship between S and P stated 
by the conclusion will have to follow—that is, the argument is valid.  
 In case you’re not clear about the concept of validity, remember: An argument 
is valid if, and only if, it is not possible for its premises to be true while its conclusion 
is false. This is just another way of saying that,  were  the premises of a valid argument 
true (whether or not they are in fact true), then the truth of the conclusion would be 
guaranteed. If the premises of a valid argument are in fact true, then that argument is 
said to be sound, and its conclusion has been proven to be true. In a moment, we’ll 
begin developing the first of two methods for assessing the validity of syllogisms. 
 First, though, let’s look at some candidates for syllogisms. In fact, only one of 
the following qualifies as a categorical syllogism. Can you identify which one? 
What is wrong with the other two? 
All Americans are consumers.
Some consumers are not Democrats.
Therefore, some Americans are not Democrats.
1. All cats are mammals.
   Not all cats are domestic.
   Therefore, not all mammals are domestic.
2. All valid arguments are good arguments.
   Some valid arguments are boring arguments.
   Therefore, some good arguments are boring arguments.
3. Some people on the committee are not students.
   All people on the committee are local people.
   Therefore, some local people are nonstudents.

264 
CHAPTER 9: DEDUCTIVE ARGUMENTS I
 We hope it was fairly obvious 
that the second argument is the 
only proper syllogism. The first 
example has a couple of things 
wrong with it: Neither the sec-
ond premise nor the conclu-
sion is in standard form—no 
standard-form categorical claim 
begins with the word “not”—and 
the predicate term must be a 
noun or noun phrase. The sec-
ond premise can be translated 
into “Some cats are not domes-
tic creatures” and the conclu-
sion into “Some mammals are 
not domestic creatures,” and the 
result is a syllogism. The third argument is okay up to the conclusion, which 
contains a term that does not occur anywhere in the premises: “nonstudents.” 
However, because “nonstudents” is the complement of “students,” this argu-
ment can be turned into a proper syllogism by obverting the conclusion, pro-
ducing “Some local people are not students.” 
 Once you’re able to recognize syllogisms, it’s time to learn how to determine 
their validity. We’ll turn now to our first method, the Venn diagram test. 
 The Venn Diagram Method of Testing for Validity 
 Diagramming a syllogism requires three overlapping circles, one representing 
each class named by a term in the argument. To be systematic, in our diagrams 
we put the minor term on the left, the major term on the right, and the middle 
term in the middle but lowered a bit. We will diagram the following syllogism 
step by step: 
 In this example, “socialists” is the minor term, “Republicans” is the major term, 
and “collectivists” is the middle term. See  Figure 7 for the three circles required, 
labeled appropriately. 
 We fill in this diagram by diagramming the premises of the argument just 
as we diagrammed the A-, E-, I-, and O-claims earlier. The premises in the fore-
going example are diagrammed like this: First: No Republicans are collectivists 
( Figure 8 ). Notice that in this figure we have colored the entire area where the 
Republican and collectivist circles overlap. 
 Second: All socialists are collectivists ( Figure  9 ). Because diagramming 
the premises resulted in the coloring of the entire area where the socialist 
and Republican circles overlap, and because that is exactly what we would do 
to diagram the syllogism’s conclusion, we can conclude that the syllogism is 
valid. In general, a syllogism is valid if and only if diagramming the premises 
No Republicans are collectivists.
All socialists are collectivists.
Therefore, no socialists are Republicans.
S
P
M
premise
premise
conclusion
 FIGURE 6 
 Relationship 
of terms in categorical 
syllogisms. 

 
CATEGORICAL SYLLOGISMS
265
 FIGURE 7 
 Before either premise has been diagrammed.  
Socialists
Republicans
Collectivists
 FIGURE 8 
 One premise diagrammed.  
Socialists
Republicans
Collectivists
automatically produces a correct diagram of the conclusion. *  (The one excep-
tion is discussed later.)  
 When one of the premises of a syllogism is an I- or O-premise, there can be 
a problem about where to put the required X. The following example presents 
such a problem (see  Figure 10  for the diagram). Note in the diagram that we have 
numbered the different areas in order to refer to them easily. 
 *It might be helpful for some students to produce two diagrams, one for the premises of the argument and one 
for the conclusion. The two can then be compared: Any area of the conclusion diagram that is colored must also be 
colored in the premises diagram, and any area of the conclusion diagram that has an X must also have one in the 
premises diagram. If both of these conditions are met, the argument is valid. (Thanks to Professor Ellery Eells of the 
University of Wisconsin, Madison, for the suggestion.) 
Abe Lincoln Knew His Logic
Validity and Soundness in the Lincoln–Douglas Debates
Here’s Abraham Lincoln speaking in the fifth Lincoln–Douglas debate:
Nothing in the Constitution . . . can destroy a right dis-
tinctly and expressly affirmed in the Constitution.
The right of property in a slave is distinctly and expressly 
affirmed in the Constitution.
Therefore, nothing in the Constitution can destroy the 
right of property in a slave.
Lincoln goes on to say:
There is a fault [in the argument], but the fault is not in the 
reasoning; but the falsehood in fact is a fault of the prem-
ises. I believe that the right of property in a slave is not 
distinctly and expressly affirmed in the Constitution.

266 
CHAPTER 9: DEDUCTIVE ARGUMENTS I
Some S are not M.
All P are M. 
Some S are not P.
 (The horizontal line separates the premises from the conclusion.) 
 An X in either area 1 or area 2 of  Figure 10  makes the claim “Some S are not M” 
true, because an inhabitant of either area is an S but not an M. How do we determine 
which area should get the X? In some cases, the decision can be made for us:  When 
one premise is an A- or E-premise and the other is an I- or O-premise, diagram the A- 
or E-premise first.  (Always color areas in before putting in Xs.) Refer to  Figure 11  to 
see what happens with the current example when we follow this rule.  
 Once the A-claim has been diagrammed, there is no longer a choice about 
where to put the X—it has to go in area 1. Hence, the completed diagram for this 
argument looks like  Figure 12 . And from this diagram, we can read the conclusion 
“Some S are not P,” which tells us that the argument is valid. 
 In some syllogisms, the rule just explained does not help. For example, 
 A syllogism like this one still leaves us in doubt about where to put the X, even 
after we have diagrammed the A-premise ( Figure 13 ): Should the X go in area 4 or 
5? When such a question remains unresolved, here is the rule to follow:  An X that 
can go in either of two areas goes on the line separating the areas, as in  Figure 14 .   
 In essence, an X on a line indicates that the X belongs in one or the other of 
the two areas, maybe both, but we don’t know which. When the time comes to 
see whether the diagram yields the conclusion, we look to see whether there is an 
X  entirely  within the appropriate area. In the current example, we would need an 
X entirely within the area where S and P overlap; because there is no such X, the 
argument is invalid. An X  partly  within the appropriate area fails to establish the 
conclusion. 
All P are M.
Some S are M.
Some S are P.
 FIGURE 9 
 Both premises diagrammed. 
Socialists
Republicans
Collectivists
 FIGURE 10 
5
4
6
S
P
M
1
2
5
4
6
7
3

 
CATEGORICAL SYLLOGISMS 
267
 FIGURE 14 
 FIGURE 13 
S
P
M
5
4
S
P
M
X
 FIGURE 11 
S
P
M
 FIGURE 12 
S
P
M
X
 Please notice this about Venn diagrams: When both premises of a syllo-
gism are A- or E-claims and the conclusion is an I- or O-claim, diagramming 
the premises cannot possibly yield a diagram of the conclusion (because A- 
and E-claims produce only coloring of areas, and I- and O-claims require an X 
to be read from the diagram). In such a case, remember our assumption that 
every class we are dealing with has at least one member. This assumption jus-
tifies our looking at the diagram and determining whether any circle has all 
but one of its areas colored.  If any circle has only one area remaining uncol-
ored, an X should be put in that area. This is the case because any member 
of that class has to be in that remaining area. Sometimes placing the X in this 
way will enable us to read the conclusion, in which case the argument is valid 
(on the assumption that the relevant class is not empty); sometimes placing 
the X will not enable us to read the conclusion, in which case the argument 
is invalid, with or without any assumptions about the existence of a member 
within the class.  

268 
CHAPTER 9: DEDUCTIVE ARGUMENTS I
 Categorical Syllogisms with Unstated Premises 
 Many “real-life” categorical syllogisms have unstated premises. For example, 
suppose somebody says, 
 The speaker’s argument rests on the unstated premise that you shouldn’t give 
dogs things they could choke on. In other words, the argument, when fully spelled 
out, is this: 
 The unstated premise appears in brackets. 
 To take another example: 
 Here, the speaker’s argument rests on the unstated premise that it’s dumb to 
risk a dangerous breakdown. In other words, when fully spelled out, the argu-
ment is this: 
 When you hear (or give) an argument that looks like a categorical syllogism 
that has only one stated premise, usually a second premise has been assumed 
and not stated. Ordinarily, this unstated premise remains unstated because the 
speaker thinks it is too obvious to bother stating. The unstated premises in the 
arguments above are good examples: “You shouldn’t give dogs things they could 
choke on,” and “It is dumb to risk a dangerous breakdown.” 
 When you encounter (or give) what looks like a categorical syllogism that 
is missing a premise, ask: Is there a reasonable assumption I could make that 
would make this argument valid? We covered this question of unstated premises 
in more detail in Chapter 2, and you might want to look there for more informa-
tion on the subject. 
 At the end of this chapter, we have included a few exercises that involve 
missing premises. 
 Real-Life Syllogisms 
 We’ll end this section with a word of advice. Before you use a Venn diagram (or 
the rules method described on page 272) to determine the validity of real-life 
arguments, it helps to use a letter to abbreviate each category mentioned in the 
You shouldn’t give chicken bones to dogs. They could choke on them.
All chicken bones are things dogs could choke on.
[No things dogs could choke on are things you should give dogs.]
Therefore, no chicken bones are things you should give dogs.
Driving around in an old car is dumb, since it might break down in a dangerous place.
All examples of driving around in an old car are examples of risking dangerous 
breakdown.
[All examples of risking dangerous breakdown are examples of being dumb.]
Therefore, all examples of driving around in an old car are examples of being dumb.

 
CATEGORICAL SYLLOGISMS
269
The World’s Two Most Common Syllogisms
We’re pretty sure the syllogism you’ll run across most frequently is of this form:
All As are Bs.
All Bs are Cs.
All As are Cs.
Some real-life versions are easier to spot than others. Here’s an example: “The chords 
in that song are all minor chords because every one of them has a flatted third, and that 
automatically makes them minor chords.” Here’s another: “Jim will be on a diet every day 
next week, so you can expect him to be grumpy the whole time. He’s always grumpy when 
he’s on a diet.”
If a real, live syllogism turns out not to have the form just described, there’s a very good 
chance it has this form:
All As are Bs.
No Bs are Cs.
No As are Cs.
Here’s an example: “Eggs and milk are obviously animal products, and since real vegans 
don’t eat any kind of animal product at all, they surely don’t eat eggs or milk.”
argument. This is mainly just a matter of convenience: It is easier to write down 
letters than to write down long phrases. 
 Take the first categorical syllogisms given on page 268: 
 The argument spelled out, once again, is this: 
 Abbreviating each of the three categories with a letter, we get 
 Then, the argument is 
You shouldn’t give chicken bones to dogs because they could choke on them.
All chicken bones are things dogs could choke on.
[No things dogs could choke on are things you should give dogs.]
Therefore, no chicken bones are things you should give dogs.
C 5 chicken bones; D 5 things dogs could choke on; and S 5 things you should 
give dogs.
All C are D
[No D are S]
Therefore, no C are S.

270 
CHAPTER 9: DEDUCTIVE ARGUMENTS I
 Likewise, the second argument was this: 
 When fully spelled out, the argument is 
 Abbreviating each of the three categories, we get the following abbreviation key: 
 Then, the argument is 
 A final tip: Take the time to write down your abbreviation key clearly. 
Driving around in an old car is dumb, since it might break down in a dangerous place.
All examples of driving around in an old car are examples of risking dangerous 
breakdown.
[All examples of risking dangerous breakdown are examples of being dumb.]
Therefore, all examples of driving around in an old car are examples of being 
dumb.
D 5 examples of driving around in an old car; R 5 examples of risking dangerous 
breakdown; S 5 examples of being dumb.
All D are R
[All R are S]
Therefore, all D are S.
■ We’re not certain 
exactly what the AT&T 
people had in mind 
here, but it looks like 
a syllogism with the 
conclusion unstated. 
With the conclusion 
“Your world is AT&T,” is 
the argument valid? In 
fact, you can’t get any 
conclusion at all about 
AT&T and “your world” 
from this billboard, as 
much as it might appear 
otherwise.

 
CATEGORICAL SYLLOGISMS 
271
 Put the following arguments in standard form (you may have to use the obver-
sion, conversion, or contraposition operations to accomplish this); then deter-
mine whether the arguments are valid by means of diagrams. 
 1. No blank drives contain any data, drives although some blank drives are for-
matted. Therefore, some formatted drives do not contain any data. 
 2. All ears of corn with white tassels are unripe, but some ears are ripe even 
though their kernels are not full-sized. Therefore, some ears with full-sized 
kernels are not ears with white tassels. 
 3. Prescription drugs should never be taken without a doctor’s order. So no 
over-the-counter drugs are prescription drugs, because all over-the-counter 
drugs can be taken without a doctor’s order. 
  4. All tobacco products are damaging to people’s health, but some of them are 
addictive substances. Some addictive substances, therefore, are damaging to 
people’s health. 
 5. A few digital players use 3.0 transfer rates, so some of them must cost at least 
twenty dollars because you can’t buy any player with a 3.0 rate for less than 
twenty dollars. 
▲
▲
 Exercise 9-14 
 Exercise 9-13 
 Use the diagram method to determine which of the following syllogisms are valid 
and which are invalid. 
 1. All paperbacks are books that use glue in their spines.
  No books that use glue in their spines are books that are sewn in signatures.
  No books that are sewn in signatures are paperbacks.
 2. All sound arguments are valid arguments.
  Some valid arguments are not interesting arguments. 
  Some sound arguments are not interesting arguments.
 3. All topologists are mathematicians.
  Some topologists are not statisticians.
  Some mathematicians are not statisticians
 4. Every time Louis is tired, he’s edgy. He’s edgy today, so he must be tired 
today.  
 5. Every voter is a citizen, but some citizens are not residents. Therefore, some 
voters are not residents. 
 6. All the dominant seventh chords are in the mixolydian mode, and no mix-
olydian chords use the major scale. So no chords that use the major scale are 
dominant sevenths. 
 7. All halyards are lines that attach to sails. Painters do not attach to sails, so 
they must not be halyards. 
 8. Only systems with no moving parts can give you instant access. Standard 
hard drives have moving parts, so they can’t give you instant access. 
 9. All citizens are residents. So, since no noncitizens are voters, all voters must 
be residents. 
 10. No citizens are nonresidents, and all voters are citizens. So, all residents 
must be nonvoters. 
▲
▲
▲
▲

272 
CHAPTER 9: DEDUCTIVE ARGUMENTS I
 FIGURE 15 
 Distributed 
terms. 
A-claim:
E-claim:
I-claim:
O-claim:
No  S  are  P .
Some S are not  P .
Some S are P.
All  S  are P.
 6. Everything that Pete won at the carnival must be junk. I know that Pete won 
everything that Bob won, and all the stuff that Bob won is junk. 
 7. Only people who hold stock in the company may vote, so Mr. Hansen must not 
hold any stock in the company, because I know he was not allowed to vote.  
 8. No off-road vehicles are allowed in the unimproved portion of the park, but 
some off-road vehicles are not four-wheel-drive. So some four-wheel-drive 
vehicles are allowed in the unimproved part of the park. 
 9. Some of the people affected by the new drainage tax are residents of the 
county, and many residents of the county are already paying the sewer tax. 
So, it must be that some people paying the sewer tax are affected by the new 
drainage tax, too. 
 10. No argument with false premises is sound, but some of them are valid. So, 
some unsound arguments must be valid. 
▲
▲
 The Rules Method of Testing for Validity 
 The diagram method of testing syllogisms for validity is intuitive, but there is a 
faster method that makes use of three simple rules. These rules are based on two 
ideas, the first of which has been mentioned already: affirmative and negative 
categorical claims. (Remember, the A- and I-claims are affirmative; the E- and 
O-claims are negative.) The other idea is that of  distribution.  Terms that occur in 
categorical claims are either distributed or undistributed: Either the claim says 
something about every member of the class the term names, or it does not. *  Three 
of the standard-form claims distribute one or more of their terms. In  Figure 15 , 
the circled letters stand for distributed terms, and the uncircled ones stand for 
undistributed terms. As the figure shows, the A-claim distributes its subject term, 
the O-claim distributes its predicate term, the E-claim distributes both, and the 
I-claim distributes neither. 
 We can now state the three  rules of the syllogism.  A syllogism is valid if, and 
only if, all of these conditions are met:
 *This is a rough-and-ready definition of distribution. If you’d like a more technical version, here’s one: A term is 
 distributed in a claim if, and only if, on the assumption that the claim is true, the class named by the term can 
be replaced by  any subset of that class without producing a false claim. Example: In the claim “All senators are 
politicians,” the term “senators” is distributed because, assuming the claim is true, you can substitute  any subset of 
senators (Democratic ones, Republican ones, tall ones, short ones) and the result must also be true. “Politicians” is not 
distributed: The original claim could be true while “All senators are honest politicians” was false. 
 1.  The number of negative claims in the premises must be the 
same as the number of negative claims in the conclusion.  
(Because the conclusion is always one claim, this implies that 
no valid syllogism has two negative premises.)  
 2.  At least one premise must distribute the middle term. 
 3.  Any term that is distributed in the conclusion of the syllo-
gism must be distributed in its premises. 
 These rules are easy to remember, and with a bit of practice, you 
can use them to determine quickly whether a syllogism is valid. 

 
EXERCISES 
273
 Which of the rules is broken in this example? 
 The term “keyboard players” is the middle term, and it is undistributed in both 
premises. The first premise, an A-claim, does not distribute its predicate term; the 
second premise, an O-claim, does not distribute its subject term. So this syllogism 
breaks rule 2. 
 Another example: 
 This syllogism breaks rule 1 because it has a negative premise but no negative 
conclusion. 
 A last example: 
All pianists are keyboard players.
Some keyboard players are not percussionists. 
Some pianists are not percussionists.
No dogs up for adoption at the animal shelter are pedigreed dogs.
Some pedigreed dogs are expensive dogs.
Some dogs up for adoption at the animal shelter are expensive dogs.
No mercantilists are large landowners.
All mercantilists are creditors.
No creditors are large landowners.
 A Guide to Dweebs, Dorks, Geeks, and Nerds 
We found this Venn diagram floating around on the web. It gives us a tongue-in-cheek (we think) 
sorting of various categories of people based on three characteristics: intelligence, social inepti-
tude, and obsession. You can interpret this in the same way we interpreted such diagrams in this 
chapter (e.g., a dweeb is a member of the class of intelligent people and of the class of the socially 
inept, but not a member of the class of the obsessed).
Nerd
Dweeb
Dork
Geek
Obsession
Social
ineptitude
Intelligence

274 
CHAPTER 9: DEDUCTIVE ARGUMENTS I
 The minor term “creditors” is distributed in the conclusion (because it’s the sub-
ject term of an E-claim) but not in the premises (where it’s the predicate term of 
an A-claim). So this syllogism breaks rule 3. 
 
The following list of topics covers the basics of categorical logic as discussed in 
this chapter:
 ■ The four types of categorical claims include A, E, I, and O.
 ■ There are Venn diagrams for the four types of claims.
 ■ Ordinary English claims can be translated into standard-form categorical 
claims. Some rules of thumb for such translations are as follows:
—  “only” introduces predicate term of A-claim
—  “the only” introduces subject term of A-claim
—  “whenever” means times or occasions
—  “wherever” means places or locations
—  claims about individuals are treated as A- or E-claims
 ■ The square of opposition displays contradiction, contrariety, and subcontra-
riety among corresponding standard-form claims.
 ■ Conversion, obversion, and contraposition are three relations that result from 
operations performed on standard-form claims; some are equivalent to the 
original, and some are not.
 ■ Categorical syllogisms are standardized deductive arguments; we can test 
them for validity by the Venn diagram method or by the rules method—the 
latter relies on the notions of distribution and the affirmative and negative 
qualities of the claims involved.
Recap
Exercise 9-15
In each of the following items, identify whether A, B, or C is the middle term.
 1. All A are B.
  
All A are C.
  
All B are C.
 2. All B are C.
  
No C are D.
  
No B are D.
 3. Some C are not D.
  
All C are A. 
  
Some D are not A.
 4. Some A are not B.
  
Some B are C. 
  
Some C are not A.
 5. No C are A.
  
Some B are A. 
  
Some C are not B.
▲
▲
Additional 
Exercises

 
EXERCISES 
275
Exercise 9-16
Which terms are distributed in each of the following?
 1. All A are B.
 
a. A only
 
b. B only
 
c. both A and B
 
d. neither A nor B
 2. No A are B.
 
a. A only
 
b. B only
 
c. both A and B
 
d. neither A nor B
 3. Some A are B.
 
a. A only
 
b. B only
 
c. both A and B
 
d. neither A nor B
 4. Some A are not B.
 
a. A only
 
b. B only
 
c. both A and B
 
d. neither A nor B
Exercise 9-17
How many negative claims appear in the premises of each of the following arguments? 
(In other words, how many of the premises are negative?) Your options are 0, 1, or 2.
 1. All A are B.
 
 All A are C.
 
 Therefore, all B are C.
 2. All B are C.
 
 No C are D.
 
 Therefore, no B are D.
 3. Some C are not D.
 
 All C are A.
 
 Therefore, some D are not A.
 4. Some A are not B.
 
 Some B are C.
 
Therefore, some C are not A.
 5. No A are B.
 
 Some B are not C.
 
 Some A are C.
Exercise 9-18
Which rules (if any) are broken in each of the following? Select from these options:
 a. breaks rule 1 only
 b. breaks rule 2 only
▲
▲
▲
▲

276 
CHAPTER 9: DEDUCTIVE ARGUMENTS I
 c. breaks rule 3 only
 d. breaks more than one rule
 e. breaks no rule
 1. All A are B.
 
All A are C.
 
Therefore, all B are C.
 2. All B are C.
 
No C are D.
 
Therefore, no B are D.
 3. Some C are not D.
 
All C are A.
 
Therefore, some D are A.
 4. Some A are not B.
 
Some B are C.
 
Therefore, some C are not A.
 5. Some A are C.
 
Some C are B.
 
Therefore, some A are B.
 6. Some carbostats are framistans.
 
No framistans are arbuckles.
 
Some arbuckles are not carbostats.
 7. All framistans are veeblefetzers.
 
Some veeblefetzers are carbostats.
 
Some framistans are carbostats.
 8. No arbuckles are framistans.
 
All arbuckles are carbostats. 
 
No framistans are carbostats.
 9. All members of the class are registered students.
 
Some registered students are not people taking fifteen units.
 
Some members of the class are not people taking fifteen units.
 10. All qualified mechanics are people familiar with hydraulics.
 
No unschooled people are people familiar with hydraulics.
 
No qualified mechanics are unschooled people.
Exercise 9-19
Which rules (if any) are broken in each of the following?
Note: If an argument breaks a rule, which rule is broken depends on how 
you translate the claims in the argument. For example, the claim “Dogs shouldn’t 
be given chicken bones” could be translated as an E-claim: “No dogs are animals 
that should be given chicken bones.” But it also could be translated as an A-claim: 
“All dogs are animals that shouldn’t be given chicken bones.” If the original claim 
appeared in an invalid argument, one rule would be broken if you translated it as 
the E-claim. A different rule would be broken if you translated it as the A-claim.
  1. All tigers are ferocious creatures. Some ferocious creatures are zoo animals. 
Therefore, some zoo animals are tigers. (For this and the following items, 
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲

 
EXERCISES 
277
it will help if you abbreviate each category with a letter. For example, let 
T 5 tigers, F 5 ferocious creatures, and Z 5 zoo animals.)
 2. Some pedestrians are not jaywalkers. Therefore, some jaywalkers are not 
gardeners, since no gardeners are pedestrians.
 3. Because all shrubs are ornamental plants, it follows that no ornamental 
plants are cacti, since no cacti qualify as shrubs.
  4. Weightlifters aren’t really athletes. Athletics requires the use of motor skills; 
and few, if any, weightlifters use motor skills.
 5. The trick to finding syllogisms is to think categorically, as well as to focus on 
the key argument in a passage. For example, some passages contain a good 
bit of rhetoric, and some passages that do this make it hard to spot syllo-
gisms, with the result that it is hard to spot syllogisms in some passages.
 6. Every broadcast network has seen its share of the television audience 
decline during the past six years. But not every broadcast network that has a 
decline in television audience share has lost money. So, not every broadcast 
network has lost money.
  7. Many students lift papers off the Internet, and this fact is discouraging to 
teachers. However, it must be noted that students who do this are only 
cheating themselves, and anyone who cheats himself or herself loses in the 
long run. Therefore, lifting papers off the Internet is a losing proposition in 
the long run.
 8. When he was Speaker of the House, Newt Gingrich could be counted on to 
advance Republican causes. At the time, nobody who would do that could 
be accused of being soft on crime, which explains why, at the time, Gingrich 
could hardly be accused of being soft on crime.
 9. It would be in everyone’s interest to amend the Constitution to permit 
school prayer. And it is obviously in everyone’s interest to promote religious 
freedom. It should be no surprise, then, that amending the Constitution to 
permit school prayer will promote religious freedom.
 10. If you want to stay out all night dancing, it is fine with me. Just don’t cry 
about it if you don’t get good grades. Dancing isn’t a total waste of time, 
but dancing the whole night certainly is. There are only so many hours in 
a day, and wasting time is bound to affect your grades negatively. So, fine, 
stay out dancing all night. It’s your choice. But you have to expect your 
grades to suffer.
Exercise 9-20
Refer back to Exercises 9-13 and 9-14 (pages 270–271), and check the arguments 
for validity using the rules. We recommend abbreviating each category with a letter.
Once again, remember: If an argument breaks a rule, which rule is broken 
depends on how you translate the claims in the argument. For example, the claim 
“Dogs shouldn’t be given chicken bones” could be translated as an E-claim: “No 
dogs are animals that should be given chicken bones.” But it also could be trans-
lated as an A-claim (the obverse of the other version): “All dogs are animals that 
shouldn’t be given chicken bones.” If the original claim appeared in an invalid 
argument, one rule would be broken if you translated it as an E-claim. A different 
rule would be broken if you translated it as an A-claim.
Answers to 2, 5, 7, and 8 of both exercises are given in the answers section.
▲
▲
▲
▲

278 
CHAPTER 9: DEDUCTIVE ARGUMENTS I
Exercise 9-21
For each of the following items: Abbreviate each category with a letter, then trans-
late the argument into standard form using the abbreviations. Then test the argu-
ment for validity using either the diagram method or the rules method.
Note: For many of these items, it can be difficult to translate the arguments 
into standard form.
  1. Some athletes are not baseball players, and some baseball players are not 
basketball players. Therefore, some athletes are not basketball players.
 2. Rats are disease-carrying pests and, as such, should be eradicated because 
such pests should all be eradicated.
 3. All creationists are religious, and all fundamentalists are religious, so all cre-
ationists are fundamentalists.
 4. Every sportscaster is an athlete, and no athlete is a college professor. There-
fore, no sportscasters are college professors.
 5. Anyone who voted for the Democrats favors expansion of medical services for 
the needy. So, the people who voted for the Democrats all favor higher taxes, 
since anyone who wants to expand medical services must favor higher taxes.
 6. All cave dwellers lived before the invention of the radio, and no one alive 
today is a cave dweller. Thus, no person who lived before the invention of the 
radio is alive today.
 7. Conservationists don’t vote for Republicans, and all environmentalists are 
conservationists. Thus, environmentalists don’t vote for Republicans.
 8. Since all philosophers are skeptics, it follows that no theologian is a skeptic, 
since no philosophers are theologians.
 9. Each philosopher is a skeptic, and no philosopher is a theologian. Therefore, 
no skeptic is a theologian.
 10. Peddlers are salespeople, and confidence men are, too. So, peddlers are con-
fidence men.
 11. Drug addicts are a burden on society.  So are criminals of all sorts.  That’s 
why I say all addicts are criminals.
 12. Critical thinkers recognize invalid syllogisms; therefore, critical thinkers are 
logicians, since logicians can spot invalid syllogisms, too.
 13. The Mohawk Indians are Algonquin, and so are the Cheyenne. So, the 
Mohawks are really just Cheyenne.
 14. Idiots would support the measure, but no one else would. Whatever else you 
may think of the school board, you can’t say they are idiots. [Therefore . . .]
 15. This is not the best of all possible worlds, because the best of all possible worlds 
would not contain mosquitoes, and this world contains plenty of mosquitoes!
 16. From time to time, the police have to break up parties here on campus, since 
some campus parties get out of control, and when a party gets out of control, 
well, you know what the police have to do.
 17. I know that all fundamentalist Christians are evangelicals, and I’m pretty 
sure that all revivalists are also evangelicals. So, if I’m right, at least some 
fundamentalist Christians must be revivalists.
 18. “Their new lawn furniture certainly looks cheap to me,” she said. “It’s made 
of plastic, and plastic furniture just looks cheap.”
▲
▲
▲
▲

 
EXERCISES 
279
 19. None of our intramural sports are sports played in the Olympics, and some 
of the intercollegiate sports are not Olympic sports, either. So, some of the 
intercollegiate sports are also intramural sports.
 20. The moas were all Dinornithidae, and no moas exist anymore. So, there 
aren’t any more Dinornithidae.
 21. Everybody on the district tax roll is a citizen, and all eligible voters are also 
citizens. So, everybody on the district tax roll is an eligible voter.
 22. Any piece of software that is in the public domain may be copied without 
permission or fee. But that cannot be done in the case of software under 
copyright. So, software under copyright must not be in the public domain.
 23. None of the countries that have been living under dictatorships for these 
past few decades are familiar with the social requirements of a strong 
democracy—things like widespread education and a willingness to abide by 
majority vote. Consequently, none of these countries will make a successful 
quick transition to democracy, since countries where the aforementioned 
requirements are unfamiliar simply can’t make such a transition.
 24. Trust Senator Cobweb to vote with the governor on the new tax legisla-
tion. Cobweb is a liberal, and liberals just cannot pass up an opportunity 
to raise taxes.
 25. Investor-held utilities should not be allowed to raise rates, since all public util-
ities should be allowed to raise rates, and public utilities are not investor held.
 26. Masterpieces are no longer produced on cassettes. This is because master-
pieces belong to the classical repertoire, and classical music is no longer 
produced on cassettes.
 27. It isn’t important to learn chemistry, since it isn’t very useful, and there isn’t 
much point in learning something that isn’t useful.
 28. Stockholders’ information about a company’s worth must come from the 
managers of that company, but in a buy-out, the managers of the company 
are the very ones who are trying to buy the stock from the stockholders. So, 
ironically, in a buyout situation, stockholders must get their information 
about how much a company is worth from the very people who are trying to 
buy their stock.
 29. All the networks devoted considerable attention to reporting poll results 
during the last election, but many of those poll results were not especially 
newsworthy. So, the networks have to admit that some unnewsworthy items 
received quite a bit of their attention.
 30. If a person doesn’t understand that the earth goes around the sun once a year, 
then that person can’t understand what causes winter and summer. Strange 
as it may seem, then, there are many American adults who don’t know what 
causes winter and summer, because a survey a year or so ago showed that 
many such adults don’t know that the earth goes around the sun.
 31. Congress seems ready to impose trade sanctions on China, and perhaps it 
should. China’s leaders cruelly cling to power. They flout American interests 
in their actions in Tibet, in their human-rights violations, in their weapons 
sales, and in their questionable trade practices. Any country with a record 
like this deserves sanctions.
 32. Since 1973, when the U.S. Supreme Court decided Miller v. California, no 
work can be banned as obscene unless it contains sexual depictions that are 
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲

280 
CHAPTER 9: DEDUCTIVE ARGUMENTS I
“patently offensive” to “contemporary community standards” and unless the 
work as a whole possesses no “serious literary, artistic, political or scientific 
value.” As loose as this standard may seem when compared with earlier tests 
of obscenity, the pornographic novels of “Madame Toulouse” (a pseudo-
nym, of course) can still be banned. They would offend the contemporary 
standards of any community, and to claim any literary, artistic, political, or 
scientific value for them would be a real joke.
Exercise 9-22
This exercise is a little different, and you may need to work one or more such items 
in class in order to get the hang of them. Your job is to try to prove each of the fol-
lowing claims about syllogisms true or false. You may need to produce a general 
argument—that is, show that every syllogism that does this must also do that—or 
you may need to produce a counterexample, that is, an example that proves the 
claim in question false. The definition of categorical syllogism and the rules of the 
syllogism are of crucial importance in working these examples.
  1. Every valid syllogism must have at least one A- or E-claim for a premise.
 2. Every valid syllogism with an E-claim for a premise must have an E-claim for 
a conclusion.
 3. Every valid syllogism with an E-claim for a conclusion must have an E-claim 
for a premise.
 4. It’s possible for a syllogism to break two of the rules of the syllogism.
 5. No syllogism can break all three of the rules of the syllogism.
Exercise 9-23
For each of these, identify a premise (or conclusion) that makes the item a valid, 
standard-form categorical syllogism. If this cannot be done, say so.
 1. All A are B.
 
 ???
 
 Therefore, all A are C.
 2. All B are C.
 
 ???
 
 Therefore, no B are D.
 3. Some C are D.
 
 ???
 
 Therefore, some D are not A.
 4. All A are B.
 
 Some B are not C.
 
 Therefore, ???
 5. Some A are B.
 
 Some B are C.
 
 Therefore, ???
 6. Some A are not C.
 
 Some A are not D.
 
 Therefore, ???
▲
▲
▲
▲

 
EXERCISES 
281
 7. All A are B.
 
 No A are C.
 
 Therefore, ???
 8. No A are B.
 
 ???
 
 Therefore, some B are not C.
 9. No B are A.
 
 ???
 
 Therefore, no B are C.
 10. Some A are B.
 
 Some B are not C.
 
 Therefore, ???
Exercise 9-24
Follow the instructions for each item.
  1. “All business executives have accounting experience, and some business 
executives are not economists.”
  Which of the following statements follows validly from these premises?
 
a. Some economists do not have accounting experience.
 
b. Some people with accounting experience are not economists.
 
c. All people with accounting experience are business executives.
 
d. More than one of the above.
 
e. None of the above.
 2. “Coffee is a stimulant, since coffee contains caffeine.”
  What statement must be added to this syllogism to make it valid?
 
a. All substances that contain caffeine are stimulants.
 
b. All stimulants are substances that contain caffeine.
 
c. Neither of the above makes it valid.
 
d. Both of the above make it valid.
 3. “All musicians can read music; plus, all Washington University music majors 
can read music.”
  Which of the following statements follows validly from these premises?
 
a. Anyone who can read music is a musician.
 
b. All Washington University music majors are musicians.
 
c. Neither of the above.
 
d. Both of the above.
 4. “All CEOs are college grads. Therefore, some college grads are not economists.”
 
 What statement must be added to this syllogism to make it valid?
 
a. Some CEOs are not economists.
 
b. Some economists are not CEOs.
 
c. Neither of the above makes it valid.
 
d. Both of the above make it valid.
 5. “Some economists are historians; therefore, some radicals are not historians.”
 
 What statement must be added to this syllogism to make it valid?
 
a. No economists are radicals.
 
b. Some economists are not radicals.
 
c. Some radicals are not economists.
 
d. None of the above make it valid.
▲
▲
▲
▲

282 
CHAPTER 9: DEDUCTIVE ARGUMENTS I
 6. “All online businesses are modern businesses, from which an obvious con-
clusion follows, since modern businesses don’t include any brick-and-mortar 
businesses.” What conclusion, if any, makes this a valid categorical syllogism?
 7. “Political radicals never become Navy SEALS, from which it follows that 
some patriots are not Navy Seals.” What premise must be added to make this 
a valid categorical syllogism?
 8. “All NASCAR drivers are NASCAR fans, but no Minnesotans are NASCAR 
fans.” What conclusion, if any, makes this a valid categorical syllogism?
 9. “All physicians own mutual funds, from which it follows that no professors 
are physicians.” What premise must be added to make this a valid categorical 
syllogism?
 10. “Some private investigators carry sidearms, and some people who carry 
sidearms are not licensed to do so.” What conclusion, if any, makes this a 
valid categorical syllogism?
Exercise 9-25
The following is an anonymous statement of opinion that appeared in a newspa-
per call-in column.
This is in response to the person who called in that we should provide a 
shelter for the homeless, because I think that is wrong. These people make 
the downtown area unsafe because they have nothing to lose by robbing, 
mugging, etc. The young boy killed by the horseshoe pits was attacked 
by some of these bums, assuming that witnesses really saw people who 
were homeless, which no doubt they did, since the so-called homeless all 
wear that old worn-out hippie gear, just like the people they saw. They also 
lower property values. And don’t tell me they are down and out because 
they can’t find work. The work is there if they look for it. They choose for 
themselves how to live, since if they didn’t choose, who did?
A lot of things might be said in criticism of this tirade, but what we want 
you to notice is the breakdown of logic. The piece contains, in fact, a gross logic 
error, which we ask you to make the focus of a critical essay. Your audience is 
the other members of your class; that is, you are writing for an audience of criti-
cal thinkers.
Exercise 9-26
Pornography violates women’s rights. It carries a demeaning message 
about a woman’s worth and purpose and promotes genuine violence. This 
is indeed a violation of women’s civil rights and justifies the Minneapolis 
City Council in attempting to ban pornography.
This letter to the editor is, in effect, two syllogisms. The conclusion of the 
first is that pornography violates women’s rights. This conclusion also functions 
as a premise in the second syllogism, which has as its own conclusion the claim 
that the Minneapolis City Council is justified in attempting to ban pornography. 
Both syllogisms have unstated premises. Translate the entire argument into stan-
dard-form syllogisms, supplying missing premises, and determine whether the 
reasoning is valid.
▲
▲

 
EXERCISES 
283
Exercise 9-27
Each of the following arguments contains an unstated premise, which, together 
with the stated premise, makes the argument in question valid. Your job is to 
identify this unstated premise, abbreviate each category with a letter, and put the 
argument in standard form.
  1. Ladybugs eat aphids; therefore, they are good to have in your garden.
 2. CEOs have lots of responsibility; therefore, they should be paid a lot.
 3. Anyone who understands how a computer program works knows how 
important logic is. Therefore, anyone who understands how a computer pro-
gram works understands how important unambiguous writing is.
  4. Self-tapping screws are a boon to the construction industry. They make it 
possible to screw things together without drilling pilot holes.
 5. No baseball player smokes anymore. Baseball players all know that smoking 
hampers athletic performance.
 6. You really ought to give up jogging. It is harmful to your health.
 7. Camping isn’t much fun. It requires sleeping on the hard ground and getting 
lots of bug bites.
 8. Having too much coffee makes you sleep poorly. That’s why you shouldn’t do it.
 9. Do you have writer’s block? No problem. You can always hire a secretary.
 10. You think those marks were left by a—snake? That’s totally crazy. Snakes 
don’t leave footprints.
Exercise 9-28
Diagram the argument found in the passage in Exercise 9-26 using the methods 
described in Chapter 2.
Writing Exercises
 1. Should dogs be used in medical experiments, given that they seem to have 
the capacity to experience fear and feel pain? Write a short paper defend-
ing a negative answer to this question, taking about five minutes to do so. 
When you have finished, exchange arguments with a friend and rewrite each 
other’s argument as a categorical syllogism or a combination of categorical 
syllogisms. Remember that people often leave premises unstated.
 2. Follow the instructions for Writing Exercise 1, but this time defend the posi-
tion that it is not wrong to use dogs in medical experiments.
▲
▲

284
 10 
 T
 he earliest development of truth-functional logic took 
place among the Stoics, who flourished from about the 
third century  b.c.e.  until the second century  c.e.  But it 
was in the late nineteenth and twentieth centuries that the real 
power of  truth-functional logic  (known also as  propositional 
or  sentential logic ) became apparent. 
 The “logic of sentences” is one of the bases on which mod-
ern symbolic logic rests, and as such it is important in such intel-
lectual areas as set theory and the foundations of mathematics. It 
is also the model for electrical circuits of the sort that are the basis 
of digital computing. But truth-functional logic is also a useful 
tool in the analysis of language, and, in particular, of arguments. 
 You’ll remember that categorical logic, the subject of the 
preceding chapter, was based on how the words “all,” “some,” 
and “not” worked to produce relations of inclusion and exclu-
sion among classes. Truth-functional logic depends on how 
words like “and,” “or,” “if,” and so on work. These words are used 
to build complex claims out of simpler ones. The term “truth-
functional” (we'll sometimes abbreviate this as "T-F") means 
simply that the truth of these complex claims depends entirely 
on the truth of their simpler parts. We’ll turn to these subjects 
in just a moment. First, a brief commercial: 
 The study of truth-functional logic can benefit you in 
several ways. For one thing, you’ll learn something about the 
 Deductive Arguments II 
 Truth-Functional Logic 
Students will learn to . . . 
  1.  Understand the basics of truth tables 
and logical symbols 
  2.  Symbolize compound claims 
  3.  Evaluate truth-functional 
arguments using common 
argument forms 
  4.  Use the method of deduction for 
proving an argument is valid 

 
TRUTH TABLES AND LOGICAL SYMBOLS 
285
structure of language that you wouldn’t learn any other way. For another, you’ll 
get a sense of what it’s like to work with a very precise, nonmathematical system 
of symbols that is nevertheless very accessible to nearly any student willing to 
invest a modest effort. The model of precision and clarity that such systems pro-
vide can serve you well when you communicate with others in ordinary language. 
 If you’re not comfortable working with symbols, the upcoming sections on 
truth-functional arguments and deductions might look intimidating. But they 
are not as forbidding as they may appear. We presume that the whole matter of a 
symbolic system is unfamiliar to you, so we’ll start from absolute scratch. Keep in 
mind, though, that everything builds on what goes before. It’s important to mas-
ter each concept as it’s explained and not fall behind. Catching up can be very 
difficult. If you find yourself having difficulty with a section or a concept, put in a 
bit of extra effort to master it before moving ahead. It will be worth it in the end. 
 TRUTH TABLES AND LOGICAL SYMBOLS  
 Our “logical vocabulary” will consist of claim variables and logical symbols. 
Before we consider the real heart of the subject, truth tables and the symbols that 
represent them, let’s first clarify the use of letters of the alphabet to symbolize 
terms and claims. 
 Claim Variables 
 In Chapter 9, we used uppercase letters to stand for terms in categorical claims. 
Here, we use uppercase letters to stand for claims. Our main interest is now in the 
way that words such as “not,” “and,” “or,” and so on affect claims and link them 
together to produce compound claims out of simpler ones. So, don’t confuse the 
Ps and Qs, called  claim variables,  that appear in this chapter with the variables 
used for terms in Chapter 9. * 
 Truth Tables 
 Let’s now consider truth tables and symbols. In truth-functional logic, any given 
claim, P, is either true or false. The following little table, called a  truth table, dis-
plays both possible truth values for P: 
 * It is customary to use one kind of symbol, usually lowercase letters or Greek letters, as  claim variables and plain or 
italicized uppercase letters for  specific claims. Although this use has some technical advantages and makes possible 
a certain theoretical neatness, beginning students can find it confusing. Therefore, we’ll use uppercase letters for both 
variables and specific claims and simply make it clear which way we’re using the letters. 
 P 
 T 
 F 
Whichever truth value the claim P might have, its negation or contradictory, which 
we’ll symbolize ~P ,  will have the other. Here, then, is the truth table for  negation: 
 P 
  ~P 
 T 
 F 
 F 
 T 

286 
CHAPTER 10: DEDUCTIVE ARGUMENTS II
 The left-hand column of this table sets out both possible truth values for P, and 
the right-hand column sets out the truth values for ~P based on P’s values. This is a 
way of defining the negation sign, ~, in front of the P. The symbol means “change the 
truth value from T to F or from F to T, depending on P’s values.” Because it’s handy 
to have a name for negations that you can say aloud, we read ~P as “not-P.” So, if P 
were “Parker is at home,” then ~P would be “It is not the case that Parker is at home,” 
or, more simply, “Parker is not at home.” In a moment we’ll define other symbols by 
means of truth tables, so make sure you understand how this one works. 
 Because any given claim is either true or false, two claims, P and Q, must 
both be true, both be false, or have opposite truth values, for a total of four pos-
sible combinations. Here are the possibilities in truth-table form: 
 P 
 Q 
 T 
 T 
 T 
 F 
 F 
 T 
 F 
 F 
 ■ The word “and,” when used in questions, can produce some interesting and amusing results. In this 
case, Brutus means to ask, “How many of them are boys, and how many of them are girls?” But Jack 
thinks he asks, “How many of them are girls or boys?” There’s even a third version: “How many of them 
are  both girls and boys?” Presumably, none. 
source: THE BORN LOSER © 2005 Art and Chip Sansom. Reprinted by permission of Universal Uclick for UFS. All 
rights reserved.
 A  conjunction  is a compound claim made from two simpler claims, called 
conjuncts. A conjunction is true if and only if both of the simpler claims that make 
it up (its conjuncts) are true.  An example of a conjunction is the claim “Parker is at 
home and Moore is at work.” We’ll express the conjunction of P and Q by connect-
ing them with an ampersand (&). The truth table for conjunctions looks like this:
 P 
 Q 
 P & Q 
 T 
 T 
 T 
 T 
 F 
 F 
 F 
 T 
 F 
 F 
 F 
 F 
P & Q is true in the first row only, where both P and Q are true. Notice that 
the “truth conditions” in this row match those required in the italicized statement 
above the truth table. * 
 * Some of the words that have truth-functional meaning have other kinds of meanings as well. For example, “and” can 
signify not only that two things happened but that one happened earlier than the other. An example: “Melinda got on 
the train and bought her ticket” is quite different from “Melinda bought her ticket and got on the train.” In this case, 
“and” operates as if it were “and then.” 

 
TRUTH TABLES AND LOGICAL SYMBOLS 
287
 Here’s another way to remember how conjunctions work: If either part of 
a conjunction is false, the conjunction itself is false. Notice finally that, although 
the word “and” is the closest representative in English to our ampersand symbol, 
there are other words that are correctly symbolized by the ampersand: “but” and 
“while,” for instance, as well as such phrases as “even though.” So, if we let P stand 
for “Parsons is in class” and let Q stand for “Quincy is absent,” then we should 
represent “Parsons is in class even though Quincy is absent” by P & Q. The reason 
is that the compound claim is true only in one case: where both parts are true. 
And that’s all it takes to require an ampersand to represent the connecting word 
or phrase. 
 A  disjunction  is another compound claim made up of two simpler claims, 
called  disjuncts. A disjunction is false if and only if both of its disjuncts are false. 
Here’s an example of a disjunction: “Either Parker is at home, or Moore is at work.” 
We’ll use the symbol ∨ (“wedge”) to represent disjunction when we symbolize 
claims—as indicated in the example, the closest word in English to this symbol is 
“or.” The truth table for disjunctions is this:
P
Q
 P ∨ Q
T
T
T
T
F
T
F
T
T
F
F
F
Notice here that a disjunction is false only in the last row, where both of its 
disjuncts are false. In all other cases, a disjunction is true. 
 The third kind of compound claim made from two simpler claims is the 
 conditional claim.  In ordinary English, the most common way of stating condi-
tionals is by means of the words “if . . . then . . . ,” as in the example “If Parker is at 
home, then Moore is at work.” 
 We’ll use an arrow to symbolize conditionals: P → Q. The first claim in a con-
ditional, the P in the symbolization, is the  antecedent,  and the second—Q in this 
case—is the  consequent.  A conditional claim is false if and only if its antecedent 
is true and its consequent is false. The truth table for conditionals looks like this:
P
Q
P → Q
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
T
T
F
F
T
Only in the second row, where the antecedent P is true and the consequent 
Q is false, does the conditional turn out to be false. In all other cases, it is true. * 
 * Like the conjunction, conditionals in ordinary language can have more than the meaning we assign to the arrow. The 
arrow represents what is often called the “material conditional,” conditionals that are true except when the antecedent 
is true and the consequent false. 
  
 Differences between material conditionals and the conditionals used in ordinary language have held the attention 
of logicians and philosophers for a long time and are still controversial. See, for example, Richard Bradley, “A Defence of 
the Ramsey Test,” in the philosophical journal  Mind 116, no. 461 (January 2007): 1–21. 

288 
CHAPTER 10: DEDUCTIVE ARGUMENTS II
 Of the four types of truth-functional claims—negation, conjunction, disjunc-
tion, and conditional—the conditional typically gives students the most trouble. 
Let’s have a closer look at it by considering an example that may shed light on how 
and why conditionals work. Let’s say that Moore promises you that, if his paycheck 
arrives this morning, he’ll buy lunch. So, now we can consider the conditional 
 We can symbolize this using P (for the claim about the paycheck) and L (for the claim 
about lunch): P → L. Now let’s try to see why the previous truth table fits this claim. 
 The easiest way to see this is by asking yourself what it would take for Moore to 
break his promise. A moment’s thought should make this clear: Two things have to 
happen before we can say that Moore has fibbed to you. The first is that his paycheck 
must arrive this morning. (After all, he didn’t say what he was going to do if his pay-
check  didn’t  arrive, did he?) Then, it being true that his paycheck arrives, he must 
then  not  buy you lunch. Together, these two items make it clear that Moore’s original 
promise was false. Notice: Under no other circumstances would we say that Moore 
broke his promise. And  that is why the truth table has a conditional false in one and 
only one case, namely, where the antecedent is true and the consequent is false. 
(In everyday communication, when we discover the antecedent of a conditional is 
false, we normally just forget about the claim. Here, we say it’s true because it clearly 
isn’t false.) Basic information about all four symbols is summarized in  Figure 1 .  
If Moore’s paycheck arrives this morning, then Moore will buy lunch.
 FIGURE 1 
 The Four Basic 
Logical Symbols 
 Disjunction (∨) 
 Truth table:
P
Q
(P ∨ Q)
T
T
T
T
F
T
F
T
T
F
F
F
 Closest English counterparts: “or,” 
“unless” 
 Conditional (→ ) 
 Truth table:
P
Q
(P → Q)
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
T
T
F
F
T
 Closest English counterparts: 
 “if . . . then,”  “provided that” 
 Negation (~) 
 Truth table:
P
~P
T
F
F
T
 Closest English counterparts: 
“not,” or “it is not the case 
that” 
 Conjunction (&) 
 Truth table:
P
Q
(P & Q)
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
T
F
F
F
F
 Closest English counterparts: 
“and,”  “but,”  “while” 

 
TRUTH TABLES AND LOGICAL SYMBOLS 
289
 Our logical symbols can work in combination. Consider, for example, the 
claim “If Paula doesn’t go to work, then Quincy will have to work a double shift.” 
We’ll represent the two simple claims in the obvious way, as follows: 
 P   5 Paula goes to work. 
 Q  5 Quincy has to work a double shift. 
 And we can symbolize the entire claim like this: 
 ~P → Q  
 Here is a truth table for this symbolization:
 P 
 Q 
 ~P 
 ~P → Q 
 T 
 T 
 F 
 T 
 T 
 F 
 F 
 T 
 F 
 T 
 T 
 T 
 F 
 F 
 T 
 F 
Notice that the symbolized claim ~P → Q is false in the  last  row of this table. That’s 
because, here and only here, the antecedent, ~P, is true and its consequent, Q, is 
false. Notice that we work from the simplest parts to the most complex: The truth 
value of P in a given row determines the truth value of ~P, and that truth value in 
turn, along with the one for Q, determines the truth value of ~P → Q. 
 Consider another combination: “If Paula goes to work, then Quincy and 
Rogers will get a day off.” This claim is symbolized this way: 
 P → (Q & R) 
 This symbolization requires parentheses in order to prevent confusion with 
(P  → Q) & R, which symbolizes a different claim and has a different truth 
table. Our claim is a conditional with a conjunction for a consequent, whereas 
(P → Q) & R is a conjunction with a conditional as one of the conjuncts. The 
parentheses are what make this clear. 
 You need to know a few principles to produce the truth table for the symbol-
ized claim P → (Q & R). First, you have to know how to set up all the possible com-
binations of true and false for the three simple claims P, Q, and R. In claims with 
only one letter, there were two possibilities, T and F. In claims with two letters, 
there were four possibilities.  Every time we add another letter, the number of pos-
sible combinations of T and F doubles, and so, therefore, does the number of rows 
in our truth table.  The formula for determining the number of rows in a truth table 
for a compound claim is  r   5  2  n  , where  r  is the number of rows in the table and  n is 
the number of letters in the symbolization. Because the claim we are interested in 
has three letters, our truth table will have eight rows, one for each possible combi-
nation of T and F for P, Q, and R. Here’s how we do it: 
 P 
 Q 
 R 
 T 
 T 
 T 
 T 
 T 
 F 
 T 
 F 
 T 
 T 
 F 
 F 
 F 
 T 
 T 
 F 
 T 
 F 
 F 
 F 
 T 
 F 
 F 
 F 

290 
CHAPTER 10: DEDUCTIVE ARGUMENTS II
 The systematic way to construct such a table is to alternate Ts and Fs in the 
right-hand column, then alternate  pairs  of Ts and  pairs  of Fs in the next column 
to the left, then sets of  four  Ts and sets of  four  Fs in the next, and so forth. The left-
most column will always wind up being half Ts and half Fs. 
 The second thing we have to know is that the truth value of a compound 
claim in any particular case (i.e., any row of its truth table) depends entirely upon 
the truth values of its parts; and if these parts are themselves compound, their 
truth values depend upon those of their parts; and so on, until we get down to let-
ters standing alone. The columns under the letters, which you have just learned to 
construct, will then tell us what we need to know. Let’s build a truth table for P → 
(Q & R) and see how this works. 
 P 
 Q 
 R 
 Q & R 
  P → Q & R  
 T 
 T 
 T 
 T 
 T 
 T 
 T 
 F 
 F 
 F 
 T 
 F 
 T 
 F 
 F 
 T 
 F 
 F 
 F 
 F 
 F 
 T 
 T 
 T 
 T 
 F 
 T 
 F 
 F 
 T 
 F 
 F 
 T 
 F 
 T 
 F 
 F 
 F 
 F 
 T 
 Test Yourself 
These cards are from a deck that has letters on one side and numbers on the other. They are 
supposed to obey the following rule: “If there is a vowel on one side, then the card has an even 
number on the other side.” 
 Question: To see that the rule has been kept, which card(s) must be turned over and 
checked? (Most university students flunk this simple test of critical thinking.) 
 
e
d
6
3
 The three columns at the left, under P, Q, and R, are our  reference columns, set 
up just as we discussed previously. They determine what goes on in the rest of 
the table. From the second and third columns, under the Q and the R, we can 
fill in the column under Q & R. Notice that this column contains a T only in the 
first and fifth rows, where both Q and R are true. Next, from the column under 
the P and the one under Q & R, we can fill in the last column, which is the 

 
TRUTH TABLES AND LOGICAL SYMBOLS
291
one for the entire symbolized claim. It contains Fs only in rows two, three, and 
four, which are the only ones where its antecedent is true and its consequent 
is false. 
 What our table gives us is a  truth-functional analysis  of our original claim. 
Such an analysis displays the compound claim’s truth value, based on the truth 
values of its simpler parts. Remember, ”truth-functional” is just a fancy term for 
saying that the truth of the compound claim results entirely from the truth values 
of the smaller parts. 
 If you’ve followed everything so far without problems, that’s great. If you’ve 
not yet understood the basic truth-table idea, however, as well as the truth tables 
for the logical symbols, then by all means stop now and go back over this mate-
rial. You should also understand how to build a truth table for symbolizations 
consisting of three or more letters. What comes later builds on this foundation, 
and as with any construction project, without a strong foundation the whole 
thing collapses. 
 A final note before we move on: Two claims are  truth-functionally equiva-
lent if they have exactly the same truth table—that is, if the Ts and Fs in the col-
umn under one claim are in the same arrangement as those in the column under 
the other. Generally speaking, when two claims are equivalent, one can be used in 
place of another—truth-functionally, they each imply the other. 
 Okay. It’s time now to consider some tips for symbolizing propositi onal 
claims.    
 Truth-functional Logic and Electrical Circuits 
 We mentioned at the beginning of the chapter that truth-functional logic is the basis of digital computing. 
This is because, translated into hardware systems, “true” and “false” become “on” and “off.” Although there’s a lot 
more to it than this, we can illustrate in a crude way a little of how this works. 
 Let’s construct a simple electrical circuit from an electrical source to a ground and put a lightbulb in it 
somewhere, like this: 
Electrical
source
Lightbulb
Ground
In this situation, the light burns all the time. Now, let’s add a switch and give it a name, “P,” like so:    
P

292 
CHAPTER 10: DEDUCTIVE ARGUMENTS II
P
(Switch P represents a sentence that can be true or false, just as the switch can be open or closed.) When the 
switch is open (corresponding to false), in the second drawing, the light doesn’t come on, but when it’s closed 
(corresponding to true) in the third drawing the light comes on. Now, let’s add another switch in the same line 
and call it “Q”: 
P
Q
Q
P
This simple circuit is analogous to a simple conjunction, “P & Q,” because  both  switches must be closed for 
the bulb to come on, just as both conjuncts have to be true in order for the conjunction to be true. So, 
although there are four possible combinations for the switches (open  1  open, open  1  closed, closed  1
open, closed  1  closed), only one of them causes the bulb to burn, just as there is only one T in the truth table 
for conjunction. 
 We can represent disjunction with a different circuit, one with the switches wired in parallel rather than 
in series: 
In this case, if  either  the P switch or the Q switch is on, the bulb will light up. So, it lights up in three of the four 
possible combinations of open/closed for the two switches, just as the disjunction “P ∨ Q” is true in three of the 
rows in its truth table. 
 We complicate our circuit-making chores somewhat when we bring in negation. If we have a switch 
labeled “~P,” for example, we just treat it the same as if it were “P”: It’s either open or closed. But if our cir-
cuit contains a switch, P, and another switch, ~P, then we have to connect them (we’ll do it with a dotted 
line), indicating that these switches are always opposite; when one closes, the other automatically opens. 
Now we get two interesting results: When two switches that are “negations” of each other are wired in 
series like this      
P
~P

 
SYMBOLIZING COMPOUND CLAIMS
293
Here, the light can never go off! (This circuit is the exact equivalent of our original one, in which there were no 
switches at all.) In truth-functional logic, what is being represented here, of course, is that a contradiction is 
never true (bulb never comes on), and a tautology is never false (bulb never goes off). (“Tautology” is a tradi-
tional and somewhat fancy word for a sentence with nothing but “T”s in its truth table.) 
 This gives you nothing more than a peek at the subject (among other things, truth-functional logic can 
help us design circuits that are the simplest possible for doing a certain job—i.e., for being on and off under 
exactly the right circumstances); unfortunately, we don’t have room to go further into the subject here. An 
Introduction to Computer Science class would be the best next step. 
we have a dysfunctional circuit: The light can never come on! But we get the opposite result when we wire the 
two negation switches in parallel: 
P
~P
 SYMBOLIZING COMPOUND CLAIMS  
 Most of the things we can do with symbolized claims are pretty straightforward; 
that is, if you learn the techniques, you can apply them in a relatively clear-cut 
way. What’s less clear-cut is how to symbolize a claim in the first place. We’ll cover 
some tips for symbolization in this section and then give you a chance to practice 
with some exercises. 
 Remember, when you symbolize a claim, you’re displaying its truth-functional 
structure. The idea is to produce a version that will be truth-functionally equiva-
lent to the original informal claim—that is, one that will be true under all the same 
circumstances as the original and false under all the same circumstances. Let’s go 
through some examples that illustrate a few of the most frequently encountered 
symbolization problems.   
 “If” and “Only If” 
 In symbolizing truth-functional claims, as in translating categorical claims in 
Chapter 9, nothing can take the place of a careful reading of what the claim in 
question says. It always comes down to a matter of exercising careful judgment. 
 Of all the basic truth-functional types of claim, the conditional is probably 
the most difficult for students to symbolize correctly. There are so many ways 
to make these claims in ordinary English that it’s not easy to keep track. Fortu-
nately, the phrases “if” and “only if” account for a large number of conditionals, 
so you’ll have a head start if you understand their uses. Here are some general 
rules to remember:  
The word “if,” used alone, introduces the antecedent of a conditional. The 
phrase “only if” introduces the consequent of a conditional. 

294 
CHAPTER 10: DEDUCTIVE ARGUMENTS II
 To put it another way: It’s not the location of the part in a conditional that tells us 
whether it is the antecedent or the consequent; it’s the logical words that identify 
it. Consider this example: 
 The “Parker” part of the claim is the antecedent, even though it comes  after the 
“Moore” part. It’s as though the claim had said, 
 We would symbolize this claim as P → M. Once again, it’s the word “if” that tells 
us what the antecedent is. 
 This claim is different. In this case, the “Parker” part is the antecedent because “only 
if” introduces the consequent of a conditional. This is truth-functionally the same as  
 Using the letters indicated in parentheses, we’d symbolize this as 
Moore will get wet if Parker capsizes the boat.
If Parker capsizes the boat, Moore will get wet.
Parker will pay up only if Moore sinks the nine ball.
If Parker pays up (P), then Moore sunk (or must have sunk) the nine ball (M).
P → M
 Truth-Functional Trickery 
 Using what you know about truth-functional logic, can you identify how the sender of this 
encouraging-looking notice can defend the claim (because it  is  true), even though the receiver 
is not really going to win one nickel? 
 You Have Absolutely Won 
$1,000,000.00 
 If you follow the instructions inside 
and return the winning number! 
 Answer: Because there is not going to be any winning number inside (there are usually several 
 losing  numbers, in case that makes you feel better), the conjunction “you follow the instruc-
tions inside and [you] return the winning number” is going to be false, even if you do follow the 
instructions inside. Therefore, because this conjunction is the antecedent of the whole condi-
tional claim, the conditional claim turns out to be true. 
 Of course, uncritical readers will take the antecedent to be saying something like “If you 
follow the instructions inside  by returning the winning number inside ” (as if there were a winning 
number inside). These are the people who may wind up sending their own money to the mailer. 

 
SYMBOLIZING COMPOUND CLAIMS
295
 Don’t worry about the grammatical tenses; we’ll adjust those so that the claims 
make sense. We can use “if” in front of a conditional’s antecedent, or we can use 
“only if” in front of its consequent; we produce exactly equivalent claims in the 
two cases. As is the case with “if,” it doesn’t matter where the “only if” part of the 
claim occurs. The part of this claim that’s about Moore is the consequent, even 
though it occurs at the beginning of this version: 
 Once again: P → M. 
Only if Moore sinks the nine ball will Parker pay up.
 Damned If You Do, But If You Don’t . . . 
  The fearful, and unbelieving, and the abominable, and murderers, and whoremongers, 
and sorcerers, and idolators, and all liars, shall have their part in the lake which burneth 
with fire and brimstone. 
 —Revelation 21:8 
 This came to us in a brochure from a religious sect offering salvation for the believer. Notice, 
though, that the passage from the Bible doesn’t say that, if you believe, you  won’t  go to hell. It 
says, if you don’t believe, you  will go to hell. 
 Symbolize the following using the claim variables P and Q. (You can ignore differ-
ences in past, present, and future tense.)
 1. If Quincy learns to symbolize, Paula will be amazed. 
 2. Paula will teach him if Quincy pays her a big fee. 
 3. Paula will teach him only if Quincy pays her a big fee. 
 4. Only if Paula helps him will Quincy pass the course. 
 5. Quincy will pass if and only if Paula helps him. 
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
 Exercise 10-1 
 Claim 5 in the preceding exercise introduces a new wrinkle, the phrase “if and 
only if.” Remembering our general rules about how “if” and “only if” operate sep-
arately, it shouldn’t surprise us that “if and only if” makes both antecedent and 
consequent out of the claim it introduces. We can make P both antecedent and 
consequent this way: * 
 (P → Q) & (Q → P) 
 * Many texts introduce a new symbol (“P ↔ Q”) to represent “P if and only if Q.” It works exactly like our version; 
i.e., it has the same truth table as “(P → Q) & (Q → P).” Under some circumstances, the extra symbol provides some 
efficiencies, but for us it is unnecessary and would be merely something else to learn and remember. 

296 
CHAPTER 10: DEDUCTIVE ARGUMENTS II
 There are other ways to produce conditionals, of course. In one of its senses, 
the word “provided” (and the phrase “provided that”) works like the word “if” in 
introducing the antecedent of a conditional. “Moore will buy the car, provided the 
seller throws in a ton of spare parts” is equivalent to the same expression with the 
word “if” in place of “provided.” 
 Necessary and Sufficient Conditions 
 Conditional claims are sometimes spelled out in terms of necessary and sufficient 
conditions. Consider this example: 
 This tells us that we can’t have combustion without oxygen, or “If we have com-
bustion (C), then we must have oxygen (O).” Notice that  the necessary condition 
becomes the consequent of a conditional: C → O. 
 A sufficient condition  guarantees  whatever it is a sufficient condition for. 
Being born in the United States is a sufficient condition for U.S. citizenship—that’s 
 all  one needs to be a U.S. citizen.  Sufficient conditions are expressed as the ante-
cedents of conditional claims,  so we would say, “If Juan was born in the United 
States (B), then Juan is a U.S. citizen (C)”: B → C. 
 You should also notice the connection between “if” and “only if” on the one 
hand and necessary and sufficient conditions on the other. The word “if,” by itself, 
introduces a sufficient condition; the phrase “only if” introduces a necessary condi-
tion. So the claim “X is a necessary condition for Y” would be symbolized “Y → X.” 
 From time to time, one thing will be both a necessary and a sufficient condi-
tion for something else. For example, if Jean’s payment of her dues to the National 
Truth-Functional Logic Society (NTFLS) guaranteed her continued membership 
(making such payment a sufficient condition) and there were no way for her to 
The presence of oxygen is a necessary condition for combustion.
 ■ Comment: We often 
use “only if” when 
we mean to state 
both necessary and 
sufficient conditions, 
even though, literally 
speaking, it produces 
only the former. If Lew 
were a critical thinker, 
he’d check this deal 
more carefully before 
getting out the hose 
and bucket. See the text 
that follows. 

 
SYMBOLIZING COMPOUND CLAIMS
297
continue membership  without paying her dues (making payment a necessary con-
dition as well), then we could express such a situation as “Jean will remain a mem-
ber of the NTFLS (M) if and only if she pays her dues (D)”: (M → D) & (D → M). 
 We often play fast and loose with how we state necessary and sufficient condi-
tions. A parent tells his daughter, “You can watch television only if you clean your 
room.” Now, the youngster would ordinarily take cleaning her room as both a neces-
sary and a sufficient condition for being allowed to watch television, and probably 
that’s what a parent would intend by those words. But notice that the parent actually 
stated only a necessary condition; technically, he would not be going back on what 
he said if room cleaning turned out not to be sufficient for television privileges. Of 
course, he’d better be prepared for more than a logic lesson from his daughter in such 
a case, and most of us would be on her side in the dispute. But, literally, it’s the neces-
sary condition that the phrase “only if” introduces, not the sufficient condition.  
 “Unless” 
 Consider the claim “Paula will foreclose unless Quincy pays up.” Asked to symbol-
ize this, we might come up with ~Q → P because the original claim is equivalent 
to “If Quincy doesn’t pay up, then Paula will foreclose.” But there’s an even sim-
pler way to do it. Ask yourself, What is the truth table for ~Q → P? If you’ve gained 
familiarity with the basic truth tables by this time, you realize that it’s the same as 
the table for P ∨ Q. And, as a matter of fact, you can treat the word “unless” exactly 
like the word “or” and symbolize it with a “∨”. 
 “Either . . . Or” 
 Sometimes we need to know exactly where a disjunction begins; it’s the job of the 
word “either” to show us. Compare the claims 
 and 
 These two claims say different things and have different truth tables, but the only 
difference between them is the location of the word “either”; without that word, 
the claim would be completely ambiguous. “Either” tells us that the disjunction 
begins with P in the first claim and Q in the second claim. So, we would symbolize 
the first (P & Q) ∨ R and the second P & (Q ∨ R). 
Either P and Q or R
P and either Q or R.
 Another “If” and “Only If” Confusion 
  Do you want to install and run Flasher 3.0 distributed by SE Digital Arts? Caution: SE Digital 
Arts claims that this content is safe. You should install or view this content if you trust SE 
Digital Arts to make that assertion. 
 —A typical download caution 
 Presumably, they mean not “if” but “only if.” Do you see why? In any case, this caution contains 
one heck of a weaseler (Chapter 5). 

298 
CHAPTER 10: DEDUCTIVE ARGUMENTS II
 The word “if” does much the same job for conditionals that “either” does for 
disjunctions. Notice the difference between 
 and 
 “If” tells us that the antecedent begins with Q in the first example and with P in the 
second. Hence, the second must have P & Q for the antecedent of its symbolization. 
 In general, the trick to symbolizing a claim correctly is to pay careful atten-
tion to exactly what the claim says—and this often means asking yourself just 
exactly what would make this claim false (or true). Then, try to come up with a 
symbolization that says the same thing—that is false (or true) in exactly the same 
circumstances. There’s no substitute for practice, so here’s an exercise to work on.      
 When we symbolize a claim, we’re displaying its truth-functional structure. Show 
that you can figure out the structures of the following claims by symbolizing them. 
Use these letters for the first ten items:
 P   5 Parsons signs the papers. 
 Q   5 Quincy goes (or will go) to jail. 
 R    5 Rachel files (or will file) an appeal. 
Use the symbols ~, &, ∨, and →. We suggest that, at least at first, you make symbol-
ization a two-stage process: First, replace simple parts of claims with letters; then, 
replace logical words with logical symbols, and add parentheses as required. 
We’ll do an example in two stages to show you what we mean. 
 Example 
 If Parsons signs the papers, then Quincy will go to jail but Rachel will not file 
an appeal. 
 Stage 1: If P, then Q but ~R 
 Stage 2: P → (Q & ~R) 
1. If Parsons signs the papers then Quincy will go to jail, and Rachel will file an 
appeal.  
2. If Parsons signs the papers, then Quincy will go to jail and Rachel will file an 
appeal.  
 3. If Parsons signs the papers and Quincy goes to jail then Rachel will file an 
appeal.  
 4. Parsons signs the papers and if Quincy goes to jail Rachel will file an appeal. 
 5. If Parsons signs the papers then if Quincy goes to jail Rachel will file 
an appeal.  
▲
▲
▲
 Exercise 10-2 
P and if Q then R
If P and Q then R.

 
TRUTHFUNCTIONAL ARGUMENTS 
299
 Construct truth tables for the symbolizations you produced for Exercise 10-2. 
Determine whether any of them are truth-functionally equivalent to any others. 
(Answers to the items with triangles are provided in the answers section at the 
back of the book.) 
▲
 Exercise 10-3 
 6. If Parsons signs the papers Quincy goes to jail, and if Rachel files an appeal 
Quincy goes to jail. 
 7. Quincy goes to jail if either Parsons signs papers or Rachel files an appeal. 
 8. Either Parsons signs the papers or, if Quincy goes to jail, then Rachel will file 
an appeal. 
 9. If either Parsons signs the papers or Quincy goes to jail then Rachel will file 
an appeal. 
 10. If Parsons signs the papers then either Quincy will go to jail or Rachel will 
file an appeal. 
 For the next ten items, use the following letters:
 C  5 My car runs well. 
 S   5 I will sell my car. 
 F    5 I will have my car fixed. 
 11. If my car doesn’t run well, then I will sell it. 
 12. It’s not true that, if my car runs well, then I will sell it. 
 13. I will sell my car only if it doesn’t run well. 
 14. I won’t sell my car unless it doesn’t run well. 
 15. I will have my car fixed unless it runs well. 
 16. I will sell my car but only if it doesn’t run well. 
 17. Provided my car runs well, I won’t sell it. 
 18. My car’s running well is a sufficient condition for my not having it fixed. 
 19. My car’s not running well is a necessary condition for my having it fixed. 
 20. I will neither have my car fixed nor sell it. 
▲
▲
▲
▲
 TRUTHFUNCTIONAL ARGUMENTS  
 Categorical syllogisms (discussed in Chapter 9) have a total of 256 forms. A truth-
functional argument, by contrast, can take any of an infinite number of forms. 
Nevertheless, we have methods for testing for validity that are flexible enough to 
encompass every truth-functional argument. In the remainder of this chapter, 
we’ll look at three of them: the truth-table method, the short truth-table method, 
and the method of deduction. 
 Before doing anything else, though, let’s quickly review the concept of 
validity. An argument is  valid,  you’ll recall, if and only if the truth of the prem-
ises guarantees the truth of the conclusion—that is, if the premises were true, the 
conclusion could not then be false. (Where validity is concerned, remember, it 
doesn’t matter whether the premises are  actually true.) 

300 
CHAPTER 10: DEDUCTIVE ARGUMENTS II
The Truth-Table Method 
 The  truth-table test for validity  requires familiarity with the truth tables for the 
four logical symbols, so go back and check yourself on those if you think you may 
not understand them clearly. Here’s how the method works: We present all of the 
possible circumstances for an argument by building a truth table for it; then we 
simply look to see if there are any circumstances in which the premises are all true 
and the conclusion false. If there are such circumstances—one row of the truth 
table is all that’s required—then the argument is invalid. 
Let’s look at a simple example. Let P and Q represent any two claims. Now, 
look at the following symbolized argument: 
 We can construct a truth table for this argument by including a column for 
each premise and one for the conclusion: 
1
2
3
4
5
P
Q
~P
 P → Q
~Q
T
T
F
T
F
T
F
F
F
T
F
T
T
T
F
F
F
T
T
T
 The first two columns are reference columns; they list truth values for the letters that 
appear in the argument. The reference columns should be constructed in accor-
dance with the method described on pages 290–291. The third and fourth columns 
appear under the two premises of the argument, and the fifth column is for the con-
clusion. The truth values in these columns are determined by those in the appropri-
ate rows of the reference columns. Note that in the third row of the table, both 
premises are true and the conclusion is false. This tells us that it is possible for the 
premises of this argument to be true while the conclusion is false; thus, the argument 
is invalid. Because it doesn’t matter what claims P and Q might stand for, the same is 
true for  every argument of this pattern. Here’s an example of such an argument: 
 Using S for “The Saints beat (or will beat) the 49ers” and G for “The Giants make 
(or will make) the playoffs,” we can symbolize the argument like this:
S → G
 ~S 
~G 
The first premise is a conditional, and the other premise is the negation of the 
antecedent of that conditional. The conclusion is the negation of the conditional’s 
consequent. It has exactly the same structure as the argument for which we just 
did the truth table; accordingly, it, too, is invalid. 
If the Saints beat the 49ers, then the Giants will make the playoffs. But the Saints 
won’t beat the 49ers. So the Giants won’t make the playoffs.
P → Q
~P
Therefore, ~Q

 
TRUTHFUNCTIONAL ARGUMENTS
301
 Let’s do another simple one: 
  We’re going to have large masses of arctic air (A) flowing into the Midwest 
unless the jet stream (J) moves south. Unfortunately, there’s no chance of 
the jet stream’s moving south. So you can bet there’ll be arctic air flowing 
into the Midwest. 
Symbolization gives us
 Here’s a truth table for the argument:
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 A 
 J 
 A ∨ J 
 ~J 
 T 
 T 
 T 
 F 
 T 
 F 
 T 
 T 
 F 
 T 
 T 
 F 
 F 
 F 
 F 
 T 
Note that the first premise is represented in column 3 of the table, the second 
premise in column 4, and the conclusion in one of the reference columns, col-
umn 1. Now, let’s recall what we’re up to. We want to know whether this argument 
is valid—that is to say, is it possible for the premises to be true and the conclu-
sion false? If there is such a possibility, it will turn up in the truth table because, 
remember, the truth table represents every possible situation with respect to the 
claims A and J. We find that the premises are both true in only one row, the sec-
ond, and when we check the conclusion, A, we find it is true in that row. Thus, 
there is  no  row in which the premises are true and the conclusion false. So, the 
argument is valid. 
 Here’s an example of a rather more complicated argument: 
 Let’s assign some letters to the simple claims so that we can show this argu-
ment’s pattern. 
 S     5 Scarlet is guilty of the crime. 
 W  5 Ms. White left the back door unlocked. 
 C    5 The colonel retired before ten o’clock. 
 Now we symbolize the argument to display this pattern:
 S → (W & C) 
 ~W ∨ ~C
~S
A ∨ J
~J
A
If Scarlet is guilty of the crime, then Ms. White must have left the back door 
unlocked and the colonel must have retired before ten o’clock. However, either 
Ms. White did not leave the back door unlocked, or the colonel did not retire 
before ten. Therefore, Scarlet is not guilty of the crime.

302 
CHAPTER 10: DEDUCTIVE ARGUMENTS II
 The first three columns are our reference columns, columns 7 and 8 are for the 
premises of the argument, and column 9 is for the argument’s conclusion. The 
remainder—4, 5, and 6—are for parts of some of the other symbolized claims; 
they could be left out if we desired, but they make filling in columns 7 and 8 a 
bit easier. 
 Once the table is filled in, evaluating the argument is easy. Just look to see 
whether there is any row in which the premises are true and the conclusion is 
false. One such row is enough to demonstrate the invalidity of the argument. 
 In the present case, we find that both premises are true only in the last three 
rows of the table. And in those rows, the conclusion is also true. So there is no set 
of circumstances—no row of the table—in which both premises are true and the 
conclusion is false. Therefore, the argument is valid. 
 The Short Truth-Table Method 
 Although filling out a complete truth table always produces the correct answer 
regarding a truth-functional argument’s validity, it can be quite a tedious chore—
in fact, life is much too short to spend much of it filling in truth tables. Fortunately, 
there are shorter and more manageable ways of finding such an answer. The easi-
est systematic way to determine the validity or invalidity of truth-functional argu-
ments is the  short truth-table method.  Here’s the idea behind it:  If an argument is 
invalid, there has to be at least one row in the argument’s truth table where the 
Let’s think our way through this argument. As you read, refer back to the sym-
bolized version shown previously. Notice that the first premise is a conditional, 
with “Scarlet is guilty of the crime” as antecedent and a conjunction as conse-
quent. In order for that conjunction to be true, both “Ms. White left the back door 
unlocked” and “The colonel retired before ten o’clock” have to be true, as you’ll 
recall from the truth table for conjunctions. Now look at the second premise. It is 
a disjunction that tells us  either  Ms. White did not leave the back door unlocked 
 or  the colonel did not retire before ten. But if either or both of those disjuncts are 
true, at least one of the claims in our earlier conjunction is false. So it cannot be 
that  both  parts of the conjunction are true. This means the conjunction symbol-
ized by W & C must be false. And so the consequent of the first premise is false. 
How can the entire premise be true, in that case? The only way is for the anteced-
ent to be false as well. And that means that the conclusion, “Scarlet is not guilty of 
the crime,” must be true.
  All of this reasoning (and considerably more that we don’t require) is 
implicit in the following truth table for the argument: 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
S
W
C
~W
~C
W & C
S → W & C
~W ∨ ~C
~S
T
T
T
F
F
T
T
F
F
T
T
F
F
T
F
F
T
F
T
F
T
T
F
F
F
T
F
T
F
F
T
T
F
F
T
F
F
T
T
F
F
T
T
F
T
F
T
F
F
T
F
T
T
T
F
F
T
T
F
F
T
T
T
F
F
F
T
T
F
T
T
T

 
TRUTHFUNCTIONAL ARGUMENTS
303
 An Al Gore Chain Argument 
 
  If governments (which have not indi-
cated they are willing to act) do not act 
soon, carbon emissions will cause a seri-
ous increase in global temperatures. And 
if that happens, there will be a series of 
planetary catastrophes. Finally, if these 
catastrophes take place, the world will 
become uninhabitable. So, unfortu-
nately, our ability to live on this planet 
depends on the timely actions of govern-
ments that so far have shown little incli-
nation to act. 
 —Our exaggeration of an Al Gore thesis 
 Notice that this passage is simply two chain 
arguments linked together. (Chain arguments 
are discussed in the section titled “Deductions” 
that follows.) 
premises are true and the conclusion is false.  With the short truth-table method, we 
simply focus on finding such a row. Consider this symbolized argument:
We begin by looking at the conclusion. Because it’s a conditional, it can be made 
false only one way, by making its antecedent true and its consequent false. So, we 
do that by making P false and R false. 
 Can we now make both premises true? Yes, as it turns out, by making Q true. 
This case
makes both premises true and the conclusion false and thus proves the argument 
invalid. What we’ve done is produce the relevant row of the truth table without 
bothering to produce all the rest. Had the argument been valid, we would not 
have been able to produce such a row. 
P → Q
~Q → R
~P → R
P
Q
R
F
T
F

304 
CHAPTER 10: DEDUCTIVE ARGUMENTS II
 Here’s how the method works with a valid argument. Consider this example:
The only way to make the conclusion false is to make S true and R false: 
 Now, with S true, the only way we can make the second premise true is by 
making Q true:
But now, there is no way at all to make the first premise true, because P ∨ Q is going 
to be true (because Q is true), and R is already false. Because there is no other way 
to make the conclusion false and the second premise true, and because this way 
fails to make the first premise true, we can conclude that the argument is  valid.  
 In many cases, there will be more than one way to make the conclusion 
false. Here’s a symbolized example:
Because the conclusion is a conjunction, it is false if either or both of its conjuncts 
are false, which means we could begin by making S true and T false, S false and T 
true, or both S and T false. This is trouble we’d like to avoid if possible, so let’s see 
(P ∨ Q) → R
S → Q
S → R
 P 
 Q 
 R 
 S 
 
 
 F 
 T 
 P 
 Q 
 R 
 S 
 
 T 
 F 
 T 
■ Bertrand Russell was 
among the earliest 
developers of the 
system of logic we 
explore in this chapter. 
Ludwig Wittgenstein 
was his student; the 
two are thought to 
be among the most 
important of all 
twentieth-century 
philosophers.
P & (Q ∨ R)
R → S 
trying to make these true
P → T
S & T 
 6 
trying to make this false
6

 
TRUTHFUNCTIONAL ARGUMENTS 
305
if there’s someplace else we can begin making our assignment. (Remember: The 
idea is to try to assign true and false to the letters so as to make the premises true 
and the conclusion false. If we can do it, the argument is invalid.) 
In this example, to make the first premise true, we  must  assign true to the 
letter P. Why? Because the premise is a conjunction, and both of its parts must 
be true for the whole thing to be true. That’s what we’re looking for: places where 
we are  forced  to make an assignment of true or false to one or more letters. Then 
we make those assignments and see where they lead us. In this case, once we’ve 
made P true, we see that, to make the third premise true, we are forced to make T 
true (because a true antecedent and a false consequent would make the premise 
false, and we’re trying to make our premises true). 
 After making T true, we see that, to make the conclusion false, S must be 
false. So we make that assignment. At this point we’re nearly done, needing only 
assignments for Q and R.
Are there any other assignments that we’re forced to make? Yes: We must make R 
false to make the second premise true. Once we’ve done that, we see that Q must be 
true to preserve the truth of the first premise. And that completes the assignment:
This is one row in the truth table for this argument—the only row, as it 
turned out—in which all the premises are true and the conclusion is false; thus, it 
is the row that proves the argument invalid. 
 In the preceding example, there was a premise that forced us to begin with a 
particular assignment to a letter. Sometimes, neither the conclusion nor any of the 
premises forces an assignment on us. In that case, we must use trial and error: Begin 
with one assignment that makes the conclusion false (or some premise true) and 
see if it will work. If not, try another assignment. If all fail, then the argument is valid. 
 Often, several rows of a truth table will make the premises true and the conclu-
sion false; any one of them is all it takes to prove invalidity. Don’t get the mistaken idea 
that, just because the premises are all true in one row and so is the conclusion, the 
conclusion follows from the premises—that is, that the argument must be valid. To 
be valid, the conclusion must be true in  every row in which all the premises are true. 
 To review: Try to assign Ts and Fs to the letters in the symbolization so that all 
premises come out true and the conclusion comes out false. There may be more 
than one way to do it; any of them will do to prove the argument invalid. If it is impos-
sible to make the premises and conclusion come out this way, the argument is valid.       
 P 
 Q 
 R 
 S 
 T 
 T 
 
 
 F 
 T 
 P 
 Q 
 R 
 S 
 T 
 T 
 T 
 F 
 F 
 T 
 Construct full truth tables or use the short truth-table method to determine which 
of the following arguments are valid. 
 1. P ∨ ~Q
 ~Q 
 ~P 
▲
 Exercise 10-4 

306 
CHAPTER 10: DEDUCTIVE ARGUMENTS II
 These are simple arguments for you to symbolize; then determine whether they 
are valid. 
 1. If Bobo is smart, then he can do tricks. However, Bobo is not smart. So he 
cannot do tricks. 
 2. If God is always on America’s side, then America wouldn’t have lost any wars. 
America has lost wars. Therefore, God is not always on America’s side. 
 3. If your theory is correct, then light passing Jupiter will be bent. Light passing 
Jupiter is bent. Therefore, your theory is correct. 
 4. Moore eats carrots and broccoli for lunch, and if he does that, he probably is 
very hungry by dinnertime. Conclusion: Moore is very hungry by dinnertime. 
 5. If you value your feet, you won’t mow the lawn in your bare feet. Therefore, 
since you do mow the lawn in your bare feet, we can conclude that you don’t 
value your feet. 
▲
▲
 Exercise 10-5 
  2. P → Q
 ~Q 
 ~P 
 3. ~(P ∨ Q)
 R → P 
 ~R 
 4. P → (Q → R)
 ~(P → Q) 
 R 
 5. P ∨ (Q → R)
 Q & ~R 
 ~P 
 6. (P → Q) ∨ (R → Q)
 P & (~P → ~R) 
 Q 
 7. (P & R) → Q
 ~Q 
 ~P 
 8. P & (~Q → ~P)
 R → ~Q 
 ~R 
 9. L ∨ ~J
 R → J 
 L → ~R 
 10. ~F ∨ (G & H)
 P → F 
 ~H → ~P 
▲
▲
▲

 
TRUTHFUNCTIONAL ARGUMENTS 
307
 Use either the long or short truth-table method to determine which of the following 
arguments are valid. 
 1. K → (L & G)
 M → (J & K)
B & M 
 B & G 
 2. L ∨ (W → S)
 P ∨ ~S 
 ~L → W 
P 
 3. M & P
 R → ~P
F ∨ R 
 G → M
G & F 
  4. (D & G) → H
 M & (H → P) 
 M → G
D & P 
▲
▲
▲
▲
 Exercise 10-6 
  6. If Bobo is smart, then he can do tricks; and he can do tricks. Therefore, he 
is smart. 
 7. If Charles had walked through the rose garden, then he would have mud on 
his shoes. We can deduce, therefore, that he did walk through the rose gar-
den, because he has mud on his shoes. 
 8. If it rained earlier, then the sidewalks will still be wet. We can deduce, there-
fore, that it did rain earlier, because the sidewalks are still wet. 
 9. If you are pregnant, then you are a woman. We can deduce, therefore, that 
you are pregnant, because you are a woman. 
 10. If this stuff is on the final, I will get an A in the class because I really under-
stand it! Further, the teacher told me that this stuff will be on the final, so I 
know it will be there. Therefore, I know I will get an A in the class. 
 11. If side A has an even number, then side B has an odd number, but side A does 
not have an even number. Therefore, side B does not have an odd number.  
 12. If side A has an even number, then side B has an odd number, and side B 
does have an odd number. Therefore, side A has an even number. 
 13. If the theory is correct, then we will have observed squigglyitis in the speci-
men. However, we know the theory is not correct. Therefore, we could not 
have observed squigglyitis in the specimen. 
 14. If the theory is correct, then we will have observed dilation in the specimen. 
Therefore, since we did not observe dilation in the specimen, we know the 
theory is not correct. 
 15. If we observe dilation in the specimen, then we know the theory is correct. 
We observed dilation—so the theory is correct. 
▲
▲
▲

308 
CHAPTER 10: DEDUCTIVE ARGUMENTS II
 DEDUCTIONS  
 The next method we’ll look at is less useful for proving an argument  invalid than 
the truth-table methods, but it has some advantages in proving that an argument 
is valid. The method is that of  deduction. 
 When we use this method, we actually deduce (or “derive”) the conclusion 
from the premises by means of a series of basic, truth-functionally valid argument 
patterns. This is a lot like “thinking through” the argument, taking one step at a 
time to see how, once we’ve assumed the truth of the premises, we eventually 
arrive at the conclusion. (We do this for an example on page 301.) We’ll consider 
some extended examples showing how the method works as we explain the first 
few basic argument patterns. We’ll refer to these patterns as truth-functional rules 
because they govern what steps we’re allowed to take in getting from the prem-
ises to the conclusion. (Your instructor may ask that you learn some or all of the 
basic valid argument patterns. It’s a good idea to be able to identify these patterns 
whether you go on to construct deductions from them or not.) 
Group I Rules: Elementary Valid Argument Patterns 
 This first group of rules should be learned before you go on to the Group II rules. 
Study them until you can work Exercise 10-7 with confidence. 
 5. R → S
 (S & B) → T
T → E  
 (R ∨ B) → E 
 6. (D & P) → R
 ~R
 S → R
 ~D & ~P
 7. P → (D & J)
 ~M → ~L
L ∨ (M → P) 
 J & D 
 8. M ∨ J
 ~J → R 
 (~R ∨ ~M) → J 
 9. D → ~M
 (K ∨ L) → (M ∨ R) 
 (D → ~R) → (D → ~L) 
 10. (P & R) → (E ∨ ~ S)
 (S → O)
(N ∨ R) & (S → P) 
 ~N 
S → (O & E) 
▲

 
DEDUCTIONS
309
Any argument of the pattern
P → Q
P
Q
is valid. If you have a conditional among the premises, and if the antecedent of that 
conditional occurs as another premise, then by  modus ponens  the consequent of 
the conditional follows from those two premises. The claims involved do not have to 
be simple letters standing alone—it would have made no difference if, in place of P, 
we had had something more complicated, such as (P ∨ R), as long as that compound 
claim appeared everywhere that P appears in the previous pattern. For example:
The idea, once again, is that if you have  any conditional whatsoever  on a line of 
your deduction, and if you have the antecedent of that conditional on some other 
line, you can write down the consequent of the conditional on your new line. 
 If the consequent of the conditional is the conclusion of the argument, then 
the deduction is finished—the conclusion has been established. If it is not the 
conclusion of the argument you’re working on, the consequent of the conditional 
can be listed just as if it were another premise to use in deducing the conclusion 
you’re after. An example:
We’ve numbered the three premises of the argument and set its conclusion off to 
the side. (Hereafter we’ll use a slash and three dots [/∴] in place of “therefore” to 
indicate the conclusion.) Now, notice that line 1 is a conditional, and line 3 is its 
antecedent. Modus ponens allows us to write down the consequent of line 1 as a 
new line in our deduction:
At the right, we’ve noted the abbreviation for the rule we used and the lines the 
rule required. These notes are called the  annotation  for the deduction. We can 
now make use of this new line in the deduction to get the conclusion we were 
originally after, namely, S.
Again, we used modus ponens, this time on lines 2 and 4. The same explanation 
as that for deriving line 4 from lines 1 and 3 applies here. 
Rule 1: Modus 
ponens (MP), also 
known as affirming 
the antecedent
1. (P ∨ R) →  Q   Premise
2. P ∨ R         Premise
3. Q        From the premises, by modus ponens
1. P → R
2. R → S
3. P   Therefore, S
4. R  1, 3, MP
5. S  2, 4, MP

310 
CHAPTER 10: DEDUCTIVE ARGUMENTS II
Notice that the modus ponens rule and all other Group I rules can be used 
only on whole lines.  This means that you can’t find the items you need for MP as 
parts of a line, as in the following:
This is  not  a legitimate use of MP. We do have a conditional as  part  of the first line, 
and the second line is indeed the antecedent of that conditional. But the rule can-
not be applied to parts of lines. The conditional required by rule MP must take up 
the entire line, as in the following:
The  modus tollens pattern is this: 
P → Q
~Q
~P
If you have a conditional claim as one premise and if one of your other premises is 
the negation of the consequent of that conditional, you can write down the nega-
tion of the conditional’s antecedent as a new line in your deduction. Here’s a 
deduction that uses both of the first two rules:
In this deduction, we derived line 4 from lines 2 and 3 by modus ponens, and then 
4 and 1 gave us line 5, which is what we were after, by modus tollens. The fact that 
the antecedent of line 1 is itself a compound claim, (P & Q), is not important; our 
line 5 is the antecedent of the conditional with a negation sign in front of it, and 
that’s all that counts.  
P → Q
Q → R
P → R 
 The  chain argument  rule allows you to derive a conditional from two you already 
have, provided the antecedent of one of your conditionals is the same as the con-
sequent of the other.  
(P → Q) ∨ R
P     
Q ∨ R  
 
(erroneous!)
P → (Q ∨ R)
P     
Q ∨ R
Rule 2: Modus 
tollens (MT), also 
known as denying 
the consequent
1. (P & Q) → R
2. S
3. S → ~R     /∴ ~(P & Q)
4. ~R     2, 3, MP
5. ~(P & Q)   1, 4, MT
Rule 3: Chain 
argument (CA) 

 
DEDUCTIONS
311
 If the Dollar Falls . . . 
 The valid argument patterns are in fact fairly common. Here’s one from an article in  Time  as to 
why a weakening dollar is a threat to the stock market: 
  Why should we care? . . . If the dollar continues to drop, investors may be tempted to 
move their cash to currencies on the upswing. That would drive the U.S. market lower. . . . 
Because foreigners hold almost 40% of U.S. Treasury securities, any pullout would risk a 
spike in interest rates that would ultimately slaughter the . . . market. 
 The series of chain arguments here is reasonably obvious. In effect: If the dollar falls, then inves-
tors move their cash to currencies on the upswing. If investors move their cash to currencies 
on the upswing, then the U.S. market goes lower. If the U.S. market goes lower, then interest 
rates on U.S. Treasury securities rise. If interest rates on U.S. Treasury securities rise, then the . . . 
market dies. [Therefore, if the dollar falls, then the . . . market dies.] 
P ∨ Q 
 
P ∨ Q
~P 
 
 
~Q 
Q 
 
P
 From a disjunction and the negation of one disjunct, the other disjunct may be derived.   
This one is obvious, but we need it for obvious reasons: 
P & Q 
P & Q
P 
 
Q
If the conjunction is true, then of course the conjuncts must all be true. You can pull 
out one conjunct from any conjunction and make it the new line in your deduction. 
P
Q
P & Q
 This rule allows you to put any two lines of a deduction together in the form of a 
conjunction.  
P 
 
Q 
P ∨ Q 
 P ∨ Q
 Clearly, no matter what claims P and Q might be, if P is true then  either  P or Q 
must be true. The truth of one disjunct is all it takes to make the whole disjunction 
true. 
P → Q
R → S
P ∨ R
Q ∨ S
Rule 4: Disjunctive 
argument (DA)
Rule 5: 
Simplification (SIM)
Rule 6: 
Conjunction (CONJ)
Rule 7: Addition 
(ADD)
Rule 8: Constructive 
dilemma (CD)

312 
CHAPTER 10: DEDUCTIVE ARGUMENTS II
 The disjunction of the antecedents of any two conditionals allows the derivation 
of the disjunction of their consequents.  
P → Q
R → S
~Q ∨ ~S
~P ∨ ~R 
   The disjunction of the negations of the consequents of two conditionals allows the 
derivation of the disjunction of the negations of their antecedents. (Refer to the 
previous pattern as you read this, and it will make a lot more sense.)       
Rule 9: Destructive 
dilemma (DD)
 For each of the following groups of symbolized claims, identify which Group I rule 
was used to derive the last line. 
1. P → (Q & R)
  
(Q & R) → (S ∨ T)
  
P → (S ∨ T)
2. (P & S) ∨ (T → R)
  
~(P & S)
  
T → R
▲
▲
 Exercise 10-7 
 Logician at Work 
 No, really. Problem solving in matters like auto 
mechanics involves a great deal of deductive 
reasoning. For example, “The problem had to 
be either a clogged fuel filter or a defective fuel 
pump. But we’ve replaced the fuel filter, and it 
wasn’t that, so it has to be a bad fuel pump.” 
This is an example of one of our Group I rules. 
 

 
DEDUCTIONS 
313
 Construct deductions for each of the following, using the Group I rules. Each can 
be done in just a step or two (except number 10, which takes more). Remember, the 
slash and three dots operates like "therefore" to introduce the conclusion. 
 1.  1. R → P  
 
2. Q → R      /∴Q → P 
 2.  1. P → S 
 
2. P ∨ Q  
 
3. Q → R      /∴S ∨ R 
 3.  1. R & S 
 
2. S → P     /∴P 
 4.  1. P → Q  
 
2. ~P → S 
 
3. ~ Q      /∴S 
 5.  1. (P ∨ Q) → R  
 
2. Q        /∴R 
 6.  1. ~P 
 
2. ~ (R & S) ∨ Q  
 
3. ~P → ~ Q    /∴ ~ (R & S) 
 7.  1. ~ S 
 
2. (P & Q) → R  
 
3. R → S     /∴ ~ (P & Q) 
 8.  1. P → ~ (Q & T) 
 
2. S → (Q & T) 
 
3. P       /∴ ~ S 
 9.  1. (P ∨ T) → S 
 
2. R → P  
▲
▲
▲
 Exercise 10-9 
 Go back to Exercise 10-5 and determine which items are instances of modus 
ponens and which are instances of modus tollens. 
 Exercise 10-8 
 3. P ∨ (Q & R)
  (Q & R) → S
  P → T
  S ∨ T
 4. (P ∨ R) → Q
  ~Q
  ~(P ∨ R)
 5. (Q → T) → S
  ~S ∨ ~P
  R → P
  ~(Q → T) ∨ ~R 
▲
▲
▲

314 
CHAPTER 10: DEDUCTIVE ARGUMENTS II
 Group II Rules: Truth-Functional Equivalences 
 These rules are different from our Group I rules in some important ways. First, 
they are expressed as truth-functional equivalences. This means that they each 
take the form of two types of symbolizations that have exactly the same truth 
table. We’ll use a double-headed arrow, ↔, to indicate that we can move from 
either side to the other. (Remember that Group I rules allow us to go only one 
direction, from premises to conclusion.) A second major difference is that these 
rules can be used on  parts of lines. So, if we have a conjunction in a deduction, 
and we have a Group II rule that says one of the conjuncts is equivalent to some-
thing else, we can substitute that something else for the equivalent conjunct. 
You’ll see how this works after an example or two. 
 Here is the overall principle that governs how Group II rules work:  A claim 
or part of a claim may be replaced by a claim to which it is equivalent by one of the 
following Group II rules.  Once again, how this works should become clear in a 
moment. As in the case of the first group, the Ps and Qs and so forth in the state-
ment of the rules can stand for any symbolized claim whatever, as long as each 
letter stands for the same claim throughout.  
 P ↔ ~~P  
 This rule allows you to add or remove two negation signs in front of any claim, 
whether simple or compound. For example, this rule allows the derivation of 
either of the following from the other, 
 because the rule guarantees that (Q ∨ R) and its double negation, ~~ (Q ∨ R), are 
equivalent. This in turn guarantees that P → (Q ∨ R) and P → ~~ (Q ∨ R) are equiv-
alent, and hence that each implies the other. 
Here’s an example of DN at work:
 We use DN on line 2 to get line 3. Now, our new line is the negation of “~(Q → R),” 
the consequent of line 1. So disjunctive argument allows us to get “P” on the 
new line. 
Rule 10: Double 
negation (DN)
P → (Q ∨ R)  P → ~~(Q ∨ R)
1. P ∨ ~(Q → R)
2. (Q → R)     /∴P
3. ~~(Q → R)   2, DN
4. P       1, 3, DA
 
3. R ∨ Q  
 
4. Q → T      /∴S 
10.  1. (T ∨ M) → ~ Q 
 
2. (P → Q) & (R → S)  
 
3. T        /∴ ~P 
▲

 
DEDUCTIONS
315
 (P & Q) ↔ (Q & P) 
 (P ∨ Q) ↔ (Q ∨ P) 
 This rule allows any conjunction or disjunction to be “turned around” so that the 
conjuncts or disjuncts occur in reverse order. Here’s an example: 
 Either of these symbolized claims can be deduced from the other. Notice that 
commutation is used on  part of the claim—just the consequent.  
This rule allows us to change a conditional into a disjunction and vice versa. 
 (P → Q) ↔ (~P ∨ Q)  
 Notice that the antecedent always becomes the negated disjunct or vice versa, 
depending on which way you’re going. Another example: 
The following rule may remind you of the categorical operation of contraposition 
(see Chapter 9)—this rule is its truth-functional version.
 (P → Q) ↔ (~Q → ~P)  
 This rule allows us to exchange the places of a conditional’s antecedent and con-
sequent but only by putting on or taking off a negation sign in front of each. Here’s 
another example: 
Sometimes you want to perform contraposition on a symbolization that 
doesn’t fit either side of the equivalence because it has a negation sign in front of 
either the antecedent or the consequent but not both. You can do what you want 
in such cases, but it takes two steps, one applying double negation and one apply-
ing contraposition. Here’s an example:
Your instructor may allow you to combine these steps (and refer to both DN and 
CONTR in your annotation).
 ~(P & Q) ↔ (~P ∨ ~Q)
 ~(P ∨ Q) ↔ (~P & ~Q)
Rule 11: 
Commutation (COM)
P → (Q ∨ R)   P → (R ∨ Q)
Rule 12: 
Implication (IMPL)
(P ∨ Q) → R   ~(P ∨ Q) ∨ R
Rule 13: 
Contraposition 
(CONTR)
(P & Q) → (P ∨ Q)   ~(P ∨ Q) → ~(P & Q)
(P ∨ Q) → ~R
~~(P ∨ Q) → ~R  Double negation
R → ~(P ∨ Q)    Contraposition
Rule 14: DeMorgan’s 
Laws (DEM)

316 
CHAPTER 10: DEDUCTIVE ARGUMENTS II
 Notice that, when the negation sign is “moved inside” the parentheses, the “&” 
changes into a “∨,” or vice versa. It’s important not to confuse the use of the nega-
tion sign in DeMorgan’s Laws with that of the minus sign in algebra. Notice that 
when you take ~(P ∨ Q) and “move the negation sign in,” you do  not  get (~P ∨ ~Q). 
The wedge must be changed to an ampersand or vice versa whenever DEM is 
used. You can think of ~(P ∨ Q) and (~P & ~Q) as saying “neither P nor Q,” and you 
can think of ~(P & Q) and (~P ∨ ~Q) as saying “not both P and Q.” 
 [P → (Q → R)] ↔ [(P & Q) → R] 
 Square brackets are used exactly as parentheses are. In English, the exportation 
rule says that “If P, then if Q, then R” is equivalent to “If both P and Q, then R.” (The 
commas are optional in both claims.) If you look back to Exercise 10-2, items 3 
and 5 (pages 298–299), you’ll notice that, according to the exportation rule, each 
of these can replace the other.  
[P & (Q & R)] ↔ [(P & Q) & R]
[P ∨ (Q ∨ R)] ↔ [(P ∨ Q) ∨ R]
 Association simply tells us that, when we have three items joined together with 
wedges or with ampersands, it doesn’t matter which ones we group together. If 
we have a long disjunction with more than two disjuncts, it still requires only one 
of them to be true for the entire disjunction to be true; if it’s a conjunction, then 
all the conjuncts have to be true, no matter how many of them there are, in order 
for the entire conjunction to be true. Your instructor may allow you to drop paren-
theses in such symbolizations, but if you’re developing these rules as a formal 
system, he or she may not. 
[P & (Q ∨ R)] ↔ [(P & Q) ∨ (P & R)]
[P ∨ (Q & R)] ↔ [(P ∨ Q) & (P ∨ R)]
This rule allows us to “spread a conjunct across a disjunction” or to “spread a dis-
junct across a conjunction.” In the first example that follows, look at the left-hand side 
of the equivalence. The P, which is conjoined with a disjunction, is picked up and 
dropped (distributed) across the disjunction by being conjoined with each part. (This 
is easier to understand if you see it done on the board than by trying to figure it out 
from the page in front of you.) The two versions of the rule, like those of DEM, allow 
us to do exactly with the wedge what we’re allowed to do with the ampersand. 
 (P ∨ P) ↔ P  
 (P & P) ↔ P 
 This rule allows a few obvious steps; they are sometimes necessary to “clean up” 
a deduction. 
 The twelve-step and seven-step examples that follow show some deductions 
that use rules from both Group I and Group II. Look at them carefully, covering up 
the lines with a piece of paper and uncovering them one at a time as you progress. 
This gives you a chance to figure out what you might do before you see the answer. 
In any case, make sure you understand how each line was achieved before going 
on. If necessary, look up the rule used to make sure you understand it. 
Rule 15: 
Exportation (EXP)
Rule 16: 
Association (ASSOC)
Rule 17: 
Distribution (DIST)
Rule 18: 
Tautology (TAUT)

 
DEDUCTIONS
317
 The first example is long but fairly simple. Length is not always proportional 
to difficulty. 
 1. P → (Q → R)
 2. (T → P) & (S → Q)
 3. T & S        /∴ R
 4. T → P       2, SIM
 5. S → Q      2, SIM
 6. T        3, SIM
 7. S        3, SIM
 8. P         4, 6, MP
 9. Q        5, 7, MP
10. P & Q     8, 9, CONJ
11. (P & Q) → R    1, EXP
12. R       10, 11, MP
It’s often difficult to tell how to proceed when you first look at a deduction 
problem. One strategy is to work backward. Look at what you want to get, look at 
what you have, and see what you would need in order to get what you want. Then 
determine where you would get  that,  and so on. We’ll explain in terms of the fol-
lowing problem.
 We began by wanting ~P as our conclusion. If we’re familiar with modus tollens, 
it’s clear from line 1 that we can get ~P if we can get the negation of line 1’s con-
sequent, which would be ~(Q & R). That in turn is the same as ~Q ∨ ~R, by one of 
DeMorgan’s laws, which we can get if we can get either ~Q or ~R. So now we’re 
looking for some place in the first three premises where we can get ~Q. That’s 
easy: from lines 2 and 3, by modus ponens. A little practice and you’ll be surprised 
how easy these strategies are to use, at least  most of the time! 
The table in Figure 2 sums up all the rules introduced so far. Refer back to it 
as you work through deductions in the remainder of the chapter.
1. P → (Q & R)
2. S → ~Q
3. S       /∴ ~P
4. ~ Q     2, 3, MP
5. ~Q ∨ ~ R     4, ADD
6. ~(Q & R)     5, DEM
7. ~P       1, 6, MT

318 
CHAPTER 10: DEDUCTIVE ARGUMENTS II
 The annotations that explain how each line was derived have been left off the fol-
lowing deductions. For each line, supply the rule used and the numbers of any 
earlier lines the rule requires. 
 1.  1. 
P → Q          (Premise)  
 
2. 
R → S         (Premise)  
 
3. 
Q → ~S           (Premise)/∴ P → ~ R  
 
4. 
P → ~S  
 
5. 
~ S → ~R 
 
6. 
P → ~R 
 2.  1. 
~P             (Premise) 
 
2. 
(Q → R) & (R → Q)   (Premise)  
▲
 Exercise 10-10 
FIGURE 2 
Truth-Functional Rules for Deductions

 
DEDUCTIONS 
319
 
3. 
R ∨ P           (Premise) / ∴ Q  
 
4. 
R 
 
5. 
R → Q  
 
6. 
Q 
 3.  1. 
P → Q          (Premise)  
 
2. 
R → (~S ∨ T)       (Premise)  
 
3. 
~P → R           (Premise) / ∴ (~ Q & S) → T 
 
4. 
~ Q → ~P 
 
5. 
~ Q → R 
 
6. 
~ Q → (~ S ∨ T) 
 
7. 
~Q → (S → T) 
 
8. 
(~Q & S) → T 
 4.  1. 
(P & Q) → T        (Premise)  
 
2. 
P            (Premise) 
 
3. 
~Q → ~P         (Premise) / ∴ T  
 
4. 
P → Q  
 
5. 
Q 
 
6. 
P & Q 
 
7. 
T 
 5.  1. ~(S ∨ R)          (Premise)  
 
 2. P → S           (Premise)  
 
 3. T → (P ∨ R)      (Premise) / ∴ ~T 
 
 4. ~S & ~R 
 
 5. ~S 
 
 6. ~P 
 
 7. ~R 
 
 8. ~P & ~R 
 
 9. ~(P ∨ R) 
 
10. ~T 
 6.  1. 
(P ∨ (Q & R)         (Premise)  
 
2. 
R → D             (Premise)  
 
3. 
M & ~ D          (Premise) /∴ P  
 
4. 
(P ∨ Q) & (P ∨ R) 
 
5. 
P ∨ R  
 
6. 
~D 
 
7. 
~R 
 
8. 
P 
 7.  1. 
(Q ∨ R) & P       (Premise)  
 
2. 
~M → ~ Q         (Premise)  
 
3. 
~L → ~ R         (Premise) /∴ (P & M) ∨ (P & L) 
▲
▲

320 
CHAPTER 10: DEDUCTIVE ARGUMENTS II
 
 4. Q ∨ R  
 
 5. Q → M 
 
 6. R → L 
 
 7. M ∨ L 
 
 8. P 
 
 9. P & (M ∨ L)  
 
10. (P & M) ∨ (P & L) 
 8.  1. (~L ∨ ~ E) & (A → H)   (Premise)  
 
 2. (B & L) ∨ U        (Premise)  
 
 3. M → ~U          (Premise)  
 
 4. ~ A → E          (Premise) /∴ M → H 
 
 5. U ∨ (B & L)  
 
 6. ~ U → (B & L)  
 
 7. M → (B & L)  
 
 8. ~ M ∨ (B & L)  
 
 9. (~ M ∨ B) & (~ M ∨ L)  
 
10. ~ M ∨ L 
 
11. M → L 
 
12. ~ L ∨ ~ E  
 
13. L → ~ E 
 
14. M → ~ E 
 
15. ~ E → A 
 
16. A → H 
 
17. M → A 
 
18. M → H 
 Derive the indicated conclusions from the premises supplied. 
 1.  1. P & Q 
 
2. P → R       / ∴ R 
 2.  1. R → S 
 
2. ~P ∨ R       / ∴ P → S 
 3.  1. P ∨ Q  
 
2. R & ~Q      / ∴ P 
 4.  1. ~P ∨ (~Q ∨ R) 
 
2. P         / ∴ Q → R 
 5.  1. T ∨ P  
 
2. P → S       / ∴ ~ T → S 
 6.  1. Q ∨ ~S  
 
2. Q → P        /∴ S → P 
 7.  1. ~S ∨ ~R 
 
2. P → (S & R)     / ∴ ~P 
▲
▲
▲
 Exercise 10-11 

 
DEDUCTIONS 
321
 Derive the indicated conclusions from the premises supplied. 
 1.   1. P → R  
 
2. R → Q          / ∴ ~P ∨ Q 
 2.   1. ~P ∨ S 
 
2. ~T → ~S       / ∴ P → T 
 3.   1. F → R 
 
2. L → S 
 
3. ~C 
 
4. (R & S) → C       / ∴ ~F ∨ ~L 
 4.   1. P ∨ (Q & R)  
 
2. (P ∨ Q) → S       / ∴ S 
 5.   1. (S & R) → P 
 
2. (R → P) → W  
 
3. S            / ∴ W 
 6.   1. ~L → (~P → M)  
 
2. ~(P ∨ L)        / ∴ M 
 7.   1. (M ∨ R) & P  
 
2. ~S → ~P 
 
3. S → ~M        / ∴ R 
 8.   1. Q → L 
 
2. P → M 
 
3. R ∨ P  
 
4. R → (Q & S)       / ∴ ~M → L 
 9.   1. Q → S 
 
2. P → (S & L)  
 
3. ~P → Q 
 
4. S → R         / ∴ R & S 
 10.   1. P ∨ (R & Q)  
 
2. R → ~P 
 
3. Q → T           / ∴ R → T 
▲
▲
▲
▲
 Exercise 10-12 
 Conditional Proof 
 Conditional proof (CP)  is both a rule and a strategy for constructing a deduction. 
It is based on the following idea: Let’s say we want to produce a deduction for a 
conditional claim, P → Q. If we produce such a deduction, what have we proved? 
 8.   1. ~Q & (~S & ~T) 
 
2. P → (Q ∨ S)     / ∴ ~P 
 9.   1. P ∨ (S & R)  
 
2. T → (~P & ~R)   /∴ ~T 
 10.   1. (S & P) → R 
 
2. S         /P → R 
▲

322 
CHAPTER 10: DEDUCTIVE ARGUMENTS II
We’ve proved the equivalent of “If P were true, then Q would be true.” One way to 
do this is simply to  assume that P is true (that is, to add it as an additional premise) 
and then to prove that, on that assumption, Q has to be true. If we can do that—
prove Q after assuming P—then we’ll have proved that, if P then Q, or P → Q. Let’s 
look at an example of how to do this; then we’ll explain it again. 
 Here is the way we’ll use CP as a new rule: Simply write down the anteced-
ent of whatever conditional we want to prove, drawing a circle around the num-
ber of that step in the deduction; in the annotation, write “CP Premise” for that 
step. Here’s what it looks like: 
 Then, after we’ve proved what we want—the consequent of the conditional—in 
the next step, we write down the full conditional. Then we draw a line in the mar-
gin to the left of the deduction from the premise with the circled number to the 
number of the line we deduced from it. (See the following for an example.) In the 
annotation for the last line in the process, list  all the steps from the circled number 
to the one with the conditional’s consequent,  and give CP as the rule. Drawing the 
line that connects our earlier CP premise with the step we derived from it indi-
cates we’ve stopped making the assumption that the premise, which is now the 
antecedent of our conditional in our last step, is true. This is known as  discharging 
the premise. Here’s how the whole thing looks: 
 Here’s the promised second explanation. Look at the example. Think of the con-
clusion as saying that, given the two original premises,  if  we had ~P, we could get 
R. One way to find out if this is so is to  give ourselves  ~P and then see if we can get 
R. In step 3, we do exactly that: We give ourselves ~P. Now, by circling the num-
ber, we indicate that  this is a premise we’ve given ourselves  (our “CP premise”) 
and therefore that it’s one we’ll have to get rid of before we’re done. (We can’t be 
allowed to invent, use, and keep just any old premises we like—we could prove 
 anything  if we could do that.) But once we’ve given ourselves ~P, getting R turns 
out to be easy! Steps 4 and 5 are pretty obvious, aren’t they? (If not, you need more 
practice with the other rules.) In steps 3 through 5, what we’ve actually proved is 
that  if  we had ~P, then we could get R. So we’re justified in writing down step 6 
because that’s exactly what step 6 says: If ~P, then R. 
 Once we’ve got our conditional, ~P → R, we’re no longer dependent on the 
CP premise, so we draw our line in the left margin from the last step that depended 
on the CP premise back to the premise itself. We  discharge the premise. 
 1. P ∨ (Q → R)   Premise 
 2. Q          Premise / ∴ ~P → R 
 3. ~P           CP Premise 
 1. P ∨ (Q → R)      Premise 
 2. Q          Premise /∴ ~P → R 
 3. ~P             CP Premise 
 4. Q → R           1, 3, DA 
 5. R       2, 4, MP 
 6. ~P → R       3–5, CP   

 
DEDUCTIONS
323
 Here are some very important restrictions on the CP rule:
1. CP can be used only to produce a conditional claim: After we discharge 
a CP premise, the very next step must be a conditional with the preceding step as 
consequent and the CP premise as antecedent. [Remember that lots of claims are 
equivalent to conditional claims. For example, to get (~P ∨ Q), just prove (P → Q), 
and then use IMPL.] 
 2.  If more than one use is made of CP at a time—that is, if more than one CP 
premise is brought in—they must be discharged in exactly the reverse order from 
that in which they were assumed. This means that the lines that run from different 
CP premises must not cross each other. See the following examples. 
 3. Once a CP premise has been discharged, no steps derived from it—those 
steps encompassed by the line drawn in the left margin—may be used in the 
deduction. (They depend on the CP premise, you see, and it’s been discharged.) 
 4. All CP premises must be discharged. 
This sounds a lot more complicated than it actually is. Refer back to these restrictions 
on CP as you go through the examples, and they will make a good deal more sense. 
 Here’s an example of CP in which two additional premises are assumed and 
discharged in reverse order. 
 
 Notice that the additional premise added at step 5 is discharged when step 8 is com-
pleted, and the premise at step 3 is discharged when step 10 is completed. Once again: 
Whenever you discharge a premise, you must make that premise the antecedent 
of the next step in your deduction. (You might try the preceding deduction without 
using CP; doing so will help you appreciate having the rule, however hard to learn it 
may seem at the moment. Using CP makes many deductions shorter, easier, or both.) 
 Here are three more examples of the correct use of CP: 
 1. P → [Q ∨ (R & S)]     Premise 
 2. (~Q → S) → T       Premise  / ∴ P → T 
 3. P             CP Premise 
 4. Q ∨ (R & S)     1, 3,  MP 
 5. ~Q             CP Premise 
 6. R & S          4, 5, DA 
 7. S            6, SIM 
 8. ~Q → S       5–7, CP  
 9. T         2, 8, MP 
 10. P → T       3–9, CP 
1. (R → ~P) → S         Premise
2. S → (T ∨ Q)         Premise / ∴ ~ (R & P) → (T → Q)
3. ~ (R & P)            CP Premise
4. ~ R ∨ → ~P        3, DEM
5. R → ~P          4, IMPL
6. S          1, 5, MP
7. (T ∨ Q)         2, 6, MP
8. ~ (R & P) → (T ∨ Q)      3–7, CP

324 
CHAPTER 10: DEDUCTIVE ARGUMENTS II
 In this case, one use of CP follows another: 
 In this case, one use of CP occurs “inside” another: 
 1. (P ∨ Q) → R         Premise
 2. (S ∨ T) → U          Premise  /∴ (~R → ~P) & (~U → ~T)
 3. ~R             CP Premise
 4. ~(P ∨ Q)         1, 3, MT
 5. ~P & ~ Q          4, DEM
 6. ~P            5, SIM
 7. ~R → ~P         3–6, CP
 8. ~U            CP Premise
 9. ~(S ∨ T)         2, 8, MT
10. ~S & ~ T           9, DEM
11. ~T            10, SIM
12. ~U → ~ T         8–11, CP
13. (~R → ~P) & (~U → ~T)  7, 12, CONJ
 1. R → (S & Q)            Premise
 2. P → M              Premise
 3. S → (Q → ~M)           Premise
 4. (J ∨ T) → B          Premise  /∴ R → (J → (B & ~P))
 5. R                 CP Premise
 6. J               CP Premise
 7. J ∨ T              6, ADD
 8. B            4, 7, MP
 9. (S & Q)           1, 5, MP
10. (S & Q) → ~M             3, EXP
11. ~M           9, 10, MP
12. ~P           2, 11, MT
13. B & ~P            8, 12, CONJ
14. J → (B & ~P)       6–13, CP
15. R → (J → (B & ~P))    5–14, CP
 Before ending this section on deductions, we should point out that our sys-
tem of truth-functional logic has a couple of properties that are of great theoreti-
cal interest: It is both sound and complete. To say that a logic system is sound (in 
the sense most important to us here) is to say that  every deduction that can be 
constructed using the rules of the system constitutes a valid argument.  Another way 
to say this is that no deduction or string of deductions allows us to begin with true 
sentences and wind up with false ones. 

 
EXERCISES 
325
 To say that our system is complete is to say that  for every truth-functionally 
valid argument that there is (or even could be), there is a deduction in our system 
of rules that allows us to deduce the conclusion of that argument from its premises. 
That is, if conclusion C really does follow validly from premises P and Q, then we 
know for certain that it is possible to construct a deduction beginning with just P 
and Q and ending with C. 
 We could have produced a system that is both sound and complete and that 
had many fewer rules than our system has. However, in such systems, deduc-
tions tend to be very difficult to construct. Although our system is burdened 
with a fairly large number of rules, once you learn them, producing proofs is not 
too difficult. So, in a way, every system of logic is a trade-off of a sort. You can 
make the system small and elegant but difficult to use, or you can make it larger 
and less elegant but more efficient in actual use. (The smaller systems are more 
efficient for some purposes, but those purposes are quite different from ours in 
this book.)          
 The following topics were covered in this chapter:
 ■ Logical symbols, their truth tables, and their English counterparts: negation, 
conjunction, disjunction, conditional (see  Figure 1 , page 288, for a summary).  
 ■ Symbolizations of truth functions can represent electrical circuits because 
“true” and “false” for sentences can be made to correspond to “on” and “off” 
for circuits. 
 ■ Sentences in normal English can be symbolized by claim letters and our four 
logical symbols; care is required to make sure the result is equivalent. 
 ■ The truth-table method and the short truth-table method both allow us to 
determine whether an argument is truth-functionally valid. 
 ■ Deductions can be used to prove the validity of propositional arguments; 
they make use of the rules on the  Figure 2 , page 317, and the rule of condi-
tional proof, pages 321–323. 
 Recap 
 Exercise 10-13 
 Display the truth-functional structure of the following claims by symbolizing 
them. Use the letters indicated. 
 D  5 We do something to reduce the deficit. 
 B   5 The balance of payments gets worse. 
 C   5 There is (or will be) a financial crisis. 
 Additional 
Exercises 

326 
CHAPTER 10: DEDUCTIVE ARGUMENTS II
 1. The balance of payments will not get worse if we do something to reduce 
the deficit. 
 2. There will be no financial crisis unless the balance of payments gets worse. 
 3. Either the balance of payments will get worse, or, if no action is taken on the 
deficit, there will be a financial crisis. 
 4. The balance of payments will get worse only if we don’t do something to 
reduce the deficit. 
 5. Action cannot be taken on the deficit if there’s a financial crisis. 
 6. I can tell you about whether we’ll do something to reduce the deficit and 
whether our balance of payments will get worse: Neither one will happen. 
 7. In order for there to be a financial crisis, the balance of payments will have to 
get worse and there will have to be no action taken to reduce the deficit. 
 8. We can avoid a financial crisis only by taking action on the deficit and keep-
ing the balance of payments from getting worse. 
 9. The  only thing that can prevent a financial crisis is our doing something to 
reduce the deficit. 
 Exercise 10-14 
 For each of the numbered claims below, there is exactly one lettered claim that is 
equivalent. Identify the equivalent claim for each item. (Some lettered claims are 
equivalent to more than one numbered claim, so it will be necessary to use some 
letters more than once.) 
 1. Oil prices will drop if Venezuela increases its production. 
 2. Oil prices will drop only if Venezuela increases its production. 
 3. Neither will oil prices drop, nor will Venezuela increase its production. 
 4. Oil prices cannot drop unless Venezuela increases its production. 
 5. The only thing that can prevent oil prices from dropping is Venezuela 
increasing its production. 
 6. A drop in oil prices is necessary for Venezuela to increase its production. 
 7. All it takes for Venezuela to increase its production is a drop in oil prices. 
 8. Venezuela will not increase its production while oil prices drop; each possi-
bility excludes the other. 
 
a.  It’s not the case that oil prices will drop, and it’s not the case that 
Venezuela will increase its production. 
 
b. If Venezuela increases its production, then oil prices will drop. 
 
c. Only if Venezuela increases its production will oil prices drop. 
 
d.  Either Venezuela will not increase its production, or oil prices will 
not drop. 
 
e. If Venezuela does not increase production, then oil prices will drop. 
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲

 
EXERCISES 
327
 Exercise 10-15 
 Construct deductions for each of the following. (Try these first without using con-
ditional proof.) 
 1.  1. P 
 
2. Q & R 
 
3. (Q & P) → S       / ∴ S 
 2.  1. (P ∨ Q) & R  
 
2. (R & P) → S 
 
3. (Q & R) → S       / ∴ S 
 3.  1. P → (Q → ~R)  
 
2. (~R → S) ∨ T 
 
3. ~T & P         / ∴ Q → S 
 4.  1. P ∨ Q  
 
2. (Q ∨ U) → (P → T) 
 
3. ~P 
 
4. (~P ∨ R) → (Q → S)   /∴ T ∨ S 
 5.  1. (P → Q) & R  
 
2. ~S 
 
3. S ∨ (Q → S)      /∴ P → T 
 6.  1. P → (Q & R)  
 
2. R → (Q → S)     /∴ P → S 
 7.  1. P → Q         /∴ P → (Q ∨ R) 
 8.  1. ~P ∨ ~Q 
 
2. (Q → S) → R     /∴ P → R 
 9.  1. S 
 
2. P → (Q & R)  
 
3. Q → ~S        /∴ ~P 
 10.  1. (S → Q) → ~R 
 
2. (P → Q) → R        /∴ ~Q 
 Exercise 10-16 
 Use the rule of conditional proof to construct deductions for each of the following. 
 1.  1. P → Q  
 
2. P → R        / ∴ P → (Q & R) 
 2.  1. P → Q  
 
2. R → Q        / ∴ (P ∨ R) → Q 
 3.  1. P → (Q → R)   /∴ (P → Q) → (P → R) 
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲

328 
CHAPTER 10: DEDUCTIVE ARGUMENTS II
 4.  1. P → (Q ∨ R) 
 
2. T → (S & ~R)     / ∴ (P & T) → Q 
 5.  1. ~P → (~Q → ~R)  
 
2. ~(R & ~P) → ~ S    /∴ S → Q 
 6.  1. P → (Q → R) 
 
2. (T → S) & (R → T)  / ∴ P → (Q → S) 
 7.  1. P ∨ (Q & R)  
 
2. T → ~(P ∨ U) 
  3. S → (Q → ~R)     / ∴ ~ S ∨ ~ T 
 8.  1. (P ∨ Q) → R  
 
2. (P → S) → T     / ∴ R ∨ T 
 9.  1. P → ~Q 
 
2. ~R → (S & Q)    / ∴ P → R 
 10.  1. (P & Q) ∨ R  
 
2. ~R ∨ Q        / ∴ P → Q 
 Exercise 10-17 
 Display the truth-functional form of the following arguments by symbolizing 
them; then use the truth-table method, the short truth-table method, or the 
method of deduction to prove them valid or invalid. Use the letters provided. 
(We’ve used underscores in the example and in the first two problems to help you 
connect the letters with the proper claims.) 
 Example 
 If  M aria does not go to the movies, then she will  h elp Bob with his logic 
homework. Bob will  f ail the course unless Maria  h elps him with his logic 
homework. Therefore, if  M aria goes to the movies, Bob will  f ail the course. 
(M, H, F) 
 Symbolization 
 1. ~M → H  (Premise)  
 2. ~H → F    (Premise)  / ∴ M → F 
 Truth Table 
▲
▲
▲
 M 
 H 
 F 
 ~M 
 ~H 
 ~M → H 
 ~H → F 
 M → F 
 T 
 T 
 T 
 F 
 F 
 T 
 T 
 T 
 T 
 T 
 F 
 F 
 F 
 T 
 T 
 F 
 We need to go only as far as the second row of the table, since both premises come 
out true and the conclusion comes out false in that row. 
    1. If it’s  c old, Dale’s motorcycle won’t  s tart. If Dale is not  l ate for work, then his 
motorcycle must have  s tarted. Therefore, if it’s  c old, Dale is  l ate for work. 
(C, S, L)  
▲

 
EXERCISES 
329
 2. If profits depend on  u nsound environmental practices, then either the 
 q uality of the environment will deteriorate, or profits will  d rop.  J obs will be 
plentiful only if profits do not drop. So, either jobs will not be plentiful, or the 
quality of the environment will deteriorate. (U, Q, D, J) 
 3. The new road will not be built unless the planning commission approves the 
funds. But the planning commission’s approval of the funds will come only 
if the environmental impact report is positive, and it can’t be positive if the 
road will ruin Mill Creek. So, unless they find a way for the road not to ruin 
Mill Creek, it won’t be built. (R, A, E, M) 
 4. The message will not be understood unless the code is broken. The killer 
will not be caught if the message is not understood. Either the code will be 
broken, or Holmes’s plan will fail. But Holmes’s plan will not fail if he is given 
enough time. Therefore, if Holmes is given enough time, the killer will be 
caught. (M, C, K, H, T) 
 5. If the senator votes against this bill, then he is opposed to penalties against 
tax evaders. Also, if the senator is a tax evader himself, then he is opposed to 
penalties against tax evaders. Therefore, if the senator votes against this bill, 
he is a tax evader himself. (V, O, T) 
 6. If you had gone to class, taken good notes, and studied the text, you’d have 
done well on the exam. And if you’d done well on the exam, you’d have 
passed the course. Since you did not pass the course and you did go to class, 
you must not have taken good notes and not studied the text. 
 7. Either John will go to class, or he’ll miss the review session. If John misses 
the review session, he’ll foul up the exam. If he goes to class, however, he’ll 
miss his ride home for the weekend. So John’s either going to miss his ride 
home or foul up the exam. 
 8. If the government’s position on fighting crime is correct, then if more 
people are locked up, then the crime rate should drop. But the crime rate 
has not dropped, despite the fact that we’ve been locking up record num-
bers of people. It follows that the government’s position on fighting crime 
is not correct.  
 9. The creation story in the book of Genesis is compatible with the theory of 
evolution, but only if the creation story is not taken literally. If, as most scien-
tists think, there is plenty of evidence for the theory of evolution, the Genesis 
story cannot be true if it is not compatible with evolution theory. Therefore, 
if the Genesis story is taken literally, it cannot be true. 
 10. The creation story in the book of Genesis is compatible with the theory of 
evolution, but only if the creation story is not taken literally. If there is plenty 
of evidence for the theory of evolution, which there is, the Genesis story 
cannot be true if it is not compatible with evolution theory. Therefore, if the 
Genesis story is taken literally, it cannot be true. 
 11. If there was no murder committed, then the victim must have been killed by 
the horse. But the victim could have been killed by the horse only if he, the 
victim, was trying to injure the horse before the race; and, in that case, there 
certainly was a crime committed. So, if there was no murder, there was still a 
crime committed. 
 12. Holmes cannot catch the train unless he gets to Charing Cross Station by 
noon; and if he misses the train, Watson will be in danger. Because Moriarty 
▲
▲
▲

330 
CHAPTER 10: DEDUCTIVE ARGUMENTS II
 Writing Exercises 
 1. a.  In a one-page essay evaluate the soundness of the argument in the box 
on page 302. Write your name on the back of your paper. 
 
b.  When everyone is finished, your instructor will collect the papers 
and redistribute them to the class. In groups of four or five, read the 
papers that have been given to your group and select the best one. The 
instructor will select one group’s top-rated paper to read to the class for 
discussion. 
 2. Take about fifteen minutes to write an essay responding to the paper the 
instructor has read to the class in Writing Exercise 1. When everyone is 
finished, the members of each group will read each other’s responses and 
select the best one to share with the class. 
has thugs watching the station, Holmes can get there by noon only if he goes 
in disguise. So, unless Holmes goes in disguise, Watson will be in danger. 
 13. It’s not fair to smoke around nonsmokers if secondhand cigarette smoke 
really is harmful. If secondhand smoke were not harmful, the American 
Lung Association would not be telling us that it is. But it is telling us that 
it’s harmful. That’s enough to conclude that it’s not fair to smoke around 
nonsmokers.  
 14. If Jane does any of the following, she’s got an eating disorder: If she goes on 
eating binges for no apparent reason, if she looks forward to times when she 
can eat alone, or if she eats sensibly in front of others and makes up for it 
when she’s alone. Jane does in fact go on eating binges for no apparent rea-
son. So it’s clear that she has an eating disorder. 
 15. The number of business majors increased markedly during the past decade; 
and if you see that happening, you know that younger people have devel-
oped a greater interest in money. Such an interest, unfortunately, means that 
greed has become a significant motivating force in our society; and if greed 
has become such a force, charity will have become insignificant. We can pre-
dict that charity will not be seen as a significant feature of this past decade. 
 Exercise 10-18 
 Using the method described in Chapter 2, diagram five of the items in the previ-
ous exercise. 
▲

 11 
331
 I
 n this chapter we explain how to think critically about 
inductive reasoning, meaning reasoning used to  support
rather than to demonstrate a conclusion. Inductive argu-
ments offer  evidence  for a contention. They are not evaluated 
as valid or invalid, but as relatively strong or relatively weak, 
depending on how much the evidence increases the probabil-
ity of the conclusion. 
 ARGUMENT FROM ANALOGY 
 An   Argument from Analogy  is an argument that something 
has an attribute because a similar thing has that attribute. 
Here is an example: 
 The   analogues   in this argument are Bill and Sam. The 
  conclusion-analogue   (Sam) is argued to have the   attribute of 
interest   (liking hunting) because the   premise-analogue  (Bill) 
is said to have it. 
 Students will learn to . . . 
  1. Identify and evaluate arguments 
from analogy 
  2. Evaluate generalizations from 
samples 
  3. Evaluate scientific generalizations 
from samples and explain how they 
differ from everyday generalizations 
from samples 
  4. Evaluate the strength of statistical 
syllogisms and distinguish them 
from generalizations from samples 
  5. Identify causal statements, three 
principles used in forming causal 
hypotheses, and three types of rea-
soning used to help confirm causal 
hypotheses 
  6. Calculate statistical probabilities 
  7. Explain how the concept of cause 
applies to the law 
 Inductive Reasoning 
Bill likes hunting.
Therefore his brother Sam likes hunting.

332 
CHAPTER 11: INDUCTIVE REASONING
 Here is another example: 
 The  analogues  in this argument are rats and humans. It is argued that the 
conclusion-analogue (humans) will have the attribute of interest (living longer on 
a calorie-restricted diet) because the premise-analogue (rats) are said to have it. 
 One more example: 
 The analogues in this argument are Darby’s performance as a dog-sitter and 
Darby’s performance as a babysitter. The conclusion-analogue (her performance 
as a babysitter) is argued to have the attribute of interest (being excellent) because 
the premise-analogue (her performance as a dog-sitter) is said to have it. 
 The conclusion-analogue is sometimes called the  target analogue,  and the 
premise-analogue is sometimes called (somewhat misleadingly) the  sample ana-
logue. Your instructor may find that terminology helpful. 
 Evaluation of Arguments from Analogy 
 Evaluating arguments from analogy is basically just a matter of comparing and 
contrasting the analogues, the same thing you practiced in high school English. 
It is far from an exact science and requires us mainly to rely on our experience 
about how similar two or more things are. 
Guidelines for Thinking Critically About an Argument from Analogy
 Here are general guidelines for evaluating arguments from analogy:
 ■ The more numerous and diversified the similarities are between the 
 premise-analogue and the conclusion-analogue, the stronger the argument.
For example, the more similar Bill and Sam are (see the first argument), the 
more likely it is that Sam also likes hunting given that his brother Bill does. If 
they are twins and grew up in the same household, that makes it more likely 
that Sam likes hunting given that Bill does. If Sam and Bill both like a diverse 
Rats live longer if put on a calorie-restricted diet.
Therefore humans will live longer if put on a calorie-restricted diet.
Darby is an excellent dog-sitter.
Therefore she would be an excellent babysitter.
source: DILBERT © 2006 Scott Adams. Used By permission of UNIVERSAL UCLICK. All rights reserved.

 
ARGUMENT FROM ANALOGY
333
array of the same activities—fishing, going to football games, playing poker, 
and so on—that makes it more likely Sam likes hunting given that Bill does. 
 ■ The more numerous and diversified the differences between the premise-
analogue and the conclusion-analogue, the weaker the argument. For exam-
ple, if Sam and Bill are different ages and live in different parts of the country, 
that makes it less likely that Sam likes hunting given that Bill does. If Bill likes 
fishing, going to football games, and playing poker, but Sam doesn’t, that also 
makes it less likely that Sam likes hunting given that Bill does.  
 ■ If there is more than one premise-analogue, the more numerous and diversified 
the premise-analogues are, the stronger the argument. For example, compare 
these two arguments:
 The second argument is stronger because there are now five premise-
analogues (Bill, Sarah, Peter, and the two parents), and those five are diversi-
fied, in that they include a sister, a second brother, and two parents. 
 ■ If there is more than one premise-analogue, the fewer the contrary premise- 
analogues, the stronger the argument, and the more the contrary premise-
analogues, the weaker the argument. A   contrary premise-analogue  is a 
premise-analogue that does not share the attribute of interest. Here is an 
example:
 This argument is weaker than the previous one because it contains a con-
trary premise-analogue—namely, the older brother Peter. Peter is a contrary 
 premise-analogue because Peter doesn’t like hunting. 
 As stated, appraisal of arguments from analogy is not an exact science. Analyz-
ing them blindly according to some formula isn’t the best idea. However, we as critical 
thinkers want to pay special attention to the ways the premise-analogue or analogues 
and the conclusion-analogue  differ.   Attacking the analogy   is the time-honored strat-
egy for rebutting an argument from analogy—showing that the premise-analogue or 
analogues are not as similar to the conclusion-analogue as stated or implied. This 
could mean showing there are fewer similarities between premise- and conclusion-
analogues, or more dissimilarities, or both. Often it means calling attention to a sin-
gle, glaring dissimilarity between the analogues that undermines the argument. 
 The fallacy known as   weak analogy   (sometimes called   false analogy  ) is a 
weak argument based on debatable or unimportant similarities between two or 
more things. It was discussed in Chapter 7. 
Bill likes hunting.
Therefore his brother Sam likes hunting.
Bill, his sister Sarah, the oldest brother in the family, Peter, and both the 
parents like hunting. Therefore the other brother Sam also likes hunting.
Bill, his sister, Sarah, and both parents like hunting. But the oldest brother in 
the family, Peter, does not.
Therefore the other brother Sam likes hunting.

334 
CHAPTER 11: INDUCTIVE REASONING
 Three Arguments from Analogy 
Here are three examples of analysis of arguments from analogy:
The premise-analogue is Cheryl; the conclusion-analogue is Denise, and 
the attribute of interest is liking  Superman  movies. No contrary analogues are 
mentioned. The similarities between the two cases include attending the same 
school, watching the same TV shows, liking the same music and You Tube videos, 
and having many friends in common. These are relevant similarities, and the list 
is relatively diversified. This is a relatively strong argument.
The premise-analogue is the Soviet Union; the conclusion-analogue is Iran, 
and the attribute of interest is our being able to co-exist with the country. No con-
trary analogues are mentioned. The speaker does not list similarities between the 
two cases, but the speaker should because they are not self-evident. There are, 
however, differences between the analogues that weaken this argument. Iran, 
unlike the Soviet Union, supports organizations accused of engaging in terrorism, 
has vowed to destroy a neighboring country, and doesn’t have formal diplomatic 
relations or treaties with the United States. There is also no hotline between the 
United States and Iran, as there was between the United States and Soviet Union. 
We think this is a relatively weak argument.
 The premise-analogue is rollerblading; the conclusion-analogue is skiing, 
and the attribute of interest is being good at the activity in question. No contrary 
analogues are mentioned. People who know something about the analogues in 
an analogical argument are in the best place to evaluate the argument; that holds 
for this example as well as the previous examples. We, not even being novices at 
skiing or rollerblading, would think the most important similarities between the 
activities are that both involve standing on an apparatus that is going fast. Both 
require balance, coordination, and a degree of indifference to bone breakage. 
Both activities involve equipment without brakes. It might be more difficult to 
turn on skis than on rollerblades. The problem with rollerblades might be making 
them not turn. 
 This is a weaker argument than would be a similar argument based on an 
analogy between rollerblading and ice skating. But it is stronger than a similar 
argument based on an analogy between skiing and curling. 
 Other Uses of Analogy 
 Analogies are used for nonargumentative purposes. Among the more important 
of these are to explain how things work and what they are like. Here is an example: 
1.  Cheryl and Denise are teenage sisters. They attend the same school, watch 
the same TV shows, like the same music and You Tube videos, and have 
many friends in common. Cheryl likes Superman movies. Therefore, Denise 
will like Superman movies.
2.  We co-existed with the former Soviet Union when it had nuclear weapons. 
Therefore, we can co-exist with Iran, should it obtain nuclear weapons.
3.  Rollerblading is very much like skiing. I am good at rollerblading. Therefore 
I will be good at skiing.

 Guidelines for Thinking Critically About 
Arguments from Analogy 
■ The more numerous and diversified the similarities are between the premise-analogue 
and the conclusion-analogue, the stronger the argument. 
■ The more numerous and diversified the differences between the premise-analogue 
and the conclusion-analogue, the weaker the argument. 
■ Given more than one premise analogue, the more numerous and diversified the premise-
analogues, the stronger the argument.  
■ Given more than one premise analogue, the fewer the contrary premise-analogues, the stron-
ger the argument; and the more the contrary premise-analogues, the weaker the argument.   
 Note that only similarities and dissimilarities that are related to the attribute of interest 
should be considered when you evaluate an argument from analogy. 
 
ARGUMENT FROM ANALOGY
335
Electricity going through a wire is like water going through a hose. The wire 
is the hose; amps are the water; volts create the pressure that pushes the 
amps through the wire; and ohms measure resistance to the flow.
 This is not an argument; it is an analogy used to explain what electricity is 
like and how it works. 
 Analogies are also used for persuasion, as explained in Chapter 5. Here is an 
example: 
 This is not an argument. It offers no reason for thinking that a bear market is 
dangerous or that a person should avoid one. This is a rhetorical analogy, a con-
cept discussed in Chapter 5. 
 On the other hand, analogies figure into moral and legal arguments in an 
important way. A basic moral principle is that we should treat like cases alike. 
If two people are performing analogous actions in analogous circumstances, it 
would be wrong to praise one and blame the other. More details about this use of 
analogies are provided in Chapter 12. 
 Similarly, the legal principle of  stare decisis  (stand by things already decided) is 
the idea that a case currently before the court should be decided by legal precedent—
that is, decided in accordance with analogous legal rulings from the past. Again, more 
details are provided in Chapter 12.  
Finally, we should mention that logical analogies are used to rebut or refute 
arguments. Here is an example:
Bears are dangerous. If you get too close, you can lose it all. The same holds 
true of bear markets. In the presence of a bear market, the thing to do is the 
same as when in the presence of a real bear. Run!
BILL: Since all Marxists are progressives, all progressives are Marxists.
JILL: Bill, that is a poor argument. That is like arguing that, since all dogs are 
animals, all animals are dogs.

336 
CHAPTER 11: INDUCTIVE REASONING
 Identify whether each of these is
 A  5  argument from analogy 
 B  5  an analogy that isn’t an argument
  1. These shrubs have shiny green leaves, and so does privet. I bet these shrubs 
keep their leaves in the winter, too. 
 2. Working in this office is like driving around Florida without AC. 
 3. Between you and me, Huck has less personality than a pincushion. 
  4. You don’t like picnicking? Well, you won’t like camping, either. You can’t do 
either without getting eaten by mosquitoes. 
 5. As soon as I saw all these formulas and stuff, I knew I’d like symbolic logic. 
It’s just like math, which I love. 
 6. I love washing dishes like I love cleaning the bathroom. 
  7. Driving fast is playing with fire. 
 8. Too much sun will make your face leathery. I suppose it will have that effect 
on your hands, too. 
 9. Here, use that screwdriver like a chisel. Just give it a good whack with the 
hammer. 
 10. She’s no good at tennis. No way she’s good at racquetball. 
 11. “Religion . . . is the opium of the people. To abolish religion as the illusory 
happiness of the people is to demand their real happiness.” 
 — Karl Marx 
▲
▲
▲
▲
 Exercise 11-1 
 The following exercises should help you understand arguing from analogy. 
 
■ The legal principle of 
stare decisis (stand by 
things already decided) 
is the idea that a case 
currently before a court 
should be decided 
by legal precedent—
that is, decided in 
accordance with 
analogous legal rulings 
from the past.

 
ARGUMENT FROM ANALOGY 
337
 12. “Publishing is to thinking as the maternity ward is to the first kiss.” 
 — Friedrich von Schlegel 
 13. “A book is like a mirror. If an ape looks in, a saint won’t look out.” 
 — Ludwig Wittgenstein 
 14. Historically, the market goes up when the employment situation worsens 
and goes down when it gets better. Right now, there is bad news on employ-
ment, and the latest statistics show unemployment is getting worse. This 
could be a good time to buy stocks. 
 15. Yamaha makes great motorcycles. I’ll bet their pianos are pretty good, too. 
 16. “Life is a roll of toilet paper. The closer you get to the end, the faster it goes.” 
 — Anonymous 
 In each item, identify the premise-analogue, the conclusion analogue, and the 
attribute of interest.
  1. Saccharin causes cancer in rats, and rats are like humans, biologically speak-
ing. So saccharin will cause cancer in humans, too. 
 2. Doug Gray is a successful businessman; he’d make a fine mayor. 
 3. Jeb Bush is very popular in Georgia. He’d be just as popular in Alabama, 
since most voters in both states are southern conservatives. 
  4. Tell you what, this ant poison looks like Windex. I bet we can clean the 
windows with it. 
 5. You need strong, quick fingers if you’re going to play a violin or a viola. 
Angus is great on the violin; he’d probably be great on the viola, too. 
 6. I liked Will Smith’s last movie, so I’ll probably like this one too, especially 
since they have the same story line. 
  7. January’s heating bill will be high, given that December’s was outrageous 
and January is supposed to be even colder. 
 8. Expect Hawes to speak his mind at the meeting. He always speaks up in class. 
 9. Appeasement didn’t work with Hitler; why should it work with Kim Jong Il? 
 10. Abortion means killing a live person. If abortion is wrong, then so is capital 
punishment, since it also involves killing a live person. 
▲
▲
▲
▲
 Exercise 11-2 
 In each item, identify the premise-analogue, the conclusion analogue, and the 
attribute of interest.
  1. It’s easy to use an iPod; it’s got to be easy to use an iPad. Apple makes them both. 
 2. Almonds upset my stomach; I’d bet hazel nuts do, too. 
 3. The bagels at Safeway are great, so the sourdough’s probably fine. 
  4. Odwalla carrot juice tastes moldy; I’d bet their orange juice tastes that way as 
well.  
 5. My PC slowed way down after a couple of years; it’ll happen to yours, too. 
 6. L.L. Bean makes great sheets; I bet they make great bedspreads. 
  7. It’s a good thing auto insurance is mandatory; why would it be different with 
health insurance? 
▲
▲
▲
 Exercise 11-3 

338 
CHAPTER 11: INDUCTIVE REASONING
 8. The Greek economy collapsed because of all the government pensions. If it 
happened there, it can happen here. 
 9. I can’t play a baritone; I doubt I could play a Sousaphone. 
   10. You don’t like  Dancing with the Stars? Then don’t bother watching  So You 
Think You Can Dance. 
 11. Let’s get a Whirlpool washing machine. Their dishwashers are great! 
▲
 Rank these analogues from most similar to most dissimilar.
 a. football and bowling 
 b. football and rugby 
 c. football and golf 
   d. football and basketball  
 e. football and chess 
 f. football and tennis 
▲
 Exercise 11-4 
 Rank these analogues from most similar to most dissimilar.
 a. going to a rock concert and going to a bluegrass concert 
 b. watching Lady Gaga on YouTube and seeing her in concert 
 c. going to a ballet and going to a classical concert 
 d. going to a ballet and watching Lady Gaga on YouTube 
 e. listening to classical music and reading poetry 
 f. seeing Lady Gaga in concert or going to a Fourth of July fireworks show 
 Exercise 11-5 
 Evaluate the following arguments as relatively strong or weak. To a certain extent 
this will be a judgment call, but the class as a whole should reach approximate 
consensus on many items.
  1. Earth is like Mars. Since Earth can support life, so can Mars. 
 2. Tucker wasn’t any good when he managed Big Five Sports; I doubt he’d be 
good at managing an auto parts store. 
 3. Hey, work for Harris if you can. She leaves big tips; she probably pays her 
employees well, too. 
  4. Saddam was another Hitler. Obviously we had to take him out. 
 5. Julia is good at bowling; I bet she’d be great at poker. 
 6. Julia is good at croquet; I bet she’d be great at bowling. 
  7. Ann takes care of her dog; she’d make a great babysitter. 
 8. Hey, Carl? When you don’t return something you borrowed, that’s like steal-
ing. Give Tony back his wheelbarrow. 
 9. Warren shows up to work on time; I bet he pays his rent on time. 
 10. Norway is like Sweden. There’s no crime in Norway, so there won’t be any in 
Sweden, either. 
▲
▲
▲
▲
 Exercise 11-6 
 What kind of argument is this?
 “The proponents of [school] vouchers say, in essence, that if competition 
produces excellences in other fields—consumer products, athletics, and 
higher education, to name but three—it would be healthy for the schools as 
well. Their logic is difficult to refute.” 
 — Dan Walters, political columnist 
 Exercise 11-7 

 
GENERALIZING FROM A SAMPLE
339
 During three earlier years, Kirk has tried to grow artichokes in his backyard gar-
den, and each time, his crop has been ruined by mildew. Billie prods him to try 
one more time, and he agrees to do so, though he secretly thinks, “This is proba-
bly a waste of time. Mildew is likely to ruin this crop, too.” How should each of the 
following suppositions affect his confidence that mildew will ruin this crop, too?
 1. Suppose this year Kirk plants the artichokes in a new location. 
 2. Suppose on the past three occasions Kirk planted his artichokes at different 
times of the growing season. 
 3. Suppose this year Billie plants marigolds near the artichokes. 
 4. Suppose the past three years were unusually cool. 
 5. Suppose only two of the three earlier crops were ruined by mildew. 
 6. Suppose one of the earlier crops grew during a dry year, one during a wet 
year, and one during an average year. 
 7. Suppose this year, unlike the preceding three, there is a solar eclipse. 
 8. Suppose this year Kirk fertilizes with lawn clippings for the first time. 
 9. Suppose this year Billie and Kirk acquire a large dog. 
10. Suppose this year Kirk installs a drip irrigation system. 
▲
▲
▲
▲
 Exercise 11-8 
 GENERALIZING FROM A SAMPLE 
 You    generalize from a sample    when you reason that all, most, or some percent-
age of the members of a population have an attribute because all, most, or some 
percentage of a sample of the population have that attribute. A “population” is 
any identifiable group of things. An example: 
 In this example, the  population  consists of Stooler lectures I will hear. All 
members of this population are argued to have the  attribute of interest (being 
liked by me) because all members of the  sample of them (the lectures I’ve heard 
so far) have that attribute. 
 Another example: 
 In this example, the  population is pit bulls. Most members of this popula-
tion are argued to have the  attribute of interest  (being sweet) because most mem-
bers of a  sample of them (the pit bulls I have met) have that attribute. 
 Another example: 
So far, I’ve liked every one of Professor Stooler’s lectures.
Therefore I will like all of his lectures.
Most pit bulls I’ve met are sweet.
Therefore most pit bulls are sweet.
This sip of coffee is too strong.
Therefore all the coffee in this pot is too strong.
Studies indicate that more 
brunettes than blondes or 
redheads have high-paying 
corporate jobs.
—From a letter in the San Fran-
cisco Chronicle
Is this evidence of discrimination 
against blondes and redheads, as 
the writer of the letter thought?
 
 Nope; there are more brunettes 
to begin with. We’d be suspicious if 
fewer brunettes had high-paying 
corporate jobs.

340 
CHAPTER 11: INDUCTIVE REASONING
 It takes getting used to, to think of a pot of cof-
fee as a population, but you can view it as a popula-
tion of sips. 
 Another example: 
 The  population here is occasions within the 
theater. The  sample  is occasions during which the 
speaker has been in this theater. The  attribute of 
interest is the attribute of being freezing. 
 One more example: 
 In this example, the  population  is Kroger 
peaches. About 50 percent of this population is 
said to have the  attribute of interest  (being mushy) 
because 50 percent of the peaches in a  sample of 
Kroger peaches (the Kroger peaches I’ve had to 
date) have that attribute. 
 Evaluation of Arguments That Generalize from a Sample 
 The most important principle for evaluating generalizations from samples is this:
 ■  The more atypical the sample, the weaker the generalization. An   atypical 
(“biased”) sample    is one that doesn’t  mirror or represent the overall popula-
tion. It is one  in which an important variable is disproportionately present or 
absent. For example, if the Kroger peaches I’m selecting from have been out on 
the shelves for several days, my sample will contain a disproportionate number 
of peaches that other customers have already picked over. It thus may not accu-
rately mirror the entire population of Kroger peaches. It may include more mushy 
peaches than you would find in the overall Kroger peach population. Any con-
clusion we might come to about the proportion of mushy peaches in the overall 
Kroger peach population might be inaccurate if it were based on that sample. 
  
 
  Of course, one does not always know when a sample is atypical in an 
important way. That’s because one does not know what variables are related 
to the attribute we are interested in. Are Georgia peaches prone to being (or 
not being) mushy? We, at least, don’t know. The safest bet therefore is to be 
cautious about generalizing from a sample that even  could be atypical. 
  
 
  Science uses methods (which we discuss later) to help ensure that a 
sample of a population is not atypical. Our best bet in everyday generalizing is 
to try to make the sample from which we generalize as   diversified  as possible.  
Whenever I come to this theater it is freezing.
Therefore it is always freezing.
Every other peach I have gotten at Kroger was 
mushy.
Therefore about 50 percent of all Kroger 
peaches are mushy.
■ For the purposes of 
inductive generalizing, 
the diversification of 
a population should 
be replicated in 
the sample.

 
GENERALIZING FROM A SAMPLE
341
 Guidelines for Thinking Critically About 
Generalizations from a Sample 
■  The more atypical the sample, the weaker the generalization. 
■  The less diversified the sample, the weaker the generalization.  
■  Generalizations based on samples too small to accurately mirror the overall population are 
relatively weak. 
 ■ The less diversified the sample, the weaker the generalization. Of course, 
if a sample is too small, it cannot be sufficiently diversified. Thus we go to the 
next point. 
 ■ Generalizations based on samples too small to accurately mirror the 
overall population are relatively weak. If, however, a population is likely 
to be homogeneous, such as the population of “tastes” in a pot of soup, or 
a population of ball bearings produced by the same machine, then even a 
small, undiversified sample is likely to be typical. 
 Three Arguments That Generalize from a Sample 
 Here are three arguments together with a brief analysis: 
 The sample (the motel room) is only a single place and probably is atypical: 
A motel room is more likely than most places to have been treated for pests. 
 The speaker is generalizing from himself or herself, to the “population” of 
people who have feelings about Jane. The sample is too small and undiversified to 
offer much support for the generalization. 
 The population here is all plants of the type in question. Although the 
“sample” (this specific skin-reaction to this type of plant) is small and undi-
versified, that doesn’t matter much because the “population” (all my skin-
reactions to this type of plant) is apt to be relatively homogeneous. A person’s 
physiological responses to the same type of stimulus are apt to be fairly consis-
tent. This is the strongest of the three arguments.   
1.  There aren’t any silverfish in this motel room; therefore, there aren’t 
any silverfish anywhere in Lodi.
2. I don’t like Jane; others probably feel the same.
3. OMG! Look at this rash! I’ll steer clear of this kind of plant next time.

342 
CHAPTER 11: INDUCTIVE REASONING
  SCIENTIFIC GENERALIZING FROM A SAMPLE 
  Scientific generalizing from a sample differs from the everyday variety of general-
izing in these particulars:
 ■ Scientific populations of interest and attributes of interest are precisely 
defined by means of a   sampling frame  , a set of criteria that make it clear 
for any specific thing whether or not it is a member of the population and 
whether or not it has the attribute of interest. 
 ■ Samples are scientifically selected to avoid bias or skew (which refer to the 
same thing). A   biased (skewed) sample  is what in ordinary English is called 
an atypical sample, one in which variables that may be linked to the attri-
bute of interest are not present in the same proportion as in the population 
of interest. (Please notice that “biased sample” does  not denote a sample of 
people with strong or unfounded opinions.) 
 ■ Random sampling is the most common method used to ensure that a sample 
is not biased. A   random sample  is one selected by a procedure that gives 
every member of a population an equal chance of being included. 
 ■ Variables present in even random samples are subject to random fluctuation. 
For example, if the   true proportion  of the students at a large state university 
who are registered Democrats is 30 percent, it will  not be the case that every 
random sample of students from the university will contain  exactly  30 percent 
registered Democrats. Rather, the proportion of registered Democrats in each 
random sample will vary randomly from sample to sample. The smaller the 
random sample, the wider will be the range of random fluctuation. The range 
of random fluctuation is known as the   error margin  . The probability that a 
random sample of a given size will fall within the error margin can be mathe-
matically calculated, and is known as the   confidence level  . For example, in a 
random sample of 250 students at the university, there is a 95 percent proba-
bility (that’s the confidence level) that the proportion of registered Democrats 
in the sample will be within 6 percentage points (that’s the error margin) of 
the true proportion of registered Democrats. 
 You should now look at  Table 11-1 , which applies to very large populations. 
You will see that the confidence level of the table is 95 percent, which is the level 
scientific polling organizations have settled on. (In a reputable scientific poll, if 
the confidence level is not mentioned, assume it is 95 percent.) Although we are 
illustrating things by talking about populations of people, what we say applies to 
generalizing from a sample of any kind of identifiable entity. 
 As you look at the table, notice three things: 
 First, small random samples have huge error margins. 
 Second, as the random sample size increases, the error margin decreases. 
 Third,  notice that error margins narrow quite a bit as the size of the ran-
dom sample increases from 10 to 50, but then the narrowing effect slows. By 
the time we get to a random sample size of 500, which has an error margin 
of plus or minus 4 percentage points, you would have to double the sample 
size to narrow the error margin by only a single percentage point. Now that 
you see this, you won’t be surprised to learn that, no matter what a reputable 
public opinion survey is about, it usually involves between 1,000 and 1,500 in 
the sample. Trying to reduce the error margin further generally isn’t worth the 
extra expense. 

 
THE STATISTICAL SYLLOGISM 
343
 Confidence level of 95 percent in all cases. 
 Sample Size 
 Error Margin (%) 
 Corresponding Range (Percentage Points) 
 10 
 6  30 
 60 
 25 
 6  22 
 44 
 50 
 6  14 
 28 
 100 
 6  10 
 20 
 250 
 6  6 
 12 
 500 
 6  4 
 8 
 1,000 
 6  3 
 6 
 1,500 
 6  2 
 4 
 The error margin decreases rapidly as the sample size begins to increase, but this decrease 
slows markedly as the sample gets larger. It is usually pointless to increase the sample 
beyond 1,500 unless there are special requirements of precision or confidence level. 
 (We assume, both here and in the text, that the population is large—that is, 10,000 or 
larger. When the population is small, a correction factor can be applied to determine the 
appropriate error margin. But most reported polls have large enough populations that we 
need not concern ourselves here with the calculation methods for correcting the error margin.) 
 Table 11-1 
 Approximate Error Margins for Various Random Samples 
from Large Populations 
 You should take with you from this discussion of scientific generalizing the 
following three lessons: 
 First,  at the heart of scientific generalizing are procedures that help mini-
mize bias in samples—in other words, that help ensure that samples are not 
atypical or skewed. Unfortunately, samples used in everyday generalizing are 
not selected scientifically, with the result that everyday generalizing is frequently 
based on atypical samples (the exception is when the samples are from homoge-
neous populations, like the “population” of tastes of coffee in a pot of coffee). For 
that reason, the fallacy known as generalizing from exceptional cases, explained 
in Chapter 7, is common. 
 Second,  also at the heart of scientific generalizing is statistical mathemat-
ics, which enables various important probabilities to be precisely calculated, as 
explained earlier. Everyday generalizing involves at best only approximate or 
“ball park” estimates of the probability that the members of a large and nonho-
mogeneous population will have or lack a certain attribute. 
 Third,  as noted, small random samples have huge error margins. Everyday 
generalizing usually involves small samples that rarely qualify as random. For 
that reason, examples of the fallacy known as hasty generalization, explained in 
Chapter 7, are easy to find. 
 THE STATISTICAL SYLLOGISM 
 A   statistical syllogism   applies a general statement to a specific case. Here is an 
example:  

344 
CHAPTER 11: INDUCTIVE REASONING
Most teachers are Democrats.
York is a teacher.
Therefore York is a Democrat.
The strength of this argument depends on the general statement “Most 
teachers are Democrats.” The higher the proportion of teachers who are Demo-
crats, the stronger the argument.
 Obviously, other considerations bear on the  overall  probability that York is 
a Democrat. Estimating the probability that he is a Democrat,  everything consid-
ered,  involves what logicians refer to as  the     Principle of Total Evidence   —the idea 
that in estimating probabilities of something, you must take into account all avail-
able relevant information. But we are not concerned here with the probability, 
everything considered, that York is a Democrat. We are concerned only with the 
strength of this argument. 
 Schematically the argument has this form: 
 The strength of such arguments depend on the proportion of Xs that are 
Ys. The greater the proportion, the stronger the argument. When evaluating the 
strength of such arguments, don’t confuse the strength with the overall probability 
that the conclusion is true. 
Here is another example of a statistical syllogism. This type of argument is 
encountered ever so frequently; and now you know what kind of argument it is:
 Basically, the argument assumes that a high proportion of things that walk, 
talk, and look like a duck are ducks; therefore, since this thing walks, talks, and 
looks like a duck, it is a duck. 
 Among other things, the following exercises will help you explore the differ-
ence between statistical syllogisms and generalizing from samples. 
Such-and-such proportion of Xs are Ys.
This is an X.
Therefore this is a Y.
A general statement refers to multiple members of a population nonspecifically. 
 Which five of the following are general statements?
1. Danielle is older than Christina. 
 2. Annual ryegrass dies out in the summer. 
 3. Feral donkeys cause considerable damage to the ecology of Death Valley. 
4. A significant proportion of small-business owners oppose raising the mini-
mum wage. 
 5. The president of the senior class didn’t wear a tux to the prom, if you can 
believe it. 
▲
▲
 Exercise 11-9 
This walks like a duck, talks like a duck, and looks like a duck. Therefore, it is 
a duck.

 
THE STATISTICAL SYLLOGISM 
345
 6. It costs $55 a year to subscribe to  Consumer Reports. 
  7. Glasses purchased online may not be satisfactory for your purposes. 
 8. Tony the Shark works for No Doz Escobar. 
 9. The most common seeing-eye dog is the German shepherd. 
 10. The Toledo museum isn’t open this evening. 
▲
▲
 Which five of the following are generalizations from samples, and which five are 
statistical syllogisms?
 1. Rainbird sprinklers don’t last long, judging from my experience. 
 2. That sprinkler won’t last long: it’s a Rainbird. 
 3. Don’t worry about your tree losing its leaves; it’s a camphor tree. 
 4. I don’t think camphor trees are deciduous; at any rate ours isn’t. 
 5. Blu-ray disks aren’t any better than regular old DVDs; so don’t expect this 
disk to be better than what you are used to. 
 6. Target gives refunds no questions asked. I found that out when I returned a 
shirt without a receipt. 
 7. It’s difficult to find a grocery store in Fresno; the time I was there I looked all 
over and only found car parts places and liquor stores. 
 8. Marsha will be on time; she usually is. 
 9. Jorge and Susan are both really bright; apparently most music majors are. 
 10. Jorge and Susan are both really bright; after all, they are music majors. 
▲
▲
▲
▲
 Exercise 11-10 
 For each of the following, mark:
 A  5  statistical syllogism 
 B  5  generalization from a sample 
 C  5  neither
  1. Here, try this one. It’ll stop your cough. It’s a Breezer. 
 2. Costco charges less than Walmart for comparable items. I’ve shopped at 
both for years. 
 3. Alvid likes the president; after all, he’s a Democrat. 
 4. The local Kia dealership is thriving, which suggests that Kia is doing well 
nationally.  
 5. Professor Stooler is a tough grader; he teaches physics. 
 6. Almost every Shih Tzu I’ve run into is smart; there probably aren’t any any-
where that aren’t. 
 7. A majority of Republicans favor immigration reform, and Horace is a Repub-
lican. Connect the dots. 
 8. Sally is apt to be cranky; she usually is when she skips breakfast. 
 9. Comcast service has improved a lot over the past year judging from what has 
happened around here. 
 10. It will still be cool there in June; the elevation at Denver is over 5,000 feet. 
▲
▲
▲
▲
 Exercise 11-11 

346 
CHAPTER 11: INDUCTIVE REASONING
 Complete each of these statistical syllogisms by supplying an appropriate prem-
ise or conclusion. 
 Example 
 Marilyn is a florist; I bet she’s a nice person. 
 Premise: Most florists are nice people.
 1. Don’t waste your time trying to teach that dog to fetch. Otterhounds don’t do 
that. 
 2. I don’t see how you could have high blood pressure; you jog, what, ten miles 
a day? 
 3. Most people who drive that kind of car have money to burn, so I imagine he 
has money to burn. 
  4. Dr. Walker belongs to the ACLU; and most people who belong to the ACLU 
are liberals. 
 5. Sharon shops online; I bet she doesn’t pay sales tax. 
 6. York belongs to the NRA; he’s probably a Republican. 
 7. Most members of the NRA are Republicans; therefore, probably York is a 
Republican.  
 8. Most smokers drink; I imagine, therefore, that Sally drinks. 
 9. Melody will be upset; who wouldn’t if her husband did that? 
 10. Verizon provides service to most small towns; so you’ll probably get service 
in Chabot Gap. 
▲
▲
▲
▲
 Complete each of these statistical syllogisms by supplying an appropriate premise 
or conclusion.
 1. Christine’s probably pretty athletic; she’s a professional dancer. 
 2. I doubt Lays have preservatives; most chips these days don’t. 
 3. Aubrey is fibbing; nine times out of ten, when somebody says she doesn’t 
care what people think, she’s fibbing. 
 4. Kids around here generally don’t drop out of school, so Jim won’t drop out. 
 5. I don’t think their band will be popular; they play jazz. 
 6. Deanna isn’t likely to help; she’s too concerned about herself. 
 7. I expect it’s going to rain; it usually does when it’s hot. 
 8. Probably they have a key; most members do. 
 9. We might have trouble parking; it’s New Year’s Eve, don’t forget. 
 10. Most governors haven’t been good presidents, and Christie is a governor. 
▲
▲
▲
▲
 Exercise 11-13 
 Identify the sample, the population, and the attribute of interest in each of the 
following.
 1. I’ve seen at least ten Disney movies and not one of them has been violent. 
Apparently Disney doesn’t make violent movies. 
 2. Most of my professors wear glasses; it’s a good bet most professors every-
where wear glasses. 
 3. Conservatives I know don’t like Huckabee. Based on that, I’d say most con-
servatives don’t like him. 
▲
 Exercise 11-14 
 Exercise 11-12 

 
THE STATISTICAL SYLLOGISM 
347
 4. Judging from what I saw, Columbus State is a fun place to be. 
 5. Seven of the last ten El Niños were associated with below-average rainfall 
across southern Canada. Therefore 70 percent of all El Niños will be associ-
ated with below-average rainfall across southern Canada. 
 6.  mrs. bruder: Bruder! Bruder! Can you believe it? The Music Department is 
selling two grand pianos! 
    mr. bruder: Well, let’s check it out. But remember, the last pianos they sold 
were overpriced. Probably all their pianos are overpriced. 
 7. Costco’s store-brand coffee tastes as good as any name brand; I’ll bet any 
store brand product from Costco is as good as the name brand. 
 8. A 55 percent approval rating? Them polls is all rigged! Most people I know 
think he’s a Marxist. 
 9. The young people around here sure are crazy! Did you see those two dudes 
drag racing? 
 10. The fries at McDonald’s are too salty, judging from these. 
▲
▲
▲
 Identify the sample, the population, and the attribute of interest in each of the 
following:
  1. Whoa, is this joint overpriced or what! Look at what they want for quart of milk! 
 2. The Hamptons? People there are snobs, judging from what I’ve seen. 
 3. PCs are way faster than Macs! Just compare these two puppies! 
 4. Life insurance salespeople are always trying to sell you stuff you don’t need; 
anyway, the ones I know do. 
 5. Did you see that? The drivers in this town are crazy! 
 6. I get lots of dropped calls with AT&T where I live; it’s probably the same 
everywhere.  
 7. After the first test, I knew I’d do well in this class. 
 8. The doorbell doesn’t ring and the hot water heater is busted. Doesn’t any-
thing work in this house? 
 9. I never saw a frost after March. I don’t think it can happen this close to the coast. 
 10. English classes are boring, judging from the one I took. 
▲
▲
▲
▲
 Exercise 11-15 
 Using you background knowledge, rank the following populations from least 
diversified to most diversified.
 1. Television sitcoms 
 2. Movies 
 3. Episodes of Survivor 
 4. Movies rated PG 
 5. Movies starring Meryl Streep  
▲
 Exercise 11-16 
 Using you background knowledge, rank the following populations from least 
diversified to most diversified.
 1. Professional athletes 
 2. National Football League referees 
▲
 Exercise 11-17 

348 
CHAPTER 11: INDUCTIVE REASONING
 3. Physically fit people 
 4. Major League baseball players 
 5. Olympic shot-putters 
 Using you background knowledge, rank the following populations from least 
diversified to most diversified.
 1. People 
 2. Cowboys 
 3. Democrats 
 4. Teachers 
 5. Cowboys who are teachers 
▲
 Exercise 11-18 
 Think of as many variables as you can that are apt to be associated with each of the 
following attributes. For example, height and jumping ability are apt to be associ-
ated with being a professional basketball player: the more professional basketball 
players there are in a population the more tall people who are good at jumping 
there are apt to be. 
 Your instructor may make this a timed competition, giving the person who 
wins an opportunity to go home after class.
 1. Driving a Lexus 
 2. Owning a pet 
 3. Having no cavities 
 4. Being susceptible to poison oak or ivy 
 5. Owning a hand gun 
 6. Being afraid of the dark 
 7. Being nearsighted 
 8. Reading romance novels 
 9. Drinking Budweiser 
 10. Watching reality shows 
 11. Owning an iPad 
 12. Seeing a psychotherapist 
 13. Attending church once a week 
▲
▲
▲
▲
 Exercise 11-19 
 In each of the following pairs, identify the strongest argument. Some items may 
be ties.
 1.  a. The coffee in that pot is lousy. I just had a cup. 
 b. The coffee at that restaurant is lousy; I just had a cup. 
 2.  a.  I’ve been to one ballet and I’ve never been so bored in my life. I’m sure 
they will all be the same. 
 b. I love ballet! I’ve been to only one, but I fell in love instantly. 
 3.  a. Cockers eat like pigs, judging from the cocker I had as a kid. 
 b. Dogs eat like pigs, judging from the cocker I had as a kid. 
 4.  a.  Acura transmissions fail before 100,000 miles, judging from what hap-
pened to my car. 
 b. Acura transmissions fail before 100,000 miles; at least that’s what the  Con-
sumer Reports survey of Acura owners indicated. 
▲
▲
 Exercise 11-20 

 
THE STATISTICAL SYLLOGISM 
349
 5.  a.  Lupe’s sister and father both have high blood pressure. It probably runs in 
the family. 
 b. Lupe’s sister, father, and brother have high blood pressure. It probably 
runs in the family. 
 6.  a.  Sherry doesn’t write well, based on how poorly she did on this five-page 
paper.  
 b. Sherry writes very well, based on how well she did on this five-page paper. 
 7.  a. Blue Cross will cover that procedure. It covered it for me. 
 b. Blue Cross will cover that procedure. It covered a similar one for me. 
▲
 “Most Ohio State students I’ve met believe in God. Therefore, most 
Ohio State students believe in God.” 
 How should each of the following suppositions affect the speaker’s confidence in 
his or her conclusion?
 1. Suppose the students in the sample were interviewed as they left a local 
church after Sunday services. (Ohio State has no admission requirements 
pertaining to religious beliefs.) 
 2. Suppose the students in the sample were first-year students. 
 3. Suppose the students in the sample were on the university football team. 
 4. Suppose the students in the sample were selected by picking every tenth 
name on an alphabetical list of students’ names. 
 5. Suppose the students in the sample were respondents to a questionnaire 
published in the campus newspaper titled “Survey of Student Religious 
Beliefs.”  
 6. Suppose the students in the sample were randomly selected from a list of reg-
istered automobile owners. 
▲
▲
 Exercise 11-21 
 Read the passage below, and answer the questions that follow. 
 In the Georgia State University History Department, students are 
invited to submit written evaluations of their instructors to the 
department’s personnel committee, which uses those evaluations 
to determine whether history instructors should be recommended 
for retention and promotions. In his three history classes, Professor 
Ludlum has a total of one hundred students. Six students turned 
in written evaluations of Ludlum; two of these evaluations were 
favorable and four were negative. Professor Hitchcock, who sits 
on the History Department Personnel Committee, argued against 
recommending Ludlum for promotion. “If a majority of the students 
who bothered to evaluate Ludlum find him lacking,” he stated, “then 
it’s clear a majority of all his students find him lacking.” 
 1. What is the sample in Hitchcock’s reasoning? 
 2. What is the population? 
 3. What is the attribute of interest? 
 4. Are there differences between the sample and the population that should 
reduce our confidence in Hitchcock’s conclusion? 
▲
▲
 Exercise 11-22 

350 
CHAPTER 11: INDUCTIVE REASONING
  5. Is the sample random? 
  6. Is the sample large enough? 
 7. Based on these considerations, how strong is Hitchcock’s reasoning? 
▲
 Which of the following arguments would you regard as relatively strong? To a 
certain extent this will be a judgment call, but the class as a whole should reach 
approximate consensus on many items.
1. My cousin uses a Dodge truck on his ranch; it has over 300,000 miles on the 
original engine. Obviously, Dodge really does build tough trucks. 
 2. Drug abuse among pro athletes is unquestionably a serious and widespread 
problem. Why, last week three players from just one team said they used HGH!  
 3. Orange cats are easy to train. I had one once—Gross Kitty we called him—
and you could teach that cat to ski if you wanted to. 
4. You’re gonna take a course from Toadstool? Two guys I know think he’s ter-
rible! He flunked both of them! 
 5. Most Americans favor a national lottery to reduce the federal debt, judging 
from a poll taken in Las Vegas where about 80 percent said they liked the idea.  
 6. Young people these days are too easily distracted by things. Just look at the 
kids in this class. 
7. Most Ohio residents are worried about air quality. In a survey taken in 
Cleveland, more than half the respondents identified air pollution as the 
most significant environmental hazard. 
 8. It’s time to take back our government. Most Americans agree with that.  
 9. I wouldn’t buy anything from Ace. The lawn mower I got there didn’t work 
worth beans. 
10. Border collies are way smarter than Rottweilers. I know: I’ve owned both. 
 11. My Zenon plasma TV broke down three times in the first six month. It’s a 
bad brand. 
 12. Did you know there’s no Starbuck’s in Pincus, Nebraska? I guess Starbuck’s 
doesn’t like the state. 
13. Southwest doesn’t assign seats. Leastwise they didn’t on the flights I’ve taken. 
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
 Exercise 11-23 
 CAUSAL STATEMENTS AND THEIR SUPPORT 
  As you’ve learned earlier in the book, an  argument  is intended to support or dem-
onstrate a contention. A   causal statement   sets forth the cause of some event. 
Unfortunately arguments and causal statements use overlapping vocabulary. 
 This is an argument: 
 This, however, is a causal statement: 
The toilet is leaking because the floor is wet.
The floor is wet because the toilet is leaking.

 
CAUSAL STATEMENTS AND THEIR SUPPORT
351
 The first example gives evidence that the toilet is leaking. It is an  argument
that the toilet is leaking. The second example states the  cause of the wet floor. 
 In this section we are concerned with reasoning used to establish causal 
statements. Here is an example of such an argument: 
 The conclusion of this argument is a causal statement; the rest of it offers 
reasons for thinking it is true. 
Forming Causal Hypotheses 
A statement that X causes or caused Y is often a hypothesis. A causal hypothesis 
is a tentative claim—a statement off ered for further investigation or testing.
Normally, when we are concerned with the cause of something, our reason-
ing falls into two parts: (1) forming a hypothesis and (2) confi rming the hypoth-
esis. Th ese are distinct activities (though they involve overlapping principles). If 
the car won’t start, we fi rst think of possible causes; those that seem most likely 
ar e the ones we off er as hypotheses. We then test them if we can.
Here are three principles often used to arrive at causal hypotheses 
Paired Unusual Events Principle*
The “paired unusual events principle” of arriving at a causal hypothesis is pretty 
straightforward: If something unusual happens, look for something else unusual 
that has happened and consider whether it might be the cause. If you wake up 
one morning with a splitting headache, and you remember doing something 
unusual the night before that might be a cause, such as reading in poor light or 
having a bit too much to drink, you hypothesize that it has something to do with 
the headache.
Here is another example of how a pairing of unusual events can suggest a 
causal hypothesis:
Now, the fact that two unusual things happened around the same time is at 
best only grounds for suspecting causation. It does not establish causation. Th e 
previous argument does not establish that Zicam prevents colds or kept you from 
catching one. You don’t know what would have happened if you hadn’t taken 
Zicam. Take out the word “maybe” and you have the fallacy (discussed in Chapter 7) 
known as post hoc, ergo propter hoc.
To arrive at causal hypotheses one uses common sense and background 
knowledge of what causes what and how things work. Yes, if your scratchy throat 
We dried the floor, turned off the toilet, and waited. The floor stayed dry. Then 
we turned the toilet back on and watched. Now there is a puddle on the floor.
Therefore the leaking toilet caused the puddle.
As soon as my throat got scratchy I took Zicam. My sore throat went away and 
I never caught a cold.
Therefore, maybe Zicam prevents colds. 
The moment that declaration 
was made, oil prices jumped 
over $18 a barrel.
—Post hoc, ergo propter hoc 
from SENATOR JOSEPH BIDEN, 
criticizing a U.S. Senate resolu-
tion declaring the IRG (Iranian 
Revolutionary Guard) a terror-
ist organization.
*This principle of hypothesis formation is sometimes called the Method of Difference, terminology invented by the 
English logician John Stuart Mill.
According to a report in the 
Journal of the American Medical 
Association, infants who are 
breastfed have higher IQs later 
in life.
Maybe parents with higher IQs are 
more aware of the health advan-
tages of breastfeeding and as a 
result are more likely to breastfeed 
their children.

352 
CHAPTER 11: INDUCTIVE REASONING
goes away, you might recall that a raccoon had crossed your path before that hap-
pened. But it isn’t plausible to think that a raccoon crossing your path could make 
a sore throat go away. Why isn’t it plausible? Because given normal experience, 
one cannot see how a raccoon crossing one’s path could make a sore throat go 
away. One cannot conceive of a mechanism by which this might happen.
Common Variable Principle*
The second principle for arriving at a causal hypothesis also straightforward: A 
variable common to multiple occurrences of something  may be related to it caus-
ally. For example:
This information logically justifies the hypothesis that tacos caused the 
intestinal problems suffered by Kearney residents. The conjecture might then be 
confirmed or disconfi rmed by other means, such as testing the tacos for salmo-
nella bacteria.
Here is another example of how identification of a common variable in mul-
tiple occurrences of something suggests a causal hypothesis:
Here, the variable common to the years the azaleas didn’t bloom is also said 
to be absent in the years they did bloom. It is reasonable to hypothesize that heavy 
fertilizing prevented the azaleas from blooming.
Covariation Principle**
The third principle for arriving at a causal hypothesis works like this:  When a 
variation in one phenomenon is accompanied by a variation in another phenom-
enon, we have a covariation or correlation, these being the same. For example, if 
crime rates go up as gun sales increase, the two increases are correlated. You saw 
in Chapter 7 that “correlations don’t prove causation.” Nevertheless, when guided 
by common sense and background knowledge of what causes what, correlations 
can offer a reason for hypothesizing causation may exist, as in this example:
When several people in Kearney complained to their physicians about acute 
intestinal distress, health officials investigated and found that all of them had 
eaten tacos at the county fair.
Therefore, perhaps the tacos caused the infection.
Some years the azaleas bloomed well; in other years they didn’t bloom at all. 
In the years they didn’t bloom, I fertilized heavily, but I didn’t do that in the 
years they bloomed well.
Therefore, perhaps heavy fertilizing caused them not to bloom.
It’s well known that younger 
Americans are much more 
likely to favor gay marriage 
than older ones. But did you 
know that the most direct cor-
relation so far, regardless of 
age, is between people who do 
not like sushi and people who 
do not favor gay marriage! Yes: 
no matter whether a person is 
a millennial, a gen X, a boomer, 
or a “greatest generation,” the 
more likely they don’t like 
sushi, the more likely they 
don’t favor gay marriage.
—MotherJones, May/June 2013
Over the past few years online instruction has increased at San Diego State. 
During the same time the average GPA of San Diego State students has 
increased.
Therefore, the increase in GPA may be due to the increase in online instruction. 
*This principle of hypothesis formation was referred to by John Stuart Mill as the Method of Agreement.
**Mill referred to this principle of hypothesis formation as the Method of Concomitant Variation.

 
CAUSAL STATEMENTS AND THEIR SUPPORT
353
The correlation does not establish causation, but it 
suggests a hypothesis.
Another example:
The information doesn’t establish that meat  con-
sumption in Holland after the Second World War caused 
the increase in prostate cancer there, but it  warrants 
that hypothesis—that is, it suggests a cause-and-effect 
connection.
To repeat, correlation does not prove causation. 
The causal links suggested by correlation are only possi-
ble links. A boy’s hair grows longer as he learns the mul-
tiplication table, but there is no causal link between the 
two things. Skiing accidents increase as Christmas sales 
pick up, but there is no causal connection. The princi-
ples we have discussed for developing causal hypotheses 
require common sense and some knowledge of what 
causes what and how things work. From our background 
knowledge, we can see how meat consumption might be related to prostate can-
cer, but we cannot see how hair length could have anything to do with learning 
arithmetic.
 Weighing Evidence 
 Coming up with a causal hypothesis involves  weighing evidence.  The car isn’t 
starting. Why? Well, we heard funny clicking sounds when we tried to start it, the 
kind associated with having a battery that is almost dead. Unfortunately we also 
noticed gas fumes, like when an engine is flooded. We noticed other anomalies: 
we had just filled up with a new brand of gas; the steering wheel won’t unlock; it is 
unusually cold out; and so forth. We had just installed a new radio, too. Could that 
have anything to do with the problem? 
When meat consumption in Holland went up 
after the Second World War, so did the rate of 
prostate cancer in that country.
Therefore, perhaps eating meat causes prostate 
cancer.
■ Jeff Fulcher, a former 
student of ours, read 
this book and then flew 
airplanes in Alaska. These 
two “paired unusual 
events” do NOT suggest a 
causal hypothesis be cause 
it is difficult to think of a 
mechanism by which one 
of them might be the 
cause or effect of another. 
Background knowledge 
and common sense must 
guide us in the formation 
of hypotheses.
Behavioral Causes
Consider these statements:
■ Olivia isn’t talking to Emma because Emma insulted her.
■ The union approved the contract because their members wanted to end the strike.
■ Christie was elected because he appealed to independent voters.
These statements explain the causes of behavior in terms of reasons and motives. Now, reasons 
and motives are not physical causes. Saying Christie was elected because he appealed to inde-
pendent voters isn’t like saying a puddle is on the floor because the toilet is leaking. Reason and 
motives are said to be behavioral causes rather than physical causes.

354 
CHAPTER 11: INDUCTIVE REASONING
 In real life, forming a hypothesis is not as simple as the preceding three 
principles suggest. We have to weigh things. For example, the association 
between clicking sounds and almost-dead batteries is more significant than 
the fact that the steering wheel won’t unlock, or even that gasoline could be 
smelled. The smell of gasoline, which often accompanies engine flooding, 
might be explained by the fact we just filled up. We’d check battery connections 
and hope for the best. 
 Here is another example of weighing evidence: 
You go to a physician about numbness in a leg. The doctor asks a series of 
questions. Exactly where in the leg is the numbness? When did it begin? Did 
it begin suddenly? Did something unusual happen? Is it worse at some times 
of the day? Do you experience it in the other leg? Does it depend on your 
activities or the position of the leg? Do you smoke? Do you have high blood 
pressure? Are you experiencing other unusual symptoms? The investigation 
discloses various symptoms: Some of them might be associated with a 
neurological condition, another with an orthopedic condition, perhaps 
another is a psychiatric condition, and so forth.
 The physician considers which symptoms are most important, and diag-
noses your condition accordingly. The diagnosis is the physician’s causal 
hypothesis. She doesn’t arrive at it through any straightforward, formulistic 
application of the previous three principles. She is, however, looking for asso-
ciations and correlations between symptoms and medical conditions, and she 
is looking for unusual events that might have accompanied the onset of numb-
ness. “Did something unusual happen?” is a test to see if principle 1 applies. 
She, being a physician, is in the best position to gauge the comparative signifi-
cance of our answers. 
 One more example: 
 These factors suggest contradictory hypotheses. But some factors are more 
important than others. The fact that Adam lied about his whereabouts, while sus-
picious, may not be as suspicious as the fact that Brady owed the victim money 
and threatened him. We would guess the investigators will examine Brady’s alibi 
carefully. 
 As you can see from these cases, formulating a causal hypothesis involves 
weighing various considerations, rather than applying one or more of the three 
principles according to a formula. Background knowledge is terrifically impor-
tant when it comes to evaluating evidence. Physicians will be better than most 
A murder has been committed, and investigators have narrowed the field to 
three suspects. Bullets from Adam’s gun killed the victim, and Adam turns out 
to have lied about his whereabouts at the time of the murder. But Adam was 
a good friend of the victim, and investigators cannot discern a motive. Brady, 
on the other hand, owed the victim money, was known to have threatened 
him, and had access to Adam’s gun. But Brady has an alibi. Cox was seen in 
the vicinity of the murder at the time it happened, knew the victim, and also 
might have had access to Adam’s gun. But Cox has no apparent motive.

Three Principles for Forming 
Causal Hypotheses 
■ Paired unusual events principle: If something unusual happens look for something else 
unusual and consider whether it might be the cause.
■ Common variable principle: A variable related to multiple occurrences of something may be 
related to it causally.
■ Co-variation principle:  If a variation in one phenomenon is accompanied by a variation in 
another, consider whether the two phenomena may be related causally.
These three principles only suggest causation.  They do not establish it.  It is a fallacy to 
think any of them establishes causation in and of itself.
 
CAUSAL STATEMENTS AND THEIR SUPPORT
355
at evaluating medical symptoms, police investigators better than most at solving 
crimes, and historians better than most when it comes to explaining the causes of 
historical events. Our own causal hypothesizing will be best in whatever areas we 
have the most knowledge. 
 Which are arguments and which are causal statements, depending on the most 
likely context? 
1. The air is smoky because that house is on fire. 
 2. That house is on fire because the air is smoky. 
 3. She had a great workout because she is sweating. 
4. She is sweating because she had a good workout. 
 5. He has indigestion because he ate something harmful. 
 6. He ate something harmful because he has indigestion. 
7. She is late because she had car trouble. 
 8. She had car trouble because she is late. 
 9. It is late because the bars are closed. 
10. The bars are closed because it is late. 
▲
▲
▲
▲
 Exercise 11-24 
 Which are arguments and which are causal statements, depending on the most 
likely context? 
 Some of the following items would normally be seen as arguments others as 
explanations. Sort the items into the proper categories.
1. Why am I crying? I am crying because you never remember my birthday. 
 2. If I were you, I wouldn’t wear an outfit like that. It makes you look too old. 
 3. Rascal Flatts will never make a comeback. They just don’t appeal to today’s 
younger crowd. 
4. Steph won’t wear outfits like that because she thinks they are tacky. 
 5. My toe hurts because I stubbed it. 
 6. The board has lost faith in the president. Why else would they ask her to resign? 
▲
▲
 Exercise 11-25 

356 
CHAPTER 11: INDUCTIVE REASONING
 What is the cause and what is the effect in each of the following?
 1. The cat won’t eat, so Mrs. Quibblebuck searches her mind for a reason. 
“Now, could it be,” she muses, “that I haven’t heard mice scratching around 
in the attic lately?” “That’s the explanation,” she concludes. 
 2. Each time one of the burglaries occurred, observers noticed a red Mustang 
in the vicinity. The police, of course, suspect the occupants are responsible. 
 3. Violette is a strong Cowboys fan. Because of her work schedule, however, she 
has been able to watch their games only twice this season, and they lost both 
times. She resolves not to watch any more. “It’s bad luck,” she decides. 
 4. Giving the little guy more water could have prevented him from getting 
dehydrated, said Ms. Delacruz. 
 5. OAXACA, Mexico (AP)—Considered by many to be Mexico’s culinary capi-
tal, this city took on McDonald’s and won, keeping the hamburger giant out 
of its colonial plaza by passing around tamales in protest. 
▲
▲
 Exercise 11-27 
 Which of the following state or imply cause/effect?
 1. The quarterback’s finally being healthy is probably what made the Eagles 
more competitive this year. 
 2. Dress warmly! It’s windy out there. 
 3. Ryan’s disposition has deteriorated since he and his wife separated; it isn’t 
coincidence. 
 4. Senator Craig’s behavior forced conservatives to call for his resignation. 
 5. Getting a new trumpet player certainly improved the brass sections. 
 6. When men wear swimsuits, they have difficulty doing math problems. 
 7. Despite the injuries, the Dolphins kept winning. It must have something to 
do with their positive attitude. 
 8. Too little sleep slows down your reaction time. 
 9. Women are worse drivers than men. 
   10. Why does Chaz remove the paper towels from the kitchen before his mother-
in-law visits? He’s a creep. 
 11. Randomized clinical trials produced unbiased data on the benefits of drugs. 
 12. The batteries in this dang flashlight are completely dead! 
 13. This flashlight won’t work because the batteries are completely dead. 
 14. Believe me, the batteries in that flashlight are dead. Try it. You’ll see. 
 15. Aunt Clara thinks her prayers cured Uncle Pete. [Caution!] 
 16. The risk of having a heart attack is 33 percent higher in the winter than in the 
summer in Philadelphia. 
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
 Exercise 11-26 
 7. If I were you, I wouldn’t open a furniture store here, because students give 
away furniture every spring. 
 8. Most people like freestone peaches more than clingstone because they are 
easier to eat. 
 9. Around here, people don’t take no for an answer. Just ask anyone. 
 10. Dr. York flunks people because he is a crank. 
▲
▲

 
CAUSAL STATEMENTS AND THEIR SUPPORT 
357
 Into which category do each of the following items fall?
 A  5  A causal statement is used as a premise. 
 B  5  A causal statement is used as a conclusion. 
 C  5  A causal statement stands by itself as an unsupported claim.
 1. Awww, don’t get on her, Mom. She didn’t rake the leaves because her stom-
ach was hurting and she had to lie down. 
 2. The garage gets cluttered because we never throw anything away. So, if we 
want a neat garage, we’d better change our habits. 
 3. Mr. Snork is taking French so he can speak the language when he goes to 
Europe in the spring. 
 4. The reason the door keeps banging is that the windows are open on the 
south side of the house, and there is a strong breeze. 
 5. We eliminated the other possibilities. The puddle was caused by a leaking 
wax ring. 
 6. I am sure Professor York will end on time this evening. He always ends on 
time because he likes to watch the 11:00 news. 
 7. You think the mower won’t start because it’s old? That’s not why. You let gas 
sit in the carburetor all winter, and it gums up the works. That’s why it won’t 
start. It has nothing to do with its being old. 
 8. The coffee I drink in the evening must explain why I can’t sleep. The only 
other things it could be are sweet desserts and anxiety, and I don’t eat des-
sert, and I’m not worried about anything. 
 9. Yes, I know Emily doesn’t go out much, but you can hardly blame her. She 
doesn’t go out because she wants to study. 
 10. The zucchini grows better than the eggplant because it gets more fertilizer. 
 11. Why didn’t the tomatoes do better? I don’t think we were fertilizing them 
enough. Right after I gave them Miracle-Gro, they did fine. 
 12. Just look at the cat hair on this keyboard! Where do you let your cat sleep? 
No wonder your computer doesn’t work right. 
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
 Exercise 11-28 
 6. Eating fish or seafood at least once a week lowers the risk of developing 
dementia, researchers have found. 
 7. It has long puzzled researchers why people cannot detect their own bad 
breath. One theory is that people get used to the odor. 
 8. Researchers based at McDuff University put thirty young male smokers on 
a three-month program of vigorous exercise. One year later, only 14 percent 
of them still smoked. An equivalent number of young male smokers who did 
not go through the exercise program were also checked after a year, and it 
was found that 60 percent still smoked. The experiment is regarded as sup-
porting the theory that exercise helps chronic male smokers kick the habit. 
 9. The stronger the muscles, the greater the load they take off the joint, thus 
limiting damage to the cartilage, which explains why leg exercise helps pre-
vent osteoarthritis. 
 10. Many judges in Oregon will not process shoplifting, trespassing, and small-
claims charges. This saves the state a lot of money in court expenses. 
▲
▲

358 
CHAPTER 11: INDUCTIVE REASONING
Classify each of the following hypotheses according to the principle used to arrive 
at it. Use this key:
P 5 paired unusual events principle
C 5 common variable principle
COV 5 covariation principle
 1. According to a report in the American Journal of Cardiology, people who 
reported the highest level of stress had the greatest likelihood of being hos-
pitalized with heart disease. The higher the level of stress, the greater the 
likelihood. This suggests that stress is bad for the heart.
 2. Pat never had trouble playing that passage before. I wonder what the prob-
lem is. It must have something to do with the piano she just bought.
 3. Sometimes the fishing is pretty good here; sometimes it isn’t. When I try to 
pin down why, it seems like the only variable is the wind. For some reason, 
wind keeps the fish from biting.
 4. Texting doesn’t impair academic performance? From what I’ve seen, the 
more the texting, the worse the grades.
 5. Gas prices have gone up by 40 cents a gallon in the past three weeks. It all 
started when they had that refinery fire down there in Texas. Must have 
depleted the supplies.
 6. Whenever we have great roses like this, it’s always been after a long period of 
cloudy weather. Must be they don’t like direct sun.
 7. In a recent Chinese study reported in the journal Alzheimer’s & Demen-
tia, it was found that the people with the greatest exposure to secondhand 
smoke were twice as likely to develop Alzheimer’s. Another study, appear-
ing in Occupational and Environmental Medicine, linked passive smoking 
to severe dementia. The greater the cumulative exposure to secondhand 
smoke, the higher the risk of dementia, according to this study. A working 
hypothesis is that exposure to secondhand smoke can cause dementia.
 8. All of a sudden, he’s all “Let’s go to Beano’s for a change.” Right. Am I sup-
posed to think it’s just coincidence his old girlfriend started working there?
 9. You really want to know what gets me and makes me be so angry? It’s you! 
You and your stupid habit of never closing your closet door.
 10. I’ve noticed that the more stress I am under, the more colds I seem to get. I 
wonder if stress causes colds.
▲
▲
▲
 Exercise 11-29 
 13. Given your symptoms, Charles, I’d say your pain is due to a sprain, not a 
break. Plus, your X-rays don’t show a broken bone. 
 14. Maria can tell what note you are playing because she has perfect pitch. 
 15. Give ’em a break. That kind of work makes noise, and they gotta start work 
early to get it done. 
 16. Why did Dr. York give a test on Friday? He wanted to surprise us. 
 17. TV watching leads to violent behavior. Studies show that adolescents who 
watch more television are more prone to act violently. 
▲
▲

 
CAUSAL STATEMENTS AND THEIR SUPPORT 
359
 11. Why in heck am I so tired today? Must be all the studying I did last night. 
Thinking takes energy.
 12. The computer isn’t working again. Every time it happens, the dang kids have 
been playing with it. Why can’t they just use the computers they have down 
at school?
 13. Many studies seem to show that as meat consumption goes up, overall 
health declines, which suggests that the two are causally related.
 14. What makes your dog run away from time to time? I bet it has to do with that 
garbage you feed him. You want him to stay home? Feed him better dog food.
 15. I’ll tell you what caused all these kids to take guns to school and shoot peo-
ple. Every single one of them liked to play violent videogames; that’s what 
caused it.
 16. At our university we have observed that the more writing courses students 
take, the better they do on our university critical thinking exit exam. That’s 
why we suspect that English courses may be among the better ways to teach 
critical thinking.
 17. Gag! What did you do to this coffee, anyway—put Ajax in it?
 18. Can you beat that? I set this battery on the garage floor last night, and this 
morning it was dead. I guess the old saying about cement draining a battery 
is still true.
 19. Clinton was impeached. Then his standing went up in the opinion polls. Just 
goes to show: No publicity is bad publicity.
 20. Young teenage men everywhere have observed that the more they shave, the 
heavier their beards seems to get. They believe that shaving may stimulate 
beard growth.
 21. Why did the dog yelp? Are you serious? You’d yelp, too, if someone stomped 
on your foot.
 22. Freddy certainly seems more at peace with himself these days. I guess psy-
chotherapy worked for him.
 23. Seems like now that kids spend more time playing these violent video 
games, there has been a lot more bullying. I wonder if video watching is 
connected to that.
 24. Whenever we have people over, the next morning the bird is all squawky and 
grumpy. The only thing I can figure is it must not get enough sleep when we 
have company.
 25. The mower worked fine last week, and now it won’t even start. Could letting 
it stand out in the rain have something to do with that?
 26. Every time Greg plays soccer, his foot starts hurting. It also hurts when he 
jogs. But when he rides his bike, he doesn’t have a problem. It must be the 
pounding that causes the problem.
 27. You know, all of a sudden she started acting cold? She didn’t like it when I 
told her I was going to play poker with you guys.
 28. Your Suburban is hard to start. Mine starts right up. You always use Chevron; 
I use Texaco. You’d better switch to Texaco.
▲
▲
▲

360 
CHAPTER 11: INDUCTIVE REASONING
 Use your understanding of what causes what and how things work to answer the 
following questions. There is not necessarily a correct answer, but interesting 
controversies may be suitable for class discussion.
 1. Do any of these explanations or any combination of them seem better or 
worse as an explanation of why more people come down with flu in the win-
ter? Can you think of a better explanation?
 
a. In winter, people wear warmer clothes. 
 
b. Flu viruses survive longer in cold air. 
 
c. More hot chocolate is consumed in winter. 
 
d. People stay indoors more and are in closer proximity to one another. 
 2. Reportedly, obesity among American children is increasing. Do any of these 
explanations seem better or worse?
 
a. Children are eating more. 
 
b. Children are eating more fast food. 
 
c. Text messaging takes up so much time, kids have no time left for exercise. 
 
d. It’s getting too hot to exercise, thanks to global warming. 
 3. In a recent study of more than 40,000 Japanese adults, it was found that 
those who drank lots of green tea were less likely to die from cardiovascular 
disease than were those who drank only a little. Do any of these explanations 
of that result seem better or worse?
 
a. Green tea may be more popular than black tea. 
 
b. Green tea is better for your health than black tea is. 
 
c. Green tea is known to contain more antioxidants than black tea. 
 
d. Green-tea drinkers may be more likely to eat fruits and vegetables.  
 4. Japanese are less likely than Americans to die of stroke. Do any of these 
explanations seem better or worse?
 
a. Japanese people drink more green tea. 
 
b. Japanese people eat more sushi. 
 
c. NASCAR racing is more popular in America than in Japan. 
 
d. Americans spend more time mowing lawns. 
 5. There is a strong association between lack of sleep and depression. Do any 
of these explanations seem better or worse?
 
a. Sleeplessness causes depression. 
 
b. Depression causes sleeplessness. 
 
c. Sleeplessness and depression may both result from some underlying cause. 
 6. When Horace thinks of doing a dusty job like vacuuming his car or sweeping 
out the garage, he almost always sneezes. Do any of these explanations seem 
better or worse?
 
a. Thinking of dust causes Horace to sneeze. 
 
b. A sneeze coming on makes Horace think of dust. 
 
c. It is probably just coincidence. 
 7. Every spring and summer, increased snow-cone consumption is correlated 
with each of the following. Which correlations seem most likely to be due to 
cause and effect, if any.
 
a. Increased number of drownings 
 
b. Increased sales of swimsuits 
 
c. Increased sales of beer 
▲
▲
▲
 Exercise 11-30 

 
CAUSAL STATEMENTS AND THEIR SUPPORT 
361
 
d. Increased number of lightning strikes 
 
e. Increased numbers of mosquitoes 
 8. The early 2000s saw a downturn in armed robbery, which coincided with 
increased cell phone ownership. Do any of these explanations seem better 
or worse?
 
a. Robbers backed off because they knew more people could call for help. 
 
b. It’s probably just coincidence. 
 
c.  Criminals were becoming too busy talking on cell phones to rob 
anyone.  
 
d.  Robbers know most cell phones can take photos; they worried about 
having their pictures taken. 
 9. In 2007, the homicide rate was higher than in 2006. To which of the following 
is that fact possibly related by cause or effect?
 
a. In 2007, fewer hurricanes hit Florida. 
 
b. During the preceding two years, the war in Iraq went badly. 
 
c. Several years earlier, Bill Clinton had sex with an intern and lied about it. 
 
d. In 2007, the price of houses declined sharply. 
 10. The junior high basketball team played exceptionally well against a tough 
opponent. The coach rewarded the players with lavish praise and ice cream. 
In the next game, the team didn’t play as well. Select the best responses:
 
a. “Obviously, rewarding the team backfired.” 
 
b. “The coach should have given them a better reward.” 
 
c. “The coach should have rewarded only the best players.” 
 
d.  “The team probably still wouldn’t have played as well, even if the coach 
hadn’t rewarded the players.” 
 11. Can mere reading of articles about dieting cause teenage girls to resort 
to extreme weight-loss measures? According to a study published in the 
journal  Pediatrics (reported by Carla K. Johnson of the Associated Press in 
January 2007), the answer might well be yes. In the study, female middle 
school students were interviewed in 1999 and again in 2004 and their 
heights and weights were measured. Those in the first interview who said 
they frequently read magazine articles about dieting were more likely than 
those who said they never read such articles to report in the second sur-
vey that they indulged in extreme weight-loss measures like vomiting and 
taking laxatives. The effect was present whether or not the girls were over-
weight or considered their weight important when they started reading the 
articles, the researchers said. 
   
 Propose two explanations for the findings that seem likely or possible. 
▲
 In each of the following items cause and effect is asserted or implied.  Using your 
background knowledge of how things work and what causes what, provide a 
believable alternative explanation for each assertion.  Use the following key:
 A  5  this may well just be coincidence 
 B  5   the stated “cause” might really be the effect, and the stated “effect” might 
really be the cause 
 C  5   the “cause” and “effect” might actually both be the effects of a third thing 
 D  5  legitimate cause and effect
 Exercise 11-31 

362 
CHAPTER 11: INDUCTIVE REASONING
 1. Whenever I mow the lawn, I end up sneezing a lot more than usual. Must be 
gas fumes from the mower. 
 2. Maybe the reason he’s sick is all the aspirin he’s taking. 
 3. The only thing that could possibly account for Clark and his two brothers 
all having winning lottery tickets is that all three had been blessed by the 
Reverend Jim Jome just the day before. I’m signing up for the Reverend’s 
brotherhood.  
 4. What else could cause the leaves to turn yellow in the fall? It’s got to be the 
cold weather! 
 5. Perhaps Jason is nearsighted because he reads so many books. 
 6. First, Rodrigo gets a large inheritance. Then Charles meets the girl of his 
dreams. And Amanda gets the job she was hoping for. What did they all have 
in common? They all thought positively. It can work for you, too. 
 7. It’s common knowledge that osteoarthritis of the knee causes weakness in 
the quadriceps. 
 8. Ever since the country lost its moral direction, the crime rate has gone 
through the ceiling. What more proof do you need that the cause of skyrock-
eting crime is the breakdown in traditional family values? 
 9. Wow! Is Johnson hot or what? After that rocky start, he has struck out the last 
nine batters to face him. That’s what happens when ol’ Randy gets his confi-
dence up. 
 10. Research demonstrates that people who eat fish are smarter. I’m going to 
increase my intake. 
 11. What a night! All those dogs barking made the coyotes yap, and nobody 
could sleep. 
 12. Isn’t it amazing how, when the leaves drop off in the winter, it makes the 
branches brittle? 
 13. What explains all the violence in society today? TV. Just look at all the vio-
lence they show these days. 
 14. On Monday, Mr. O’Toole came down with a cold. That afternoon, Mrs. 
O’Toole caught it. Later that evening, their daughter caught it, too. 
 15. Retail sales are down this year. That’s because unemployment is so high. 
 16. Yes, they’re saying electric blankets aren’t really a health threat, but I know 
better. A friend had cancer, and know what? He slept with an electric blanket.  
 17. At finals time, the bearded man on the front campus offers prayers in return 
for food. Donald is thinking, “Sure. Why not?—can’t hurt anything.” He 
approaches the bearded man with a tidbit. Later: The bearded man prays. 
Donald passes his finals. To skeptical friends: “Hey, you never know. I’ll take 
all the help I can get.” 
 18. It is an unusually warm evening, and the birds are singing with exceptional 
vigor. “Hot weather does make a bird sing,” Uncle Irv observes. 
 19. Why did Uncle Ted live such a long time? A good attitude, that’s why. 
 20. Studies demonstrate that people who are insecure about their relationships 
with their partners have a notable lack of ability to empathize with others. 
That’s why we recommend that partners receive empathy training before 
they get married. 
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲

 
CAUSAL STATEMENTS AND THEIR SUPPORT
363
Go to Church and Live Longer 
 According to Bill Scanlon, a reporter for the Scripps Howard News Service, researchers 
from the University of Colorado, the University of Texas, and Florida State University 
determined that twenty-year-olds who attend church at least once a week for a life-
time live on the average seven years longer than twenty-year-olds who never attend. 
The data came from a 1987 National Health Interview Survey that asked 28,000 peo-
ple their income, age, church-attendance patterns, and other questions. The research 
focused on 2,000 of those surveyed who subsequently died between 1987 and 1995.
 a. Propose two different causal hypotheses to explain these findings. 
 b. What data would you need to have greater confidence in these hypotheses?  
 Exercise 11-32 
 Confirming Causal Hypotheses 
 Confirmation of many cause-and-effect hypotheses consists in trying to show 
that the hypothesized cause is the condition “but for which” the effect in question 
would not happen. For example: 
 The hypothesized cause is the leaking toilet. The effect in question is the wet 
floor. The argument gives a reason for thinking that, but for the toilet, the floor 
would have stayed dry. 
 A condition  but for which  the effect would not happen is expressed in the 
Latin legal phrase   conditio sine qua non  (“a condition without which nothing”). 
If you look at the new cases of 
death from AIDS, the fastest-
growing category could be 
ladies over the age of 70. If 
last year one woman over 70 
died from AIDS and this year 
two do, you get a 100 percent 
increase in AIDS deaths for that 
category.
—JOHN ALLEN PAULOS
Percentage increases from a small 
baseline can be misleading.
We dried the floor, turned off the toilet, and waited. The floor stayed dry.
Then we turned the toilet back on and watched. Now there is a puddle on the floor.
Therefore the leaking toilet caused the puddle.
 21. Lack of self-confidence can be difficult to explain, but common sense sug-
gests that stuttering is among the causes, judging from how often the two 
things go together. 
22. When I went to Munich last summer, I went to this movie, and who was 
there? This guy I went to school with and hadn’t seen in fifteen years! No 
way that could be coincidence! 
 23. It’s odd. I’ve seen a huge number of snails this year, and the roses have mildew. 
Don’t know which caused which, but one of them obviously caused the other.  
 24. Her boyfriend is in a bad mood, you say? I’ll bet it’s because she’s trying too 
hard to please him. Probably gets on his nerves. 
25. Many people note that top executives wear expensive clothes and drive nice 
cars. They do the same, thinking these things must be a key to success. 
   26. “. . . and let’s not underestimate the importance of that home field advantage, 
guys.” 
   
 “Right, Dan. Six of the last seven teams that had the home field advan-
tage went on to win the Super Bowl.” 
 27. On your trip across the country, you note that the traffic is awful at the first 
intersection you come to in New Jersey. “They certainly didn’t do anyone a 
favor by putting a traffic light at this place,” you reflect. “Look at all the con-
gestion it caused.” 
▲
▲

364 
CHAPTER 11: INDUCTIVE REASONING
 Now, a critic might complain that the toilet would not have been leaking but for 
the fact that there is water in it. And he or she might also point out that there wouldn’t 
be water in the toilet but for the fact that water exists on Earth. And that wouldn’t 
happen, the critic might say, but for the fact that Earth is just the right distance from 
the sun to have water. What is the answer to this critic? The answer is that we were 
concerned only with whether the puddle was caused by the leaking toilet. Since that 
question has nothing to do with these other things, we logically can ignore them.  
Randomized Controlled Experiments
    Here is another example of reasoning that tries to show that something wouldn’t 
have happened, but for the hypothesized cause. It’s a long example, but you need 
to read it carefully. 
In an experiment, 50 willing volunteers were infected with a cold virus and 
then randomly divided into two groups. The subjects in one group were 
given a Zicam treatment, as per the instructions on the box. Two weeks 
later, the number of people with colds in both groups was compared. 
Eighteen of the subjects who had not been treated with Zicam had colds, 
and only 10 of the subjects who had been treated had colds, a difference 
that is statistically significant at the .05 level. Therefore, Zicam probably 
reduced the frequency of colds in the experimental group.
 Is Hypothesis-Confirmation a Logic Fallacy? 
•  If the causal hypothesis in question is true, then such-and-such would 
have been observed.
• Such-and-such was observed.
• Therefore, the causal hypothesis is true.
 This formula is an example of affirming the consequent (AC), a logical fallacy explained 
in Chapter 8. But when the results of a scientific experiment are presented this way as a step 
toward confirmation of a causal hypothesis, the reasoning would be better thought of as an 
inductive argument and represented by this formula: 
• Such-and-such was observed.
•  The best explanation of this fact is that the causal hypothesis in ques-
tion is probably true.
• Therefore, the causal hypothesis is probably true.
Here’s an example:
•  The  frequency of colds in the experimental group was observed to be 
significantly lower than in the control group.
•  The best explanation of this fact is that Zicam reduced the frequency of 
colds in the experimental group.
•  Therefore probably Zicam reduced the frequency of colds in the experi-
mental group.

 
CAUSAL STATEMENTS AND THEIR SUPPORT
365
 The argument about Zicam on the preceding page is relatively strong. It 
describes what is known as a   randomized controlled experiment  —one in 
which subjects are  randomly assigned  either to an “experimental group” (E) or a 
“control” (C), which differ from one another in only one respect: subjects in the E 
group are subjected to the suspected cause (in this case Zicam). 
 Could the low frequency of colds in the experimental group have been due 
to variables other than the Zicam? For example, could a disproportionate num-
ber of subjects in that group be resistant to colds? That’s unlikely, because the 
subjects were randomly divided into the two groups. Randomization of subjects 
into the comparison groups helps ensure that both groups were identical (prior to 
administering Zicam to the subjects in one group). 
 Could the low frequency of colds in the experimental group be due to chance 
rather than to the Zicam? The odds against this happening can be calculated 
using the mathematics of statistics, and as it turns out, there is a 95 percent chance 
that the difference in frequency of colds between E and C did not occur by chance. 
To elaborate on this, notice this sentence in the previous argument: 
 Here is what this means. There were 25 subjects in both the experimental 
and control groups; 40 percent of the experimental group (10/25) caught colds, 
and 72 percent of the control group (18/25) caught colds. According to the math-
ematics of statistics, a difference this large (32 percentage points) is “statistically 
significant at the .05 level,” which just means there is a 95 percent chance it is not 
due to chance.  Table 11-2  sets forth the approximate number of percentage points 
that the difference,  d,  in the experimental and control groups must exceed for it to 
be statistically significant at the .05 level. As you can see in the table, when there 
are 25 people in the experimental group, as in this experiment, a  d  of 27 percent-
age points or greater is statistically significant. 
Eighteen of the subjects who had not been treated with Zicam had colds, and 
only 10 of the subjects who had been treated had colds, a difference that is 
statistically significant at the .05 level.
■ The Golden Compass. 
Just as it was supposed 
to, this picture makes 
us want to see this 
movie. We don’t know 
why it has that effect, 
but we do not need an 
argument to know that 
it does have that effect.

366 
CHAPTER 11: INDUCTIVE REASONING
 Number in Experimental Group  
(with Similarly Sized Control Group) 
 Approximate Figure That d Must Exceed 
to Be Statistically Significant  
(in Percentage Points) 
 10 
 40 
 25 
 27 
 50 
 19 
 100 
 13 
 250 
 8 
 500 
 6 
 1,000 
 4 
 1,500 
 3 
 Table 11-2 
 Approximate Statistically Significant  d ’s at .05 Level 
 So, this randomized controlled experiment confirms an association (in this 
experiment) between (1) the members of a group taking Zicam and (2) having a 
reduced frequency of colds, and moreover, that association very probably did not 
just occur by chance. Yes, it  could  just be chance: a 95 percent probability that it 
wasn’t chance isn’t the same as a 100 percent probability. But a 95 percent prob-
ability is still a very high probability. * 
Prospective Observational Studies**
  The randomized controlled experiment (RCE) is the standard for confirming and 
disconfirming hypotheses about causation in populations. Other confirmation 
techniques mimic it. Two of the most important of these are “prospective obser-
vational studies” and “retrospective observational studies.” Observational studies 
are not experiments. The researcher does not control the assignment of people 
(or other things, if the study does not involve people) to the comparison groups, 
and does not experiment with either group. Instead the groups are “observed.” 
 A prospective observational study is very similar to a randomized controlled 
experiment. Here is an example, which we will explain: 
 *The fact that Zicam is associated with a diminished frequency of colds not attributable to chance does not entail that 
Zicam will diminish the frequency of colds for any specific individual. 
 **Prospective observational studies are also called cause-to-effect studies. 
Does partying on the weekends adversely affect academic performance? 
Students at San Diego State University were surveyed about their weekend 
study habits. The academic performance of 100 students who identified 
themselves as attending parties on most weekends was compared with that 
of 100 students who said they rarely or never attended weekend parties. 
It was found that 60 percent of the party-goers had GPAs below the mean 
for all San Diego State University students. Only 30 percent of the students 
who said they rarely or never attended weekend parties had GPAs below the 
mean. Therefore, attending weekend parties probably adversely affects a 
student’s academic performance.

 
CAUSAL STATEMENTS AND THEIR SUPPORT
367
 As you can see, in a   prospective observational study   two groups are com-
pared as to the frequency of something (in this case low GPAs). All the members 
of one group say they have the suspected causal factor (in this case, attendance at 
parties on most weekends), and none of the members of the other group say they 
have it. A significant difference in the frequency of the “effect” (low GPAs) in the 
first group is unlikely due to chance. 
 But are the two groups really comparable?   Confounding variables  that 
may affect GPA may be present disproportionately in the comparison groups. For 
example, the partying group may contain a disproportionate number of first-year 
students who live in the dorms, and it may be the noise and distraction that is 
driving down their grades. 
Confounding variables (sometimes called “lurking” variables) may be con-
trolled to a certain extent in observational studies by  matching  them in the two 
comparison groups. For example, the researcher might attempt to make sure the 
comparison groups had the same number of first-year students. However, since 
researchers cannot know what all the confounding variables are, observational 
studies are inherently weaker than randomized controlled experiments. They can 
offer only a weaker form of hypothesis-confirmation. 
Retrospective Observational Studies*
 In a    retrospective observational study   one reasons backward from a phenome-
non of interest to a suspected cause or causal factor. In one comparison group the 
phenomenon is universally present. In the other it is universally absent. Both 
groups are then checked to see if there is a significant difference in the frequency 
of the suspected causal agent. Here is an example: 
 In one comparison group, all students are on academic probation; in the 
other group none are. The only thing that could account for this difference— if the 
comparison groups otherwise are the same—is that most of the former group said 
they attended parties on most weekends. However, is it true that the two groups 
are otherwise the same? This type of reasoning suffers from the same problems 
as found in prospective observational studies: We cannot be sure the comparison 
groups do not disproportionately contain confounding variables. In this example, 
we cannot be sure that the students on academic probation are not dispropor-
tionately first-year students, for example. 
 Bottom line: Observational studies offer weaker confirmation of causal 
hypotheses because confounding variables may not be equally distributed in the 
comparison groups. 
Does partying on the weekends adversely affect academic performance? 
Students at San Diego State University were surveyed about their weekend 
study habits. It was found that of 100 students on academic probation, 
60 percent identified themselves as attending parties on most weekends. 
By contrast, only 20 percent of 100 students not on academic probation 
identified themselves as attending parties on most weekends. Therefore, 
attending weekend parties probably adversely affects a student’s academic 
performance.
 *Retrospective observational studies are also called effect-to-cause studies. 

Methods Used to Help Confirm 
Causal Hypotheses 
 ■ Randomized controlled experiment:  An experiment  in which subjects are randomly 
assigned either to an “experimental group” (E) or a “control” (C), which theoretically differ 
from one another only in that subjects in E are subjected to a suspected cause.  The groups 
are compared as to the frequency in each of a suspected “effect.”
 ■ Prospective observational study: A study of two groups, in one of which a suspected 
causal agent is universally present and in the other is universally absent. The groups are 
compared as to the frequency in each of a suspected “effect.”
 ■ Retrospective observational study:  A study of two groups, in one of which a phenomenon 
of interest is universally present and in the other is universally absent. The groups are com-
pared as to the frequency in each of a suspected causal agent for the phenomenon. 
368 
CHAPTER 11: INDUCTIVE REASONING
 CALCULATING STATISTICAL PROBABILITIES 
  We constantly make decisions based on how probable we think an event is. If we 
think the likelihood of rain is small, we schedule the picnic; if we think the chances 
of our three kings winning the hand are good, we bet heavily; if we think the odds are 
that the prices of houses are about to go up, we’re more inclined to buy one before 
they do. Sometimes, if it isn’t a coin flip or a card game, it is very difficult to determine 
what the odds of a given event happening are. But our understanding of probabilities 
is further diminished by a failure to calculate probabilities correctly when more than 
one event is in question. Let us explain how to calculate some of these probabilities.  
 Joint Occurrence of Independent Events 
The probability of an outcome can be calculated by simple division. Let’s look at a 
simple case: What are the chances a flipped coin will come up “heads”? There are 
two possible outcomes when we flip a coin, one of which is the one we’re inter-
ested in: heads. If we divide the number of outcomes we’re interested in (1 in this 
example) by the number of possible outcomes, we get 1 divided by 2, or 1/2 (or .5 
or 50%, all of which mean the same thing). 
What is the probability of the coin coming up heads twice in a row? To find 
out, we must multiply the probability of each independent outcome. In this case, 
we multiply .5 times .5, getting .25 or 25%. So there is a 25% chance of getting two 
heads in a row.
Now, what is the probability of rolling dice and getting a 7? There are six 
ways you can produce a seven, that being the outcome we’re interested in (6 1 1, 
1 1 6, 5 1 2, 2 1 5, etc.), and there are 36 possible outcomes in all. (Each die has 
six faces, so 6 3 6 is the number of possible outcomes.) Divide 6 by 36 and you get 
1/6 or a little under 17%. And that is the probability of a roll of fair dice coming up 
7: one out of 6; almost 17%.
 Notice, we spoke of two independent events. Events are independent when 
neither of them has an effect on the outcome of the other. Since one coin flip does 
not affect how the next will come up, these are independent. But what if we have 
a bag of ten marbles, nine of which are white and one of which is red. What are 
the chances that a random draw will produce the red marble? We know the odds 

 
CALCULATING STATISTICAL PROBABILITIES
369
are 1 in 10, or 1/10, or 10 percent. (If you like fancy terminology, this 1/10 figure is 
known as the “proportional frequency” of red to white marbles.) If the first marble 
drawn is white, what are the chances a second draw will produce the red marble? 
Notice that the answer is not 10 percent, because there are now only nine marbles 
left in the bag, so the answer is 1 in 9, or 1/9, or 11.1 percent. The two draws in this 
case are dependent events, because what happens in the first case does affect the 
odds in the second case. (Of course, if the red marble had been drawn in the first 
case, the odds of its being drawn in the second drop to zero!) 
 Many people don’t realize that independent events really are independent. 
After flipping three heads in a row (the likelihood of which is .5  3  .5  3  .5, or 12.5 per-
cent), one might think that it is more likely that tails will come up on the next flip. But 
this is a serious mistake known as the gambler’s fallacy, as was explained in Chapter 
8; the next flip has a 50 percent chance of being heads, just like every other flip.  
 Alternative Occurrences 
 Figuring the likelihood of two or more alternative occurrences is fairly straight 
forward, provided the events are mutually exclusive. Let’s say you want to know 
the probability of drawing either a spade or a heart from a deck of fifty-two cards. 
(These are mutually exclusive events, since drawing a spade prevents drawing a 
heart and vice versa.) Since one-fourth of the cards are spades and one-fourth are 
hearts, there is a 1-in-4 chance, or .25 chance, of a drawn card being a spade and 
similarly for it being a heart. To determine the likelihood of it being a spade or a 
heart, we simply add the probabilities of the two events: .25  1  .25  5  .5, or a 50 
percent chance of it being a spade or a heart. This, of course, is exactly what we’d 
expect since spades and hearts comprise half the deck. 
 So, once again, to find the probability that either X or Y will happen, we sim-
ply add the probabilities of X and Y. 
 Expectation Value 
 How can you identify a good bet when you see one? Let’s say you and a friend 
have lunch together. Your friend proposes that you flip a coin and the loser pays 
the entire lunch bill. Is this a good idea from your point of view? The answer is yes 
if your part of the bill is bigger than your friend’s and no if his part is bigger than 
yours. Let’s consider how we discover such answers, whether in simple cases like 
our example or in more complicated situations. 
The relevant concept here is called    expectation value (EV)    ,  which is the result 
of how much you expect to gain combined with the likelihood of your gaining it. We 
return to our example: Let’s say that your lunch was $20 and your friend’s was $10, 
for a total of $30. (You didn’t go to the Four Seasons, but you didn’t go to Burger King 
either.) You stand to win $20 if you win the coin flip (since your friend would be buy-
ing your $20 lunch) and to lose $10 if you lose the flip (since you’d be buying his $10 
lunch). The chances of your winning or losing the coin flip are the same: .5 or 50 
percent. Now, your expectation value is found by multiplying the probability of your 
winning (.5) by the amount you might win ($20) and subtracting from this result the 
probability of your losing (also .5) times the amount you might lose ($10). So,
EV 5 (.5 3 20) 2 (.5 3 10)
EV 5 10 2 5
EV 5 5

370 
CHAPTER 11: INDUCTIVE REASONING
 Anytime the EV is greater than zero, it is a good bet, and this is a very good 
bet. Notice that, if both you and your friend had spent $15, your EV would be 
7.5 minus 7.5, or zero. That means you and your friend have an equally good (or 
equally bad) bet. You have exactly the same chance of winning the same amount. 
Let’s look at another gambling situation. On a typical craps table, there is a 
bet called Big 6. If you put $5 on that part of the table, you are betting that a six will 
be rolled before a seven. If your six comes up first, the house pays you $5, and if the 
seven comes up first, the house takes your $5. What is the expectation value of this 
bet? First, you and the house both stand to win or lose $5. What are your odds of 
winning? There are six ways that a pair of dice can make a seven, and only five ways 
they can make a six. So the odds of the house’s number coming up are 6 to 5; your 
probability of winning is about .45 and the house’s probability of winning is about 
.55. (Over the long run, of every eleven times there is a winner, the house will win 
six and you will win five.) Your EV works out this way:
 As mentioned, any bet with an EV below 0 is not a good bet. For this bet to 
be equally fair to both sides, the house would have to pay $6 when you win and 
you would pay $5 when you lose. This, in gamblers terminology, would make the 
money odds ($6 vs. $5) match the gambling odds (6-to-5 against), and the casino 
would soon be out of business. 
 One last example, since more people play poker than play craps. Let’s say you 
are holding four hearts and are thinking about drawing one card to make a heart 
flush, which will make it almost certain you’ll win the hand. What are the odds of 
drawing that fifth heart? There are 47 cards outside your hand, and 9 of them are 
hearts, so your chance of drawing a fifth heart is 9/47 or a little less than 5-to-1. So, 
to be worth your while, there needs to be at least $5 of other people’s money in the 
pot for every $1 of yours. If that’s the case, it’s worth going for the fifth heart. But if 
there is less than $5 for every $1 of yours in the pot, it’s time to fold ’em. 
 It is not always possible to calculate an expectation value because we may 
not know all the facts about our situation. But when we can, it is always a good 
idea; otherwise, you are operating from guesswork or, worse, ignorance. 
 Calculating Conditional Probabilities 
 Given the probability of B given A, what is the probability of A given B? Huh? Need 
an example? 
 Such questions can seem daunting, but the solution is to convert them to 
questions about proportions. 
EV 5 (.45 3 5) 2 (.55 3 5)
EV 5 2.25 2 2.75
EV 5 2 .5
At your school of 1,000, the probability of being a male given you are a math 
major is .76. What is the probability of being a math major given you are a male?
At your school of 1,000, 76 percent of the math majors are males. What 
proportion of males are math majors?

 
CAUSATION IN THE LAW
371
 You already know what proportion of math majors are males. If you know 
what proportion of the non-math majors are males, and you know how many 
math majors there are, you know what proportion of the males are math majors. 
 For example, let’s say that at your school of 1,000 there are 50 math majors, 
76 percent of whom are males; and let’s say 50 percent of the non-math majors 
are males. Then you calculate as follows: 
 Knowing how to convert probabilities to proportions can be useful for calculat-
ing probabilities in medical tests, an ability that can be very important. For example: 
 You might think it is high. However, let’s say that out of every 1,000 males, 
only 10 have prostate cancer, and let’s say that 20 percent of men who don’t have 
prostate cancer have elevated PSA levels. Then you reason as follows: 
 The key to calculating the probability of B given A if you know the probabil-
ity of A given B is to convert the problem to proportions, and obtain information 
about the false positives (the proportion of not-As that are B), and the number of 
As there are in every 1,000 people. If you try to answer the question without these 
last two pieces of information, you commit the fallacy of overlooking false posi-
tives or overlooking prior probabilities, fallacies explained in Chapter 8. 
 CAUSATION IN THE LAW 
  In concluding this chapter, we direct your attention to an arena in which a great deal 
of money and sometimes even human life depend on establishing causation. In 
the law, causation is the connection between action and harm. Only if your action 
causes harm (or contributes to its cause) can you be said to be responsible for it. In 
civil law, it is a necessary condition of tort liability *  that a person’s action caused the 
harm in question. It is also a necessary condition for some, but not all, kinds of crimi-
nal liability. (Not all crimes involve harm—attempted crimes, for example.) It may 
seem simple to say that X caused Y, but as we will see, there are complications. 
 The broadest sense of the word “cause” is that of a  conditio sine qua non
(“a condition without which nothing”), mentioned earlier. Such causes are often 
called   but for causes ,  a cause but for which the harm in question would not have 
76 percent of the math majors are  males 5 38
50 percent of the non-math majors are  males 5 475
Therefore, of the 513 males at the school, 38 are math  majors 5 7.4 percent
Ninety-nine percent of men who have prostate cancer have elevated levels 
of PSA. What is the probability that your uncle has prostate cancer given that 
he has an elevated PSA level?
Ninety-nine percent of the men who have prostate cancer have 
elevated  PSA levels 5 10
Twenty percent of the men who don’t have prostate cancer have 
elevated  PSA levels 5 198
Therefore, of the 208 men (out of every thousand) who have elevated PSA 
levels, 10 have prostate cancer 5 4.8 percent
Almost no one in Las Vegas 
believes the gambler’s fallacy is 
in fact a fallacy.
—From an anonymous 
reviewer of this book
How does he or she know this?
 *The legal obligation of one person to a victim as the result of a civil wrong or injury. 

372 
CHAPTER 11: INDUCTIVE REASONING
happened. It would be wrong to punish a person for causing a harm by doing some-
thing when the harm would have happened even if the thing had not been done. 
 Of course a cause in this sense has antecedents  but for which it would not 
have happened either. But for a physician having written a prescription in 1925, 
the father of Lee Harvey Oswald, the man who shot John Kennedy in Dallas, 
Texas, in 1963, would not have gone into the drugstore where he met Lee Harvey 
Oswald’s mother, and Lee Harvey Oswald would not have been born. 
 Clearly we don’t want to trace causes back this far in order to assign liability 
for a harm. In order to identify a  legal cause  (or a “proximate cause,” as it is some-
times known), restrictions are placed on the notion of cause  sine qua non.  A legal 
cause is generally said to be a combination of fact and decision or fact and policy. 
That is because deciding what is “important” or “significant” requires a decision of 
some sort or a policy that indicates what is important. In a famous essay on the sub-
ject, **  H. L. A. Hart and A. M. Honoré try to show that common sense can guide the 
necessary decisions. They argue that in order to hold a person legally responsible 
for a harm, we must be able to trace the harm caused back to that person’s action. 
If Smith throws a lighted cigarette into roadside brush, and the brush catches fire, 
and eventually much of San Diego County burns up, we do not excuse Smith when 
he claims that the breeze caused the fire to spread, because breezes are a “com-
mon recurrent feature,” a part of the causal background, like oxygen in the air. Such 
features are not seen as intervening forces that mitigate Smith’s responsibility. 
 But if Jones comes along and pours gasoline on the fire, which might have 
gone out otherwise, we say that Jones caused the destruction. That is because his 
intervention is voluntary and contravenes Smith’s causal role. 
 Sometimes coincidence intervenes: Moore punches Merton, who falls to 
the ground. At that moment, a tree falls over in the wind and strikes Merton, kill-
ing him. Because the tree’s falling is a pure coincidence, not foreseen by Moore, 
we cannot hold him responsible for Merton’s death. We can say he caused Mer-
ton’s bruises, but not his death. The idea here is that we do not hold a person 
responsible when coincidence intervenes in this way. 
 Obviously there is more to say about this subject, but a least you have seen 
some of the directions the discussion on causation in the law takes. 
 ■  An argument from an analogy is an argument that something has an attribute 
because a similar thing has that attribute. 
 ■  Thinking critically about arguments from analogy involves the principles 
stated on page 333. 
 ■  The time-honored strategy for rebutting an argument from analogy is to 
“attack the analogy” by calling attention to important dissimilarities between 
the premise-analogue and the conclusion-analogue. 
 ■  Arguments from analogy are especially important in ethics, history, and the 
law, and in rebutting other arguments. 
 ■  Generalizing from a sample happens when you reason that all, most, or some 
percentage of the members of a population have an attribute because all, 
most, or some percentage of a sample of the population have that attribute. 
 ■  Thinking critically about generalizations from samples involves the prin-
ciples stated on pages 340–341. 
 Recap 
**H. L. A. Hart and A. M. Honoré, Causation and the Law (London: Oxford University Press, 1959), esp. 59–78.

 
EXERCISES 
373
 Exercise 11-33 
 Fill in the blanks:
  1. The probability of an outcome is the result of dividing the number of _____ by 
the number of _____.
 2. Two events are said to be independent when  _____ . 
 3. The probability of two independent events occurring jointly is found by  _____ . 
  4. The probability of two independent events occurring alternatively is found 
by  _____ . 
 5. EV, or expectation value, is the result of  _____ combined with  _____ . 
 6. If we know the probability of event B given A, the probability of A given B is 
called  _____ . 
  7. A person commits the gambler’s fallacy when he or she  _____ . 
 Exercise 11-34 
 Answer as indicated.
  1. You draw a card from a fifty-two-card deck. You then draw a second card 
from the remaining deck. Are your two draws independent events? 
▲
▲
▲
▲
 Additional 
Exercises 
 ■  Scientific generalizing from samples differs from the everyday variety in that 
everyday samples are not scientifically selected to eliminate bias, and prob-
abilities in everyday generalizations cannot be calculated precisely. 
 ■  Statistical syllogisms have this form: Most Xs are Ys; this is an X; therefore this 
is a Y. 
 ■ The strength of a statistical syllogism is distinct from the probability of its 
conclusion everything considered. 
 ■  Arguments and causal statements often use the same vocabulary. 
 ■  Causal statements can be conclusions or premises in arguments, but not 
entire arguments. 
 ■  A causal hypothesis is a tentative causal statement offered for further investi-
gation or testing. 
 ■  Three principles are useful in arriving at causal hypotheses: the paired unusual 
events principle, the common variable principle, and the covariation principle.  
 ■  Confirmation of a causal hypothesis often is an attempt to show that the 
suspected cause is the condition but for which the phenomenon of interest 
would not have happened. 
 ■  Three forms of reasoning are useful in confirming causal hypotheses: ran-
domized controlled experiments, prospective observational studies, and ret-
rospective observational studies. 
 ■  Useful probability calculations include the joint occurrence of independent 
events, the occurrence of mutually exclusive events, conditional probabilities, 
and expectation value. 
 ■  The legal cause of an effect often requires a judgment regarding what causal 
agent is most relevant. 

374 
CHAPTER 11: INDUCTIVE REASONING
 2. What is the likelihood of flipping a coin four times and getting tails each time?  
 3. If you have flipped a coin three times and gotten tails each time, what is the 
likelihood of the next flip being tails? 
 4. In a game of “paper, scissors, rock,” what is the likelihood of both players 
coming up with paper? 
 5. At a local high school, there are 300 first-year students, 280 sophomores, 220 
juniors, and 200 seniors. What is the probability that a randomly chosen stu-
dent will be a senior? 
 6. In the previous question, what is the proportional frequency of seniors? 
 7. Chandra figures the chances of her next assignment being in Hawaii is about 
30 percent. She figures she also has a 10 percent chance of being assigned 
next to Europe. If she’s right, what are the chances she’ll be assigned to 
either one or the other of these places? 
 8. Harriet is pretty sure that, for her birthday, her boyfriend is going to get her 
either a pearl necklace or a new coat. She thinks the pearls have a 
30 percent chance and the coat has a 20 percent chance. According to her 
figures, what is the probability that she’s right about getting one or the other? 
 9. A jar contains 100 balls, and 20 of them are red. What is the probability of 
picking 2 red balls, provided we put the first one back before the second pick?  
 10. You draw one card from a fifty-two-card deck. What is the probability that it 
will be an ace? 
 11. You draw one card from a fifty-two-card deck. What is the probability that it 
will be a face card (jack, queen, or king)? 
 12. You have two fifty-two-card decks, and you draw one card from each deck. 
What is the probability that both of your cards will be queens? 
   13. You are playing a game as you go down the highway. You know that 40 percent 
of the cars in your state are of Japanese makes. What are the odds that the next 
two cars you see on the road are Japanese?  
 14. There are three cups in front of you. There is a bean under one of them. You 
are betting $5 that you can guess which cup has the bean. How much must 
the other side put up in order for it to be a totally fair bet? 
 15. You are betting that you can flip a coin and get heads two times in a row. You 
are willing to put up $10. How much must your other player put up for it to 
be a totally fair bet? 
 16. There are 5,000 students at your campus. If you are an athlete, the probabil-
ity that you are male is .65. What else do you need to know to calculate the 
probability that someone is an athlete given that he is a male? 
 17. Let’s say that among the street population in San Francisco’s Tenderloin 
District, 100% of heroin users smoke pot.  What percent of pot smokers use 
heroin?  [Also assume that 1% of this population use heroin, and assume 
that 90% of those who don’t use heroin smoke pot.] 
 Exercise 11-35 
 There is no single event, activity, decision, law, judgment, in this period of 
time that I call the “three strikes” era—other than “three strikes”—that could 
explain the tremendous acceleration in the drop in crime. 
 — Dan Lungren, former California attorney general, who helped draft 
California’s Three Strikes law 
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲

 
EXERCISES 
375
 Under this law, conviction for a third felony carried with it a mandatory sentence 
of twenty-five years to life. Although the crime rate in California had been falling 
before the law took effect in 1994, it reportedly fell even faster after the law was 
enacted, and California’s crime rate dropped to levels not seen since the 1960s. 
 Provide two reasonable alternative hypotheses to explain the acceleration 
of the drop in the crime rate in California. What data would you need to be con-
vinced that Lungren’s hypothesis is the best? 
 Exercise 11-36 
 Suppose a university teacher wants to know whether or not requiring attendance 
improves student learning. How could she find out? In groups (or individually if 
the instructor prefers), describe an experiment that an instructor might actually 
use. Groups may then compare proposals to see who has the best idea. 
 Exercise 11-37 
 For each of the following passages:
 a. Identify a causal hypothesis that might be raised by the passage. 
 b. Identify whether the passage reports on a randomized controlled experiment, 
a prospective observational study, or a retrospective observational study.  
 c. Identify the comparison groups. 
 d. State the difference in “effect” or “cause” between the comparison groups. 
 e. Identify any problems in the investigation or the report of it, including 
uncontrolled confounding variables. 
 f. State the conclusion you think is warranted by the report.
 1. Michael Slepian of Tufts University and several colleagues conducted a study 
of professional poker players’ actions during the play of their hands, looking for 
signs that indicated whether or not the players had strong hands.  The research-
ers used college students (who were not poker experts) as judges of the players’ 
confidence in their cards, randomly dividing 78 students into three groups:  One 
group looked at 20 two-second clips of players’ arms and hands as they placed 
their bets, a second group saw the same number of clips of just the players’ 
upper bodies during that same action, and the third group saw only the players’ 
faces.  All clips were edited from the televised 2009 World Series of Poker.  
   
Each student participant judged each poker hand on a scale of 1 (very bad) 
to 7 (very good), based on what they could tell from the player’s face, upper 
body, or arms/hands during the couple of seconds when the player moved 
his chips.  Participants who saw only the arm/hand movements of the play-
ers scored best at estimating the actual strength of their poker hands, scoring 
significantly better than chance.  Those who looked at players’ upper bodies 
scored approximately the same as chance, and those who saw only players’ 
faces scored a bit worse than chance.  (This last result is probably due to the 
players’ ability to send deceptive signals with their faces.)  The students’ ratings 
were compared to the statistical likelihood of each player’s winning, a percent-
age calculated by the tournament and displayed to the television audience, 
although it was hidden from the study participants.
   
A second study replicated the findings of the superior accuracy of estimating 
strength of poker hands from seeing only the arms and hands of poker players.
—adapted from Science News
▲

376 
CHAPTER 11: INDUCTIVE REASONING
 2. Learning music can help children do better at math. Gordon Shaw of the Uni-
versity of California, Irvine, and Frances Rauscher at the University of Wiscon-
sin compared three groups of second graders: 26 received piano instruction 
plus practice with a math videogame, 29 received extra English lessons plus the 
game, and 28 got no special lessons. After four months, the piano kids scored 15 
to 41 percent higher on a test of ratios and fractions than the other participants.   
 — adapted from Sharon Begley, Newsweek 
 3. The Carolina Abecedarian Project [A-B-C-D, get it?] selected participants from 
families thought to be at risk for producing mildly retarded children. These 
families were all on welfare, and most were headed by a single mother who had 
scored well below average on a standardized IQ test (obtaining IQs of 70 to 85). 
The project began when the participating children were 6 to 12 weeks old and 
continued for the next 5 years. Half of the participants were randomly assigned 
to take part in a special day-care program designed to promote intellectual 
development. The program ran from 7:15 to 5:15 for 5 days a week for 50 weeks 
each year until the child entered school. The other children received the same 
dietary supplements, social services, and pediatric care but did not attend day 
care. Over the next 21 years, the two groups were given IQ tests and tests of 
academic achievement. The day-care program participants began to outper-
form their counterparts on IQ tests starting at 18 months and maintained this 
IQ advantage through age 21. They also outperformed the others in all areas of 
academic achievement from the third year of school onward.   
 — adapted from Developmental Psychology,  6th ed., David R. Schaffer 
 4. Research at the University of Pennsylvania and the Children’s Hospital of 
Philadelphia indicates that children who sleep in a dimly lighted room until 
age two may be up to five times more likely to develop myopia (nearsighted-
ness) when they grow up. 
   
 The researchers asked the parents of children who had been patients at 
the researchers’ eye clinic to recall the lighting conditions in the children’s 
bedroom from birth to age two. 
   
 Of a total of 172 children who slept in darkness, 10 percent were near-
sighted. Of a total of 232 who slept with a night light, 34 percent were near-
sighted. Of a total of 75 who slept with a lamp on, 55 percent were nearsighted. 
   
 The lead ophthalmologist, Dr. Graham E. Quinn, said that “just as the 
body needs to rest, this suggests that the eyes need a period of darkness.” 
 — adapted from an AP report by Joseph B. Verrengia 
 5. You want to find out if the coffee grounds that remain suspended as sediment 
in French press, espresso, and Turkish and Greek coffee can cause headaches. 
   
 You randomly divide fifty volunteers into two groups and feed both groups 
a pudding at the same time every day. However, one group mixes eight grams 
of finely pulverized used coffee grounds into the pudding before eating it 
(that’s equivalent to the sediment in about one and a half liters of Turkish cof-
fee). Within three weeks, you find that 50 percent of the group that has eaten 
grounds have had headaches; only 27 percent of the other group have experi-
enced a headache. You conclude that coffee grounds may indeed cause head-
aches and try to get a grant for further studies. (This is a fictitious experiment.)  
 6. Do you enjoy spicy Indian and Asian curries? That bright yellow-orange 
color is due to curcumin, an ingredient in the spice turmeric. An experiment 
▲

 
EXERCISES 
377
conducted by Bandaru S. Reddy of the American Health Foundation in Val-
halla, New York, and reported in  Cancer Research suggests that curcumin 
might suppress the development of colon cancer. 
   
 Places where turmeric is widely used have a low incidence of colon cancer, 
so the research team decided to investigate. They administered a powerful 
colon carcinogen to sixty-six rats and then added curcumin at the rate of 2,000 
parts per million to the diet of thirty of them. At the end of a year, 81 percent 
of the rats eating regular rat food had developed cancerous tumors, compared 
with only 47 percent of those that dined on the curcumin-enhanced diet. In 
addition, 38 percent of the tumors in rats eating regular food were invasive, 
and that was almost twice the rate in rodents eating curcumin-treated chow.   
 — adapted from Science News 
 7. Does jogging keep you healthy? Two independent researchers interested 
in whether exercise prevents colds interviewed twenty volunteers about 
the frequency with which they caught colds. The volunteers, none of whom 
exercised regularly, were then divided into two groups of ten, and one group 
participated in a six-month regimen of jogging three miles every other day. 
At the end of the six months, the frequency of colds among the joggers was 
compared both with that of the nonjoggers and with that of the joggers prior 
to the experiment. It was found that, compared with the nonjoggers, the jog-
gers had 25 percent fewer colds. The record of colds among the joggers also 
declined in comparison with their own record prior to the exercise program. 
 8. In one fifty-seven-month study, whose participants were all male physicians, 
104 of those who took aspirin had heart attacks, as compared with 189 heart 
attacks in those who took only a sugar pill. This means ordinary aspirin reduced 
the heart attack risk for healthy men by 47 percent. At least seven long-term 
studies of more than 11,000 heart attack victims have shown that one-half or 
one aspirin per day can reduce the risk of a second attack by up to 20 percent.   
 — adapted from the Los Angeles Times 
 9. Although cigarette ads sometimes suggest that smoking is macho, new stud-
ies indicate that smoking can increase the risk of impotence. In a study of 
116 men with impotence caused by vascular problems, done at the Univer-
sity of Pretoria, South Africa, 108 were smokers. Two independent studies, 
one done by the Centre d’Etudes et de Recherches di l’Impuissance in Paris, 
and reported in the British medical journal  Lancet, and the other done by 
Queen’s University and Kingston General Hospital in Ontario, found that 
almost two-thirds of impotent men smoked. 
   
 To test whether smoking has an immediate effect on sexual response, a 
group of researchers from Southern Illinois and Florida State universities fit-
ted 42 male smokers with a device that measures the speed of arousal. The 
men were divided into three groups, one group given high-nicotine ciga-
rettes, one group cigarettes low in nicotine, and one group mints. After smok-
ing one cigarette or eating a mint, each man was placed in a private room and 
shown a two-minute erotic film while his sexual response was monitored. 
Then he waited ten minutes, smoked two more cigarettes or ate another 
mint, and watched a different erotic film, again being monitored. 
   
 The results: Men who smoked high-nicotine cigarettes had slower 
arousal than those who smoked low-nicotine cigarettes or ate mints. 
 — adapted from Reader’s Digest 
▲

378 
CHAPTER 11: INDUCTIVE REASONING
 10. “A study published in the July 27  Journal of the American Medical Association 
indicates that taking androgen (a male sex hormone) in high doses for four 
weeks can have important effects on the high density lipoproteins (HDLs) in 
the blood, which are believed to protect against the clogging of vessels that 
supply the heart. Ben F. Hurley, an exercise physiologist from the University 
of Maryland in College Park who conducted the study at Washington Uni-
versity, monitored the levels of HDL in the blood of sixteen healthy, well-
conditioned men in their early thirties who were taking androgens as part 
of their training program with heavy weights. Prior to use of the hormone, 
all had normal levels of HDLs. After four weeks of self-prescribed and self-
administered use of these steroids the levels dropped by about 60 percent. 
   
 “Hurley is cautious in interpreting the data. ‘You can’t say that low HDL 
levels mean that a specified person is going to have a heart attack at an ear-
lier age. All you can say is that it increases their risk for heart disease.’” 
 — D. Franklin, Science News 
 11. “New studies reported in the  Journal of the American Medical Association 
indicate that vasectomy is safe. A group headed by Frank Massey of UCLA 
paired 10,500 vasectomized men with a like number of men who had not 
had the operation. The average follow-up time was 7.9 years, and 2,300 pairs 
were followed for more than a decade. The researchers reported that, aside 
from inflammation in the testes, the incidence of diseases for vasectomized 
men was similar to that in their paired controls. 
   
 “A second study done under federal sponsorship at the Battelle Human 
Affairs Research Centers in Seattle compared heart disease in 1,400 vasecto-
mized men and 3,600 men who had not had the operation. Over an average 
follow-up time of fifteen years, the incidence of heart diseases was the same 
among men in both groups.” 
 — Edward Edelson, New York Daily News;  reprinted in Reader’s Digest 
 12. “A new study shows that the incidence of cancer tumors in rats exposed to 
high doses of X-rays dropped dramatically when the food intake of the rats 
was cut by more than half. Dr. Ludwik Gross of the Veterans Administration 
Medical Center noted that this study is the first to demonstrate that 
radiation-induced tumors can be prevented by restricting diet. 
   
 “The experimenters exposed a strain of laboratory rats to a dose of 
X-rays that produced tumors in 100 percent of the rats allowed to eat their 
fill—about five or six pellets of rat food a day. 
   
 “When the same dose of X-rays was given to rats limited to two pellets of 
food a day, only nine of 29 females and one of 15 males developed tumors, 
the researchers reported. 
   
 “The weight of the rats on the reduced diet fell by about one-half, but 
they remained healthy and outlived their counterparts who died of cancer, 
Gross said. He noted that the restricted diet also reduced the occurrence of 
benign tumors. There is no evidence that restriction of food intake will slow 
the growth of tumors that have already formed in animals, he said.” 
 — Paul Raeburn, Sacramento Bee 
 13. Investigations conducted by researchers at the University of Washington in 
Seattle suggest that cheating may create more positive feelings than guilty 
ones. In one experiment, 179 participants were asked to unscramble as 
▲
▲

 
EXERCISES 
379
many of 15 words as possible in four minutes and told they would be given 
$1 for every correct word. Unknown to the subjects, their responses were 
recorded.  When they were asked to check their own work in private before 
submitting it, 71 participants cheated by adding additional correct words 
to their answer sheets.  Afterwards, cheaters reported on average a greater 
increase in excitement and positive feelings than non-cheaters did.
—Adapted from Science News
 14. “A study released last week indicated that Type A individuals, who are char-
acteristically impatient, competitive, insecure and short-tempered, can 
halve their chances of having a heart attack by changing their behavior with 
the help of psychological counseling. 
   
 “In 1978, scientists at Mt. Zion Hospital and Medical Center in San Fran-
cisco and Stanford University School of Education began their study of 862 
predominantly male heart attack victims. Of this number, 592 received group 
counseling to ease their Type A behavior and improve their self-esteem. After 
three years, only 7 percent had another heart attack, compared with 13 percent 
of a matched group of 270 subjects who received only cardiological advice. 
Among 328 men who continued with the counseling for the full three years, 
79 percent reduced their Type A behavior. About half of the comparison group 
was similarly able to slow down and cope better with stress. 
   
 “This is the first evidence ‘that a modification program aimed at Type A 
behavior actually helps to reduce coronary disease,’ says Redford Williams of 
Duke University, an investigator of Type A behavior.” 
 —Science News 
 Exercise 11-38 
 Researchers from Tenon Hospital in Paris reported to the American Urological 
Association that dogs can be trained to detect the odor of chemicals released into 
urine by prostate cancer. The researchers first trained a Belgian Malinois to iden-
tify urine samples from patients with prostate cancer and to differentiate them 
from urine samples from healthy subjects. They then determined whether the 
dog could select a urine sample from a prostate cancer victim when four urine 
samples from healthy people were present. The dog was correct in 63 out of 66 
tests—more accurate than the PSA test now used to detect prostate cancer. The 
researchers currently are training other dogs.*
 1. Do you think the dog’s success rate was coincidental? Why or why not? 
 2. Do you see any weakness in the experiment? 
 3. If you were testing the ability of this dog to detect urine from victims of pros-
tate cancer, would you do anything differently? 
 Exercise 11-39 
 Let’s say you randomly divide 700 men in the early stages of prostate cancer into 
two groups. The men in one group have their prostates removed surgically; those 
in the other group are simply watched to let the disease take its course. Research-
ers did this to 700 Scandinavian men and reported the results in the  New England 
Journal of Medicine  in fall 2002. As it turns out, 16 of those who underwent surgery 
http://phys.org/news194726672.html

380 
CHAPTER 11: INDUCTIVE REASONING
died from prostate cancer, as compared with 31 of those who did not undergo 
surgery. On the face of it, these figures suggest your chances of not dying from 
prostate cancer are better if you have surgery. But put on your thinking caps and 
answer the following questions.
 1. Suppose that, despite these findings, there was no statistically significant dif-
ference in how long the men in each group lived. What would that suggest? 
 2. The follow-up comparison lasted six years. Suppose that, after ten years, the 
death rates from prostate cancer were the same for the two groups. What 
would that suggest? 
 3. Suppose Scandinavian men are not screened for prostate cancer as aggres-
sively as American men and tend to be older when they get the first diagno-
sis. What would that suggest? 
 4. Suppose Scandinavian men are screened more aggressively for prostate can-
cer than American men and tend to be younger when they get the first diag-
nosis. What would that suggest? 
 Here, as elsewhere, you need to know the whole picture to make a judgment. 
How old were the men to begin with? If they were relatively young men, how long 
did the study last? Was there a difference in how long the men in the two groups 
lived? (Note that prostate removal has risks and sometimes produces important 
negative side effects.) 
 Writing Exercises 
  1. Select one of the following general claims and explain how you might find 
out if it is true. Begin by making the generalization more precise by clearly 
specifying the population and attribute in question and how you might 
select a sample from the population. Alternatively, if you think you already 
have evidence the claim is true, produce an argument that supports it.
 
a. Politicians can’t be trusted. 
 
b. Government intrudes in our private lives/business affairs too much. 
 
c. Many welfare recipients take advantage of the system. 
 
d. Anyone who really wants a job can find one. 
 
e. University professors are liberals. 
 
f.  The media are biased. 
   
When everyone is finished, the instructor will redistribute all papers to other 
members of the class. In groups of four or five, read the papers and select the best 
one to share with everyone in the class. Be prepared to explain why it is the best.  
  2. In a study reported by Gene Koretz in  BusinessWeek (December 9, 2002). 
nine- and ten-year old boys and girls ran a short race. There was no signifi-
cant difference in the average speeds of the children when they ran solo, but 
when they ran the race again, paired with another child, the boys’ speeds, 
but not the girls’, increased. The boys’ speeds increased most when they 
were paired on the second trial with a girl. In a brief essay offer a hypothesis 
to explain this result, and describe how your hypothesis might be (partially) 
confirmed or disconfirmed. 
   
When everyone is finished, the instructor will redistribute all papers 
to other members of the class. In groups of four or five, read the papers 
and select the best one to share with everyone in the class. Be prepared to 
explain why it is the best. 

 12 
381
 L
 et’s imagine that you and an acquaintance have the same 
insurance agent, and you discover that the acquaintance, 
who lost his job during a recent recession, is involved in 
an insurance-fraud scam. He is trying to defraud the company 
out of tens of thousands of dollars. When you visit the agent to 
check up on your own policy, should you say anything about 
what your friend is doing? 
 From time to time, we all face tough moral decisions. 
A mother must decide whether her daughter’s softball game 
has a higher priority than her professional responsibility. 
“Dear Abby” tries to answer a young woman with a service-
man fiancé serving abroad who has fallen in love with some-
one new. A governor must decide whether to send a convicted 
criminal to death row on circumstantial evidence. A president 
faces the decision of whether to take a nation to war. 
 When people think abstractly, sometimes they believe 
that moral issues are subjective. You hear them say such things 
as “When it comes to what you should do, the right thing is 
what seems right to you. End of story.” However, we asked a 
class how many thought “Dear Abby” should have told her 
young correspondent, “Hey, do whatever you feel like”—not 
 Students will learn to . . . 
 1. Explain the role of value judgment in 
moral reasoning 
 2. Name and explain the major perspec-
tives in moral reasoning in Western 
thought 
 3. Explain the elements of moral 
deliberation 
 4. Explain the principles that underlie 
legal reasoning and argument 
 5. Explain the principles involved in 
aesthetic reasoning and judgment 
 Moral, Legal, and Aesthetic 
Reasoning  

382 
CHAPTER 12: MORAL, LEGAL, AND AESTHETIC REASONING
a single hand was raised. When people hear about a real moral 
dilemma, not to mention confront one for themselves, they usu-
ally  don’t  think it’s merely a matter of personal opinion. They 
discuss the issue with others, seek advice, consider options, and 
weigh consequences. When they do this, they find that some 
considerations and arguments carry more weight and are better 
than others. (You may remember our brief treatment of this topic 
in Chapter 1). 
 In the first part of this chapter, we look at what actually is 
involved in moral reasoning and deliberation. Then we will do the 
same for aspects of legal reasoning and for aesthetic reasoning. 
 VALUE JUDGMENTS  
 Let’s begin by fine-tuning what we mean when we talk about 
moral reasoning. Recently, our colleague Becky White debated 
what to do about a student who had copied parts of someone else’s term paper 
and was silly enough to think Professor White wouldn’t notice. Many things could 
be said about the student; what Professor White said was, “He deserves an F.” And 
that’s what she gave him—for the entire course. 
 Professor White’s statement is what people call a “value judgment.”  * A 
value judgment  assesses the merit, desirability, or praiseworthiness of someone 
or something. When our colleague said the student deserved an F, she wasn’t 
describing him; she was  judging  him. She thought he had done something  wrong. 
 Moral reasoning differs from other kinds of reasoning in that it consists 
mainly of trying to establish moral value judgments. Because moral reasoning is 
all about moral value judgments, you need to be able to identify one when you 
run into it. 
 A difficulty is that not every value judgment expresses a  moral  value judg-
ment. When you say a movie is pretty good, you are judging the movie, but not 
its morality. When you say Pepsi is better than Coke, you are making a taste value 
judgment, not a moral value judgment. 
 To help solidify your grasp of the important concept of a moral value judg-
ment, the claims in the left column are all moral value judgments; those in the 
right are value judgments, but not of the moral variety. Exercises on moral rea-
soning are at the end of the section titled “Moral Deliberation” in this chapter.
*Value judgments are also known as “normative” or “prescriptive” statements. We’ll stick with “value judgments” 
because the term is largely self-explanatory and we want to avoid terminological clutter.
 ■ The “Dear Abby” 
column is now written 
by Jeanne Phillips, 
the original Abby’s 
daughter. The column 
often employs moral 
reasoning, which 
is discussed in this 
chapter. 
Moral Value Judgments
Nonmoral Value Judgments
1.  It was wrong for the senator to 
withhold information.
2.  The senator ought not to claim 
residence in one district when 
he actually lives in another.
3. Abortion is immoral.
4.  Children should be taught to 
respect their elders.
5.  I don’t deserve to be flunked for 
an honest mistake.
1. The senator dresses well.
2.  Avatar has some of the best 
special effects of any movie 
ever made.
3.  As an actor, Paris Hilton is a 
nice clothes rack.
4.  Frank Zappa was a so-so 
guitarist.
5. Jessie J rocks.

 
VALUE JUDGMENTS
383
Typically, moral value judgments employ such words as “good,” “bad,” “right,” 
“wrong,” “ought,” “should,” “proper,” and “justified,” “fair,” and so forth, and their 
opposites. But you need to bear in mind that, although these words often signal a 
moral evaluation, they do not always do so. Telling someone she should keep her 
promise is making a moral value judgment; telling her she should keep her knees 
bent when skiing is assigning a positive value to keeping bent knees, but not a 
moral value. 
 It’s also worth noticing that implicit value judgments can be made inside 
claims that are not themselves value judgments. For example, “David Axelrod, a 
good man, engineered President Obama’s reelection” is not a value judgment, but 
the part about Axelrod being a good man is. 
 Moral versus Nonmoral 
 A source of confusion in discussions that involve moral reasoning is the word 
“moral.” The word has two separate and distinct meanings. First, “moral” may 
be used as the opposite of “nonmoral.” This is the sense in which we have been 
using the term. The claim “Chris Christie weighs more than 200 pounds” is a 
nonmoral claim, meaning it has nothing to do with morality. “Chris Christie is 
an evil man,” by contrast, has a lot to do with morality: It is a moral value judg-
ment, a claim that expresses a moral value. The same is true of the claim, “Chris 
Christie is a good man.” 
 The second meaning of “moral” is the opposite not of “nonmoral” but of 
“immoral.” Kicking a cat for the heck of it would be immoral; taking care of it 
would be moral. In this sense of the word, “moral” is used to mean “good,” “right,” 
“proper,” and so forth. 
 To avoid confusion, when we use the word “moral” in this chapter, we always 
mean moral as opposed to nonmoral; that is, as having to do with morality. Thus, 
the statements “It was wrong to kick the cat” and “It wasn’t wrong to kick the cat” 
are both moral judgments. 
 Two Principles of Moral Reasoning 
 Suppose Moore announces on the first day of class that the final exam will be 
optional. “Except,” he says, pointing at some person at random, “for the young 
woman there in the third row. For you,” he says, “the final is mandatory.” 
 The problem here is that this student is no different from everyone else, yet 
Moore is treating her differently. And this brings us to the first principle of moral 
reasoning. 
 For convenience, let’s call this the  consistency principle. If Moore gives two 
students the same grade despite the fact that one student did much better than 
the other, Moore has violated the principle. 
 It is important to see that this is a principle of  moral reasoning,  not a moral 
principle. It’s not like saying, “You should be kind to animals.” It’s like saying, “If 
all Xs are Ys, then if this thing is an X, then it is a Y”—“If all students are entitled to 
Moral Reasoning Principle 1
If separate cases aren’t different in any relevant way, then they should be treated the 
same way, and if separate cases are treated the same way, they should not be different 
in any relevant way.

384 
CHAPTER 12: MORAL, LEGAL, AND AESTHETIC REASONING
an optional final, then if the young woman in the third row is a student, then she 
is entitled to an optional final.” 
 The second principle of moral reasoning is procedural rather than logical: 
 For example, if Parker says, “Blue-eyed students can take tests with books 
open, but nobody else can,” he needs to show that he is not violating the consis-
tency principle. He must show that there is something about having blue eyes that 
should entitle such individuals to take their tests with their books open. 
 When do separate cases count as the same or different? Fortunately, prin-
ciple 2 enables us to sidestep having to answer this question in the abstract. If 
Harlan approved of the war in Afghanistan but opposed the war in Vietnam, and 
the cases seem to us not to differ in any relevant way, then, if Harlan cannot point 
to a difference that seems satisfactory to us, we are justified in regarding him as 
inconsistent. If Carol treats black customers and white customers differently and 
cannot identify for us some relevant difference between the two, then we are jus-
tified in regarding her as inconsistent. 
 Suppose, however, that Carol thinks that skin color itself is a difference between 
blacks and whites relevant to how people should be treated, and she charges us with 
failing to make relevant discriminations. Here, it would be easy for us to point out to 
Carol that skin color is an immutable characteristic of birth like height or eye color; 
does Carol adjust her civility to people depending on those characteristics? 
 It isn’t difficult to perceive the inconsistency on the part of a salesperson 
who is more polite to customers of one group; but other cases are far tougher, and 
many are such that reasonable people will disagree about their proper assess-
ment. Is a person inconsistent who approves of abortion but not capital pun-
ishment? Is a person inconsistent who, on the one hand, believes that the states 
should be free to reduce spending on welfare but, on the other, does not think that 
the states should be able to eliminate ceilings on punitive damages in tort cases? 
No harm is done in asking, “What’s the difference?” and because much headway 
can be made in a discussion by doing so, it seems wise to ask. 
 In Chapter 6, we talked about the argumentum  ad hominem,  a fallacy one ver-
sion of which we commit when we think we rebut the content of what someone says 
by pointing out inconsistency on his or her part. Now, let’s say Ramesh tells us it is 
wrong to hunt, and then we find out Ramesh likes to fish. And let’s say that, when 
we press Ramesh, he cannot think of any relevant moral difference between the two 
activities. Then he is being inconsistent. But that does not mean that it is right to 
hunt, nor does it mean that it is wrong to fish. An argumentum  ad hominem  occurs if 
we say something like “Ramesh, you are mistaken when you say it is wrong to hunt, 
because you yourself fish.” It is not an argumentum  ad hominem  to say, “Ramesh, you 
are being inconsistent. You must change your position on either hunting or fishing.” 
 Similarly, let’s suppose Professor Moore gives Howard an A and gives James 
a C but cannot think of any differences between their performance in his course. 
It would be committing an argumentum  ad hominem  if we said, “Moore, James 
does not deserve a C, because you gave Howard an A.” Likewise, it would be 
committing an argumentum   ad hominem  if we said, “Moore, Howard does not 
deserve an A, because you gave James a C.” But it is  not  illogical to say, “Moore, 
you are being inconsistent. You have misgraded one of these students.” 
Moral Reasoning Principle 2
If someone appears to be violating the consistency principle, then the burden of proof 
is on that person to show that he or she is in fact not violating the principle.

 
VALUE JUDGMENTS
385
 Moral Principles 
 Because separate moral cases, if similar, must be given similar treatment, a moral 
principle is a value judgment that is general in nature. That is, a moral principle 
refers to what should be done (or is right, proper, etc.) not just in a single case but 
in all similar cases. “Stealing is wrong” is a moral principle. “It is wrong to steal 
from Billy Bob” is just a true moral value judgment about a specific case. Likewise, 
“It is wrong for Billy Bob to steal” is a specific moral value judgment and not a 
moral principle. To qualify as a moral principle, a moral value judgment must be 
general in scope. Actually, this follows from the consistency principle. The largest 
part of everyday moral reasoning takes the form of deducing specific moral value 
judgments from general moral principles. We’ll look next at how this works. 
 Deriving Specific Moral Value Judgments 
 From the standpoint of logic, there is something puzzling about deriving a spe-
cific moral value judgment from a premise that is not a value judgment. For 
example, consider this argument: 
 We hear such arguments in everyday life and tend to think nothing of them; 
they certainly do not seem illogical. If facts and statistics are not grounds for mak-
ing moral decisions, what is? Nevertheless, logically, arguments like this—the 
basic kind of argument of moral reasoning—are puzzling, because the premise 
(“Elliott’s father depends on Elliott”) is not a value judgment, whereas the conclu-
sion (“Elliott should take care of him”) is. How, logically, can we get from the “is” 
premise to the “should” conclusion? How does the “should” get in there? 
 The answer is that the conclusion of this argument follows logically from the 
stated premise, only if a  general  moral principle is assumed. In this case, a prin-
ciple that would work is: Adult children should take care of parents who are 
dependent on them. Here is the argument with its conclusion: 
 The result is a valid deductive argument. Likewise, any chain of moral rea-
soning that starts from a claim about facts and ends up with a moral value judg-
ment assumes a general principle that ties the fact-stating “is” premise to the 
value-stating “should” conclusion. 
 So far, this is just a point about the logic of moral reasoning. But there is a 
practical point to be made here as well. It helps clarify matters to consider our 
general moral principles when we advance moral arguments. If we agree with 
the premise that Elliott’s father depends on Elliott but disagree with the conclu-
sion that Elliott should take care of his father, then our quarrel must be with the 
unstated general principle that adult children should take care of their parents 
who are dependent on them. For example, should an adult take care of parents 
even if it means sacrificing the welfare of his or her spouse? Considering the 
Elliott’s father depends on Elliott. Therefore, Elliott should take care of him.
Premise: Elliott’s father depends on Elliott.
[Unstated general moral principle: Adult children should take care of their parents 
who are dependent on them.]
Conclusion: Therefore, Elliott should take care of his father.

386 
CHAPTER 12: MORAL, LEGAL, AND AESTHETIC REASONING
assumed general moral principle that ties the fact-stating premise with the value-
judging conclusion can help clarify the issues involved in a moral decision. 
 For another example, you sometimes hear this said: 
 A general moral principle assumed here might be: Whatever is unnatural 
ought not to be done. Bringing that principle to light sets the stage for fruitful dis-
cussion. What counts as unnatural? Is it unnatural to fly? To wear clothing? To live 
to 100? To have sex beyond one’s reproductive years? And is it true that unnatural 
things never should be done? In the natural world, severely disabled offspring are 
left to fend for themselves; are we wrong to care for our own children who are 
severely disabled? Scratching oneself in public certainly qualifies as natural, but 
in our culture doing so is not considered proper. 
 Earlier, we mentioned our colleague Becky White, who failed a student for 
copying parts of another student’s paper. As it so happens, Professor White also 
considered whether to penalize the student who allowed his paper to be read by 
the student who ended up copying parts of it. Was it wrong for Charles (whose 
name we have changed) to show his work to a classmate who then copied parts 
of it? Thinking that it was wrong would require a general principle, and one that 
would work would be: It is wrong to show your work to classmates before they 
have turned in their own work. This principle would yield a deductively valid 
argument, and there is something to be said for the principle. For example, show-
ing your exam answers to the classmate sitting next to you is grounds for dismissal 
in many universities. At the same time, showing a term paper to a classmate to get 
constructive feedback is a good thing. Careful consideration of the earlier prin-
ciple might lead to the conclusion that, in fact, Charles did nothing wrong. 
 After a few exercises, we’ll have a look at the most general and fundamental 
moral principles assumed in most moral reasoning. 
Homosexuality is unnatural. Therefore, it ought not to be practiced.
 Deducing the Right Thing to Do 
 Nearly any kind of reasoning can appear in a discussion of moral matters. For example, we 
might need to reason inductively to support a claim about the effect of an action on the gen-
eral happiness. On the other hand, the claim “You should do X” is ordinarily the conclusion of 
deductive reasoning. Something like this would be typical:
That such arguments are frequently part of a discussion about what one should do is not 
surprising, for they reflect the consistency principle—that like cases be treated alike. This prin-
ciple is embedded in the general claim in the premises regarding Denzil. It groups together 
everybody who benefited from the program as similar cases. 
Everybody who benefited from the program should contribute to its continuance.
Denzil benefited from the program.
Therefore, Denzil should contribute to its continuance.

 
VALUE JUDGMENTS 
387
 Which of the following claims are value judgments?
 1. Lizards make fine pets. 
 2. You can get a clothes rack at True Value for less than $15. 
 3. Melissa gives the best haircuts in this town. 
 4. It was a great year for regional politics. 
 5. Key officials of the Department of Defense are producing their own unveri-
fied intelligence reports about an arms buildup. 
 6. Texas leads the nation in accidental deaths caused by police chases. 
 7. Napoleon Bonaparte was the greatest military leader of modern times. 
 8. Racial segregation is immoral anytime, anywhere. 
 9. The president deployed a “missile defense” that wasn’t adequately tested. 
 10. Air consists mainly of nitrogen and oxygen. 
▲
▲
▲
▲
 Exercise 12-1 
 Which of the following claims are value judgments?
 1. T-shirts made by Fruit of the Loom are soft and luxurious. 
 2. Kerry was nearly as detailed as Clinton in reports to the press. 
 3. The Pentagon was not nearly as supportive of a war as it should have been. 
  4. Tens of billions of dollars have been wasted on worthless public transporta-
tion schemes. 
 5. Atlanta is sultry in the summer. 
 6. Religious school teachers are stricter than their nonreligious counterparts. 
  7. Six Flags has the scariest rides in the state. 
 8. The TV host with the most forceful delivery? That would have to be Al 
Sharpton.  
 9. Brandon is not nearly as happy as his wife, Hunter. 
 10. Hunter is more selfish than she should be. 
▲
▲
▲
 Exercise 12-2 
 Which of the following are moral value judgments?
  1. Marina’s car puts out horrible smoke; for the sake of us all, she should get it 
tuned up. 
 2. After the surgery, Nicky’s eyesight improved considerably. 
 3. Ms. Beeson ought not to have embezzled money from the bank. 
  4. Violence is always wrong. 
 5. Ryder ought to wear that sweater more often; it looks great on him. 
 6. Jen, you are one of the laziest people I know! 
  7. My computer software is really good; it even corrects my grammar. 
 8. Elizabeth has been very good tonight, according to the babysitter. 
 9. Judge Ramesh is quite well-informed. 
 10. Judge Ramesh’s decision gave each party exactly what it deserved. 
▲
▲
▲
▲
 Exercise 12-3 

388 
CHAPTER 12: MORAL, LEGAL, AND AESTHETIC REASONING
 11. The editor couldn’t use my illustrations; she said they were boring. 
 12. Wow. That was a tasty meal! 
 13. The last set of essays was better than the first. 
 14. Do unto others as you would have them do unto you. 
 15. People who live in glass houses shouldn’t throw stones. 
 16. You really shouldn’t make so much noise when the people upstairs are try-
ing to sleep. 
 17. It is unfair the way Professor Smith asks questions no normal person can 
answer.  
 18. “Allegro” means fast, but not that fast! 
 19. Being in touch with God gives your life meaning and value. 
 20. Thou shalt not kill. 
 MAJOR PERSPECTIVES IN MORAL REASONING  
 Moral reasoning usually takes place within one or more frameworks or perspec-
tives. Here, we consider perspectives that have been especially influential in 
Western thought. 
 Consequentialism 
 The perspective known as  consequentialism  is the view that the  consequences of 
a decision, deed, or policy determine its moral value. If an action produces better 
consequences than the alternatives, then it is the better action, morally speaking. 
One of the most important versions of this view is  utilitarianism,  which says that, 
if an act will produce more happiness than will alternatives, it is the right thing to 
do, and if it will produce less happiness, it would be wrong to do it in place of an 
alternative that would produce more happiness. In short, act so as to produce the 
most happiness. 
 Many of us use a pro–con list of consequences as a guideline when consid-
ering what course of action to take. Your parents are divorced; should you spend 
Thanksgiving with your father’s side of the family or with your mother’s? Some-
one will be disappointed, but there may be more people disappointed on one 
side. Or the disappointment may be more deeply felt on one side. As a utilitarian, 
you calculate as best you can how your decision will affect the happiness of peo-
ple on both sides of the equation. Plus, you must factor in how  certain  the out-
comes of each alternative are with respect to happiness, assigning more weight 
to relatively more certain positive outcomes. Because you can generally be more 
certain of the effect of an act on your own happiness and on the happiness of oth-
ers you know well, it is often morally proper to favor the act that best promotes 
your own or their happiness. Of course, you must not use this as an excuse to 
be entirely self-serving: Your own happiness isn’t more important morally than 
another’s. The best course of action morally is not always the one that best pro-
motes your own happiness. 
 In sum, utilitarians weigh the consequences of the alternatives, pro and con, 
and then choose the alternative that maximizes happiness. One of the original 
and most profound intellects behind utilitarianism, Jeremy Bentham (1748–1832), 
even went so far as to devise a  hedonistic calculus —a method of assigning actual 

 
MAJOR PERSPECTIVES IN MORAL REASONING 
389
numerical values to pleasures and pains based on their intensity, certainty, dura-
tion, and so forth. Other utilitarians think that some pleasures are of a higher 
quality (e.g., reading Shakespeare is of a higher quality than watching  Survivor! ). 
Although there are other important unresolved issues in utilitarianism, the basic 
idea involves weighing the consequences of possible actions in terms of happi-
ness. Utilitarianism has considerable popular appeal, and real-life moral reason-
ing is often utilitarian. 
 Nevertheless, some aspects of the theory are problematic. Typically, when 
we deliberate whether or not to do something, we don’t always take into con-
sideration only the effect of the action on happiness. For example, other people 
have  rights  that we sometimes take into account. We would not make someone 
in our family a slave, even if the happiness produced for the family by doing 
so outweighed the unhappiness it created for the slave. We also consider our 
 duties and  obligations. We think it is our duty to return a loan to someone, even 
if we are still short of cash and the other person doesn’t need the money and 
doesn’t even remember having loaned it to us. If we make a date and then want 
to break it because we’ve met the love of our life, we think twice about standing 
up our original date, even if we believe that our overall happiness will far out-
weigh the temporary unhappiness of our date. To many, the moral obligation 
of a promise cannot be ignored for the sake of the overall happiness that might 
result from breaking it. 
 In estimating the moral worth of what people do, utilitarianism also seems to 
discount people’s  intentions.  Suppose a mugger attacks somebody just as a huge 
flower pot falls from a balcony above. The mugger happens to push the individual 
the instant before the flower pot lands on the exact spot where the victim had 
been standing. The mugger has saved the victim’s life, as it turns out. But would 
we say that the mugger did a morally good deed just because his action had a 
happy result? According to utilitarianism, we would—assuming the net result of 
the action was more happiness than would otherwise have been the case. So, util-
itarianism doesn’t seem to be the complete story in moral reasoning. 
 Another important consequentialist theory is  ethical egoism,  the idea 
that, if an act produces more happiness for oneself than will the alternatives, 
then it is the right thing to do, and if it produces less happiness for oneself 
than the alternatives, it is wrong to do it. In short, act so as to best promote 
your own happiness. But any well-thought-out theory of ethical egoism does 
not prescribe acting purely selfishly, for selfish behavior is not likely to pro-
duce the most happiness for oneself in the long run. Still, there is a differ-
ence between saying that the reason for doing something is to bring yourself 
happiness and saying that the reason for doing something is to bring others 
happiness. The latter doctrine is  ethical altruism,  which discounts one’s own 
happiness as of lesser value than the happiness of others. From this perspec-
tive, utilitarianism is the middle ground, in which one’s own happiness and 
others’ happiness are treated as equally important.  
 Duty Theory/Deontologism 
 Immanuel Kant (1724–1804), who witnessed the beginning phases of the utilitar-
ian philosophy, found utilitarianism deficient because of its neglect, among other 
things, of moral duty. Kant’s theory is a version of what is called  duty theory, or 
 deontologism. 
 Kant acknowledged that our lives are full of imperatives based on our own 
situations and our objectives. If we want to advance at work, then it is imperative 

 Acts and Rules 
 Thinking of cheating on a test? Maybe the sum total of happiness in the world would be 
increased by this single  act  of cheating. But if the  principle  involved were adopted widely, the 
sum total of happiness would be decreased. 
 This raises the question: When calculating happiness outcomes, should we contemplate 
happiness outcomes of the particular  act  in question? Or should we contemplate happiness 
outcomes of adoption of the  principle involved in the act? 
 Accordingly, some philosophers make a distinction between “act utilitarianism,” which 
evaluates the moral worth of an act on the happiness it would produce, and “rule utilitarian-
ism,” which evaluates the moral worth of an act on the happiness that would be produced by 
adoption of the principle it exemplifies. 
390 
CHAPTER 12: MORAL, LEGAL, AND AESTHETIC REASONING
that we keep our promises; if we are concerned about our friends’ happiness, 
then it is imperative that we not talk about them behind their backs. But this type 
of  hypothetical imperative,  which tells us we ought to do (or ought not to do) 
something in order to achieve such and such a result, is not a  moral imperative, 
Kant argued. Keeping a promise so we’ll get a solid reputation is neither morally 
praiseworthy nor morally blameworthy, he said. For our act to be  morally praise-
worthy, it must be done, not for the sake of some objective, but simply because  it 
is right.  Our action of keeping our promise is morally praiseworthy, he said, only 
if we do it simply because it is right to keep our promises. A moral imperative is 
unconditional or  categorical;*  it prescribes an action, not for the sake of some 
result, but simply because that action is our moral duty. 
 It follows from this philosophy that, when it comes to evaluating an action 
morally, what counts is not the result or consequences of the action, as utili-
tarianism maintains, but the intention from which it is done. And the morally 
best intention—indeed, in Kant’s opinion the  only  truly morally praiseworthy 
intention—is that according to which you do something just because it is your 
moral duty. 
 But what makes something our moral duty? Some deontologists ground 
duty in human nature; others ground it in reason; in Western culture, of course, 
many believe moral duty is set by God. How can we tell what our duty is? Some 
believe our duty is to be found by consulting conscience; others believe that it is 
just self-evident or is clear to moral intuition. Those who maintain that human 
moral duties are established by God usually derive their specific understanding 
of these duties through interpretations of religious texts such as the Bible, though 
there is disagreement over what the correct interpretation is as well as who should 
do the interpreting. 
 Kant answered the question, How can we tell what our moral duty is? as fol-
lows: Suppose you are considering some course of action—say, whether to bor-
row some money you need very badly. But suppose you know you can’t pay back 
the loan. Is it morally permissible for you to borrow money under such circum-
stances? Kant said to do this: First, find the  maxim  (principle of action) involved 
in what you want to do. In the case in question, the maxim is “When I’m in need 
*Although it is related, this use of “categorical” should not be confused with its use in Chapter 9.

 
MAJOR PERSPECTIVES IN MORAL REASONING 
391
of money, I’ll go to my friends and promise I’ll pay it back, even if I know I can’t.” 
Next, ask yourself, “Could I want this maxim to be a  universal  law or rule, one 
that everyone should follow?” This process of  universalization  is the feature that 
lets you judge whether something would work as a moral law, according to Kant. 
Could you make it a universal law that it is okay for everybody to lie about paying 
back loans? Hardly: If everyone adopted this principle, then there would be no 
such thing as loan making. In short, the universalization of your principle under-
mines the very principle that is universalized. If everyone adopted the principle, 
then nobody could possibly follow it. The universalization of your principle is 
illogical, so it is your duty to pay back loans. 
 As you can see, the results of acting according to Kant’s theory can be radi-
cally different from the results of acting according to utilitarianism. Utilitarianism 
would condone borrowing money with no intention of repaying it, assuming that 
doing so would produce more happiness than would be produced by not doing 
so. But Kant’s theory would not condone it. 
 Kant also noted that, if you were to borrow a friend’s money with no inten-
tion of repaying it, you would be treating your friend merely as a means to an 
end. If you examine cases like this, in which you use other people as mere tools 
for your own objectives, then, Kant said, you will find in each case a transgres-
sion of moral duty, a principle of action that cannot be universalized. Thus, he 
warned us, it is our moral duty never to treat someone else  merely  as a tool, as 
means to an end. Of course, Kant did not mean that Moore cannot ask Parker 
for help on some project; doing so would not be a case of Moore’s using Parker 
 merely as a tool. 
 Kant’s theory of the moral necessity of never treating other people as mere 
tools can be modified to support the ideas that people have rights and that treat-
ment of others must always involve fair play. Regardless of whether you subscribe 
to Kant’s version of duty theory, the chances are that your own moral delibera-
tions are more than just strictly utilitarian and may well involve considerations 
of what you take to be other moral requirements, including your duties and the 
rights of others. 
 Moral Relativism 
 One popular view of ethics, especially perhaps among undergraduates taking 
a first course in philosophy, is  moral relativism,  the idea that what is right and 
wrong depends on and is determined by one’s group or culture. 
 A mistake sometimes made in moral reasoning is to confuse the following 
two claims:
  1. What is  believed to be right and wrong may differ from group to group, society 
to society, or culture to culture. 
  2. What  is right and wrong may differ from group to group, society to society, or 
culture to culture. 
 The second claim, but not the first, is moral relativism. Please go back and 
read the two claims carefully. They are so similar that it takes a moment to see 
they are actually quite different. But they are different. The first claim is incontest-
able; the second claim is controversial and problematic. It may well have been the 
majority belief in ancient Greece that there was nothing wrong with slavery. But 
that does not mean that at that time there was nothing wrong with slavery. 

392 
CHAPTER 12: MORAL, LEGAL, AND AESTHETIC REASONING
 It is worth noting that moral relativism suffers from three potential difficul-
ties. First, exactly what counts as a group, society, or culture, and what are the 
criteria for membership in one? How many groups, societies, or cultures do you 
belong to? You probably find it hard to say. This makes it difficult to specify which 
set of general principles apply to a person. 
 The second difficulty is that conflicting views about moral principles are to 
be found within all but the very smallest groups. For example, even within small 
communities, people may disagree about gay marriage or abortion. 
Mill’s Fallacies
The founding fathers of utilitarianism (discussed in the text) are the English philosophers Jer-
emy Bentham (1748-1832) and John Stuart Mill (1806-1873).  After he died Bentham was paid 
the rare tribute of having his skeleton (dressed in his clothes) displayed at the University Col-
lege in London.  Apparently it still attends meetings of the College Council where Bentham is 
listed as “present but not voting.”
Mill, Bentham’s godson, was a precocious young scholar who read Greek by the time he 
was 3. His book, A System of Logic, was a best seller in England, and not just among philoso-
phers but among the general public.  YouTube was not available.
Every student of logic and philosophy should know that Mill gave the following infamous 
argument for utilitarianism, in the fourth chapter of his treatise that went by that name:
The only proof capable of being given that an object is visible, is that people actually see 
it. The only proof that a sound is audible, is that people hear it . . . In like manner, I appre-
hend, the sole evidence it is possible to produce that anything is desirable, is that people 
do actually desire it . . . No reason can be given why the general happiness is desirable, 
except that each person, so far as he believes it to be attainable, desires his own happi-
ness… we have not only all the proof which the case admits of, but all which it is possible 
to require, that happiness is a good: that each person’s happiness is a good to that person, 
and the general happiness, therefore, a good to the aggregate of all persons.
Now Mill said that this was not a proof in the ordinary sense.  That’s just as well, because in the 
ordinary sense it contains three fallacies:
 1. Deriving an ought from an is—deriving what people ought to do from what they actually 
do.  We discussed this earlier, on pages 385–386, when we said that arguments that derive 
an ought-statement from an is-statement assume a general moral principle
 2. Equivocation—the argument moves from “desirable” in the sense of being sought after, to 
“desirable” in the sense of being something that should be sought after. (See Chapter 8 for 
a discussion of equivocation.)
 3. Composition—the argument moves from the fact that individual happiness is a good 
thing, to the conclusion that the collective happiness is a good thing. (See Chapter 8 for a 
discussion of composition.)
Eminent philosophers have defended Mill by trying to show that he didn’t really commit 
these mistakes.  That he has defenders suggests they think he needs defending. 
Our own view is that Mill knew what he was doing and that is why he said that this was not 
a proof in the ordinary sense.  We agree that it is not a proof in the ordinary sense.  Not knowing 
any other sense, we regard it as a piece of rhetoric (Chapter 4).

 
MAJOR PERSPECTIVES IN MORAL REASONING 
393
 A third difficulty is perhaps less obvious. To understand the problem, if 
someone belongs to a society that believes it is permissible to kill Americans, 
then you, as a moral relativist, must concede it is permissible for that person to 
kill Americans. But if Americans in general agree on anything, it is that nobody 
should kill another person simply because of his or her national status. Therefore, 
if you are an American, you must also say it is  not  permissible for that person to 
kill Americans. Subscribing to moral relativism has placed you in a self-contradic-
tory position. 
 Another popular moral perspective is  moral subjectivism,  the idea that 
what is right and wrong is merely a matter of subjective opinion, that thinking 
that something is right or wrong makes it right or wrong for that individual. We 
considered subjectivism in Chapter 1 and saw there the mistake in thinking that 
all value judgments are subjective.  
 Religious Relativism 
 As you might expect,  religious relativism  is the belief that what is right and wrong 
is whatever one’s religious culture or society deems. The problems attending this 
view are the same as those for other versions of relativism. First, what counts as 
a religious culture or society and as membership within one? Are Baptists and 
Catholics part of the same culture? Are you a Christian even if you never attend 
church? Second, even within a single culture, conflicting moral views are likely to 
be found. The United Church of Christ, for example, currently is conflicted about 
gay marriage. 
 Third, those who belong to one religion might well consider practices of 
other religions to be sinful. For example, members of the first religion may think 
it is sinful to worship a false god. Thus, according to religious relativism, if you 
belong to the first religion, then you must say that those who worship the other 
god are doing something sinful, because that is the view of your religion. But as a 
religious relativist, you must also say that those who worship the other god are  not 
doing something sinful. 
 Religious Absolutism 
 One way out of this difficulty might be to subscribe to  religious absolutism, 
which maintains that the correct moral principles are those accepted by the “cor-
rect” religion. A problem, of course, is that opinions vary as to what the correct 
religion is. 
 Virtue Ethics 
 Up to this point, the ethical perspectives discussed have focused on the ques-
tion of what is the right or proper act, decision, practice, or policy. For that rea-
son, these perspectives are referred to as “ethics of conduct.” However, another 
approach, one predominant in classical Greek thinking, has regained popularity 
among some contemporary moral philosophers. This approach, known as  virtue 
ethics, focuses not on what to do but on how to be. 
 To find an excellent example of virtue ethics, one need look no further than the 
Boy Scout pledge. A Boy Scout doesn’t pledge to do or to refrain from doing this or 
that particular action; instead, he pledges to  be  a certain kind of person. He pledges 
to  be  trustworthy, loyal, helpful, friendly, courteous, kind, brave, and so forth. This 
I’m not guilty of murder. I’m 
guilty of obeying the laws of 
the Creator.
—BENJAMIN MATTHEW WILLIAMS, 
who committed suicide while 
awaiting sentencing for having 
murdered a gay couple

394 
CHAPTER 12: MORAL, LEGAL, AND AESTHETIC REASONING
■ The Ten Commandments 
represent the 
perspective of religious 
absolutism.
is a list of “virtues,” or traits of character. A 
person who has them is disposed by habit to 
act in certain ways and not to act in others. 
 The ancient Greeks believed it was 
supremely important for a person to achieve 
psychological and physical balance; and 
to do that, the person needed to develop a 
consistently good character. A person out 
of balance will not be able to assess a situa-
tion properly and will tend to overreact or to 
not react strongly enough; moreover, such 
a person will not know his or her proper 
limits. People who recognize their own 
qualifications and limitations and who are 
capable of reacting to the right degree, at the 
right time, toward the right person, and for 
the right reason are virtuous persons. They 
understand the value of the idea of modera-
tion: not too much and not too little, but in 
each case a response that is just right. 
 Aristotle (384–322  b.c.e. ) regarded vir-
tue as a trait, like having wisdom, being just, 
or being courageous, that we acquire when 
we use our capacity to reason to moderate our 
impulses and appetites. The largest part of 
Aristotle’s major ethical writing, the  Nicoma-
chean Ethics,  is devoted to analysis of specific 
moral virtues as means between extremes 
(for example, being courageous is the mean 
between fearing everything and fearing noth-
ing). He also emphasized that virtue is a mat-
ter of habit; it is a trait, a way of living. 
 Virtue ethics is not an abstruse ethical 
theory. Many of us (fortunately) wish to be 
(or to become) persons of good character. And as a practical matter, when we are 
deliberating a course of action, our approach often is to consider what someone 
whose character we admire would do in the circumstances. 
 Still, it is possible that virtue theory alone cannot answer all moral ques-
tions. Each of us may face moral dilemmas of such a nature that it simply isn’t 
clear what course of action is required by someone of good character. 
 Determine which ethical perspective is primarily reflected in each of the follow-
ing statements. Choose from
 A  5 consequentialism 
 B  5 duty ethics/deontology 
 C  5 virtue ethics 
 D  5 moral relativism 
 E  5 religious absolutism 
 Exercise 12-4 

 
MAJOR PERSPECTIVES IN MORAL REASONING 
395
 In each of the following passages, a general moral principle must be added as an 
extra premise to make the argument valid. Supply such a principle. 
 Example 
 Mrs. Montez’s new refrigerator was delivered yesterday, and it 
stopped working altogether. She has followed the directions carefully 
but still can’t make it work. The people she bought it from should 
either come out and make it work or replace it with another one. 
 Principle 
 People should make certain the things they sell work. 
  1. After borrowing Jacob’s car, Mason had an accident and crumpled a fender. 
So, Mason ought to pay whatever expenses were involved in getting Jacob’s 
car fixed. 
  2. When Sarah bought the lawn mower from Jean, she promised to pay another 
fifty dollars on the first of the month. Since it is now the first, Sarah should 
pay Jean the money. 
  3. Jayden worked on his sister’s car all weekend. The least she could do is let 
him borrow the car for his job interview next Thursday. 
▲
 Exercise 12-5 
 1. Yes, innocent civilians have been killed in Afghanistan. But in the long run, 
the world will be a safer place if Afghanistan becomes a democracy. 
 2. Although many cultures have practiced human sacrifice, within the culture 
it was not thought to be wrong. So, human sacrifice within those cultures 
wasn’t really immoral. 
 3.  (Note: “Preferential treatment” refers to the practice of some universities and 
professional schools of lowering entrance requirements for women and ethnic 
minorities.) Preferential treatment is wrong, period. You shouldn’t discrimi-
nate against anyone, no matter how much society benefits from it. 
 4. Sure, we might benefit from expanding Highway 99. But seizing a person’s 
property against his or her wishes is just wrong, period. 
 5. Sure, we might benefit from expanding Highway 99. But it’s wrong to seize 
someone’s property, at least in this country. In our society, property rights 
are fundamental. 
 6. Sure, we might benefit from expanding Highway 99. But it’s wrong to seize 
someone’s property! You have a God-given right to own property. 
 7. If a company doesn’t want to hire a woman, nobody should force it to. A 
company has a right to hire whomever it wants! 
 8. You have to balance a person’s rights against the common good. Pornogra-
phy isn’t good for a society, and we should get rid of it. 
 9. Gay marriage? I think it is only fair! The right to happiness is a basic human 
right. 
 10. Gay marriage? I am against it. Once gays start marrying, the next thing you 
know, brothers and sisters will get married. Then moms and sons. Society 
will come apart at the seams.  
▲
▲
▲
▲

396 
CHAPTER 12: MORAL, LEGAL, AND AESTHETIC REASONING
 4. Noah is obligated to supply ten cords of firewood to the lodge by the begin-
ning of October, since he signed a contract guaranteeing delivery of the 
wood by that date. 
 5. Since it was revealed yesterday on the 11:00 news that Mayor Ahearn has 
been taking bribes, he should step down any day now. 
 6. As a political candidate, Havenhurst promised to put an end to crime in the 
inner city. Now that she is in office, we’d like to see results. 
 7. Since he has committed his third felony, he should automatically go to 
prison for twenty-five years. 
 8. Laura’s priest has advised Laura and her husband not to sign up for the 
in vitro fertilization program at the hospital, because such treatments are 
unnatural. 
 9. Ali has been working overtime a lot lately, so he should receive a bonus. 
 10.    It is true there are more voters in the northern part of the state. But that 
shouldn’t allow the north to dictate to the south. 
▲
▲
▲
 MORAL DELIBERATION  
 Before you began this chapter, you may have assumed that moral discussion is 
merely an exchange of personal opinion or feeling, one that reserves no place for 
reason or critical thinking. But moral discussion usually assumes some sort of 
perspective like those we have mentioned here. Actually, in real life, moral rea-
soning is often a mixture of perspectives, a blend of utilitarian considerations 
weighted somewhat toward one’s own happiness, modified by ideas about 
duties, rights, and obligations, and mixed often with a thought, perhaps guilty, 
about what the ideally virtuous person (a parent, a teacher) would do in similar 
circumstances. It also sometimes involves mistakes—value judgments may be 
confused with other types of claims, inconsistencies may occur, inductive argu-
ments may be weak or deductive arguments invalid, fallacious reasoning may be 
present, and so forth. 
 We can make headway in our own thinking about moral issues by trying to 
get clear on what perspective, if any, we are assuming. For example, suppose we 
are thinking about the death penalty. Our first thought might be that society is 
much better off if murderers are executed. Are we then assuming a utilitarian per-
spective? Asking ourselves this question might lead us to consider whether there 
are  limits  to what we would do for the common good—for example, would we be 
willing to risk sacrificing an innocent person? It might also lead us to consider 
how we might  establish  whether society is better off if murderers are executed—if 
we are utilitarians, then ultimately we will have to establish this if our reasoning 
is to be compelling. 
 Or suppose we have seen a friend cheating on an exam. Should we report it 
to the teacher? Whatever our inclination, it may be helpful to consider our per-
spective. Are we viewing things from a utilitarian perspective? That is, are we 
assuming that it would promote the most happiness overall to report our friend? 
Or do we simply believe that it is our duty to report him or her, come what may? 
Would a virtuous person report his or her friend? Each of these questions will 
tend to focus our attention on a particular set of considerations—those that are 
the most relevant to our way of thinking. 

 
MORAL DELIBERATION
397
 It may occur to you to wonder at this point if there is any reason for choos-
ing among perspectives. The answer to this question is yes: Adherents of these 
positions, philosophers such as those we mentioned, offer grounding or support 
for their perspectives in theories about human nature, the natural universe, the 
nature of morality, and other things. In other words, they have  arguments  to sup-
port their views. If you are interested, we recommend a course in ethics. 
Why Moral Problems Seem Unresolvable
Ethical differences sometimes seem irreconcilable.  Often the problem comes down to a dif-
ference in moral perspective. Proponents of affirmative action often speak of it as promising a 
greater good. Opponents regard it as treating people unequally. Those who favor gun control 
think public safety will be improved if more restrictions are placed on gun ownership. Those 
who oppose restrictions speak of gun control as violating Constitutional rights.
This is not to say that ethical differences always come down to different moral perspec-
tives. Pro-life and pro-choice adherents share a rights-based perspective; they disagree over 
which right is more basic, a woman’s right to choose, or the rights of the unborn. Both parties 
presumably agree that in the absence of a compelling justification it is wrong to take a human 
life. They seem to disagree, however, as to when life begins. 
Identify each of the following questions as A, B, or C.
A 5 moral value judgment
B 5 nonmoral value judgment
C 5 not a value judgment
1. You should avoid making such a large down payment.
 2. You can’t go wrong taking Professor Anderson’s class.
 3. Misdemeanors are punished less severely than felonies.
 4. Anyone who would do a thing like that to another human being is beneath 
contempt.
 5. Anthony thought about homeschooling his kids.
 6. Anthony should have thought about homeschooling his kids.
 7. Anthony thought about whether he should homeschool his kids.
 8. Did Anthony think about homeschooling his kids? Apparently.
 9. It was a darn good thing Anthony thought about homeschooling his kids.
 10. You should have left a note when you dented that car.
▲
▲
▲
▲
Exercise 12-6
Identify each of the following statements as A, B, or C.
A 5 moral value judgment
B 5 nonmoral value judgment
C 5 not a value judgment
Exercise 12-7

398 
CHAPTER 12: MORAL, LEGAL, AND AESTHETIC REASONING
Answer the question or respond to the statement that concludes each item.
 1. Tory thinks women should have the same rights as men. However, he also thinks 
that, although a man should have the right to marry a woman, a woman should 
not have the right to marry a woman. Is Tory being consistent in his views?
 2. At Shelley’s university, the minimum GPA requirement for admission is 
relaxed for 6 percent of incoming students. Half of those admitted under this 
program are women and minorities, and the other half are athletes, children 
of alumni, and talented art and music students. Shelley is opposed to special 
admissions programs for women and minority students; she is not opposed 
to special admission programs for art and music students, athletes, or chil-
dren of alumni. Is she consistent?
 3. Marin does not approve of abortion because the Bible says explicitly, “Thou 
shalt not kill.” “‘Thou shalt not kill’ means thou shalt not kill,” he says. Marin 
does, however, approve of capital punishment. Is Marin consistent?
 4. Koko believes that adults should have the unrestricted right to read whatever 
material they want to read, but she does not believe that her seventeen-year-
old daughter Gina should have the unrestricted right to read whatever she 
wants to read. Is Koko consistent?
 5. Jackson maintains that the purpose of marriage is procreation. On these 
grounds, he opposes same-sex marriages. “Gays can’t create children,” he 
explains. However, he does not oppose marriages between heterosexual part-
ners who cannot have children due to age or medical reasons. “It’s not the 
same,” he says. Is Jack being consistent?
▲
▲
▲
Exercise 12-8
 1. The employees deserve health care benefits.
 2. Last year, the employees may have deserved health care benefits, but they 
don’t now.
 3. The employees’ health care benefits consumed 40 percent of our operating 
costs.
 4. The health care benefits we gave the employees last year were excessive.
 5. The health care benefits we gave the employees were generous, but not 
excessive.
 6. Sophia is the best photographer in the department.
 7. Susan should not have used a filter when she made those photographs.
 8. Olivia upset that man when she photographed him; she shouldn’t have done 
that.
 9. Madison’s photographs are exquisite in their realism and detail.
 10. Be more careful mowing the lawn! You could hurt yourself.
 11. Be more tactful dealing with people! You could hurt them.
 12. Use more fertilizer! You’ll get better plants.
 13. Use more deodorant! Your kids will thank you for it.
 14. Avery works harder than anyone else in the office.
 15. It was not right of Ava to dump Logan without giving him a chance to explain 
what happened.
▲
▲
▲
▲

 
MORAL DELIBERATION 
399
 6. Zoey thinks the idea of outlawing cigarettes is ridiculous. “Give me a break,” 
she says. “If you want to screw up your health with cigarettes, that’s your 
own business.” However, Zoey does not approve of the legalization of mari-
juana. “Hel-loh-o,” she says. “Marijuana is a drug, and the last thing we need 
is more druggies.” Is Zoey being consistent?
 7. California’s Proposition 209 amends the California state constitution to 
prohibit “discrimination or preferential treatment” in state hiring based 
on race, gender, or ethnicity. Opponents say that Proposition 209 singles 
out women and members of racial and ethnic minorities for unequal 
treatment. Their argument is that Proposition 209 makes it impossible 
for members of these groups to obtain redress for past discrimination 
through preferential treatment, whereas members of other groups who 
may have suffered past discrimination (gays, for example, or members of 
religious groups) are not similarly restricted from seeking redress. Evalu-
ate this argument.
 8. Harold prides himself on being a liberal. He is delighted when a federal 
court issues a preliminary ruling that California’s Proposition 209 (see pre-
vious item) is unconstitutional. “It makes no difference that a majority of 
California voters approved the measure,” Harold argues. “If it is unconstitu-
tional, then it is unconstitutional.” However, California voters also recently 
passed an initiative that permits physicians to prescribe marijuana, and Har-
old is livid when the U.S. attorney general says that the federal government 
will ignore the California statute and will use federal law to prosecute any 
physician who prescribes marijuana. Is Harold consistent?
 9. Dylan is of the opinion that we should not perform medical experiments 
on people against their will, but he has no problem with medical experi-
ments being done on dogs. Chloe disagrees. She sees no relevant difference 
between the two cases.
  
 
“What, no difference between people and dogs?” Dylan asks.
  
 
“There are differences, but no differences that are relevant to the issue,” 
Chloe responds. “Dogs feel pain and experience fear just as much as people.”
  
 
Is Chloe correct?
 10. Mr. Bork is startled when a friend tells him he should contribute to the wel-
fare of others’ children as much as to his own.
   
“Why on earth should I do that?” Mr. Bork asks his friend.
   
“Because,” his friend responds, “there is no relevant difference between 
the two cases. The fact that your children are yours does not mean that there 
is something different about them that gives them a greater entitlement to 
happiness than anyone else’s children.”
   
How should Mr. Bork respond?
 11. The university wants to raise the requirements for tenure. Professor Peter-
son, who doesn’t have tenure, says that doing so is unfair to her. She argues 
that those who received tenure before she did weren’t required to meet such 
exacting standards; therefore, neither should she. Is she correct?
 12. Reverend Heinz has no objection to same-sex marriages but is opposed to 
polygamous marriages. Is there a relevant difference between the two cases, 
or is Reverend Heinz being inconsistent?
▲

400 
CHAPTER 12: MORAL, LEGAL, AND AESTHETIC REASONING
 1. Daniel needs to sell his car, but he doesn’t have money to spend on repairs. 
He plans to sell the vehicle to a private party without mentioning that the 
rear brakes are worn. Evaluate Daniel’s plan of action from a deontological 
perspective—that is, can the maxim of Daniel’s plan be universalized?
 2. Defend affirmative action from a utilitarian perspective.
 3. Criticize affirmative action from a deontological perspective. (Hint: Con-
sider Kant’s theory that people must never be treated as means only.)
 4. Criticize or defend medical experimentation on animals from a utilitarian 
perspective.
 5. Criticize or defend medical experimentation on animals from a religious 
absolutist perspective.
 6. A company has the policy of not promoting women to be vice presidents. 
What might be said about this policy from the perspective of virtue ethics?
 7. What might be said about the policy mentioned in item 6 from the perspec-
tive of utilitarianism?
 8. Evaluate embryonic stem cell research from a utilitarian perspective.
 9. In your opinion, would the virtuous person, the person of the best moral 
character, condemn, approve, or be indifferent to bisexuality?
 10. “We can’t condemn the founding fathers for owning slaves; people didn’t 
think there was anything wrong with it at the time.” Comment on this remark 
from the standpoint of deontologism.
 11. “Let’s have some fun and see how your parrot looks without feathers.” (The 
example is from philosopher Joseph Grcic.) Which of the following perspec-
tives seems best equipped to condemn this suggestion?
 
a. utilitarianism
 
b. deontologism
 
c. religious absolutism
 
d. virtue ethics
 
e. moral relativism
 12. “Might makes right.” Could a utilitarian accept this? Could a virtue ethicist? 
Could Kant? Could a moral relativist? Could someone who subscribes to 
divine command theory?
Exercise 12-9
 This is Darwin’s natural selection at its very best. The highest bidder 
gets youth and beauty.
These are the words of fashion photographer Ron Harris, who auctioned the ova of 
fashion models via the Internet. The model got the full bid price, and the website took 
a commission of an additional 20 percent. The bid price included no medical costs, 
though it listed specialists who were willing to perform the procedure. Harris, who cre-
ated the video “The 20 Minute Workout,” said the egg auction gave people the chance 
to reproduce beautiful children who would have an advantage in society. Critics, 
however, were numerous. “It screams of unethical behavior,” one said. “It is accept-
able for an infertile couple to choose an egg donor and compensate her for her time, 
inconvenience and discomfort,” he said. “But this is something else entirely. Among 
other things, what happens to the child if he or she turns out to be unattractive?”
Discuss the (moral) pros and cons of this issue for five or ten minutes in 
groups. Then take a written stand on the question “Should human eggs be auc-
tioned to the highest bidder?” When you are finished, discuss which moral per-
spective seems to be the one in which you are operating.
Exercise 12-10

 
LEGAL REASONING
401
 LEGAL REASONING  
 When we think about arguments and disputes, the first image to come to most 
minds is probably that of an attorney arguing a case in a court of law. Although 
it’s true that lawyers require a solid understanding of factual matters related to 
their cases and of psychological considerations as well, especially where juries 
are involved, it is still safe to say that a lawyer’s stock-in-trade is argument. Law-
yers are successful—in large part—to the extent that they can produce evidence 
in support of the conclusion that most benefits their clients—in other words, their 
success depends on how well they can put premises and conclusions together 
into convincing arguments (This does not mean we  discount the use of rhetorical 
devices and persuasive techniques of all sorts in courtrooms.) 
 When one thinks of the many varieties of law—administrative law, commer-
cial law, criminal law, international law, tax law, and so on—one is apt to think that 
there may be no distinctive common ground that one might call “uniquely legal 
reasoning.” This conclusion is absolutely correct. Still, we can distinguish broadly 
between questions of  interpreting and applying the law in specific instances and 
questions related to  what the law should be. Typically, jurists and practicing attor-
neys are more interested in the former type of question and legal philosophers in 
the latter. 
 Reasoning used by jurists and attorneys in applying the law is both deduc-
tive and inductive; if deductive, the reasoning can be sound, valid, or invalid; 
and if inductive, it can range from strong to weak. Deductive reasoning, of 
course, includes categorical and hypothetical reasoning; and inductive reason-
ing includes generalizing, reasoning by analogy, and reasoning about cause and 
effect. Reasoning by analogy and reasoning about cause and effect deserve spe-
cial mention in connection with applying the law. 
 One kind of argument occupies a special place in applying the law: the 
appeal to precedent.  This is the practice of using a case that has already been 
decided as an authoritative guide in deciding a new case that is similar. The 
appeal to precedent is none other than an argument by analogy, in which the 
current case is argued to be sufficiently like the previous case to warrant deciding 
it in the same way. Appeal to precedent also assumes the consistency principle 
that is found in moral reasoning: Cases that aren’t relevantly different must be 
treated the same way. To treat similar cases differently would be illogical; it would 
also be unjust. 
 The Latin name for the principle of appeal to precedent is  stare decisis
(“Don’t change settled decisions,” more or less). In the terminology of Chapter 
11, the “analogues” are the earlier, settled cases on 
one hand and the current case on the other. The 
important question is whether the analogues are so 
similar that treating them differently would violate 
stare decisis.  Apart from their significance to the 
parties involved, legal reasoning by analogy is not 
different in principle from reasoning by analogy in 
any other context. 
 The appeal to precedent is embodied in what 
is usually called the “common law.” Originally 
developed in England over a thousand years ago, 
common law is the reliance on precedent as the 
determining factor in present decisions. Its logical 
basis is the principle just described of treating simi-
lar cases similarly. Common law legal systems are 
 ■ John Roberts, Chief 
Justice of the U.S. 
Supreme Court, 
which decides the 
constitutionality of 
legislation, actions of 
public officials, lower 
court decisions, and 
other public matters. 
This power, known as 
“judicial review, ” is 
not explicit in the U.S. 
Constitution but was 
established in  Marbury 
v. Madison (1803), a 
landmark decision of 
the Supreme Court. 

402 
CHAPTER 12: MORAL, LEGAL, AND AESTHETIC REASONING
distinguished from civil law systems, where the greater reliance is on statutory 
enactments. It is usual for modern legal systems to make use of a combination of 
these two influences, with English influence causing an emphasis on common 
law and Roman influence an emphasis on civil law. Anyhow, that similar cases 
must be decided according to consistently applied rules is, as Wikipedia puts it, 
at the heart of all common law systems. And that conforms to our principle of 
justice. 
 Also especially important when it comes to applying the law is reasoning 
about cause and effect. Causation is the foundation of legal liability. In some 
contexts, that a party is legally liable for something may mean more than sim-
ply that he or she caused it; but having caused it is normally a necessary con-
dition for being legally liable for it. In Chapter 11, we discussed causation in 
the law.  
 Justifying Laws: Four Perspectives 
 The reasoning employed to justify or defend specific laws is similar to moral 
reasoning, discussed in the previous section. Both types of reasoning involve 
applying general principles to specific cases, and both refer ultimately to one or 
more of a handful of basic perspectives within which the reasoning takes place. 
Indeed, the moral perspectives already discussed can and are used to justify 
and defend specific laws. For example, the utilitarian idea that it is desirable 
to increase the sum total of happiness is used to defend eminent domain (by 
which a state seizes a person’s property without his or her consent). And the 
deontological principle that others should not be used as the means to some 
end is used to argue against it. The harm principle, discussed below, which 
holds that only what harms others should be legally forbidden, is an extension 
of deontological ethics (although its most eloquent exponent was the utilitarian 
John Stuart Mill). 
 Of course, we are often most interested in the justification of laws that would 
forbid us to do something we might otherwise want to do or would require us 
to do something we would prefer not to do. Consider, then, whether a law that 
forbids doing X should be enacted by your state legislature. *  Typically, there are 
four main grounds, or “perspectives,” on which a supporter of a law can base his 
or her justification. The first is simply that doing X is immoral. The claim that 
the law should make illegal anything that is immoral is the basis of the position 
known as  legal moralism.  One might use such a basis to justify laws forbidding 
murder, assault, or unorthodox sexual practices. For a legal moralist, the kinds of 
arguments designed to show that an action is immoral are directly relevant to the 
question of whether the action should be illegal. 
 The next ground on which a law can be justified is probably the one that 
most people think of first. It is very closely associated with John Stuart Mill (1806–
1873) and is known as the  harm principle:  The only legitimate basis for forbid-
ding X is that doing X causes harm to others. Notice that the harm principle states 
not just that harm to others is a good ground for forbidding an activity but that 
it is the  only  ground. (In terms of the way we formulated such claims in Chapter 
 *The example here is of a criminal law—part of a penal code designed to require and forbid certain behaviors and to 
punish offenders. The situation is a little different in civil law, a main goal of which is to shift the burden of a wrongful 
harm (a “tort”) from the person on whom it fell to another, more suitable person—usually the one who caused the 
harm. 

 
LEGAL REASONING
403
10, on propositional logic, the principle would be stated, “It is legitimate to forbid 
doing X  if and only if  doing X causes harm to others.”) A person who defends this 
principle and who wants to enact a law forbidding X will present evidence that 
doing X does indeed cause harm to others. Her arguments could resemble any of 
the types covered in earlier chapters. 
 A third ground on which our hypothetical law might be based is legal pater-
nalism.  Legal paternalism  is the view that laws can be justified if they prevent a 
person from doing harm to him- or herself; that is, they forbid or make it impos-
sible to do X,  for a person’s own good. Examples include laws that require that seat 
belts be worn while riding in automobiles and that helmets be worn while riding 
on motorcycles. Many laws prohibiting or limiting the use of drugs also fall into 
this category. 
 The last of the usual bases for justifying criminal laws is that some behavior 
is generally found offensive. The  offense principle  says that a law forbidding X 
can be justifiable if X causes great offense to others. Laws forbidding public urina-
tion and burning of the flag are often justified on this ground. 
 Stand Your Ground 
 More than half the states in the United States have adopted the “Castle doctrine”—the legal 
position that a person does not have an obligation to retreat from a threat in his or her own 
home, and further that the person may use deadly force in order to thwart an attacker in such 
circumstances. In Florida, as in several other states, a further law was passed in 2005 that 
extended the right to use deadly force in self-defense to any place the defender has a legal 
right to be. Such laws have come to be known as “stand your ground” (SYG) laws. * 
 Whether the SYG laws have reduced or increased violence is not clear. Proponents and 
opponents have both cited evidence, and there have been studies that interested parties can 
check before making up their minds. 
 These laws came into sharp focus in February 2012, when George Zimmerman, a 28-year-
old “multiracial” Hispanic, shot and killed Trayvon Martin, a 17-year-old black youth during 
a much-disputed confrontation. Martin was walking home from a convenience store to the 
house where his father’s fiancée lived and where he was staying. Zimmerman, the neighbor-
hood watch coordinator, was in his vehicle when he spotted Martin, and he called police to 
report him as behaving suspiciously. Zimmerman left his car during the call, and soon after a 
violent encounter ensued, the only account of which is Zimmerman’s, since Martin was shot 
dead in the fight. Zimmerman claimed Martin, who was unarmed, attacked him and that he 
fired in self-defense. 
 The Sanford, Florida, police were subjected to criticism for delaying bringing charges 
against the shooter. The cause of the delay, according to the police and local prosecutors, was 
the stand your ground law, which provides not only a defense in a criminal trial but also immu-
nity from civil suits and from a criminal trial under the right circumstances. 
Zimmerman went to trial in June 2013 on charges of second-degree murder and man-
slaughter. On July 13, 2013, a jury acquitted him of both charges. Although Florida’s SYG law 
was clearly relevant to the case, Zimmerman’s lawyers made scant reference to it during their 
defense. The extent to which it influenced the jury is not known at this writing.
 * Some supporters of these laws, in a salute to Clint Eastwood’s Dirty Harry character, refer to them as “make my day” 
laws; opponents of the laws, including the Brady Campaign to Prevent Gun Violence, refer to them as “shoot first” laws. 

404 
CHAPTER 12: MORAL, LEGAL, AND AESTHETIC REASONING
 For each of the following kinds of laws, pick at least one of the four grounds for 
justification discussed in the text—legal moralism, the harm principle, legal 
paternalism, and the offense principle—and construct an argument designed to 
justify the law. You may not agree either with the law or with the argument; the 
exercise is to see if you can connect the law to the (allegedly) justifying principle. 
For many laws, more than one kind of justification is possible, so there can be 
more than one good answer for many of these. 
 1. Laws against shoplifting 
 2. Laws against forgery 
 3. Laws against suicide 
 4. Laws against spitting on the sidewalk 
 5. Laws against driving under the influence of drugs or alcohol 
 6. Laws against adultery 
 7. Laws against marriage between two people of the same sex 
 8. Laws that require people to have licenses before they practice medicine 
 9. Laws that require drivers of cars to have driver’s licenses 
 10. Laws against desecrating a corpse 
 11. Laws against trespassing 
 12. Laws against torturing your pet (even though it may be legal to kill your pet, 
if it is done humanely) 
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
 Exercise 12-11 
 What is the law, and how should it be applied? These questions are per-
haps somewhat easier than the question, What should the law be? But they are 
still complicated. An example will provide an indication. Back in Chapter 3, 
we discussed vague concepts, and we found that it is impossible to rid our talk 
entirely of vagueness. Here’s an example from the law. Let’s suppose that a city 
ordinance forbids vehicles on the paths in the city park. Clearly, a person vio-
lates the law if he or she drives a truck or a car down the paths. But what about 
a motorbike? A bicycle? A go-cart? A child’s pedal car? Just what counts as a 
vehicle and what does not? This is the kind of issue that must often be decided 
in court because—not surprisingly—the governing body writing the law could 
not foresee all the possible items that might, in somebody’s mind, count as a 
vehicle. 
 The process of narrowing down when a law applies and when it does not, 
then, is another kind of reasoning problem that occurs in connection with the 
law. 
 This exercise is for class discussion or a short writing assignment. In the text, 
“Vehicles are prohibited on the paths in the park” was used as an example of a law 
that might require clarification. Decide whether the law should be interpreted to 
forbid motorcycles, bicycles, children’s pedal cars, and battery-powered remote-
control cars. On what grounds are you deciding each of these cases? 
 Exercise 12-12 

 
AESTHETIC REASONING 
405
 The U.S. Supreme Court came to a decision not long ago about the proper applica-
tion of the word “use.” Briefly, the case in point was about a man named John Angus 
Smith, who traded a handgun for cocaine. The law under which Smith was charged 
provided for a much more severe penalty—known as an enhanced penalty—if a 
gun was used in a drug-related crime than if no gun was involved. (In this case, the 
enhanced penalty was a mandatory thirty-year sentence; the “unenhanced” pen-
alty was five years.) Justice Antonin Scalia argued that Smith’s penalty should not 
be enhanced because he did not use the gun in the way the writers of the law had in 
mind; he did not use it  as a gun. Justice Sandra Day O’Connor argued that the law 
requires only the  use  of a gun, not any particular  kind  of use. If you were a judge, 
would you vote with Scalia or with O’Connor? Construct an argument in support of 
your position. (The decision of the Court is given in the answer section at the back 
of the book.) 
 Exercise 12-13 
 AESTHETIC REASONING  
 Like moral and legal thinking, aesthetic thinking relies on a conceptual framework 
that integrates fact and value. Judgments about beauty and art—even judgments 
about whether something is a work of art or just an everyday object—appeal to 
principles that identify sources of aesthetic or artistic value. So, when you make 
such a judgment, you are invoking aesthetic concepts, even if you have not made 
them explicit to yourself or to others. 
 Eight Aesthetic Principles 
 Here are some of the aesthetic principles that most commonly support or influ-
ence artistic creation and critical judgment about art. The first three identify value 
in art with an object’s ability to fulfill certain cultural or social functions. 
 1.  Objects are aesthetically valuable if they are meaningful or teach us truths. 
For example, Aristotle says that tragic plays teach us general truths about the 
human condition in a dramatic way that cannot be matched by real-life experi-
ence. Many people believe art shows us truths that are usually hidden from us by 
the practical concerns of daily life. 
 2.  Objects are aesthetically valuable if they have the capacity to convey values 
or beliefs that are central to the cultures or traditions in which they originate or 
that are important to the artists who made them.  For example, John Milton’s poem 
 Paradise Lost  expresses the seventeenth-century Puritan view of the relationship 
between human beings and God. 
 3.  Objects are aesthetically valuable if they have the capacity to help bring 
about social or political change.  For instance, Abraham Lincoln commented 
that Harriet Beecher Stowe’s  Uncle Tom’s Cabin  contributed to the antislavery 
movement.   
 Another group of principles identifies aesthetic value with objects’ capaci-
ties to produce certain subjective—that is, psychological—states in persons who 
experience or appreciate them. Here are some of the most common or influential 
principles of the second group:
 4.  Objects are aesthetically valuable if they have the capacity to pro-
duce pleasure in those who experience or appreciate them.  For instance, the 

406 
CHAPTER 12: MORAL, LEGAL, AND AESTHETIC REASONING
nineteenth-century German philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche identifies one 
kind of aesthetic value with the capacity to create a feeling of ecstatic bonding in 
audiences. 
 5.  Objects are aesthetically valuable if they have the capacity to produce cer-
tain emotions we value, at least when the emotion is brought about by art rather 
than life.  In the  Poetics,  Aristotle observes that we welcome the feelings of fear 
created in us by frightening dramas, whereas in everyday life fear is an experience 
we would rather avoid. The psychoanalyst Sigmund Freud offers another version 
of this principle: While we enjoy art, we permit ourselves to have feelings so sub-
versive that we have to repress them to function in everyday life. 
 6.  Objects are aesthetically valuable if they have the capacity to produce spe-
cial nonemotional experiences, such as a feeling of autonomy or the willing suspen-
sion of disbelief.  This principle is the proposal of the nineteenth-century English 
poet Samuel Taylor Coleridge. One of art’s values, he believes, is its ability to stim-
ulate our power to exercise our imaginations and consequently to free ourselves 
from thinking that is too narrowly practical. 
 Notice that principles 4 through 6 resemble the first three in that they iden-
tify aesthetic value with the capacity to fulfill a function. According to these last 
three, the specified function is to create some kind of subjective or inner state 
 ■ Christo, The Gates. 
This particular art work 
occupied 23 miles of 
pathways in New York 
City's Central Park. 
Public reaction varied 
from lavish praise to 
outright ridicule. This 
section of the book 
considers principles on 
which artistic creation is 
commonly judged.

 
AESTHETIC REASONING
407
in audiences; according to the first three, however, art’s function is to achieve 
such objective outcomes as conveying information or knowledge or preserving 
or changing culture or society. But there are yet other influential aesthetic prin-
ciples that do not characterize art in terms of capacities for performing functions. 
According to one commonly held principle, art objects attain aesthetic value by 
virtue of their possessing a certain special aesthetic property or certain special 
formal configurations. 
 7.  Objects are aesthetically valuable if they possess a special aesthetic prop-
erty or exhibit a special aesthetic form.  Sometimes this aesthetic property is 
called “beauty,” and sometimes it is given another name. For instance, the early-
twentieth-century art critic Clive Bell insists that good art is valuable for its own 
sake, not because it fulfills any function. To know whether a work is good aes-
thetically, he urges, one need only look at it or listen to it to see or hear whether 
it has “significant form.” “Significant form” is valuable for itself, not for any func-
tion it performs.   
 Finally, one familiar principle insists that no reasons can be given to support 
judgments about art. Properly speaking, those who adhere to this principle think 
that to approve or disapprove of art is to express an unreasoned preference rather 
than to render judgment. This principle may be stated as follows:
 8.  No reasoned argument can conclude that objects are aesthetically valuable 
or valueless.  This principle is expressed in the Latin saying  “De gustibus non est 
disputandum,” or “Tastes can’t be disputed.” 
 The principles summarized here by no means exhaust the important views 
about aesthetic value, nor are they complete expositions of the views they repre-
sent. Historically, views about the nature of art have proven relatively fluid, for 
they must be responsive to the dynamics of technological and cultural change. 
■ The watercolor by Alicia 
Alvarez on this page, 
and the pen and ink by 
Julia Ross on the page 
next: are lighthearted 
portrayals of the 
feminine, although they 
accomplish this in very 
different ways.

408 
CHAPTER 12: MORAL, LEGAL, AND AESTHETIC REASONING
Moreover, even though the number of familiar conceptions of aesthetic value 
is limited, there are many alternative ways of stating these that combine the 
thoughts behind them in somewhat different ways. 
Consequently, to attempt to label each principle with a name invites 
confusion. For example, let’s consider whether any of the principles might be 
designated  formalism,  which is an important school or style of art. Although 
the seventh principle explicitly ascribes aesthetic value to a work’s form as 
opposed to its function, the formal properties of artworks also figure as valu-
able, although only as means to more valuable ends, in certain formulations 
of the first six principles. For instance, some scholars, critics, and artists think 
certain formal patterns in works of art can evoke corresponding emotions, 
social patterns, or pleasures in audiences—for example, slow music full of 
minor chords is commonly said to make people feel sad. On the other hand, 
the art works on this and the preceding page would generally be seen as having 
a contrary effect. 
 You should understand that all of the principles presented here merely 
serve as a basic framework within which you can explore critical thinking about 
art. If you are interested in the arts, you will very likely want to develop a more 
complex and sophisticated conceptual framework to enrich your thinking about 
this subject.  
 Using Aesthetic Principles to Judge Aesthetic Value 
 The first thing to notice about the aesthetic principles we’ve just discussed is that 
some are compatible with each other. Thus, a reasonable thinker can appeal to 
more than one in reaching a verdict about the aesthetic value of an object. For 
 The story is told of the Ameri-
can tourist in Paris who told 
Pablo Picasso that he didn’t 
like modern paintings because 
they weren’t realistic. Picasso 
made no immediate reply. A 
few minutes later the tourist 
showed him a snapshot of his 
house. 
 “My goodness,” said Picasso, 
“is it really  as small as that? ” 
 —J ACOB B RAUDE

 
AESTHETIC REASONING 
409
instance, a consistent thinker can use both the first and the fifth principle in 
evaluating a tragic drama. Aristotle does just this in his  Poetics. He tells us that 
tragedies are good art when they both convey general truths about the human 
condition and help their audiences purge themselves of the pity and fear they feel 
when they face the truth about human limitations. A play that presents a general 
truth without eliciting the proper catharsis (release of emotion) in the audience 
or a play that provokes tragic emotions unaccompanied by recognition of a gen-
eral truth is not as valuable as a play that does both. 
 However, some of these principles cannot be used together consistently to 
judge aesthetic value. These bear the same relationship to each other as do con-
trary claims (recall the square of opposition in Chapter 9). They cannot both be 
true, although both might be false. For instance, the principle that art is valuable 
in itself by virtue of its form or formal configuration (not because it serves some 
function), and the principle that art is valuable because it serves a social or politi-
cal function cannot be used consistently together. You might have noticed, also, 
that the eighth principle contradicts the others; that is, the first seven principles 
all specify kinds of reasons for guiding and supporting our appreciation of art, but 
the last principle denies that there can be any such good reasons. 
 Finally, it is important to understand that the same principle can generate 
both positive and negative evaluations, depending on whether the work in ques-
tion meets or fails to meet the standard expressed in the principle. For example, 
the fourth principle, which we might call “aesthetic hedonism,” generates positive 
evaluations of works that produce pleasure but negative evaluations of works that 
leave their audiences in pain or displeased. 
 Suppose that the two statements in each of the following pairs both appear in a 
review of the same work of art. Identify which of the eight aesthetic principles 
each statement in the pair appeals to. Then state whether the principles are com-
patible (that is, they are not contrary to each other) and thus form the basis for a 
consistent critical review. 
 1.  a.  Last weekend’s performance of the Wagnerian operatic cycle was superb; 
the music surged through the audience, forging a joyous communal bond. 
 b. Smith’s forceful singing and acting in the role of Siegfried left no doubt 
why Wagner’s vision of heroic morality was attractive to his Teutonic 
contemporaries.     
 2.  a.  Leni Riefenstahl’s film  Triumph of the Will proved to be effective art 
because it convinced its audiences that the Nazi Party would improve the 
German way of life. 
 b. Despite its overtly racist message,  Triumph of the Will is great art, for films 
should be judged on the basis of their visual coherence and not in terms of 
their moral impact. 
 3.  a.  All lovers of art should condemn Jackson Pollock’s meaningless abstract 
expressionist splatter paintings. 
 b. These paintings create neither sadness nor joy; those who view them feel 
nothing, neither love nor hate nor any of the other passions that great art 
evokes.     
▲
 Exercise 12-14 

410 
CHAPTER 12: MORAL, LEGAL, AND AESTHETIC REASONING
4.  a.  Laurence Olivier’s film production of  Hamlet has merit because he allows 
us to experience the impact of the incestuous love that a son can feel for 
his mother. 
 b. Nevertheless, Olivier’s  Hamlet is flawed because it introduces a dimension 
inconceivable to an Elizabethan playwright. 
   5.    a.  There is no point arguing about or giving reasons for verdicts about art, 
because each person’s tastes or responses are so personal. 
 b. Those who condemn sexually explicit performance art do not recognize 
that art is valuable to the extent it permits us to feel liberated and free of 
convention.      
▲
 Evaluating Aesthetic Criticism: Relevance and Truth 
 Is any evaluation of a work of art as good as any other in creating a critical treat-
ment of that work? The answer is no, for two reasons: (1) the principles of art that 
one adopts function as a conceptual framework that distinguishes relevant from 
irrelevant reasons; (2) even a relevant reason is useless if it is not true of the work 
to which it is applied. 
 Let’s consider the first reason. What would convince you of the value of a 
work if you accepted principles 4 through 6—all of which maintain that aesthetic 
value resides in the subjective responses art evokes in its audiences? In this case, 
you are likely to be drawn to see Picasso’s  Guernica  if you are told that it has the 
power to make its viewers experience the horrors of war; but you would not be 
attracted by learning, instead, that  Guernica  explores the relationship of two- and 
three-dimensional spatial concepts. Suppose you reject principles 1 through 3, 
which conceive of aesthetic value in terms of the work’s capacity to perform an 
objective, cognitive, moral, social, or political function. The fact that Picasso was 
a communist will strike you as irrelevant to appreciating  Guernica unless you 
accept one or more of the first three principles. 
 To illustrate the second reason, look at the reproduction of  Guernica. Sup-
pose a critic writes, “By giving his figures fishlike appearances and showing 
them serenely floating through a watery environment, Picasso makes us feel 
 The aim of art is to represent 
not the outward appearance 
of things, but their inward 
significance. 
 —A RISTOTLE 
 ■ Pablo Picasso,  Guernica. 

 
AESTHETIC REASONING 
411
that humans will survive under any conditions.” But no figures in  Guernica look 
anything like fish; moreover, they are surrounded by fire, not water, and they are 
twisted with anguish rather than serene. So, this critic’s reasons are no good. 
Because they are not true of the work, they cannot guide us in perceiving features 
that enhance our appreciation. A similar problem occurs if reasons are implau-
sible. For instance, an interpretation of  Guernica  as a depiction of the Last Supper 
is implausible, because we cannot recognize the usual signs of this theme, the 
twelve disciples and Jesus at a table (or at least at a meal), in the far fewer figures 
of the painting. 
 State whether each of the reasons below is relevant according to any one of the 
aesthetic principles. If the reason is relevant, identify the principle that makes it 
so. If no principle makes the reason relevant, state that it is irrelevant. 
 1. Raphael’s carefully balanced pyramidal compositions give his paintings of 
the Madonna such beautiful form that they have aesthetic value for Christian 
and atheist alike. 
 2. By grouping his figures so that they compose a triangle or pyramid, Raphael 
directs the viewer’s eye upward to heaven and thereby teaches us about the 
close connection between motherhood and God. 
 3. The melody from the chorus “For unto Us a Child Is Born” in Handel’s 
 Messiah was originally composed by Handel for an erotic love song. Con-
sequently, it evokes erotic responses that distract and detract from the devo-
tional feeling audiences are supposed to experience when they hear  Messiah 
performed.  
 4. Vincent van Gogh tells us that he uses clashing reds and greens in  The Night 
Café to help us see his vision of “the terrible passions of humanity”; it is the 
intensity with which he conveys his views of the ugliness of human life that 
makes his work so illuminating. 
 5. The critics who ignored van Gogh’s painting during his lifetime were seri-
ously mistaken; by damaging his self-esteem, they drove him to suicide. 
 6. Moreover, these critics misjudged the aesthetic value of his art, as evidenced 
by the fact that his paintings now sell for as much as $80 million. 
 7. By showing a naked woman picnicking with fully clothed men in  Déjeuner 
sur l’herbe, Édouard Manet treats women as objects and impedes their efforts 
to throw off patriarchal domination. 
▲
▲
▲
 Exercise 12-15 
 Asuka, a three-year-old chimpanzee in Japan, was sad and lonely, so the zoo 
director gave her paper, paints, and brushes to keep her busy. Look at the pho-
tograph of Asuka and her painting on the next page. Does the painting have aes-
thetic value? Use each of the eight aesthetic principles to formulate one reason 
for or against the aesthetic value of Asuka’s work. You should end up with eight 
reasons, one appealing to each principle. 
▲
 Exercise 12-16 

412 
CHAPTER 12: MORAL, LEGAL, AND AESTHETIC REASONING
 ■ Asuka the chimpanzee. 
 Why Reason Aesthetically? 
 The various aesthetic principles we’ve introduced 
are among those most commonly found, either 
explicitly or implicitly, in discussions about art. 
Moreover, they have influenced both the creation of 
art and the selection of art for both private and pub-
lic enjoyment. But where do these principles come 
from? There is much debate about this; to under-
stand it, we can draw on notions about definition 
(introduced in Chapter 3) as well as the discussion 
of generalizations (Chapter 11).  
 Some people think that aesthetic principles 
are simply elaborate definitions of our concepts of 
art or aesthetic value. Let’s explain this point. We 
use definitions to identify things; for example, by 
definition we look for three sides and three angles 
to identify a geometric figure as a triangle. Simi-
larly, we can say that aesthetic principles are defini-
tions; that is, these principles provide an aesthetic 
vocabulary to direct us in recognizing an object’s 
aesthetic value. 
 If aesthetic principles are true by definition, 
then learning to judge art is learning the language 
of art. But because artists strive for originality, we 
are constantly faced with talking about innova-
tive objects to which the critic’s familiar vocabu-
lary does not quite do justice. This aspect of art 
challenges even the most sophisticated critic to 
continually extend the aesthetic vocabulary. 
 Others think that aesthetic principles are generalizations that summarize 
what is true of objects treated as valuable art. Here, the argument is by analogy 
from a sample class to a target population. Thus, someone might hold that all or 
most of the tragic plays we know that are aesthetically valuable have had some-
thing important to say about the human condition; for this reason, we can expect 
this to be true of any member of the class of tragic plays we have not yet evaluated. 
Or, also by inductive analogy, musical compositions that are valued so highly that 
they continue to be performed throughout the centuries all make us feel some 
specific emotion, such as joy or sadness; so we can predict that a newly composed 
piece will be similarly highly valued if it also evokes a strong, clear emotion. Of 
course, such arguments are weakened to the extent that the target object differs 
from the objects in the sample class. Because there is a drive for originality in art, 
newly created works may diverge so sharply from previous samples that argu-
ments by analogy sometimes prove too weak. 
 It is sometimes suggested that these two accounts of the source of aesthetic 
principles really reinforce each other: Our definitions reflect to some extent our 
past experience of the properties or capacities typical of valuable art, and our past 
experience is constrained to some extent by our definitions. But if art changes, of 
what use are principles, whether analytic or inductive, in guiding us to make aes-
thetic judgments and—even more difficult—in fostering agreement about these 
judgments? 

 
RECAP 
413
 At the very least, these principles have an emotive force that guides us in per-
ceiving art. You will remember that emotive force (discussed briefly in Chapter 5) 
is a dimension of language that permits the words we use to do something more 
than convey information. In discussion about art, the words that constitute reasons 
can have an emotive force directing our attention to particular aspects of a work. If 
the critic can describe these aspects accurately and persuasively, it is thought, the 
audience will focus on these aspects and experience a favorable (or unfavorable) 
response similar to the critic’s. If a critic’s reasons are too vague or are not true of 
the work to which they are applied, they are unlikely to bring the audience into 
agreement with the critic. 
 The principles of art, then, serve as guides for identifying appropriate cate-
gories of favorable or unfavorable response, but the reasons falling into these cat-
egories are what bring about agreement. They are useful both in developing our 
own appreciation of a work of art and in persuading others. The reasons must be 
accurately and informatively descriptive of the objects to which they are applied. 
The reasons enable us (1) to select a particular way of viewing, listening, reading, 
or otherwise perceiving the object and (2) to recommend, guide, or prescribe that 
the object be viewed, heard, or read in this way. 
 So, aesthetic reasons contain descriptions that prompt ways of perceiving 
aspects of an object. These prescribed ways of seeing evoke favorable (or unfa-
vorable) responses or experiences. For instance, suppose a critic states that van 
Gogh’s brush strokes in  Starry Night  are dynamic and his colors intense. This 
positive critical reason prescribes that people focus on these features when they 
look at the painting. The expectation is that persons whose vision is swept into 
the movement of van Gogh’s painted sky and pierced by the presence of his 
painted stars will, by virtue of focusing on these formal properties, enjoy a posi-
tive response to the painting. 
 To learn to give reasons and form assessments about art, practice applying 
these principles as you look, listen, or read. Consider what aspects of a painting, 
musical performance, poem, or other work each principle directs you to contem-
plate. It is also important to expand your aesthetic vocabulary so that you have 
words to describe what you see, hear, or otherwise sense in a work. As you do 
so, you will be developing your own aesthetic expertise. And, because your rea-
sons will be structured by aesthetic principles others also accept, you will find 
that rational reflection on art tends to expand both the scope and volume of your 
agreement with others about aesthetic judgments. 
 The key points in this chapter are as follows:
 ■ Value judgments are claims that express values. 
 ■ Moral value judgments express moral values. 
 ■ Certain words, especially “ought,” “should,” “right,” “wrong,” and their oppo-
sites, are used in moral value judgments, though they can also be used in a 
nonmoral sense. 
 ■ Reasoning about morality is distinguished from other types of reasoning in 
that the conclusions it tries to establish are moral value judgments. 
 ■ Conclusions containing a value judgment cannot be reached solely from 
premises that do not contain a value judgment (“you cannot get an ‘ought’ 
 Recap 

414 
CHAPTER 12: MORAL, LEGAL, AND AESTHETIC REASONING
from an ‘is’ ”). A general moral principle must be supplied to tie together the 
fact-stating premise and the value-judgment conclusion. 
 ■ In a case in which we disagree with a value-judgment conclusion but not 
with the fact-stating premise, we can point to this general moral principle as 
the source of disagreement. 
 ■ People are sometimes inconsistent in their moral views: They treat similar 
cases as if they were different, even when they cannot tell us what is impor-
tantly different about them. 
 ■ When two or more cases that are being treated differently seem similar, the 
burden of proof is on the person who is treating them differently to explain 
what is different about them. 
 ■ Moral reasoning is usually conducted within a perspective or framework. 
Influential Western perspectives include consequentialism, utilitarianism, 
ethical egoism, deontologism, moral relativism, religious absolutism, reli-
gious relativism, and virtue ethics. 
 ■ Often, different perspectives converge to produce similar solutions to a moral 
issue.  
 ■ Keeping in mind our own perspective can help focus our own moral delibera-
tions on relevant considerations. 
 ■ Legal reasoning, like moral reasoning, is often prescriptive. 
 ■ Legal studies are devoted to such problems as justifying laws that prescribe 
conduct. 
 ■ Legal moralism, the harm principle, legal paternalism, and the offense prin-
ciple are grounds for justifying laws that prescribe conduct. 
 ■ Determining just when and where a law applies often requires making vague 
claims specific. 
 ■ Precedent is a kind of analogical argument by means of which current cases 
are settled in accordance with guidelines set by cases decided previously. 
 ■ Whether a precedent governs in a given case is decided on grounds similar to 
those of any other analogical argument. 
 ■ To reason aesthetically is to make judgments within a conceptual framework 
that integrates facts and values. 
 ■ Aesthetic value is often identified as the capacity to fulfill a function, such as 
to create pleasure or promote social change. 
 ■ Alternatively, aesthetic value is defined in terms of a special aesthetic prop-
erty or form found in works of art. 
 ■ Still another view treats aesthetic judgments as expressions of tastes. 
 ■ Reasoned argument about aesthetic value helps us to see, hear, or otherwise 
perceive art in changed or expanded ways and to enhance our appreciation 
of art. 
 ■ A critic who gives reasons in support of an aesthetic verdict forges agreement 
by getting others to share perceptions of the work. The greater the extent to 
which we share such aesthetic perceptions, the more we can reach agree-
ment about aesthetic value. 

 
EXERCISES 
415
 Exercise 12-17 
 State whether the following reasons are (a) helpful in focusing perception to elicit 
a favorable response, (b) helpful in focusing perception to elicit an unfavorable 
response, (c) too vague to focus perception, (d) false or implausible and therefore 
unable to focus perception, or (e) irrelevant to focusing perception. The infor-
mation you need is contained in the reasons, so try to visualize or imagine what 
the work is like from what is said. All of these are paraphrases of testimony given 
at a hearing in 1985 about a proposal to remove  Tilted Arc,  an immense abstract 
sculpture, from a plaza in front of a federal office building. 
1. Richard Serra’s  Tilted Arc is a curved slab of welded steel 12 feet high, 120 
feet long, weighing over 73 tons, and covered completely with a natural 
oxide coating. The sculpture arcs through the plaza. By coming to terms with 
its harshly intrusive disruption of space, we can learn much about how the 
nature of the spaces we inhabit affects our social relations. 
 2. Richard Serra is one of our leading artists, and his work commands very high 
prices. The government has a responsibility to the financial community. It is 
bad business to destroy this work because you would be destroying property.  
 3.  Tilted Arc ’s very tilt and rust remind us that the gleaming and heartless steel 
and glass structures of the state apparatus can one day pass away. It there-
fore creates an unconscious sense of freedom and hope. 
4.  Tilted Arc looks like a discarded piece of crooked or bent metal; there’s no 
more meaning in having it in the middle of the plaza than in putting an old 
bicycle that got run over by a car there. 
 5.  Tilted Arc launches through space in a thrilling and powerful acutely arched 
curve.  
▲
▲
 Additional 
Exercises 
 ■ Richard Serra’s  Tilted Arc. 

416 
CHAPTER  12: MORAL, LEGAL, AND AESTHETIC REASONING
 6.  Tilted Arc is big and rusty. 
 7. Because of its size, thrusting shape, and 
implacably uniform rusting surface,  Tilted 
Arc makes us feel hopeless, trapped, and 
sad. This sculpture would be interesting if 
we could visit it when we had time to explore 
these feelings, but it is too depressing to face 
every day on our way to work. 
 8. Serra’s erotically realistic, precise rendering 
of the female figure in  Tilted Arc exhibits how 
appealingly he can portray the soft circularity 
of a woman’s breast. 
 9.  Tilted Arc is sort of red; it probably isn’t blue. 
 Exercise 12-18 
 The artist Artemisia Gentileschi (ca. 1597–after 
1651) was very successful in her own time. Suc-
cess came despite the trauma of her early life, 
when she figured as the victim in a notorious 
rape trial. But after she died, her work fell into 
obscurity; it was neither shown in major muse-
ums nor written about in art history books. 
Recently, feminist scholars have revived inter-
est in her work by connecting the style and/or 
▲
 ■ Artemisia Gentileschi’s 
Judith. 
▲
theme of such paintings as her  Judith  with her 
rape and with feelings or issues of importance to women. But other schol-
ars have pointed out that both her subject matter and her treatment of it are 
conventionally found as well in the work of male painters of the Caravaggist 
school, with which she is identified. Based on this information, and using one 
or more of the aesthetic principles described in this chapter, write an essay 
arguing either that the painting  Judith  has aesthetic value worthy of our atten-
tion or that it should continue to be ignored.  
 Writing Exercises 
 1. In the movie  Priest, the father of a young girl admits to the local priest—in 
the confessional—that he has molested his daughter. However, the man 
lacks remorse and gives every indication that he will continue to abuse the 
girl. For the priest to inform the girl’s mother or the authorities would be to 
violate the sanctity of the confessional, but to not inform anyone would sub-
ject the girl to further abuse. What should the priest do? Take about fifteen 
minutes to do the following:
 
a.  List the probable consequences of the courses of action available to the 
priest.  
 
b. List any duties or rights or other considerations that bear on the issue. 
   
When fifteen minutes are up, share your ideas with the class. 

 
EXERCISES 
417
   
 Now, take about twenty minutes to write an essay in which you do the 
following:
 
a. State the issue. 
 
b. Take a stand on the issue. 
 
c. Defend your stand. 
 
d. Rebut counterarguments to your position. 
   
 When you are finished, write down on a separate piece of paper a num-
ber between 1 and 10 that indicates how strong you think your argument 
is (1  5 very weak; 10  5 very strong). Write your name on the back of your 
paper. 
   
 When everyone is finished, the instructor will collect the papers and 
redistribute them to the class. In groups of four or five, read the papers and 
assign a number from 1 to 10 to each one (1  5 very weak; 10  5 very strong). 
When all groups are finished, return the papers to their authors. When you 
get your paper back, compare the number you assigned to your work with 
the number the group assigned it. The instructor may ask volunteers to 
defend their own judgment of their work against the judgment of the group. 
Do you think there is as much evidence for your position as you did at the 
beginning of the period? 
 2. Follow the same procedure as previously used to address one of the follow-
ing issues:
 
a.  A friend cheats in the classes he has with you. You know he’d just laugh if 
you voiced any concern. Should you mention it to your instructor? 
 
b.  You see a friend stealing something valuable. Even though you tell your 
friend that you don’t approve, she keeps the item. What should you do? 
 
c.  Your best friend’s fiancé has just propositioned you for sex. Should you 
tell your friend? 
 
d.  Your parents think you should major in marketing or some other practi-
cal field. You want to major in literature. Your parents pay the bills. What 
should you do? 
 3. Before a stand your ground  (SYG) law such as that found in Florida (see the 
box on page 403), there was a presumed common-law requirement that a 
person attempt to retreat from a threat of bodily harm everywhere outside 
one’s own home. Under this common-law requirement, only when retreat 
was impossible or unreasonable could one respond with deadly force. Under 
the Florida SYG law, one has the right to use deadly force in self-defense 
wherever he or she has a legal right to be. Under what circumstances do you 
think the Florida law should come into play? That is, what would one have 
to know about the confrontation between Zimmerman and Martin before 
applying the statute?
 4. Generally speaking, do you think stand your ground laws are a good idea? 
Why, or why not?
 5. Which of the four types of justification described in the chapter best apply to 
stand your ground laws? Is the justification successful?

EXERCISES FROM PREVIOUS EDITIONS 
 Note: Answers to questions 5, 10, 15, and so on may be found in the Student Edition of the Online Learning Center; 
answers to all questions may be found in the Instructor’s Edition of the Online Learning Center. 
 Exercise A-1 
 Identify (and explain, if your instructor requires) any fallacies you find in the fol-
lowing passages. There may be some that contain no fallacy. 
   The proponents of this spend-now–pay-later boondoggle would like you to 
believe that this measure will cost you only one billion dollars. That’s NOT TRUE. 
In the last general election, some of these very same people argued against 
unneeded rail projects because they would cost taxpayers millions more in inter-
est payments. Now they have changed their minds and are willing to encourage 
irresponsible borrowing. Connecticut is already awash in red ink. Vote NO.  
 Of course, Chinese green tea is good for your health. If it weren’t, how could it be 
so beneficial to drink it? 
  Overheard: “No, I’m against this health plan business. None of the proposals are 
gonna fix everything, you can bet on that.” 
  Rush Limbaugh argues that the establishment clause of the First Amendment 
should not be stretched beyond its intended dimensions by precluding volun-
tary prayer in public schools. This is a peculiar argument, when you consider that 
Limbaugh is quite willing to stretch the Second Amendment to include the right 
to own assault rifles and Saturday night specials. 
  You have a choice: Either you let ’em out to murder and rape again and again, or 
you put up with a little prison overcrowding. I know what I’d choose. 
  I think you can safely assume that Justice Scalia’s opinions on the cases before the 
Supreme Court this term will be every bit as flaky as his past opinions. 
  The legalization of drugs will not promote their use. The notion of a widespread 
hysteria sweeping across the nation as every man, woman, and child instanta-
neously becomes addicted to drugs upon their legalization is, in short, ridiculous.  
  Way I figure is, giving up smoking isn’t gonna make me live forever, so why bother?  
  Harvard now takes the position that its investment in urban redevelopment proj-
ects will be limited to projects that are environmentally friendly. Before you con-
clude that that is such a swell idea, stop and think. For a long time, Harvard was 
one of the biggest slumlords in the country. 
  Capital punishment was invented during barbaric times. No civilized society 
ought to tolerate it. 
  Dear Editor—I read with amusement the letter by Leslie Burr titled “It’s time to get 
tough.” Did anyone else notice a little problem in her views? It seems a little odd 
that somebody who claims that she “loathes violence” could also say that “crimi-
nals should pay with their life.” I guess consistency isn’t Ms. Burr’s greatest concern.  
  I believe Tim is telling the truth about his brother, because he just would not lie 
about that sort of thing. 
  I think I was treated unfairly. I got a ticket out on McCrae Road. I was doing about 
sixty miles an hour, and the cop charged me with “traveling at an unsafe speed.” 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
 APPENDIX 

 
EXERCISE A1 
419
I asked him just exactly what would have been a safe speed on that particular 
occasion—fifty? forty-five?—and he couldn’t tell me. Neither could the judge. I 
tell you, if you don’t know what speeds are unsafe, you shouldn’t give tickets for 
“unsafe speeds.” 
     YOU: Look at this. It says here that white males still earn a lot more than minori-
ties and women for doing the same job. 
 YOUR FRIEND: Yeah, right. Written by some woman, no doubt. 
  Suspicious: “I would forget about whatever Moore and Parker have to say about 
pay for college teachers. After all, they’re both professors themselves; what would 
you expect them to say?” 
  “Steve Thompson of the California Medical Association said document-checking 
might even take place in emergency rooms. That’s because, while undocumented 
immigrants would be given emergency care, not all cases that come into emer-
gency rooms fall under the federal definition of an emergency. 
 “To all those arguments initiative proponents say hogwash. They say the 
education and health groups opposing the initiative are interested in protect-
ing funding they receive for providing services to the undocumented.” 
 —Sacramento Bee 
  “Creationism cannot possibly be true. People who believe in a literal interpreta-
tion of the Bible just never outgrew the need to believe in Santa Claus.” 
 — Melinda Zerkle 
  It’s obvious to me that abortion is wrong—after all, everybody deserves a chance 
to be born. 
  Overheard: Well, I think that’s too much to tip her. It’s more than 15 percent. Next 
time it will be 20 percent, then 25 percent—where will it stop? 
     CARLOS: Four a.m.? Do we really have to start that early? Couldn’t we leave a little 
later and get more sleep? 
 JEANNE: C’mon, don’t hand me that! I know you! If you want to stay in bed until 
noon and then drag in there in the middle of the night, then go by yourself! If we 
want to get there at a reasonable hour, then we have to get going early and not 
spend the whole day sleeping. 
  “Americans spend between $28 and $61 billion a year in medical costs for treat-
ment of hypertension, heart disease, cancer and other illnesses attributed to con-
sumption of meat, says a report out today from a pro-vegetarian doctor’s group. 
 “Dr. Neal D. Barnard, lead author of the report in the  Journal of Preventive Med-
icine,  and colleagues looked at studies comparing the health of vegetarians and 
meat eaters, then figured the cost of treating illnesses suffered by meat eaters in 
excess of those suffered by vegetarians. Only studies that controlled for the health 
effects of smoking, exercise and alcohol consumption were considered. 
 “The American Medical Association, in a statement from Dr. M. Roy Schwarz, 
charged that Barnard’s group is an ‘animal rights front organization’ whose 
agenda ‘definitely taints whatever unsubstantiated findings it may claim.’ ” 
 —USA Today 
  I know a lot of people don’t find anything wrong with voluntary euthanasia, 
where a patient is allowed to make a decision to die and that wish is carried out 
by a doctor or someone else. What will happen, though, is that if we allow volun-
tary euthanasia, before you know it we’ll have the patient’s relatives or the doctors 
making the decision that the patient should be “put out of his misery.” 
  You’re wrong about Rudy Giuliani not knowing how to best to handle terror 
attacks. After all, when 9/11 happened, he was there. 
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23

420 
APPENDIX: EXERCISES FROM PREVIOUS EDITIONS
  Whenever legislators have the power to raise taxes, they will always find problems 
that seem to require for their solution doing exactly that. This is an axiom, the 
proof of which is that the power to tax always generates the perception on the part 
of those who have that power that there exist various ills the remedy for which can 
lie only in increased governmental spending and hence higher taxes. 
  Don’t tell me I should wear my seat belt, for heaven’s sake. I’ve seen you ride a 
motorcycle without a helmet! That’s even more dangerous! 
  I’ll tell you what Congress passed. They call it health care reform, but what it really 
is is communism, pure and simple. It’s designed to tax everybody who works so 
people who don’t work can still have an easy life. 
  When it comes to the issue of race relations, either you’re part of the solution, or 
you’re part of the problem. 
  What! So now you’re telling me we should get a new car? I don’t buy that at all. 
Didn’t you claim just last month that there was nothing wrong with the Plymouth?  
  Letter to the editor: “The Supreme Court decision outlawing a moment of silence 
for prayer in public schools is scandalous. Evidently the American Civil Liber-
ties Union and the other radical groups will not be satisfied until every last man, 
woman and child in the country is an atheist. I’m fed up.” 
  We should impeach the attorney general. Despite the fact that there have been 
many allegations of unethical conduct on his part, he has not done anything to 
demonstrate his innocence. 
  Amnesty International defends only criminals. This is obvious because the peo-
ple it helps are already in jail, and that shows they’re guilty of something. 
 Overheard: “Hunting immoral? Why should I believe that, coming from you? You 
fish, don’t you?” 
  “Will we have an expanding government, or will we balance the budget, cut gov-
ernment waste and eliminate unneeded programs?” 
 — Newt Gingrich, in a Republican National Committee solicitation 
  Despite all the studies and the public outcry, it’s still true that nobody has ever 
actually seen cigarette smoking cause a cancer. All the antismoking people can do 
is talk about statistics; as long as there isn’t real proof, I’m not believing it. 
  YOU: Clinton should have been thrown in jail for immoral behavior. Just look at 
all the women he has had affairs with since he left the presidency. 
 YOUR FRIEND: Hey, wait a minute. How do you know he has had affairs since he 
was president? 
 YOU: Because if he didn’t, then why would he be trying to cover up the fact that 
he did? 
  On “The Colbert Report”, Steven Colbert regularly asked his guests: “George W. 
Bush: a great president? or the greatest president?” 
  In 1996, a University of Chicago study gave evidence that letting people carry con-
cealed guns appears to sharply reduce murders, rapes, and other violent crimes. 
Gun-control backer Josh Sugarman of the Violence Policy Center commented: 
“Anyone who argues that these laws reduce crime either doesn’t understand the 
nature of crime or has a preset agenda.” 
  Letter to the editor: “I strongly object to the proposed sale of alcoholic bev-
erages at County Golf Course. The idea of allowing people to drink wherever 
and whenever they please is positively disgraceful and can only lead to more 
alcoholism and all the problems it produces—drunk driving, perverted par-
ties, and who knows what else. I’m sure General Stuart, if he were alive today 
to see what has become of the land he deeded to the county, would disapprove 
strenuously.”  
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38

 
EXERCISE A1 
421
  Letter to the editor: “I’m not against immigrants or immigration, but something 
has to be done soon. We’ve got more people already than we can provide neces-
sary services for, and, at the current rate, we’ll have people standing on top of one 
another by the end of the century. Either we control these immigration policies or 
there won’t be room for any of us to sit down.” 
  Letter to the editor: “So now we find our local crusader-for-all-that-is-right, and I am 
referring to Councilman Benjamin Bostell, taking up arms against the local adult 
bookstore. Is this the same Mr. Bostell who owns the biggest liquor store in Chilton 
County? Well, maybe booze isn’t the same as pornography, but they’re the same sort 
of thing. C’mon, Mr. Bostell, aren’t you a little like the pot calling the kettle black?”  
  Letter to the editor: “Once again the  Courier  displays its taste for slanted journal-
ism. Why do your editors present only one point of view? 
 “I am referring specifically to the editorial of May 27, regarding the death pen-
alty. So capital punishment makes you squirm a little. What else is new? Would you 
prefer to have murderers and assassins wandering around scot-free? How about 
quoting someone who has a different point of view from your own, for a change?”  
  There is only one way to save this country from the domination by the illegal drug 
establishment to which Colombia has been subjected, and that’s to increase ten-
fold the funds we spend on drug enforcement and interdiction. 
  It’s practically a certainty that the government is violating the law in the arms 
deals with Saudi Arabians. When officials were asked to describe how they were 
complying with the law, they said that details about the arms sales were classified.  
  Letter to the editor: “I would like to express my feelings on the recent conflict 
between county supervisor Blanche Wilder and Murdock County Sheriff Al Peters 
over the county budget. 
 “I have listened to sheriffs’ radio broadcasts. Many times there have been dan-
gerous and life-threatening situations when the sheriff’s deputies’ quickest pos-
sible arrival time is 20 to 30 minutes. This is to me very frightening. 
 “Now supervisor Wilder wants to cut two officers from the Sheriff’s Depart-
ment. This proposal I find ridiculous. Does she really think that Sheriff Peters can 
run his department with no officers? How anyone can think that a county as large 
as Murdock can get by with no police is beyond me. I feel this proposal would be 
very detrimental to the safety and protection of this county’s residents.” 
  Letter to the editor: “Andrea Keene’s selective morality is once again showing 
through in her July 15 letter. This time she expresses her abhorrence of abortion. 
But how we see only what we choose to see! I wonder if any of the anti- abortionists 
have considered the widespread use of fertility drugs as the moral equivalent of 
abortion, and, if they have, why they haven’t come out against them, too. The use 
of these drugs frequently results in multiple births, which leads to the death of 
one of the infants, often after an agonizing struggle for survival. According to the 
rules of the pro-lifers, isn’t this murder?” 
  In one of her columns, Abigail Van Buren printed the letter of “I’d rather be a 
widow.” The letter writer, a divorcée, complained about widows who said they 
had a hard time coping. Far better, she wrote, to be a widow than to be a divorcée, 
who are all “rejects” who have been “publicly dumped” and are avoided “like they 
have leprosy.” Abby recognized the fallacy for what it was, though she did not call 
it by our name. What is our name for it? 
 Overheard: “Should school kids say the Pledge of Allegiance before class? Cer-
tainly. Why shouldn’t they?” 
  Letter to the editor: “Once again the Park Commission is considering closing 
North Park Drive for the sake of a few joggers and bicyclists. These so-called 
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48

422 
APPENDIX: EXERCISES FROM PREVIOUS EDITIONS
fitness enthusiasts would evidently have us give up to them for their own private 
use every last square inch of Walnut Grove. Then anytime anyone wanted a pic-
nic, he would have to park at the edge of the park and carry everything in—ice 
chests, chairs, maybe even Grandma. I certainly hope the commission keeps the 
entire park open for everyone to use.” 
  “Some Christian—and other—groups are protesting against the placing, on fed-
eral property near the White House, of a set of plastic figurines representing a 
devout Jewish family in ancient Judaea. The protestors would of course deny that 
they are driven by any anti-Semitic motivation. Still, we wonder: Would they raise 
the same objections (of unconstitutionality, etc.) if the scene depicted a modern, 
secularized Gentile family?” 
 —National Review 
  “It’s stupid to keep on talking about rich people not paying their fair share of taxes 
while the budget is so far out of balance. Why, if we raised the tax rates on the wealthy 
all the way back to where they were in 1980, it would not balance the federal budget.” 
 — Radio commentary by Howard Miller 
  From a letter to the editor: “The counties of Michigan clearly need the ability to raise 
additional sources of revenue, not only to meet the demands of growth but also to 
maintain existing levels of service. For without these sources those demands will 
not be met, and it will be impossible to maintain services even at present levels.”  
  A representative of the Catholic Church in Puerto Rico, in a radio interview (broad-
cast on National Public Radio), said that the Church was against the use of con-
doms. Even though the rate of AIDS infection in Puerto Rico is much higher than on 
the U.S. mainland, the spokesperson said that the Church could not support the use 
of condoms because they are not absolutely reliable in preventing the spread of the 
disease. “If you could prove that condoms were absolutely dependable in prevent-
ing a person from contracting AIDS, then the Church could support their use.”  
  [Former California] Assemblyman Doug La Malfa said AB 45 [which bans hand-
held cell phone use while driving] is one more example of a “nanny government.” 
“I’m sick and tired of being told what to do on these trivial things,” he said. “Hel-
met laws, seat-belt laws—what’s next?” 
  The U.S. Congress considered a resolution criticizing the treatment of ethnic 
minorities in a Near Middle Eastern country. When the minister of the interior 
was asked for his opinion of the resolution, he replied, “This is purely an internal 
affair in my country, and politicians in the U.S. should stay out of such affairs. If 
the truth be known, they should be more concerned with the plight of minority 
peoples in their own country. Thousands of black and Latino youngsters suffer 
from malnutrition in the United States. They can criticize us after they’ve got their 
own house in order.” 
  It doesn’t make any sense to speak of tracing an individual human life back past 
the moment of conception. After all, that’s the beginning, and you can’t go back 
past the beginning.  
 MOE: The death penalty is an excellent deterrent for murder. 
 JOE: What makes you think so? 
 MOE: Well, for one thing, there’s no evidence that it’s not a deterrent. 
  JOE: Well, states with capital punishment have murder rates just as high as states 
that don’t have it. 
  MOE: Yes, but that’s only because there are so many legal technicalities standing 
in the way of executions that convicted people hardly ever get executed. Remove 
those technicalities, and the rate would be lower in those states. 
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56

 
EXERCISE A1 
423
  Overheard: “The new sculpture in front of the municipal building by John Murrah 
is atrocious and unseemly, which is clear to anyone who hasn’t forgotten Mur-
rah’s mouth in Vietnam right there along with Hayden and Fonda calling for the 
defeat of America. I say: Drill holes in it so it’ll sink and throw it in Walnut Pond.” 
  Overheard: “Once we let these uptight guardians of morality have their way and 
start censoring  Playboy and  Penthouse, the next thing you know they’ll be dictat-
ing everything we can read. We’ll be in fine shape when they decide that  Webster’s 
should be pulled from the shelves.” 
  It seems the biggest problem the nuclear industry has to deal with is not a poor 
safety record but a lack of education of the public on nuclear power. Thousands 
of people die each year from pollution generated by coal-fired plants. Yet, to date 
there has been no death directly caused by radiation at a commercial nuclear 
power plant in the United States. We have a clear choice: an old, death-dealing 
source of energy or a safe, clean one. Proven through the test of time, nuclear 
power is clearly the safest form of energy and the least detrimental to the environ-
ment. Yet it is perceived as unsafe and an environmental hazard. 
  A high school teacher once told my class that, if a police state ever arose in Amer-
ica, it would happen because we freely handed away our civil rights in exchange 
for what we perceived would be security from the government. We are looking at 
just that in connection with the current drug crisis. 
 “For almost thirty years, we’ve seen increasing tolerance, legally and socially, 
of drug use. Now we are faced with the very end of America as we know it, if not 
from the drug problem, then from the proposed solutions to it.” 
 “First, it was urine tests. Officials said that the innocent have nothing to fear. 
Using that logic, why not allow unannounced police searches of our homes for 
stolen goods? After all, the innocent would have nothing to fear.” 
 “Now we’re looking at the seizure of boats and other property when even traces 
of drugs are found. You’d better hope some drug-using guest doesn’t drop the 
wrong thing in your home, car, or boat.” 
 “The only alternative to declaring real war on the real enemies—the Asian and 
South American drug families—is to wait for that knock on the door in the middle 
of the night.” 
  The mayor’s argument is that, because the developers’ fee would reduce the num-
ber of building starts, ultimately the city would lose more money than it would 
gain through the fee. But I can’t go along with that. Mayor Tower is a member of 
the Board of Realtors, and you know what they think of the fee. 
  Letter to the editor: “Next week the philosopher Tom Regan will be in town again, 
peddling his animal rights theory. In case you’ve forgotten, Regan was here about 
three years ago arguing against using animals in scientific experimentation. As 
far as I could see then and can see now, neither Regan nor anyone else has man-
aged to come up with a good reason why animals should not be experimented 
on. Emotional appeals and horror stories no doubt influence many, but they 
shouldn’t. I’ve always wondered what Regan would say if his children needed 
medical treatment that was based on animal experiments.” 
  Not long before Ronald and Nancy Reagan moved out of the White House, former 
chief of staff Don Regan wrote a book in which he depicted a number of reveal-
ing inside stories about First Family goings-on. Among them was the disclosure 
that Nancy Reagan regularly sought the advice of a San Francisco astrologer. In 
response to the story, the White House spokesperson at the time, Marlin Fitz-
water, said, “Vindictiveness and revenge are not admirable qualities and are not 
worthy of comment.” 
57
58
59
60
61
62
63

424 
APPENDIX: EXERCISES FROM PREVIOUS EDITIONS
  “People in Hegins, Pennsylvania, hold an annual pigeon shoot in order to control 
the pigeon population and to raise money for the town. This year, the pigeon shoot 
was disrupted by animal rights activists who tried to release the pigeons from their 
cages. I can’t help but think these animal rights activists are the same people who 
believe in controlling the human population through the use of abortion. Yet, they 
recoil at a similar means of controlling pigeons. What rank hypocrisy.” 
 — Rush Limbaugh 
  Dear Mr. Swanson: I realize I’m not up for a salary increase yet, but I thought it 
might make my review a bit more timely if I pointed out to you that I have a copy 
of all the recent e-mail messages between you and Ms. Flood in the purchasing 
department. 
 I don’t care if Nike has signed up Michael Jordan, Tiger Woods, and even Santa 
Claus to endorse its shoes. It’s a crummy company that makes a crummy product. 
The proof is the fact that it pays poor women a dollar sixty for a long day’s work 
in its Vietnamese shoe factories. That’s not even enough to buy a day’s worth of 
decent meals! 
  I don’t care if Nike has signed up Michael Jordan, Tiger Woods, and even Santa 
Claus to endorse its shoes. It’s a crummy company, and I wouldn’t buy its shoes 
no matter what the circumstance. You don’t need any reason beyond the fact that 
it pays poor women a dollar sixty for a long day’s work in its Vietnamese shoe fac-
tories. That’s not even enough to buy a day’s worth of decent meals! 
  Nike is a crummy company that makes crummy shoes. Look: it still sponsors Tiger 
Woods even after all the bad stuff that came to light about him. 
     POWELL FAN: Colin Powell said that diplomatic efforts to avoid war with Iraq 
were serious and genuine, and his word was good enough for me. 
 SKEPTIC: And what made you so sure he was telling telling it like it is? 
 POWELL FAN: Because he’s the one guy in the administration you could trust. 
  If you give the cat your leftover asparagus, next thing you know you’ll be feeding 
him your potatoes, maybe even your roast beef. Where will it all end? Pretty soon 
that wretched animal will be sitting up here on the table for dinner. He’ll be eating 
us out of house and home. 
  Look, either we refrain from feeding the cat table scraps, or he’ll be up here on the 
table with us. So don’t go giving him your asparagus. 
  We have a simple choice. Saving Social Security is sure as hell a lot more impor-
tant than giving people a tax cut. So write your representative now, and let him or 
her know how you feel. 
  Let gays join the military? Give me a break. God created Adam and Eve, not Adam 
and Steve. 
  So my professor told me if he gave me an A for getting an 89.9 on the test, next he’d 
have to give people an A for getting an 89.8 on the test, and pretty soon he’d have 
to give everyone in the class an A. How could I argue with that? 
  Those blasted Democrats! They want to increase government spending on educa-
tion again. This is the same outfit that gave us $600 toilet seats and government 
regulations up the wazoo. 
  The way I see it, either the senator resigns, or he sends a message that no one 
should admit to his misdeeds. 
  Lauren did a better job than anyone else at the audition, so even though she has 
no experience, we’ve decided to give her the part in the play. 
     TERRY: I failed my test, but I gave my prof this nifty argument. I said, “Look, sup-
pose somebody did 0.0001 percent better than I, would that be a big enough dif-
ference to give him a higher grade?” And he had to say no, so then I said, “And if 
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78

 
EXERCISE A1 
425
someone did 0.0001 percent better than that second person, would that be a big 
enough difference?” And he had to say no to that, too, so I just kept it up, and he 
never could point to the place where the difference was big enough to give the 
other person a higher grade. He finally saw he couldn’t justify giving anyone a 
better grade. 
 HARRY: Well? What happened? 
 TERRY: He had to fail the whole class. 
  “Many, but not all, on the other side of the aisle lack the will to win,” said Repre-
sentative Charlie Norwood of Georgia. “The American people need to know pre-
cisely who they are.” He said, “It is time to stand up and vote. Is it Al Qaeda, or is 
it America?” 
 —New York Times,  June 15, 2006 
  Look, maybe you think it’s okay to legalize tribal casinos, but I don’t. Letting every 
last group of people in the country open a casino is a ridiculous idea, bound to 
cause trouble. 
 What, you of all people complaining about violence on TV? You, with all the pro 
football you watch? 
  You have three Fs and a D on your exams, and your quizzes are on the borderline 
between passing and failing. I’m afraid you don’t deserve to pass the course. 
  I can safely say that no law, no matter how stiff the consequence is, will com-
pletely stop illegal drug use. Outlawing drugs is a waste of time. 
  If we expand the commuter bus program, where is it going to end? Will we want 
to have a trolley system? Then a light rail system? Then expand Metrolink to our 
area? A city this size hardly needs and certainly cannot afford all these amenities. 
     YAEKO: The character Dana Scully on  The X-Files  really provided a good role 
model for young women. She was a medical doctor and an FBI agent, and she was 
intelligent, professional, and devoted to her work. 
  MICHAEL: Those shows about paranormal activities are so unrealistic. Alien 
abductions, government conspiracies—it’s all ridiculous. 
  Overheard: “The reason I don’t accept evolution is that ever since Darwin, scien-
tists have been trying to prove that we evolved from some apelike primate ances-
tor. Well, they still haven’t succeeded. Case closed.” 
 Ladies and gentlemen, as you know, I endorsed council member Morrissey’s 
bid for reelection based on his outstanding record during his first term. Because 
you are the movers and shakers in this community, other people place the same 
high value on your opinions that I do. Jim and I would feel privileged to have your 
support.  
  It’s totally ridiculous to suppose that creationism is true. If creationism were true, 
then half of what we know through science would be false, which is complete 
nonsense.  
 KIRSTI: I counted my CDs this weekend, and out of twenty-seven, ten of them 
were by U2. They were such a good band! I haven’t heard anything by Bono for a 
long time. He had such a terrific voice! 
 BEN: Wasn’t he bisexual? 
 Was Gerhard a good committee chair? Well, I for one think you have to say he was 
excellent, especially when you consider all the abuse he put up with. Right from 
the start, people went after him—they didn’t even give him a chance to show what 
he could do. It was really vicious—people making fun of him right to his face. Yes, 
under the circumstances he has been quite effective. 
  Medical research that involves animals is completely unnecessary and a waste 
of money. Just think of the poor creatures! We burn and blind and torture them, 
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91

426 
APPENDIX: EXERCISES FROM PREVIOUS EDITIONS
and then we kill them. They don’t know what is going to happen to them, but they 
know something is going to happen. They are scared to death. It’s really an outrage.  
 Dear Editor— If Christians do not participate in government, only sinners will. 
  The HMO people claim that the proposal will raise the cost of doing business 
in the state to such a degree that insurers will be forced to leave and do busi-
ness elsewhere. What nonsense. Just look at what we get from these HMOs. 
I know people who were denied decent treatment for cancer because their 
HMO wouldn’t approve it. There are doctors who won’t recommend a pro-
cedure for their patients because they are afraid the HMO will cancel their 
contract. And when an HMO does cancel some doctor’s contract, the patients 
have to find a new doctor themselves—if they can. Everybody has a horror 
story. Enough is enough.  
  From an interview by Gwen Ifill (PBS News Hour) with Senator Kit Bond, then 
ranking Republican on the Senate Intelligence Committee:
   IFILL: Do you think that waterboarding, as I have described it, constitutes torture?  
  BOND: There are different ways of doing it; it’s like swimming: freestyle, back-
stroke. Waterboarding could be used, almost, to define some of the techniques 
that our trainees are put through. But that’s beside the point. It’s not being used. 
There are some who say that, in extreme circumstances, if there is a threat of an 
imminent major attack on the United States, it might be used. 
  The opposing party is going to give its reply to the president’s speech in just a few 
minutes. Prepare yourself for the usual misstatements of fact, exaggerated criti-
cism, and attempts to distract from the real issues. Their only reason for giving a 
reply is to score political points. 
  The proposal to reduce spending for the arts just doesn’t make any sense. We 
spend a paltry $620 million for the NEA [National Endowment for the Arts], while 
the deficit is closing in on $200 billion. Cutting support for the arts isn’t going to 
eliminate the deficit; that’s obvious. 
  Year-round schools? I’m opposed. Once we let them do that, the next thing you 
know they’ll be cutting into our vacation time and asking us to teach in the eve-
nings and on the weekends, and who knows where it will end. We teachers have 
to stand up for our rights. 
 Romney was for abortion rights before he began running for president. Then he 
was anti-abortion. I thought he should be ignored completely on the subject since 
you couldn’t depend on what he says. 
  Even if we outlaw guns, we’re still going to have crime and murder. So I really 
don’t see much point in it. 
 Exercise A-2 
 Select the fallacy most clearly present (if one is present) from the lists following 
the passages. 
   The health editor for  USA Today  certainly seems to know what she is talking 
about when she recommends we take vitamins, but I happen to know she works 
for Tishcon, Inc., a large manufacturer of vitamin supplements.
 a. irrelevant conclusion 
   b. apple polishing  
   c. fallacious appeal to popularity  
 d.  argumentum ad hominem 
 e. no fallacy 
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
1

 
EXERCISE A2 
427
  The president is right. People who are against fighting in Afghanistan are unwill-
ing to face up to the threat of terrorism.
 a. fallacious to common practice  
 b. peer pressure fallacy 
 c. false dilemma 
 d. straw man 
 e. begging the question 
  Well, I, for one, think the position taken by our union is correct, and I’d like to 
remind you before you make up your mind on the matter that around here we 
employees have a big say in who gets rehired.
 a. wishful thinking 
 b.  argumentum ad hominem 
 c. scare tactics 
 d. apple polishing 
 e. begging the question 
  On the whole, I think global warming is a farce. After all, most people think win-
ters are getting colder, if anything. How could that many people be wrong?
 a. appeal to emotion (outrage) 
 b. fallacious appeal to popularity 
 c. straw man 
 d. no fallacy 
 MARCO: I think global warming is a farce. 
  CLAUDIA: Oh, gad. How can you say such a thing, when there is so much evi-
dence behind the theory? 
  MARCO: Because. Look. If it isn’t a farce, then how come the world is colder now 
than it used to be? 
 a. begging the question 
 b. fallacious appeal to popularity 
   c. irrelevant conclusion  
 d.  argumentum ad hominem 
 e. no fallacy 
 Of course you should buy a life insurance policy! Why shouldn’t you?
    a. irrelevant conclusion  
   b. wishful thinking  
   c. scare tactics  
 d. peer pressure fallacy 
 e. misplacing the burden of proof 
  My opponent, Mr. London, has charged me with having cheated on my income 
tax. My response is, When are we going to get this campaign out of the gutter? 
Isn’t it time we stood up and made it clear that vilification has no place in politics?
 a. irrelevant conclusion 
 b. wishful thinking 
 c. fallacious appeal to common practice 
 d. fallacious appeal to popularity 
 e.  argumentum ad hominem 
 Look, even if Bush did lie about the WMD threat, what’s the surprise? Clinton 
lied about having sex with that intern, and Bush’s own father lied about raising 
taxes.
 a. irrelevant conclusion 
 b. straw man 
 c. false dilemma 
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

428 
APPENDIX: EXERCISES FROM PREVIOUS EDITIONS
 d.  argumentum ad hominem 
 e. fallacious appeal to common practice 
  If cigarettes aren’t bad for you, then how come it’s so hard on your health to smoke?
 a.  argumentum ad hominem 
 b. misplacing the burden of proof 
 c. slippery slope 
 d. begging the question 
     GARRY: I think the people who lost their livelihood because of the Gulf oil spill 
ought to be paid their losses in full. 
  HARRY: But there are disasters all over the place. You can’t compensate everybody.   
 a. perfectionist fallacy 
 b. straw man 
   c. fallacious appeal to tradition  
 d. fallacious appeal to common practice 
  So what if the senator accepted a little kickback money—most politicians are cor-
rupt, after all.
 a. argument from envy 
   b. fallacious appeal to tradition  
   c. fallacious to common practice  
 d.  argumentum ad hominem 
 e. no fallacy 
  Me? I’m going to vote with the company on this one. After all, I’ve been with them 
for fifteen years.
 a. genetic fallacy 
 b. appeal to emotion (call this an “appeal to loyalty”) 
 c. slippery slope 
 d. misplacing the burden of proof 
 e. no fallacy 
 Public opinion polls? They’re rigged. Just ask anyone.
 a. slippery slope  
 b. guilt tripping 
 c. begging the question 
 d. fallacious appeal to popularity 
 e. no fallacy 
 Hey! It can’t be time for the bars to close. I’m having too much fun.
 a. false dilemma  
 b. misplacing the burden of proof 
 c. wishful thinking 
 d. fallacious appeal to tradition 
 e. no fallacy 
  A mural for the municipal building? Excuse me, but why should public money, 
our tax dollars, be used for a totally unnecessary thing like art? There are potholes 
that need fixing. Traffic signals that need to be put up. There are a million things 
that are more important. It is an outrage, spending taxpayers’ money on unneces-
sary frills like art. Give me a break!
 a.  argumentum ad hominem 
 b. argument from outrage 
 c. slippery slope 
 d. perfectionist fallacy 
 e. no fallacy 
9
10
11
12
13
14
15

 
EXERCISE A2 
429
 Mathematics is more difficult than sociology, and I really need an easier term this 
fall. So I’m going to take a sociology class instead of a math class.
 a.  argumentum ad hominem 
 b. appeal to pity 
 c. false dilemma 
 d. begging the question 
 e. no fallacy 
  Parker says Macs are better than PCs, but what would you expect him to say? He’s 
owned Macs for years.
 a. fallacious to common practice  
 b.  argumentum ad hominem 
 c. begging the question 
 d. perfectionist fallacy 
 e. no fallacy 
  The congressman thought the president’s behavior was an impeachable offense. 
But that’s nonsense, coming from the congressman. He had an adulterous affair 
himself, after all.
 a.  argumentum ad hominem 
 b. poisoning the well 
 c. perfectionist fallacy 
 d. genetic fallacy 
 e. no fallacy 
  Your professor wants you to read Moore and Parker? Forget it. They are so right 
wing their book is falling off the shelf.
 a. poisoning the well 
 b.  argumentum ad hominem 
 c. misplacing the burden of proof 
 d. fallacious to tradition 
 e. no fallacy 
 How do I know God exists? Hey, how do you know I’m wrong?
 a. perfectionist fallacy 
 b.  argumentum ad hominem 
 c. misplacing the burden of proof 
 d. slippery slope 
 e. begging the question 
  Laws against teenagers drinking? They are a total waste of time, frankly. No 
matter how many laws we pass, there are always going to be some teens who 
drink.
 a. misplacing the burden of proof 
 b. perfectionist fallacy 
 c. line-drawing fallacy 
 d. slippery slope 
 e. no fallacy 
 Even though Sidney was old enough to buy a drink at the bar, she had no identifi-
cation with her, and the bartender would not serve her.
 a. perfectionist fallacy 
 b.  argumentum ad hominem 
 c. misplacing the burden of proof 
 d. slippery slope 
 e. no fallacy 
16
17
18
19
20
21
22

430 
APPENDIX: EXERCISES FROM PREVIOUS EDITIONS
  Just how much sex has to be in a movie before you call it pornographic? Seems to 
me the whole concept makes no sense.
 a. perfectionist fallacy 
 b. line-drawing fallacy 
 c. straw man 
 d. slippery slope  
 e. no fallacy 
 Studies confirm what everyone already knows: Smaller classes make students 
better learners.
 a. perfectionist fallacy 
 b. begging the question 
 c. misplacing the burden of proof 
   d. fallacious appeal to popularity  
 e. no fallacy 
  The trouble with impeaching the president is this: Going after every person who 
occupies the presidency will take up everyone’s time, and the government will 
never get anything else done.
 a.  argumentum ad hominem 
 b. straw man 
 c. argument from outrage 
 d. appeal to envy 
 e. irrelevant conclusion 
  The trouble with impeaching the president is this. If we start going after him, next 
we’ll be going after senators, representatives, governors. Pretty soon, no elected 
official will be safe from partisan attack.
 a.  argumentum ad hominem 
 b. slippery slope 
 c. straw man 
 d. false dilemma  
 e. misplacing the burden of proof 
     MR. IMHOFF: That does it. I’m cutting down on your peanut butter cookies. 
Those things blimp me up. 
 MRS. IMHOFF: Oh, Imhoff, get real. What about all the ice cream you eat? 
 a.  argumentum ad hominem 
 b. misplacing the burden of proof 
 c. straw man 
 d. slippery slope  
 e. argument from outrage 
 KEN: I think I’ll vote for Andrews. She’s the best candidate. 
 ROBERT: Why do you say she’s best? 
 KEN: Because she’s my sister-in-law. Didn’t you know that? 
 a. apple polishing 
 b. appeal to pity 
 c. scare tactics 
 d. irrelevant conclusion 
 e. no fallacy 
  Morgan, you’re down-to-earth and I trust your judgment. That’s why I know I can 
count on you to back me up at the meeting this afternoon.
    a. apple polishing  
 b. appeal to pity 
 c. scare tactics 
23
24
25
26
27
28
29

 
EXERCISE A4 
431
 d. guilt tripping 
 e. no fallacy 
 “Do you want to sign this petition to the governor?” 
 “What’s it about?” 
 “We want him to veto that handgun registration bill that’s come out of the 
legislature.” 
 “Oh. No, I don’t think I want to sign that.” 
 “Oh, really? So are you telling me you want to get rid of the Second Amendment?”
 a. false dilemma 
 b.  argumentum ad hominem 
 c. genetic fallacy 
 d. misplacing the burden of proof 
 e. no fallacy 
 Exercise A-3 
 Answer the following questions and explain your answers. (Bases for class 
discussions.) 
   A brand of toothpaste is advertised as best-selling. How relevant is that to whether 
to buy the brand?  
  A brand of toothpaste is best-selling. How relevant is that to whether to buy that 
brand? 
  An automobile is a best seller in its class. How relevant is that to whether to buy 
that kind of automobile? 
 A movie is a smash hit. Would that influence your opinion of it? Should it? 
 Your friends are all Republicans. Would that influence your decision about which 
party to register with? Should it?  
  Your friends are all Democrats. Would that influence what you say about Demo-
crats to them? Should it? 
  Your friend’s father wrote a novel. How relevant is that to whether you should say 
nice things about the book to your friend? 
 Your friend’s mother is running for office. How relevant is that to whether you 
should vote for her? 
  Your own mother is running for office. How relevant is that to whether she will do 
a good job? To whether you should vote for her? 
  The late movie critic Roger Ebert gave a 2012 movie a “thumbs-up” and calls it 
one of the best of the year. How relevant is this to whether you should rent and 
watch the movie? 
 Exercise A-4 
 Which of the following claims do you believe? Which of them do you  really have 
evidence for? Which of them do you believe on an “everyone knows” basis? (Bases 
for class discussions.) 
 Small dogs tend to live longer than large dogs. 
 Coffee has a dehydrating effect. 
 Most people should drink at least eight glasses of water a day. 
 If you are thirsty, it means you are already dehydrated. 
 Rape is not about sex; it’s about aggression. 
30
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
1
2
3
4
5

432 
APPENDIX: EXERCISES FROM PREVIOUS EDITIONS
 Marijuana use leads to addiction to harder drugs. 
 The news media are biased. 
 You get just as much ultraviolet radiation on a cloudy day as on a sunny day. 
  If you don’t let yourself get angry every now and then, your anger will build up to 
the exploding point. 
 Carrots make you see better. 
 Reading in poor light is bad for your eyes. 
 Sitting too close to the TV is bad for your eyes. 
 Warm milk makes you sleepy. 
 Covering your head is the most effective way of staying warm in cold weather. 
 Smoking a cigarette takes seven minutes off your life. 
  Government-run health care management is more (or less—choose one) expen-
sive than private-run health care management. 
 Exercise A-5 
 Maude and Clyde are discussing whether to buy this nice little cottage. Identify as 
many fallacies and rhetorical devices as you can in their conversation.  
  CLYDE:   Maude, look at this place! This is the house for us! Let’s make an offer 
right now. We can afford it! 
 MAUDE:  Oh, Clyde, be serious. That house is way beyond our means. 
 CLYDE:  Well, I think we can afford it. 
 MAUDE:  Honey, if we can afford it, pigs can fly. 
 CLYDE:   Look, do you want to live in a shack? Besides, I called the real estate agent. 
She says it’s a real steal. 
 MAUDE:  Well, what do you expect her to say? She’s looking for a commission. 
 CLYDE:   Sometimes I don’t understand you. Last week you were pushing for a 
really upscale place. 
 MAUDE:   Clyde, we can’t make the payments on a place like that. We couldn’t 
even afford to heat it! And what on earth are we going to do with a lake? 
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
Elegant Country Estate
■ Stunning Federal-style brick home with 
exquisite appointments throughout
■ 20 picturesque acres with lake, pasture, 
and woodland
■ 5 bedrooms, 4.5 baths 
■ 5,800 sq. ft. living space, 2,400 sq. ft. 
basement
■ Formal living room; banquet dining with 
butler’s pantry; luxurious foyer, gourmet 
kitchen, morning room
■ 3 fireplaces, 12 chandeliers

 
EXERCISE A6 
433
 CLYDE:   Honey, the payments would only be around $5,000 a month. How much 
do you think we could spend? 
 MAUDE:  I’d say $1,800. 
 CLYDE:  Okay, how about $2,050? 
 MAUDE:  Oh, for heaven’s sake! Yes, we could do $2,050! 
 CLYDE:  Well, how about $3,100? 
 MAUDE:  Oh, Clyde, what is your point? 
 CLYDE:   So $3,100 is okay? How about $3,200? Stop me when I get to exactly where 
we can’t afford it. 
 MAUDE:   Clyde, I can’t say exactly where it gets to be too expensive, but $5,000 a 
month is too much. 
 CLYDE:  Well, I think we can afford it. 
 MAUDE:  Why? 
 CLYDE:  Because it’s within our means! 
 MAUDE:   Clyde, you’re the one who’s always saying we have to cut back on our 
spending! 
 CLYDE:  Yes, but this’ll be a great investment! 
 MAUDE:  And what makes you say that? 
 CLYDE:  Because we’re bound to make money on it. 
 MAUDE:  Clyde, honey, you are going around in circles. 
 CLYDE:  Well, can you prove we can’t afford it? 
 MAUDE:   Once we start spending money like drunken sailors, where will it end? 
Next we’ll have to get a riding mower, then a boat for that lake, a butler for the 
butler’s pantry—we’ll owe everybody in the state! 
 CLYDE:   Well, we don’t have to make up our minds right now. I’ll call the agent 
and tell her we’re sleeping on it. 
 MAUDE:  Asleep and dreaming. 
  Exercise A-6 
 Where we (Moore and Parker) teach, the city council recently debated relaxing 
the local noise ordinance. One student (who favored relaxation) appeared before 
the council and stated: “If 250 people are having fun, one person shouldn’t be 
able to stop them.” 
 We asked our students to state whether they agreed or disagreed with that 
student and to support their position with an argument. Here are some of the 
responses. Go through them and identify any instances of rhetorical devices or 
fallacious reasoning.
   I support what the person is saying. If 250 people are having fun, 1 person 
shouldn’t be able to stop them. Having parties and having a good time are a 
way of life for Chico State students. The areas around campus have always been 
this way.  
  A lot of people attend Chico State because of the social aspects. If rules are too 
tight, the school could lose its appeal. Without the students, local businesses 
would go under. Students keep the town floating. It’s not just bars and liquor 
1
2

434 
APPENDIX: EXERCISES FROM PREVIOUS EDITIONS
stores, but gas stations and grocery stores and apartment houses. This town 
would be like Orland. 
 If students aren’t allowed to party, the college will go out of business. 
  We work hard all week long studying and going to classes. We deserve to let off 
steam after a hard week. 
  Noise is a fact of life around most college campuses. People should know what 
they are getting into before they move there. If they don’t like it, they should just 
get earplugs or leave. 
  I agree with what the person is saying. If 250 people want to have fun, what gives 1 
person the right to stop them? 
  I am sure many of the people who complain are the same people who used to be 
stumbling down Ivy Street twenty years ago doing the same thing that the current 
students are doing. 
  Two weeks ago, I was at a party, and it was only about 9:00 p.m. There were only a 
few people there, and it was quiet. And then the police came and told us we had to 
break it up because a neighbor complained. Well, that neighbor is an elderly lady 
who would complain if you flushed the toilet. I think it’s totally unreasonable. 
  Sometimes the noise level gets a little out of control, but there are other ways to 
go about addressing this problem. For example, if you are a neighbor, and you are 
having a problem with the noise level, why don’t you call the “party house” and let 
them know, instead of going way too far and calling the police? 
  I’m sure that these “narcs” have nothing else better to do than to harass the “party 
people.”  
 You can’t get rid of all the noise around a college campus no matter what you do. 
  The Chico noise ordinance was put there by the duly elected officials of the city 
and is the law. People do not have the right to break a law that was put in place 
under proper legal procedures. 
  The country runs according to majority rule. If the overwhelming majority want 
to party and make noise, under our form of government they should be given the 
freedom to do so. 
  Students make a contribution to the community, and in return they should be 
allowed to make noise if they want. 
 Your freedom ends at my property line. 
 Exercise A-7 
 For the past four years, Cliff has attempted the 100-mile bike ride on the Fourth of 
July. He has never had the stamina to finish. He decides to attempt the ride again, 
but is pessimistic about his chances of finishing. How should each of the follow-
ing suppositions affect his confidence that once again he  won’t finish?
 Suppose past attempts were done in a variety of weather conditions. 
 Suppose Cliff will ride the same bike this year as on all previous attempts. 
  Suppose past attempts were on the same bike, but that is not the bike Cliff will 
ride this year. 
 Suppose Cliff hasn’t yet decided what kind of bike to ride this year. 
 Suppose past attempts were all on flat ground, and this year’s ride will also be on 
flat ground. 
  Suppose past attempts were all on flat ground, and this year’s ride will be in hilly 
terrain.  
  Suppose past attempts were all in hilly terrain, and this year’s ride will be on flat 
ground.  
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
1
2
3
4
5
6
7

 
EXERCISE A9 
435
 In answering question 7, did you consider only the stated information, or did you 
consider other things you know about bike riding? 
  Suppose some of past attempts were on flat ground and others were in hilly ter-
rain, but where this year’s ride will be hasn’t been announced yet. 
 Exercise A-8 
 Explain how each of the following public opinion poll questions is slanted, if it is.
   Some say Republican plans to reduce environmental safeguards will lead to more 
ecological disasters. Do you favor or oppose these plans? 
  Was BP slow to respond to the Gulf Oil Spill because it didn’t care or because it 
hadn’t adequately prepared for drilling in deep water? 
  Do you agree or disagree that immigration laws should be more vigorously 
enforced?  
  Some say that the high cost of medicine is due to frivolous lawsuits. Do you favor 
or oppose ceilings on the amount doctors can be sued for? 
  Polls indicate that most Americans are satisfied with their health care. Do you 
agree or disagree that health care reform is needed? 
 To reduce the federal deficit, do you favor raising taxes on working families or 
reducing excessive government spending? 
  To reduce the federal deficit, do you favor raising taxes on the super wealthy or 
slashing services for the needy? 
  Should a doctor be able to withhold medical care from a baby who has survived 
an abortion? 
  When framing new laws, should legislators be guided by Judeo-Christian values 
or only by secular considerations? 
  Would you favor or oppose reasonable background checks on people who want to 
purchase deadly assault weapons. 
Many portions of the Affordable Care Act (Obamacare) will begin later this 
year and the Congressional Budget Office’s estimate of the program’s cost has 
increased to $1.85 trillion.  Do you:
a. Support  the complete repeal of the law
b. Support adding the additional billions to trillions in spending needed to run 
the program
c. Support legislation to fix the main problem in the law without repealing it
d. Support  eliminating funding for the implementation of the law if the Senate 
and president won’t repeal the law
e. Support both A and D
f. Support both B and C
 Exercise A-9 
 Find a confidence-level indicator (e.g., possibly, maybe, probably.) or an error-
margin indicator (e.g., around, about, approximately.) in each of the following 
arguments. Then, create a new argument with a more appropriate indicator. 
 Example 
original argument: 
 It rained yesterday. Therefore, it absolutely, positively will rain again today. 
8
9
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11

436 
APPENDIX: EXERCISES FROM PREVIOUS EDITIONS
 New argument with a more appropriate confidence-level indicator: 
 It rained yesterday. Therefore, it could well rain again today. 
   Paulette, Georgette, Babette, and Brigitte are all Miami University students, and 
they all are members of Webkinz. Therefore, all Miami University students are 
members of Webkinz. 
 Paulette, Georgette, Babette, and Brigitte are all Miami University students and 
the first three are members of Webkinz. Therefore, exactly three out of every four 
Miami University students is a member of Webkinz.  
 Gustavo likes all the business courses he has taken at Foothill College. Therefore, 
he is bound to like the next business course he takes at Foothill. 
  Gustavo liked two of the four business profs he has had at Foothill College. There-
fore, he will like 50 percent of all his business profs at Foothill. 
  Gustavo likes all the business courses he has had at Foothill. No doubt his brother 
Sergio will like all his Foothill business courses, too.  
  Twenty percent of York’s 8:00 a.m. class watch PBS. Therefore, 20 percent of York’s 
9:00 a.m. class watch PBS. 
  Twenty percent of York’s 8:00 a.m. class watch PBS. Therefore, it is certain that 
exactly 20 percent of all the students at York’s community college watch PBS. 
  Bill Clinton lied about his relationship with Monica Lewinsky; therefore, he lied 
about Jennifer Flowers as well. 
  Seventy percent of Walmart shoppers own cars. Therefore, the same percentage 
of Target customers own cars. 
  Susan likes Thanksgiving. We can be very certain, therefore, that she likes Christ-
mas too. 
 Exercise A-10 
 Arrange the alternative conclusions of the following arguments in order of 
decreasing confidence level. Some options are pretty close to tied; don’t get into 
feuds with classmates over close calls. 
   Not once this century has this city gone Republican in a presidential election. 
Therefore,
 a. I wouldn’t count on it happening this time. 
 b. It won’t happen this time. 
 c. In all likelihood, it won’t happen this time. 
 d. There’s no chance whatsoever that it will happen this time. 
 e. It would be surprising if it happened this time. 
 f. I’ll be a donkey’s uncle if it happens this time. 
 Byron doesn’t know how to play poker, so,
 a. He sure as heck doesn’t know how to play blackjack. 
 b. It’s doubtful he knows how to play blackjack. 
 c. There’s a possibility he doesn’t know how to play blackjack. 
 d. Don’t bet on him knowing how to play blackjack .
 e. You’re nuts if you think he knows how to play blackjack. 
 Every time I’ve used the Beltway, the traffic has been heavy, so I figure that
 a. The traffic is almost always heavy on the Beltway. 
 b. Frequently the traffic on the Beltway is heavy. 
 c. As a rule, the traffic on the Beltway is heavy. 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
1
2
3

 
EXERCISE A12 
437
 d. The traffic on the Beltway can be heavy at times. 
 e. The traffic on the Beltway is invariably heavy. 
 f. Typically, the traffic on the Beltway is heavy. 
 g. The traffic on the Beltway is likely to be heavy most of the time. 
  Exercise A-11 
 In which of the following arguments is the implied confidence level too high or 
low, given the premises? After you have decided, compare your results with those 
of three or four classmates. 
   We spent a day on the Farallon Islands last June, and was it ever foggy and cold! 
So, dress warmly when you go there this June. Based on our experience, it is cer-
tain to be foggy and cold. 
  We’ve visited the Farallon Islands on five different days, two during the summer 
and one each during fall, winter, and spring. It’s been foggy and cold every time 
we’ve been there. So, dress warmly when you go there. Based on our experience, 
there is an excellent chance it will be foggy and cold whenever you go. 
  We’ve visited the Farallon Islands on five different days, all in June. It’s been foggy 
and cold every time we’ve been there. So, dress warmly when you go there in June. 
Based on our experience, it could well be foggy and cold. 
  We’ve visited the Farallon Islands on five different days, all in June. It’s been 
foggy and cold every time we’ve been there. So, dress warmly when you go there 
in June. Based on our experience, there is some chance it will be foggy and cold.  
  We’ve visited the Farallon Islands on five different days, all in January. It’s been 
foggy and cold every time we’ve been there. So, dress warmly when you go there 
in June. Based on our experience, it almost certainly will be foggy and cold. 
 Exercise A-12 
 In each of the following, determine whether the sample, the population, or the 
attribute of interest is excessively vague. 
 The tests in the class are going to be hard, judging from the first midterm. 
  The transmissions in Chrysler minivans tend to fail prematurely, if my Voyager is 
an indication. 
  Judging from my experience, technical people are exceedingly difficult to com-
municate with sometimes. 
  Men cannot tolerate stress. My husband even freaks if the newspaper is a little late.  
 Movies are too graphic these days. Just go to one—you’ll see. 
 Violence in movies carries a message that degrades women. The movies playing 
right now prove the point. 
  You need to get cooler clothing than that if you’re going to Minneapolis in the 
summer. I’ve been there. 
  Entertainment is much too expensive these days. Just look at what they charge for 
movies. 
 Art majors sure are weird! I roomed with one once. Man. 
  The French just don’t like Americans. I couldn’t find anyone in Paris who would 
speak English to me. 
 All the research suggests introverts are likely to be well versed in computer skills. 
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11

438 
APPENDIX: EXERCISES FROM PREVIOUS EDITIONS
 Suspicious people tend to be quite unhappy, from what I’ve observed. 
  Everyone marries someone who looks like him or her. Just check out the married 
people you know. 
 Exercise A-13 
 If you can, specify a sampling frame for each of the following populations and 
attributes. In other words, define them so one could determine whether a person 
or thing is a member of the population and has the attribute. 
 The proportion of Denver residents who watch  The Bachelorette. 
 The proportion of religious people in your city who are conservatives. 
 The proportion of blondes at your university. 
 The proportion of country songs about lost love. 
 The proportion of plumbers in Chicago who play the Illinois Lotto. 
 The proportion of people with long necks who make good listeners. 
 Exercise A-14 
 Some of the following items would normally be seen as arguments and others as 
explanations. Sort the items into the proper categories. 
   Collins will probably be absent again today. She seemed pretty sick when I saw her.  
 Yes, I know Collins is sick, and I know why: She ate raw seafood. 
  Did Bobbie have a good time last night? Are you kidding? She had a great time! 
She stayed up all night, she had such a great time. 
  You don’t think the toilet leaks? Why, just look at the water on the floor. What else 
could have caused it? 
  You know, it occurs to me the reason the band sounded so bad is the new director. 
They haven’t had time to get used to her. 
  What a winter! And to think it’s all just because there’s a bunch of warm water off 
the Oregon coast. 
  Hmmm. I’m pretty sure you have the flu. If you had a cold, you wouldn’t have 
aches and a fever. Aches and fever are a sign you have the flu. 
  Hillary Clinton goes up and down in the opinion polls. That’s   cause sometimes 
she makes sense, and other times she sounds crazy. 
 VIKKI: Remember the California Raisins? What happened to them? 
 NIKKI: They faded. I guess people got tired of them or something. 
  Believe it or not, for a while there, a lot of young women were shaving their heads. 
It was probably the Britney Spears influence. 
  Couples who regard each other as equals are more likely to suffer from high blood 
pressure than are couples in which one perceives the other as dominant. This is 
an excellent reason for marrying someone you think is beneath you. 
  Couples who regard each other as equals are more likely to suffer from high blood 
pressure than are couples in which one perceives the other as dominant. This is 
apparently because couples who see their partners as equals argue more, and 
that raises their blood pressure. 
 Exercise A-15 
 For each of the following, identify the presumed cause and the presumed effect. 
Then identify which items contain or imply a causal claim, hypothesis, or 
12
13
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12

 
EXERCISE A16 
439
explanation that isn’t testable. If an item falls into that category, decide whether 
the problem is due to vagueness, circularity, or some other problem. 
 What causes your engine to miss? Perhaps a fouled spark plug? 
  Antonio had a run of hard luck, but that’s to be expected if you throw away a chain 
letter.  
 Veronica is grouchy because she doesn’t sleep well. 
 Divine intervention can cure cancer. 
 The CIA destroyed the files because it didn’t want agents identified. 
 Having someone pray for you can cure cancer. 
 Having your mother pray for you brings good luck. 
 Oatmeal lowers cholesterol. 
 Why did Blake get the flu? Because he’s susceptible to it, obviously. 
 Federer won the match mainly because Roddick couldn’t return his serve. 
 Federer won the match because he wanted to win more than Roddick did. 
  The reason Tuck can play high notes so well is that he has command of the upper 
register.  
 Professor York’s French is improving, thanks to his trips to Paris. 
  “Men are biologically weaker than women and that’s why they don’t live as long.” 
 — Attributed to “a leading expert” by Weekly World News 
 Smoking marijuana can cause lung cancer. 
 Exercise A-16 
 For each of the following, identify the presumed cause and the presumed effect. 
Then identify which items contain or imply a causal claim, hypothesis, or expla-
nation that isn’t testable. If an item falls into that category, decide whether the 
problem is due to vagueness, circularity, or some other problem. If you see some 
other problem, raise your hand and tell everybody what it is. 
 He has blue eyes because he had them in a previous incarnation. 
  The Pacers did much better in the second half. That’s because they gained 
momentum.  
 Alcoholics can’t give up drinking because they are addicted to liquor. 
 Gone with the Wind was a big hit because reviewers praised it. 
  Nicholas, you want to know why you have so much bad luck? It’s because you 
want to have bad luck. You have a subconscious desire for bad luck. 
 Why do I like Budweiser? Maybe I was subjected to subliminal advertising. 
  This part of the coast is subject to mudslides because there’s a lack of mature 
vegetation.  
  As Internet use grew, insurance costs fell. The Internet apparently drove down 
insurance prices. 
  Within eleven months of September 11, 2001, eleven men connected to bioterror 
and germ warfare died in strange and violent circumstances. Don’t tell me that’s 
coincidence!  
  When his dog died, Ryan was so upset he could hardly eat. In my opinion, he was 
transferring his grief from his mother’s death to his dog’s. 
  Why does she sleep so late? Obviously, she’s just one of those people who have a 
hard time waking up in the morning. 
  When parapsychologist Susan Blackmore failed to find evidence of ESP in 
numerous experiments,  Fate  magazine’s consulting editor D. Scott Rogo 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12

440 
APPENDIX: EXERCISES FROM PREVIOUS EDITIONS
explained her negative results as due to subconscious resistance to the idea 
that psychic phenomena exist. 
 — Reported in The Skeptical Inquirer 
  According to a report in  Weekly World News,  when tourists defied an ancient curse 
and took rocks home from Hawaii’s Volcanoes National Park, they paid the con-
sequences. According to the report, the curse caused a Michigan man to tumble 
to his death falling downstairs, a Massachusetts woman to lose her savings in the 
stock market, and a Canadian tourist to die in a head-on car accident. 
 Why is there so much violence these days? Rap music, that’s why. 
  The reason I got into so much trouble as a kid was that my father was a heavy 
drinker.  
  According to Martin Gardner, in Shivpuri, a town in India, there is a large stone 
ball weighing about 140 pounds. It is possible for five men to stand around the 
ball and touch the lower half with a forefinger; if they recite a prayer while doing 
so, the ball rises. Some believe this is a miracle of the god Shiva. 
 Exercise A-17 
 Identify each of the following as (a) a claim about a specific case of cause and 
effect, (b) a general causal claim, or (c) neither of these. 
 The hibiscus died while we were away. There must have been a frost. 
 Carlos isn’t as fast as he used to be; that’s what old age will do. 
 Kent’s college education helped him get a high-paying job. 
 The most frequently stolen vehicle of 2012 is a 1994 Honda Accord. 
 Vitamin C prevents colds. 
 The woman he returned to be with is Deborah. 
  The high reading on the thermometer resulted from two causes: This thermom-
eter was located lower to the ground than at other stations, and its shelter was too 
small, so the ventilation was inadequate. 
 Oily smoke in the exhaust is caused by worn rings. 
 The initial tests indicate that caffeine has toxic effects in humans. 
 Neonatal sepsis is usually fatal among newborns. 
  WIN 51,711 halts development of paralysis in mice that have been infected with 
polio-2.  
  A stuck hatch cover on  Spacelab  blocked a French ultraviolet camera from con-
ducting a sky survey of celestial objects. 
  An experimental drug has shown broad antiviral effects on a large number of the 
picornaviruses against which it has been tested. 
 Investigation revealed the problem was a short-circuited power supply. 
  Arteriovenous malformations—distortions of the capillaries connecting an arteri-
ole and a small vein in the brain—can bleed, causing severe headaches, seizures, 
and even death. 
  Because of all the guns that its citizens own, the United States has never been 
invaded.  
  According to two reports in the  New England Journal of Medicine,  oil from fish can 
prevent heart disease. 
 The most important cause in the growing problem of illiteracy is television. 
  “Raymond the Wolf passed away in his sleep one night from natural causes; his heart 
stopped beating when the three men who slipped into his bedroom stuck knives in it.” 
 — Jimmy Breslin, The Gang That Couldn’t Shoot Straight 
13
14
15
16
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19

 
EXERCISE A18 
441
 Exercise A-18 
 Match each item to a concept on this list:
 A  5  overlooking prior probabilities or false positives 
 B  5  overlooking the possibility of regression 
 C  5  misplacing the burden of proof 
 D  5  argument from anecdote 
 E  5   conditio  sine qua non 
 F  5  confusing explanations with excuses 
   The Amazing Vikings had an off night. Their shooting was poor, their defense 
uninspired. Everything was reflected in the lopsided score. “Laps,” Coach Snort 
said after the loss. “Nobody showers before he does ten laps!” When the guys won 
their next game, the coach knew he had done the right thing. “You just gotta moti-
vate them,” he thought. 
  If your eyes are extremely sensitive to light, there is better than a 50–50 chance 
you have bacterial meningitis, since light sensitivity almost always accompanies 
the disease. 
  Wood smoke a health hazard? You kidding? We been using wood our entire lives 
to heat with. You gonna tell me we wouldn’t know about it if it had hurt us? 
  Eat plenty of carbohydrates before an intense workout. Nobody has ever shown 
that carbo-loading doesn’t enhance athletic performance. 
  The research team administered Deconolate to the men whose recent PSA read-
ings were highly elevated, and then retested them. The average PSA reading for 
the group had declined markedly, suggesting that Deconolate may be useful in 
the fight against prostate cancer. 
  It is ridiculous for the FDA to ban ephedrine. I used the stuff for years to help with 
allergies, and I am as healthy as a horse. 
 Spokesperson for BP: Halliburton cemented the drill in place, not BP. 
 Congressperson: Don’t try to put the blame on someone else. 
 “It’s your fault!” 
 “What? I didn’t run over the sprinkler! You did!!” 
 “Yeah, but if you had remembered the milk, I wouldn’t even be going to the store.”  
 After an evening when the mosquitoes were particularly bad, Tony rushed out to 
Ace and bought a Mosquito Magnet. That evening the mosquitoes didn’t seem as 
bad. “It works,” Tony told his wife. 
  If the HDL reading of a male over 50 is low, the odds are he has heart disease, 
since most men over 50 with heart disease have low HDL readings. 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

 Appeal to Pity 
 An appeal-to-emotion fallacy that 
occurs when a speaker or writer “supports” a conten-
tion by playing on our sympathy rather than by pro-
ducing a real argument. 
 Appeal to Popularity  See  Fallacious Appeal to 
Popularity 
 Appeal to Precedent 
 The claim (in law) that a cur-
rent case is sufficiently similar to a previous case that 
it should be settled in the same way. 
 Appeal to Tradition  See  Fallacious Appeal to Com-
mon Practice. 
 Apple Polishing 
 An appeal-to-emotion fallacy that 
occurs when a speaker or writer “supports” a conten-
tion by trying to flatter us rather than by producing a 
real argument. 
 Argument  An attempt to support or prove a contention 
by providing a reason for accepting it. The contention 
itself is called the  conclusion;  the statement (or state-
ments) offered as support or demonstration is referred 
to as the premise (or premises). Sometimes “argument” is 
used to refer only to the premise (or premises).  
 Argument by Anecdote 
 A fallacy that occurs when 
a speaker or writer tries to support a general claim by 
offering a story. 
 Argument by Anecdote—causal variety 
 A fallacy 
that occurs when a speaker or writer tries to support a 
causal statement by offering a story. 
 Argument from Analogy 
 An argument that some-
thing has an attribute because a similar thing has that 
attribute.  
 Argument from Outrage 
 An appeal-to-emotion 
fallacy that occurs when a speaker or writer “sup-
ports” a contention by trying to make us angry rather 
than by producing a real argument.  
 Argument pattern  The structure of an argument. 
This structure is independent of the argument’s con-
tent. Several arguments can have the same pattern 
(e.g.,  Modus Ponens ) yet be about quite different sub-
jects. Variables are used to stand for classes or claims 
in the display of an argument’s pattern. 
 Argumentum Ad Hominem 
 A fallacy that occurs 
when a speaker or writer attempts to dismiss some-
one’s position by dismissing the person (rather than 
attacking his or her position). 
 Attacking the analogy 
 An attempt to rebut an argu-
ment from analogy by calling attention to important 
dissimilarities between the analogues. 
 Attribute of interest  The attribute ascribed to a 
thing or things in the conclusion of an inductive gen-
eralization, inductive Argument from Analogy, or sta-
tistical syllogism. 
 Atypical sample 
 See Biased sample. 
 Availability heuristic 
 Unconsciously assigning a 
probability to a type of event on the basis of how often 
one thinks of events of that type. 
 Glossary 
 Accident 
 A fallacy that occurs when a speaker or 
writer assumes that a general statement automati-
cally applies to a specific case that is (or could well 
be) exceptional. 
 Ad Hominem 
 See Argumentum Ad Hominem. 
 Affirmative claim  A claim that includes one class 
or part of one class within another: A- and I-claims. 
 Affirming the Antecedent 
 See  Modus Ponens. 
 Affirming the Consequent 
 A fallacy, consisting of a 
conditional claim as one premise, a claim that affirms 
the consequent of the conditional as a second prem-
ise, and a claim that affirms the antecedent of the 
conditional as the conclusion. 
 Ambiguity  Having more than one meaning. An 
ambiguous claim is one that can be interpreted in 
more than one way and whose meaning is not made 
clear by the context.  See also Semantic ambiguity; 
Syntactic ambiguity.  
 Ambiguous pronoun reference 
 A statement or 
phrase in which it is not clear to what or to whom a 
pronoun is supposed to refer. 
 Amphiboly 
 A fallacy that occurs when a speaker or 
writer attempts to demonstrate or support a point by 
playing on the ambiguity of an expression, where the 
ambiguity derives from the expression’s syntax. 
 Analogical argument 
 See Argument from Analogy. 
 Analogues  Things that have similar attributes. 
 Analogy 
 A linguistic expression that treats two or 
more events or things as similar. 
 Analytic claim  A claim whose truth or falsity is 
determined simply by the definitions of the words 
that make it up. Contrast with  Synthetic claim. 
 Analytical definition  Specification of the features 
a thing must possess in order for the term being 
defined to apply to it. 
 Anecdotal Evidence, Fallacy of 
 See Argument by 
Anecdote.  
 Antecedent  See Conditional claim. 
 Appeal to Common Practice  See Fallacious Appeal 
to Common Practice  
 Appeal to Emotion 
 A fallacy that occurs when a 
speaker or writer “supports” a contention by play-
ing on our emotions rather than by producing a real 
argument.  
 Appeal to Envy 
 An appeal-to-emotion fallacy that 
occurs when a speaker or writer “supports” a conten-
tion by trying to make us envious rather than by pro-
ducing a real argument. 
 Appeal to Ignorance  A fallacy that occurs when 
a speaker or writer argues that we should believe a 
claim because nobody has proved it false. 
 Appeal to Jealousy 
 An appeal-to-emotion fallacy 
that occurs when a speaker or writer “supports” a 
contention by trying to make us jealous rather than by 
producing a real argument. 

 
GLOSSARY 
443
 Background information 
 The body of justified 
beliefs that consists of facts we learn from our own 
direct observations and facts we learn from others. 
 Balance of considerations reasoning  Trying to 
determine which considerations, both for and against 
thinking or doing something, carry the most weight. 
 Bandwagon effect 
 An unconscious tendency to 
modify one’s views to make them consonant with 
those of other people. 
Bandwagon Fallacy An appeal-to-emotion fallacy 
that occurs when a speaker or writer “supports” a con-
tention not by producing a real argument for it but by 
playing on our desire to be in step with popular opinion. 
 Begging the Question 
 A fallacy that occurs when a 
speaker or writer tries to “support” or “demonstrate” 
a contention by offering as “evidence” or “proof” 
what amounts to a repackaging of the very contention 
in question. 
 Belief bias 
 The tendency to evaluate an argument 
by how believable its conclusion is. 
 Better-than-average illusion  When a majority of 
a group estimates they are better at something than a 
majority of the group, the group is said to be subject to 
this illusion. When the majority of a group estimates they 
are worse at something than a majority of group, they are 
said to be subject to the “worse than average illusion.”  
 Biased (skewed) sample 
 A sample in which an 
important variable is disproportionately present or 
absent.  See also Fallacy of Biased Sample. 
 But for cause 
 A  conditio sine qua non, a condition 
without which an effect could not have happened. 
Category 
A group, collection, class, population, or 
division of things
 Categorical claim  A claim that asserts or denies 
membership in second category by members of a first 
category.  See also Standard-form categorical claim. 
 Categorical imperative  Kant’s term for an abso-
lute moral rule that holds unconditionally or 
“categorically.”  
 Categorical logic  A system of logic based on the 
relations of inclusion and exclusion among categories. 
This branch of logic specifies the logical relationships 
among claims that can be expressed in the forms “All 
Xs are Ys,” “No Xs are Ys,” “Some Xs are Ys,” and “Some 
Xs are not Ys.” Developed by  Aristotle in the fourth 
century  b.c.e.,  categorical logic is also known as Aris-
totelian or traditional logic.  
 Categorical syllogism  A two-premise deductive 
argument in which every claim is categorical and 
each of three terms appears in two of the claims—for 
example, all soldiers are martinets and no martinets 
are diplomats, so no soldiers are diplomats. 
Causal hypothesis 
A tentative causal statement 
offered for further investigation or testing.
 Causal factor 
 A causal factor for an effect is a vari-
able whose presence in a population raises the prob-
ability that the effect will be present as well. 
 Causal mechanism 
 An interface between cause 
and effect that has the property of making the effect 
happen, given the cause. 
 Causal statement  A statement that sets forth the 
cause of an event. 
 Cause-and-effect claim 
 See Causal statement. 
 Chain argument 
 An argument consisting of three 
conditional claims, in which the antecedents of one 
premise and the conclusion are the same, the conse-
quents of the other premise and the conclusion are 
the same, and the consequent of the first premise and 
the antecedent of the second premise are the same. 
 Circularity  The property of a cause-and-effect 
claim where the “cause” merely restates the effect. 
 Claim  When a belief (judgment, opinion) is 
asserted in a declarative sentence, the result is a claim 
or statement. 
   Claim variable    A letter that stands for a claim. 
 Cognitive bias 
 A psychological factor that uncon-
sciously affects belief formation. 
 Common variable principle 
 A principle for form-
ing a causal hypothesis that must be guided by com-
mon sense and background knowledge: a variable 
common to multiple occurrences of something may 
be related to it causally. See also Covariation principle 
and Paired unusual events principle. 
 Complementary term  A term is complementary to 
another term if and only if it refers to everything that 
the first term does not refer to. 
 Composition  A fallacy that happens when a speaker 
or writer assumes that what is true of a group of things 
taken individually must also be true of those same 
things taken collectively; or assumes that what is true 
of the parts of a thing must be true of the thing itself.  
 Conclusion 
 In an argument, the claim thought to 
be supported or demonstrated by another claim (or 
claims) referred to as the premise (or premises). 
 Conclusion indicator  A word or phrase (e.g., 
“therefore”) that ordinarily indicates the presence of 
the conclusion of an argument. 
 Conclusion-analogue 
 The analogue referred to in 
the conclusion of an argument from analogy. 
 Conditio sine qua non 
 A condition without which 
it could not be. Often referred to as a “but for cause.” 
 Conditional claim  A claim that state-of-affairs A 
cannot hold without state-of-affairs B holding as well—
e.g., “If A, then B.” The A-part of the claim is called the 
 antecedent; the B-part is called the  consequent.  
 Conditional probability 
 The probability of an 
event if another has occurred. 
 Conditional proof (CP) 
 A deduction for a condi-
tional claim “If P, then Q” that proceeds by assuming 
that P is true and then proving that, on that assump-
tion, Q must also be true. 
 Confidence level  The probability that the random 
variation of a sample proportion from random sam-
ple to random sample will fall within the error mar-
gin.  See also Sample proportion. 
 Confirmation bias  A tendency to attach more 
weight to considerations that support our views. 
 Conflicting claims 
 Two claims that cannot both be 
correct. 
 Confounding variable 
 A variable that, in an inves-
tigation of causation, may be causally linked with an 

444 
GLOSSARY
effect of interest or cause of interest, but which is not 
the subject of the investigation. 
 Confusing Contraries and Contradictories 
 A fal-
lacy in which two contrary claims are taken as contra-
dictories or vice versa.  See also  Contrary claims and 
contradictories.  
 Confusing Explanations with Excuses  The fallacy 
of presuming that when someone explains how or 
why something happened, he or she is either excus-
ing or justifying what happened. 
 Conjunction 
 A compound claim made from two 
simpler claims. A conjunction is true if and only if 
both of the simpler claims that compose it are true. 
 Consequent 
 See Conditional Claim. 
 Consequentialism 
 In moral reasoning, the view 
that the consequences of a decision, deed, or policy 
determine its moral value. 
 Consistency and inconsistency  A set of beliefs is 
consistent if it is possible for them all to all be true at 
the same time, and inconsistent if it is not possible for 
them to all be true at the same time. 
 Consistency principle  The first principle of moral 
reasoning, which states that, if separate cases aren’t 
different in any relevant way, they should be treated the 
same way, and if separate cases are treated in the same 
way, they should not be different in any relevant way.  
 Contradictories  Two statements that are exact oppo-
sites; they cannot both be true and cannot both be false.  
 Contradictory claims 
 See Contradictories. 
 Contrapositive  The claim that results from switch-
ing the places of the subject and predicate terms in 
a categorical claim and replacing both terms with 
complementary terms.  
 Contraries  Two statements that cannot both be 
true but can both be false. 
 Contrary analogue  See  Contrary premise-analogue.  
 Contrary claims 
 See Contraries. 
 Contrary premise-analogue  A premise-analogue 
that weakens an argument from analogy; a disanalogy.  
 Converse 
 The converse of a categorical claim is the 
claim that results from switching the places of the 
subject and predicate terms. 
 Covariation principle  A principle for forming a 
causal hypothesis that must be guided by common 
sense and background knowledge: If a variation in 
one phenomenon is accompanied by a variation in 
another, consider whether the two phenomena may 
be related causally. See also Common variable prin-
ciple and Paired unusual events principle. 
 Critical thinking 
 We think critically when we ratio-
nally evaluate our own or others’ thinking. 
 Cum Hoc, Ergo Propter Hoc 
 “With this, therefore 
because of it.” A fallacy that occurs when a speaker or 
writer assumes that the fact that two events happen at 
about the same time establishes that one caused the 
other. 
 Deduction (proof) 
 A numbered sequence of truth-
functional symbolizations, each member of which 
validly follows from earlier members by one of the 
truth-functional rules. 
 Deductive argument  An argument intended to 
prove or demonstrate, rather than merely support, a 
conclusion.  
 Definition by example 
 Pointing to, naming, or 
otherwise identifying one or more examples of the 
term being defined; also called  ostensive definition.   
 Definition by synonym 
 Giving another word or 
phrase that means the same thing as the term being 
defined.  
 Demonizing  A rhetorical technique that tries to 
induce loathing of someone or something by portray-
ing the person or thing as evil. 
 Denial  A fallacy that occurs when we forget that 
wanting something to be false is irrelevant to whether 
it is false. 
 Denying the Antecedent  A fallacy, consisting of a 
conditional claim as one premise, a claim that denies 
the antecedent of the conditional as a second prem-
ise, and a claim that denies the consequent of the 
conditional as the conclusion. 
 Denying the Consequent 
 See Modus Tollens. 
 Deontologism  See Duty theory. 
 Disanalogy 
 See Contrary premise-analogue. 
 Disinterested party  A person who has no stake in our 
belief or disbelief in a claim.  See also Interested party.  
 Disjunction  A compound claim made up of two 
simpler claims. A disjunction is false only if both of 
the simpler claims that make it up are false. 
 Distribution 
 A term is distributed if and only if the 
category it names is referred to in its entirety. 
 Diversified sample 
 A sample whose members are 
heterogeneous.  
 Divine command theory 
 The view that our moral 
duty (what’s right and wrong) is dictated by God. 
 Division  A fallacy that occurs when a speaker or 
writer assumes that what is true of a group of things 
taken collectively must also be true of those same 
things taken individually; or assumes that what is true 
of a whole is also true of its parts. 
 Downplayer  An expression used to play down or 
diminish the importance of something. 
 Duty theory 
 The view that a person should perform 
an action because it is his or her moral duty to per-
form it, not because of any consequences that might 
follow from it. Also called  Deontologism. 
 Dysphemism  A word or phrase used to produce 
a negative effect on a reader’s or listener’s attitude 
about something or to minimize the positive associa-
tions the thing may have. 
 Emotive meaning  The positive or negative associa-
tions of an expression; an expression’s  rhetorical force. 
 Equivalent claims  Two claims are equivalent if and 
only if in exactly the same circumstances they would 
both have the same truth-value. 
 Equivocation  A fallacy that occurs when a speaker 
or writer attempts to demonstrate or support a point 
by playing on the ambiguity of an expression.  
 Error margin  The range of random variation of a 
sample proportion across multiple random samples 
of a given size. 

 
GLOSSARY 
445
 Ethical altruism 
 The moral doctrine that discounts 
one’s own happiness as being of lesser value than the 
happiness of others. 
 Ethical egoism 
 The moral doctrine that the right-
ness of an act is determined by the happiness it pro-
duces for oneself. 
 Euphemism 
 An agreeable or inoffensive expres-
sion that is substituted for an expression that may be 
found unpleasant or offensive by a listener or reader. 
 Expectation values (EV) 
 The likelihood of a result 
combined with the possible effects of that result (e.g., 
the likelihood of your winning a poker hand com-
bined with the amount you would stand to gain).  
 Expert 
 A person who, through training, education, 
or experience, has special knowledge or ability in a 
subject.  
 Expertise 
 An unusual knowledge or ability in a 
given subject, most often due to specialized experi-
ence or education. 
 Explanation  A claim or set of claims intended to 
make another claim, object, event, or state of affairs 
intelligible. Also, an account of how an object, event, 
or state of affairs came to be. 
 Explanatory analogy  An analogy that is used to 
explain.  
 Explanatory definition  A definition used to 
explain, illustrate, or disclose important aspects of a 
difficult concept. 
 Extension  The set of things to which a term applies.  
 “Fact vs. opinion” 
 Sometimes people refer to true 
objective claims as “facts,” and use the word “opin-
ion” to designate any claim that is subjective. 
 Factual claim 
 An objective claim. 
 Fallacious Appeal to Authority 
 A fallacy that 
occurs when a speaker or writer tries to support a 
contention by offering as evidence the opinion of a 
nonauthoritative source. 
 Fallacious Appeal to Common Belief  See Falla-
cious Appeal to Popularity. 
 Fallacious Appeal to Popularity 
 A fallacy that 
occurs when a speaker or writer treats an issue that 
cannot be settled by public opinion as if it can. Also 
known as Fallacious Appeal to Common Belief. 
Fallacious Appeal to Common Practice 
A fallacy 
that occurs when a speaker or writer tries to justify a 
practice on the grounds that it is traditional or is com-
monly practiced.
Fallacious Appeal to Tradition 
See Fallacious 
Appeal to Common Practice
Fallacy A common mistake in reasoning.
 Fallacy of Biased Sample  A fallacy that occurs when 
a speaker or writer generalizes about a large or hetero-
geneous population on the basis of an atypical sample.  
 Fallacy of induction  See Induction fallacy. 
 Fallacy of Small Sample 
 A fallacy that occurs 
when a speaker or writer generalizes about a large or 
heterogeneous population on the basis of too small 
a sample.  
 Fallacy of the Lonely Fact  See  Hasty Generalization.  
 False Analogy 
 See Weak Analogy. 
 False consensus effect 
 Assuming that the views 
held by members of our group are held by society 
at large.  
 False Dilemma  A fallacy that occurs when a speaker 
or writer tries to establish a point by offering it as the 
only alternative to something we will find unaccept-
able, unattainable, or implausible.  
 Fear or hate mongering  A rhetorical technique 
that occurs when speakers or writers make inflamma-
tory or scary statements intended to anger or frighten 
us, without pretending that the statements support a 
specific conclusion.  
 Formal fallacy  A fallacy that occurs when a speaker 
or writer advances a deductive argument that has an 
invalid logical form. 
 Fostering xenophobia 
 See Xenophobia. 
 Fundamental attribution error  A tendency to 
attribute the mistakes of members of the in-group 
to extenuating circumstances, while attributing 
the same mistakes when made by members of out-
groups to character defects. 
 Gambler’s Fallacy 
 A failure to recognize that 
independent events do not affect one another’s out-
come—a belief that past performance of such events 
(as coin tosses) can affect later events. 
 General statement  A statement that refers to mul-
tiple members of a population nonspecifically. 
 Generality 
 Lack of detail or specificity. The more 
different kinds of Xs to which the word for Xs applies, 
the more general that word is. 
 Generalization  An argument used to support a 
general statement. The word also is used as a syn-
onym for “general statement.” 
Generalizing 
See Generalizing from a Sample.
 Generalizing from a Sample  Reasoning that all, 
most, or some percentage of the members of a popula-
tion have an attribute because all, most, or some per-
centage of a sample of the population have that attribute.  
 Generalizing from a Small Sample 
 See  Fallacy of 
Small Sample. 
 Generalizing from Exceptional Cases 
 A fallacy 
that occurs when a speaker or writer arrives at a gen-
eral statement by citing an atypical supporting case. 
 Generalizing from Too Few Cases 
 See Hasty 
Generalization. 
 Genetic Fallacy  A fallacy that occurs when a speaker 
or writer argues that the origin of a contention in and 
of itself automatically renders it false.  
 Good deductive argument 
 See Valid argument. 
 Good inductive argument  A relatively strong 
inductive argument.  See 
also Stronger/weaker 
arguments.  
 Grouping ambiguity  A kind of semantic ambigu-
ity in which it is unclear whether a claim refers to a 
group of things taken individually or collectively. 
 Guilt by Association  A fallacy that occurs when a 
speaker or writer tries to induce us to dismiss a belief 
by telling us that someone we don’t like has that belief.  
 Guilt 
Tripping 
 An 
appeal-to-emotion 
fallacy 
that occurs when a speaker or writer “supports” a 

446 
GLOSSARY
contention by trying to make us feel guilty rather than 
by producing a real argument. 
 Harm principle  The claim that the only way to jus-
tify a restriction on a person’s freedom is to show that 
the restriction prevents harm to other people. 
 Hasty Generalization  A fallacy that occurs when a 
speaker or writer tries to support a general statement 
or rule by citing too few supporting cases . See also 
Fallacy of Small Sample. 
 Heterogeneous sample/population 
 A sample/
population whose members have a large variety of 
characteristics.  
 Heuristic 
 A rule of thumb employed unconsciously 
by people when they estimate probabilities. In psy-
chology, the field known as “heuristics and biases” 
was originated by Daniel Kahneman and Amos 
Tversky. 
 Homogeneous sample/population  A sample/pop-
ulation whose members have the same characteristics.  
 Hyperbole  Extravagant overstatement. 
 Hypothesis 
 See Causal hypothesis. 
 Hypothetical imperative 
 Kant’s term for an imper-
ative that tells us how we must act to reach a specific 
objective.  
 IBE  See Inference to the Best Explanation. 
 In-group bias  A predisposition to find fault with 
outsiders.  
 Inconsistency 
 See Consistency. 
 Independent events 
 Two events are independent 
when neither of them has an effect on the outcome 
of the other. 
 Indirect proof 
 Proof of a claim by demonstrating 
that its negation is false, absurd, or self-contradictory.  
 Induction fallacy  An argument that is supposed to 
raise the probability of its conclusion, but is so weak 
as to fail almost entirely to do so. 
   Inference to the Best Explanation (IBE)   
 An argu-
ment whose conclusion states the most likely cause 
of something. 
 Initial plausibility 
 One’s rough assessment of how 
credible a claim seems. 
 Innuendo 
 An insinuation of something derogatory.  
 Intension 
 The set of characteristics a thing must 
have for a term correctly to apply to it. 
 Interested party  A person who stands to gain from 
our believing his or her claim.  See also Disinterested 
party.  
 Invalid argument 
 An argument that isn’t valid. 
 Irrelevant Conclusion 
 Any relevance fallacy that 
does not fit comfortably into the other categories dis-
cussed in this book. 
 Issue 
 A point that is or might be disputed, debated, 
or wondered about. Essentially, a question. 
 Knowledge 
 If you believe a claim, have an argu-
ment for it that is beyond reasonable doubt, and have 
no reason to think you are mistaken, you may be said 
to have knowledge that the claim is true. 
 Legal cause  That combination of fact and policy 
that holds a person legally responsible for harm only 
if the harm caused can be traced back to that person’s 
actions. Also referred to as  proximate cause. 
 Legal moralism 
 The theory that, if an activity is 
immoral, it should also be illegal. 
 Legal paternalism 
 The theory that a restriction 
on a person’s freedom can sometimes be justified by 
showing that it is for that person’s own benefit. 
 Lexical definition 
 The meaning of a word that is 
given in the dictionary. 
 Line-Drawing Fallacy  A fallacy that occurs when a 
speaker or writer assumes that either a crystal-clear 
line can be drawn between two things, or they cannot 
really be differentiated. 
 Loaded question  A question that rests on one or 
more unwarranted or unjustified assumptions. 
 Logic 
 The branch of philosophy concerned with 
whether the reasons presented for a claim, if those 
reasons were true, would justify accepting the claim. 
 Logical analogy  An analogy whose analogues are 
arguments.  
 Loss aversion 
 Being more strongly motivated to 
avoid a loss than to accrue a gain. 
 Mean 
 A type of average. The arithmetic mean of a 
group of numbers is the number that results when 
their sum is divided by the number of members in the 
group. 
 Median 
 A type of average. In a group of numbers, 
as many numbers of the group are larger than the 
median as are smaller. 
 Method of Agreement 
 See  Common variable 
principle. 
 Method of Concomitant Variation 
 See Covariation 
principle. 
 Method of Difference  See  Paired unusual events 
principle. 
 Misplacing the Burden of Proof 
 A fallacy that 
occurs when a speaker or writer attempts to support 
or prove a point by trying to make us disprove it. 
 Mode 
 A type of average. In a group of numbers, the 
mode is the number occurring most frequently. 
 Modus ponens 
 An argument consisting of a condi-
tional claim as one premise, a claim that affirms the 
antecedent of the conditional as a second premise, 
and a claim that affirms the consequent of the condi-
tional as the conclusion. 
 Modus tollens  An argument consisting of a condi-
tional claim as one premise, a claim that denies the 
consequent of the conditional as a second premise, 
and a claim that denies the antecedent of the condi-
tional as the conclusion. 
 Moral relativism  The view that what is morally 
right and wrong depends on and is determined by 
one’s group or culture. 
 Moral subjectivism  The idea that what is right and 
wrong is merely a matter of subjective opinion, that 
thinking something is right or wrong makes it right or 
wrong for that individual. 

 
GLOSSARY 
447
 Naturalistic fallacy 
 The assumption that one 
can conclude directly from a fact (what “is”) what 
a rule or a policy should be (an “ought”) without a 
value-premise.  
 Negation 
 The contradictory of a given claim; the 
negation of claim P is usually given as “not-P.” 
 Negative claim  A claim that excludes one class or 
part of one class from another: E- and O-claims. 
 Negativity bias  An unconscious tendency to give 
more weight to negative evaluations than to positive 
evaluations.  
 Non sequitur 
 A statement that is unrelated to the 
statement that immediately preceded it. 
 Normative statement 
 See Value judgment. 
 Obedience to authority 
 The tendency to comply 
with instructions from an authority even when they 
conflict with our values. 
 Objective claim 
 See Objective statement. 
 Objective issue 
 See Objective question. 
 Objective question 
 A question whose answer is an 
objective statement. 
 Objective statement  A statement that is not made 
true or false by the speaker or writer’s thinking it is 
true or false. 
   Obverse   
 The obverse of a categorical claim is that 
claim that is directly across from it in the square of 
opposition, with the predicate term changed to its 
complementary term. 
 Offense principle 
 The claim that an action or activ-
ity can justifiably be made illegal if it is sufficiently 
offensive.  
 Opinion  A claim that somebody believes to be true.  
 Ostensive definition 
 See Definition by example. 
 Otherizing  A rhetorical technique that divides peo-
ple into two groups: Us and Them; and portrays Them 
as suspicious, dangerous, or repulsive. Them includes 
ideological opponents and other social groups who 
can be blamed for our problems. Minorities with their 
“unreasonable demands” are easy targets.  
 Overconfidence effect 
 A tendency to overestimate 
the percentage of correct answers we have given to 
questions on a subject we are not experts about. 
   Overestimating the strength of an argument    Assign-
ing an inappropriately high confidence-level indicator 
or an inappropriately narrow error-margin indicator to 
the conclusion of an inductive argument.  
 Overlooking a Possible Common Cause  A fallacy 
that occurs when a speaker or writer overlooks the 
possibility that two things may both be the effects of 
a third thing. 
 Overlooking False Positives  A fallacy that occurs 
when a speaker or writer calculates the proportion 
of Xs in a population that are Ys from information 
about the proportion of Ys in the population that are 
Xs, without knowing what proportion of nonYs in the 
population are Xs. 
 Overlooking Prior Probabilities  A fallacy that 
occurs when a speaker or writer calculates the 
proportion of Xs in a population that are Ys from 
information about the proportion of Ys in the popula-
tion that are Xs, without knowing the proportion of Ys 
in the population. 
 Overlooking the Possibility of Coincidence 
 A fal-
lacy that occurs when a speaker or writer assumes 
that a coincidental temporal juxtaposition of two 
events is due to causation. 
   Overlooking the Possibility of Random Varia-
tion 
 A fallacy that occurs when a speaker or writer 
assumes that random fluctuation is due to causation. 
   Overlooking the Possibility of Regression    A fal-
lacy that occurs when a speaker or writer assumes 
that a change in the value of a variable from more 
atypical to less on subsequent measurements is due 
to causation. 
   Overlooking the Possibility of Reversed Causa-
tion 
 A fallacy that occurs when a speaker or writer 
overlooks the possibility that the stated cause may 
actually be the effect, and the stated effect may actu-
ally be the cause. 
   Paired unusual events principle   
 A principle for 
forming a causal hypothesis that must be guided 
by common sense and background knowledge: If 
something unusual happens, look for something else 
unusual that has happened and consider whether it 
might be the cause. See also Common variable prin-
ciple and Covariation principle. 
 Paralipsis  A passing over with brief mention so as 
to emphasize the suggestiveness of what is omitted. 
Also called  Significant mention. 
 Peer Pressure Fallacy  A fallacy that occurs when a 
speaker or writer tries to persuade us to do or accept 
something by playing on our fear of becoming an out-
cast if we don’t. 
 Perfectionist Fallacy 
 A fallacy that occurs when a 
speaker or writer ignores options between “perfec-
tion” and “nothing.” 
 Poisoning the Well 
 A fallacy that occurs when a 
speaker or writer attempts to dismiss what someone 
is going to say, by talking about the person’s character 
or circumstances or consistency. 
 Population  An identifiable group of things. 
 Post Hoc, Ergo Propter Hoc 
 “After this, therefore 
because of it.” A fallacy that occurs when a speaker or 
writer assumes that the fact that one event came after 
another establishes that it was caused by it. 
 Precising definition  A definition whose purpose 
is to reduce vagueness or generality or to eliminate 
ambiguity. 
 Predicate term  The noun or noun phrase that 
refers to the second class mentioned in a standard-
form categorical claim. 
 Predictable ratio 
 The ratio that the results of a 
series of events can be expected to have, given the 
antecedent conditions of the series. Examples: The 
predictable ratio of a fair coin flip is 50 percent 
heads and 50 percent tails; the predictable ratio of 
sevens coming up when a pair of fair dice is rolled is 
1 in 6, or just under 17 percent.  

448 
GLOSSARY
 Premise indicator 
 A word or phrase (e.g., “since it 
is the case that . . .”) that ordinarily indicates the pres-
ence of the premise of an argument. 
 Premise  The claim or claims in an argument 
thought to support or demonstrate a conclusion. 
 Premise-analogue 
 An argument from analogy is 
an argument that something has an attribute because 
a similar thing has that attribute. The similar thing is 
the premise-analogue. 
 Principle of total evidence  The idea that in esti-
mating probabilities of something, you must take into 
account all available relevant information. 
 Principle of utility  The basic principle of utilitari-
anism, to create as much overall happiness and/or to 
limit unhappiness for as many as possible. 
 Prior probability  See True proportion  
 Probability of an event 
 The probability of an event 
is its likelihood of happening expressed as a propor-
tion, percentage or decimal. 
 Proof surrogate  An expression used to suggest 
that there is evidence or authority for a claim without 
actually saying what it is. 
 Propositional logic  A system of logic that specifies the 
logical relationships among truth-functional claims—
claims whose truth values depend solely upon the truth 
values of their simplest component parts. In particular, 
propositional logic deals with the logical functions of 
the terms “not,” “and,” “or,” “if . . . then,” and so on.  
 Prospective observational study  A study of two 
groups, in one of which a suspected causal agent is 
universally present, and in the other of which it is 
universally absent. A significant difference in the 
frequency of a suspected “effect” in the comparison 
groups is evidence of causal linkage between it and 
the suspected causal agent. Also known as a non-
experimental cause-to-effect study. 
 Proximate cause  See legal cause. 
 Random sample  A sample selected by a procedure 
that gives every member of a population an equal 
chance of being included. 
 Randomized controlled experiment  An experi-
ment in which subjects are randomly assigned either 
to an “experimental group” (E) or a “control” (C), 
which theoretically differ from one another in only 
one respect: subjects in the E group are subjected to 
a suspected cause. 
 Red herring 
 See Relevance Fallacy. 
 Reductio Ad Absurdum 
 An attempt to show that 
a claim is false by demonstrating that it has false or 
absurd logical consequences; literally, “reducing to 
an absurdity.” 
 Regression 
 See Statistical regression. 
 Relativism  The idea that truth is relative to the 
standards of a given culture. More precisely, relativ-
ism holds that if your culture and some other culture 
have different standards of truth or evidence, there is 
no independent “God’s-eye view” by which one cul-
ture’s standards can be seen to be more correct than 
the other’s. 
 Relevance fallacy  Any fallacy that occurs when a 
speaker or writer attempts to support or prove a point 
by bringing up an irrelevant consideration. Includes 
several varieties, such as  Argumentum Ad Hominem, 
Straw Man, and Appeal to Emotion. 
 Religious absolutism  The view that the correct 
moral principles are those accepted by the “correct” 
religion.  
 Religious relativism  The belief that what is right 
and wrong is whatever one’s religious culture or soci-
ety deems it to be. 
 Representative sample 
 A sample that isn’t biased. 
 See also Fallacy of Biased Sample. 
 Retrospective observational study  A study of two 
groups, in one of which a phenomenon of interest 
is universally present, and in the other of which it is 
universally absent. A significant difference in the fre-
quency of a suspected causal agent in the compari-
son groups is evidence of causal linkage between the 
it and the phenomenon. Also known as a nonexperi-
mental effect-to-cause study. 
 Rhetoric 
 In our usage, “rhetoric” is language used 
primarily to persuade or influence beliefs or attitudes 
rather than to prove logically. 
 Rhetorical analogy 
 An analogy used to express or 
influence attitudes or affect behavior; such analogies 
often invoke images with positive or negative emo-
tional associations. 
 Rhetorical definition 
 A pseudo-definition given to 
express our feelings or influence someone else’s. 
 Rhetorical device  Rhetorical devices are used to 
influence beliefs or attitudes through the associations, 
connotations, and implications of words, sentences, 
and more extended passages. While rhetorical devices 
may be used to enhance the persuasive force of argu-
ments, they do not add to their logical force.  
 Rhetorical explanation  An explanation intended 
to influence attitudes or affect behavior; such expla-
nations often make use of images with positive or 
negative emotional associations. 
 Rhetorical force 
 See Emotive meaning. 
 Sample proportion  The proportion of a sample 
that has an attribute of interest.  
 Sample size 
 Sample size can affect the size of the 
error margin or the confidence level of inductive gen-
eralizations from a sample. 
 Sample 
 A subset of a population. 
 Sample-analogue 
 See premise-analogue. 
 Sampling frame  A precise definition of a sample or 
attribute that makes it unambiguous whether any given 
thing is a member of the sample and has the attribute.  
 Scapegoating 
 Placing the blame for some bad 
effect on a person or group of people who are not 
really responsible for it but who provide an easy tar-
get for animosity. 
 Scare Tactics 
 A fallacy that occurs when a speaker 
or writer tries to scare us into accepting an irrelevant 
conclusion. Includes direct threats (which sometimes 
are called “arguments from force”). 

 
GLOSSARY 
449
 Self-contradictory claim 
 A claim that is analyti-
cally false. 
 Self-selected sample  A sample whose members 
are included by their own decision. 
 Self-Selection Fallacy 
 A fallacy that occurs when a 
speaker or writer generalizes incautiously from a self-
selected sample. 
 Semantic ambiguity 
 See  Semantically ambiguous 
claim.  
   Semantically ambiguous claim    An ambiguous 
claim whose ambiguity is due to the ambiguity of a 
word or phrase in the claim. 
 Significant mention 
 See Paralipsis. 
 Skewed sample 
 See Biased sample. 
 Slanter 
 A linguistic device used to affect opinions, 
attitudes, or behavior without argumentation. Slant-
ers rely heavily on the suggestive power of words and 
phrases to convey and evoke favorable and unfavor-
able images. 
 Slippery Slope 
 A fallacy that occurs when a speaker 
or writer rests a conclusion on an unsupported warn-
ing that is controversial and tendentious, to the effect 
that something will progress by degrees to an unde-
sirable outcome. 
 Social utility 
 A focus on what is good for soci-
ety (usually in terms of overall happiness) when 
deciding on a course of action.  See also  Principle of 
utility.  
 Sound argument  A valid argument whose prem-
ises are true. 
 Spin  Statements using rhetorical devices and tech-
niques to evoke positive or negative reactions to a 
politician or political party or perspective. 
 Square of opposition  A table of the logical relation-
ships between two categorical claims that correspond 
to each other. 
 Standard-form categorical claim  Any claim that 
results from putting words or phrases that name cate-
gories in the blanks of one of the following structures: 
“All  _____  are  _____ ”; “No  _____  are  _____ ”; “Some 
 _____ are  _____ ”; and “Some  _____ are not  _____ .” 
 Stare decisis 
 “Letting the decision stand.” Going by 
precedent.  
 Statistical regression 
 If the average value of a vari-
able is atypical on one measurement, it is likely to be 
less atypical on a subsequent measurement. 
 Statistical syllogism A syllogism having this form: 
Such-and-such proportion of Xs are Ys.
This is an X.
Therefore this is a Y.
  Statistically significant  From a statistical point of 
view, probably not due to chance. 
 Stereotype  A cultural belief or idea about a social 
group’s attributes, usually simplified or exaggerated. 
It can be positive or negative. 
 Stipulative definition  A definition (of a word) that 
is specific to a particular context. 
 Straw Man  A fallacy that occurs when a speaker or 
writer attempts to dismiss a contention by distorting 
or misrepresenting it. 
 Stronger/weaker arguments 
 The more likely 
the premise of an inductive argument makes the 
conclusion, the stronger the argument, and the 
less likely it makes the conclusion, the weaker the 
argument.  
 Subcontrary claims  Two claims that can both be 
true at the same time but cannot both be false at the 
same time. 
 Subject term 
 The noun or noun phrase that refers 
to the first class mentioned in a standard-form cat-
egorical claim. 
 Subjective claim 
 See Subjective statement. 
 Subjective expression 
 See Subjective statement. 
 Subjective issue 
 See Subjective question. 
 Subjective question 
 A question whose answer is a 
subjective statement. 
 Subjective statement  A statement that is made true or 
false by the speaker or writer’s thinking it is true or false.  
 Syllogism 
 A 
deductive 
argument 
with 
two 
premises.  
 Syntactic ambiguity  See  syntactically ambiguous 
claim.  
 Syntactically ambiguous claim  An ambiguous claim 
whose ambiguity is due to the structure of the claim.  
 Synthetic claim  A claim whose truth or falsity is 
not determined simply by the definitions of the words 
that make it up. Contrast with  Analytic claim. 
 Target analogue 
 See Conclusion analogue. 
 Term 
 A noun or noun phrase. 
 Truth  In this book we use the concept in a common-
sense way: A claim is true if it is free from error. 
Truth-function 
A relationship between a complex 
sentence and its simpler parts. The truth of the larger 
sentence results entirely from (is a function of) the 
truth value of its simpler parts.
Truth-functional analysis The result of producing 
a full truth-table for a truth-functional claim.
Truth-functional equivalence    Two claims are 
truth-functionally equivalent if and only if they have 
exactly the same truth table. 
Truth-functional logic 
and give it the same defi-
nition as currently given for “Propositional logic.”  
Then, under “propositional logic,” put see Truth-func-
tional logic.
Truth-functional rule 
A rule of deduction that 
allows the derivation of a line from one or more ear-
lier lines.
Truth-functional symbolization A representation 
of a sentence using only letters for its simplest parts—
its independent clauses—and logical symbols for 
negation, conjunction, disjunction, and conditional 
claims
 True proportion 
 The proportion of a population 
that actually has an attribute of interest. 
Truth table   
 A table that lists all possible combina-
tions of truth values for the claim variables in a sym-
bolized claim or argument and then specifies the 
truth value of the claim or claims for each of those 
possible combinations. 

450 
GLOSSARY
Truth value 
If a claim is true, its truth value is 
“true”; if it is false its truth value is “false.”
Two Wrongs Make a Right   
 A fallacy that occurs 
when a speaker or writer thinks that the wrongfulness 
of a deed is erased by its being a response to another 
wrongful deed. 
 Undistributed Middle Fallacy   A fallacy that occurs 
when a speaker or writer assumes that two things 
related to a third thing are necessarily related to each 
other that occurs. 
 Untestable Explanation 
 A fallacy that occurs when 
a speaker or writer offers an explanation that could 
not be tested even in principle.  
 Utilitarianism  The moral position that, if an act 
will produce more happiness than its alternatives, 
that act is the right thing to do, and if the act will pro-
duce less happiness than its alternatives, it would be 
wrong to do it in place of an alternative that would 
produce more happiness. 
 Vague claim  A claim that lacks sufficient precision 
to convey the information appropriate to its use. 
 Vagueness 
  A concept is vague if we cannot say with 
certainty what it includes and what it excludes. 
 Valid argument 
 An argument such that it would be 
self-contradictory to maintain that the conclusion is 
false and the premise (or premises) are true. 
 Value judgment  A claim that assesses the merit, desir-
ability, or praiseworthiness of someone or something. 
Also called a  normative or a  prescriptive statement.  
 Variable 
 Something that varies. In deductive rea-
soning, the most important variables are terms, 
claims, and arguments. In inductive generalizing 
from samples, inductive arguments from analogy, 
and arguments for causal claims, the most important 
variables are attributes. 
 Venn diagram 
 A graphic means of representing a 
categorical claim or categorical syllogism by assign-
ing classes to overlapping circles. Invented by English 
mathematician John Venn (1834–1923). 
 Virtue ethics 
 The moral position unified around 
the basic idea that each of us should try to perfect a 
virtuous character that we exhibit in all actions. 
 Weak Analogy  A weak argument based on debatable 
or unimportant similarities between two or more things.  
 Weak argument 
 See Stronger/weaker arguments. 
 Weaseler 
 An expression used to protect a claim 
from criticism by weakening or qualifying it. 
 Wishful Thinking  A fallacy that occurs when we 
forget that wanting something to be true is irrelevant 
to whether it is true. 
 Worse than average illusion  See Better than aver-
age illusion. 
 Xenophobia  Fear or dislike of what is foreign or 
strange. 

This page intentionally left blank

 Answers, Suggestions, and Tips for 
Triangle Exercises 
 Exercise 1-6 
 1. Does not contain an argument. 
 4. Argument, whose conclusion is that computers will 
never be able to converse intelligently through speech.  
 7. Argument, whose conclusion is that chemicals in 
teething rings and soft plastic toys may cause cancer.  
 10. Does not contain an argument. 
 Exercise 1-7 
 1. a 
 4. c 
 7. b 
 10. b 
 Exercise 1-8 
 1. We (the authors) think we probably tend to over-
estimate the probability of types of events that are 
fresh in our minds (availability heuristic). 
 4. Belief bias is the tendency to evaluate an argument 
on the basis of how believable its conclusion is 
to us. Confirmation bias is the tendency to attach 
more weight to evidence that supports our own 
point of view. 
 Exercise 1-11 
 1. Contains an argument whose conclusion is the 
stock market probably will go down. 
 4. Contains an argument whose conclusion is that 
probably more women than men are upset by 
pornography.  
 7. Does not contain an argument. 
 10. Subtle, but the speaker is giving a reason for think-
ing  AI is the best talent show on TV. So the passage 
contains an argument whose conclusion is that 
contention.    
 Exercise 1-12 
 1. a 
 4. b 
 7. e. Reading the passage very closely, you can 
see that the premise (which follows “since”) 
addresses the issue whether it is surprising 
that the winner of this year’s spelling bee is 
a straight A student whose favorite subject is 
science.  
 10. c. But notice YOUR FRIEND hasn’t given a reason 
for thinking the governor has been good. 
 Exercise 1-1 
 1. An argument consists of two parts, one of which, 
the premise, is intended to provide a reason for 
accepting the other part, the conclusion. Unfortu-
nately, sometimes people use the word “argument” 
to refer just to the premise. 
 4. F 
 7. T 
 10. F. As an example of an opinion that isn’t subjec-
tive, we (the authors) are of the opinion there 
is life somewhere else in the universe. If there 
is life, our opinion is true. If there isn’t, then it 
is false. We don’t know whether our opinion is 
true or false, but we do know that it is one or 
the other, and we know that whether it is true or 
false is independent of whether we think there 
is life somewhere else in the universe. 
 13. c. The first order of business is to determine what 
the issue is. 
 16. T 
 19. T 
 Exercise 1-2 
 1. This item belongs in one group. 
 4. This item belongs in the same group as item 1. 
 7. This belongs in a different group from 1 and 4. 
 10. This belongs in the same group as 1 and 4. 
 Exercise 1-3 
 1. Not objective 
 4. Not objective 
 7. Not objective 
 10. Objective 
 Exercise 1-4 
 1. Subjective 
 4. Subjective 
 7. Not subjective, assuming the speaker is expressing 
the opinion that the movie frightened his sister a lot.  
 10. Not subjective, unless the speaker intends to imply 
that Kerry’s chin is unattractive, in which case the 
assertion would be subjective. 
 Exercise 1-5 
 1. Argument 
 4. Not an argument 
 7. No arguments here 
   10. Argument. The last sentence is the conclusion.    
 Chapter 1: What  Is Critical Thinking, Anyway? 

 
ANSWERS, SUGGESTIONS, AND TIPS FOR TRIANGLE EXERCISES 
453
 Exercise 1-13 
 1. Whether police brutality happens often. 
 4. Whether we have a good reason to believe the 
world is independent of our minds. 
 7. Whether it is the case that you should sign up for 
lessons on how to use a synthesizer if you buy one. 
 10. Whether Native Americans, as true conservationists, 
have something to teach readers about their rela-
tionship to the earth. There are other points made in 
the passage, but they are subsidiary to this one.    
 Exercise 1-14 
 1. MRS. is addressing both issues raised by MR. 
 4. CAUTIOUS is addressing the issue raised by 
HEEDLESS, of whether people should complain 
about what we are doing in Afghanistan. 
 7. OLD GUY is addressing YOUNG GUY’s issue of 
whether baseball players are better now than forty 
years ago. 
 10. SECOND NEIGHBOR is addressing the issue raised 
by FIRST NEIGHBOR, which is whether SECOND 
NEIGHBOR has a right to make so much noise at 
night. SECOND NEIGHBOR thinks he has the right.  
 13. DEVON is not addressing RAMON’s issue, which is 
whether this English course is a complete waste of 
time. 
 16. PARKER isn’t addressing MOORE’s issue, which is 
whether Thomas Brothers or Vernon Construction 
does better work. Instead, he addresses whether 
Thomas Brothers charges too much. 
 19. On the surface, it may seem that both hands 
address the issue of whether a person such as ONE 
HAND can feel safe in her own home. But ONE 
HAND’s real issue is whether the large number of 
handguns makes one unsafe in one’s own home. 
OTHER HAND ignores this issue completely. 
 22. JENNIFER does not address the issue raised by 
KATIE, which is whether she (JENNIFER) would 
be better off riding a bike to school.  JENNIFER 
in effect changes the subject. Instead of address-
ing whether she would be better off riding a bike 
to school, JENNIFER starts talking about KATIE, 
as if KATIE’S behavior somehow invalidates what 
KATIE has asserted. This is like  item 5, in which 
MR. JR changes the subject in a similar way.  
 25. HERR UBERALLES thinks they spend more 
than they should on heating. FRAU UBERALLES 
reminds him that she gets cold easily, which 
she thinks justifies their heating expense. She 
addresses the issue raised by him. 
 Exercise 1-15 
 1. Pertains to moral right/wrong 
 4. Pertains to moral right/wrong 
 7. Doesn’t pertain 
 10. Pertains to aesthetic good/bad 
 13. Doesn’t pertain. It merely explains how to stop the 
decline in enrollments. 
 Exercise 1-16 
 1. b. Both are arguments. 
 4. b. Both are arguments. 
 7. b. Both are explanations. 
 10. a. Both contain two assertions, the second of 
which is implied to take priority. 
 Answer to question posed in box 
on page 10 
 Can animals think critically? Unquestionably animals 
think, but do they review and evaluate their thinking? We 
don’t know, but we have our doubts.   
 Exercise 2-1 
 1.  a. Premise;   
 b.  premise; 
 c.  conclusion 
 2.  a. Premise; 
 b.  premise; 
 c.  conclusion 
 3.  a. Conclusion; 
 b.  premise 
 4.  a. Premise; 
 b.  premise; 
 c.  conclusion 
 5.  a. Premise; 
 b.  conclusion; 
 c.  premise;  
 
  d. premise  
 Exercise 2-2 
 1. Premise: All Communists are Marxists. 
 
  Conclusion: All Marxists are Communists. 
 4. Premise: That cat loves dogs. 
 
  Conclusion: Probably she won’t be upset if you 
bring home a new dog for a pet. 
 7. Premise: Presbyterians are not fundamental-
ists. Premise: All born-again Christians are 
fundamentalists. 
 
  Conclusion: No born-again Christians are 
Presbyterians.  
 10. Premise: The clunk comes only when I pedal. 
 
  Conclusion: The problem is in the chain, the crank, 
or the pedals. 
 Exercise 2-3 
 1. Conclusion: There is a difference in the octane 
ratings between the two grades of gasoline. 
 4. Conclusion: Scrub jays can be expected to be 
aggressive when they’re breeding. 
 7. Conclusion: Dogs are smarter than cats. 
 10. Unstated conclusion: She is not still interested 
in me. 
 Exercise 2-4 
 1. Deductive demonstration 
 4. Inductive support 
 7. Inductive support 
 10. Deductive demonstration 
 Chapter 2: Two Kinds of Reasoning 

454 
ANSWERS, SUGGESTIONS, AND TIPS FOR TRIANGLE EXERCISES
 Exercise 2-5 
 1. Inductive 
 4. Inductive 
 7. Deductive (with the unstated premise: If I didn’t 
get enough sleep last night I should get to bed ear-
lier tonight). 
 10. Inductive 
 Exercise 2-6 
 1. b 
 4. b 
 7. b 
 10. b 
 Exercise 2-7 
 1. a 
 4. a 
 7. b 
 10. c 
 Exercise 2-8 
 1. Inductive 
 4. True 
 7. Deductive 
 10. Inductive 
 13. T 
 17. F 
 Exercise 2-9 
 1. Deductive demonstration 
 2. Inductive support 
 4. Inductive support 
 7. Two arguments here. In the first argument, if 
the speaker is assuming that the universe’s not 
having arisen by chance increases the prob-
ability that God exists, then his or her argument 
is inductive. Likewise, in the second argument, 
if the speaker is assuming that an increase in 
the number of believing physicists increases the 
probability that God exists, then his or her argu-
ment is inductive.  
 8. Inductive support 
 Exercise 2-10 
 1.    North Korea is a great threat to its neighbors. 
 
    It has a million-person army ready to be 
unleashed at a moment’s notice. 
 
    It also has nuclear weapons.
 
  
 
 6.    You’re overwatering your lawn. 
 
    There are mushrooms growing around the base 
of that tree—a sure sign of overwatering. 
 
    There are worms on the ground. 
 
    They come up when the earth is oversaturated. 
 
 
 
 9.    If you drive too fast, you’re more likely to get a 
ticket.  
 
    You’re also more likely to get into an accident. 
 
    So, you shouldn’t drive too fast. 
 
 
 
 10.    You should consider installing a solarium. 
 
    You can still get a tax credit. 
 
    You can reduce your heating bill. 
 
    If you build it right, you can actually cool your 
house with it in the summer. 
 
 
 
 13.    We must paint the house now. 
 
    If we don’t then we’ll have to paint it next 
summer.  
 
    If we have to paint it next summer, we’ll have to 
cancel our trip. 
 
    It’s too late to cancel the trip. 
 
 
 
 Exercise 2-11 
 1. “Because” is followed by a cause. 
 4. “Because” is followed by a cause. 
 7. “Because” is followed by a cause. 
 9. “Because” is followed by a premise. 
 Exercise 2-12 
 1. Could not possibly be false. 
 4. Could not possibly be false. 
 7. Could not possibly be false. 
 10. Could not possibly be false. 
 Exercise 2-13 
 1. Anyone who keeps his or her word is a person 
of good character. 
 4. One cannot murder someone without being 
in the same room. 
 7. Anyone who commits murder should be 
executed.  
 10. All squeaking fans need oil. 
 1
 2
 3
 1
 2
 3
 4
 1
 2
 3
 1
 2
 3
 4
 1
 2
 3
 4

 
ANSWERS, SUGGESTIONS, AND TIPS FOR TRIANGLE EXERCISES 
455
 Exercise 2-14 
 1. Puddles everywhere usually indicate a recent rain. 
 4. The next day after a week of cold weather usually is 
cold. 
 7. Having leftovers is an indication that a party wasn’t 
successful.  
   10. My cold probably would not have disappeared like 
magic if I had not taken Zicam.    
 Exercise 2-15 
 
 1. 
 
 
 
 4. 
 
 
 Exercise 2-16 
 1. a 
 4. b 
 Exercise 2-17 
 1.    Your distributor is the problem. 
 
    There’s no current at the spark plugs. 
 
    If there’s no current at the plugs, then either 
your alternator is shot or your distributor is 
defective. 
 
    [Unstated] Either your alternator is shot, or your 
distributor is defective. 
 
    If the problem were in the alternator, then your 
dash warning light would be on. 
 
    The light isn’t on.
 
  
 
 4.    They really ought to build a new airport. 
 
    It [a new airport] would attract more business to 
the area. 
 
    The old airport is overcrowded and dangerous.
 
  
 
 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
 6
 1
 2
 3
 Note: Claim  3  could be divided into two separate 
claims, one about overcrowding and one about 
danger. Th is would be important if the overcrowding 
were clearly off ered as a reason for the danger. 
 Exercise 2-18 
 1.   1  Cottage cheese will help you to be slender. 
 
 
 2  Cottage cheese will help you to be youthful. 
 
 
 3  Cottage cheese will help you to be more beautiful. 
 
 
 4  Enjoy cottage cheese often.
 
  
 
 4.   1  The idea of a free press in America is a joke. 
 
 
 2  The nation’s advertisers control the media. 
 
 
 3  Advertisers, through fear of boycott, can dictate 
programming.  
 
 
 4  Politicians and editors shiver at the thought of 
a boycott. 
 
 
 5  The situation is intolerable. 
 
 
 6  I suggest we all listen to NPR and public television.
 
  
 
 Note: Th e writer may see claim  1  as the fi nal 
conclusion and claim  5  as his comment upon it. 
Claim  6  is probably a comment on the results of 
the argument, although it, too, could be listed as a 
further conclusion. 
 7.   1  Most schools should offer single-sex classes. 
 
 
 2  Single-sex classes promote learning. 
 
 
 3  Girls do bener in math and science courses 
when they are alone with other girls. 
 
 
 4  Gender offers distractions that interfere with 
learning. 
 
 
 5  Research also shows that in mixed classrooms 
most instructors will spend more time answering 
questions from boys.
 
 
 6  Schools that offer single-sex classes always 
report learning gains for students of both sexes. 

456 
ANSWERS, SUGGESTIONS, AND TIPS FOR TRIANGLE EXERCISES
 10.   1  Well-located, sound real estate is the safest 
investment in the world. 
 
 
 2  Real estate is not going to disappear as can 
dollars in savings accounts. 
 
 
 3  Real estate values are not lost because of inflation.  
 
 
 4  Property values tend to increase at a pace at 
least equal to the rate of inflation. 
 
 
 5  Most homes have appreciated at a rate greater 
than the inflation rate. . . . 
 
 
 
 12.   1  About 100 million Americans are producing 
data on the Internet. . . .  
 
 
 2  Each user is tracked, so private information is 
available in electronic form. 
 
 
 3  One website . . . promises, for seven dollars, to 
scan . . . , etc. 
 
 
 4  The combination of capitalism and technology 
poses a threat to our privacy.
 
 
 
 14.   1  Measure A is consistent with the City’s General 
Plan and City policies. . . .  
 
 
 2  A yes vote will affirm the wisdom of well-
planned, orderly growth. . . . 
 
 
 3  Measure A substantially reduces the amount of 
housing previously approved for Rancho Arroyo. 
 
 
 4  Measure A increases the number of parks and 
amount of open space. 
 
 
 5  Measure A significantly enlarges and enhances 
Bidwell Park. 
 
 
 6  Approval of Measure A will require dedication 
of 130.8 acres to Bidwell Park. 
 
 
 7  Approval of Measure A will require the devel-
oper to dedicate seven park sites. 
 
 
 8  Approval of Measure A will create 53 acres of 
landscaped corridors and greenways. 
 
 
 9  Approval of Measure A will preserve existing 
arroyos and protect sensitive plant habitats. . . .  
 
 10 Approval of Measure A will create junior high 
school and church sites. 
 
 11 Approval of Measure A will plan villages with 
2,927 dwellings. 
 
 12 Approval of Measure A will provide onsite job 
opportunities and retail services. 
 
 13 [Unstated conclusion] You should vote for 
Measure A.
 
 
 17.  1  In regard to your editorial, “Crime bill wastes 
billions,” let me set you straight. [Your position is 
mistaken.]  
 
 
 2  Your paper opposes mandatory life sentences for 
criminals convicted of three violent crimes, and you 
whine about how criminals’ rights might be violated.  
 
 
 3  Yet you also want to infringe on a citizen’s 
rights to keep and bear arms. 
 
 
 4  You say you oppose life sentences for three-time 
losers because judges couldn’t show any leniency 
toward the criminals no matter how trivial the crime.  
 
 
 5  What is your definition of trivial, busting an 
innocent child’s skull with a hammer?
 
 
 
 18.   1  Freedom means choice. 
 
 
 2  This is a truth antiporn activists always forget 
when they argue for censorship. 
 
 
 3  In their fervor to impose their morality, groups 
like Enough Is Enough cite extreme examples of 
pornography, such as child porn, suggesting that 
they are available in video stores. 
 
 
 4  This is not the way it is. 
 
 
 5  Most of this material portrays not actions such 
as this but consensual sex between adults. 
 
 
 6  The logic used by Enough Is Enough is that, if 
something can somehow hurt someone, it must be 
banned.  
 
 
 7  They don’t apply this logic to more harmful 
substances such as alcohol or tobacco. 
 
 
 8  Women and children are more adversely 
affected by drunken driving and secondhand 
smoke than by pornography. 
 
 
 9  Few Americans would want to ban alcohol or 
tobacco even though these substances kill hun-
dreds of thousands of people each year. 
 
 10  [Unstated conclusion] Enough Is Enough is 
inconsistent.  
 
 11  [Unstated conclusion] Enough Is Enough’s 
antiporn position is incorrect.
 
 

 
ANSWERS, SUGGESTIONS, AND TIPS FOR TRIANGLE EXERCISES 
457
 Exercise 3-1 
 In order of decreasing vagueness:
 1. d, e, b, c, f, and a. Compare (e) and (b). If Eli and 
Sarah made plans for the future, then they certainly 
discussed it. But just discussing it is more vague—
they could do that with or without making plans. 
 4. c, d, e, a, b 
   7. a, c, e, b, d     
 Exercise 3-2 
 1. Somewhat too vague; same problem as in the 
example.  
 4. Ambiguous; who was in the car? 
 7. Ambiguous; he gave it to her or the cat? 
 11. Too vague; how much exercise is “modest 
exercise”? 
 Exercise 3-3 
 1. Answer b is more precise. 
 4. Answer a is more precise. 
 7. Answer b is more precise, but not by much. 
 10. a 
 15. b 
 Exercise 3-4 
 1. “Piano” is defined analytically. 
 4. “Red planet” is defined by synonym. (This one is 
tricky because it looks like a definition by example. 
But there is only one red planet, so the phrase 
refers to exactly the same object as the word 
“Mars.”)  
 8. “Chiaroscuro” is defined by synonym. 
 11. “Significant other” is defined by example—several 
of them. 
 Exercise 3-5 
 1. Too imprecise. Sure, you can’t say exactly how 
much longer you want it cooked, but you can pro-
vide guidelines; for example, “Cook it until it isn’t 
pink.”  
 4. Precise enough. 
 7. Precise enough. 
 10. For a first-timer or an inexperienced cook, this 
phrase is not sufficiently precise. 
 Exercise 3-7 
 “Feeding” simply means “fertilizing” and is precise 
enough. “Frequently” is too vague. “No more than half” 
is acceptable. “Label-recommended amounts” is okay, 
too. “New year’s growth begins” and “each bloom period 
ends” seem a little imprecise for a novice gardener, but 
because pinpoint timing apparently isn’t crucial, these 
expressions are acceptable—so it seems to us, anyhow. 
“Similar” is not precise enough for a novice gardener. 
“Immediately after bloom” suggests that precise timing 
is important here, and we fi nd the phrase a bit too vague, 
at least for inexperienced gardeners. “When the nights 
begin cooling off ” is too vague even if precision in timing 
isn’t terribly important. 
 Exercise 3-8 
 1. The Raider tackle blocked the Giants linebacker. 
 4. How Therapy Can Help Victims of Torture 
 7. Chelsea’s nose resembles Hillary’s. 
 10. 6 Coyotes That Maul Girl Are Killed by Police 
 13. Second sentence: More than one disease can be 
carried and passed along to humans by a single 
tick.  
 16. We make good things happen. 
 19. Dunkelbrau—for those who crave the best-tasting 
real German beer 
 22. Jordan could write additional profound essays. 
 25. When she lay down to nap, she was disturbed by a 
noisy cow. 
 28. When Queen Elizabeth appeared before her 
troops, they all shouted “harrah.” 
 31. AT&T, for as long as your business lasts. 
 32. This class might have had a member of the oppo-
site sex for a teacher. 
 33. Married 10 times before, woman gets 9 years in 
prison for killing her husband. 
 Exercise 3-9 
 1. As a group 
 4. As a group 
 7. It’s more likely that the claim refers to the Giants as 
a group, but it’s possible that it refers to the play of 
individuals. 
 10. As individuals 
 12. Probably as individuals 
 15. Ambiguous. If the claim means that people are 
living longer than they used to, the reference is to 
people as individuals. If the claim means that the 
human race is getting older, then the reference is to 
people as a group. If the claim expresses the truism 
that to live is to age, then the reference is to people 
as individuals. 
 Exercise 3-14 
 7, 6, 4, 1, 3, 2, 5 
 Exercise 3-16 
 1. Students should choose their majors with consid-
erable care. 
 4. If a nurse can find nothing wrong with you in a 
preliminary examination, a physician will be recom-
mended to you. However, in this city physicians wish 
to protect themselves by having you sign a waiver.  
 7. Soldiers should be prepared to sacrifice their lives 
for their comrades. 
 Chapter 3: Clear Thinking, Critical Thinking, and Clear Writing 

458 
ANSWERS, SUGGESTIONS, AND TIPS FOR TRIANGLE EXERCISES
 10. Petitioners over sixty should have completed form 
E-7. 
 13. Language is nature’s greatest gift to humanity. 
 16. The proof must be acceptable to the rational 
individual.  
 17. The country’s founders believed in the equality of all. 
 20. Athletes who want to play for the National Football 
League should have a good work ethic. 
 24. Most U.S. senators are men. (Gender is important 
to the meaning of the sentence.) 
 27. Mr. Macleod doesn’t know it, but Ms. Macleod is a 
feminist.  
 30. To be a good politician, you have to be a good 
salesperson.    
 Exercise 3-18 
In case you couldn’t fi gure it out, the friend is a woman.
 Chapter 4: Credibility 
 Exercise 4-2 
 Something like number 9 is probably true, given the 
huge, almost unimaginable diff erence in wealth between 
the richest and the poorest people on the planet, but we 
have no idea what the actual numbers are. Regarding 
number 12, the warning went around on the web for a 
while, and even Click and Clack, the car guys on NPR’s 
“Car Talk” allowed there might be something to this but 
they didn’t want to conduct the appropriate experiments 
to fi nd out. As it turns out, experience has shown there 
is a danger of explosion due to static electricity, and cars 
now have warnings against the practice. Number 15 is 
also true. We don’t give any of the rest of them much of 
a chance. 
 Exercise 4-7 
 1. Of the first five, we’d say 1, 3, and 4 are probably 
interested parties. Of the last three, you must pre-
sume 8 is an interested party unless you can be 
assured he or she will not benefit more from the 
sale of one brand or the other. Numbers 6 and 7 
depend entirely on the level of knowledge of the 
individuals and their lack of brand loyalty. 
 Exercise 4-10 
 10. One should be very cautious about expecting 
important results from such a plan. It should be 
noted that the plan includes injections of hor-
mones that many believe are not healthy in the 
long run.    
 Exercise 4-11 
 1. In terms of expertise, we’d list (d), (c), and (b) first. 
Given what we’ve got to go on, we wouldn’t assign 
expert status to either (a) or (e). We’d list all entries 
as likely to be fairly unbiased except for (a), which 
we would expect to be very biased. 
 3. Expertise: First (b), then (a), then (c) and (d) 
about equal, and (e) last. We’d figure that (b) is 
most likely to be unbiased, with (c), (d), and (e) 
close behind; Choker would be a distant last on 
this scale. Her bad showing on the bias scale more 
than makes up for her high showing on the exper-
tise scale.    
 Exercise 4-12 
 1. The most credible choices are either the FDA or 
 Consumer Reports, both of which investigate health 
claims of the sort in question with reasonable objec-
tivity. The company that makes the product is the 
least credible source because it is the most likely to 
be biased. The owner of the health food store may 
be very knowledgeable regarding nutrition but is 
not a credible source regarding drugs. Your local 
pharmacist can reasonably be regarded as credible, 
but he or she may not have access to as much infor-
mation as the FDA or  CR. [We should add here that 
the FDA itself has come under considerable criti-
cism in recent years, especially for making decisions 
on medical issues based on political considerations. 
The debate over approval of Plan B, the “morning 
after” pill, was a case in point. (See “Morning-After 
Pill,”  The New York Times, August 28, 2005.)]  
   2. It would probably be a mistake to consider any 
of the individuals on this list more expert than 
the others, although different kinds and different 
levels of bias are fairly predictable on the parts of 
the  victim’s father, the NRA representative, and 
possibly the police chief. The senator might be 
expected to have access to more data that are rel-
evant to the issue, but that would not in itself make 
his or her credibility much greater than that of the 
 others. The problem here is that we are dealing 
with a value judgment that depends very heavily 
upon an individual’s point of view rather than his 
or her expertise. What is important to this question 
is less the credibility of the person who gives us an 
answer than the strength of the supporting argu-
ment, if any, that he or she provides. 
 3. Although problem 2 hinges on a value judgment, 
this one calls for an interpretation of the original 
intent of a constitutional amendment. Here, our 
choices would be either the Supreme Court Justice 
or the constitutional historian, with a slight prefer-
ence for the latter because Supreme Court Justices 
are concerned more with constitutional issues as 
they have been interpreted by other courts than 
with original intent. (And Supreme Court Justices 
are not the most reliable historians of the Court.) 
The NRA representative is paid to speak for a certain 

 
ANSWERS, SUGGESTIONS, AND TIPS FOR TRIANGLE EXERCISES 
459
point of view and would be the least credible, in our 
view. The senator and the U.S. president would fall 
somewhere in between: Both reasonably might be 
expected to be knowledgeable about constitutional 
issues but much less so than our first two choices.    
 Exercise 4-13 
 1. Professor St. Germain would possess the greatest 
degree of credibility and authority on (d), (f), and 
(h), and, compared with someone who had not 
lived in both places, on (i). 
 Exercise 4-15 
 1. We’d accept this as probably true—but probably 
only  approximately true. It’s difficult to be precise 
about such matters; Campbell will most likely lay 
off  about 650 workers, including  about 175 at its 
headquarters.  
 8. We’d accept this as likely. 
 12. No doubt cats that live indoors do tend to live 
longer than cats that are subject to the perils of 
outdoor life. If statistics on how much longer 
indoor cats live on the average were available, 
we’d expect the manufacturer to know them. But 
we suspect that such statistics would be difficult to 
establish (and probably not worth the effort), and 
we therefore have little confidence in the statistic 
cited here.  
 20. This one is seriously nuts. But we’re not sure 
whether most of the blame should go to the  Post or 
to the  People’s Daily. 
 Solution to triangle puzzle on page 103 
 If you look carefully, you’ll see that the hypotenuse (the 
topmost, longest line) of the two triangles are diff erent. 
Th e upper one is slightly concave and the lower is slightly 
convex, thus allowing for extra space inside the lower tri-
angle. Th at’s where the “hole” comes from! 
 Chapter 5: Rhetoric, the Art of Persuasion 
 Exercise 5-1 
 1. Downplayer 
 4. Downplayer 
 7. Euphemism 
 10. Downplayer 
 13. Euphemism 
 16. Downplayer 
 19. Euphemism 
 Exercise 5-3 
 1. Stereotype 
 4. Loaded question 
 7. Loaded question 
 10. Innuendo 
 13. Innuendo 
 16. Loaded question 
 Exercise 5-4 
 1. Rhetorical analogy 
 4. Rhetorical analogy 
 7. Rhetorical analogy 
 10. Rhetorical analogy 
 Exercise 5-6 
 1. Twenty percent more than what? Are there prod-
ucts with  fake dairy butter? 
 4. This is not too bad, as long as we know what is 
meant by “the desert.” Some deserts get more rain 
than others. 
 7. This one is straightforward, but remember that 
grading has changed a lot in the past twenty years, 
and grades nearly everywhere are higher (grade 
inflation); this doesn’t necessarily mean today’s 
students are better. 
 10. This doesn’t make it a brilliant season all by itself. 
There may have been a big change in the economy, 
increasing attendance proportionately. Or atten-
dance may have been miserable last year. 
 Exercise 5-8 
 1. Hyperbole 
 4. Proof surrogate 
 7. Ridicule/sarcasm 
 10. Hyperbole 
 Exercise 5-9 
 1. Ridicule/sarcasm 
 4. Proof surrogate 
 7. Proof surrogate 
 10. Ridicule/sarcasm 
 Exercise 5-10 
 1. Otherizing 
 4. Otherizing; fostering xenophobia 
 7. This contains elements of all the rhetorical catego-
ries listed in the directions to this exercise. 
 10. This passage does not fit any of the categories. 
 13. Primarily otherizing and fostering xenophobia 
 Exercise 5-11 
 1. c (probably the main theme here) 
 4. c 
 7. a, c, and d 

460 
ANSWERS, SUGGESTIONS, AND TIPS FOR TRIANGLE EXERCISES
 10. d 
 13. a 
 16. d 
 19. a 
 Exercise 5-12 
 1. Hyperbole 
 2. Dysphemism 
 3. Rhetorical analogy 
 4. Dysphemism 
 5. Downplayer 
 6. Dysphemism 
 Exercise 5-13 
 (1) Dysphemism, (2) dysphemism, (3) hyperbole, (4) wea-
seler, (5) proof surrogate, (6) mildly downplays the clause 
that immediately precedes it, (7) loaded question  
 Exercise 5-15 
 1. Whether the tax rate on carried interest is a good thing 
 2. That it is not a good thing 
 3. Yes, he does support his position with arguments.  
Here is a version of the most important one:
 
   Premise:  No part of the tax code is acceptable if 
it is unfair.
 
   Premise:  The “carried interest” portion of the 
tax code is unfair because it requires much less 
in taxes from wealthy money managers than it 
requires of other working people.
 
   Therefore the carried interest portion of the tax 
code is unacceptable. 
 4. We do find rhetorical devices and strategies going on 
in this passage. Dysphemisms incude: “tax giveaway” 
(for tax break), “stupendously wealthy” (a dysphe-
mism in this context), “get away with” (for being 
exempt from the law), “crony capitalism” (is self-
explanatory), and “cheating” (also self-explanatory). 
There is also “othering” going on, since the speaker 
clearly paints the beneficiaries of carried interest 
as very different from the rest of us.  It would be too 
strong to call the passage hate mongering, but the 
speaker would probably not be disappointed if a lis-
tener were inclined to despise money managers and 
this tax break.    
 Exercise 5-20 
 1. a 
 4. a 
 7. c 
 10. d 
 Exercise 5-21 
 1. The quotation marks downplay the quality of the 
school.  
 4. Rhetorical definition 
 7. Euphemism 
 10. Rhetorical definition 
 13. Downplayer and proof surrogate 
 Exercise 5-22 
 1. “Shamelessly” is a downplayer and also is innu-
endo; “make sure Americans everywhere know” 
is hyperbole and ridicule; the rest of the passage is 
also hyperbole and ridicule. 
 4. Innuendo 
 7. Euphemism 
 10. Rhetorical comparison; hyperbole 
 13. Innuendo 
 16. Downplayer; hyperbole; dysphemism 
 19. Dysphemism; innuendo (“still isn’t right”); proof 
surrogate  
 22. There is every reason to believe that this trend is 
going to continue,” is a proof surrogate. There may 
be such reasons, but none is given or cited in the 
passage.  
 25. Lots of them here! To begin, “orgy” is a dysphe-
mism; “self-appointed” is a downplayer. The 
references to yurts and teepees is ridicule, and 
“grant-maintained” is a downplayer. The rest of it 
employs a heavy dose of sarcasm. 
 Exercise 5-27 
 1. Superior? In what way? More realistic character 
portrayal? Better expression of emotion? Probably 
the claim means only “I like Paltrow more than I 
like Blanchett.” 
 4. Fine, but don’t infer that they both grade the 
same. Maybe Smith gives 10 percent A’s and 
10 percent F’s, 20 percent B’s and 20 percent D’s, 
and 40  percent C’s, whereas Jones gives everyone 
a C. Who do you think is the more discriminating 
grader, given this breakdown? 
 7. Well, first of all, what is “long-distance”? Second, 
and more important, how is endurance measured? 
People do debate such issues, but the best way to 
begin a debate on this point would be by spelling 
out what you mean by “requires more endurance.”  
 10. This is like a comparison of apples and oranges. 
How can the popularity of a movie be compared 
with the popularity of a song? 
 Exercise 5-28 
 1. Smarter in what way?  This is too vague. 
 4. “Attend church regularly” is a bit vague; a person 
who goes to church each and every Christmas and 
Easter is a regular, although infrequent, attender. 
We don’t find “majority” too vague in this usage. 
 7. “Contained more insights” is much too vague. The 
student needs to know more specifically what was 
the matter with his or her paper, or at least what 
was better about the roommate’s paper. 
 10. These two sorts of things are much too different 
to be compared in this way. If you’re starving, the 
chicken looks better; if you need to get from here to 
there, it’s the Volkswagen. (This is the kind of ques-
tion Moore likes to ask people. Nobody can figure 
out why.)     

 
ANSWERS, SUGGESTIONS, AND TIPS FOR TRIANGLE EXERCISES 
461
 Exercises 
 1. c. False dilemma (perfectionist fallacy) 
 5. c. False dilemma (you either support same-sex mar-
riage or you are a homophobe who hates gays)  
 10. f. Appeal to emotion (scare tactics) 
 15. g. Irrelevant conclusion 
 20. b. Straw man 
 25. b. Straw man 
 30. e. Begging the question 
 35. d. Misplacing the burden of proof 
 40. e. Begging the question 
 45. g. Irrelevant conclusion 
 50. a.  Argumentum ad hominem (genetic fallacy); 
poisoning the well also okay 
 55. b. Straw man 
 60. a.  Argumentum ad hominem  (guilt by association)  
 65. c. False dilemma 
 70. f. Appeal to emotion (flattery, apple polishing) 
 75. a.   Argumentum ad hominem (genetic fallacy) 
 80. a.  Argumentum ad hominem (genetic fallacy) 
 85. e. Begging the question 
 90. b. Straw man 
 95. g. Irrelevant conclusion 
 100. e. Begging the question 
 Chapter 6: Relevance (Red Herring) Fallacies 
 Chapter 7: Induction Fallacies 
 Exercises 
 1. h. Slippery Slope 
 5. d. Fallacious Appeal to Authority 
 10. a. Hasty Generalization 
 15.  f.  Cum Hoc, Ergo Propter Hoc 
 20. b. Accident 
 25.  f.  Cum Hoc, Ergo Propter Hoc 
 30.  f. Post Hoc, Ergo Propter Hoc; Argument by 
Anecdote—causal variety 
 35. d. Fallacious Appeal to Authority 
 40. a. Hasty Generalization 
 45. d. Fallacious Appeal to Authority 
 50. b. Accident 
 55. e. Fallacious Appeal to Popularity 
 60. g. Overlooking the Possibility of Random Variation 
 65. e. Fallacious Appeal to Popularity 
 70.  f.  Post Hoc, Ergo Propter Hoc; Argument by 
 Anecdote—causal variety 
 75. a. Generalizing from Exceptional Cases/Hasty 
Generalization 
 80. a. Generalizing from Exceptional Cases/Hasty 
Generalization 
 85.  i, g.  Untestable Explanation; Overlooking the Pos-
sibility of Regression 
 90.  f.  Cum Hoc, Ergo Propter Hoc 
 95. a. Generalizing from Exceptional Cases/Hasty 
Generalization 
 100. b. Accident 
 105.  i. Untestable Explanation 
 110. h. Slippery Slope 
 115. d. Fallacious Appeal to Authority 
 120. d. Fallacious Appeal to Authority 
 125. h. Slippery Slope 
 Chapter 8: Formal Fallacies and Fallacies of Language 
 Exercise 8-1 
 1. Contradictories 
 4. Neither 
 7. Contraries 
 10. Contraries 
 Exercise 8-4 
 1. e. Equivocation 
 5.  f. Composition 
 10. a. 
Affirming the Consequent 
 15. c. Undistributed Middle fallacy 
   20. e. Composition  
 25. c. Undistributed Middle fallacy 
 30.  f. Division 
 35. b. Denying the Antecedent 
 40. g. Division 
 45. a. Affirming the Consequent 
 50. d. Excuse 
 55. b. Denying the Antecedent 
 60. g. Division 
 65. a. Affirming the Consequent 
 70. h. Miscalculating probabilities (ignoring false 
positives)  
 75. d. No 
 80. a. Affirming the Consequent 
 85. e. Equivocation 
 90. h. Miscalculating probabilities 
 95. a. Affirming the Consequent 
 100. e. Equivocation 
 105. g. Division 

462 
ANSWERS, SUGGESTIONS, AND TIPS FOR TRIANGLE EXERCISES
 Exercise 9-1 
 1. All senators are politicians. 
 4. All senators are politicians. 
 7. Some politicians are not senators. 
 10. Some senators are not politicians. 
 13. Some scholars are not philosophers. 
 Exercise 9-2 
 1. All salamanders are lizards. 
 4. All members of the suborder Ophidia are snakes. 
 7. All alligators are reptiles. 
   10. All places there are snakes are places there are frogs.  
 13. All people who got raises are vice presidents. 
 16. All people identical with Socrates are Greeks. 
 19. All examples of salt are things that preserve meat. 
 Exercise 9-3 
 1. No students who wrote poor exams are students 
who were admitted to the program. 
 4. Some first basemen are right-handed people. 
 7. All passers are people who made at least 50 percent.  
 10. Some days I’ve had are days like this one. 
 13. Some holidays are holidays that fall on Saturday. 
 16. All people who pass the course are people who 
pass this test. Or: No people who fail this test are 
people who pass the course. 
 19. All times they will let you enroll are times you’ve 
paid the fee. 
 Exercise 9-4 
 1. Translation: Some anniversaries are not happy 
occasions. (True) 
 
  Corresponding A-claim: All anniversaries are 
happy occasions. (False) 
 
  Corresponding E-claim: No anniversaries are 
happy occasions. (Undetermined) 
 
  Corresponding I-claim: Some anniversaries are 
happy occasions. (Undetermined) 
 4. Translation: Some allergies are things that can kill 
you. (True) 
 
  Corresponding A-claim: All allergies are things that 
can kill you. (Undetermined) 
 
  Corresponding E-claim: No allergies are things that 
can kill you. (False) 
 
  Corresponding O-claim: Some allergies are not 
things that can kill you. (Undetermined) 
 7. Translation: Some herbs are medicinal substances. 
(False)
 
 Corresponding A-claim: All herbs are medicinal 
substances. (False)
 
 Corresponding E-claim:  No herbs are medicinal 
substances. (True)
 
 Corresponding O-claim:  Some herbs are not 
medicinal substances. (True)
 10. Translation:  Some colorful frogs are not poisonous 
frogs. (True)
 
 Corresponding A-claim: All colorful frogs are 
poisonous frogs. (False)
 
 Corresponding E-claim: No colorful frogs are 
poisonous frogs. (Undetermined)
 
 Corresponding I-claim: Some colorful frogs are 
poisonous frogs. (Undetermined)
 Exercise 9-5 
    1. No non-Christians are non-Sunnis. (Not equivalent)  
 4. Some Christians are not Kurds. (Not equivalent) 
 7. All Muslims are Shiites. (Not equivalent) 
 10. All Muslims are non-Christians. (Equivalent) 
 Exercise 9-6 
 1. Some students who scored well on the exam are not 
students who didn’t write poor essays. (Equivalent)  
 4. No students who were not admitted to the program 
are students who scored well on the exam. (Not 
equivalent)  
 7. All people whose automobile ownership is not 
restricted are people who don’t live in the dorms. 
(Equivalent)  
 10. All first basemen are people who aren’t right-
handed. (Equivalent) 
 Exercise 9-7 
 2. All encyclopedias are nondefinitive works. 
 4. No sailboats are sloops. 
 Exercise 9-8 
 Translations of the lettered claims:
 a. Some people who have been tested are not people 
who can give blood. 
 b. Some people who can give blood are not people 
who have been tested. 
 c. All people who can give blood are people who have 
been tested. 
 d. Logically equivalent to: “Some people who have 
been tested are people who cannot give blood” 
[converse]. Logically equivalent to: “Some people 
who have been tested are not people who can give 
blood” [obverse of the converse]. 
 e. Logically equivalent to: “All people who have been 
tested are people who cannot give blood.” Logically 
equivalent to: “No people who have been tested 
are people who can give blood” [obverse]. 
 1. Equivalent to: “Some people who have not been 
tested are people who can give blood,” which is 
equivalent to: “Some people who can give blood 
are people who have not been tested” by conver-
sion.  This in turn is equivalent to (b) by obversion.
 4. Equivalent to “All people who can give blood are 
people who have been tested” (c). 
 Chapter 9: Deductive Arguments I: Categorical Logic 

 
ANSWERS, SUGGESTIONS, AND TIPS FOR TRIANGLE EXERCISES 
463
 Exercise 9-9 
 1. Equivalent to (b) 
 4. Equivalent to (d) 
 Exercise 9-10 
 1. Obvert (a) to get “some Slavs are not Europeans.” 
 4. Obvert the conversion of (b) to get “Some mem-
bers of the club are not people who took the exam.” 
 7. Contrapose (a) to get “All people who will not be 
allowed to perform are people who did not arrive 
late.” Translate (b) into “Some people who did not 
arrive late are people who will not be allowed to 
perform” and convert to “Some people who will 
not be allowed to perform are people who did not 
arrive late.” 
 10. Begin with (b). First obvert, then convert the result 
to get “No drives that can be reformatted are 
devices capable of defragmentation.” 
 Exercise 9-11 
 1. Invalid (this would require the conversion of an 
A-claim).  
 4. Valid (the converse of an I-claim is logically equiv-
alent to the original claim). 
 7. Valid (the premise is the obverse of the 
conclusion).  
 10. Invalid. The premise translates “Some people in 
uniform are not people allowed to play,” which is 
obverted and then converted to become “Some 
people not allowed to play are people in uniform.”  
The conclusion becomes “Some people not allowed 
to play are not people in uniform.”  These are sub-
contraries, and one does not follow from the other.  
 Exercise 9-12 
 1. The converse of (a) is the contradictory of (b), so 
(b) is false. 
 4. Obvert (a) and convert (b).  Since a false O-claim 
implies a false corresponding E-claim, (b) is false. 
 7. Translate (a) as “Some of GB’s novels are novels in 
which the hero gets killed,” and (b) as “Some nov-
els in which the hero gets killed are GB’s novels.”  
Converting the latter, we have two subcontraries.  
If one subcontrary, (a), is false, the other, (b), must 
be true.  
 10. This exercise is possibly the most difficult in the chapter 
for many students.  Most cannot look at these claims 
and tell what follows about (b), and this inability justi-
fies learning these techniques.  Correct translation is 
crucial:  (a) becomes “All persimmons that have not 
been left to dry are astringent persimmons.”  Now find 
the contrapositive of that claim:  “All persimmons that 
are not astringent are persimmons that have been left 
to dry.”    
 
  
Next, obvert and then convert (b), arriving at:  
“Some persimmons that are not astringent are per-
simmons that have been left to ripen.”  (b) is now an 
I-claim that corresponds to the A-claim that resulted 
from (a).  A true A-claim implies a true corresponding 
I-claim, so (b) is true.
 Exercise 9-13 
 1. Valid: 
All P are G.
No G are S.
No S are P.
 4. Invalid: 
All T are E.
All T-T are E. (T 5 times Louis is tired, etc.)
All T-T are T. (T-T 5 times identical with today)
 7. Valid: 
All H are S.
No P are S.
No P are H.
 10. Invalid: 
All C are R.
All V are C.
No R are V.
 Exercise 9-14 
 1. No blank drives are drives that contain data. 
Some blank drives are formatted drives.
Some formatted drives are not drives that  
contain data.
 Valid: 
 4. All tobacco products are substances damaging to 
people’s health. 
Some tobacco products are addictive substances.
Some addictive substances are substances damag-
ing to people’s health.
 Valid: 
 7. All people who may vote are stockholders in the 
company.     
No people identical with Mr. Hansen are 
people who may vote.
No people identical with Mr. Hansen are 
stockholders in the company.
S
P
G
T-T
T
E
P
H
S
(Note: Th ere is more than one 
way to turn this into standard 
form. Instead of turning non-
residents into residents, you 
can do the opposite.)
R
V
C
Formatted
drives
Drives that 
contain data
Blank drives
X
Addictive 
substances
Substances damaging to 
people’s health
Tobacco products
X

464 
ANSWERS, SUGGESTIONS, AND TIPS FOR TRIANGLE EXERCISES
Invalid:
 Note: Remember that claims with individuals as 
subject terms are treated as A- or E-claims. 
 10. After converting, then obverting the conclusion: 
No arguments with false premises are sound 
arguments.
Some arguments with false premises are valid 
arguments. 
Some valid arguments are not sound arguments.
Valid:
Valid
arguments
Sound arguments
Arguments with
false premises
X
 Exercise 9-15 
 1. A 
 4. B 
 Exercise 9-16 
 1. a 
 4. b 
 Exercise 9-17 
 1. 0 
 4. 1 
 Exercise 9-18 
 1. c 
 4. c 
 7. b 
 10. e 
 Exercise 9-19 
 1.  All T are F.
Some F are Z.
Some Z are T.
Invalid; breaks rule 2
 4. There are two versions of this item, depending on 
whether you take the premise to say  no weightlift-
ers use motor skills or only some don’t. We’ll do it 
both ways: 
All A are M.
No W are M.
No W are A.
Valid
All A are M.
Some W are not M.
No W are A.
Invalid; breaks rule 3
 7. Using  I 5   people who lift papers from the Internet
C 5 people who are cheating themselves
L 5   people who lose in the long run
All I are C.
All C are L.
All I are L.
Valid 
 10.  D 5 people who dance the whole night
 
 W 5 people who waste time
 
  G 5 people whose grades will suffer
All D are W.
All W are G.
All D are G.
Valid
 Exercise 9-20 
 (Refer to Exercise 9-13 for these fi rst four items.)
 2. (Given in standard form in the text) 
 
  Invalid: breaks rule 2 
   5. All voters are citizens.      
Some citizens are not residents.
Some voters are not residents.
Invalid: breaks rule 2
 7. All halyards are lines that attach to sails. 
No painters are lines that attach to sails.
No painters are halyards.
Valid
 8. No systems that can give instant access are systems 
with moving parts. 
All standard hard drives are systems with 
moving parts.
No standard hard drives are systems that 
can give instant access.
Valid; breaks no rule
 (Refer to Exercise 9-14 for the next four items.)
 2. After obverting both premises, we get: 
No ears with white tassels are ripe ears.
Some ripe ears are not ears with full-sized 
kernels.
Some ears with full-sized kernels are not ears 
with white tassels.
Invalid: breaks rule 1
 5. After obverting the second premise: 
Some digital players are machines with 3.0 transfer 
rates.
All machines with 3.0 transfer rates are machines 
that cost at least twenty dollars.
Some digital players are machines that cost at 
least twenty dollars.
Valid
 7. All people who may vote are people with stock. 
No [people identical with Mr. Hansen] are 
people who may vote.
No [people identical with Mr. Hansen] are people 
with stock.
Invalid: breaks rule 3 (major term)
People = 
Mr. Hansen
People who may vote
Stockholders in 
the company

 
ANSWERS, SUGGESTIONS, AND TIPS FOR TRIANGLE EXERCISES 
465
 8. No off-road vehicles are vehicles allowed in the 
unimproved portion of the park. 
Some off -road vehicles are not four-wheel-
drive vehicles.
Some four-wheel-drive vehicles are allowed in the 
unimproved portion of the park.
Invalid: breaks rule 1
 Exercise 9-21 
 1. A  5 athletes; B  5 baseball players; 
C  5 basketball players 
Some A are not B.
Some B are not C.
Some A are not C.
Invalid: breaks rule 1
 4. S 5 sportscasters; A 5 athletes; P 5 college 
professors
All S are A
No A are P
No S are P
Valid
 15. T  5 worlds identical to this one; B  5 the best of all 
possible worlds; M  5 mosquito-containing worlds 
No B are M.
All T are M.
No T are B.
Valid
 18. P  5 plastic furniture; C  5 cheap-looking furniture; 
 
  L  5 their new lawn furniture 
All L are P.
All P are C.
All L are C.
Valid
 21. D  5 people on the district tax roll; C  5 citizens; 
E  5 eligible voters 
All D are C.
All E are C.
All D are E.
Invalid: breaks rule 2
 24. C  5 people identical to Cobweb; L  5 liberals; 
T  5 officials who like to raise taxes 
All C are L.
All L are T.
All C are T.
Valid
 29. P  5 poll results; U  5 unnewsworthy items; 
I  5 items receiving considerable attention from the 
networks      
All P are I.
Some P are U.
Some I are U.
Valid
 30. E  5 people who understand that the earth goes 
around the sun; W  5 people who understand 
what causes winter and summer; A  5 American 
adults  
All W are E.
Some A are not E.
Some A are not W.
Valid
 32. N  5 the pornographic novels of “Madame Tou-
louse”; W  5 works with sexual depictions patently 
offensive to community standards and with no 
serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific 
value; O  5 works that can be banned as obscene 
since 1973 
All O are W.
All N are W.
All N are O.
Invalid: breaks rule 2
 Exercise 9-22 
 1. True. A syllogism with neither an A- nor an E-prem-
ise would have (I) two I-premises, which would 
violate rule 2; or (II) two O-premises, which would 
violate rule 1; or (III) an I-premise and an O-premise. 
Alternative (III) would require a negative conclusion 
by rule 1, and a negative conclusion would require 
premises that distribute at least two terms, the mid-
dle term and (by rule 3) at least one other. Because 
an I-premise and an O-premise collectively distribute 
only one term, alternative (III) won’t work either.  
 4. True. An AIE syllogism whose middle term is the 
subject of the A-premise breaks exactly two rules. If 
the middle term is the predicate of the A-premise, 
this syllogism breaks three rules. 
 Exercise 9-23 
 1. All B are C. 
 4. Cannot be done. 
 7. Some B are not C. 
 10. Cannot be done.
 Exercise 9-24 
 1. b 
 4. a 
 7. Some political radicals are patriots (or the converse 
of this claim). 
 10. No conclusion validly follows. 
 Exercise 9-27 
 1. L  5 ladybugs; A  5 aphid-eaters; G  5 good things 
to have in your garden 
All L are A.
[All A are G.]
All L are G.
Valid
 4. S  5 self-tapping screws; B  5 boons to the con-
struction industry; P  5 things that make it possible 
to screw things together without drilling pilot holes 
All S are P.
[All P are B.]
All S are B.
Valid

466 
ANSWERS, SUGGESTIONS, AND TIPS FOR TRIANGLE EXERCISES
 Chapter 10: Deductive Arguments II: Propositional Logic 
 Test Yourself Answer 
 Since you’ve gone to the trouble to seek answers to some 
exercises, we’ll throw in an answer to the test in the box 
on page 290. Two cards must be turned over, the one with 
the “e” and the one with the “3.” 
 Exercise 10-1 
 1. Q → P 
 2. Q → P 
 3. P → Q 
 4. Q → P 
 5. (P → Q) & (Q → P) 
 Exercise 10-2 
 1. (P → Q) & R 
 2. P → (Q & R) 
 
  Notice that the only difference between (1) and (2) 
is the location of the comma. But the symbolizations 
have two different truth tables, so moving the comma 
actually changes the meaning of the claim. And we’ll 
bet you thought that commas were there only to tell 
you when to breathe when you read aloud.  
 5. P → (Q → R). Compare (5) with (3). 
 11. ~ C → S 
 12. ~ (C → S) 
 16. S → ~ C. Ordinarily, the word “but” indicates a 
conjunction, but in this case it is present only for 
emphasis—“only if” is the crucial truth-functional 
phrase.  
 20. ~ (F v S) or (~ F & ~ S). Notice that, when you 
“move the negation sign in,” you have to change 
the wedge to an ampersand (or vice versa). Don’t 
treat the negation sign as you would treat a minus 
sign in algebra class, or you’ll wind up in trouble.    
 Exercise 10-3 
 
 1. 
 
P
Q
R
(P → Q)
(P → Q) & R
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
F
T
F
F
F
F
F
T
T
T
T
F
T
F
T
F
F
F
T
T
T
F
F
F
T
F
  
 2.  
 
P
Q
R
(Q & R)
P → (Q & R)
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
T
F
T
F
F
T
F
F
F
F
F
T
T
T
T
F
T
F
F
T
F
F
T
F
T
F
F
F
F
T
 
 5. 
 
P
Q
R
(Q → R)
P → (Q → R)
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
T
F
T
T
T
T
F
F
T
T
F
T
T
T
T
F
T
F
F
T
F
F
T
T
T
F
F
F
T
T
 
 11. 
 
C
S
~ C
~ C → S
T
T
F
T 
T
F
F
T
F
T
T
T
F
F
T
F
 
 12. 
 
C
S
C → S
~ (C → S)
T
T
T
F
T
F
F
T
F
T
T
F
F
F
T
F
 
 16. 
 
C
S
~ C
S → ~ C
T
T
F
F
T
F
F
T
F
T
T
T
F
F
T
T
 
 20. 
 
F
S
F v S
~ (F v S)
T
T
T
F
T
F
T
F
F
T
T
F
F
F
F
T
 
  Since ~ ( F   v   S )  is exactly equivalent to ~  F  & ~  S,  the 
latter can be substituted for the former in the preceding 
table and it will still be correct. Columns for ~  F  and 
for ~  S  would need to be added to make it complete.  
 Exercise 10-4 
 
 1.  Invalid:
 
 
(Premise) 
(Premise)
(Conclusion)
P
Q
~ Q
P ∨ ~ Q
~ P
T
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
T
F
F
T
F
F
T
F
F
T
T
T
(Row 2)
 4. Invalid: 
 (Conclusion)  
(Premise)  
(Premise)
P
Q
R
(P → Q)
~ (P → Q)
(Q → R)
P → (Q → R)
T
T
T
T
F
T
T
T
T
F
T
F
F
F
T
F
T
F
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
T
T
T
F
T
T
T
F
T
T
F
T
F
T
F
F
T
F
F
T
T
F
T
T
F
F
F
T
F
T
T
(Row 4)

 
ANSWERS, SUGGESTIONS, AND TIPS FOR TRIANGLE EXERCISES 
467
 7. Invalid:
(Premise)
(Premise)
(Conclusion)
P Q R
~ Q
P & R (P & R) → Q
~ P
T T
T
F
T
T
F
T T
F
F
F
T
F
T F
T
T
T
F
F
T F
F
T
F
T
F
F T
T
F
F
T
T
F T
F
F
F
T
T
F F
T
T
F
T
T
F F
F
T
F
T
T
(Row 4)
 10. The table is 16 rows long, and in no row are the 
premises true and the conclusion false.  So the 
argument is valid.
  Exercise 10-5 
 1. Invalid 
 
 S → T
 
 ~S 
 
 ~T
 4. Valid 
 
 L
 
 L → H
 
 H
 7. Invalid 
 
 R → M
 
 M
 
 R
 10. Valid 
 
 F → A
 
 F
 
 A
 13. Invalid
 
 P → S
 
 ~P
 
 ~S
 Exercise 10-6 
 We’ve used the short truth-table method to demonstrate 
invalidity. 
    1. Valid. There is no row in the argument’s table that 
makes the premises all T and the conclusion F. 
 2. Invalid. There are two rows that make the premises 
T and the conclusion F. (Such rows are sometimes 
called “counterexamples” to the argument.) Here 
they are: 
 
  
L
W
S
P
T
F
F
F
T
T
F
F
 (Remember: You need to come up with only  one of these 
rows to prove the argument invalid.)
 3. Invalid. There are two rows that make the premises 
T and the conclusion F: 
 
  
M
P
R
F
G
T
T
T
F
T
T
T
F
T
F
 4. Invalid. There are three rows that make the prem-
ises true and the conclusion F: 
 
  
D
G
H
P
M
F
T
T
T
T
F
T
F
T
T
F
T
F
F
T
 5. Invalid. There are two rows that make the premises 
T and the conclusion F: 
 
  
R
S
B
T
E
T
T
F
F
F
F
F
T
F
F
 Exercise 10-7 
 1. Chain argument 
 2. Disjunctive argument 
 3. Constructive dilemma 
 4. Modus tollens 
 5. Destructive dilemma 
 Exercise 10-8 
 Modus ponens occurs in items 4, 10, and 15; modus tol-
lens occurs in items 2, 5, and 14. 
 Exercise 10-9 
 1.  1. R → P 
(Premise)  
 
 2. Q → R 
(Premise) /∴ Q → P 
 
 3. Q → P 
1, 2, CA 
 4.  1. P → Q 
(Premise)  
 
 2. ~ P → S 
(Premise)  
 
 3. ~ Q 
(Premise) /∴ S 
 
 4. ~ P 
1, 3, MT 
 
 5. S 
2, 4, MP 
 7.  1. ~ S 
(Premise)  
 
 2. (P & Q) → R 
(Premise)  
 
 3. R → S 
(Premise) /∴ ~ (P & Q)  
 
 4. ~ R 
1,3, MT 
 
 5. ~ (P & Q) 
4, 2, MT 
 10.  1. (T ∨ M) → ~ Q 
(Premise)  
 
 2. (P → Q) & (R → S) 
(Premise) 
 
 3. T 
(Premise) /∴ ~ P 
 
 4. T ∨ M 
3, ADD  
 
 5. ~ Q 
1, 4, MP 
 
 6. P → Q 
2, SIM 
 
 7. ~ P 
5, 6, MT 
 Exercise 10-10 
 1.  4. 1, 3, CA 
 
 5. 2, CONTR 
 
 6. 4, 5, CA 
 4.  4. 3, CONTR 
 
 5. 2, 4, MP 
 
 6. 2, 5, CONJ 
 
 7. 1, 6, MP 

468 
ANSWERS, SUGGESTIONS, AND TIPS FOR TRIANGLE EXERCISES
 7. 4. 1, SIM
 
 5. 2, CONTR
 
 6. 3, CONTR
 
 7. 4, 5, 6, CD
 
 8. 1, SIM
 
 9. 8, 7, CONJ
 
 10.  9, DIST
 Exercise 10-11 
 Th ere is usually more than one way to do these. 
 1.  1. P & Q 
(Premise)  
 
 2. P → R 
(Premise) / ∴ R 
 
 3. P 
1, SIM 
 
 4. R 
2, 3, MP 
 2.  1. R → S 
(Premise)  
 
 2. ~ P ∨ R 
(Premise) /∴ P → S 
 
 3. P → R 
2, IMPL 
 
 4. P → S 
1, 3, CA 
 4.  1. ~ P ∨ (~ Q ∨ R) 
(Premise)  
 
 2. P 
(Premise) /∴ Q → R 
 
 3. P → (~ Q ∨ R) 
1, IMPL 
 
 4. ~ Q ∨ R 
2, 3, MP 
 
 5. Q → R 
4, IMPL 
 8.  1. ~ Q & (~ S & ~ T) 
(Premise) 
 
 2. P → (Q ∨ S) 
(Premise) /∴ ~ P 
 
 3. (~ Q & ~ S) & ~ T 
1, ASSOC 
 
 4. ~ Q & ~ S 
3, SIM 
 
 5. ~ (Q ∨ S) 
4, DEM 
 
 6. ~ P 
2, 5, MT 
 Exercise 10-12 
 1.  1. P → R 
(Premise)  
 
 2. R → Q 
(Premise) /∴ ~ P ∨ Q 
 
 3. P → Q 
1, 2, CA 
 
 4. ~ P ∨ Q 
3, IMPL 
 4.  1. P ∨ (Q & R) 
(Premise)  
 
 2. (P ∨ Q) → S 
(Premise) /∴ S 
 
 3. (P ∨ Q) & (P ∨ R) 
1, DIST  
 
 4. P ∨ Q 
3, SIM  
 
 5. S 
2, 4, MP 
 7.  1. (M ∨ R) & P 
(Premise)  
 
 2. ~ S → ~ P 
(Premise)  
 
 3. S → ~ M 
(Premise) /∴ R 
 
 4. P → S 
2, CONTR 
 
 5. P 
1, SIM 
 
 6. S 
4, 5, MP 
 
 7. ~ M 
3, 6, MP 
 
 8. M ∨ R 
1, SIM  
 
 9. R 
7, 8, DA 
 10.  1. P ∨ (R & Q) 
(Premise)  
 
 2. R → ~ P 
(Premise)  
 
 3. Q → T 
(Premise) /∴ R → T 
 
 4. (P ∨ R) & (P ∨ Q) 
1, DIST  
 
 5. P ∨ Q 
4, SIM  
 
 6. ~ P → Q 
5, DN/IMPL 
 
 7. R → Q 
2, 6, CA 
 
 8. R → T 
3, 7, CA 
 Exercise 10-13 
 1. D → ~ B 
 4. B → ~ D 
 7. C → (B & ~ D) 
 Exercise 10-14 
 1. Equivalent to (b) 
 4. Equivalent to (c) 
 7. Equivalent to (c) 
 Exercise 10-15 
 1.  1. P 
(Premise)  
 
 2. Q & R 
(Premise)  
 
 3. (Q & P) → S 
(Premise) /∴ S 
 
 4. Q 
2, SIM 
 
 5. Q & P 
1, 4, CONJ 
 
 6. S 
3, 5, MP 
 4.  1. P ∨ Q 
(Premise)  
 
 2. (Q ∨ U) → (P → T) 
(Premise)  
 
 3. ~ P 
(Premise)  
 
 4. (~ P ∨ R) → (Q → S) 
(Premise) / ∴ T ∨ S 
 
 5. Q 
1, 3, DA 
 
 6. Q ∨ U 
5, ADD  
 
 7. P → T 
2, 6, MP 
 
 8. ~ P ∨ R 
 3, ADD 
 
 9. Q → S 
4, 8, MP 
   10. T ∨ S 
1, 7, 9, CD 
 7.  1. P → Q 
(Premise) /∴ P → (Q ∨ R) 
 
 2. ~ P ∨ Q 
1, IMPL  
 
 3. (~ P ∨ Q) ∨ R 
2, ADD 
 
 4. ~ P ∨ (Q ∨ R) 
3, ASSOC 
 
 5. P → (Q ∨ R) 
4, IMPL 
 10.  1. (S → Q) → ~ R 
(Premise) 
 
 2. (P → Q) → R 
(Premise) /∴ ~ Q 
 
 3. ~ R → ~ (P → Q) 
2, CONTR 
 
 4. (S → Q) → ~ (P → Q) 
1, 3, CA 
 
 5. ~ (S → Q) ∨ ~ (P → Q) 4, IMPL  
 
 6. ~ (~ S ∨ Q) ∨ ~ (~ P ∨ Q) 5, IMPL (twice)  
 
 7. (S & ~ Q) ∨ (P & ~ Q) 
6, DEM/DN (twice) 
 
 8. (~ Q & S) ∨ (~ Q & P) 
7, COM  
 
 9. ~ Q & (S ∨ P) 
8, DIST 
    10. ~ Q 
9, SIM 

 
ANSWERS, SUGGESTIONS, AND TIPS FOR TRIANGLE EXERCISES 
469
 Exercise 10-16 
 1.  1. P → Q 
(Premise)  
 
 2. P → R 
(Premise) /∴ P → (Q & R)  
 
 3.  P 
CP Premise 
 
 4. Q 
1, 3, MP 
 
 5. R 
2, 3, MP 
 
 6. Q & R 
4, 5, CONJ 
 
 7. P → (Q & R) 
3–6, CP 
 4.  1. P → (Q ∨ R) 
(Premise)  
 
 2. T → (S & ~ R) 
(Premise) /∴ (P & T) → Q  
 
 3. P & T 
CP Premise 
 
 4. P 
3, SIM 
 
 5. T 
3, SIM 
 
 6. Q ∨ R 
1, 4, MP 
 
 7. S & ~ R 
2, 5, MP 
 
 8. ~ R 
7, SIM 
 
 9. Q 
6, 8, DA 
   10. (P & T) → Q 
3–9, CP 
 7.  1. P ∨ (Q & R) 
(Premise)  
 
 2. T → ~ (P ∨ U) 
(Premise)  
 
 3. S → (Q → ~ R) 
(Premise) /∴ ~ S ∨ ~ T 
 
 4. S 
CP Premise 
   
 5. Q → ~ R 
3, 4, MP  
 
 6. ~ Q ∨ ~ R 
5, IMPL  
 
 7. ~ (Q & R) 
6, DEM 
 
 8. P 
1, 7, DA 
 
 9. P ∨ U 
8, ADD 
   10. ~ ~ (P ∨ U) 
9, DN  
   11. ~ T 
2, 10, MT 
   12. S → ~ T 
4–11, CP 
   13. ~ S ∨ ~ T 
12, IMPL 
 10.  1. (P & Q) ∨ R 
(Premise)  
 
 2. ~ R ∨ Q 
(Premise) /∴ P → Q 
 
 3. P 
CP Premise 
 
 4. ~ Q 
CP Premise 
 
 5. ~ R 
2, 4, DA 
 
 6. P & Q 
1, 5, DA 
 
 7. Q 
6, SIM 
 
 8. ~ Q → Q 
4–7, CP 
 
 9. Q ∨ Q 
8, IMPL  
   10. Q 
9, TAUT 
   11. P → Q 
3–10, CP 
 Exercise 10-17 
 1.  C → ~ S
~ L → S
C →  L
Valid
 4.  ~ M ∨ C
~ M → ~ K
C ∨ H
T → ~ H
T → K
Invalid
 7.  C ∨ S
S → E
C → R
R ∨ E
Valid
 10.  C → ~L
(E → (~C → ~T)) & E
L → ~T
Valid
 13.  S → ~ F
~S → ~ T
T
~F
Valid
 Chapter 11: Inductive Reasoning 
 Exercise 11-1 
 1. a 
 4. a 
 7. b 
 10. a 
 Exercise 11-2 
 1. Premise-analogue: rats. Conclusion-analogue: 
humans. Attribute of interest: saccharin as a cause 
of cancer. 
 4. Premise-analogue: Windex. Conclusion-analogue: 
this ant poison. Attribute of interest: being usable 
to clean windows. 
 7. Premise-analogue: December’s heating bill. 
 Conclusion-analogue: January’s heating bill. 
Attribute of interest: being high. 
 10. Premise-analogue: abortion. Conclusion-analogue: 
capital punishment. Attribute of interest: being wrong.    
 Exercise 11-3 
 1. Premise-analogue: iPods. Conclusion-analogue: 
iPads. Attribute of interest: being easy to use. 
 4. Premise-analogue: Odwalla carrot juice. Conclu-
sion-analogue: Odwalla orange juice. Attribute of 
interest: tasting moldy. 
 7. Premise-analogue: auto insurance. Conclusion-
analogue: health insurance. Attribute of interest: 
being a good thing. 

470 
ANSWERS, SUGGESTIONS, AND TIPS FOR TRIANGLE EXERCISES
 10. Premise-analogue:  Dancing with the Stars. Conclu-
sion-analogue:  So You Think You Can Dance. Attri-
bute of interest: being something you don’t like. 
 Exercise 11-4 
 Football and rugby; football and basketball; football and 
tennis; football and bowling; football and golf; football 
and chess. 
 Exercise 11-6 
 1. This is stronger than a parallel argument that uses 
“Neptune” rather than “Mars” as an analogue. 
 4. This is stronger than a parallel argument that 
uses “Muammar Gadaffi” rather than “Saddam 
 Hussein” as an analogue. 
 7. This is stronger than a parallel argument that uses 
“Ann’s rubber plant” rather than “her dog” as an 
analogue.  
 10. This is stronger than a parallel argument that employs 
a non-Scandinavian country as an analogue.    
 Exercise 11-8 
 1. The new supposition introduces a difference 
between past crops and this crop, so it weakens the 
argument. Kirk should be less confident the new 
crop will be like the previous crops. 
 4. The supposition here is that this year will probably 
be different from previous years. This makes it less 
likely this year’s crop will be like previous crops. 
 7. The new supposition introduces what is probably 
an irrelevant difference between this year’s crop 
and the previous crops and has no bearing on the 
strength of the argument. 
 10. The new supposition introduces a potentially 
relevant difference between the analogues, so it 
weakens the argument and makes it less likely this 
year’s crop will be like previous crops. 
 Exercise 11-9 
 1. Not a general statement 
 4. A general statement 
 7. A general statement 
 10. Not a general statement 
 Exercise 11-10 
 1. Generalization from a sample 
 4. Generalization from a sample 
 7. Generalization from a sample 
 10. Statistical syllogism 
 Exercise 11-11 
 1. a 
 4. b 
 7. a 
 10. a 
 Exercise 11-12 
 1. Most (all, nearly all, etc.) Otterhounds don’t fetch. 
 4. Therefore most likely (probably, etc.) Dr. Walker is 
a liberal. 
 7. York is a member of the NRA. 
 10. Chabot Gap is a small town. 
 Exercise 11-13 
 1. Most professional dancers are pretty athletic. 
 4. Jim is a kid from around here. 
 7. It’s hot now. 
 10. Christie probably won’t be a very good president. 
 Exercise 11-14 
 1. Sample: the ten Disney movies I have seen. Popu-
lation: Disney movies. Attribute of interest: being 
nonviolent. 
 4. Sample: my past experience at Columbus State. 
Population: all my experiences at Columbus State. 
Attribute of interest: being fun. 
 7. Sample: Costco store-brand coffee. Population: 
Costco store-brand products. Attribute of interest: 
being as good as name-brand products. 
 10. Sample: these McDonald’s fries. Population: 
McDonald’s fries. Attribute of interest: being too 
salty.    
 Exercise 11-15 
 1. Sample: this quart of milk. Population: things 
for sale at this joint. Attribute of interest: being 
overpriced.  
 4. Sample: life insurance salespeople I know. Popula-
tion: life insurance salespeople. Attribute of inter-
est: trying to sell you stuff you don’t need. 
 7. Sample: my performance on the first test. Popula-
tion: my performance on assessments in this class. 
Attribute of interest: being well done. 
 10. Sample: the English class I took. Population: En glish 
classes. Attribute of interest: being boring.    
 Exercise 11-16 
 Episodes of Survivor, movies staring Meryl Streep, televi-
sion sitcoms, movies rated PG, movies. 
 Exercise 11-17 
 Olympic shot-putters, National Football League refer-
ees, major league baseball players, professional athletes, 
physically fi t people. 
 Exercise 11-18 
 Cowboys who are teachers, cowboys, teachers, Demo-
crats, people. 
 Exercise 11-19 
 1. We’d speculate that a disproportionate number of 
Lexus drivers (a) own swimming pools, (b) have a 
college degree, (c) are over 40 years old, and (d) think 
of themselves as knowledgeable about politics.  
 4. The population of people who are susceptible to 
poison ivy or oak might perhaps include a dis-
proportionate number of people (a) who are fair-
skinned, and (b) who are not elderly. Dog owners 

 
ANSWERS, SUGGESTIONS, AND TIPS FOR TRIANGLE EXERCISES 
471
and hikers are more apt to have cases of poison oak 
or ivy, although they wouldn’t necessarily be more 
susceptible to the plight. 
 7. We’d bet that a disproportionate number of near-
sighted people (a) like to read, (b) own more 
than a single pair of vision glasses, (c) have family 
members who are nearsighted, and (d) suffer from 
glaucoma.  
 10. Those who watch reality shows, we conjecture, are 
more likely than the general population to (a) be 
under 50, (b) not have PhDs, (c) not be in the top 
20% of income recipients, and (d) be impressed by 
expensive cars and clothes. 
 Exercise 11-20 
 1. a 
 4. b 
 7. a
 Exercise 11-21 
 1. Given this supposition, the speaker should be less 
confident that most Ohio State students say they 
believe in God.
 4. Given this supposition, the speaker should be 
more confident that most Ohio State students say 
they believe in God. 
 Exercise 11-22 
 1. The six students who turned in written evaluations. 
 4. Yes. The sample contains a disproportionate num-
ber of individuals who feel strongly enough about 
Ludlum to write something. 
 7. Poor reasoning. The sample is small and under-
represents those who do not have strong enough 
feelings about Ludlum to write. 
 Exercise 11-23 
 1. The speaker is implying that, in general, Dodge builds 
tough trucks, meaning, evidently, that in general 
Dodge trucks can be driven many miles on the origi-
nal engine. This conclusion is derived from a sample 
of one. It must be allowed, however, that Dodge 
trucks as they emerge off the assembly line make up a 
relatively homogeneous population: Dodge no doubt 
spends a lot of money trying to ensure that all trucks 
within a given category come off the production line 
the same. It also must be allowed that this particular 
truck, having 300,000 miles on the original engine, 
qualifies as a very tough truck. But given the varia-
tions in the way trucks are driven, it still shouldn’t be 
regarded as a strong argument.  
 4. Unless Toadstool teaches a single small class, this 
generalization is based on a relatively small sample 
and thus is not very strong. 
 7. This generalization is based on a potentially atypi-
cal sample and thus is not very strong.  
 10. This generalization is based on a small sample and 
is not very strong. 
 13. An airline’s seating policy may be fairly uniform 
across its flights, so this is not a weak argument. 
 Exercise 11-24 
 1. Causal statement 
 4. Causal statement 
 7. Causal statement 
   10. Causal statement, but the lateness of the hour 
could have been offered as evidence that the bars 
are closed. 
 Exercise 11-25 
 1. Causal statement (behavioral variety) 
 4. Causal statement (behavioral variety) 
 7. Argument 
 10. Causal statement (behavioral variety) 
 Exercise 11-26 
 1. Implies cause and effect 
 4. Implies cause and effect (this is a behavioral causal 
statement)  
 7. Implies cause and effect, vaguely (this is a behav-
ioral causal statement) 
 10. Implies cause and effect (this is a behavioral causal 
statement)  
 13. Implies cause and effect 
 16. Does not imply cause and effect 
 Exercise 11-27 
 1. Effect: cat is not eating; cause: cat is eating mice 
 4. Effect: the little guy’s not dehydrating; cause: giving 
him more water 
 7. Effect: that people cannot detect their own bad 
breath; cause: becoming used to the odor 
 10. Effect: a savings to the state in court expenses; 
cause: judges’ not processing shoplifting, trespass-
ing, and small-claims charges charges (this is a 
behavioral causal statement) 
 Exercise 11-28 
 1. A 
 4. C 
 7. A 
 9. A
 10. C 
 13. B 
 16. C 
 Exercise 11-29 
 1. COV 
 5. P 
 7. C 
 9. C 
 13. COV 
 18. P 
 26. C 

472 
ANSWERS, SUGGESTIONS, AND TIPS FOR TRIANGLE EXERCISES
 Exercise 11-30 
 1. Answers (b) and (d) seem better in that one can at 
least see how their being true could result in more 
cases of flu in the winter. 
 4. Answer (c) is the least plausible, because it is dif-
ficult to see how less NASCAR racing could reduce 
death by stroke. 
 7. None seem likely to be due to cause and effect. 
 10. Answer (d) is the best response. Statistical regres-
sion offers an attractive explanation of why the 
team didn’t do as well. 
 Exercise 11-31 
 1. C.  Mowing the grass results in both fumes and 
grass dust. 
 4. C. Shorter days contribute to both. 
 7. B. Weak quadriceps might cause the knee problem.  
 10. B. Maybe smart people eat more fish. 
 13. B.  If there is more violence, there is likely to be 
more on TV. 
 16. A. Coincidence seems likely 
 19. C.  Good health may have contributed both to 
Uncle Ted’s attitude and to his longevity. 
 22. A. Coincidence 
 25. B.  Top executives can easily afford expensive 
clothes and nice cars. 
 Exercise 11-33 
 1. ways it can happen;possible outcomes. 
 4. Adding the probability of each event 
 Exercise 11-34 
 1. No. After the first draw, the remaining deck is 
smaller. 
 4. .11, or 11 percent 
 7. 40 percent 
 10. 4 in 52, or 1 in 13, or about 7½ percent 
 13. About 16 percent (.4 times .4  5 .16) 
 16. You need to know two things: the proportion of 
males who aren’t athletes and the proportion of all 
students are athletes. 
 Exercise 11-37 
 1. (a) Poker players’ confidence in the strength of 
their cards causes differences in arm motions 
that can be interpreted by observers who are not 
poker experts. (b) This is a randomized controlled 
experiment. (c) One group saw clips of arm/hand 
motions; a second saw clips of upper bodies; a 
third saw clips of faces. All groups were measured 
against the likelihood of correct answers being due 
to chance.  (d) In this report, only the first group 
performed significantly better than chance, the 
second group performed approximately as chance 
would have it, and the third performed rather 
worse than chance would have produced.  (e) 
Further study, with larger numbers of participants, 
would seem to be in order.  (f) Arm/hand motions 
are probably better indicators of the strength of an 
expert poker player’s hand than other bodily indi-
cators, particularly facial expressions. 
 4. (a) The lead ophthalmologist thinks that leaving 
a light on at night deprives infant eyes of the rest 
needed for nonmyopic development. In short, the 
causal hypothesis at issue is that leaving a light 
on at night when children are infants contributes 
to their becoming myopic. (b) This is a prospec-
tive observational study. True, the researchers are 
asking parents of children at the hospital to think 
back to when their children were infants. But the 
comparison groups are based on the presence or 
absence of the hypothesized causal factor (sleep-
ing with light on at night). (c) There are three 
comparison groups: the 172 infants who (were said 
to have) slept in darkness, the 232 who slept with 
a night light, and the 75 who slept with a lamp on. 
(d) In the first group 10 percent were nearsighted; 
in the second group 34 percent were nearsighted; 
in the last group 55 percent were nearsighted. 
(e) The report does not rule out the possibility that 
nearsighted parents are more apt to leave lights 
on in their children’s rooms. (f) Because of the 
possibility of the confounding variable mentioned 
in (e), the study offers very weak support for the 
hypothesis.  
 7. (a) The causal hypothesis at issue is that exercise 
prevents colds. (b) Presumably this is a random-
ized controlled experiment, although the report 
does not specifically state that the subjects were 
randomly divided into two groups; and one part 
of the experiment is a prospective observational 
study (as will be explained). (c) There are three 
comparison groups: the ten who participated in 
the six-month regimen of jogging three miles every 
other day; the same group prior to the regimen; 
and the ten who did not participate in the regimen. 
(d) The joggers had 25 percent fewer colds than the 
nonjoggers, and were said to have had fewer colds 
than they themselves had in some unspecified 
period prior to the experiment/study. (e) We don’t 
know if the only difference between the joggers 
and the nonjoggers was the jogging. (f) The 
25 percent fewer colds the joggers had could be 
due to chance or to confounding variables. For 
example, did the nonjoggers try to compensate for 
their lack of exercise by going to a gym during the 
six-month period? 
 10. (a) High doses of androgen lower HDL levels in 
the blood. (b) This is a prospective observational 
study. (c) There are two comparison groups: the 
sixteen men before taking androgen, and the same 
men after taking androgen. (d) The HDL levels of 
the men in the second group were 60 percent lower 
after four weeks of taking androgen. (e) We can’t 
be sure there aren’t confounding variables: We 
don’t know that men in the second group didn’t do 
something else while they were taking androgen 
that might have caused their HDL levels to drop. 
(f) This drop in HDL is statistically significant, and 
occurred after a short period of time. However, we 
can’t be sure there aren’t confounding variables 

 
ANSWERS, SUGGESTIONS, AND TIPS FOR TRIANGLE EXERCISES 
473
 Chapter 12: Moral, Legal, and Aesthetic Reasoning 
 Exercise 12-1 
 1. Value judgment 
 4. Value judgment 
 7. Value judgment 
   10. Not a value judgment    
 Exercise 12-2 
 1. Not a value judgment, although it surely hints at one. 
 4. Value judgment 
 7. Not a value judgment in the ordinary sense, but 
since rides are often evaluated by degree of scari-
ness, this may imply such a judgment.  
 Exercise 12-3 
 1. Moral value judgment 
 4. Moral value judgment 
 7. Not a moral value judgment 
 10. Moral value judgment 
 Exercise 12-4 
 1. A 
 4. B 
 7. B 
 10. A 
 Exercise 12-5 
 2. People ought to keep their promises. 
 5. A mayor who takes bribes should resign. 
 7. Anyone who commits a third felony should auto-
matically go to prison for twenty-five years. 
 8. Whatever is unnatural is wrong and should be 
avoided.    
 Exercise 12-6 
 1. B 
 4. A 
 7. C, although the claim Anthony thought about is 
B, a nonmoral value judgment 
 9. B 
 Exercise 12-7 
 1. A 
 4. B (probably) 
 7. B 
 10. B 
 Exercise 12-8 
 1. Not really. To be consistent, Tory would have to say 
that if one gender has the right to marry whomever 
they want, so should the other gender have the 
same right. He does not say whether he denies 
men a right to same-sex marriagem, but he does 
deny that right to women. 
 2. To avoid inconsistency, Shelley must be able to iden-
tify characteristics of art and music students, athletes, 
and children of alumni—for whom she  believes 
the special admissions program is acceptable—and 
show that, aside from women and minority students 
who happen also to be in one of the listed categories, 
such students do not have these characteristics. 
Furthermore, the characteristics she identifies must 
be relevant to the issue of whether an individual 
should be admitted into the university. It may well 
be possible to identify the characteristics called for. 
(Remember that consistency is a necessary condi-
tion for a correct position, but not a sufficient one.)  
 3. Marin could be consistent only if he could show 
that the process of abortion involves killing and 
capital punishment does not. Because this is 
impossible—capital punishment clearly does 
involve killing—he is inconsistent. However, 
Marin’s inconsistency is the result of his blanket 
claim that  all killing is wrong. He could make a 
consistent case if he were to maintain only that the 
killing of  innocent people is wrong, and that abor-
tion involves killing innocent people but capital 
punishment does not. There is another approach: 
Marin could argue that only  state-mandated killing 
(which would include capital punishment but not 
abortion) is permissible. (Each of these last claims 
would require strong arguments.) 
 8. To avoid inconsistency, Harold would have 
to identify a relevant difference between the 
that account for it. Nevertheless, given the appar-
ent health threat posed by low HDL, we would 
not take androgen if it were not prescribed by a 
physician.  
 13. (a) Cheating creates more positive feelings than 
guilty feelings  (b) This is a controlled experiment. 
Its design does not require randomization except 
in the initial selection of subjects.  (c) One group 
of 71 subjects cheated on a test; the other group 
of 108 did not. (d) On average the cheaters, as 
compared to the non-cheaters, reported a higher 
level of excitement and more positive feelings than 
guilty ones. (e) “Cheaters reported on average a 
greater increase in excitement and positive feelings 
than non-cheaters did.”  This summary statement 
of the difference between the two groups is vague. 
(f) Maybe it isn’t the cheating itself that thrilled 
the cheaters, but the money.  Cheaters may also be 
more inclined to lie about their feelings.  The most 
you could say is that these cheaters were more apt 
than the non-cheaters to report excitement and 
positive feelings. 

474 
ANSWERS, SUGGESTIONS, AND TIPS FOR TRIANGLE EXERCISES
discrimination law and the marijuana law. In fact, 
there is one fairly obvious one to which he can 
appeal: The former has been declared contrary 
to the state constitution; the latter has not been 
alleged to be contrary to any constitution. So, 
Harold may object to the failure to implement 
the latter, even if it does conflict with federal drug 
laws—after all, if the law has not been found 
unconstitutional, shouldn’t the will of the voters 
prevail? (It is a separate matter, of course, whether 
he can build a strong argument in the case of the 
marijuana law.) 
 Exercise 12-11 
 1. The harm principle: Shoplifting harms those from 
whom one steals. 
 2. The harm principle: Forgery tends to harm others. 
 4. We think the offense principle is the most relevant, 
because the practice in question is found highly 
offensive by most people (at least we believe—and 
hope—so). But one might also include the harm 
principle, because spitting in public can spread 
disease-causing organisms. 
 6. Legal moralism, because many people find adul-
tery immoral; and, to a lesser extent, both the harm 
principle and legal paternalism, because adultery 
can harm the adulterer’s partner emotionally 
and increase the spread of sexually transmitted 
diseases. 
 10. The offense principle 
 Exercise 12-13 
 Comment: In fact, a majority of the Supreme Court 
agreed with Justice O’Connor and sentenced John Angus 
Smith to thirty years in prison. Your authors take Justice 
Scalia’s side and believe the Court’s majority made a 
 serious mistake. 
 Exercise 12-14 
 1.  a. Principle 4 
 b. Principle 2 
  Compatible 
 4.  a. Principle 5 
 b. Principle 2 
  Compatible 
 Exercise 12-15 
 1. Relevant on Principle 7 
 4. Relevant on Principle 1 
 7. Relevant on Principle 3 
 Exercise 12-16 
 Principle 1: Asuka’s picture does not teach us any-
thing, for no chimp can distinguish between truth 
and falsity; it is a curiosity rather than a work of art. 
 Principle 2: By looking at Asuka’s very symbolic paint-
ings, we are compelled to accept her vision of a world 
in which discourse is by sight rather than by sound. 
 Principle 3: Perhaps the most far-reaching impact of 
Asuka’s art is its revelation of the horrors of encaging 
chimps; surely beings who can reach these heights 
of sublimely abstract expression should not see the 
world through iron bars. 
 Principle 4: Dear Zookeeper: Please encourage Asuka 
to keep painting, as the vibrant colors and intense 
brushstrokes of her canvases fi ll all of us with delight. 
 Principle 5: I never thought I would wish to feel like 
an ape, but Asuka’s art made me appreciate how 
chimps enjoy perceiving us humans as chumps. 
 Principle 6: Th is is not art, for no ape’s product can con-
vey the highest, most valuable, human states of mind. 
 Principle 7: Whether by the hand of ape or man, that 
the canvases attributed to Asuka show lovely shapes 
and colors is indisputable. 
 Principle 8: What is art is simply what pleases a per-
son’s taste, and Asuka obviously fi nds painting tasty, 
as she tends to eat the paint. 
 Exercise 12-17 
 1. a 
 4. b 

Dana Fradon/The New Yorker Collection/www.
cartoonbank.com. Used with permission. P 115. 
Copyright © Peter Funt, from www.CandidCamera.com. 
Used with permission. Page 121: DILBERT © 2007 Scott 
Adams. Used By permission of UNIVERSAL UCLICK. 
All rights reserved. Chapter 5 Page 146: DOONESBURY 
© 1988 G. B. Trudeau.  Reprinted with permission of 
UNIVERSAL UCLICK.  All rights reserved. Page 175: 
Victor Juhasz for ROLLING STONE Magazine. Copyright 
© 2010. Used with permission. Chapter 10 Page 286: 
THE BORN LOSER © 2005 Art and Chip Sansom. 
Reprinted by permission of Universal Uclick for UFS. 
All rights reserved. Chapter 11 Page 332: DILBERT 
© 2006 Scott Adams. Used By permission of UNIVERSAL 
UCLICK. All rights reserved.
Text:
Chapter 1 P 3: Richard H. Hersch, Reprinted with 
permission from “Going Naked,” by Richard H. Hersch, 
in Peer Review vol. 9, no. 2. Copyright © 2007 by the 
Association of American Colleges and Universities. 
Chapter 3 P 75: THE BORN LOSER © 2009 Art and 
Chip Sansom. Reprinted by permission of Universal 
Uclick for UFS. All rights reserved. P 90: Tom Cheney, 
Waiter to man who has giant pile of all foods. “How’s 
everything?”—Issue Publication Date: 03/22/2010, Tom 
Cheney/The New Yorker Collection/www.cartoonbank
.com. Used with permission. Chapter 4 P 113: Dana 
Fradon, Man sitting in front of television. “Those are the 
headlines, and we’ll be back in a moment to blow them 
out of proportion.”—Issue Publication Date: 09/23/1991. 
Credits
Images RF; p. 180(left): © Design Pics/Natural Selection 
David Ponton RF; p. 180(right): Photo by Lynn Betts, 
USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service; 
p. 182(left): © Brendan Smialowski/AFP/Getty Images; 
p. 182(right): © Paul Sakuma/AP Photo; p. 187: 
© Popperfoto/Getty Images; p. 188: © Jack Star/
PhotoLink/Getty Images RF; p. 190: © Brad Barket/
Getty Images RF. Chapter 7 Opener: © alengo/Getty 
Images RF; p. 205: © Richard Parker; p. 206: © Paul 
Sakuma/AP Photo; p. 207(left): © Yuri Gripas/UPI/
Newscom; p. 207(right): © Pete Marovich/ZUMAPRESS/
Newscom; p. 208(left): © David Madison/Digital Vision/
Getty Images RF; p. 208(right): © Tetra Images/Getty 
Images RF. Chapter 8 Opener: © Tom Grill/Corbis RF; 
p. 227: © geogphotos/Alamy; p. 229: © Bettmann/
Corbis; p. 230: © Richard Parker; p. 233: © Tim Dunn/
Special to the Bee. Chapter 9 Opener: © Brand X 
Pictures RF; p. 244: © 20th Century Fox Film Corp. All 
rights reserved. Courtesy: Everett Collection; p. 249: 
© The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc./Jack Holtel, 
photographer; p. 258: Courtesy of the Center for Disease 
Control/James Gathany; p. 265: Library of Congress 
Prints & Photographs Division [LC-USZ62-13016]; 
p. 270: © Richard Parker. Chapter 10 Opener: © Dennis 
Hallinan/Alamy; p. 302: © Michael Euler/AP Photo; 
p. 312: © ColorBlind Images/Getty Images RF. 
Chapter 11 Opener: © John Lund/Getty Images; 
p. 336: © moodboard/Getty Images RF; p. 340: © Irwin 
Fedriansyah/AP Photo; p. 353: Courtesy Josh Fulcher; 
p. 365: © New Line Cinema/Courtesy: Everett 
Collection. Chapter 12 Opener: © Carl De Souza/
AFP/Getty Images/Newscom; p. 382: © Frederick 
M. Brown/Getty Images; p. 394: © Brandi Simons/
AP Photo; p. 401: © Susan Walsh/AP Photo; p. 406: © 
Viviane Moos/Corbis; p. 407: © Alicia Alvarez, Photo by 
Photo:
Front Matter Page xviii: © Ingram Publishing/Alamy 
RF; p. xxi: © Thomas Cordova/Inland Valley Daily 
Bulletin; p. xxvi: Photo courtesy of Curtis Peldo. 
Chapter 1 Opener: © Raj Kamal/Getty Images RF; 
p. 4: © Jason LaVeris/FilmMagic/Getty Images; p. 5: 
© Thinkstock/Getty Images RF; p. 9: © Brand X Pictures 
RF; p. 12: © Peter Turnley/Corbis; p. 15: © Mandel 
Ngan/AFP/Getty Images; p. 18: © Lars A. Niki. 
Chapter 2 Opener: © McCoy Wynne/Alamy; p. 40: 
© Lars A. Niki; p. 43: © Jill Giardino/Getty Images RF. 
Chapter 3 Opener: © Samantha Craddock/agefotostock 
RF; p. 67(1): © Kurt Krieger/Corbis; p. 67(2): © 20th 
Century Fox Film Corp. All rights reserved. Courtesy: 
Everett Collection; p. 67(3): © Yari Film Group 
Releasing/Courtesy: Everett Collection; p. 67(4): 
Courtesy: Everett Collection; p. 68: © McGraw-Hill 
Companies, Inc./Jill Braaten, photographer; p. 92: 
© Richard Parker. Chapter 4 Opener: © J.R. Bale/
Alamy RF; p. 100: © Comstock/Punchstock RF; p. 105: 
© Digital Vision/Getty Images RF; p. 106: © Miguel 
Villagran/Getty Images; p. 110: © Royalty-Free/Corbis; 
p. 114: © John Medina/WireImage/Getty Images; p. 115: 
© Robert Lehmann/Alamy RF; p. 123: © Van Redin/
Summit Entertainment/Courtesy: Everett Collection; 
p. 127: © Terry Goodlad, Atria Books/AP Photo. 
Chapter 5 Opener: © Ingram Publishing RF; p. 141: 
© Mike Yarish/Fox/Courtesy: Everett Collection; p. 143: 
© Lucy Nicholson/Reuters; p. 144: © Paul Hawthorne/
Getty Images; p. 151: © Richard Parker; p. 154: © Pete 
Souza/UPI/Newscom; p. 155: © David Fleetham/
Alamy; p. 157: Library of Congress Prints & Photographs 
Division [LC-DIG-ppmsca-04294]; p. 158: © Ingram 
Publishing RF. Chapter 6 Opener: © Don Farrall/Getty 
Image Researcher: Danny Meldung, Photo Affairs
Interior Designer: Tara McDermott
Cover Designer: Tara McDermott

476 
CREDITS
Richard Parker; p. 408: © Julia Ross; p. 410: Photo © Art 
Resource, NY. © Estate of Pablo Picasso/Artists Rights 
Society (ARS), New York; p. 412: © Kimimasa Mayama/
Reuters/Corbis; p. 415: Richard Serra. Tilted Arc, 1981. 
Weatherproof Steel, 12’ x 120’ x 2½”. Collection: General 
Services Administration, Washington, DC. Installed: 
Federal Plaza, New York. Destroyed by the Federal 
Government 1989. © 2010 Richard Serra/Artists Rights 
Society (ARS), New York. Photo Courtesy of Richard 
Serra; p. 416: © Scala/Art Resource, NY. Appendix 
Page 432: © Comstock/PunchStock RF.

Index
Note: Page numbers followed by “n” indicate notes. 
Analogues, 331–332, 334
Analogy
Argument from Analogy, 331–336
rhetorical, 146–148
Weak Analogy/False Analogy fallacy, 
202–203, 333
Analytical definitions, 79
And, 286–287
Anecdote, Argument by, 198–199, 213
Annan, Kofi, 167
Antecedent
affirming, 309–310
conditional claim, 287, 296–297
defined, 223
Denying the Antecedent fallacy, 
223–224
misleading truth-functional, 294
Appeals
advertising, 120–124
to precedent, 335–336, 401–402
Appeal to Emotion fallacy, 185–188
Appeal to Envy, 187
Appeal to Jealousy, 187
Appeal to Pity, 187
Apple Polishing, 187
Argument from Outrage, 185
Guilt Tripping, 187
Peer Pressure fallacy, 186
Scare Tactics, 186–187
Appeal to Envy fallacy, 187
Appeal to Ignorance, 183
Appeal to Jealousy fallacy, 187
Appeal to Pity fallacy, 187
Apple Polishing fallacy, 187
Argument, 32–63. See also Fallacies; 
Truth-functional arguments
addition, 311, 317
association, 316, 318
balance of considerations reasoning, 
40–41
A because B statements, 43
chain, 302, 310, 317
clarifying structure of, 49–51
commutation, 315, 318
conclusion in, 8, 32–34
conjunction, 286–287, 311, 317
constructive dilemma, 311–312, 317
contraposition, 315, 318
in critical thinking, 7–8
deductive. See Deductive arguments
DeMorgan’s Laws, 315–316, 318
destructive dilemma, 312, 317
diagramming structure of, 49–51
disjunctive, 287, 288, 311, 317
distribution, 316, 318
double negation of, 314, 318
ethos, pathos, and logos in, 43–44
evaluating logic of, 52
exportation, 316, 318
if . . . then . . .  sentences in, 38, 42, 223
inductive. See Inductive arguments
invalid, 2, 223, 299
lists of facts in, 42
modus ponens, 309–310, 317
modus tollens, 310, 317
parts of, 8, 32–34
patterns of deductive, 308–312
pictures not, 40, 42
premise in, 8, 32–34
proof beyond reasonable doubt, 37
simplification, 311, 317
tautology, 316–318
truth-functional. See Truth-functional 
arguments
understanding, 48–52
valid, 34–35, 37–38
window dressing versus, 51–52
Argumentative essays, 65, 81–85
Argument by Anecdote, 198–199, 213
Argument from Analogy, 331–336
analogues, 331–334
attacking the analogy, 333
evaluation of, 332–333
examples, 334
guidelines for critical thinking, 335
other uses of analogy, 334–335
Argument from Outrage fallacy, 185
Argumentum Ad Hominem, 177–179, 
232, 384
defined, 177
Genetic fallacy, 178–179
Guilt by Association, 178
inconsistency, 383–384
Poisoning the Well, 178
Ariely, Daniel, 19n, 44n
Aristotle, 43–44, 135, 244, 250, 394, 406, 
409, 410
Asch, Solomon, 15n
Association, 316, 318
Assumptions, unwarranted, 143
Asuka (chimpanzee), 411, 412
Attacking the analogy, 333
Attribute of interest, 331–332, 334, 339–340
Atypical samples, 340
Authority
Fallacious Appeal to, 204
obedience to, 17
Availability heuristics, 15
Background knowledge, claims and, 
102–103
Bagdikian, Ben, 116
Baker, Samm S., 206
Balance of considerations reasoning, 
40–41
Bandwagon effect, 15–16
Bandwagon fallacy, 205–206
Bates, Stanley, 11
Begging the Question, 79, 184–185
Begley, Sharon, 376
Belief bias, 15
Beliefs
cognitive biases, 14–19
propositional, 3–4
Abbreviating, subject and predicate 
terms, 246
ABC, 114, 115
A because B statements, 43
Accident fallacy, 201–202, 228
Accomplishments, expertise of sources 
and, 108
Accuracy in Media, 117
A-claims
about, 246
as affirmative claim, 247
contraposition, 256, 258
conversion, 255, 257
identifying, 250–251
individual claims treated as, 250–251
obversion, 255–256, 257–258
only in, 248–250
rules of syllogism, 272–274
square of opposition, 253–254
testing for validity, 264–268, 272–274
Venn diagrams, 246–247
Acts, 390
Addition, 311, 317
Ad hominem fallacies. See Argumentum 
Ad Hominem
Advertising, 120–124
billboard, 92
methods of appeal in, 120–124
persuasion through visual imagery, 
153–156
product placement versus, 123
skepticism toward, 124
Advocacy television, 116–117
Aesthetic reasoning, 405–413
evaluating works of art, 410–411
judging aesthetic value, 408–409
principles of, 404–408
using, 412–413
Affirmative action, 397
Affirmative claims, 247
Affirming the antecedent, 309–310
Affirming the Consequent fallacy, 222–223
African Queen, The (film), 123
Alexander the Great, 43
Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland 
(Carroll), 255
Alicke, Mark D., 18n
Alterman, Eric, 114
Alternative occurrences, 369
Altruism, ethical, 389
Alvarez, Alicia, 407
Ambiguity, 68–72
defined, 68
grouping, 69–70
pronoun references and, 71–72
semantic, 69
syntactic, 70–72
using, 71
Ambiguous claims, 225–226
American Idol (TV program), 18
& (ampersand), 286–287
Amphiboly fallacy, 226

478 
INDEX
translating into categorical, 247–251
truth-functionally equivalent claims, 
291
types of truth-functional logic, 288
in Venn diagrams, 246–247
Claim variables, 285–286
Clinton, Bill, 65, 103, 164
Clinton, Hillary, 23, 136
Closing of the American Mind, The 
(Bloom), 65
CNN, 112, 114, 116
Cobain, Kurt, 91
Cognitive biases, 14–19
bandwagon effect and, 15–16
belief bias, 15
better-than-average illusion, 18
confirmation bias, 15, 120
false consensus effect, 15
fundamental attribution error, 16, 
156
heuristics, 15
in-group bias, 16, 156
loss aversion, 16
negativity bias, 16
obedience to authority, 17
overconfidence effect, 17–18
rational choice and, 17
Cohen, Marsha N., 94
Coincidence, Overlooking Possibility, 
209, 212
Colbert Report, The, 78, 117, 420
Colbert, Stephen, 78, 117, 420
Coleridge, Samuel Taylor, 406
Collegiate Learning Assessment 
(CLA) Project, Council for Aid to 
Education, 3
Comedy Central, 117
Common Belief, Fallacious Appeal to, 
204–207
Common Cause, Overlooking Possible, 
209–210, 212
Common Practice, Fallacious Appeal to, 
205, 206, 207
Common variable principle, 355
Commutation, 315, 318
Comparative data, 146–148
Comparisons
evaluating, 147
graphic, 148
misleading, 146–148
Complementary terms, 256
Composition fallacy, 226, 227, 392
Conclusion-analogues, 331–332, 334
Conclusions
in argument, 8, 32–34
basing on fact or opinion, 5–6
identifying, 34, 48–52
Irrelevant, 188–190
making, 3
pictures not, 42
thinking critically about, 32–34
unstated conclusions, 33–34
using as premise, 33
Conditional claims
antecedents and consequents in, 287, 
296–297
either . . . or phrases, 297–298
necessary and sufficient conditions in, 
296–297
truth-table symbols for, 288–290
unless, 297
Conditional probabilities, 370–371
retrospective observational studies, 
367, 368
weighing evidence, 353–355
Causal statements, 350–368
defined, 350
forming causal hypotheses, 351–353, 
355
Cause and Effect fallacies, 207–213
Argument by Anecdote (Causal 
Variety), 213
Cum Hoc, Ergo Propter Hoc, 211
Overlooking a Possible Common 
Cause, 209–210, 212
Overlooking the Possibility of 
Coincidence, 209, 212
Overlooking the Possibility of Random 
Variation, 210
Overlooking the Possibility of 
Regression, 210–211
Overlooking the Possibility of 
Reversed Causation, 212
Post Hoc, Ergo Propter Hoc, 207–209, 
351
CBS, 114, 115
Chain arguments, 302, 310, 317
Chalabi, Ahmad, 108
Cheating, 390, 396
Chocola, Chris, 195
Chrétien, Jean, 65
Christo, 406
Churchill, Winston, 161
Claims. See also Conditional claims
about individuals, 250–251
A-claims. See A-claims
affirmative, 247
ambiguous, 225–226
antecedents and consequents in, 287, 
296–297
asserting as truth, 20
assessing content of, 99–103
background information for, 102–103
in categorical logic, 245–251
claim variables, 285
conditional, 287, 296–297
conjunctions in compound, 286–287, 
311, 317
contradictory, 253–254
contraposition of, 256, 258, 315, 318
contrary, 253–254
conversion of, 255, 257
credibility of, 98–103
disjunctions in compound, 287, 288, 
311, 317
E-claims. See E-claims
equivalent, 247
I-claims. See I-claims
if and only if phrases in, 293–296, 297
incredible claims, 99
initial plausibility of, 102–103
Internet sources and, 117–120
letters for claim variables, 285–286
negative, 247
news media’s, 115, 116–117
objective and subjective, 4–5
obversion of, 255–256, 257–258
O-claims. See O-claims
propositional, 4
radio and television, 116–117
skepticism toward advertising, 124
sources of, 98
subcontrary, 253–254
symbolizing compound, 293–298
Bell, Clive, 407
Bentham, Jeremy, 388–389, 392
Better-than-average illusion, 18
Biases. See also Cognitive biases
belief, 15
confirmation, 15, 120
Fallacy of Biased Sample, 200
negativity, 16
within news media, 113–116
sampling, 342
Biden, Joseph, 68, 170–171, 351
Billboard advertising, 92
Blackmore, Susan, 439–440
Blogs, 119–120
Bloom, Alan, 65
Bogart, Humphrey, 123
Bond, Kit, 426
Boxer, Barbara, 65
Braude, Jacob, 408
Breaking Bad (TV program), 24
Breslin, Jimmy, 440
Brown, Dan, 91
Brown, Dee, 26–27
Bruss, Robert, 60
Buchanan, Patrick, 114, 160
Buhler, Rich, 119
Bunting, Larry, 171
Burden of proof, 182–183, 384
Bury My Heart at Wounded Knee 
(Brown), 26–27
Bush, George W., 107, 108
Bushman, Brad, 121
But for causes, 371–372
Cannon, Lou, 88
Carlson, Neil R., 12
Carolina Abecedarian Project, 376
Carroll, Lewis, 255
Castle doctrine, 403
Categorical imperative, 390
Categorical logic. See also Categorical 
syllogisms
about, 244–245
categorical syllogisms, 263–270
claims used in, 245–251
contraposition, 256, 258
conversion of claims, 255, 257
Venn diagrams illustrating claims, 
246–247
Categorical syllogisms, 263–270
common, 269
defined, 299
invalid, 299
terms of, 263
testing validity of, 264–268, 272–274
unstated premises for, 268
Causal explanation, legal reasoning and, 
401–402
Causal hypothesis
common variable principle, 355
confirming, 363–364
covariation principle, 352–353, 355
defined, 351
forming, 351–353, 355
paired unusual events principle, 351, 
355
prospective observational studies, 
366–367, 368
randomized controlled experiments, 
364–366, 368

 
INDEX 
479
Eastwood, Clint, 403n
E-claims
about, 246
contraposition, 256, 258
conversion, 255, 257
identifying, 250–251
individual claims treated as, 250–251
as negative claim, 247
obversion, 255–256, 257–258
rules of syllogism, 272–274
square of opposition, 253–254
testing for validity, 264–268, 272–274
Venn diagrams, 246–247
Edelson, Edward, 378
Educational Testing Service (ETS), 81
Education, expertise of sources and, 108
Eells, Ellery, 265
Egoism, ethical, 389
Eisenhower, Dwight D., 157
Either . . . or phrases, 297–298
Elam, Chris, 1
Eldridge, Paul, 66
Electrical circuits, 291–293
Emling, Shelley, 141
Emotions. See also Appeal to Emotion 
fallacy; Persuasion; Rhetorical 
devices
conveying in photographs, 143
emotive meaning of words, 78, 
136–137, 413
mistaken observations and, 100
Encyclopedias, 117–119
Envy, Appeal to, 187
Equivalent claims, 247
Equivocation fallacy, 225–226, 392
Error margins, sampling and, 342
Essays, argumentative, 65, 81–85
E.T. (film), 117
Ethical altruism, 389
Ethical egoism, 389
Ethical perspectives, 388–394
consequentialism, 388–389
ethical altruism, 389
ethical egoism, 389
irreconcilable differences from, 397
moral problems as unresolvable, 397
utilitarianism, 388–389
virtue ethics, 393–394
Ethos, 43–44
Euphemisms, 137
Everyone knows . . .  fallacies, 150–151
Evidence
Principal of Total Evidence, 344
weighing, 353–355
Example, definition by, 78
Exceptional Cases, Generalizing from, 
200–201
Expectation value (EV), 369–370
Experience, expertise of sources and, 108
Expertise of sources, 107–111
Exportation, 316, 318
Facial features, 106
Factcheck.org, 119
Facts
checking on Internet, 119
Fallacy of the Lonely Fact, 198
lists of in argument, 42
opinion versus, 5–6
Fallacies
Ad Hominem, 177–179, 232, 383–384
Affirming the Consequent, 222–223
Deductions, 308–318
conditional proofs (CP), 321–325
defined, 308
elementary valid argument patterns, 
308–312
truth-functional equivalences, 291, 
314–318
Deductive arguments, 34–35, 37–40, 
243–330
association, 316, 318
balance of considerations reasoning, 
40–41
categorical logic, 244–245
chain arguments, 302, 310, 317
conditional proofs (CP), 321–325
conjunction, 286–287, 311, 317
constructive dilemma, 311–312, 317
contraposition, 256, 258, 315, 318
deductions in, 308–318
destructive dilemma, 312, 317
inductive arguments versus, 37–38
premises in, 38–40
proof beyond a reasonable doubt, 37
Definitions, 76–80
importance of, 76–77
kinds of, 78–79
precising, 78, 79
purposes of, 77–78, 79–80
rhetorical, 78, 146
tips for using, 79–80
De gustibus non est disputandum, 407
Demagoguery, 135–136, 156–158
Demonizing, 156–157
DeMorgan’s Laws, 315–316, 318. See also 
Categorical logic; Truth-functional 
logic
Denial fallacy, 189
Denying the Antecedent fallacy, 
223–224
Denying the consequent, 310
Deontologism, 389–391
Deriving ought from is fallacy, 392
Destructive dilemma, 312, 317
Diagramming. See also Venn diagrams
arguments, 49–51
syllogisms, 264–268, 272–274
Disinterested parties, 105
Disjunctions
about, 287
rule for arguments with, 311, 317
truth-table symbols for, 288
using in compound claims, 287
Disjunctive argument, 287, 288, 311, 317
Disney, 112
Distribution, 316, 318
Diversified samples, 340–341
Diversity
evaluating person’s credibility, 
106–107
stereotypes, 140–141
word choice reflecting, 84–85
Division fallacy, 227–228
DNA analysis, 100
Dobbs, Lou, 114
Double negation, 314, 318
Downplaying others, 138–139
Doyle, Arthur Conan, 47, 243–244
Drudge Report, The, 115, 120
Dunning, David, 8n
Duties, 389–391
Duty theory, 389–391
Dysphemisms, 137, 144–145
Conditional proofs (CP), 321–325
examples, 323–324
restrictions, 323
Conditio sine qua non, 363, 371–372
Confidence level, 342
Confirmation bias, 15, 120
Confounding variables, 367
Confusing Contraries and 
Contradictories fallacy, 230–231
Confusing Explanations with Excuses 
fallacy, 228–229
Conjunctions
in compound claims, 286–287, 311, 
317
as downplayers, 139
truth-table symbols for, 288
Consequent
Affirming the Consequent fallacy, 
222–223
conditional claim, 287, 296–297
defined, 223
denying the consequent, 310
Consequentialism, 388–389
Consistency/Inconsistency fallacy, 231–232
Consistency principle, 383–384
Constructive dilemma, 311–312, 317
Consumer Reports, 24, 119, 123–124
Consumers Union, 123–124
Contradictory claims, 253–254
Contraposition
illustrated, 256, 258
truth-functional rule for, 315, 318
Contrary claims, 253–254
Conversion
about, 255
illustrated, 257
Cordingley, Bill, 106
Correlation, 208
Coulter, Ann, 15, 149, 152, 160, 166–167
Council for Aid to Education, 3
Covariation principle, 352–353, 355
Cox News Service, 141
Credibility, 96–134
advertising, 120–124
assessing claims, 98–103
evaluating source, 98, 105–111
fraud on Internet, 96–98
government management of news, 
112–113, 115
Internet resources and, 117–120
news media, 112–120
website, 118, 119
Crisp, Quentin, 137
Critical thinking
arguments, 7–8
beliefs and claims, 3–6
clarifying issues in, 6–7
cognitive biases, 14–19
conclusions and, 32–34
defining, 1–3
impact of, 20–21
skills needed for, 3
as thinking about thinking, 2, 5
truth and knowledge, 20
Cruz, Ted, 194
Cum Hoc, Ergo Propter Hoc, 211
Cunningham, Ward, 118
Daily Show, The, 112, 117
Deaver, Jeffery, 103
Deduction, deducing the right thing to 
do, 386

480 
INDEX
Huckabee, Mike, 117
Huffington Post, 120
Human Inference (Nisbett and Ross), 201
Humphrey, Hubert, 149
Hurley, Ben F., 378
Hussein, Saddam, 108
Huxley, Aldous, 229
Hyperbole, 144–145
Hypotheses. See Causal hypothesis
Hypothetical imperative, 389–390
IBE (inference to best explanation), 41
I-claims
about, 246
as affirmative claim, 247
contraposition, 256, 258
conversion, 255, 257
identifying, 250–251
obversion, 255–256, 257–258
rules of syllogism, 272–274
square of opposition, 253–254
testing for validity, 264–268, 272–274
Venn diagrams, 246–247
If and only if phrases, 293–296, 297
If . . . then . . .  sentences, 38, 42, 223
Ignorance, Appeal to, 183
Implication, 315, 318
Inconsistency 384
Incredible claims, 99
Independent events, statistical 
probability of joint occurrence, 
368–369
Induction fallacies, 197–221
Cause and Effect, 207–213
defined, 197
Fallacious Appeal to Authority, 204
Fallacious Appeal to Popularity/
Common Belief, 204–207
Generalizations, 197–202
Slippery Slope, 213–214
Untestable Explanation, 214
Weak Analogy, 202–203, 333
Inductive arguments, 36–40
balance of considerations reasoning, 
40–41
deductive arguments versus, 37–38
premises in, 38–40
strength or weakness of, 36, 37–38
Inductive reasoning, 331–380. See also 
Inductive arguments
Argument from Analogy, 331–336
causal statements and support, 
350–368
causation in the law, 371–372
generalizing from a sample, 339–343
statistical probabilities, 368–371
statistical syllogisms, 343–344
Inference to Best Explanation (IBE), 41
In-group bias, 16, 156
Initial plausibility, of claims, 102–103
Innocence Project, 100
Innuendo
slanting writing with, 141–142
statistics used with, 142
Intentions, 389
Interested parties, 105–106, 109, 122
International Carwashing Association 
(ICA), 61
Internet
blogs, 119–120
checking facts on, 119
credibility of news media, 117–120
Fundamental attribution error, 16, 156
Funt, Peter, 115
Gamache, Larry, 190
Gambler’s fallacy, 233–234
Gates, Bill, 142
Gender
credibility and, 107
word choice and, 85
General Electric, 112
Generalities in language, 72–73
Generalization fallacies, 197–202
Accident fallacy, 201–202, 228
Exceptional Cases, 200–201
Hasty Generalization (Generalizing 
from Too Few Cases), 198–200, 
227
Generalizing from samples, 339–343
arguments with analysis, 341
attribute of interest, 339–340
evaluation of arguments, 340–341
guidelines for critical thinking, 341
population, 339–340
sample, 339–340
scientific, 342–343
Genetic Fallacy, 178–179
Gentilischi, Artemisia, 416
Gingrich, Newt, 420
Glancing blow, 84
Glee (TV program), 141
Goebbels, Joseph, 151, 156–157, 158
Goldberg, Bernard, 114
Goldwater, Barry, 149
Gore, Al, 152, 302
Government management of news, 
112–113, 115
Graham, Stedman, 171–172
Graphic misinformation, 148
Gross, Ludwik, 378
Groups
grouping ambiguity, 69–70
in-group bias, 16, 156
Guernica (Picasso), 410–411
Guilt by Association, 178
Guilt Tripping fallacy, 187
Hannity, Sean, 115, 117, 139
Hansel, C. E. M., 101n
Happiness and consequentialism, 388–389
Harding, Warren G., 6–7
Harm principle, 402–403
Harris, V. A., 16n
Hart, H. L. A., 372
Hasty Generalization (Generalizing from 
Too Few Cases), 198–200, 227
Hate mongering, 157–158
Hayes, Chris, 117
Hedonistic calculus, 388–389
Hepburn, Katharine, 123
Heuristics, 15
Hickson, John, 109
Hill, Gwen, 426
Hilton, Paris, 67
Hitler, Adolf, 136, 146, 157, 160, 202–203, 
229
Hogan, Kathleen, 232
Holt, Jim, 172
Honoré, A. M., 372
Horse laugh, 144
Hound of the Baskervilles, The (Doyle), 47
How to Think About Weird Things (Schick 
and Vaughn), 26
Fallacies—Cont.
Amphiboly, 226
Appeal to Emotion, 185–188
Begging the Question, 79, 184–185
Cause and Effect, 207–213
Composition, 226, 227, 392
Confusing Contraries and 
Contradictories, 230–231
Confusing Explanations with Excuses, 
228–229
Consistency/Inconsistency, 231–232
defined, 176
Denying the Antecedent, 223–224
Division, 227–228
Equivocation, 225–226, 392
everyone knows . . . , 150–151
Fallacious Appeal to Authority, 204
Fallacious Appeal to Popularity/
Common Belief, 204–207
False Dilemma, 180–182
Generalizations, 197–202
Hasty Generalization (Generalizing 
from Too Few Cases), 198–200, 
227
hypothesis-confirmation, 364
Irrelevant Conclusion, 188–190
Line-Drawing, 181–182, 214
miscalculating probabilities, 232–235
Misplacing the Burden of Proof, 182–183
relevance (red herring), 176–190
Slippery Slope, 213–214
Straw Man, 179
Undistributed Middle, 224–225
Untestable Explanation, 214
Weak Analogy, 202–203, 333
wishful thinking, 101
Fallacies of Induction. See Induction 
fallacies
Fallacious Appeal to Authority, 204
Fallacious Appeal to Popularity/Common 
Belief, 204–207
Bandwagon fallacy, 205–206
Fallacious Appeal to Common 
Practice, 205, 206, 207
Fallacy of the Lonely Fact, 198
False Analogy fallacy, 202–203, 333
False consensus effect, 15
False Dilemma fallacy, 180–182
Line-Drawing fallacy, 181–182, 214
Perfectionist fallacy, 181
False Positives, Overlooking, 234–235
Falsity, 20
Fear mongering, 157–158, 187
Feedback, 2
Feinstein, Dianne, 194
Fiore, Edith, 126
Firm, The (film), 123
First order of business, 6
Flip-flopping, 177, 231–232
Formalism, 408
Fostering xenophobia, 157
4-1-9 fraud, 97–98
Fox News, 114, 115, 116
Franklin, Benjamin, 229
Franklin, D., 378
Fraud
4-1-9, 97–98
Internet, 96–98
Freud, Sigmund, 70, 406
Friedman, Martin, 148
Friedman, Milton, 228
Fulcher, Jeff, 353

 
INDEX 
481
Miscalculating Probabilities fallacies, 
232–235
Gambler’s fallacy, 233–234
Overlooking False Positives, 234–235
Overlooking Prior Probabilities, 234
Mish’alani, Susan, 12
Misleading information
evaluating comparisons in, 146–148
news media stories with, 115
visual images conveying, 153–156
Misnomers, 145
Misplacing the Burden of Proof fallacy, 
182–183
Mitchell, Todd, 170
Modus ponens argument, 309–310, 317
Modus tollens argument, 310, 317
Moral deliberation, 396–397
Moral principles, 385
Moral reasoning, 381–400
about, 381–382
aesthetic reasoning, 405–413
burden of proof in inconsistent, 384
consequentialism in, 388–389
consistency principle, 383–384
deducing right thing to do, 386
deriving specific moral value 
judgments, 385–386
duty theory, 389–391
influential perspectives on, 388–394
judging aesthetic value, 408–409
legal reasoning, 401–404
moral deliberation, 396–397
moral principles, 385
moral relativism, 391–393
moral subjectivism, 6, 393
principles of, 383–384
religious absolutism, 393
religious relativism, 393
value judgments, 382–383
virtue ethics, 393–394
Moral relativism, 391–393
Moral subjectivism, 6, 393
Moral value judgments, 382–383, 
385–386, 413
Moulton, Janice, 94
MoveOn.org, 117
MSNBC, 115, 116, 117
Muir, David, 190
“Myth of the Neutral Man, The” 
(Moulton), 94
National Federation for Decency, 174
National Household Survey on Drug 
Abuse, 148
National Public Radio, 114
National Rifle Association (NRA), 60, 144, 
170–171
NBC, 13, 114, 115
Necessary and sufficient conditions, 
296–297
Negation, 285–286
double, 314, 318
symbols for truth-table, 288
Negative claims, 247
Negativity bias, 16
New media, 115
News Corp., 112
News media, 112–120
advocacy television, 116–117
bias within, 113–116
government management of, 
112–113, 115
Legal cause, 372
Legal moralism, 402–403
Legal paternalism, 403
Legal reasoning, 401–404
appeals to precedent, 335–336, 
401–402
causation in, 371–372
failure of personal observations, 100
legal cause/proximate cause, 372
legal moralism, 402–403
legal paternalism, 403
legislative misnomers, 145
Line-Drawing fallacy, 182
Misplacing the Burden of Proof fallacy, 
182–183
morality and, 401–404
proof beyond a reasonable doubt, 37
stand your ground (SYG) laws, 403
stare decisis, 335–336, 401
Legislative misnomers, 145
Lenin, Vladimir, 151
Levin, Barnard, 67
Lexical definitions, 77, 79
LexisNexis, 117
Lichtenstein, Sarah, 18n
Limbaugh, Rush, 14, 114, 115, 145, 149, 
152, 178, 218, 424
Lincoln, Abraham, 265, 405
Line-Drawing fallacy, 181–182, 214
Linguistic indicators
conclusions, 34
premises, 35
Loaded questions, 142–143
Logic, 52, 135. See also Categorical logic; 
Truth-functional logic
Logos, 43–44
Lohan, Lindsay, 103, 253–254
Loss aversion, 16
Lucas, Greg, 172
Lungren, Dan, 374
Luntz, Frank, 140
Maddow, Rachel, 117
Maharis, George, 123
Maher, Bill, 149, 152
Major term, 263
Manners from Heaven (Crisp), 137
Marriott Corp., 171
Martin, Trayvon, 403
Marx, Karl, 336
Massey, Frank, 378
Mass nouns, 250
Maverick, Maury, 64n
May, Clifford, 130
McCarthy, Joseph, 187
McKay, J. Curtis, 82
McManus, Michael, 113
Media. See Advertising; Internet; New 
media
Mellinkoff, Abe, 171
Mencken, H. L., 7, 13, 82
Merrill, Raymond James, 96
Meyer, Dick, 78n
Middle term, 263
Mikkelson, Barbara, 119, 120
Milgram, Stanley, 17n
Miller, Howard, 422
Millgram, Stanley, 17
Mill, John Stuart, 392, 402–403
Milner, Martin, 123
Milton, John, 405
Minor term, 263
fraud on, 96–98
Wikipedia, 117–119
Invalid arguments, 2, 223, 299
In Your Face (Cordingley), 106
Iraq War, 108, 113, 146
Irrelevant Conclusion fallacy, 188–190
Denial, 189
Two Wrongs Make a Right, 189
Wishful Thinking, 101, 189
Issues
clarifying, 6–7
first order of business and, 6
Ito, Tiffany A., 16n
Jackson, Brooks, 119
Jealousy, Appeal to, 187
Johnson, Collen, 69
Johnson, Lyndon, 108
Johnson, Wendell, 84
Jones, E. E., 16n
Judgments, 4
Judith (Gentilishi), 416
Kaczynski, David, 94
Kahneman, Daniel, 15n, 18n
Kant, Immanuel, 389–391
Keaton, Jamey, 17n
Keefe, R., 66n
Keillor, Garrison, 18n
Kennedy, John F., 59–60, 130, 372
Kevorkian, Jack, 171
Kilbourne, Dave, 91
King, Steve, 207
Knee-jerk reaction, 83
Knowledge
background, 102–103
controversial nature of, 20
Koretz, Gene, 380
Kouki, Gregory, 77
Kristol, William, 114
Kruger, Justin, 8n
Language. See also Writing
ambiguity in, 68–72
and in truth-functional logic, 286–287
conjunctions in compound claims, 
286–287, 311, 317
defining terms, 76–80
downplaying others, 138–139
dysphemisms, 137, 144–145
either . . . or phrases, 297–298
euphemisms, 137
found in moral value judgments, 
382–383, 413
generalities in, 72–73
if and only if phrases, 293–296, 297
pronoun references and ambiguity, 
71–72
rhetorical force of, 78, 136–137, 413
translating claims into standard form, 
247–251
understanding words in claim 
variables, 286
unless claims, 297
using only, 248–250
vagueness in, 66–68
weaselers, 137–138, 297
word choice, 84–85
Lapierre, Wayne, 170–171
Lauder, Brent, 185
Leacock, Stephen, 120
Lederer, Richard, 89

482 
INDEX
Principal of Total Evidence, 344
Prior Probabilities, Overlooking, 234
Product placement, 123
Pronoun references, 71–72
Proof beyond a reasonable doubt, 37
Proof surrogates, 150–151
Propaganda, 16
Propositional beliefs, 3–4
Propositional logic. See Truth-functional 
logic
Prospective observational studies, 
366–367, 368
Proximate cause, 372
Pryor, Mark, 195
Public Broadcasting System, 114
Putin, Vladimir, 107
Qualifying phrases, 138
Questions
Begging the Question, 79, 184–185
loaded, 142–143
objective. See Issues
Quinn, Graham E., 376
Quotation marks, as downplayers, 138
Rachid, Regina, 96
Radio, 114, 116
Raeburn, Paul, 378
Randomized controlled experiments, 
364–366, 368
Random samples, 342
Random Variation, Overlooking 
Possibility of, 210
Rangel, Charles, 160
Rauscher, Frances, 376
Reagan, Nancy, 423
Reagan, Ronald, 149, 423
Real-life syllogisms, 265, 268–270
Reasonable doubt, 37
Reasoning
aesthetic. See Aesthetic reasoning
balance of considerations, 40–41
cognitive biases in, 14–19
inductive. See Inductive reasoning
legal. See Legal reasoning
moral. See Moral reasoning
Recommendations, expertise of sources 
and, 109
Red herrings, 176–177. See also Relevance 
(red herring) fallacies
Reference columns, 290–291
Regression, Overlooking Possibility of, 
210–211
Reid, Thomas, 14
Relativism, 6
moral, 391–393
religious, 393
Relevance (red herring) fallacies, 176–190
Appeal to Emotion, 185–188
Argumentum Ad Hominem, 177–179, 
232, 383–384
Begging the Question, 79, 184–185
defined, 176–177
False Dilemma, 180–182
Irrelevant Conclusion, 188–190
Misplacing the Burden of Proof, 
182–183
Straw Man, 179
Religious absolutism, 393
Religious relativism, 393
Repetition, 151–152
Reputation, expertise of sources and, 108
Owen, Mark, 48
Ozark, Danny, 66
Paired unusual events principle, 351, 355
Palin, Sarah, 115, 161
Paradise Lost (Milton), 405
Pascal, Blaise, 48
Paternalism, legal, 403
Pathos, 43–44
Paulos, John Allen, 363
Paul, Rand, 232
Pawlik, David, 110
Peer Pressure fallacy, 186–187
Pelley, Scott, 115
Pelosi, Nancy, 161
Perfectionist fallacy, 181
Personal observation
claims conflicting with, 99–102
failure of, 100
initial plausibility of claims and, 
102–103
prospective observational studies, 
366–367, 368
retrospective observational studies, 
367, 368
Persuasion. See also Rhetorical devices
in argumentative essays, 84
ethos, pathos, and logos in, 43–44
photographs and, 153–156
rational arguments as form of, 33–34
rhetorical force of, 78, 136–137, 413
Persuasive definitions, 78
Persuasive writing, 84
Phillips, Jeanne, 382
Phishing, 96–98
Photographs
conveying emotion in, 143
not arguments, 40, 42
persuasion using, 153–156
Physical characteristics of person, 
106–107
Picasso, Pablo, 408, 410–411
Pity, Appeal to, 187
Plato, 80
Poetics (Aristotle), 406, 409
Poisoning the Well, 178
PolitiFact.com, 119
Popularity, Fallacious Appeal to, 204–207
Population, generalizing from samples, 
339–340
Post Hoc, Ergo Propter Hoc, 207–209, 351
Postman, Neil, 77
Powell, Colin, 424
Precedent, appeals to, 335–336, 401–402
Precising definitions, 78, 79
Predicate term of claim, 246
Premise-analogues, 331–332, 334
Premises. See also Unstated premises
in argument, 8, 32–34
conclusions used as, 33
deduction, induction and unstated, 
38–40
identifying, 35
if . . . then . . .  sentences not, 42
pictures not, 40, 42
premise-analogues, 331–332, 334
stated and unstated, 33–34, 38–40, 268
strength of inductive arguments, 36, 
37–38
Prescriptive statements. See Value 
judgments
Presley, Elvis, 109
News media—Cont.
innuendo with statistics, 142
Internet, 117–120
misleading stories by, 115
ownership of, 112
radio, 114, 116
television, 116–117
Nicomachean Ethics (Aristotle), 394
Nietzsche, Friedrich, 406
Nigerian advance fee 4-1-9 fraud, 97
Nisbett, R. E., 201
Nixon, Richard, 115
No Easy Way (Owen), 48
Nonmoral value judgments, 382–383
Non sequiturs, 84
Normative statements. See Value 
judgments
Norwood, Charlie, 425
Obama, Barack, 115, 136, 143, 154, 
170–171, 178
Obedience to authority, 17
Objective claims, 4–5
Objective questions. See Issues
Obligations, 389–391
Observation. See Personal observation
Obversion
about, 255–256
illustrated, 257–258
O-claims
about, 246
contraposition, 256, 258
conversion, 255
identifying, 250–251
as negative claim, 247
obversion, 255–256, 257–258
rules of syllogism, 272–274
square of opposition, 253–254
testing for validity, 264–268, 272–274
Venn diagrams, 246–247
O’Connor, Sandra Day, 405
O’Donnell, Lawrence, 117
Offense principle, 403
Olbermann, Keith, 160
Olson, Theodore B., 182
Only if phrases, 293–296, 297
Only, in claims, 248–250
Opinion, 4
facts versus, 5–6
moral subjectivism and, 6, 393
Or, 287
O’Reilly, Bill, 115, 117, 149, 153
Orwell, George, 136
Ostensive definition, 78
Oswald, Lee Harvey, 59–60, 372
Otherizing, 156
Outlines, 82
Outrage, Argument from, 185
Overconfidence effect, 17–18
Overlooking a Possible Common Cause 
fallacy, 209–210, 212
Overlooking False Positives fallacy, 
234–235
Overlooking Prior Probabilities fallacy, 234
Overlooking the Possibility of 
Coincidence fallacy, 209, 212
Overlooking the Possibility of Random 
Variation fallacy, 210
Overlooking the Possibility of Regression 
fallacy, 210–211
Overlooking the Possibility of Reversed 
Causation fallacy, 212

 
INDEX 
483
Subject term of claim, 246
Sugarman, Josh, 420
Super Bowl, 208
Syllogisms
categorical, 263–270
common, 269
real-life, 265, 268–270
rules of, 272–274
statistical, 343–344
terms of, 263
testing validity with Venn diagram, 
264–268, 272–274
unstated premises in, 268
Symbols
symbolizing compound claims, 
293–298
in truth tables, 285–293
Synonym, definition by, 78, 79
Syntactic ambiguity, 70–72
System of Logic, A (Mill), 392
Taibbi, Matt, 170
Tajfel, 16n
Talk radio, 116
Target analogues, 332
Tautology, 316–318
Television, 116–117, 121
Terms
abbreviating subject and predicate, 246
in categorical claims, 245–246
defining, 76–80
finding in categorical syllogisms, 263
identifying in syllogisms, 263
Testing
categorical syllogisms, 264–268, 
272–274
validity of truth tables, 300–305
Thatcher, Margaret, 149
Thinking. See also Critical thinking
objective versus subjective, 4–5
wishful, 101
Thornton, Robert, 71
Tiedens, Lara, 106n
Tierney, John, 131
Tilted Arc (Serra), 415–416
Time Warner, 112
Toscanini, Arturo, 13
Tradition, Fallacious Appeal to, 205, 
206, 207
Trajan, Joel, 166
True proportion, 342
Truth, asserting claims as, 20
Truth-functional arguments, 299–318
association, 316, 318
chain arguments, 302, 310, 317
commutation, 315, 318
contraposition, 256, 258, 315, 318
DeMorgan’s Laws, 315–316, 318
distribution, 316, 318
double negation, 314, 318
exportation, 316, 318
implication, 315, 318
modus ponens argument, 309–310, 
317
modus tollens argument, 310, 317
tautology, 316–318
truth-table method, 300–305
valid patterns in, 299–303
Truth-functional logic. See also 
Truth-functional arguments
about, 284–285
claim variables, 285
Schaffer, David R., 376
Schick, Theodore W., Jr., 26
Schlegel, Friedrich von, 337
Schlessinger, Laura, 102
Schmid, Randolph E., 17n
Scholastic Aptitude Test (SAT), 18, 81
Schumer, Charles, 166
Scientific generalizing from samples, 
342–343
Self-Selection fallacy, 201
Semantic ambiguity, 69
Sentential logic. See Truth-functional 
logic
Serra, Richard, 415–416
Shaw, Gordon, 376
Schiavo, Terri, 155–156
Short truth-table method, 303–305
Simplification, 311, 317
Singleton, Charles Laverne, 94
Slanters, 137–139, 141–142, 146. See also 
Rhetorical devices
Sleeping Doll, The (Deaver), 103
Slepian, Michael, 375
Slippery Slope fallacy, 213–214
Slovic, Paul, 18n
Smith, P., 66n
Snopes.com, 119, 120
Society for Psychical Research, 101
Sources
basing judgment on characteristics of, 
106–107
credibility of, 98, 105–111
expertise of, 107–111
interested parties, 105–106, 109, 122
Sowell, Thomas, 95, 151, 166
Square of opposition, 253–254
Standard-form categorical claims
contraposition of, 258
converse of, 255, 257
defined, 246–247
obversion of, 255–256
translating claims into, 247–251
Stand your ground laws (SYG), 403
Stare decisis, 335–336, 401
Starry Night (Van Gogh), 413
Statistical probabilities
alternative occurrences, 369
calculating, 368–371
calculating conditional probabilities, 
370–371
expectation value, 369–370
joint occurrence of independent 
events, 368–369
miscalculating, 232–235
Statistical syllogisms, 343–344
Statistics, innuendo with, 142
Steckler, Steve, 91
Steele, Peter, 78
Stereotypes, 140–141
Stewart, Jon, 112, 117, 144
Stewart, Patrick, 67
Stipulative definitions, 78
Stoics, 284
Stowe, Harriet Beecher, 405
Straw Man fallacy, 179
Stream-of-consciousness ramble, 83
Strength of arguments, having strong 
support, 36, 37–38
Study in Scarlet, A (Doyle), 243–244
Subcontrary claims, 253–254
Subjective claims, 5
Subjectivism, moral, 6, 393
Retrospective observational studies, 
367, 368
Reversed Causation, Overlooking 
Possibility of, 212
Revising, 82–83
Rhetoric, 135–175. See also Rhetorical 
devices
Aristotle’s contributions to, 43–44
defined, 135
Rhetorical analogies, 146–148
Rhetorical definitions, 78, 146
Rhetorical devices, 137–175. See also 
Fallacies
demagoguery, 135–136, 156–158
downplayers, 138–139
dysphemisms, 137, 144–145
euphemisms, 137
hyperbole, 144–145
innuendo, 141–142
loaded questions, 142–143
misnomers, 145
proof surrogates, 150–151
repetition, 151–152
rhetorical analogies and misleading 
comparisons, 146–148
rhetorical definitions and 
explanations, 78, 146
ridicule/sarcasm, 144
slanters, 137–139, 141–142, 146
stereotypes, 140–141
weaselers, 137–138, 297
Rhetorical explanations, 146
Rhetorical force, 78, 136–137, 413
Ridicule/sarcasm, 144
Rights, 389
Robber’s Camp Experiment, 16
Roberts, John, 401
Rogo, D. Scott, 439–440
Romney, Mitt, 115, 161, 170–171, 231
Rooney, Andy, 14
Ross, Julia, 407
Ross, L., 15n, 201
Rove, Karl, 152
Rubio, Marco, 152, 153
Rules, 390
of good writing style, 83
of syllogisms, 272–274
Rumsfeld, Donald, 70
Russell, Bertrand, 66, 163, 304
Ryan, Paul, 115, 170–171
Saad, Gad, 18n
Safer, Morley, 216
Sample analogues, 332
Samples
atypical, 340
biased, 342
confidence level, 342
diversified, 340–341
error margins in, 342
Fallacy of Biased Sample, 200
Fallacy of Small Sample, 199–200
generalizing from samples, 339–343
random, 342
sampling frame, 342
Sanger, Larry, 118
Santorum, Rick, 152
Sarcasm, 144
Saunders, George, 72
Sawyer, Diane, 115
Scalia, Antonin, 182, 405
Scare Tactics, 186–187

484 
INDEX
Whistle-blowers, 113
White, Becky, 65
Wikipedia, 117–119
Wildmon, Don, 174
Will, George, 171
Williams, Benjamin Matthew, 393
Williams, Brian, 115
Willis, Bruce, 67
Window dressing, argument versus, 51–52
Windy preamble, 83
Wishful Thinking fallacy, 101, 189
Wittgenstein, Ludwig, 337
Words. See also Definitions
in claim variables, 286
emotive meaning of, 78, 136–137, 413
word choice and diversity, 84–85
Worstall, Tim, 172
Writing, 64–95. See also Language; 
Rhetorical devices
ambiguity in, 68–72
argumentative essays, 65, 81–85
claims in standard form, 247–251
defining terms in, 76–80
diversity and word choice, 84–85
dysphemisms, 137, 144–145
euphemisms in, 137
generalities in, 72–73
good writing practice, 82–83
hyperbole in, 144–145
innuendo in, 141–142
loaded questions in, 142–143
misleading comparisons, 146–148
mistakes to avoid, 83–84
persuasive, 84
proof surrogates in, 150–151
repetition in, 151–152
rhetorical analogies in, 146–148
ridicule/sarcasm in, 144
rules of good style, 83
slanters, 137–139, 141–142, 146
tips for good, 81–83
using only, 248–250
vagueness in, 66–68
weaselers, 137–138, 297
Xenophobia, fostering, 157
Yoo, John, 91
Zerkle, Melinda, 419
Zimmerman, George, 403
nonmoral, 382–383
principles of moral reasoning, 383–384
Van Gogh, Vincent, 413
Variables
claim, 285–286
common variable principle, 355
confounding, 367
Vaughn, Lewis, 26
Venn diagrams
contraposition illustrated in, 258
conversion illustrated in, 257
obversion illustrated in, 257–258
similarity with square of opposition, 
253
testing syllogisms with, 264–268, 
272–274
types of claims in, 246–247
Venn, John, 246–247
Verrengia, Joseph B., 376
Viacom, 112
Vietnam War, 108, 161
Violating consistency principle, 384
Virtue ethics, 393–394
Visual imagery. See also Aesthetic 
reasoning
conveying emotion through, 143
evaluating works of art, 410–411
graphic misinformation, 148
not argument, 40, 42
persuasion through, 153–156
Voice, The (TV program), 4
Vos Savant, Marilyn, 249
Wales, Jimmy, 118
Wallace, George, 157
Wallace, Mike, 23
Wallace, Roy, 68
Walsh, John, 167
Walters, Dan, 338
War on Drugs, 72
War on Terror, 72
Warren, Mary Anne, 23
Washington Redskins, 208
Watts, Anthony, 132–133
Weak Analogy/False Analogy fallacy, 
202–203, 333
Weak support
about arguments with, 37–38
arguments with, 36
Weaselers, 137–138, 297
Webcheckers, 119
Websites, credibility of, 118, 119
Wellman, Gerard, 66
Truth-functional logic—Cont.
combining symbols in truth tables, 
288–293
electrical circuits and, 291–293
if and only if phrases in claims, 
293–296, 297
misleading antecedents in, 294
studying, 245
symbolizing compound claims, 
293–298
symbols in, 285–293, 288–293
truth-functionally equivalent claims, 
291, 314–318
truth tables and logical symbols, 
285–293
types of claims in, 288
TruthorFiction.com, 119
Truth tables
combining symbols in, 288–293
conjunctions in, 286–287, 288, 311, 317
disjunctions in, 287, 288, 311, 317
short method for, 303–305
symbols used in, 285–293
testing validity of, 300–305
Tversky, Amos, 15n, 18n
Two Wrongs Make a Right fallacy, 189
Uncle Tom’s Cabin (Stowe), 405
Undistributed Middle fallacy, 224–225
Universalization, 391
Unless claims, 297
Unquiet Dead, The (Fiore), 126
Unstated premises
arguments containing, 33–34, 38–40
categorical syllogisms with, 268
Untestable Explanation fallacy, 214
Unwarranted assumptions, 143
Utilitarianism
act versus rule, 390
Kant’s criticisms of, 389–391
reasoning in, 388–389
Vagueness in language, 66–68
Valid arguments
about, 34–35, 37–38
truth-functional, 299–303
Validity
testing for syllogism, 264–268, 272–274
truth table, 300–305
Value judgments, 382–383
aesthetic reasoning and, 405–413
deducing right thing to do, 386
moral, 382–383, 385–386, 413

