
Critical Socio-Technical 
Issues Surrounding 
Mobile Computing
Norshidah Mohamed
Prince Sultan University, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and Universiti Teknologi 
Malaysia, Malaysia
Teddy Mantoro
USBI-Sampoerna University, Indonesia
Media Ayu
USBI-Sampoerna University, Indonesia
Murni Mahmud
International Islamic University Malaysia, Malaysia
A volume in the Advances in Wireless 
Technologies and Telecommunication (AWTT) 
Book Series 

Published in the United States of America by 
Information Science Reference (an imprint of IGI Global)
701 E. Chocolate Avenue
Hershey PA, USA 17033
Tel: 717-533-8845
Fax:  717-533-8661 
E-mail: cust@igi-global.com
Web site: http://www.igi-global.com
Copyright © 2016 by IGI Global.  All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored or distributed in 
any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, without written permission from the publisher.
Product or company names used in this set are for identification purposes only. Inclusion of the names of the products or 
companies does not indicate a claim of ownership by IGI Global of the trademark or registered trademark.
	
	
	
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
British Cataloguing in Publication Data
A Cataloguing in Publication record for this book is available from the British Library.
All work contributed to this book is new, previously-unpublished material. The views expressed in this book are those of the 
authors, but not necessarily of the publisher.
For electronic access to this publication, please contact: eresources@igi-global.com.
Critical socio-technical issues surrounding mobile computing / Norshidah Mohamed, Teddy Mantoro, Media Ayu, Murni 
Mahmud, editors. 
       pages cm 
  Includes bibliographical references and index. 
  ISBN 978-1-4666-9438-5 (hardcover) -- ISBN 978-1-4666-9439-2 (ebook)  1.  Mobile computing. 2.  Internet--Social 
aspects. 3.  Technology--Social aspects.  I. Mohamed, Norshidah, 1966- 
  QA76.59.C75 2015 
  004--dc23 
                                                            2015028204 
 
This book is published in the IGI Global book series Advances in Wireless Technologies and Telecommunication (AWTT) 
(ISSN: 2327-3305; eISSN: 2327-3313)

The Advances in Wireless Technologies and Telecommunication  (AWTT) Book Series (ISSN 2327-3305) is published by IGI Global, 701 
E. Chocolate Avenue, Hershey, PA 17033-1240, USA, www.igi-global.com. This series is composed of titles available for purchase individu-
ally; each title is edited to be contextually exclusive from any other title within the series. For pricing and ordering information please visit 
http://www.igi-global.com/book-series/advances-wireless-technologies-telecommunication-awtt/73684. Postmaster: Send all address changes 
to above address. Copyright © 2016 IGI Global. All rights, including translation in other languages reserved by the publisher. No part of this 
series may be reproduced or used in any form or by any means – graphics, electronic, or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, taping, 
or information and retrieval systems – without written permission from the publisher, except for non commercial, educational use, including 
classroom teaching purposes. The views expressed in this series are those of the authors, but not necessarily of IGI Global.
IGI Global is currently accepting manuscripts 
for publication within this series. To submit a pro-
posal for a volume in this series, please contact our 
Acquisition Editors at Acquisitions@igi-global.com 
or visit: http://www.igi-global.com/publish/.
•	
Digital Communication
•	
Mobile Technology
•	
Virtual Network Operations
•	
Radio Communication
•	
Mobile Web Services
•	
Mobile Communications
•	
Grid Communications
•	
Wireless Sensor Networks
•	
Global Telecommunications
•	
Cellular Networks
Coverage
The wireless computing industry is constantly evolving, redesigning the ways in which individuals share 
information. Wireless technology and telecommunication remain one of the most important technolo-
gies in business organizations. The utilization of these technologies has enhanced business efficiency 
by enabling dynamic resources in all aspects of society.
The Advances in Wireless Technologies and Telecommunication Book Series aims to provide 
researchers and academic communities with quality research on the concepts and developments in the 
wireless technology fields. Developers, engineers, students, research strategists, and IT managers will 
find this series useful to gain insight into next generation wireless technologies and telecommunication.
Mission
ISSN: 2327-3305 
 EISSN: 2327-3313
Xiaoge Xu
The University of Nottingham Ningbo China
Advances in Wireless  
Technologies and  
Telecommunication (AWTT) 
Book Series

Titles in this Series
For a list of additional titles in this series, please visit: www.igi-global.com
Handbook of Research on Next Generation Mobile Communication Systems
Athanasios D. Panagopoulos (National Technical University of Athens, Greece) 
Information Science Reference • copyright 2016 • 605pp • H/C (ISBN: 9781466687325) • US $370.00 (our price)
Game Theory Framework Applied to Wireless Communication Networks
Chungang Yang (Xidian University, China) and Jiandong Li (Xidian University, China) 
Information Science Reference • copyright 2016 • 503pp • H/C (ISBN: 9781466686427) • US $235.00 (our price)
Enabling Real-Time Mobile Cloud Computing through Emerging Technologies
Tolga Soyata (University of Rochester, USA) 
Information Science Reference • copyright 2015 • 400pp • H/C (ISBN: 9781466686625) • US $195.00 (our price)
Emerging Perspectives on the Design, Use, and Evaluation of Mobile and Handheld Devices
Joanna Lumsden (School of Engineering and Applied Science, Aston University, UK) 
Information Science Reference • copyright 2015 • 334pp • H/C (ISBN: 9781466685833) • US $205.00 (our price)
Technological Breakthroughs in Modern Wireless Sensor Applications
Hamid Sharif (University of Nebraska – Lincoln, USA) and Yousef S. Kavian (Shahid Chamran University of 
Ahvaz, Iran) 
Information Science Reference • copyright 2015 • 417pp • H/C (ISBN: 9781466682511) • US $200.00 (our price)
Handbook of Research on Software-Defined and Cognitive Radio Technologies for Dynamic Spectrum Management
Naima Kaabouch (University of North Dakota, USA) and Wen-Chen Hu (University of North Dakota, USA) 
Information Science Reference • copyright 2015 • 927pp • H/C (ISBN: 9781466665712) • US $505.00 (our price)
Interdisciplinary Mobile Media and Communications Social, Political, and Economic Implications
Xiaoge Xu (The University of Nottingham Ningbo China, China) 
Information Science Reference • copyright 2014 • 409pp • H/C (ISBN: 9781466661660) • US $205.00 (our price)
Cognitive Radio Sensor Networks Applications, Architectures, and Challenges
Mubashir Husain Rehmani (Department of Electrical Engineering, COMSATS Institute of Information Technology, 
Pakistan) and Yasir Faheem (Department of Computer Science, COMSATS Institute of Information Technology, 
Pakistan) 
Information Science Reference • copyright 2014 • 313pp • H/C (ISBN: 9781466662124) • US $235.00 (our price)
701 E. Chocolate Ave., Hershey, PA 17033
Order online at www.igi-global.com or call 717-533-8845 x100
To place a standing order for titles released in this series, contact: cust@igi-global.com
Mon-Fri 8:00 am - 5:00 pm (est) or fax 24 hours a day 717-533-8661

﻿﻿
Editorial Advisory Board
Rini Akmeliawati, International Islamic University, Malaysia
Nuraihan Mat Daud, International Islamic University, Malaysia
Teddy Surya Gunawan, International Islamic University, Malaysia
Pedro Isaias, Universidade Aberta (Portuguese Open University), Portugal
Ismail Khalil, Johannes Kepler University Linz, Austria
Piet Kommers, University of Twente, The Netherlands
Sri Kurniawan, University of California – Santa Cruz, USA
C. J. H. (Cees) Midden, Technische Universiteit Eindhoven, The Netherlands
Nor Laila Md Noor, Universiti Teknologi Mara, Malaysia
Anton Satria Prabuwono, King Abdulaziz University, Saudi Arabia
T. Ramayah, Universiti Sains, Malaysia
Tengku Mohd bin Tengku Sembok, Universiti Pertahanan Nasional, Malaysia
Ainin Sulaiman, University of Malaya, Malaysia
Maarten Weyn, University of Antwerp, Belgium

﻿
Table of Contents
﻿
Foreword by John Garger..................................................................................................................... xv
Foreword by T. Ramayah.....................................................................................................................xvi
Preface................................................................................................................................................xviii
Chapter 1
A Survey on Islamic Mobile Applications for Children.......................................................................... 1
Fitria Maulida Machfud, International Islamic University Malaysia, Malaysia
Murni Mahmud, International Islamic University Malaysia, Malaysia
Chapter 2
A Usable Mobile Islamic Calendar for Elderly Users........................................................................... 30
Fariza Hanis Abdul Razak, Universiti Teknologi MARA (UiTM), Malaysia
Nur Farhana Abdullah, Universiti Teknologi MARA (UiTM), Malaysia
Chapter 3
Social and Technical Perspective of Individual’s Intention to Purchase Mobile Application............... 45
Ili Hawa Ahmad, Universiti Teknologi Malaysia, Malaysia
Norshidah Mohamed, Prince Sultan University, Saudi Arabia & Universiti Teknologi 
Malaysia, Malaysia
Ab Razak Che Hussain, Universiti Teknologi Malaysia, Malaysia
Chapter 4
Collaborative Mobile Learning: A Systematic Literature Review........................................................ 73
Nor Fadzleen Sa’don, Universiti Teknologi Malaysia, Malaysia
Noorminshah A. Iahad, Universiti Teknologi Malaysia, Malaysia
Chapter 5
Design of a Hospital Interactive Wayfinding System: Designing for Malaysian Users......................... 88
Ashok Sivaji, MIMOS Berhad, Malaysia
Hizbullah Kampo Radjo, MIMOS Berhad, Malaysia
Mohd-Faizal Amin, MIMOS Berhad, Malaysia
Mohd Azrin Hafizie Abu Hashim, MIMOS Berhad, Malaysia

﻿
Chapter 6
Developing a Mobile Navigation Aid.................................................................................................. 124
Mohamad Azrix, International Islamic University Malaysia, Malaysia
Noor Walid, International Islamic University Malaysia, Malaysia
Akram Zeki, International Islamic University Malaysia, Malaysia
Jameel Jameel Yalli, International Islamic University Malaysia, Malaysia
Chapter 7
System Usability Scale Implementation for Interfaces on Mobile Touch Screen Devices 
Assessment........................................................................................................................................... 137
Svetlana Čičević, University of Belgrade, Serbia
Slobodan Mitrović, University of Belgrade, Serbia
Milkica Nešić, University of Nis, Serbia
Andreja Samčović, University of Belgrade, Serbia
Chapter 8
Linguistic Location Authority: An Intricate Imperative...................................................................... 168
Akeem Olowolayemo, International Islamic University Malaysia, Malaysia
Abu Osman Md Tap, International Islamic University Malaysia, Malaysia
Teddy Mantoro, USBI – Sampoerna University, Indonesia
Chapter 9
Managing Students’ Attendance using NFC-Enabled Mobile Phones................................................ 184
Media Anugerah Ayu, USBI – Sampoerna University, Indonesia
Barroon Ismaeel Ahmad, International Islamic University Malaysia, Malaysia
Teddy Mantoro, USBI – Sampoerna University, Indonesia
Chapter 10
Mobile Water Meter System in Android Environment........................................................................ 204
Wiwin Windihastuty, Universitas Budi Luhur, Indonesia
Teddy Mantoro, USBI – Sampoerna University, Indonesia
Media Anugerah Ayu, USBI – Sampoerna University, Indonesia
Chapter 11
The Trend of Mobile Malwares and Effective Detection Techniques.................................................. 219
Olawale Surajudeen Adebayo, International Islamic University Malaysia, Malaysia
Normaziah Abdul Aziz, International Islamic University Malaysia, Malaysia
Chapter 12
Issues Related to Network Security Attacks in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks (MANET)........................ 234
Rakesh Kumar Singh, G. B. Pant Institute of Himalayan Environment and Development 
(GBPIHED), India

﻿
Chapter 13
Mobile Embedded System: Your Door Key Evolved with Your Smartphone – A User Evaluation 
of a Two-Factor Authentication........................................................................................................... 257
Pei-Lee Teh, Monash University, Malaysia
Huo-Chong Ling, Multimedia University, Malaysia
Soon-Nyean Cheong, Multimedia University, Malaysia
Pervaiz K. Ahmed, Monash University, Malaysia
Chapter 14
Unattended Sensors in Marine Environments: Oxybuoy for Hypoxia Study...................................... 285
Rizal Mohd Nor, International Islamic University Malaysia, Malaysia
Mikhail Nesterenko, Kent State University, USA
Compilation of References................................................................................................................ 309
About the Contributors..................................................................................................................... 347
Index.................................................................................................................................................... 355

﻿
Detailed Table of Contents
﻿
Foreword by John Garger..................................................................................................................... xv
Foreword by T. Ramayah.....................................................................................................................xvi
Preface................................................................................................................................................xviii
Chapter 1
A Survey on Islamic Mobile Applications for Children.......................................................................... 1
Fitria Maulida Machfud, International Islamic University Malaysia, Malaysia
Murni Mahmud, International Islamic University Malaysia, Malaysia
This paper investigates Islamic mobile applications for children and evaluates the quantity as well as 
the quality of such applications. The existing and new criteria for exploring Islamic mobile applications 
used in this study have been enhanced and extended from the level of quality assessment to a deeper 
aspect of Islamic mobile application’s design and interface. Similarly, additional aspects have also been 
considered to analyse whether it is suitable for children in terms of language, examples used, and whether 
it is in accordance to the Islamic foundation of Shari’ah that relies on primary and secondary sources 
of knowledge, which are: Qur’an, Sunnah, and Fiqh Science. The finding shows that there are very few 
of Islamic apps for children, especially in Malay and Indonesian language. This study suggests that 
developers should design and develop more Islamic mobile apps for children, especially with education 
and entertainment features. This study also recommends some requirements and guidelines in designing 
Islamic apps that are suitable for Muslim children.
Chapter 2
A Usable Mobile Islamic Calendar for Elderly Users........................................................................... 30
Fariza Hanis Abdul Razak, Universiti Teknologi MARA (UiTM), Malaysia
Nur Farhana Abdullah, Universiti Teknologi MARA (UiTM), Malaysia
Calendar is a tool that tells us a date. While Gregorian calendars have been used worldwide, Hijrah 
calendar becomes a choice for Muslims. This Islamic calendar helps tells a user a date in Islam. Our 
previous study suggested that the Muslim elderly preferred to have Islamic mobile calendar. Despite 
abundance of Islamic mobile calendar applications, little was known whether any of them were usable 
for the elderly users. This study recommends a usable design of an Islamic mobile calendar for Muslim 
elderly users. To do this, a user test with five elderly participants was carried out and two existing 
Islamic calendars were used as probes. Later, two interfaces were produced and tested with our elderly 
participants. Based on the results and design principles, the interfaces of the Islamic mobile calendar 
have further been improved.

﻿
Chapter 3
Social and Technical Perspective of Individual’s Intention to Purchase Mobile Application............... 45
Ili Hawa Ahmad, Universiti Teknologi Malaysia, Malaysia
Norshidah Mohamed, Prince Sultan University, Saudi Arabia & Universiti Teknologi 
Malaysia, Malaysia
Ab Razak Che Hussain, Universiti Teknologi Malaysia, Malaysia
Mobile application industry has boomed tremendously since it was first introduced in 2007 which has 
gain practitioners’ and researchers’ attention. There are substantial numbers of researches on mobile 
applications that have contributed to business development. This research is aimed at investigating the 
factors influencing individuals’ purchase of mobile application. An exploratory study has been conducted 
to gain understanding of Malaysian’s perspective on mobile application purchase intention. Unstructured 
interviews were conducted among 19 research participants randomly selected from different background. 
The results show that perceived usefulness, facilitating condition, perceived value, perceived enjoyment, 
perceived fee, electronic word-of-mouth (eWOM), application design in terms of features and visual, 
trust, security, privacy, device compatibility and device consumption in terms of power and memory 
relate to individual’s intention to purchase mobile application.
Chapter 4
Collaborative Mobile Learning: A Systematic Literature Review........................................................ 73
Nor Fadzleen Sa’don, Universiti Teknologi Malaysia, Malaysia
Noorminshah A. Iahad, Universiti Teknologi Malaysia, Malaysia
Mobile learning (ML) fosters engaging personalized learning where students can optimize their 
understanding and learning gratification via wireless mobile devices. Although there are studies conducted 
on the research trends on ML, not much studies were conducted on the cutting-edge researches pertaining 
to Collaborative ML. Collaborative ML is significant because it promotes active learning and cooperative 
skills. This paper aims to analyze the state-of-the-art research conducted in the span of five years for 
identifying the trends and focuses in Collaborative ML. The systematic literature review is conducted based 
on Knowledge Discovery Database model capitalizing data mining as the main research methodology. 
Findings were based on top ten Impact Factor Journals on Educational Technology indexed in the ISI 
Web of Knowledge. The SLR discovered ten main areas that were discussed pertaining to Collaborative 
ML which are Motivation, Students’ Acceptance, Pedagogy, Assessment, Tools, Social Networking, 
Gaming, Knowledge Sharing, Special Needs and Communications.
Chapter 5
Design of a Hospital Interactive Wayfinding System: Designing for Malaysian Users......................... 88
Ashok Sivaji, MIMOS Berhad, Malaysia
Hizbullah Kampo Radjo, MIMOS Berhad, Malaysia
Mohd-Faizal Amin, MIMOS Berhad, Malaysia
Mohd Azrin Hafizie Abu Hashim, MIMOS Berhad, Malaysia
United Nations reported the importance of wayfindng as part of providing sustainable and beneficial 
accessibility to the public in built environment such as a hospital. Despite this, the survey conducted 
in this study found that current wayfinding system in hospitals does not meet the requirements of the 
Malaysian demography which is multilingual and multicultural. Furthermore, the various literacy levels 
in this country make the design more challenging. The objective of this study is to design, develop 

﻿
and test a hospital interactive wayfinding system (HIWS) that is targeted towards the West Malaysian 
population. Using the established symbols that has been validated by other studies and from the survey 
feedback obtained, the HIWS was designed and developed and tested with 24 Malaysian users using the 
lab based user experience testing. Although the results seems promising whereby 83% of users liked the 
system, the qualitative feedback revealed various improvements to the system, that would be valuable 
to the design and development team to improve HIWS.
Chapter 6
Developing a Mobile Navigation Aid.................................................................................................. 124
Mohamad Azrix, International Islamic University Malaysia, Malaysia
Noor Walid, International Islamic University Malaysia, Malaysia
Akram Zeki, International Islamic University Malaysia, Malaysia
Jameel Jameel Yalli, International Islamic University Malaysia, Malaysia
Previous studies have shown that mobile device is capable of providing navigation aid for both pedestrian 
and in-car. Crucial to this, is navigation application supported by the mobile platform. This paper proposes 
a mobile application intended for navigation aid. The application is design using a generic software 
development process. The application will enable user to navigate within certain vicinity. This will help 
users to easily find an unfamiliar place. Other function are integrated in the application, such as tasks 
function for setting the schedule visit, prayer function for du’a and additional information about certain 
places. The system is developed using the MIT apps inventor software as the main platform, plus the 
adobe Photoshop for the maps and route purposes. The system works on android platform only. The 
system is implemented for use in the Kulliyyah of Information and Communication Technology (KICT), 
International Islamic University Malaysia.
Chapter 7
System Usability Scale Implementation for Interfaces on Mobile Touch Screen Devices 
Assessment........................................................................................................................................... 137
Svetlana Čičević, University of Belgrade, Serbia
Slobodan Mitrović, University of Belgrade, Serbia
Milkica Nešić, University of Nis, Serbia
Andreja Samčović, University of Belgrade, Serbia
The indisputable fact is that touch screen mobile devices flooded the marketplace and that they have 
become an essential element in the enormous number of fields and applications. But a huge presence, 
as well as daily use, does not necessarily unambiguously reflect their optimal usability. Therefore, it is 
essential to adopt appropriate research methodologies that can evaluate the usability of mobile device 
interfaces. The main focus of the study was to examine a practical tool for usability assessment in a 
mobile work context which has to be simple and above all, proved to give a single score as its outcome. 
To achieve this goal System Usability Scale (SUS) was applied to test the Tablet PC usability. This study 
contributed with the proposal of a framework for usability testing which could help, both practitioners and 
researchers to make decisions how to improve the usability of interfaces on touch screen mobile devices.

﻿
Chapter 8
Linguistic Location Authority: An Intricate Imperative...................................................................... 168
Akeem Olowolayemo, International Islamic University Malaysia, Malaysia
Abu Osman Md Tap, International Islamic University Malaysia, Malaysia
Teddy Mantoro, USBI – Sampoerna University, Indonesia
User centric design on mobile devices has gained tremendous attention in recent time. One of the aspects 
that is very critical to making mobile applications and interface handy is to inculcate linguistic approach 
to the outputs and design. This work examines the requirements and prospects of presenting location 
authority in linguistic form. Traditional approaches include geometric and its extension in the form of 
topological or symbolic location authority. Despite the inclusion of topological systems to compensate for 
the inadequacies of the classical geometrical approaches, the role quantitative reference plays in location 
authority is still extensive yet not completely in tune with the natural cognitive of human mind. The 
present work examines the imperative for linguistic approach to location authority. It sought to evaluate 
the rationale for perception based linguistic approach to location authority relative to landmarks or points 
of interest. Efforts were also made to identify the prospects as well as challenges in the implementation 
on location based devices.
Chapter 9
Managing Students’ Attendance using NFC-Enabled Mobile Phones................................................ 184
Media Anugerah Ayu, USBI – Sampoerna University, Indonesia
Barroon Ismaeel Ahmad, International Islamic University Malaysia, Malaysia
Teddy Mantoro, USBI – Sampoerna University, Indonesia
Attendance management for educational institutions is very important; it gives clear picture of students 
who regularly attend classes. Participating in academic activities such as lectures, laboratory experiments 
by students affects their academic performance. However, the conventional way of attendance registration 
is time consuming and prone to proxy attendance. The process involves the lecturer passing a paper 
to the students in a class to write their names and sign, or find their names in the paper to sign along 
their names. Several technologies like Biometric, RFID, NFC, etc can be used to simplify and improve 
the attendance system, since user identification is the most important aspect that needs to be handled 
cautiously in this type of applications. In this work we propose a smart attendance system using NFC 
that will simplify the attendance process, by simply touching a poster or the lecturer’s NFC based mobile 
device in the class.
Chapter 10
Mobile Water Meter System in Android Environment........................................................................ 204
Wiwin Windihastuty, Universitas Budi Luhur, Indonesia
Teddy Mantoro, USBI – Sampoerna University, Indonesia
Media Anugerah Ayu, USBI – Sampoerna University, Indonesia
Water meter reader is an essential tool for water company, which is responsible for the distribution 
of clean water to the public and monitor its customer’s water consumption. Theoretically water meter 
should collect water consumption data in accurate and accountable manners. The problem is, in practice, 
sometimes the record is inaccurate and makes the customers feel uncertain of the water bill that they have 
to pay. Several factors contributed to this problem, including the officers made mistake in recording the 
number from water meter or sometimes the officer did not visit the customers and reporting based on 

﻿
the estimation of the water consumption. This chapter proposed a framework to record the water meter 
data by capturing images in a small mobile device. A prototype, as a proof of concept, of water meter 
mobile apps was developed to allow the water meter data to read and collected easily to make the billing 
processed in a more accurate manner but less hassle.
Chapter 11
The Trend of Mobile Malwares and Effective Detection Techniques.................................................. 219
Olawale Surajudeen Adebayo, International Islamic University Malaysia, Malaysia
Normaziah Abdul Aziz, International Islamic University Malaysia, Malaysia
The usefulness of mobile phones nowadays has gone beyond making calls and sending text messages. 
In fact, most of applications available on desktop computer are presently easily accessible on mobile 
devices, especially smartphone based on Androids, iOS, and Windows phone platforms. However, at 
the same time, malware is increasingly becoming pervasive on a mobile platform for financial, social 
and political exploitation. This chapter examines the trends of mobile malware and different efforts of 
anti-malware writers and researchers in addressing mobile malware on smartphones.
Chapter 12
Issues Related to Network Security Attacks in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks (MANET)........................ 234
Rakesh Kumar Singh, G. B. Pant Institute of Himalayan Environment and Development 
(GBPIHED), India
Mobile Ad Hoc Network (MANET) is a collection of communication devices or nodes that wish to 
communicate without any fixed infrastructure. The nodes in MANET themselves are responsible for 
dynamically discovering other nodes to communicate. A number of challenges like open peer-to-peer 
network architecture, stringent resource constraints, shared wireless medium, dynamic network topology 
etc. are posed in MANET. In this research, we identify the existent security threats an ad hoc network 
faces, the security services required to be achieved and the countermeasures for attacks in each layer. To 
accomplish our goal, we have done literature survey in gathering information related to various types 
of attacks and solutions, as well as we have made comparative study to address the threats in different 
layers. Finally, we have identified the challenges and proposed solutions to overcome them. There is no 
general algorithm that suits well against the most commonly known attacks such as wormhole, rushing 
attack, etc.
Chapter 13
Mobile Embedded System: Your Door Key Evolved with Your Smartphone – A User Evaluation 
of a Two-Factor Authentication........................................................................................................... 257
Pei-Lee Teh, Monash University, Malaysia
Huo-Chong Ling, Multimedia University, Malaysia
Soon-Nyean Cheong, Multimedia University, Malaysia
Pervaiz K. Ahmed, Monash University, Malaysia
The use of smartphone is pervasive. With device pocketability driving user engagement throughout 
the day, it is highly probable that smartphones will replace daily items (e.g., keys and credit cards) that 
people now carry around. The idea presented here is a significant step in this direction. This chapter 
details the authors’ design and development of a smartphone access control system using Near Field 
Communication (NFC) Encrypted Steganography Graphical Password (ESGP). The primary objective is 

﻿
to leverage the technical capability of NFC-enabled smartphones in developing a two-factor authentication 
system connecting physical resources (i.e., premises) and virtual resources (i.e., password knowledge). 
This involves a novel integration of token-based, graphical-password authentication, cryptography and 
steganography. The second objective is to evaluate users’ behavior intention to use the system. New 
insights for researchers and business world interested in the unified solutions for NFC-compatible 
smartphone, access control and mobile security are provided.
Chapter 14
Unattended Sensors in Marine Environments: Oxybuoy for Hypoxia Study...................................... 285
Rizal Mohd Nor, International Islamic University Malaysia, Malaysia
Mikhail Nesterenko, Kent State University, USA
This chapter discusses the use of unattended sensors and its use in marine environment. The authors 
present challenges of designing a marine sensor in harsh environments and a case study in implementing a 
marine sensor to study hypoxia. Hypoxia is a world-wide anthropogenic phenomenon related to pollution. 
The authors describe the construction of an inexpensive sensor buoy system, Oxybuoy, designed for 
long-term unattended oxygen sensor measurements. The technology is available to construct such sensor 
buoys. The authors showed a prototype based on commercial off-the shelf components: an embedded PC, 
an optical dissolved oxygen sensor, a temperature sensor, a Wi-Fi transmitter and a satellite transmitter. 
Its total cost is around $5,000 to construct, program and test a proof of concept of such sensor. The 
authors describe the buoy’s architectural design and three experiments that the authors carried out to 
demonstrate its viability.
Compilation of References................................................................................................................ 309
About the Contributors..................................................................................................................... 347
Index.................................................................................................................................................... 355

﻿
Foreword
﻿
APPREHENDING THE NASCENCE AND AGILITY OF MOBILE COMPUTING
This work, which circumscribes a complex and elusive topic, presents the current state of mobile 
computing by merging research, theory, and practice. Most fields benefit from decades of research and 
practice before a book such as this emerges as a beacon that synthesizes past literature and guides fu-
ture research. However, mobile computing represents a field unlike most others. The speed with which 
it evolves plunges the field into perpetual nascence, making it difficult to capture its essence before it 
again changes. Coupled with that are frustrations afforded by the research process, which takes months 
or years before insights disseminate into practice. The field’s agility resembles information efficiency in 
financial markets; by the time you hear about and implement a mobile paradigm, it has already begun to 
become obsolete, or its value has degraded to near zero. In summary, both research and practice struggle 
to keep pace with mobile computing, or more specifically, its omnipresence and cycles of emergence 
and maturity. To say that mobile computing is a moving target or peripatetic is facile at best.
Mobile computing commingles many pillars of business and society, including technological, legal, 
cultural, economic, social, and political influences. Add the complexities of human behaviors, tastes, 
and trends, and the topic becomes tortuous. This book disentangles many of these hindrances by mixing 
research, theory, and practice to provide clear examples of how mobile computing can be decomposed 
and recomposed into sound foundations of contemporary and future applications. Its value lies not only 
in its contributions to current mobile computing, but also in its structural contributions to subsequent de-
velopment of mobile archetypes. This book is destined to inspire research and practical agendas in mobile 
computing for many years. Its adherence to and balance of sound methodology and open-mindedness to 
change complement mobile computing’s principles and character.
John Garger 
The Science Survival Academy, USA 
September 2015
xv

﻿
Foreword
﻿
Changes call for innovation, and innovation leads to progress. - Li Keqiang
The world constantly evolves. The evolution has witnessed multifarious forms of innovation around us. 
Mobile and wireless technologies are amongst the most notable invention that has seen rapid develop-
ment in the last three decades. Such technological advancements have given rise to significant social 
phenomenon. Individuals nowadays demonstrate greater dependency on the use of mobile devices in 
their daily lives. As evident, in 2011, Washington Post reported that the number of cell phones exceeded 
the US population. More recently, Pew Research Center (2015) found nearly two-thirds of Americans 
own a smartphone. A total of 62% respondents in the research acknowledged that they used smartphones 
to search for information on their health condition. Meanwhile, the business world experiences distinct 
mobile business models and observes intricate lawsuits between Apple Inc. and Samsung Electronics 
on designs of tablets and smartphones.
We live in an interconnected world. The progress that people constantly demand and the technolo-
gies that emerge out of innovation have brought about issues that were inconceivable several decades 
ago. Critical Socio-Technical Issues Surrounding Mobile Computing is a timely compilation of research 
works and a pivotal reference point for both research and practice in mobile computing.
The book is unique in that it recognizes researches in mobile computing encompass social and technical 
spheres. The social sphere of the book acknowledges children and elderly with special needs. Concerns 
for mobile learners, people with religious needs and potential requirements for businesses expecting 
individuals’ mobile purchases are well addressed in the book. The technical sphere of the book parallels 
ongoing technological debates and development on mobile security, location-based, assessment, naviga-
tion aid, embedded system and, sensor.
Critical Socio-Technical Issues Surrounding Mobile Computing has endeavoured a reach out to 
academics and practitioners alike. It is a balance of social and technical perspectives. The editors have 
put in considerably great efforts to assemble a balanced team of scholars, researchers, and practitioners 
in covering both perspectives and in connecting to academics, developers, designers, and businesses. 
Change and innovation are inextricably intertwined. Readers can expect that the book is a significant 
progress in mobile computing research.
T. Ramayah 
Universiti Sains Malaysia, Malaysia
xvi

Foreword
REFERENCE
Pew Research Center. (2015). U.S. smartphone use in 2015. Retrieved from http://www.pewinternet.
org/2015/04/01/us-smartphone-use-in-2015/
xvii

﻿
Preface
﻿
The impacts of mobile technologies are tremendous. These technologies will continue to bring changes 
in the way people communicate and interact with others in the years to come. They have given rise to 
increasing expectations to be responsive among individuals, and developers in communities, businesses 
and societies. While mobile technologies have brought a multitude of benefits to users regardless of age, 
they are also recognized to pose threats to users. Notably, issues surrounding mobile computing and 
technologies will continue to prevail.
This book lends insights into social, behavioral and technical aspects surrounding mobile comput-
ing. It discusses recent research findings on mobile technologies from social, behavioral and technical 
perspectives of users, developers, designers and groups with special needs. Each chapter of the book 
acknowledges specific challenges of individuals in certain communities, mobile application business, 
environmental conditions, threats in the digital world and/or distinctive societies that are expected to 
adhere to religious practices in the course of using mobile technologies. These challenges and gaps 
identified serve as motivations for research.
The book aims at aiding future research and providing recommendations and guidelines for practice in 
mobile computing, mobile technology use, mobile application development and mobile technology secu-
rity. Critical Socio-Technical Issues Surrounding Mobile Computing is organized into fourteen chapters.
Chapter 1 and 2 provide a focus on groups with special needs for specific mobile application. Notably 
in Chapter 1 “A Survey on Islamic Mobile Applications for Children”, Fitria Maulida Machfud and Murni 
Mahmud provide insights into Islamic mobile applications for Muslim children. Surveying the differ-
ent mobile platform application stores, they noted issues surrounding mobile applications for Muslim 
children. Building on the issues, the chapter offers considerations for designing mobile applications for 
Muslim children that conform to the Islamic principles (Sharia) and cultural background. While Chap-
ter 1 focuses on Muslim children, Chapter 2 “A Usable Islamic Mobile Calendar for Elderly Users” by 
Fariza Hanis Abdul Razak and Nur Farhana Abdullah highlights on Muslim elderly users. The chapter 
discusses usable design of an Islamic mobile calendar for Muslim elderly users. Adopting a user study 
with selected elderly participants and two existing Islamic calendars as probes, the researchers defined 
Muslim elderly user’s requirement for enhanced design of Islamic calendars.
The business of mobile applications presents opportunities for researchers and mobile technology 
retailers to rethink about capturing the market. Chapter 3 “Social and Technical Perspective of Individual’s 
Intention to Purchase Mobile Application” by Ili Hawa Ahmad, Norshidah Mohamed and Ab Razak Che 
Hussain discusses insights into individuals’ purchase intention of mobile applications. Using exploratory 
research approach, they identified factors that link to individual’s purchase intention.
xviii

Preface
The use of mobile technologies in learning has given rise to the notion of collaborative mobile learning. 
Chapter 4 “Collaborative Mobile Learning: A Systematic Literature Review” by Nor Fadzleen Sa’don 
and Noorminshah Iahad presents a synthesis of systematic review of prior researches on patterns, trends 
and methodologies for collaborative mobile learning.
As mobile technologies become pervasive, its effects permeate the society at large. The subsequent 
chapters share researchers’ insights into the application of mobile technologies to specific communities.
Challenges abound for designers and developers of wayfinding systems that particularly target 
multilingual and multicultural users. Chapter 5 “Design of a Hospital Interactive Wayfinding System: 
Designing for Malaysian Users” by Ashok Sivaji, Hizbullah Kampo Radjo, Mohd-Faizal Amin and 
Mohd Azrin Hafizie Abu Hashim shares user’s challenges in way-finding at hospitals in a multilingual 
and multicultural society. The chapter advances into a discussion of design, development and test of a 
hospital interactive wayfinding system (HIWS) in overcoming the recognized challenges. The chapter 
concludes with potential enhancements of the HIWS besides immediate and prospective long term 
benefits of the system.
While Chapter 5 delves into wayfinding, Chapter 6 “Developing a Mobile Navigation Aid” by Mohamad 
Shahirul Azrix Mohamed, Noor Afiq Walid, Akram M. Zeki presents the development of a navigation 
aid for an academic community. A unique feature of the application is the integration of navigation aid 
with user’s tasks and daily prayer reminders.
A practical tool for usability assessment in a mobile work context is the focus of Chapter 7 “System 
Usability Scale Implementation for Interfaces on Mobile Touch Screen Devices Assessment” contributed 
by Svetlana Cicevic, Slobodan Mitrović, Milkica Nešić and Andreja Samčović. Through the application 
of System Usability Scale (SUS), the chapter shows how it is applied to test Tablet PC usability. The 
chapter concludes with a proposed framework for usability testing to aid practitioners and researchers 
in improving usability of interfaces on touch screen mobile devices.
Chapter 8 “Linguistic Location Authority: An Intricate Imperative” by Akeem Olowolayemo, Abu 
Osman Md Tap and Teddy Mantoro offers an excellent discussion on the requirements and prospects of 
presenting location authority in linguistic form. At the onset, the chapter reviews traditional approaches 
that include geometric and its extension in the form of topological or symbolic location authority. It con-
cludes with an identification of prospects and challenges in the implementation of location based devices.
Chapter 9 “Managing Students’ Attendance Using NFC Enabled Mobile Phones” is another chapter 
that devotes to academic community. Contributed by Media Anugerah Ayu, Barroon Ismaeel Ahmad 
and Teddy Mantoro, the chapter presents a unique yet cost-effective proposal of student attendance 
management. In this chapter, the researchers suggest the application of Near Field Communication 
(NFC) technology that integrates with mobile device. The combined application of NFC and mobile 
device provides a distinctive feature that does not require further hardware installation; thus bringing 
the investment of hardware for implementation at a minimum.
Chapter 10 “Mobile Water Meter System in Android Environment” by Wiwin Windihastuty, Teddy 
Mantoro and Media Anugerah Ayu shares an insight that is motivated by a need to solve a problem in 
Indonesia’s water meter recording. The researchers propose a framework that is characterized by cap-
turing images of water consumption using a smart phone. These images are consequently converted for 
further processing by the Regional Water Company (PAM).
Mobile security is a serious concern in mobile computing. Mobile devices are targets of attacks and 
such attacks could cause loss of information for business and individual users. Acknowledging this 
phenomenon, three chapters (Chapters 11, 12 and 13) are dedicated to a discussion on mobile security.
xix

Preface
Responding to a rising trend of mobile malware, Olawale Surajudeen Adebayo and Normaziah Abdul 
Aziz in Chapter 11 “The Trend of Mobile Malwares and Effective Detection Techniques” review exist-
ing literature on android malware and provide an analysis on mobile detection approaches. Guidelines 
on mobile malware protection are offered at the end of the chapter.
In Chapter 12, “Issues Related to Network Security Attacks in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks (MANET) 
Security”, Rakesh Kumar Singh identifies the existing security threats that an ad hoc network faces, 
security services required to be achieved and countermeasures for attacks in each layer. Rakesh uses a 
literature survey approach, makes a comparison to address threats in different layers and presents chal-
lenges and solutions.
Chapter 13 “Mobile Embedded System: Your Door Key Evolved with Your Smartphone: A User 
Evaluation of A Two-Factor Authentication” contributed by Pei-Lee Teh, Huo-Chong Ling, Soon-Nyean 
Cheong and Pervaiz K. Ahmed presents a design and development of smartphone access control system 
using Near Field Communication (NFC) Encrypted Steganography Graphical Password (ESGP). The 
system integrates token-based, graphical-password authentication, cryptography and steganography and, 
targets at leveraging the technical capability of NFC-enabled smartphones in developing a two-factor 
authentication system connecting physical resources and virtual resources. An evaluation of user’s 
behavioral intention to use the system provides a fascinating social perspective that complements the 
technical discussion of design and development of an authentication system.
Chapter 14 “Unattended Sensors in Marine Environments” contributed by Rizal Mohd Nor and 
Mikhail Nesterenko concludes the book with an excellent discussion on the use of unattended sensors, 
their application in marine environment and insights into challenges of designing a marine sensor in harsh 
environments. Building on such groundwork, the chapter advances on a case study in implementing a 
marine sensor to study hypoxia and, development and test of a sensor buoy system. The chapter offers 
insights into the potential of the sensor buoy system based on its architectural design, technological 
components, investment viability and outcomes of experiments conducted.
This book shows the communication among the researchers through their recent research findings 
in the area of mobile computing. Recognizing the on-going social and technical challenges of mobile 
technology, the researchers present opportunities for further research that touch upon the social aspects 
of people and society and technical aspects of mobile computing.
This is a hope that readers including developers, designers, businesses and groups with special needs 
can use this book for their future research and as one of the resources in practicing mobile computing, 
mobile technology use, mobile application development and mobile technology security.
Norshidah Mohamed 
Prince Sultan University, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia & Universiti Teknologi Malaysia, Malaysia
Teddy Mantoro 
Universitas Siswa Bangsa International, Indonesia
Media Ayu 
Universitas Siswa Bangsa International, Indonesia
Murni Mahmud 
International Islamic University Malaysia, Malaysia
xx

1
Copyright © 2016, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter  1
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-4666-9438-5.ch001
ABSTRACT
This paper investigates Islamic mobile applications for children and evaluates the quantity as well as 
the quality of such applications. The existing and new criteria for exploring Islamic mobile applications 
used in this study have been enhanced and extended from the level of quality assessment to a deeper 
aspect of Islamic mobile application’s design and interface. Similarly, additional aspects have also 
been considered to analyse whether it is suitable for children in terms of language, examples used, and 
whether it is in accordance to the Islamic foundation of Shari’ah that relies on primary and secondary 
sources of knowledge, which are: Qur’an, Sunnah, and Fiqh Science. The finding shows that there are 
very few of Islamic apps for children, especially in Malay and Indonesian language. This study sug-
gests that developers should design and develop more Islamic mobile apps for children, especially with 
education and entertainment features. This study also recommends some requirements and guidelines 
in designing Islamic apps that are suitable for Muslim children.
INTRODUCTION
In today’s digital world, children are exposed to technology at a very early age. Technology can have a 
positive impact on children’s development if used appropriately with rules that are set up by the parents, 
monitoring usage time and suitable media content. According to Shoukry (n.d.), computers can contrib-
ute to children’s cognitive and social development, enhance their visual attention and processing speed, 
increase their level of spoken communication, and improve their attitude toward learning. Everything 
has its advantages and disadvantages, and technology is no exception. There are two concerns regarding 
children’s use of technology, one of the most-feared being social isolation; next is the addictive nature of 
A Survey on Islamic Mobile 
Applications for Children
Fitria Maulida Machfud
International Islamic University Malaysia, Malaysia
Murni Mahmud
International Islamic University Malaysia, Malaysia

2
A Survey on Islamic Mobile Applications for Children
﻿
technology. However, it all depends on how the parents control the use of technology (Plowman, Stephen 
& McPake, 2010; Parker-Pope, 2010).
Technology comes in many forms, including mobile devices such as smartphones and tablets/pads. 
With increased Internet usage, the use of mobile devices has also increased, not only among adults, but 
also among children. Parents tend to give their children mobile devices (or gadgets) for entertainment 
purposes; however, they also persuade their children to use them for educational purposes. Not only at 
home, but also nowadays many schools around the world are making use of mobile devices in support 
of teaching and learning.
The use of the smartphone or tablet/pad cannot be separated from the use of applications and places 
where people can download them. The commonest operating systems for mobile applications are iOS, 
Android, Windows Phone, and Blackberry OS, with iOS and Android the most popular throughout 
the world. The mobile applications vary in type, such as business, games, education, productivity, etc. 
There is also an increase in developing mobile applications for religious purposes; one of them is Islamic 
mobile application.
Islam urges Muslims to utilize any techniques and tools to collect, process and disperse information 
and knowledge. In this era of ubiquitous technology, the use of modern technology in supporting religious 
education is encouraged as it helps towards the development of positive thinking, enables or enhances 
the ability to innovate and triggers the drive for self-improvement.
Indonesia is the world’s most populous Muslim-majority nation; Malaysia also has a large Muslim 
population. Both countries are part of ASEAN and are neighbours, having a similar culture and language. 
As the majority of Indonesians and Malaysians are Muslims, it has been recognized that teaching Islam 
from an early age is very important. The practice of Islam gives Muslims a tangible identity that they 
live with and project to the rest of the society. This identity can be preserved by their dynamic interac-
tion with the realities of life, influencing as well as reforming society through Islamic thoughts. The use 
of mobile technologies and the Internet is increasing in both countries, and nowadays in public places 
we can see not only adults using smartphones or tablets, also but children as young as three holding a 
gadget in their hands. As already mentioned, parents give their children these gadgets for both entertain-
ment and education. They are also given to Muslim children in order for them to learn Islam in a fun 
and entertaining way.
In this chapter, the use of technology in support of Islamic education refers to mobile applications, 
which have become an essential part of educating children. They make learning about Islam an enjoy-
able process, attractive and interactive. However, an examination of application stores has shown that, 
out of the millions of applications, only thousands are for children, with even fewer based on Islamic 
applications for children. Those that do exist are mostly in English or Arabic. Therefore, this chapter 
will discuss the need to investigate the quantity of Islamic mobile applications for children and their 
quality, whether they are in accordance with Qur’an, Sunnah, and the Fiqh science. Additionally we will 
investigate whether they are suitable for the Muslim children of Malaysia and Indonesia, from design, 
language and cultural perspectives.
BACKGROUND
Emerging advances in information and communication technologies (ICT) and the growing pervasive-
ness of the Internet over the past decade have dramatically changed social and economic activities. 

3
A Survey on Islamic Mobile Applications for Children
﻿
The Internet plays an important role in our life, regardless of age and cultural background. Its benefits, 
flowing into education, business, healthcare and other aspects of life, are immense and unprecedented.
In the academic world, the use of these technologies is burgeoning, especially in terms of “anywhere 
and anytime”. Most people do not realize that the technology is widely used in everyday tasks, resulting 
in an information society where learning is accessible all over the world whenever and wherever it is 
needed (Zain, Mahmud & Hassan, 2013). Education is no longer confined to traditional methods such as 
the classroom. Either as an aid for the primary source of education, or the main source of education itself, 
online learning or e-learning is widely used in schools, universities and home-education. Nowadays, parents 
ensure that their children spend more time learning at home using one of these technology-based tools.
Education is a fundamental human right. Every person, young or adult, in every country is entitled 
to it. One definition of education is that it is the knowledge skill, and understanding that you obtain 
from attending a school, college or university (Education, n.d.). In Islam, education is very important 
as Muslims are positively encouraged to utilize any techniques and tools to collect, process and disperse 
information, so as to venerate its value and collectively evolve from an information-based society to be-
come a knowledge-based one. According to Noordin (2009) and Kamali (2011), knowledge acquisition 
is very important for Muslims as it is mentioned in a total of 750 verses in the Qur’an. The first word 
on Surah Al-‘Alaq, which is Iqra’, meaning “Recite”, “Read” or “Baca”, implies that by reading, knowl-
edge is gained. As it says in the Qur’an: “Recite in the name of your Lord who created” (Qur’an: 96:1).
Kamali (2011) commented that the very first message of the Qur’an that marked the beginning of 
its revelation to Prophet Muhammad pertains to knowledge. As mentioned above, man is summoned to 
“read in the name of your Lord”. He then also said that God refers to Himself as the first teacher; in the 
Qur’an Surah Al-‘Alaq says: “Recite, and your Lord is the most Generous. He Who taught (the use of) 
the pen” (Qur’an: 96:3-4). According to Yaakub (2011), in Islam knowledge aims to guide the human 
intellectual to elaborate and understand the ultimate questions of life. He added the reference from the 
Hadith as narrated by Abu Da’uw, that the Prophet Muhammad PBUH encouraged the acquisition of 
knowledge by saying: “Verily, the men of knowledge are the inheritors of the prophets” (Abu Da’uw, 
Hadith no. 3641).
Islam puts considerable emphasis on its followers to acquire knowledge, as education is the birthright 
of every Muslim and Muslimah. Zain, Mahmud and Hassan (2013) stated that the best investment is 
investment in education, because it eventually leads to intellectual property. No one can steal or destroy 
intellectual property as it is intangible. After all, knowledge had led Muslims to become the superpower 
of the world for twelve centuries.
As the paradigm of conveying learning moves from the traditional to more modern ways, money is no 
longer an issue for gaining knowledge, especially for the “haves”. Not only do they enrol their children 
in the top schools, but they also provide them with any means, such as extra lessons, books and gadgets, 
that will help them to improve the quality of their education. When children have access to high-quality 
education, this creates a ripple effect of opportunity that influences generations to come. Quality edu-
cation is critical to the development of both society and individuals, and it helps to pave the way for a 
successful and productive future (Education Section Programme Division, 2000).
With the rapid development and use of mobile technology, almost all the mobile phone producers 
have their own application stores, which customers can access to download free applications or purchase 
others. Users of iOS-based product such as Macbook, iPhone and iPad can access iTunes or AppStore 
to download applications. Users of Android-based products such as Samsung, HTC and Motorola have 
Google Play, and Windows-based product users (Windows Phone, HTC, Nokia) can go to Windows Phone 

4
A Survey on Islamic Mobile Applications for Children
﻿
Store. Other types of mobile operating system include Blackberry OS, from Blackberry AppWorld, and 
Symbian (Nokia) from OVI Store.
Millions of mobile applications are available to be downloaded and/or purchased via the appropriate 
application store. The applications are divided into several categories: games, entertainment, utilities, 
education, productivity, book, lifestyle, reference, healthcare and fitness, travel, music, navigation, sports, 
business, finance, photography, social networking, and news (Mobile Phone App Store Statistics, 2014). 
There is a further grouping, apps specifically developed for children, with sub-classes for entertainment, 
education, and games.
As stated above, education is a fundamental right no matter how old you are, or which country and 
race you are from. It is widely accepted that education brings broad benefits to an individual as well 
as to society. Education is especially important for children, as it is the means by which children are 
socialized and prepared academically for their adult roles as workers and citizens. Often overlooked is 
how education serves a generation while they are children; it is as a way for children to create long-
lasting relationships, and build social and emotional competencies, life skills and strength of character. 
It is also a means for them both to pursue knowledge in general and to develop interest in (or ignore) 
specific subjects, which ultimately will influence their future career choices and pastimes. In Islam, one 
of the most discussed questions is to whom the educators are responsible for educating, teaching, and 
instructing. In the Qur’an and Sunnah, people are called to fulfil the duty of education. As revealed in 
the Qur’an Surah At-Tahrim: “O you who have believed, protect yourselves and your families from a 
Fire…” (Qur’an: 66:6).
This verse was interpreted by the Prophet Muhammad’s (PBUH) companion Ali bin Abi Talib 
(RadiAllahu `anhu) as: “Educate and teach your wife and children good things.” (Tafseer Ath-Thobari, 
Al-Maktabah As-Syamilah). And many Hadith or Prophetic Guidelines also stress the importance of 
parents educating their children, including At-Tirmidhi: “Good manners are the best things that a father 
could grant to his son” (Ulwan as translated by Ghali, Abdul-Ghani, Elkhatib, & Sha’ban, 2004).
Taking the examples of Qur’an verse and Hadith above, Muslim parents are aware that they need to 
take special care in educating, instructing and guiding their children. Ulwan (Ulwan, tr. Ghali, Abdul-
Ghani, Elkhatib & Sha’ban, 2004), listed seven types of education that parents are responsible for teaching 
their children: faith, ethical, physical, intellectual, psychological, social, and sexual. He explained further 
that faith education links the child with the principles of faith, the pillars of Islam, and the foundations 
of Shari’ah. The significance of introducing the concepts of faith and Islamic teaching during a child’s 
early years was passed down by the Prophet Muhammad PBUH, as told by his companion Ali (Radi-
Allahu `anhu) and narrated by At-Tabarani: “Habituate your children to entertain three traits: Loving 
your Prophet, loving his family and relatives, and reciting the Qur’an. Surely the bearers of the Qur’an 
are in the shadow of Allah’s Throne on a day where there is no shadow but His, together with Allah’s 
Messengers and beloved ones”.
As discussed above, Indonesia and Malaysia are among the world’s most populous Muslim-majority 
nations. In both countries, with good telecommunications infrastructures the Internet is ubiquitous and 
most children, especially the young teenage generation, are technology “savvy”, with gadgets like smart-
phones and tablets a daily necessity. As regional neighbours, Indonesia and Malaysia share common 
historical roots and cultural heritage (Chong, 2012). The official languages are mutually intelligible, 
although spelling, pronunciation, and vocabulary differ (Burhanudeen et al., 2007).

5
A Survey on Islamic Mobile Applications for Children
﻿
Indonesia is an archipelago of thousands of islands, divided into 34 provinces. It has hundreds of 
distinct native ethnic and linguistic groups, with variations in culture, language and cuisine. Indonesia’s 
culture was developed over centuries, influenced by Indian, Arabic, Chinese and European sources. Over 
700 living languages are spoken in Indonesia, while the official language, Bahasa Indonesia, was based 
on the prestige dialect of Malay and influenced not only by local languages such as Javanese, Sundanese 
and Minangkabau but also by Dutch and Sanskrit (Lewis, Simons & Fennig, 2009; Sneddon, 2003).
Malaysia, too, is a diverse society, multi-ethnic, multicultural, and multilingual. Its origins stemmed 
from a combination of indigenous tribal and Malay culture, but with the advent of foreign trade it was 
influenced by Chinese and Indian as well as Persian and Arabic culture. Colonization by the British 
also had a strong cultural influence (Raghavan, 1977). Malaysia’s official language is Malaysian, a stan-
dardised form of the Malay language, although English is an active second language. Malaysia has many 
other languages, such as Iban, the main tribal language in Sarawak; Tamil for the Malaysian Indians; 
and Cantonese, Mandarin, Hokkien, etc. for the Chinese Malaysians (Adelaar & Himmelmann, 2005). 
Malaysia’s culture is based on that of its indigenous peoples, incorporating elements from many other 
cultures, and with a special emphasis on Islam (Mohamed, 2005).
Internet usage in both countries is rising every year. As can be seen from Figure 1, the proportion of 
Internet users in Malaysia (66.97 percent in 2013) is the second highest among the ASEAN countries 
after Singapore (73 percent); the figure for Indonesia is 16 percent (Internet users percentage, 2015).
Indonesia’s Internet penetration has been increasing over the last decade although the overall figure 
remains below 20 percent. Not every city in Indonesia has an equal number of Internet users; some 50 
million are heavily concentrated in Jakarta and the country’s secondary cities in Java and Sumatra. Only 
2.2 percent of total Internet usage with DSL connections and mobile Internet is accounted for by fixed 
Figure 1. Percentage of Internet users in Singapore, Malaysia, and Indonesia

6
A Survey on Islamic Mobile Applications for Children
﻿
broadband connections. Due to lack of investment and obstacles because of Indonesia’s geography as 
an archipelago, the broadband Internet infrastructure is relatively poor. Unlike other developed markets 
that experienced the age of the landline and fixed line Internet connection, Indonesia has leapfrogged 
straight to smartphones and mobile Internet access due to its youthful population’s fast adoption of new 
technologies. This presents its own set of challenges and opportunities, given the need for developing 
a wholesale ICT infrastructure and the investment that this entails; however demand means that such 
investments will pay off quickly for the government and telecom companies (Improving Internet Access in 
Indonesia, 2012). On the other hand, by September 2014 Malaysia’s mobile penetration was higher than 
that of not only Indonesia but also the United States, and the world average with 51 percent; nevertheless, 
in terms of Southeast Asia, Malaysia is fourth after Singapore, Vietnam, and Cambodia (Wong, 2014).
While mobile applications over smartphones and tablets are becoming a popular way to educate our 
children, the vast number of applications available for download means that the authenticity and plau-
sibility criteria for choosing an application remain paramount; this is especially true when it comes to 
Islamic education applications for children, whose content has to coincide with the authentic sources and 
correlate with Shari’ah law. The question of authenticity for mobile Islamic applications is therefore of 
particular concern to strongly Muslim countries like Malaysia and Indonesia, where children are exposed 
to mobile applications at a very early age. Little research has been done into the matter of content or 
how relevant, effective or interactive the applications for children are. The need to fill this research gap, 
identifying the scope and possible benefits, are the motives behind the present study.
SURVEY OF ISLAMIC MOBILE APPLICATIONS
Mobile Applications: Facts
In this era of ubiquitous computing, the development of technologies is rapidly gaining pace. From 
software to hardware, from gadgets to applications, everything is continuously changing and evolving. 
As this paper’s main objective is to investigate Islamic mobile applications for children, the basic criteria 
involved in selection are described: the operating systems, the application stores (app stores), and the 
mobile applications, apps, themselves.
Operating Systems
The mobile operating systems chosen for evaluation of Islamic mobile applications are iOS, Android, 
Windows Phone, and Blackberry OS. Since Nokia is now using Android and Windows Phone as its 
operating systems, the Symbian OS was not examined. iOS, the iPhone OS, is a mobile operating system 
developed by Apple Inc. and distributed exclusively for Apple devices such as iPhone, iPad, iPod Touch, 
and Apple TV (What is iOS?, n.d.). Android is a very strong competitor of iOS, popular with technol-
ogy companies which require a ready-made, low-cost and customizable operating system for high-tech 
devices (About Android, n.d.). Not as popular as iOS and Android, but still with a fan base, are Windows 
Phone (WP) and Blackberry OS, now known as Blackberry 10. WP features a user interface based on 
Microsoft’s Windows Phone design system, codenamed Metro (Windows Phone, n.d.), whilst Blackberry 
10 is specific to the Blackberry line of smartphone and tablet handheld devices (Blackberry OS, n.d.).

7
A Survey on Islamic Mobile Applications for Children
﻿
The user interfaces of these operating systems are similar, based on the concept of direct manipula-
tion, using multi-touch gestures. They are mostly touch screen, including gestures such as swipe, tap, 
pinch and reverse pinch to interact with the device system. Blackberry’s older models, however, have a 
keyboard with track wheel, trackball, or track pad to access the multi-touch gesture experience.
Application Stores (App Stores)
An app store (or app marketplace) is a digital distribution platform for mobile apps. Apps provide a 
specific set of functions which, by definition, do not include the running of the computer itself. Apps are 
designed to run on specific devices, and are written for specific operating systems. App stores typically 
organize their apps based on the following considerations: the function(s) provided by the app (includ-
ing games, multimedia or productivity), the device for which the app was designed, and the operating 
system on which the app will run. App stores typically take the form of an online store, where users 
can browse through these different app categories, view information about each app (such as reviews or 
ratings), and acquire the app (including app purchase, if necessary – many apps are offered at no cost). 
The selected app is downloaded automatically, after which it is installed on the user device. Some app 
stores also include a system to automatically remove an installed program from devices under certain 
conditions, with the goal of protecting the user against malicious software. App stores generally contain 
hundreds of thousands of applications in various categories, such as business, education, entertainment, 
finance, games, news, music, medical, sports, utilities, video, weather, etc. In each category, applica-
tions are divided by their status (free or paid) and can be downloaded by users anytime and anywhere 
(Pereira and Rodrigues, 2013).
The term “App Store” itself is a trademark for Apple’s mobile applications store. Based on the oper-
ating systems mentioned above, the app stores that will be used for collecting data are: iOS App Store; 
Google Play; Amazon Appstore for Android; Windows Phone Store; and Blackberry World.
•	
The original distribution platform, iOS App Store, allows users to browse and download appli-
cations developed with Apple’s iOS SDK (Software Development Kit). The apps can be down-
loaded directly to an iOS device, or on to a personal computer via iTunes (a media player, media 
library and mobile device management application developed by Apple Inc.). As of June 2014, the 
App Store officially had over 1 million apps available (App Store Metrics, n.d).
•	
Google Play, formerly known as the Android Market, in addition to offering Android applications, 
is an online electronics and digital media store, operated by Google. The service allows users 
to browse and download applications developed with the Android SDK and published through 
Google, as well as music, magazines, books, movies, and television programmes. They can be 
downloaded directly to an Android device through the Play Store mobile app, or by deploying the 
application to a device from the Google Play website. By early June 2014, the Google Play store 
had around 1,250,000 apps (Number of Android Apps, n.d).
•	
Amazon Appstore also offers apps for the Android, and includes a “free app a day” feature. Its 
“Test Drive” feature allows users to try an application on their web browser by launching a virtual 
copy of Android in the Amazon EC2 cloud for half an hour. The number of published apps in 
Amazon.com has officially reached 220,985 apps (June 16th 2014) (Amazon Appstore, 2014).
•	
The Windows Phone Store was previously known as Windows Phone Marketplace. It was de-
veloped by Microsoft for its Windows Phone platform but allows users to browse and download 

8
A Survey on Islamic Mobile Applications for Children
﻿
applications that have been developed by third parties. It has support for credit card purchases, 
operator billing, and ad-supported content. The store also features a “try-before-you-buy” option, 
where the user can download a trial or demo for a commercial app. In June 2014, the Windows 
Phone Store offered 226,294 apps (Windows Phone Application List, n.d).
•	
Developed by Blackberry Ltd, Blackberry World (previously known as Blackberry App World) 
serves the majority of Blackberry devices. The service, which went live on April 1, 2009, provides 
BlackBerry users with an interface to browse, download and update third-party applications. As 
of June 2014, 249,615 apps were available (Blackberry World, n.d).
The Apps (Mobile Applications)
The software incorporated with mobile technology for users is called an application, known as a mobile 
application or app. The wide variety of apps includes educational purposes, to assist learning activities 
outside the classroom, and the mobile learning concept has gained in strength and influence in describ-
ing the future of education (Mishra & Chavhan, 2012).
Apps, Internet jargon for “application software”, are designed to run on a mobile device, such as a 
smartphone or tablet computer. They frequently serve to provide users with similar services to those 
accessed on PCs, but are generally small, individual software units with limited functionality. Popular-
ized by Apple Inc. and its App Store, apps are also known as, Web apps, online apps, iPhone apps or 
smartphone apps (Janssen, n.d.).
According to Pereira and Rodrigues (2013), apps are Internet applications or small bundles of code 
designed and developed to run on mobile devices and to enhance their features, providing additional 
functionality and utility. This segment of mobile technology has ballooned with the widespread use of 
smartphones, portable music devices, and other mobile web-capable equipment, and includes apps such 
as games, Internet applications, widgets, calendars, email utilities and sports information.
Based on the survey of app stores accessed during this research, the apps are grouped into several 
categories. The most common ones are Books/Comics & Reference, Business, Communication, Educa-
tion, Entertainment, Finance, Food and Drink, Games, Healthcare & Fitness, Lifestyle, Music & Video, 
News & Weather, Personalization, Photography, Shopping, Social (Social Networking), Sports, Travel 
& Navigation, and Utilities (tools) & Productivity. Apps for children usually come under their own 
category, sometimes sub-categorized as education, games and entertainment apps.
Many researchers have recorded how educational media and technology are widely used to help chil-
dren learn, both in formal and informal environments, when effective teaching techniques are applied 
(Bakar, Ashrafia, Zeki & Abubakar, 2013; Zain, Mahmud & Hassan, 2013; Lubis et. al., 2011). This 
is because children are an eager audience, as they spend more time engaged with media than with any 
other leisure or academic activity. Using these media in teaching Islam is very important, making the 
material taught more understandable and presentable, and enabling students to gain more experience 
and make use of the information more easily.
In more detail, mobile technology offers an educational medium that facilitates a new learning culture. 
A book, although some people still use it as a medium to learn and study, lacks features that a mobile 
device offers, such as a portable connection to the Internet and other interactive capabilities that respond 
with ease to the user’s curiosity. According to Evans (as cited in Daily, 2013), a well-designed learning 
app offers multiple navigation paths within, around and through a bounded collection of content, which 

9
A Survey on Islamic Mobile Applications for Children
﻿
might be contained in the app or stored on the World Wide Web. It anticipates the most common of the 
multiple types of questions that can arise from the experience, problem, or situation it is designed to 
address. With regard to religious matter, Daily (2010) stated that wherever and whenever a text or piece 
of material culture (e.g., artwork, church, mosque, temple, prayer beads) from one’s own or another’s 
religious tradition is found, the smartphone could facilitate inquiry. Ideally, the app will provide “the 
bounded environment” that enables the user to acquire the information, and not just by searching the 
entire Internet. In addition, although apps are intended to “solve” problems, in the early days of mobile 
technology, games were especially popular; while they offered play, they also posed a risk of addiction. 
Their popularity indicates that users want and expect apps to have a playful element, to release stress 
(Daily, 2010).
According to Barendregt (2009), the idea of Islamic hardware brings us back to the “first Muslim 
iPod”, manufactured as an “Islamic encyclopaedia” which became the latest version of the increasingly 
popular digital Qur’an or so called “pocket Muslim”. This “pocket Muslim” is a handheld device with 
all sorts of Islamic applications, in addition to the digital Qur’an (in various languages, one of which is 
Malay): various Islamic books in electronic format, a collection of texts (do’a, both written and in audio 
format), and an animation preparing one for the annual pilgrimage to Mecca.
What is an Islamic app? An Islamic app is software developed by mobile application developers that 
provides users – Muslim, non-Muslim, or new converts – with information regarding Islam, Islamic 
knowledge, principles and practices. It can be in the form of education, games, educational games 
(edugames) or entertainment. Islamic apps are not just for adults, but also for children. Generally, the 
most common form of Islamic apps for children is games or edugames. Jurafsky and Martin (as cited 
in Kamarudin and Salam, 2012) stated that as there is an increasing number of Islamic websites, many 
are influenced to promote Islamic apps and other programs to the mobile computing and mobile phone 
market. Bunt (2010) wrote that there is a growing sophistication in the nature of Islamic apps on offer, 
many focusing on ease of access, clarity and user-friendly features. The early Islamic apps offer qibla 
direction, prayer times, Qur’an recitations and readings, Hadith collections, and biographies of the 
Prophet Muhammad PBUH.
As a combination of mobile computing and e-learning, and with advances in wireless equipment, a 
mobile learning (M-learning) application presents new opportunities in the field of children’s educa-
tion. It can improve several of their basic skills such as reading and writing, and can be accomplished 
in a pleasant manner, individually or in a group, in indoor and outdoor environments. Mobile learning 
thus helps children to participate in learning activities in several ways, all the while discovering various 
physical environments such as their home, school or other public places like parks (Albalawi, 2013).
Interaction Design and Children: The Criteria
This study is a part of the Child Computer Interaction discipline. According to Hourcade (2008), inter-
action design for children is a research field concerned with designing interactive media for children. 
It provides design principles covering visual design, interaction styles, and the use of input devices as 
well as goals of interaction based on research and literature on children’s developmental psychology. For 
example, it considers their current stage in terms of motor skills, emotional and mental development.
There are five criteria that should be taken into account when designing effective educational media 
for children (Shoukry, n.d.):

10
A Survey on Islamic Mobile Applications for Children
﻿
1. 	
Age- and developmental-appropriateness;
2. 	
Responsiveness;
3. 	
Production value;
4. 	
Motivational elements;
5. 	
The use of formative and iterative research.
Ibarra (2011) suggested that when devising mobile apps for children, designers should consider the 
following factors:
1. 	
The splash screen must not take too long to load, because children are impatient.
2. 	
The home screen must be simple and straightforward.
3. 	
The settings are for the parents. Not many children use them appropriately. A non-intrusive setting 
could be used, and for advanced features can be put in the device settings panel.
4. 	
Think big, think enormous. Children are drawn to large objects, simple and easy to recognize.
5. 	
Ease-of-use rules and practices must be simplified and re-interpreted.
6. 	
Challenge and reward. Children respond to being praised and rewarded; positive words give them 
self-esteem and let them know that they are doing something well. And they also get bored with 
apps very quickly. Unless they feel entertained or are challenged to win a game, they just switch 
from one app to another.
In creating apps for children, the designer must add these specific criteria to the general criteria for 
mobile application design. In her blog, Villar (2012) stated that there are seven essential criteria for 
evaluating mobile educational applications, viz.: content; personalization; meaningful feedback; high-
order thinking skills; usability and technical performance; interactivity and engagement; and integration 
of social interactions. For the usability and technical performance criteria, she referred to Jacob Nielsen’s 
classic usability definition, whose five quality components are learnability, efficiency, memorability, 
errors, and satisfaction.
Harrison, Flood and Duce (2013) developed a new usability model called PACMAD (People at the 
Centre of Mobile Application Development). This model was designed to address the limitations of 
existing usability models when applied to mobile devices, since it brings together significant attributes 
from different usability models in order to create a more comprehensive model. These attributes are not 
new, but the existing prominent usability models ignore one or more of them, which could lead to an 
incomplete usability evaluation. PACMAD’s attributes are effectiveness, efficiency, satisfaction, learn-
ability, memorability, errors, and cognitive load. These attributes are derived from three factors which 
can affect the overall usability of a mobile application: user, task and context of use.
What Makes a Good Islamic Application?
To investigate the quality of the existing apps, this paper referred to previous research on the usability of 
both the apps but Islamic websites. Aliyu, Mahmud and Tap (2010), for example, investigated the design 
and content of Islamic websites, using nine parameters: navigation, interactivity, legitimacy, objectivity, 
authority, relevance, attractiveness, credibility, and reliability. This study focused on investigating the 
visible design and content features, therefore a single evaluator was deemed sufficient to capture the es-
sential elements. Based on their results, we derived the following criteria for a good Islamic application:

11
A Survey on Islamic Mobile Applications for Children
﻿
1. 	
Does not display any information/content that contradicts Islamic faith, Islamic moral values or 
Islamic pillars; that presents abusive or biased documents; or that is biased against Islam, Islamic 
groups or other religions.
2. 	
Provides trusted, authoritative, accurate, useful and up-to-date information about Islam and its 
civilization.
3. 	
Offers multi-lingual options, not just English, Arabic or Bahasa.
4. 	
Provides references, author’s credentials, credibility, popularity and accessibility.
5. 	
Provides information/content that is dependable, accurate, credible and relevant.
Findings and Results
An in-depth survey of several mobile application stores was carried out to collect data on existing apps, 
especially the total number of apps for children. The stores surveyed were App Store, Google Play, Ama-
zon Appstore for Android, Windows Phone Store, and Blackberry World, supporting the OS described 
above. The numbers of applications by category in each app store are shown in Table 1.
From Table 1, it is clear that the percentage of apps for children is very small: 0.38% in iTunes/Ap-
pStore, 0.33 percent in Google Play, 11.65 percent in Amazon Appstore, 2.09 percent in Windows Phone 
Store, and 1.73 percent in Blackberry World. Amazon AppStore had the largest percentage as it provides 
Android apps in common with Google Play. These children’s apps include various themes, such as educa-
tion, entertainment, games, edutainment (i.e. containing games, education, and entertainment features).
The Children category in Table 1 was further broken down into four sub-categories, viz. entertainment, 
games, education, and Islamic themes, as depicted in Table 2. The analysis was conducted manually 
by calculating the apps on the application stores, since there was no other means to identify the exact 
number of mobile applications available per category.
Figure 2 gives a clearer picture of the percentage of children’s mobile applications by type in each 
app store, out of the total mobile apps for children. As can be seen from the figure, the percentages in 
the entertainment category are 9.43%, 8.67%, 8.32%, 32.65%, and 8.52% for iTunes/AppStore, Windows 
Phone Store, Amazon AppStore, Google Play, and Blackberry World respectively. In the games category, 
the highest percentage is from Amazon AppStore, with 81.43% out of the total 28,462 apps for children, 
while the lowest is 33.05% from Windows Phone Store. In the category of education, the percentages 
are 27.21%, 27.62%, 9.96%, 32.65%, and 19.27% respectively, with the highest percentage in Windows 
Phone Store and the lowest in Amazon AppStore. The percentage of Islamic mobile applications for 
children, which are a combination of three categories: education, games, and entertainment, is very 
low, totalling around 16%. The smallest percentage is from Amazon AppStore with 0.29%, followed by 
Blackberry World, Windows Phone Store, and Google Play with 1.13%, 1.65%, and 1.67%, each, while 
the highest percentage is for iTunes/AppStore, at 10.73% of the total number of apps available being 
Islamic applications.
To investigate the number of Islamic apps for children, especially those living in Indonesia and Ma-
laysia, a more extensive survey was done by checking existing apps and categorizing them according to 
three factors: design, language, and culture.
To validate the design of existing Islamic applications for children against the Qur’an, Sunnah, and 
Fiqh Science, and also whether they are suitable for children in countries like Malaysia and Indonesia, 
we took a sample of the top-rated Islamic apps that can be accessed by all the operating systems. After 
an extensive survey of the application stores, it was found that few of the apps could be accessed or 

12
A Survey on Islamic Mobile Applications for Children
﻿
Table 2. Total children’s apps by category in five notable application stores
Children Apps Category
Mobile Apps Store
iTunes/ App 
Store
Google Play
Amazon App Store
Windows Phone
Blackberry 
AppWorld
Entertainment
415
354
2,367
1,547
368
Games
2,315
2,534
23,178
1,566
3,069
Education
1,197
1,128
2,835
1,547
832
Islamic Themes
472
68
82
78
49
Total Apps
4,399
4,084
28,462
4,738
4,318
Sources: Number of Android Apps (n.d), Windows Phone Application List (n.d), and App Store Metrics (n.d).
Table 1. Total apps by category in five notable application stores
Apps Categories
Mobile Apps Store
iTunes/AppStore
Google Play
Amazon App Store
Windows Phone
Blackberry 
AppWorld
Books/Comics & Reference
88,909
78,121
18,770
17,428
14,065
Business
96,175
73,360
5,177
6,191
5,744
Catalogues
7,750
0
0
0
0
Communication
0
27,609
2,077
0
0
Education
121,301
88,235
15,838
14,331
14,300
Entertainment
88,884
99,750
18,878
35,742
14,062
Finance
27,623
27,911
3,389
4,357
2,404
Food and Drink
24,124
0
2,063
0
0
Games
216,888
189,606
70,190
31,559
23,990
Government and Politics
0
0
0
1,624
0
Healthcare and Fitness
31,538
33,940
6,151
8,069
4,222
Libraries and Demo
0
4,243
0
0
0
Lifestyle
92,889
90,803
10,082
13,419
0
Medical
24,731
16,925
0
0
0
Music and Video
38,623
70,852
8,071
10,315
11,180
News and Weather
33,408
49,906
6,574
12,538
46,625
Personalization
0
88,148
7,068
0
10,542
Photography
30,347
15,581
2,259
6,535
5,123
Shopping
0
21,628
1,538
0
1,619
Social (Social Networking)
21,827
29,004
2,148
7,564
2,263
Sports
32,410
35,217
4,682
9,550
3,187
Transportation
0
15,885
0
0
0
Travel and Navigation
71,617
62,463
18,520
12,449
66,954
Utilities (tools) & Productivity
93,051
110,524
12,466
29,915
19,017
Children
4,399
4,084
28,462
4,738
4,318
Total Available Apps
1,146,494
1,233,795
244,403
226,324
249,615
Source: Number of Android Apps (n.d), Windows Phone Application List (n.d), and App Store Metrics (n.d).

13
A Survey on Islamic Mobile Applications for Children
﻿
downloaded on all the operating systems. Therefore, we limited our survey to ten of the top-rated and 
most-downloaded apps on the four software platforms (see Table 3).
Discussion of the apps themselves follows.
Muslim Kids Series: Dua
Muslim Kids Series: Dua is an app by Indonesian developer Yufid Inc. It can be accessed for free for 
three operating systems: iOS, Android, and Windows Phone. It is a guide for children to learn and memo-
Table 3. Top-rated children’s apps from popular mobile operating systems
Apps Name
Mobile Apps Store
iOS
Android
Windows Phone
Blackberry OS
Muslim Kids Series: Dua
Available
Available
Available
n/a
Muslim Kids Series: Mufradat (Arabic Vocabulary)
Available
n/a
n/a
n/a
Muslim Kids Series: Hijaiya (Arabic Alphabet)
Available
n/a
n/a
n/a
Marble Muslim Kids
n/a
Available
n/a
n/a
Eli Ba Learning Game
n/a
Available
n/a
n/a
Learn Arabic with Kareem
n/a
n/a
Available
n/a
Prayer in Islam (Salah)
n/a
n/a
Available
n/a
Iqra for Kids
n/a
n/a
n/a
Available
Doa Harian/Daily Prayer
n/a
n/a
n/a
Available
Jom Sholat (Let’s Pray)
n/a
n/a
n/a
Available
Note: n/a = not available.
Figure 2. Percentage of mobile applications for children based on the type and store

14
A Survey on Islamic Mobile Applications for Children
﻿
rize daily dua (prayers) with audio recitation and cute illustrations, and is available in three languages: 
Arabic, English and Indonesian. As can be seen from Figure 3, the app illustration uses a boy figure 
wearing a hat called a peci in Indonesian or kopiah in Malaysian. The figure itself is not “human”-like 
because it does not have any eyes, nose or ears. This is in accordance to Hadith narrated by Al-Bukhari 
and Muslim that stated the prohibition of Taswir (painting, drawing, sculpture and photography) of 
any being with a soul, whether human or not (Ruling on Taswir, 2013). The illustration also depicts the 
activities the dua is referring to; for example, when it is time to wake up, the boy is portrayed lying in 
bed stretching, the gesture illustrating a waking-up position. The Arabic wording is accompanied by a 
translation; children in Malaysia and Indonesia can use English or Indonesian, although it would be better 
if a Malaysian language option were also provided. The audio recitation uses a child’s voice, so it will 
be more approachable for children. However, the audio icon is not sufficiently colourful for children, 
especially without their parents’ guidance, hence they will not be able to use this feature by themselves. 
It is easy to move from one dua to another, by scrolling and tapping to open the required dua. The app 
also provides the Hadith reference to explain more of the dua.
Muslim Kids Series: Mufradat (Arabic Vocabulary)
Muslim Kids Series: Mufradat is also from Yufid Inc. It can be accessed for free from iTunes/App-
Store, but a version with more features can be purchased. It is a guide for children to learn basic Arabic 
vocabulary. There are also games to help children memorize the Arabic words. The games are writing 
the Arabic word, Tashkeel (Arabic diacritic), pairing the word with a picture, and colouring. As can be 
seen in Figure 4 and Figure 5, the app is very colourful with clear illustrations of the objects that the 
children will be learning. However, this app is only available in English, and no Indonesian or Malaysian 
language support is given. There is no tailoring feature; what you see is what you get, and you cannot 
modify the language of the app. The illustration and graphics are good, enabling children to learn not 
only the word, and how to pronounce and write it; younger children are able to learn the shape of the 
word learnt. For example, one of the categories on this app is school, in which children can learn the 
English and Arabic words and also see a picture of a particular word that is common in school, such 
as desk, chair, pencil, books, bag, etc. The audio pronunciation uses a child’s voice, so it will be more 
friendly for children. It is easy to move from one feature to another by scrolling between each category 
and tapping on the picture to open it. The menu is also interesting, because it moves like a wheel. Be-
sides the main category, where children learn the shape and the Arabic and English word of an object, 
there are three (iPhone) or four (iPad) further categories by which children can “test” their knowledge of 
the objects. The first is to put the vowel, harakaat or harakah (singular), that is provided in the bottom 
screen against the Arabic word on the green board. The clue to this category lies on the left of the green 
board, which is the picture of the object in question. Children can also choose what picture they would 
like to guess. The second category is a matching game, where children have to match the Arabic word 
on the left with the correct picture on the right. The third is colouring, where children have to colour 
the object in the paper; after finishing one drawing, the child can choose another object to colour on 
the bottom screen (on iPad) or on the main menu (on iPhone). The fourth category is only available on 
iPad: connecting dots on the green board to form the Arabic word for an object.

15
A Survey on Islamic Mobile Applications for Children
﻿
Figure 3. Muslim Kids Series: Dua app screenshot

16
A Survey on Islamic Mobile Applications for Children
﻿
Muslim Kids Series: Hijaiya (Arabic Alphabet)
This app can be accessed for free from iTunes/AppStore. It is a guide to learning the Arabic alphabet in 
a fun and easy way (see Figure 6). It has two modes. In the first, children can learn the Arabic characters 
one by one, along with the vowel (harakaat) and how it is pronounced. Every letter of the alphabet is 
complemented by audio and a cute illustration of a television screen that shows a boy holding the Arabic 
letter. When the child wants to hear its pronunciation with a vowel, he/she can choose from three pictures 
on the bottom screen. The second mode enables children to practise writing Arabic letters. Writing Arabic 
can be fun and easy, simply by connecting the dots on the whiteboard. If they successfully connect all the 
dots to write the hijaiya, they are given stars according to how perfect the connection is. This application 
is also suitable for adults. The illustration is in accordance with the Hadith narrated by Al-Bukhari and 
Muslim that stated the prohibition of Taswir. The design is colourful, but the navigation in this category 
is not simple for younger users, who will need parents’ guidance to move from one hijaiya to another. 
The pictures are also rather small. There are no instructions, either audio or text.
Figure 4. Muslim Kids Series: Mufradat app screenshot

17
A Survey on Islamic Mobile Applications for Children
﻿
Figure 5. Muslim Kids Series: Mufradat app screenshot
Figure 6. Muslim Kids Series: Hijaiya app screenshot

18
A Survey on Islamic Mobile Applications for Children
﻿
Marble Muslim Kids
Marble Muslim Kids is a free Android-based mobile application (see Figure 7) to teach children about 
Islam in exciting ways. It has an audio feature to guide them. There are several categories for children 
to learn:
1. 	
The Five Pillars of Islam;
2. 	
The Six Pillars of Iman;
3. 	
The Angels and Their Duties;
4. 	
The story of the Prophets;
5. 	
The story of Khulafaur Rasyidin (the Four Caliphates);
6. 	
The Islamic months and days;
7. 	
The Hijaiya alphabet and Arabic numbers;
8. 	
The Dhikr;
9. 	
How to perform ablution and prayer (Salaat); and
10. 	 The Names of Allah SWT (Asmaul Husna).
Figure 7. Marble Muslim Kids app screenshot

19
A Survey on Islamic Mobile Applications for Children
﻿
As can be seen in Figure 7, the illustrations resemble living creatures, like a whale or birds. Unfortu-
nately, Marble Muslim Kids only comes in Indonesian. In terms of design, although the app uses bright 
colours and attractive animations the letters are too small. The app is also complemented by a narration 
(audio feature). In terms of interactivity, this app lacks challenges like quizzes or games by which chil-
dren can “test” their new knowledge.
Elif Ba Learning Games
Elif Ba Learning Games is a free Android-based mobile application for children that can only be ac-
cessed from Android stores like Google Play and Amazon Appstore. It helps children to learn the Arabic 
alphabet through play. It is a very easy game, and is easy to use. Although it is intended for children 
adults can also learn from it. Figure 8 shows that the app has several features: three educational games 
and two learning videos. The games consist of memory, pictures, and pronunciation of the Hijaiya al-
phabets, while the videos are all about the Hijaiya pronunciation. The memory game involves matching 
the same Hijaiya characters by turning up the tiles, helping children to memorize the Arabic alphabet. 
Similarly, the pictures game matches a Hijaiya character with an object labelled in English, for example 
Alif with Apple. The pronunciation game presents tiles showing Arabic characters; when a tile is tapped, 
the app will give the correct pronunciation of the Hijaiya. The app has high-quality picture and sound, 
but the pronunciations use a male adult voice. The app comes in three languages: English, Turkish and 
German, which might deter Malaysian and Indonesian children. can be a turn off. The illustrations are 
not in accordance to Hadith narrated by Al-Bukhari and Muslim that state the prohibition of Taswir, 
because the characters resemble humans, with eyes and a mouth.
Figure 8. Elif Ba learning games app screenshot

20
A Survey on Islamic Mobile Applications for Children
﻿
Learn Arabic with Kareem
Learn Arabic with Kareem is designed for Windows users and can only be accessed, free, from Windows 
Phone Store. The app is designed to teach children and adults alike to learn to read Arabic, without any 
prior knowledge or experience, in order to be able to read the Qur’an. It is useful for children, new converts 
to Islam and anyone interested in learning how to read Arabic and the Qur’an. The app has 160 lessons 
(a two-year curriculum) based on the An Noraniyah method, presented in an attractive way especially 
for children.. The An Noraniyah method is the only authentic method that teaches how to read the Holy 
Qur’an with Tajweed (the rules governing pronunciation during recitation of the Qur’an). Applying An 
Noriyah is appropriate for new Muslims so that they can read with Tajweed from the start, and it is also 
a good self-paced learning tool for adults to improve their Tajweed in the privacy of their homes. As can 
be seen in Figure 9, the app design is not wholly suitable for children, especially younger ones, because 
it does not look interesting, and is not colourful enough to attract them (the app’s background colour is 
dominated by black); it does not use any characters or illustrations that children will relate to, and there 
is no animation. The only language supported is English.
Figure 9. Learn Arabic with Kareem app screenshot

21
A Survey on Islamic Mobile Applications for Children
﻿
Prayer in Islam (Salah)
The Prayer in Islam app is Windows Phone-based and can be accessed for free. It is an app to learn the 
prayer (Salah) and is designed for all ages. It is suitable for beginners, young children and teenagers, 
adults and non-Muslims. As can be seen from Figure 10, the design uses simple graphics, perhaps too 
simple for children who need colourful illustrations and animation to hold their interest. The app only 
supports the English language. It does provide audio control (play, pause, stop, and repeat) to control 
the audio guide, and translation (audio caption). Younger children will need help from parents. The il-
lustrations are in accordance with Hadith narrated by Al-Bukhari and Muslim that stated the prohibition 
of Taswir, but again are simple and use an adult figure instead of a child. The app lacks challenges for 
children, such as a quiz or games.
Iqra for Kids
Iqra for Kids is a pay-to-download mobile application specifically for Blackberry users, intended to 
help adults and children in learning to read the Qur’an. It teaches users to recognize Arabic alphabets, 
Arabic numbers, basic Arabic reading, and advanced Arabic reading. It has Arabic transliteration and 
Figure 10. Prayer in Islam app screenshot

22
A Survey on Islamic Mobile Applications for Children
﻿
voice features. It is available in two languages, English and Indonesian, which can be switched from the 
Options menu. As can be seen from Figure 11, the app’s illustrations are colourful, with large pictures 
and texts, and using a boy as the main character. However, the boy is not in accordance to Hadith nar-
rated by Al-Bukhari and Muslim that stated the prohibition of Taswir, because the character resembles a 
human being, complete with eyes, mouth and nose. The audio helps children readily to understand how 
to pronounce the Hijaiya and Arabic numbers. The app has good graphics and animation. However, it 
lacks interactive features such as games and quizzes.
Doa Harian (Daily Prayer)
Doa Harian, or in English Daily Prayers, is a free Blackberry OS app to help children to learn the daily 
dua from morning until night. As can be seen in Figure 12, the app is equipped with Arabic and a Latin 
transliteration to help a child read the Arabic alphabet. In terms of design, it lacks illustrations and ani-
mation that will attract children. As it uses only the colour green as the background, it is less suitable for 
children. In terms of illustration, the app uses a boy character wearing traditional Indonesian/Malaysian 
clothing for praying, the peci or kopiah (praying hat) and sarong. This is appropriate in cultural terms, 
but less so in terms of Islam, as the boy character is not presented in accordance to Hadith narrated by 
Al-Bukhari and Muslim that stated the prohibition of Taswir, as it resembles a human being, complete 
Figure 11. Iqra for Kids app screenshot

23
A Survey on Islamic Mobile Applications for Children
﻿
with the eyes, mouth and nose. The app is available only in the Indonesian language, making it difficult 
for Malaysian children to fully understand the dua. There is no audio option or narration that would help 
children to understand the dua and how to pronounce the prayers.
Jom Sholat (Let’s Pray)
Jom Solat app is a Blackberry OS based app that can only be accessed for free from Blackberry Ap-
pWorld. Jom Solat is an educational game designed for children aged 3-7 years old to learn the Salah. 
Children can see the diagrams for each pray movement, readings in Arabic and Latin alphabet, and a 
translation of each word. Audio recitations are also provided to facilitate children to learn how to read 
more effectively. Children also have the opportunity to test their knowledge by answering simple questions 
provided in game-1, and test their memory in game-2. This version only includes four questions for each 
game. This app is available only in Malay language. As can be seen in Figure 13, the app’s illustrations 
are colorful with lime green background, and using large texts. The illustration used is a boy character 
using a match green “kopiah” and sarong that is based on Malaysian culture. However, the illustration 
is not in accordance to hadith narrated by Al-Bukhari and Muslim that stated the prohibition of Taswir, 
because the boy’s character resembles human, complete with the eyes, mouth, and nose.
Solutions and Recommendations
From the quantitative analysis and results, we found that there are very few Islamic apps for children, 
around 3.3% of the millions of apps from the five major application stores. As Muslims, we need to 
consider using technology as a medium to educate our children, not only Islamic teachings but also 
secular subjects. Therefore, we need developers to design more and more apps for Muslim children.
Figure 12. Doa Harian app screenshot

24
A Survey on Islamic Mobile Applications for Children
﻿
Based on the analysis of the10 top-rated Islamic children’s mobile applications described in the previ-
ous section, we offer some recommendations for requirements that must be considered when designing 
Islamic apps, especially for children living in Malaysia and Indonesia:
1. 	
Content-Based: The contents must be appropriate to the age and development of Muslim children, 
and in accordance with the Qur’an, Sunnah, and Fiqh science. The reference of the Qur’an and 
Sunnah must be included as in the example of the Muslim Kids Series: Dua app.
2. 	
Design: The design must be simple yet colourful, with an easy-to-use interface and large pictures 
and text. However illustrations must follow the Islamic ruling narrated by Al-Bukhari and Muslim 
that stated the prohibition of Taswir (painting, drawing, sculpture, and photography) of any being 
with a soul, whether human or not. Then, the app should be quick to load and straightforward in 
operation.
3. 	
Characteristics for Children: The app developer and designer must remember that children, 
whether Muslim or non-Muslim, are easily bored. Hence, challenges like games and quizzes, along 
with a reward system, are necessary to keep the children motivated.
4. 	
Language: Since this study considers Malaysian and Indonesian children, the textual language 
should be Malaysian and Indonesian language, with additional English and Arabic.
5. 	
Culture: Examples within the app should also consider Malaysian and Indonesian culture. For 
example, in the Elif Ba learning game app, the examples use English; when pronouncing the letter 
Lam ( )لthe example used is lamp. The author suggests that examples use words that are common 
for Malaysian and Indonesian children, such as replacing lamp with layang-layang (i.e. kite). The 
character used in the Iqra for Kids app should also be illustrated by a Malaysian or Indonesian child 
wearing traditional costume with f an Indonesian or Malaysian background.
Figure 13. Jom Solat app screenshot

25
A Survey on Islamic Mobile Applications for Children
﻿
CONCLUSION AND DIRECTIONS FOR FUTURE RESEARCH
In this study, we investigated Islamic mobile applications for children and assessed the quantity and qual-
ity of such applications. Existing criteria evaluating Islamic mobile apps have been extended from the 
level of quality assessment to deeper aspects of the design and interface of Islamic mobile applications. 
Additionally, we analyzed whether they are suitable for children in terms of language and examples used, 
and whether they are in accordance with the Islamic foundation of Shari’ah that relies on primary and 
secondary sources of knowledge: the Qur’an, Sunnah, and Fiqh science.
However, the scope of this study was limited to a survey and investigation of existing mobile ap-
plications accessible to the researcher, searched using selected keywords in English, Bahasa Malaysia 
(Malay) and Bahasa Indonesia. As such, the findings do not account for what a child user feels about 
the performance of current Islamic mobile apps. Therefore, further studies using a bigger sample size 
comprising of additional users, are needed to provide deeper insight into the overall quality of existing 
Islamic mobile applications.
Little research has been done into Islamic mobile applications, especially for children. A survey is 
needed to investigate further into these kinds of application, which can give better insight to an app 
developer for developing such target-oriented applications. A huge area remains for research into the 
field of child computer interaction, especially in the context of Islamic teachings.
REFERENCES
Abdallah, S. (2008). Information Ethics from an Islamic Perspective. IGI Global. Retrieved from http://
books.google.com/books?hl=en&lr=&id=H2VuBddvMLAC&oi=fnd&pg=PT372&dq=Information
+Ethics+from+an+Islamic+Perspective&ots=2H-JbrpxKh&sig=gIbwlgTIJAM-LC90plqwgbcfSEk
About Android. (n.d.). Retrieved May 30, 2014, from http://www.apple.com/ios/what-is/
Adelaar, K. A., & Himmelmann, N. (2005). The Austronesian Languages of Asia and Madagascar. 
Routledge. Retrieved from https://books.google.com.my/books?id=BAShwSYLbUYC
Albalawi, R. (2013). Evaluating Tangible User Interface-based Mobile-learning System For Young 
Children. ProQuest Dissertations and Theses. Retrieved from http://210.48.222.80/proxy.pac/docview/
1441724917?accountid=44024
Aliyu, M., Mahmud, M., & Tap, A. O. M. (2010). Preliminary investigation of Islamic websites design 
& content feature: A heuristic evaluation from user perspective. User Science and Engineering (i-USEr), 
2010 International Conference on. doi:10.1109/IUSER.2010.5716763
Amazon Appstore. (2014, June 16). Retrieved from http://www.amazon.com/mobile-apps
App Store Metrics. (n.d.). Retrieved May 30, 2014, from http://148apps.biz/app-store-
metrics/?mpage=catcount
Bakar, N. F. A., Ashrafia, S., Zeki, A. M., & Abubakar, A. I. (2013). Visual Interactive Islamic Learning 
System for Children. International Journal on Islamic Applications in Computer Science And Technol-
ogy, 1(3), 17–23.

26
A Survey on Islamic Mobile Applications for Children
﻿
Barendregt, B. A. (2009). Mobile Religiosity in Indonesia: Mobilized Islam, Islamized Mobility and the 
Potential of Islamic Techno Nationalism. In E. Alampay (Ed.), Living the Information Society in Asia. 
ISEAS Publishing and International Development Research Centre.
Blackberry OS. (n.d.). Retrieved May 30, 2014, from http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/BlackBerry_OS
Blackberry World. (n.d.). Retrieved June 16, 2014, from https://appworld.blackberry.com/
webstore/?lang=en&region=222
Bunt, G. R. (2010). Surfing the App Souq: Islamic Applications for Mobile Devices. CyberOrient: Online 
Journal of the Virtual Middle East, 1.
Burhanudeen, H., Hamid, N. Z. A., Awal, N. M., & Mis, M. A. (2007). The Reality of Bahasa Melayu 
and Bahasa Indonesia in Academia. Academic Press.
Chong, J. W. (2012). “Mine, Yours or Ours?”: The Indonesia-Malaysia Disputes over Shared Cultural 
Heritage. Sojourn. Journal of Social Issues in Southeast Asia, 27(1), 1–53.
Daily, E. M. (2013). The Promise of Mobile Technology for Public Religious Education. Religious 
Education (Chicago, Ill.), 108(2), 112–128. doi:10.1080/00344087.2013.767653
Education. (n.d.). Merriam-Webster.com. Retrieved March 04, 2014, from http://www.merriam-webster.
com/dictionary/education
Education Section Programme Division. (2000). Defining Quality in Education. UNICEF Working 
Paper Series.
Harrison, R., Flood, D., & Duce, D. (2013). Usability of Mobile Applications: Literature Review and 
Rationale for a New Usability Model. Journal of Interaction Science, 1(1), 1–16. doi:10.1186/2194-
0827-1-1
Hourcade, J. P. (2007). Interaction Design and Children. Foundations and Trends® in Human-Computer 
Interaction, 1(4), 277–392. doi:10.1561/1100000006
Ibarra, K. (2011). Designing Apps for Kids. UX Magazine. Retrieved June 02, 2014, from http://uxmag.
com/articles/designing-apps-for-kids
Improving Internet Access in Indonesia. (2012). Retrieved from Http://Www.Gbgindonesia.Com/En/
Services/Article/2012/Improving_Internet_Access_In_Indonesia.Php)
Internet Users Percentage. (2015). Retrieved March 4, 2015, from http://www.worldbank.org
Janssen, C. (n.d.). Mobile Application (Mobile App). Retrieved from http://www.techopedia.com/defini-
tion/2953/mobile-application-mobile-app
Kamali, M. H. (2011). Classical and Contemporary Approaches to Education: An Islamic Perspective. 
Islam and Civilisational Renewal, 2(3), 447–467, 591–592. Retrieved from http://210.48.222.80/proxy.
pac/docview/1314486643?accountid=44024

27
A Survey on Islamic Mobile Applications for Children
﻿
Kamarudin, N., & Salam, S. (2012). Tajweed Understanding among Malaysian Muslims (preliminary 
findings). In 1st International Conference on Mobile Learning, Applications, and Services (mobil-
case2012) (pp. 1–4).
Lewis, M. P., Simons, G. F., & Fennig, C. D. (2009). Ethnologue: Languages of the World (Vol. 9). 
Dallas, TX: SIL International.
Lubis, M. A., Lampoh, A. A., & Yunus, , M., Shahar, S. N., Ishak, N. M., & Muhamad, T. A. (2011). 
The Use of ICT in Teaching Islamic Subjects in Brunei Darussalam. International Journal of Education 
and Information Technologies, 5(1), 79–87.
Mishra, N. R., & Chavhan, R. K. (2012). Effectiveness of Mobile Learning on Awareness About Learning 
Disability Among Student Teachers. Technology Enhanced Education (ICTEE), 2012 IEEE International 
Conference on. Doi:10.1109/ICTEE.2012.6208633
Mobile Phone App Store Statistics. (2014). Retrieved March 13, 2014, from http://www.statisticbrain.
com/mobile-phone-app-store-statistics/
Mohamed, B. (2005). Cultural Tourism Promotion and Policy in Malaysia. Paper presented at Korea, 
China, Japan, Philippines, Spain, Turkey, India and USA Joint World Cultural Tourism Conference.
Noordin, M. F. (2009). ICT and Islam. IIUM Press.
Number of Android Apps. (n.d.). Retrieved May 30, 2014, from http://www.appbrain.com/stats/number-
of-android-apps
Parker-Pope, T. (2010, June 6). An ugly toll of technology: Impatience and forgetfulness. The New York 
Times. Retrieved from http://www.nytimes.com/2010/06/07/technology/07brainside.html?_r=0
Pereira, O. R. E., & Rodrigues, J. J. P. C. (2013). Survey and Analysis of Current Mobile Learning Ap-
plications. ACM Computing Surveys, 46(2), 1–36. doi:10.1145/2543581.2543594
Plowman, L., Stephen, C., & McPake, J. (2010). Supporting young children’s learning with technology at 
home and in preschool. Research Papers in Education, 25(1), 93–113. doi:10.1080/02671520802584061
Raghavan, R. (1977). Ethno-Racial Marginality in West Malaysia: The Case of The Peranakan Hindu 
Meleka or Malaccan Chitty Community. Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde, 133(4), 438–458. 
doi:10.1163/22134379-90002605
Ruling on Taswir. (2013, February 6). Retrieved from http://salaf-us-saalih.com/2013/02/06/ruling-
on-taswir-idolspainting-drawingsculpturephotography-of-any-being-with-a-soul-shaikh-ibn-baaz-
rahimahullaah/
Shoukry, L. H. (n.d.). Child-Centered Design of Educational Mobile Games for Arab Preschoolers. 
German University in Cairo. Retrieved from http://www.academia.edu/download/30640286/small.pdf
Sneddon, J. N. (2003). The Indonesian Language: Its History and Role in Modern Society. Sydney: 
UNSW Press.

28
A Survey on Islamic Mobile Applications for Children
﻿
Ulwan, A. N. (2004). Child Education in Islam. Dar Al-Salam.
Villar, M. A. (2012). 7 Essential Criteria for Evaluating Mobile Educational Applications. Creative Design 
of Learning Experiences. Retrieved July 07, 2014, from http://mayraixavillar.wordpress.com/2012/12/06/7-
essential-criteria-for-evaluating-mobile-educational-applications/
What is iOS? (n.d.). Retrieved May 30, 2014, from http://developer.android.com/about/index.html
Windows Phone Application List. (n.d.). Retrieved May 29, 2014, from http://windowsphoneapplist.com/en/
Windows Phone. (n.d.). Retrieved May 30, 2014, from http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Windows_Phone
Wong, C. K. (2014, September 3). 12 Facts You Might Not Know about Mobile in Malaysia. Retrieved 
from http://www.ecommercemilo.com/2014/09/12-facts-mobile-malaysia.html#.Vd_1LxOqqkp
Yaakub, M. B. (2011). Knowledge Management from Islamic Perspective. Journal of Revelation and 
Science, 1(2), 14–24. Retrieved from http://www.iium.edu.my/revival/index.php/revival/article/view/27
Zain, N. Z. M., Mahmud, M., & Hassan, A. (2013). Utilization of Mobile Apps among Students with 
Learning Disability from Islamic Perspective. Information and Communication Technology for the 
Muslim World (ICT4M), 2013 5th International Conference on. doi:10.1109/ICT4M.2013.6518889
KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Android: An open-source operating system used for smartphones and tablet computers.
App: An abbreviation of application and a type of software program that is usually downloaded by 
mobile device users.
Child Computer Interaction: A sub-group of Human Computer Interaction that specializes in 
discussing any method or design of interactive technology that is proposed for children.
Fiqh: An expansion of the theory or philosophy of Islamic law, based on the teachings of the Qur’an 
and the traditions of the Prophet Muhammad PBUH (Peace be upon Him).
Hadith: A collection of narrations that depict the traditions containing teachings, deeds, and sayings 
of the Prophet Muhammad PBUH in his daily practice.
iOS: An abbreviation of iPhone Operating System. It is a mobile operating system developed and 
specialized for Apple Inc. hardware.
Islamic Mobile Application: A software application developed specifically for use on mobile de-
vices such as smartphones or tablet computers (iPad/Tab), which has Islamic themes and contains the 
teaching or knowledge of Islam.
Mobile Application: A software application developed specifically for use on mobile devices such 
as smartphones or tablet computers (iPad/Tab).
Mobile Learning: The ability to obtain or provide educational content, in any medium, for digital 
learning on mobile devices such as smartphones and tablet computers.

29
A Survey on Islamic Mobile Applications for Children
﻿
Qur’an: The Islamic sacred book. It is the words of Allah SWT as dictated to the Prophet Muham-
mad PBUH by the archangel Gabriel and written down in Arabic.
SDK: An abbreviation of Software Development Kit, a set of tools that is used to develop software 
applications such as operating systems, computer systems, video game consoles, etc.
Shari’ah: Laws of Islam based on the Qur’an, and the Sunnah and Hadiths of the Prophet Muham-
mad PBUH.
Sunnah: The second source of Islamic regulation, besides the Qur’an, based on how the Prophet 
Muhammad PBUH lived his life.

30
Copyright © 2016, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter  2
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-4666-9438-5.ch002
ABSTRACT
Calendar is a tool that tells us a date. While Gregorian calendars have been used worldwide, Hijrah 
calendar becomes a choice for Muslims. This Islamic calendar helps tells a user a date in Islam. Our 
previous study suggested that the Muslim elderly preferred to have Islamic mobile calendar. Despite 
abundance of Islamic mobile calendar applications, little was known whether any of them were usable 
for the elderly users. This study recommends a usable design of an Islamic mobile calendar for Muslim 
elderly users. To do this, a user test with five elderly participants was carried out and two existing 
Islamic calendars were used as probes. Later, two interfaces were produced and tested with our elderly 
participants. Based on the results and design principles, the interfaces of the Islamic mobile calendar 
have further been improved.
INTRODUCTION
Calendar plays such an important role in our lives as we will refer to it to see a date and check for the 
upcoming dates or events. There are many calendaring systems available such as Gregorian and Hijrah 
in which each has its own history and importance. While all of the countries around the world use the 
Gregorian system for their calendars, certain religions or cultures have their own calendaring systems. One 
such religion that has its own calendaring system is Islam, and its calendaring system is called ‘Hijrah’.
A calendar is a memory aid tool that can help a person to remember planned activities or events 
(Armstrong et al., 2010). Based on our previous study on the use of mobile phone, calendar was one 
of the most commonly used applications by the elderly users (Razak et al., 2012). The calendar they 
used was actually the phone’s manufacturer’s built-in calendar. According to our elderly participants, 
A Usable Mobile Islamic 
Calendar for Elderly Users
Fariza Hanis Abdul Razak
Universiti Teknologi MARA (UiTM), Malaysia
Nur Farhana Abdullah
Universiti Teknologi MARA (UiTM), Malaysia

31
A Usable Mobile Islamic Calendar for Elderly Users
﻿
calendar means telling a date to them. This calendar date will help them recall what date it is in Islam, 
and what they can do as a Muslim for that day. They actually preferred to have an Islamic calendar on 
their mobile phones.
Having working with the elderly people for nearly two years, we have learned that these elderly are 
more inclined towards religious or spiritual activities. One of the spiritual activities that our Muslim 
elderly participants often do is voluntary fasting, for example: fasting on every Monday and Thursday, or 
fasting three days in a row in the middle of every Islamic month, or fasting on a specific day in Islamic 
month such as on Arafah day and Asyura day. Thus, day and date are very important for these elderly 
users because they mean something for them in terms of their religious or spiritual life.
Based on data from MCMC (2005), the number of Malaysian elderly who use mobile phone in their 
daily lives has increased up to 8.7%. There is abundance of mobile phone applications including Islamic 
calendars, however, most of them are not suitable for elderly users (Renaud & Biljon, (2010) & Razak 
et al. (2012)), thus, they fail to satisfy the elderly users (Stamato & Moraes, 2012).
Due to this problem, this study was undertaken to suggest a usable design for Muslim elderly users.
BACKGROUND
This section provides some work related to calendars for elderly, Islamic calendar and elderly & spirituality.
Calendars for Elderly
Recently, there have been efforts to design calendars for the use of elderly people. Some of these cal-
endars are discussed here.
Neustaedte et al. (2007) designed a digital calendar that gets a family involved and connected. It is 
an inkable family calendar called LINC. LINC has features which are at-a-glance awareness, publicly 
visible, always on, simple and flexible interaction. Although LINC was developed for the use among 
family members, elderly and children can use it since it was accepted by these people.
Another interactive elderly calendar study was conducted by Descheneaux & Pigot (2009). To use 
the interactive calendar, users can just touch the screen to interact. This interactive calendar is a simple 
memory aid tool to remind users about appointments and medication. This calendar application can 
also help friends and family to keep in touch with the elderly as this application contains a camera to 
snap a picture.
Costa et al. (2010) developed an event scheduler for the elderly. It is called iGenda. iGenda functions 
as personal memory assistant. Consequently, iGenda has been put in hospitals to help the physicians and 
nurses to manage the aged patients. Additionally, the system was developed to run on mobile devices 
or personal computers. Patients felt that this system has helped them to keep track their daily activities 
(Costa et al., 2010).
Razak et al. (2013) designed a usable mobile calendar for the elderly which has features of reminders. 
This calendar is called Reminder for Elderly and has only a single button on the interface. This calendar 
was designed based on the design principles for the elderly and has been tested for the elderly usability. 
As a result, elderly participants felt satisfied with this calendar as they found it easy to use.

32
A Usable Mobile Islamic Calendar for Elderly Users
﻿
Islamic Calendar
Islamic calendar is used to indicate important dates in Islam (Hidayat, et al., 2010). Muslims often refer 
to the Islamic calendar for Islamic months, fasting ibadah and other important events in Islam.
In general, Islamic calendar consists of twelve months, just the same as Gregorian calendar. How-
ever, the twelve months names are totally different from the Gregorian names. The Islamic months are 
as presented in Table 1.
Islamic calendar has 354 days compared to 365 days in Gregorian calendar (Ayduz, (2007) & Penprase, 
(2011)). Moreover, Islamic calendar has eleven days less than Gregorian calendar which shows why the 
important dates do not fall on the same date as the year before in Gregorian style (Penprase, 2011). To 
predict next year’s important dates in Islamic calendar, just minus eleven days from the current date this 
year (Penprase, 2011). The important dates such as Awal Muharram, Aidil Fitri, Aidil Adha, Asyura 
day, Arafah day, Maulidur Rasul and more are based on the Islamic calendar (Hidayat, et al., 2010). 
The Islamic calendar is based on lunar observations to indicate the important dates in Islam (Ayduz, 
2007) (Hidayat, et al., 2010). On the other hand, there is history for each important event in Islam. The 
important event and meaning is briefly described in Table 2 (Penprase, (2011) & Raza, (2011)).
Elderly and Spirituality
Spirituality is a subjective matter as it means differently by different people. According to Dalby (2006), 
spirituality involves “integrity, humanistic concern, changing relationships with others and concern for 
younger generations, the relationship with a transcendent being, self-transcendence and coming to terms 
with death”.
Most elderly will be more spiritual as they feel close to God as they age (Tohit et al., (2012) & Re-
imer et al., (2009)). In Islam, it is also said that people tend to be more spiritual as they get older. They 
become more engaged in many religious activities including prayer, fasting, giving alms, pilgrimage 
(Tohit et al., 2012). Ismail (2012) state that Muslims elderly like to plan associated spiritual activities 
Table 1. Islamic months in Islamic calendar
Month
Name
1
Muharram
2
Safar
3
Rabiul Awal
4
Rabiul Akhir
5
Jamadil Awal
6
Jamadil Akhir
7
Rejab
8
Syaaban
9
Ramadhan
10
Syawal
11
Zulkaedah
12
Zulhijjah

33
A Usable Mobile Islamic Calendar for Elderly Users
﻿
such as planning events at mosque, breakfast together at the mosque, attend talk or speech by the experts 
or reciting the Al-Quran together, by referring to the Islamic calendar.
Other spiritual deeds are practicing kind values such as being kind to everyone, caring for each other, 
trusting others, not committing any crime and more (Tohit et al., 2012). Islam has taught its believers that 
doing spiritual activities will be taken into account when a person dies. This is due to Muslim’s belief 
of life after death. Therefore, the Muslim elderly will lead to life satisfaction if they become spiritual 
(Momtaz et al., 2012).
METHODOLOGY
The aim of this study was to suggest a usable design of an Islamic mobile calendar for the elderly us-
ers. To do this, we employed a user test in which we had five elderly mobile phone users and used two 
existing Islamic calendars as probes.
Participants
There were five elderly mobile phone users who agreed to participate in this study. First, we made 
appointments with the participants through phone calls. The study was done at their own home as we 
wanted them to feel comfortable while doing the test. The study took five days to complete as we only 
did one user test per day.
Probes
Two existing Islamic calendars (see (1) http://madinah.se/islamic-calendar-2014/ and (2) http://out.
easycounter.com/external/jamiat.org.za) were chosen as probes for the study. They were chosen because 
our elderly participants were already familiar with the interfaces.
Table 2. Some important events in Islam
Important Events
Meaning
Awal Muharram
Prophet Muhammad migration from Mecca to Medina. Also known as hijra.
Isra’ Mikraj
Prophet Muhammad ascented to the sky.
Ramadhan
Prophet Muhammad received the revelation of the Al-Quran.
Laylatul Qadar
Prophet Muhammad received the first revelation.
Aidil Fitri
To show the end of Ramadhan month.
Aidil Adha
To appreciate the sacrifice of Prophet Ibrahim’s son. Also, to show the end of hajj.
Asyura day
Many great signs of Allah happened on this day.
Arafah day
Indicate the final day for pilgrimage (hajj).
Tasyriq days
Days for eating and remembering Allah. Muslims are forbid to fast during these three days 
consecutively.
Maulidur Rasul
The day Prophet Muhammad was born.

34
A Usable Mobile Islamic Calendar for Elderly Users
﻿
User Testing
A user test was conducted to gather user requirements for the Islamic calendar for the elderly users. 
Interviews and observation were methods used in this study.
•	
Interviews: The interviews took place at their home during the study. Open ended questions were 
used to ask the participants. The interview was done based on one to one basis. Only the research-
ers, the participant and camera man were involved during the study. Interview sessions were re-
corded using a video camera and pictures were taken during the interview session. In addition, 
these interview sessions took fifteen (15) minutes as there were ten questions asked. Furthermore, 
these five interview sessions were conducted in Bahasa Malaysia as some of the participants did 
not understand English. Some of the interview questions were adapted from a few sources for 
example, Wu (2011), Renaud & Biljon (2010) and Moser et al. (2011). The interview questions 
were related to their personal information, reasons for using paper-based calendars and preference 
of calendar interfaces.
•	
Observation: The elderly participants were asked to express their opinions of the design inter-
faces of two existing Islamic calendars. They were seen able to express their answers without the 
researchers’ intervention. During this observational session, think aloud method was used because 
we wanted to understand their thinking. Their answers and opinions as well as their behaviours 
were also recorded using a video camera to ensure that the researchers can replay the video again 
and again to see if there was any missed answer or observation. The researchers also made a house 
tour to observe the location of their paper-based calendar.
RESULTS
This section discusses the results gathered from the user test. Tables 3-8 highlight the results which will 
be further discussed in their respective sections.
From the interviews, we learned that all of the elderly participants used paper-based calendar, how-
ever, only four used mobile calendars. From our observations, we found that their paper-based calendars 
were placed on the wall and on the desk. The size is between pocket-sized and planner-sized calendars. 
As for their mobile calendars, the elderly participants used the built-in calendars that come with their 
mobile phones. Table 3 provides an overview of their personal information and type of calendar used.
Table 3. Existing calendars used by elderly participants
Participant
Age
Gender
Q: What Type of Calendar Do You Currently Use?
Paper-Based Calendar
Mobile Calendar
P1
68
Female
√
√
P2
65
Female
√
√
P3
73
Female
√

P4
82
Male
√
√
P5
72
Male
√
√

35
A Usable Mobile Islamic Calendar for Elderly Users
﻿
Reasons for using Paper-Based Calendars
The participants were asked reasons for their paper-based calendars. The participants’ answers varied 
and have been summarized in Table 4.
As highlighted in the above table, all of the participants preferred their paper-based calendars due 
to large fonts. Large fonts made them see the dates better. As P5 highlighted that he could see the dates 
without having to wear his eye glasses.
Problems of the Paper-Based Calendars
The elderly participants were also asked about problems that they often encounter when using their 
paper-based calendars. Table 5 highlights their shared problems.
Some of the problems addressed were limited spaces, not portable and no Islamic dates. Limited 
spaces was regarded as the most common problem as it was by highlighted by P1, P2 and P3. From 
their answers, we learned that these elderly would actually like to write on the calendar, for example, to 
make an annotation or a remark on the calendar, thus, preferring some spaces for this activity. One of 
them, P4, wanted it to be portable as he could carry it anywhere and P5 wanted it to have Islamic dates.
Islamic Calendar Style Preference
When asked about their preference of the two existing calendar interfaces, Table 6 displays their choices 
and answers.
Table 4. Reasons for using their paper-based calendars
Participant
Q: Why Do You Still Use Paper-Based Calendars?
P1
“It’s easy to use it. The fonts are large. I can see everything in one calendar.”
P2
“It’s easy to see the date, however, it has limited space to write notes.”
P3
“It has large fonts and bright colours and it’s easy to understand.”
P4
“It has large fonts. I can write down simple notes on the calendar. The thing is I tend to forget current date.”
P5
“I can see dates without using my spectacles. I’m familiar with this type of calendar since I was young.”
Table 5. List of problems encountered by the elderly
Participant
Q: What Are the Problems You Often Have when using These Calendars?
P1
“I’ve got no problem with this calendar since this calendar is big and has space for me to write on it.”
P2
“My calendar has limited space to write down any notes. Using calendar planner in the diary is easier since it has 
ample space to write.”
P3
“No problem. It’s just me who somehow tend to forget important and current dates since I do not refer to calendar 
every day.”
P4
“It is not portable because of big.”
P5
“My calendar doesn’t have the Islamic dates. I have to refer to a different calendar to see the Islamic date.”

36
A Usable Mobile Islamic Calendar for Elderly Users
﻿
Opinions on Style 1 and Style 2
Table 7 shows the elderly’s opinions on both interfaces, Style 1 and Style 2.
Based on their feedback, elderly participants who chose Style 1 prefer to have all dates in one interface. 
On the other hand, elderly who chose Style 2 prefer calendar to be organized so that it is easy for them 
to see the dates. These findings are consistent with the data from our previous study with the elderly 
users (Daud, 2013) in which they prefer complete information (Style 1) to an organized layout (Style 
2). The colour coding further enhances the readability, thus, making Style 1 better preferred to Style 2.
Features to Be Included in Mobile Islamic Calendar Application
Elderly participants were then asked about the features that they wanted to include in an Islamic calendar 
application. Table 8 highlights the features suggested by the elderly participants.
From their answers, we can conclude that a mobile Islamic calendar should:
•	
Have big fonts;
•	
Have 5 different colours maximum – some of the colours suggested are green, red, and yellow as 
well as basic colours which are black and white;
Table 6. Islamic calendar style preference
Participant
Q: Which Calendar Style Do 
You Prefer (Style 1/Style 2)?
Q: Why Did You Choose That Style?
P1
Style 1
“Their colours are attractive. An eye catching calendar style.”
P2
Style 1
“I can see all important dates in one calendar. I can also easily differentiate 
between Gregorian dates and Islamic dates.”
P3
Style 2
“I can easily understand the dates stated.”
P4
Style 2
“It’s easy to see the dates. Not congested.”
P5
Style 1
“It’s easy to refer to everything in one calendar. Direct calendar style.”
Table 7. Elderly’s opinions on calendars
Participant
Q: What Is Your Opinion for Style 1 and Style 2?
P1
Style 1: “Colourful calendar. Easy to understand the dates.”
Style 2: “Less colourful. However, if Style 2 was more colourful, I would have preferred Style 2.”
P2
Style 1: “I can understand the calendar at a first glance. I can easily refer to both the Gregorian and Islamic 
dates.” 
Style 2: “Incomplete dates in this calendar style. Less attractive.”
P3
Style 1: “Colourful calendar style, but, it’s hard for me to see the Gregorian and Islamic dates.”
Style 2: “I can easily understand the dates with ‘clean’ interface style. Fewer colours make me understand the 
dates better. “
P4
Style 1: “Too many colours. The calendar interface is too congested. The font used in the calendar is small.”
Style 2: “It is a simple, clear and understandable calendar. White interface background is better than Style 1 
background.”
P5
Style 1: “Easy to understand with the colours used. Colours used have different meaning.”
Style 2: “It is troublesome to refer to the part below of the calendar to know the important dates.”

37
A Usable Mobile Islamic Calendar for Elderly Users
﻿
•	
Have reminder;
•	
Be easy-to-use.
Using the Style 1 template and the participants’ requirements, we produced two interface designs 
of the mobile Islamic calendar. The following section illustrates the calendar designs named Calendar 
Design 1 and Calendar Design 2, respectively.
Calendar Design 1
Design 1 as shown in Figure 1 consists of two weeks in the month with five colors used in the calendar 
design. The first row in yellow shows the Gregorian dates while red row shows the Islamic dates. Dates 
in bold font mean that they are important dates. Font used for this design is Verdana. Font size used for 
Table 8. Features to be included in mobile Islamic calendar
Participant
Q: What Features Do You Want for a Mobile Islamic Calendar?
P1
“I would like to have it on mobile phone, big fonts and colourful.”
P2
“Add a reminder or alarm as it can help remind me of the fasting days. The calendar has to be easy to use.”
P3
“Colours should be right, but not too many. Three (3) colors should be enough.”
P4
“I want big fonts, but not too many colours as they can confuse me. If the application can remind me, use high 
volume.”
P5
“I want big fonts and please include reminder on the important dates for fasting. Three to four colours can be used in 
the calendar application.”
Figure 1. Mobile Islamic calendar design 1

38
A Usable Mobile Islamic Calendar for Elderly Users
﻿
the month (Januari 2013), the days (Is, Se, Ra, Kh, Ju, Sa, Ah), the dates and important notes is 18. For 
this study, the language used for this calendar is Bahasa Malaysia (the Malay Language) because it is 
the preferred language for the calendars by our elderly participants. This calendar design was shown to 
the elderly participants for their evaluative opinions. Table 9 highlights their feedback.
From Table 9, the elderly participants felt that the design was simple, thus, easy to use, however, 
they preferred to have the whole month in one screen interface. Based on their suggestions, we further 
improved the interfaces for the calendar, which is referred to as Calendar Design 2. Next section illus-
trates the Design 2.
Calendar Design 2
Design 2 as in Figure 2 consists of the same number of rows and columns as in Design 1 but with a little 
bit of improvements. As required by the participants, Design 2 now includes one the whole month with 
a bigger font size, and with fewer colours. Font size of the days (Is, Se, Ra, Kh, Ju, Sa, Ah), Gregorian 
and Islamic dates remain the same size which is 18, however, font size for month (Januari 2013 / Safar 
1433) has been increased to 24 and the font size for current date (Kh 5/1/2013 and 11 Safar 1433) and 
important notes (!Puasa Sunat Khamis) is now 20. The language used is still Bahasa Malaysia. To find 
out whether this design was better than the previous one, we conducted another interview with the same 
elderly participants. Their answers were presented in Table 10.
Basically, the elderly participants were satisfied with Calendar Design 2. Based on the studies of the 
two interfaces, Design 2 met the participants’ requirements better than Design 1, thus, was chosen as a 
model to help design mobile Islamic calendar for the elderly users.
Improvements on Calendar Design 2
Two design features have been included on the Design 2: a single button
•	
A Single Button: Button should be included as it is the key of interaction between users and 
calendar application. In this study, Calendar Design 2 includes a button in order to function as 
a calendar application. As suggested by Razak et al. (2013), one button is enough to be placed 
on the application for elderly. This is due to prevent confusion among elderly when they use the 
application. In fact, one button can represent a few common tasks such as add, delete and close. 
Figure 3 shows a single button on the calendar.
Table 9. Elderly’s feedback on calendar design 1
Participant
Q: What Do You Think of Design 1? Any Suggestions?
P1
“Overall content is okay and simple. Understandable at first glance. Verdana font is suitable.”
P2
“If it can fit one whole month on one interface, it will be easier to refer to.”
P3
“Simple interface but the colours used are too many. “
P4
“Make the font size bigger. Try to reduce the colours to three colors only.”
P5
“It is readable with the chosen font. Try to include one whole month.”

39
A Usable Mobile Islamic Calendar for Elderly Users
﻿
A button called “PAPARAN” (meaning in English – display) is added to Calendar Design 2. With 
this button, common tasks such as add (TAMBAH), delete (HAPUS), and close (TUTUP) can be per-
formed. When a user clicks the “PAPARAN” button, those three common tasks button will appear. If a 
user wants to add new event or notes, user can click “TAMBAH PERKARA” button. On the other hand, 
if a user wants to delete the required notes or events, user can click “HAPUS” button. Similarly, if a user 
insists to close the application, user can click “TUTUP” button and return to the main screen. Only three 
(3) common tasks were included because most of the time, the elderly do these tasks with the calendar 
application (Razak et al. (2013)). Furthermore, the elderly are not familiar with the edit or update tasks 
(Razak et al (2012)). To update an event, button “TAMBAH PERKARA” has the same function as 
update event. With these buttons, not only the elderly know about the obligatory and voluntary fasting 
dates but also they can make some notes on important events or plans.
Figure 2. Islamic calendar design 2
Table 10. Elderly’s feedback on calendar design 2
Participant
Q: What Do You Think of Design 2? Are You Satisfied with Design 2?
P1
“Much simpler interface than Design 1. Yes.”
P2
“I can see all the important dates in one whole month. Yes.”
P3
“Simple. Not making the eyes strained as seen in Design 1. Yes.”
P4
“Bigger fonts used. The interface is better. I can see the dates without using spectacles. Yes.”
P5
“It’s easy to refer to the dates and I understand the bold dates easily. Yes.”

40
A Usable Mobile Islamic Calendar for Elderly Users
﻿
Figure 3. Calendar design 2 with a single button
Adapted from Razak et al. (2013).
Figure 4. Calendar design 2 with “HAPUS” dialog box

41
A Usable Mobile Islamic Calendar for Elderly Users
﻿
Calendar Design 2 also has a delete dialog interface. The user needs to click “PAPARAN” button 
and then clicks “HAPUS”. The main interface is blurred to make the users alert with a new dialog box’s 
appearance. This dialog box is used to alert the users and to seek confirmation of their action of delet-
ing the notes or events.
•	
Loud Reminder: High volume should be set as a default setting for the elderly users. Based on the 
literature review, the volume capacity suitable for elderly people should be at least 94 dB (deci-
bels) because their hearing capabilities decrease as they get older. From our study, we found that 
the elderly preferred the original telephone ringing sound since they were already familiar with 
that sound. In addition, the ring sound symbolizes ringing of the mobile phone thus, upon hearing 
the ring, according to them, their attention will be distracted and they would approach their mobile 
phone as fast as they can.
DISCUSSION
Two important lessons were derived from this study: design for aging declines and design for spiritual 
experience. Table 11 suggests a design guideline for a usable mobile Islamic calendar for the elderly users. 
Design for Spiritual Experience
Islamic calendar is not just about telling dates. It is also about organizing elderly religious activities such 
as going to the mosques, reciting the Al-Quran, attending usrah, tajwid, marhaban classes and performing 
voluntary fasting, as identified by Tohit et al. (2012). People become more spiritual when they age. In 
Islam, Muslims believe that any spiritual activities will definitely benefit them in hereafter (Tohit et al., 
2012). This is due to a fact that they fear death (Momtaz et al., 2012). To design for spiritual experience, 
we recommend some audios of Quranic verses or hadith and other Islamic interfaces such as Arabic texts 
and Islamic images or colours, to be included on the Islamic calendar interfaces.
Table 11. Design for aging declines
Aging Decline
Design Suggestion
Cognitive (memory) 
overload
One button interface 
Zajicek (2004) recommends decreasing the number of choices wherever possible. Razak et al. (2013) even 
suggests only ONE button. This is due to the fact that the elderly will easily get confused and this confusion will 
lead them to decline using technology. Furthermore, the content should be complete as elderly like to see as a 
whole and this statement is agreed by Hawthorn (2006), Renaud & Biljon (2010) and Daud & Razak (2012).
Perceptual – visual 
and auditory
• Visual – 18-24 font size, 3-5 bright colours 
Phiriyapokanon (2011) suggests that the suitable font size for elderly is 18 pt and using sans serif font. The font 
sizes used in the calendar design interface are 18 pt and 24 pt. Moreover, the font used in the calendar interface 
design was Verdana, a sans serif font. As for the number of colours, we suggest 3-5 only when designing for the 
elderly. 
• Auditory – high volume 94 dB above, ring sound, confirmation 
We suggest high volume, recommended 94 dB above and ring sound (Inglis, et al., 2003) for the calendar 
reminder alarm. Audio is included to notify the elderly users about the important dates. In addition, Zajicek 
(2004) also suggests the designers to include confirmatory statements wherever possible.

42
A Usable Mobile Islamic Calendar for Elderly Users
﻿
FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTION
To extend this work, we recommend that researchers:
•	
Study how Islamic calendar is used for spiritual activities;
•	
Provide a design guideline that encourages spiritual activities, thus, enhancing user experience;
•	
Do a usability test on a mobile Islamic calendar.
CONCLUSION
To design usably, user test should be conducted at least twice as this study has shown previously. User 
testing should be done in any development work although there is abundance of literature discussing your 
user population. Without a user test, you will not understand your users, thus, you will not meet their 
requirements. Literature is only for your guidance and reference. In the development, it is important to 
apply any established design principles as they can guide you to design usably for your users. From this 
study, we concluded that designing for aging declines is the right principles to be applied to an elderly 
calendar, however, for a mobile Islamic calendar, it is recommended that design for spirituality should 
also be considered in the design.
REFERENCES
Armstrong, N., Nugent, C., Moore, G., & Finlay, D. (2010). Using smartphones to address the needs of 
persons with Alzheimer’s disease. Ann. Telecommun, 65(9-10), 485–495. doi:10.1007/s12243-010-0165-3
Ayduz, D. S. (2007). Calendars and Almanac in Islamic Civilization. Foundation for Science Technol-
ogy and Civilization, 1 - 14.
Costa, A., Laredo, J. L., Novais, P., Corchado, J. M., & Neves, J. (2010). iGenda: An Event Scheduler 
for Common Users and Centralised Systems. AISC, 73, 55–62.
Dalby, P. (2006). Is there a process of spiritual change or development associated with ageing? A 
critical review of research. Ageing & Mental Health, 10(1), 4–12. doi:10.1080/13607860500307969 
PMID:16338808
Daud, N. A. (2013). Elderly Use Experiences and Perceptions On Online News and Communication 
Technology Devices. Masters Thesis.
Descheneaux, C., & Pigot, H. (2009). Interactive Calendar to Help Maintain Social Interactions for 
Elderly People and People with Mild Cognitive Impairments. ICOST, 2009, 117–124.
Hawthorn, D. (2006). Designing Effective Interfaces for Older Users. University of Waikato.
Hidayat, T., Mahasena, P., Dermawan, B., Herdiwiijaya, D., Setyanto, H., Irfan, M.,... Santoso, A. (2010). 
Developing Information System on Lunar Crescent Observations. ITB J. Sci., 42A(1), 67 - 80.

43
A Usable Mobile Islamic Calendar for Elderly Users
﻿
Inglis, E. A., Szymkowiak, A., Gregor, P., Newell, A. F., Hine, N., Shah, P., & Evans, J. et al. (2003). 
Issues surrounding the user-centred development of a new interactive memory aid. Information Society, 
2, 226–234.
MCMC. (2005). Hand Phone Users Survey. Cyberjaya, Selangor: Malaysian Communications and 
Multimedia Commission.
Momtaz, Y. A., Hamid, T. A., Ibrahim, R., Yahaya, N., & Abdullah, S. S. (2012). Moderating effect 
of Islamic religiosity on the relationship between chronic medical conditions and psychological well-
being among elderly Malays. Psychogeriatrcis, 12(1), 43–53. doi:10.1111/j.1479-8301.2011.00381.x 
PMID:22416828
Moser, C., Fuchsberger, V., Neureiter, K., Sellner, W., & Tscheligi, M. (2011). Elderly’s Social Pres-
ence Supported by ICT’s. In IEEE International Conference on Privacy, Security, Risk, and Trust (pp. 
738–741). IEEE Computing Society.
Neustaedter, C., Brush, A. B., & Greenberg, S. (2007). A Digital Family in the Home: Lessons from 
Field Trials of LINC. Proceedings Graphic Interface, 199 - 206.
Penprase, B. E. (2011). Stars That Bind: Civilization, Calendars, and the Sky. The Power of Stars, 133 - 168.
Phiriyapokanon, T. (2011). Is a big button interface enough for elderly users? Towards user interface 
guidelines for elderly users. Master Thesis.
Raza, A. M. (2011). Ashura Day (10th Muharram). Retrieved 12 31, 2012, from Islamic Centre: http://
www.islamiccentre.org/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=133:ashura-day-10th-
muharram&catid=19:islamic-calendar&Itemid=42
Razak, F. H. A., Razak, N. A., & Ahmad, N. A. (2013, September). How Simple is Simple: Our Experi-
ence with Older Adult Users. Proceedings of the APCHI, 2013, 24–27.
Razak, F. H. A., Sulo, R., & Adnan, W. A. W. (2012). Mental Model of Older Adults for Reminder 
System. In Proceedings of The 10th Asia Pacific Computer Human Interaction 2012. ACM.
Reimer, K. S., Dueck, A. C., Adelchanow, L. V., & Muto, J. D. (2009). Developing Spiritual Identity: 
Retrospective Accounts From Muslim,Jewish, and Christian Exemplars. International Handbook of 
Education for Spirituality, Care and Wellbeing, 3, 507 - 523.
Renaud, K., & Biljon, J. V. (2010). Worth-centred mobile phone design for older users. University Ac-
cess Information Society.
Stamato, C., & Moraes, A. d. (2012). Mobile Phones and Elderly People: a noisy communication. IOS 
Press.
Tohit, N., Browning, C. J., & Radermacher, H. (2012). ‘We want a peaceful life here and hereafter’: Healthy 
ageing perspectives of older Malays in Malaysia. Ageing and Society, 32(03), 405–424. doi:10.1017/
S0144686X11000316

44
A Usable Mobile Islamic Calendar for Elderly Users
﻿
Wu, D. (2011). Identifying Usability Issues in Personal Calendar Tools. NDT, 2011, 136–146.
Zajicek, M. (2004). Successful and available: Interface design exemplars for older users. Interacting 
With Computers, 16(3), 411–430. doi:10.1016/j.intcom.2004.04.003
KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Elderly Usability: An interface that is usable for the elderly users.
Elderly Users: A user population aged 60 and above.
Islamic Calendar: A calendar that has Islamic dates, days and months based on Islamic year.
Mobile Application: An application that is developed for mobile devices.
Mobile Calendar: A calendar that is installed and for use on mobile devices such as mobile phones, 
smart phones and tablets.
Muslim Elderly: An elderly whose religion is Islam.
Spiritual Experience: A type of user experience that is a result of using a spiritual application or 
technology.
Usable Design: An interface design that is usable for a specific group of users.

45
Copyright © 2016, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter  3
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-4666-9438-5.ch003
ABSTRACT
Mobile application industry has boomed tremendously since it was first introduced in 2007 which has 
gain practitioners’ and researchers’ attention. There are substantial numbers of researches on mobile 
applications that have contributed to business development. This research is aimed at investigating the 
factors influencing individuals’ purchase of mobile application. An exploratory study has been conducted 
to gain understanding of Malaysian’s perspective on mobile application purchase intention. Unstructured 
interviews were conducted among 19 research participants randomly selected from different background. 
The results show that perceived usefulness, facilitating condition, perceived value, perceived enjoyment, 
perceived fee, electronic word-of-mouth (eWOM), application design in terms of features and visual, 
trust, security, privacy, device compatibility and device consumption in terms of power and memory 
relate to individual’s intention to purchase mobile application.
INTRODUCTION
In this digitized world, using mobile technology has become the way of life for many. As the technol-
ogy evolves, there have been massive transformations from the very first mobile devices and the current 
existed mobile devices in terms of size, weight, design, power, capabilities and functionalities. Mobile 
devices have improved functionalities from a single-purpose communication device (voice and text) to a 
Social and Technical Perspective 
of Individual’s Intention to 
Purchase Mobile Application
Ili Hawa Ahmad
Universiti Teknologi Malaysia, Malaysia
Norshidah Mohamed
Prince Sultan University, Saudi Arabia & Universiti Teknologi Malaysia, Malaysia
Ab Razak Che Hussain
Universiti Teknologi Malaysia, Malaysia

46
Social and Technical Perspective of Individual’s Intention to Purchase Mobile Application
﻿
dynamic device i.e. smartphones that support a variety of functionalities (voice, text, mobile commerce, 
mobile entertainment, social networks, navigation and planner). The difference between smartphones and 
traditional mobile device is smartphones is embedded with an operating system which enables the third 
parties programme installation i.e. applications (Yan et al. 2012). Currently, the iPhone 5 from Apple 
was found to be the best smartphones available (Business Insider, 2013). According to The International 
Telecommunication Union (ITU) (2013), mobile subscriptions were 6 billion in 2011. However, the 
number has increased to 16.7% in 2012 (mobiThingking, 2013). Smartphones also have gained popularity 
among Malaysian consumers (Nielsen, 2011). In Asia, it is evident that Malaysia has shown a tremen-
dous growth in its mobile cellular market in terms of penetration rate and airtime use. According to Goi 
(2008), Malaysia is second after Singapore in terms of mobile penetration rate in South East Asia. It is 
predicted that almost 60% of the Malaysian population will own a smartphone by 2015 as the govern-
ment provides the RM200 rebate for young Malaysians to buy smartphones (Business Times, 2013).
The tremendous growth of mobile device adoption rate triggers the evolvement of mobile wireless 
technologies and the most recent and popular trend now is mobile application (Celular News, 2011). 
Mobile applications are software packages that can be installed and executed in a portable devices i.e. 
smartphones and tablets (Yan et al. 2010). According to the International Data Corporation (2010), there 
were 300,000 mobile applications available in the market after its first launch. The number is predicted to 
grow rapidly as the number of downloaded applications worldwide is expected to rise from 10.9 billion 
in 2010 to 76.9 billion in 2014. It is estimated that 1.2 billion people used mobile application in 2012 
and the number is forecasted to grow by 29.8% every year. In 2017, the number is expected to reach 4.4 
billion users with Asia having the highest number of mobile application usage.
BACKGROUND
The last recent decades witnessed the popularity of traditional internet-based online content services: 
e-book, e-learning and e-music. Nowadays, the trend is mobile application. Pew Research Center’s In-
ternet & American Life Project (2011) defined mobile application as “an end-user software application 
designed for a mobile device operating system which extends that device’s capabilities.” The environment 
of mobile application has changed after Apple released the iPhone (Charland and Leroux, 2011). The 
existence of iPhone AppStore in 2008 triggered the massive growth of mobile application development 
as developers have dedicated medium to sell their applications and get engaged with the market societies 
(Wasserman, 2010). Mobile application store like Apple AppStore offer various types of application for 
utility to the users in assist them in their daily activities. Examples of applications available are maps, 
mobile banking, internet browser, mobile ticketing and etc. The existence of those applications has 
completely changed users’ mobile experiences (Charland and Leroux, 2011) and their daily activities to 
do certain tasks. Among various types of mobile application available in the market, the most popular 
and generates huge amount of money is mobile games application (Portio Research, 2013).
Ivan and Zamfiroiu (2011) have classified five categories of mobile application. Table 1 shows the 
mobile application categories.
One of the reasons why people buy a smartphone is because it allows additional applications in 
the device apart from the pre-installed one (Prata et al. 2012). There are two types of mobile applica-
tions which are available in the market nowadays: free for downloads and paid for downloads. For paid 
downloads, it is a pay-per-user service-based digital product whereby it has cost that customers have to 

47
Social and Technical Perspective of Individual’s Intention to Purchase Mobile Application
﻿
endure to use the service. According to Gartner (2012), the download rate figure is a landslide between 
free applications downloads and paid application downloads. However, despite the availability of the 
free mobile applications for downloads there are people who are willing to pay for the paid mobile ap-
plications and the number is increasing each year. This situation gives the decision making power to the 
consumer. The consumer may choose either to purchase or abandon the service even when the service 
is benefitting them (Wang, 2008).
Prior researchers have studied on mobile application behavioral intention i.e. technology adoption, 
acceptance, use and continued usage in different context. Table 2 shows the summary of those studies.
Prior studies (as shown in Table 2) on mobile application purchase intention have focused on mobile 
games (Barbera et al. 2008), mobile TV (Wang et al. 2013a), location-based application (Keith et al. 
2011) and mobile newspaper (Wang et al. 2013b). Barbera et al. (2008) aimed to investigate the key 
drivers of mobile games adoption and users’ willingness to spend in playing games. Through online 
survey, the result shows that positive relationship between users’ prior gaming experience and their 
spending behaviour. However, users’ personal characteristics do not give any effect. Wang et al. (2013a) 
studied on the factors influencing users’ intention to use and their willingness to purchase mobile TV 
application. The research model was formed by integrating three theories i.e. Social Cognitive Theory, 
Motivation Theory and perceived value to study the utilitarian and hedonic effects. Social influence, 
personal innovativeness, perceived usefulness, perceived enjoyment and perceived value has shown 
positive significant relationship with mobile TV use and their willingness to pay. Wang et al. (2013b) 
studied on users’ adoption and purchasing intention of mobile newspaper after free trial by integrating two 
theories i.e. Expectation Confirmation Theory and Technology Acceptance Model. The results suggested 
that IT usage confirmation is positively related to their IT post-trial beliefs (i.e. perceived usefulness, 
perceived ease-of-use, and perceived enjoyment) and IT satisfaction, IT post-trial beliefs are positively 
related to their IT satisfaction thus influencing IT purchase intention. Furthermore, users’ satisfaction 
is positively related to their IT purchase intention and perceived fee of IT has a positive influence on 
users’ purchasing intention. Ivan and Zamfiroiu (2011) also mentioned that a quality mobile application 
must consider these characteristics i.e. generality, reliability, accuracy, user friendly interface, continuity, 
portability and security.
Past studies have employed the traditional theoretical information system (IS) framework of user 
acceptance of information technology (IT) i.e. Theory of Acceptance Model (TAM) (Lin, 2007; Yusta 
and Schultz, 2011; Kim and Hong, 2010; Yi et al. 2012; Ghalandari, 2012; Wan Chik and Lokman, 
Table 1. Categories of mobile application
Categories
Explanation
Applications for general 
information
Applications that provide information in a certain zone i.e. weather, TV program, horoscope and 
etc.
Applications using personal data 
to login
Applications that require the users to provide personal information for authentication to get access 
i.e. mobile banking
Network communication 
applications
Applications that become a medium of communication among users in the same application i.e. 
social network sites
Economic applications
Applications by which the users can purchases goods, make payments and other economic 
activities i.e. Amazon.com
Games
Entertainment applications

48
Social and Technical Perspective of Individual’s Intention to Purchase Mobile Application
﻿
Table 2. Prior studies on mobile application behavioral intention
Context
Author(s)
Country
Objective
Mobile games
Liang and Yeh (2010)
Taiwan
Factors influencing mobile games continued usage.
Ha et al. (2007)
Korea
Factors influencing mobile games adoption intention.
Kim et al. (2010)
Korea
The characteristics that influence users to download mobile 
games.
Bao et al. (2011)
China
Mobile online games implementation and application.
Park et al. (2013)
Korea
Factors influencing mobile gamers acceptance of mobile 
social network games
Zhou (2013b)
China
Factors influencing mobile games adoption intention.
Liu and Li (2011)
Finland
Factors influencing mobile games adoption intention.
Park and Kim (2013)
Korea
Mobile games success factors.
Petrova and Qu (2007)
New Zealand
Factors influencing mobile games adoption intention.
Sedek et al. (2011)
Malaysia
Individual characteristic in online gaming and mobile 
application use among students in higher education 
institution.
Barbera et al. (2008)
Spain
Factors influencing m-games adoption and purchase.
Mobile TV
Choi and Totten (2012)
Korea and 
USA
Factors influencing mobile TV acceptance
Zhou (2013)
China
Factors influencing mobile TV adoption intention.
Soscia et al. (2011)
Italy
Factors influencing mobile TV adoption intention.
Borges et al. (2011)
Portugal
Factors influencing mobile TV adoption intention.
Loebbecke et al. (2008)
Italy
Factors influencing mobile TV adoption intention.
Jung et al. (2009)
USA
Factors influencing mobile TV adoption intention.
Chen et al. (2010)
USA
Factors influencing mobile TV adoption intention.
Constantiou and Mahnke 
(2010)
Denmark
Factors influencing mobile TV adoption intention.
Wang et al. (2013c)
Taiwan
Users’ acceptance and willingness to pay for Mobile TV 
application.
Location-based 
Application
Keith et al. (2011)
USA
Users’ acceptance and willingness to pay for location-based 
services with mobile applications.
Weather Forecasting 
Application
Lim et al. (2013)
Korea
Purchase and dropout behaviour of mobile application users
Social Network 
Application
Taylor et al. (2011)
USA
Mobile Application Adoption by Young Adults
Mobile commerce 
application
Xin et al. (2010)
China
The adoption of mobile commerce application
Ervasti and Helaakoski 
(2010)
Finland
Users’ acceptance of application-based mobile service 
acceptance and development.
Mohelska and Tomaskova 
(2010)
Czech 
Republic
The use of mobile applications in business environment.
Mobile E-books 
Application
Gao and Deng (2012)
China
Users’ Acceptance of mobile e-books application.
Mobile newspaper
Wang et al. (2013)
China
User adoption and purchasing intention after free trial: 
an empirical study of mobile newspapers

49
Social and Technical Perspective of Individual’s Intention to Purchase Mobile Application
﻿
2006), Theory of Reasoned Actions (TRA) (Ajzen and Fishbein, 1980; Weisbergh et al. 2011; Suki et 
al. 2011; Cha, 2011; Yusta and Schultz, 2011; Rofiq et al. 2011; Yi et al. 2012), Theory of Planned 
Behaviour (TPB) (Ajzen, 1985; Weisbergh et al. 2011; Lin, 2007; Yusta and Schultz, 2011; Rofiq et al. 
2011; Huang, 2009), Theory of Diffusion of Innovation (TDI) (Yusta and Schultz, 2011) and Quality 
(Kim and Hong, 2010; Ghalandari, 2012; Malmarugan, 2008) to investigate consumers’ purchase inten-
tion behaviour. The models have been validated across many studies’ contexts but most of the studies 
have neglected monetary, social and emotional aspects in a unified model (Turel, Serenko, & Bontis, 
2010). Based on the issues highlighted, demands on research to investigate the factors influencing us-
ers’ intention to purchase mobile application are needed to give benefit for mobile services industry. So, 
this research is aimed to fill the gap by integrating both social and technical perspectives in highlighting 
factors influencing users’ intention to purchase mobile application. Next section discussed issues existed 
in mobile application environment.
Issues in Mobile Application
Usability has been one of the important issues in mobile application industry. Nielsen (2003) defined 
usability as a quality of attributes that assesses how easy user interfaces is to use. Nielsen (1994) un-
derpinned usability into five attributed; efficiency, satisfaction, learnability, memorability and errors. 
Harrison et al. (2013) in their research in usability of mobile application found that usability is measured 
in these three attributes; effectiveness, efficiency and satisfaction. The application should be accurately 
and completely functional to achieve users’ goals. When using the application, the users should feel free 
from discomfort and have positive attitude towards the application. The application should be easy to 
learn and the process is memorable so that users can use it again after a period of time without difficulty. 
Last but not least, the application should be in low error rate. It often happened that users experience 
difficulty with the ‘search’ and ‘option’ buttons in an application. Furthermore, other than usability is-
sues existed in the application itself, there are usability problems found in the application stores. Prata 
et al (2012), collected information from the 321 respondents from Brazil on their opinion of application 
search, purchase and evaluation process based on their experience using Android, Apple, Blackberry and 
Nokia application stores. They found that, 6.3% were not well aware of the dedicated application store for 
their smartphones while 67.5% of the respondents claimed that searching for the correct applications has 
been the common problem. Furthermore, 68.4% of the respondents stated that they used to abandoned 
the application purchase process because the acquisition process was too long, the application selected 
have negative evaluation, the information provided was not enough, there were a lot of negative com-
ments available and the price was too expensive. Majority of the respondents with 90.3% said that they 
had bad experience in dealing with application stores and the application downloaded. It is important to 
educate application developer to service the consumers for their excellent experience.
Another issue is mobile device may be infected by malware when consumers unknowingly downloaded 
application that contain a malware. It may originated from games, utility or other useful application as it 
is hard to differentiate between an authentic application and one that contains malware such as viruses, 
Trojan horses, spyware and spam. The malware can trick users to reveal their personal information. Unlike 
desktop computers or portable computers, most of mobile devices do not come with pre-installed security 
software. Some users choose to not install security software because it may affect the performance of 
the device and reduce battery life on some devices. Moreover, after some time applications or software 
on mobile devices will become outdated. The updated versions are not always developed and released 

50
Social and Technical Perspective of Individual’s Intention to Purchase Mobile Application
﻿
in a timely manner and even when it is available the notification may failed to reach the customers. The 
risk of using outdated software is the device may have unauthorised modification by hackers.
The last few decades see piracy affecting the movies, music and software industries. Now, the pirates 
have shifted to mobile application industry and taking advantages over the emergence of the smartphones 
and mobile application phenomenon. The mobile application developers claimed that piracy provides 
barriers on the legitimate sales successfulness. According to Carl Howe, the Yankee Group Vice Presi-
dent, if the piracy does not exist, the mobile application sales would be 20% to 50% higher than total 
sales (Business Week, 2012). Moreover, a mobile games application developer i.e. Plague Inc., James 
Vaughan said, 35% of the game’s downloads were illegal (Business Week, 2012). The website 24/7 
Wall St. estimated that Apple Application Store has lost $450 million to piracy and cracked downloads 
since the store was opened in July 2008. Furthermore, Android’s developers have reported that among 
100,000 downloads of mobile applications only 10% were paid. Furthermore, according to Android’s 
developers, piracy has cost them in excess in revenue making, increases their support and server costs 
due to substantial loads forced by pirated copies (Yankee Group, 2012). In Malaysia, 78% of computer 
users stated that they have installed pirated software (BSA Global Software Piracy Study, 2011). The 
software piracy commercial value has reached RM2 billion. However, the piracy rate in Malaysia has 
decreased one point in 2011 with 55% compared to 56% in 2010.
Last but not least are functionality performance issues. Often, users are less patient waiting for sites 
that do not load as fast as expected. Research shows that 78% application users would expect an appli-
cation to launch within two seconds. If users are not happy with the performance, almost half of them 
will abandon the application (Ruiz, 2013). According to Lapcevic (2013), only 40% of the listed ap-
plications in Apple Application Store and Google Play are actually been used and most of them offered 
inconsistence performance, do not work properly, slowdown and have problems. Users may value the 
application as poor if the constantly undergoing bad experience in using mobile application. In order to 
sustain in this business, it is vital for practitioners to understand the success factors that may enhance the 
mobile application business. Thus, this research is aimed at investigating the factors influencing users’ 
to purchase mobile application.
METHODOLOGY
An exploratory study was conducted to gain understanding of Malaysians’ perceptions on mobile applica-
tion purchase intention. According to Frey and Fontena (1993), researcher conducted exploratory study 
in the early phases of a research project in the situation where the study context is unfamiliar and new 
to the researcher and the social context. Mobile application industry has just boomed in the society for 
the past three years. Mostly, pass researches focused on users’ acceptance, adoption and usage intention 
of dedicated mobile application context. Furthermore, the studies were conducted through quantitative 
or experiment methods which may limit the view of the result. Although there are few studies been 
conducted on mobile application purchase intention, it were insufficient to conclude on the social and 
technical perspectives factors as there are various types of mobile application which serve for different 
purposes for users. Thus, exploratory is essential in this research to wide-open the view from mobile 
application users. It was an unstructured interview to 19 randomly selected respondents (undergradu-
ates and postgraduates students) in a public university in Malaysia. In order to get broader perspectives 

51
Social and Technical Perspective of Individual’s Intention to Purchase Mobile Application
﻿
of mobile application usage, respondents from different background were chosen based on the listed 
criteria as will be discussed later as the usage of smartphones is global regardless background, origins, 
age and culture. The respondents were personally approached and been asked whether they are willing 
to be interviewed. King and Horrocks (2010) said social justice and inclusivity ideology were reinforced 
by many of qualitative research projects to provide guide in the exploration process of participating 
population. Conducting qualitative study will provide rich and in-depth information on the discussed 
phenomena compared to quantitative method. For example, grounded by the philosophies of ‘participa-
tory democracy’ a small group of jury is randomly recruited which consisted of 12 to 20 people. The 
main principle of a citizens’ jury is the belief that once a small sample of a population have heard the 
evidence, their deliberations can fairly represent the perspectives of the wider community (King and 
Horrocks, 2010).
The exploratory study was conducted in two phases. In the first phase, 16 respondents have been 
interviewed to explore the trend of mobile application purchase intention. The respondents were chosen 
based on these criteria. First, they must own at least a smartphone. Second, they have used at least a 
mobile application. The interviews have been conducted through three mediums (in-person, phone and 
online messenger). All sessions were set in a private setting. It took three to four interviews session 
to iteratively refined the interview protocol before became relatively stable. The questions have been 
approach differently to respondents following the circumstances faced by certain respondents. The 
questions focused on the reason of why they would want to purchase mobile application and what their 
main concerns in purchasing mobile application are (reviews from other users, security and privacy). All 
conversations has been recorded and transcribed to reveal the result. There are 10 male and six female 
respondents participated in this study. Age of the respondents is between 27 to 34 years old. Majority 
of the respondents are married. Of 6 respondents, six were from engineering, five from IT, three from 
business and two from education background. The most preferred mobile applications social media 
followed by games and organiser. To summarise, mobile application users would purchase mobile ap-
plication for these reasons i.e. enjoyment, reasonable price, perceived value, reviews (e-WOM), facili-
tating condition, security, compatibility, trust, usefulness, design (visual and completeness) and device 
consumption (power and memory).
To meet the saturation point the second phase of interviews has been conducted through online mes-
senger to another three respondents to gain understanding on mobile games application purchase inten-
tion. The respondents were chosen based on these criteria. First, they must own at least a smartphones. 
Second, they have used at least a mobile application. Third, they must have experience of playing mobile 
games application. Last but not least, they must have experience of mobile games application purchase. 
The respondents were asked with the same questions as in the first phase and whether they agree or not 
with factors mentioned above. The result proved that the saturation level is met.
Although the respondents’ employment was not exhaustive, the result was enough to show clear 
directions for this study and to serve as a foundation for future work.
EXPLORATORY STUDY RESULTS
The results section is divided into two categories (1) technical perspectives (2) social perspectives to 
explain the reasons of why users would want to purchase mobile application.

52
Social and Technical Perspective of Individual’s Intention to Purchase Mobile Application
﻿
Technical Perspectives
Technical perspectives refer to IT infrastructure, overall technical quality, ease-of-use, usefulness, 
security and privacy measures and design. This study revealed that perceived usefulness, application 
design, security, privacy, device compatibility, device consumption, perceived value, perceived fee and 
facilitating condition are technical reasons of why they would purchase mobile application.
Perceived Usefulness
Davis (1989) defined perceived usefulness as “the degree to which a person believes that using a par-
ticular system would enhance his or her job performance.” Perceived usefulness is originated from the 
original classical theoretical model of Information Systems i.e. Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) 
developed by Davis (1986). TAM was developed to explain user acceptance of information technology 
(IT). The main constructs of TAM are perceived usefulness and perceived-ease-of-use. According to 
TAM, an individual’s behavioral intention to accept, adopt and use IT is dependent on their perceived 
usefulness and perceived ease-of-use of the technology. TAM has been adopted, tested and modified 
thousands times in prior studies for the past decades. Leong et al. (2011) examined the causal relation-
ship between perceived usefulness and consumer intention to use mobile entertainment in Malaysia. 
The findings revealed that perceived usefulness predicts Malaysian mobile entertainment adoption be-
havior. Wu et al. (2007) found that perceived usefulness has direct positive relationship with healthcare 
professional mobile healthcare systems (MHS). Kim et al. (2010) and Schierz et al. (2010) confirmed 
that perceived usefulness has strong relationship with users’ intention to use mobile payment. Jung et 
al. (2009) studied on users’ intention to adopt mobile TV and found that perceived usefulness strongly 
predicted the behavioral intention. Other studies that emphasized perceived usefulness in mobile com-
merce are Al-Alak and Al-Nawas (2010), Thakur and Srivastava (2012), Kumar and Mukherjee (2013), 
Chong (2013), Chong et al. (2012), Chen et al. (2013), Yang (2012), Cheng and Huang (2013), Shih 
and Chen (2013), Wang et al. (2013), Chen (2012), Sayid et al. (2012) and Chen and Lauffer (2012).
In this exploratory study, the perceived usefulness of mobile application was evaluated in terms of 
how beneficial the mobile application in assisting users in their everyday life tasks that may affect their 
behavioral intention to purchase their desired mobile application.
The application is useful to me.
I will buy application if it is useful to me.
I will buy application if it is useful and give benefits to my everyday life activities.
I will buy application if it is useful. Mobile applications provide easy access to the Internet without the 
need of computer.
I will buy if the application is useful and make my life easier.
To follow current trends, organizer help to ease manage my activities.

53
Social and Technical Perspective of Individual’s Intention to Purchase Mobile Application
﻿
Mobile application offers ease of usage when I need to go online from anywhere I am.
Respondents said they would want to purchase mobile application if the application is important, 
beneficial and provide convenience by assisting them which makes their tasks easy to handle. For ex-
ample, people with tight schedules always rely on organizer application to manage their daily activities 
systematically. People in their weight loss programme use fitness application to monitor their daily exercise 
routines and food diary. Nowadays, Instagram application has been popular choice for online sellers to 
market their products. Nowadays, there are many different types of mobile applications available in the 
store which offered free and paid versions. For example games, books, business, weather, shopping and 
health. There are thousands of application has been developed for each of these categories. However, 
users are not fully utilized it due to the downsides they faced when they are using the application.
Application Design
According to DeLone and McLean (2003) system quality “was measured in terms of “ease-of-use, func-
tionality, reliability, flexibility, data quality, portability, integration and importance.” Thus, game design 
falls under this construct. Prior researches have emphasized the importance of visual attractiveness in 
games. Ha et al. (2007) found that perceived attractiveness of the games influence users’ attitude toward 
playing mobile games. Ho and Wu (2012) suggested that design aesthetics increases users’ intention to 
purchase virtual goods in online games. Cyr et al. (2006) found that design aesthetics leads to mobile 
commerce users’ loyalty. Li and Yeh (2010) suggested that design aesthetics significantly impact web-
site characteristics component. Ho and Wu (2012) found that aesthetics are related to users’ intention to 
purchase virtual goods. According to DeLone and McLean (2003) information quality was measured in 
terms of accuracy, timeliness, completeness, relevance and consistency. Thus, game completeness falls 
under this construct. Prior researches have studied on the information quality of technology. Kuo et al 
(2009) found that the content quality influence users’ perceived value, users’ satisfaction, and users’ 
post-purchase intention in mobile value-added services. Zhou (2011) found that information quality is 
the critical success factors of mobile web site adoption. Zhou (2013b) found that content quality influ-
ence users’ intention to use mobile games.
In this exploratory study, application design refers to the aesthetic design, accessibility, functionality 
and completeness of the application. This is based on the responses by the respondents when they been 
asked why they would purchase mobile application.
I buy mobile application to be updated and follow current trend.
I purchase mobile application to gain more access to the application.
The application offer high quality of visual effects and more access to the application to get full benefits 
of the application.
Paid mobile applications offer full range of use and functionality. Quality of visual effects depends on 
the features of the device itself.
Most of free mobile applications do not offer full access content i.e. mobile Al-Quran application.

54
Social and Technical Perspective of Individual’s Intention to Purchase Mobile Application
﻿
Paid game application addicted me to compete with others through online to get the highest score. The 
functions are advanced compare to free application.
There are several versions of an application, only partial fundamental or basic application is allowed 
for downloading a free application and the application will not provide full service as it should be used 
by the user. The free application also cannot be the latest update as paid or purchased applications.
According to the respondents, they purchase mobile application to keep themselves updated with the 
new version of the application. Some of the applications are free at the very beginning and after some 
times, to continue using the application users are prompted to update to a new version which some may 
need to be purchased. Furthermore, free application does not offer full range usage of the whole applica-
tion. To gain more access to the application and enjoy more functions, benefits and flexibility, users are 
required to purchase the application. Moreover, for gamers some paid version games application offers 
high quality of visual effects.
Security
Kolsaker and Payne (2002) believed that security reflects “the perceptions regarding the reliability of the 
payment methods used and the mechanisms of data transmission and storage.” Dong-Her et al. (2004) 
said that, the main obstacle to the e-commerce growth is the lack of security elements which signify the 
presence of risk to the customers. Prior studies have demonstrated that security has particularly influence 
the customers’ trust of online environment (Kim et al. 2011; Kim et al. 2010; Escobar-Rodríguez and 
Carvajal-Trujillo (2014). Discussions on the importance of security in mobile application purchase with 
the respondents revealed that users are mostly concerned on security in payment process because of the 
involvement of their credit card and they have to reveal their personal information to the payment systems.
I am concern with security issue since the payment is through credit card.
I had thought about security and other issue like privacy, reliability of the software.
I consider the security issues.
I am concern about security because it will cause my money to be deducted from accounts. The security 
of transaction is much important compared to anything else.
Although security issue is at the top of their priority, the only main concern here was only at the 
payment process. Security measures are broad. It seems that they do not aware of the current issue 
in mobile application which has revealed that there are hidden malware embedded in the application 
which exposed users to danger if there are no security measures has been taken to protect the device. It 
is strongly recommended to create awareness in this issue to the users.

55
Social and Technical Perspective of Individual’s Intention to Purchase Mobile Application
﻿
Privacy
Dinev and Hart (2006) defined privacy concern as the users’ anxiety about his/her information privacy. 
Users’ privacy concern is proved to reflect attitude towards personal information (Zhou, 2011). Those 
who with high level privacy concern will expect high privacy risk by revealing their personal information 
to the online environment. In order to use or to purchase goods through online environment, consumers 
need to expose their personal information. This kind of situation makes the environment is vulnerable 
and opened for risk which leads the consumer to feels their privacy will be violated. Prior researches 
have investigate the importance of privacy concern in different contexts i.e. e-commerce (Sheng et al., 
2008; Lee et al. 2007), e-health (Angst and Agarwal, 2009), e-recruitment (Tong, 2009) and social 
networking communities. Privacy concern has found to affect consumers’ behavior indirectly through 
trust (Liu et al. 2005; Bansal et al. 2010), perceived risk (Slyke et al. 2006) and perceived usefulness 
(Kumar et al. 2008).
In the exploratory study, respondents have expressed their privacy concern in purchasing mobile ap-
plication since the purchasing process needs them to disclose their credit cards or debit cards personal 
information.
I concern with my personal information disclosure.
Yes, if the rating is low and the developer is not well-known may suspected piracy. But if it is from Apple, 
I am fully trust them to reveal my personal information to make payment transactions. Plus, I never 
encountered any problem so far in purchasing mobile application as the process is very easy.
Malware does not only risk on security but it also could jeopardize users’ private personal informa-
tion if the device is infected. It could steal, modify and use users’ personal information for their own 
purposes. Therefore, this issue is highly important to address.
Device Compatibility
Rogers (1995) defined compatibility as “the degree to which the innovation fits with the potential 
adopter’s existing values, previous experiences and current needs.” Compatibility was drawn from In-
novation Diffusion Theory in information systems users’ behavioral intention to adopt new technologies. 
Traditional compatibility refers to the stability between technology innovation and the potential users’ 
existing values, current needs, and present lifestyle. Prior research in IS has studied compatibility in 
technology adoption intention (Lu et al. 2011; Kim and Qu, 2014; Peng et al. 2014).
Based on the exploratory study, the respondents have mentioned the importance of compatibility in 
their decision to purchase mobile application. But, what they meant by compatibility was the compatibility 
of the application format with their device format. For example, mobile game application developed by 
Android is not compatible to be installed in Apple device. It is different between traditional compatibility 
that has been study broadly in prior studies of information systems.

56
Social and Technical Perspective of Individual’s Intention to Purchase Mobile Application
﻿
Paid mobile applications offers full range of use and functionality. Quality of visual effects depends on 
the features of the device itself. Compatibility, features and benefits and value for money are what I am 
concerned.
I will go through all the reviews posted by the other users. If the reviews are good and the apps are very 
usable and do not consume so much memory, then i will give it a try. If it is really work with my phone. 
Then I will keep using it. But, if it is not compatible or I rarely use it. Then, I just uninstall it in order to 
free some space in the phone memory. So, it will not affect my phone performance.
Yes, to make sure the application is compatible with the mobile device.
There is hardly a prior research has studied on the device compatibility in users’ behavioral inten-
tion studies thus called for future research to empirically tested device compatibility in their research.
Device Consumption
Prior researches have focused mainly on how to develop applications that consume less memory and 
power. But none has studied on device consumption effecting users’ behavioral intention towards using 
information technology. Thus, this has called for future research to empirically tested device consump-
tion in users’ behavioral intention in their research.
I consider the application size which does not consume much of my device memory space.
I rarely play games because the phone battery will drain out fast.
I will go through all the reviews posted by the other users. If the reviews are good and the apps are very 
usable and do not consume so much memory, then i will give it a try. If it is really work with my phone. 
Then I will keep using it. But, if it is not compatible or I rarely use it, then, I just uninstall it in order to 
free some space in the phone memory. So, it will not affect my phone performance.
Ease the usage when I need to go online from anywhere I am. As mobile banking requires security features, 
so it is essential to get the one which is reliable and safe. Besides security is the storage and version.
The results of this exploratory study show that some of the respondents looked into consumptions 
made by the application to the mobile device i.e. battery power and memory space. The users value 
smaller size mobile application that consume less power (battery) compared to bigger size application 
which drained out the battery of mobile device quickly.
Perceived Value
Zeithaml (1988) defined perceived value as “a consumer’s perceptions of what is received and what is 
given determine the consumer’s overall assessment of the utility of a product.”Value-for-money concept 
is equivalence to the trade-off between quality and price. In order to gain something in return someone 
has to sacrifice something. Different consumers might perceive the components of perceived value dif-

57
Social and Technical Perspective of Individual’s Intention to Purchase Mobile Application
﻿
ferently. Some consumers perceived value when the price of the products or services is low. Others may 
perceive the products or services are high in value when there are balance between quality and money 
that has been spent. Bolton and Drew (1991) said that examining value of any products or services as a 
trade-off between quality and price is too one-dimensional. In this era of technology advancement, there 
is a need to incorporate more sophisticated elements to measure consumers’ perceived value. Sheth et 
al. (1991) have developed a theoretical framework to measure consumers’ perceived value called “Con-
sumption Value Theory” which suggested five dimensions of values i.e. functional, emotional, social, 
epistemic and conditional values. This framework was aimed to study at the purchasing decision level 
(buy or not buy), product level (product A or B) or at brand level (brand A or brand B).
Prior researches have studied on consumers’ perceived values. Guo and Barnes (2012) explored the 
users’ intention to purchase game items within World of WarCraft and they found that perceived value 
gives strong impact on players’ purchase intention and actual purchase behaviour. Guo and Barnes (2011) 
studied on users’ intention to purchase Second Life computer games and found that perceived value is 
significant. Kim et al. (2007) found that perceived value positively influence the adoption of Mobile 
Internet (M-Internet) among Singaporean. Other studies have investigate perceived value in mobile 
commerce area i.e. Turel et al. (2009); Kuo et al. (2009); Alwahaishi and Snášel (2013)Ko et al (2009);
In the exploratory study, respondents mentioned the importance of perceived value in their decision 
to purchase mobile application as below:
Yes, I value every single dime I spent.
I will buy apps that are worth the money.
I will buy apps if it is useful and value for money. Mobile applications provide easy access to the internet 
without the need of computer.
The respondents have stated that they were concern about the quality of the application and how 
beneficial the application compared to the fee they have to sacrifice.
Perceived Fee
Kim et al. (2007) defined perceived fee as “the extent to which a customer believes that using an on-
line content service is expensive.”Cost has been recognised in prior studies as a vital aspect for the 
e-commerce adoption (Khalifa and Shen, 2008). Generally, in m-commerce users’ will be endured with 
the subscription fees i.e. subscription to mobile data services and transaction-associated costs. Wang et 
al. (2013) explored the users’ adoption and purchasing intention after free trial of mobile newspapers 
application and the results shows that perceived fee is significant. Khalifa and Shen (2008) and Chong 
et al. (2012) investigate the m-commerce adoption and the results shows that cost was found to be the 
most important factor of m-commerce adoption. Zeithaml (1988) proposed that perceived fee directly 
influences perceived values which later influence user behavioural intention to use IT. Prior researches 
have incorporated perceived fee in mobile commerce studies i.e. Khalifa and Shen (2008), Chong et al. 
(2012), Wang et al. (2013), Kim et al. (2007), Khalefa and Shen (2008b), Wu and Wang (2005), Turel 
et al. (2009) and Hsiao (2013).

58
Social and Technical Perspective of Individual’s Intention to Purchase Mobile Application
﻿
The respondents in the exploratory study mentioned that they always read the application descrip-
tions and past users reviews to check for the price offered. Some of them said they only buy if the price 
is reasonable.
Yes, to check the price. Will not buy it if it is too expensive
Yes, I value every dime I spent.
Yes, to check the price and suggestions from friends.
Yes, to check the price.
I will buy if the price is reasonable.
Facilitating Condition
Venkatesh et al. (2003) defined facilitating condition as “the degree to which an individual believes that 
an organisational and technical infrastructure exists to support use of the system.” Facilitating condition 
is derived from the traditional model of user acceptance of technology i.e. Unified Theory of Acceptance 
and Use of Information technology (UTAUT). UTAUT model was developed by Venkateshet al. (2003). 
The aim of this theory is to explain users’ intentions to use an information system (IS) and consequent 
behavior. UTAUT has been used in mobile shopping service adoption (Yang, 2010), mobile games ac-
ceptance (Chen et al. 2011), mobile games adoption (Zhou, 2013), application-based mobile tour guide 
acceptance (Lai, 2013) and mobile commerce user acceptance (Alkhunaizan and Love, 2012). Kwong 
& Park (2008) suggested that individuals with necessary skills and resources are more confident to use 
online music service. Yang (2010) found that facilitating condition influences US consumer mobile shop-
ping services adoption. Alwahaisi and Snasel (2013) suggested that facilitating conditions significant 
on behavioral intention to use ICT.
In this study, facilitating condition refers to the availability of resources that may give effect in the 
decision making process to purchase mobile application. Respondents clearly mentioned the importance 
of having enough resources when it comes to making a purchase of mobile application as below:
I do not own any credit card. It will be easy to buy an application if I have credit card. Most of free 
mobile applications do not offer full access content i.e. mobile Al-Quran application. I really want to 
buy the full range of the application but I don’t have credit cards.
It is clearly stated that availability of the resources to assist them in making purchase of mobile 
application is important. Without enough resources, the desire to install the full access content of any 
particular mobile application will be vanished.
Social Perspectives
Social in IS research refers to the influence of non-technical aspects of mobile application usage by one 
individuals on others such as word-of-mouth.

59
Social and Technical Perspective of Individual’s Intention to Purchase Mobile Application
﻿
Electronic-Word-of-Mouth (eWOM)
Hennig-Thurau et al. (2004) defines eWOM as ‘‘any positive or negative statement made by potential, 
actual, or former customers about a product or company, which is made available to a crowd of people and 
institutions via the Internet’’. In other words, eWOM is telling others about satisfaction or dissatisfaction 
regarding the usage experience of products or services to the online communities. In offline environment, 
word-of-mouth has proved to play a major role in customer purchase decision making process (Richins 
& Root-Shaffer, 1988). The existence of internet has given utility to the consumers to attain products 
and services information from the crowd effortlessly as long as they have all the necessary resources i.e. 
internet-enabled computers or mobile and knowledge of how to search for the information. Consumers 
are taking advantage of the opportunities to gather unbiased information regarding products or services 
from experienced customers. It is unbiased because the reviews were directly from the customers who 
have used the products or services without interference from the company who sells the products or 
services. Therefore, the information is more reliable.
Prior researches on consumers’ purchase intention have incorporated eWOM in their studies. See-
See-To and Ho (2014) integrated theories of trust and value co-creation to investigate whether eWOM 
affects consumers’ purchase intention in social network sites (SNSs). The result shows that eWOM has 
a direct impact on purchase intention in social networking sites (SNS). Fan and Miao (2012) in their 
study of e-commerce purchase decision have found that eWOM credibility has positively influenced 
eWOM acceptance which later has affected purchase intention. Hamouda and Tabbane (2013) examined 
the impact of exposure to eWOM on consumers’ purchase intention mediated by consumers’ attitude 
towards product in hotel industry. The result indicated attitude mediated the role of exposure of eWOM 
and consumers purchase intention which confirmed that eWOM is an effective communication tools 
for the customers.
The respondents in our study were ask whether they read the online reviews before downloading or 
purchasing any mobile application and the reason of their action. The respondents revealed the following:
Yes, to check whether the application is interesting or not.
Yes, to check the price and suggestions from friends.
Yes, to check for the ratings whether it has been rated low or high.
Yes, I read the reviews and description before any purchase to know their popularity and stability, or 
any other issues regarding it.
Yes, I read the reviews because I want to know in details and understand the application before proceed 
to purchase it.
Yes, whether it benefits me or not and the satisfaction after buying it.
I always read the terms & condition, past download comment review & look at the value of software 
usage for my own.

60
Social and Technical Perspective of Individual’s Intention to Purchase Mobile Application
﻿
The above responses show that all respondents read the online reviews before downloading or pur-
chasing any mobile application to get unbiased information of the applications. The information that 
they get through the online reviews are the price, performance, functionalities, compatibility, benefits 
and also the emotions of others while using the application. It is evident that e-WOM gives significant 
impact on users’ decision making process whether to buy or not any application.
Trust
Trust refers to “the willingness of a party to be vulnerable to the actions of another party based on the 
expectation that the other will perform a particular action important to the trustor, irrespective of the 
ability to monitor or control that other party” (Mayer et al. 1995). Pavlou and Fygenson (2006) and 
Qureshi et al. (2009) stated that trust has been considered as the major antecedence of consumers’ 
online purchasing behavior in e-commerce. Processes in online transaction are uncertainty which has 
caused fear of opportunism to the consumers’ (Gefen et al. 2003) which therefore made trust is crucial 
e-commerce success enabler.
Hsu et al. (2014) studied on the effect of four different roles of trust i.e. trust in website, vendor, auc-
tion initiator and group members towards attitude in online shopping and behavioral intention. The results 
suggested that all four have positive relationship with the attitude and later influence online shopping 
behavioral intention. Kim et al. (2011) studied on the influence of trust to consumer loyalty in towards 
shopping online tourism products and services in South Korea. The results indicated that navigation 
functionality and perceived security had positive effect on trust which affects customer loyalty.
Shankar et al. (2002) suggested that online trust should be regarded from multiple perspectives i.e. 
consumers, employees, suppliers or distributors. In example, Teo et al. (2008-2009) categorized trust into 
three perspectives i.e. trust in government, technology, and e-government web site. Reasoning from the 
above point of view, trust in online shopping can be categorized into four types i.e. trust in website (Li 
and yeh, 2010; Lu et al., 2010; Eid, 2011; Shu and Chuang, 2011; Kim et al. 2011), vendor (Lu et al., 
2010; Hu et al. 2010; Hsu et al. 2014; Nicolaou et al. 2013), auction’s initiator (Kauffman et al., 2010; 
Tsvetovat et al., 2000), group members (Lu et al., 2010; Shu and Chuang, 2011).
In the exploratory study, respondents have stated the importance of trust in their decision to purchase 
mobile application based on the discussion below:
I would purchase mobile application depending on the mobile device I use.
If the rating is low and the developer is not well-known I may suspect piracy. But if it is from Apple, 
I fully trust them and willing to reveal my personal information to make payment transactions. Plus, 
I never encountered any problem so far in purchasing mobile application as the process is very easy.
Security comes first then trust.
From the above discussion, a respondent has mentioned that types of device they use influenced 
their decision to purchase mobile application. The bigger size mobile device such as tablet computers 
is preferable compared to smartphones which is smaller in size. Furthermore, one of the respondents 
has mentioned the importance of trust in the vendor in terms of their reputation in the market and the 
previous experience dealing with the vendor.

61
Social and Technical Perspective of Individual’s Intention to Purchase Mobile Application
﻿
Perceived Enjoyment
Davis et al. (1992) defined perceived enjoyment as “the extent to which the activity of using a product 
is perceived to be enjoyable in its own right, apart from any performance consequences that may be 
anticipated.” Kim et al. (2007) said, individuals who use any particular technology and immediately 
feel joy after using it are more likely to adopt the technology and will often use it. Similarly, Sweeney 
and Soutar (2001) defined emotional values as “the utility derived from feelings or affective states that 
a product generates.”
Prior researches have explored perceived enjoyment in IT context. Guo and Barnes (2012) explored 
the users’ intention to purchase computer games items within World of WarCraft and found that perceived 
enjoyment has strong impact on players’ purchase intention and actual purchase behaviour. Guo and 
Barnes’ (2011) study on users’ intention to purchase Second Life computer gamesfound that perceived 
enjoyment influence users’ purchase intention. Mantymaki and Salo (2013) investigated teenagers’ 
intention to purchase in social virtual worlds i.e. Habbo Hotel and found that perceived enjoyment is 
significant. Ko at al. (2009) studied on consumer adoption of mobile shopping for fashion products in 
Korea and found that perceived enjoyment has significant effect on purchasing intention. Lu and Su 
(2009) explored the factors affecting purchase intention on mobile shopping web sites in Taiwan and 
found that perceived enjoyment is significant. Alwahaisi and Snasel (2013) found in their research that 
perceived playfulness significantly influence behavioural intention to use ICT.
In the exploratory study, respondents said that they purchase application that will give joy to them. 
For example, mobile games application.
The game is really good and I like that game.
The application is good, useful, interesting and related to my hobby.
I use mobile application for fun purpose and it really does fun.
They are willing to purchase the paid version of application to experience the optimal level of joy by 
playing the full completed premium version of the application.
DISCUSSIONS AND CONCLUSION
Mobile application is one of the fastest emerging businesses in the market. It is difficult to convince 
consumers to download mobile application for the first time. But losing their engagement with that ap-
plication is very easy. 25% of the consumers will use downloaded application only once and over half 
of them will not continue to use the application after three months (Marchick, 2014). Harvard Business 
Review (2011) stated that 48% of the consumers with negative experience in using products told ten or 
more about their bad experiences. According to Mckinsey (2006), 70% of buying experiences are based on 
how the customer feels they are being treated. U.S. Small Business Adminitration (2014) stated that 68% 
of the consumers bailed the products because of disappointment with the treatment they have received.
The current study explored the factors influencing users’ intention to purchase mobile application. 
The samples were collected through the unstructured interview from 19 respondents which randomly 

62
Social and Technical Perspective of Individual’s Intention to Purchase Mobile Application
﻿
selected from different background i.e. engineering, business, IT and education. This study proposed 
that perceived usefulness, facilitating condition, perceived value, perceived enjoyment, perceived fee, 
electronic word-of-mouth (eWOM), and application design in terms of features and visual, trust, secu-
rity, privacy, device compatibility and device consumption in terms of power and memory were related 
in users’ decision to purchase mobile application. The literature suggests a wide spectrum of social and 
technical perspectives of mobile application industry success as discussed above. Technical perspec-
tives refer to IT infrastructure, overall technical quality, ease-of-use, usefulness, security and privacy 
measures and design. The non-technical part of mobile application i.e. social refers to the influence of 
the technology usage by one individual on others in IS research (Wang et al. 2013c). Kellman (1958) 
developed Social Influence Theory to investigate on people can affect an individuals’ IS adoption and 
use. The term “social software” has been used since 2002 to describe any Internet software that enables 
individuals and group communication and interactions such as emails and forums. Mobile application 
fulfils the criteria. To design the sociable environment both technical and social should all be considered 
to make interactions between users possible (Gao et al. 2010). However, it is always a struggle to reconcile 
the technological and social aspects in IS research since its early period of time (Cecez-Kecmanovic and 
Galliers, 2014). Based on the interview results, respondents have concerns on both technical and social 
perspectives in purchasing a mobile application. On the technical views, respondents were concerned 
that the application should be useful and operational without difficulties otherwise they would abandon 
it and switch to a different application. Moreover, application design was important to the respondents 
too. They appreciate the eye-catching and good usability design of an application. When it comes to 
purchase through online, security and privacy are the aspects that people would have more concern on. 
Respondents also looked at the compatibility of the application with their device. Application which 
consumed less device memory and battery power always wins users’ preference. Furthermore, respon-
dents value the applications on the applications’ functionality, performance and price. Users will go 
for the application with cheaper and greater in functionalities and performance. As students, they own 
limited resources. To purchase mobile application one should own at least one credit card or debit card. 
They mostly do not have their own credit card or debit card. If they have enough resources, the scenario 
might change. On the social perspectives, respondents rely on application reviews all the time to check 
on the application performance. Trust is found to be very important to build their loyalty. In this study, 
the respondents have chosen to purchase applications from the vendor which practices ethics in business 
and offers transparent, open and straightforward business deals. Last but not least, application that gives 
joy and happiness to the users is always a choice.
Users’ intention to adopt and use certain technologies differs from technology purchase intention. 
Adopting and using certain technologies may not require the involvement of money. The scenario is dif-
ferent when spending some amount of money is the pre-requisite to use certain technologies. Although 
this exploratory study has given significant insight on the factors influencing users’ intention to purchase 
mobile application, it has neglected the importance of users’ pass experience, shopping behavior and 
their personal characteristics as been discussed by prior research (Barbera et al. 2008). Whereas Wang 
et al. (2013a) has studied on the importance of social influence and users’ personal innovativeness in 
influencing users’ intention to purchase mobile TV application. This study has enclosed on the impor-
tance of eWOM. Moreover, this studies only generally highlighted on the influencing factors of users’ 
intention to purchase mobile application. Unlike Wang et al. (2013b) which has studied the effect of 
usage confirmation of free-trial application to post-trial belief which in the end positively affected user 

63
Social and Technical Perspective of Individual’s Intention to Purchase Mobile Application
﻿
satisfaction and purchase intention. One more important aspect that this study did not covered is mobile 
application quality as has been discussed by Ivan and Zamfiroiu (2011).
The study of consumer behavior could educate company regarding the optimal features in mobile 
applications suitable with the customers’ preferences. Thus, the finding of this research suggests the 
best proposition to the mobile application developer, vendor and internet service provider in improving 
their products i.e. Mobile application and services. By knowing what consumers are concerned about 
in purchasing mobile application, designing any mobile application should follow these criteria in order 
to produce application that consumers value most thus maximize the profit making. To the consumers, 
this result may educate them in terms of knowing how to find best mobile application to assist in their 
everyday life agenda.
This study has some limitations. The respondents were mainly from the age group between 26 to 34 
years old and majority of the respondents were Malay. Kappos and Revard (2008) said that culture is 
found to be influential factor in IS development (Nicholson and Sahay, 2001; Sahay, 2002) and use (Soh 
et al. 2000). Robbinson and Stylianou (2003) suggested that the IS characteristics differ in the culture in 
which it was developed. Therefore, to generalize the study the respondents should cover respondents from 
all age group and the selection of the respondent should equally cover all ethnicity existed in Malaysia. 
Future research can opt for a cross-culture study. Finally, this study focuses on the consumers’ intention 
to purchase mobile application in general. There are numerous different types of mobile applications 
available in the market i.e. mobile games, mobile TV, mobile maps, mobile organizer and etc. Different 
application has different objectives and functionalities. Consumers might have different preferences 
while using different types of application. Therefore, there is need to investigate consumers’ behavior 
in using different types of application separately.
REFERENCES
Al-alak, B. A. M., & Alnawas, I. A. M. (2010). Mobile marketing: Examining the impact of trust, pri-
vacy, concern and consumers’ attitudes on intention to purchase. International Journal of Business and 
Management, 5(3), 28–41. doi:10.5539/ijbm.v5n3p28
Alkhunaizan, A., & Love, S. (2012). What drives mobile commerce? An empirical evaluation of the 
revised UTAUT model. International Journal of Management and Marketing Academy, 2(1), 82–99.
Alwahaishi, S., & Snášel, V. (2013). Consumers’ Acceptance and Use of Information and Communica-
tions Technology: A UTAUT and Flow Based Theoretical Model. Journal of Technology Management 
& Innovation, 8(2), 61–73. doi:10.4067/S0718-27242013000200005
Bao, X. R., Sun, M. G., & Ding, L. Y. (2011, August). The Implementation and Application of Mobile 
Online Games in China: A Marketing Perspective. In Management and Service Science (MASS), 2011 
International Conference on (pp. 1-4). IEEE. doi:10.1109/ICMSS.2011.5999177
Barbera, R. A., Doncel, L. M., & Sainz, J. (2008). Going Mobile on Games: Determinant on Payments. 
Academic Press.
Bolton, R. N., & Drew, J. H. (1991). A multistage model of customers’ assessments of service quality 
and value. The Journal of Consumer Research, 17(4), 375–384. doi:10.1086/208564

64
Social and Technical Perspective of Individual’s Intention to Purchase Mobile Application
﻿
Borges, M., Rita, P., & Pagani, M. (2011, June). A new conceptual framework to evaluate consumer 
adoption of mobile services: The case of Mobile TV. In Mobile Business (ICMB), 2011 Tenth Interna-
tional Conference on (pp. 173-184). IEEE.
BSA Global Software Piracy Study. (2011). Retrieved from http://globalstudy.bsa.org/2011/index.html
Cecez-Kecmanovic, D., Galliers, R. D., Henfridsson, O., Newell, S., & Vidgen, R. (2014). The Socio-
materiality of Information Systems: Current status, future directions. Management Information Systems 
Quarterly, 38(3), 809–830.
Charland, A., & Leroux, B. (2011). Mobile application development: Web vs. native. Communications 
of the ACM, 54(5), 49–53. doi:10.1145/1941487.1941504
Chen, L. Y. (2012, July). Marketer Perceptions of Quality on the Success of Mobile Shopping System 
and Its Impact on Performance. In SRII Global Conference (SRII), 2012 Annual (pp. 29-33). IEEE. 
doi:10.1109/SRII.2012.14
Chen, L. Y., & Lauffer, W. H. (2012). The Impact of Mobile Shopping Quality on Customer Satisfaction 
and Purchase Intentions: The IS Success Based Model. In the 8th International Symposium on Manage-
ment, Engineering and Informatics (MEI 2012). Academic Press.
Chen, R., Luo, X., Xu, H., & Zhang, W. (n.d.). The Conceptual Model of Mobile TV Service Adoption: 
A Triangulational Perspective. Academic Press.
Chen, W. K., Liu, S. T., & Hsu, W. H. (2013). The Factor of Personal Characteristic Influencing Con-
sumers’ Acceptance of Mobile Shopping Apps. Academic Press.
Cheng, Y. H., & Huang, T. Y. (2013). High speed rail passengers’ mobile ticketing adoption. Transporta-
tion Research Part C, Emerging Technologies, 30, 143–160. doi:10.1016/j.trc.2013.02.001
Choi, Y. K., & Totten, J. W. (2012). Self-construal’s role in mobile TV acceptance: Extension of TAM 
across cultures. Journal of Business Research, 65(11), 1525–1533. doi:10.1016/j.jbusres.2011.02.036
Chong, A. Y. L. (2013). Mobile commerce usage activities: The roles of demographic and motiva-
tion variables. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 80(7), 1350–1359. doi:10.1016/j.tech-
fore.2012.12.011
Chong, A. Y. L., Chan, F. T., & Ooi, K. B. (2012). Predicting consumer decisions to adopt mobile com-
merce: Cross country empirical examination between China and Malaysia. Decision Support Systems, 
53(1), 34–43. doi:10.1016/j.dss.2011.12.001
Constantiou, I. D., & Mahnke, V. (2010). Consumer behaviour and mobile TV services: Do men differ 
from women in their adoption intentions? Journal of Electronic Commerce Research, 11(2), 127–139.
Cyr, D., Head, M., & Ivanov, A. (2006). Design aesthetics leading to m-loyalty in mobile commerce. 
Information & Management, 43(8), 950–963. doi:10.1016/j.im.2006.08.009
Delone, W. H. (2003). The DeLone and McLean model of information systems success: A ten-year 
update. Journal of Management Information Systems, 19(4), 9–30.

65
Social and Technical Perspective of Individual’s Intention to Purchase Mobile Application
﻿
Dinev, T., & Hart, P. (2006). An extended privacy calculus model for e-commerce transactions. Informa-
tion Systems Research, 17(1), 61–80. doi:10.1287/isre.1060.0080
Dong-Her, S., Hsiu-Sen, C., Chun-Yuan, C., & Lin, B. (2004). Internet security: Malicious e-mails detection 
and protection. Industrial Management & Data Systems, 104(7), 613–623. doi:10.1108/02635570410550278
Eid, M. I. (2011). Determinants of e-commerce customer satisfaction, trust, and loyalty in Saudi Arabia. 
Journal of Electronic Commerce Research, 12(1), 78–93.
Ervasti, M., & Helaakoski, H. (2010). Case study of application-based mobile service acceptance and 
development in Finland. International Journal of Information Technology and Management, 9(3), 
243–259. doi:10.1504/IJITM.2010.030942
Escobar-Rodríguez, T., & Carvajal-Trujillo, E. (2014). Online purchasing tickets for low cost carriers: 
An application of the unified theory of acceptance and use of technology (UTAUT) model. Tourism 
Management, 43, 70–88. doi:10.1016/j.tourman.2014.01.017
Fan, Y. W., & Miao, Y. F. (2012). Effect of electronic word-of-mouth on consumer purchase intention: The 
perspective of gender differences. International Journal of Electronic BusinessManagement, 10(3), 175.
Frey, J., & Fontana, A. (1993). The group interview in social research. In D. Morgan (Ed.), Successful 
Focus Groups: Advancing the State of the Art. Newbury Park, CA: Sage. doi:10.4135/9781483349008.n2
Gao, Q., Dai, Y., Fan, Z., & Kang, R. (2010). Understanding factors affecting perceived sociability of 
social software. Computers in Human Behavior, 26(6), 1846–1861. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2010.07.022
Gao, T., & Deng, Y. (2012, June). A study on users’ acceptance behavior to mobile e-books applica-
tion based on UTAUT model. In Software Engineering and Service Science (ICSESS), 2012 IEEE 3rd 
International Conference on (pp. 376-379). IEEE.
Gartner. (2012). Gartner Says Free Apps Will Account for Nearly 90 Percent of Total Mobile App Store 
Downloads in 2012. Retrieved from http://www.gartner.com/newsroom/id/2153215
Gefen, D., Karahanna, E., & Straub, D. W. (2003). Trust and TAM in online shopping: An integrated 
model. Management Information Systems Quarterly, 27(1), 51–90.
Goi, C. L. (2008). Review on the Implementation of Mobile Commerce in Malaysia. Journal of Internet 
Banking and Commerce, 13(2).
Guo, Y., & Barnes, S. (2011). Purchase behavior in virtual worlds: An empirical investigation in Second 
Life. Information & Management, 48(7), 303–312. doi:10.1016/j.im.2011.07.004
Guo, Y., & Barnes, S. J. (2012). Explaining purchasing behavior within world of warcraft. Journal of 
Computer Information Systems.
Ha, I., Yoon, Y., & Choi, M. (2007). Determinants of adoption of mobile games under mobile broadband 
wireless access environment. Information & Management, 44(3), 276–286. doi:10.1016/j.im.2007.01.001
Harrison, R., Flood, D., & Duce, D. (2013). Usability of mobile applications: Literature review and ra-
tionale for a new usability model. Journal of Interaction Science, 1(1), 1–16. doi:10.1186/2194-0827-1-1

66
Social and Technical Perspective of Individual’s Intention to Purchase Mobile Application
﻿
Harvard Business Review on Increasing Customer Loyalty. (2011). Boston, MA: Harvard Business Review.
Hennig‐Thurau, T., Gwinner, K. P., Walsh, G., & Gremler, D. D. (2004). Electronic word‐of‐mouth 
via consumer‐opinion platforms: What motivates consumers to articulate themselves on the Internet? 
Journal of Interactive Marketing, 18(1), 38–52. doi:10.1002/dir.10073
Ho, C. H., & Wu, T. Y. (2012). Factors Affecting Intent to Purchase Virtual Goods in Online Games. 
International Journal of Electronic Business Management, 10(3), 204.
Hsiao, K. L. (2013). Android Smartphone adoption and intention to pay for mobile Internet: Perspectives 
from software, hardware, design, and value. Library Hi Tech, 31(2), 3–3.
Hsu, M. H., Chuang, L. W., & Hsu, C. S. (2014). Understanding online shopping intention: The roles 
of four types of trust and their antecedents. Internet Research, 24(3), 332–352. doi:10.1108/IntR-01-
2013-0007
Hu, X., Wu, G., Wu, Y., & Zhang, H. (2010). The effects of Web assurance seals on consumers’ ini-
tial trust in an online vendor: A functional perspective. Decision Support Systems, 48(2), 407–418. 
doi:10.1016/j.dss.2009.10.004
Insider, B. (2013). The Only Smartphones Worth Buying Right Now. Retrieved from http://www.busines-
sinsider.com/best-smartphones-2013-5?op=1
International Data Corporation. (2013). Retrieved from www.idc.com/research/Predictions13/down-
loadable/238044.pdf‎
Ivan, I., & Zamfiroiu, A. (2011). Quality Analysis of Mobile Applications. Informatica Economica, 
15(3), 136–152.
Jung, Y., Perez-Mira, B., & Wiley-Patton, S. (2009). Consumer adoption of mobile TV: Examining 
psychological flow and media content. Computers in Human Behavior, 25(1), 123–129. doi:10.1016/j.
chb.2008.07.011
Kappos, A., & Rivard, S. (2008). A three-perspective model of culture, information systems, and their 
development and use. Management Information Systems Quarterly, 601–634.
Kauffman, R. J., Lai, H., & Ho, C. T. (2010). Incentive mechanisms, fairness and participation in online 
group-buying auctions. Electronic Commerce Research and Applications, 9(3), 249–262. doi:10.1016/j.
elerap.2008.11.009
Keith, M. J., Babb, J., Lowry, P. B., Furner, C., & Abdullat, A. (2011). The Roles of Privacy Assurance, 
Network Effects, and Information Cascades in the Adoption of and Willingness to Pay for Location-
Based Services with Mobile Applications. Network Effects, and Information Cascades in the Adoption 
of and Willingness to Pay for Location-Based Services with Mobile Applications.
Kelman, H. C. (1958). Compliance, Identification, and Internalization: Three Processes of Attitude 
Change. Journal of Conflict.
Khalifa, M., & Shen, K. N. (2008). Explaining the adoption of transactional B2C mobile commerce. 
Journal of Enterprise Information Management, 21(2), 110–124. doi:10.1108/17410390810851372

67
Social and Technical Perspective of Individual’s Intention to Purchase Mobile Application
﻿
Khalifa, M., & Shen, K. N. (2008b). Drivers for transactional B2C m-commerce adoption: Extended 
theory of planned behavior. Journal of Computer Information Systems, 48(3), 111.
Kim, C., Tao, W., Shin, N., & Kim, K. S. (2010). An empirical study of customers’ perceptions of se-
curity and trust in e-payment systems. Electronic Commerce Research and Applications, 9(1), 84–95. 
doi:10.1016/j.elerap.2009.04.014
Kim, C. S., Oh, E. H., Yang, K. H., & Kim, J. K. (2010). The appealing characteristics of download type 
mobile games. Service Business, 4(3-4), 253–269. doi:10.1007/s11628-009-0088-0
Kim, H. W., Chan, H. C., & Gupta, S. (2007). Value-based adoption of mobile internet: An empirical 
investigation. Decision Support Systems, 43(1), 111–126. doi:10.1016/j.dss.2005.05.009
Kim, M., & Qu, H. (2013). Travelers’ Behavioral Intention toward Hotel Self-Service Kiosks Usage. 
International Journal of Contemporary Hospitality Management, 26(2), 5–5.
Kim, M. J., Chung, N., & Lee, C. K. (2011). The effect of perceived trust on electronic commerce: Shop-
ping online for tourism products and services in South Korea. Tourism Management, 32(2), 256–265. 
doi:10.1016/j.tourman.2010.01.011
King, N., & Horrocks, C. (2010). Interviews in qualitative research. Sage (Atlanta, Ga.).
Ko, E., Kim, E. Y., & Lee, E. K. (2009). Modeling consumer adoption of mobile shopping for fashion 
products in Korea. Psychology and Marketing, 26(7), 669–687. doi:10.1002/mar.20294
Kolsaker, A., & Payne, C. (2002). Engendering trust in e-commerce: A study of gender-based concerns. 
Marketing Intelligence & Planning, 20(4), 206–214. doi:10.1108/02634500210431595
Kumar, A. & Mukherjee, A. (2013). Shop while you talk: Determinants of purchase intentions through 
a mobile device. IJMM, 8(1), 23-37.
Kuo, Y. F., Wu, C. M., & Deng, W. J. (2009). The relationships among service quality, perceived value, 
customer satisfaction, and post-purchase intention in mobile value-added services. Computers in Human 
Behavior, 25(4), 887–896. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2009.03.003
Kwong, S. W., & Park, J. (2008). Digital Music Services: Consumer Intention and Adoption. Service 
Industries Journal, 28(10), 1463–1481. doi:10.1080/02642060802250278
Lai, I. K. (2013). Traveler Acceptance of an App-Based Mobile Tour Guide. Journal of Hospitality & 
Tourism Research (Washington, D.C.).
Lapcevic, B. (2013). Three common mobile app performance problems – and how to identify them. 
Academic Press.
Leong, L. Y., Ooi, K. B., Chong, A. Y. L., & Lin, B. (2011). Influence of individual characteristics, 
perceived usefulness and ease of use on mobile entertainment adoption. International Journal of Mobile 
Communications, 9(4), 359–382. doi:10.1504/IJMC.2011.041141
Li, Y. M., & Yeh, Y. S. (2010). Increasing trust in mobile commerce through design aesthetics. Comput-
ers in Human Behavior, 26(4), 673–684. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2010.01.004

68
Social and Technical Perspective of Individual’s Intention to Purchase Mobile Application
﻿
Liang, T. P., & Yeh, Y. H. (2011). Effect of use contexts on the continuous use of mobile services: The case 
of mobile games. Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, 15(2), 187–196. doi:10.1007/s00779-010-0300-1
Lim, D., Lee, H., Yoo, J., & Zo, H. (2013). Free to Paid: Purchase and Dropout Behavior of Mobile 
Application Users. Academic Press.
Liu, Y., & Li, H. (2011). Exploring the impact of use context on mobile hedonic services adoption: 
An empirical study on mobile gaming in China. Computers in Human Behavior, 27(2), 890–898. 
doi:10.1016/j.chb.2010.11.014
Loebbecke, C., Huyskens, C., & Jarvenpaa, S. L. (2008, July). Adoption of Mobile TV Services Among 
Early Users: Convergence of Familiar Technologies and Emergence of Technology Induced Paradoxes. 
In Mobile Business, 2008. ICMB’08. 7th International Conference on (pp. 231-240). IEEE.
Lu, H. P., & Su, P. Y. J. (2009). Factors affecting purchase intention on mobile shopping web sites. 
Internet Research, 19(4), 442–458. doi:10.1108/10662240910981399
Lu, Y., Yang, S., Chau, P. Y., & Cao, Y. (2011). Dynamics between the trust transfer process and inten-
tion to use mobile payment services: A cross-environment perspective. Information & Management, 
48(8), 393–403. doi:10.1016/j.im.2011.09.006
Mäntymäki, M., & Salo, J. (2010). Trust, social presence and customer loyalty in social virtual worlds. 
Academic Press.
Marchick, A. (2014). 5 Ways to Increase Revenue and Engagement with Mobile Apps. Retrieved from: 
http://blog.marketo.com/2014/07/5-ways-to-increase-revenue-and-engagement-with-mobile-apps.html
Mayer, R. C., Davis, J. H., & Schoorman, F. D. (1995). An integrative model of organizational trust. 
Academy of Management Review, 20(3), 709–734.
McIntyre, D. (2010, January 13). Apple App Store Has Lost $450 Million To Piracy. Retrieved August 
28, 2014, from http://247wallst.com/apps-software/2010/01/13/apple-app-store-has-lost-450-million-
to-piracy/
McKinsey. (2006). The ‘moment of truth’ in customer service. Retrieved from http://www.mckinsey.
com/insights/organization/the_moment_of_truth_in_customer_service
mobiThingking. (2013). Retrieved from http://mobithinking.com/mobile-marketing-tools/latest-mobile-
stats/e
Mohelska, H., & Tomaskova, H. (2010). The use of mobile application in the business environment in 
the Czech Republic. In Applied economics, business and development (AEBD): Proceedings of the world 
multiconference. Kantaoui, Sousse: World scientific and engineering academy and society.
Nicholson, B., & Sahay, S. (2001). Some political and cultural issues in the globalisation of software 
development: Case experience from Britain and India. Information and Organization, 11(1), 25–43. 
doi:10.1016/S0959-8022(00)00008-4
Nicolaou, A. I., Ibrahim, M., & Van Heck, E. (2013). Information quality, trust, and risk perceptions in 
electronic data exchanges. Decision Support Systems, 54(2), 986–996. doi:10.1016/j.dss.2012.10.024

69
Social and Technical Perspective of Individual’s Intention to Purchase Mobile Application
﻿
Nielsen, J. (1994). Usability engineering. Morgan Kaufmann Pub.
Nielsen, J. (2003). Usability 101: Introduction to usability. Academic Press.
Park, E., Baek, S., Ohm, J., & Chang, H. J. (2013). Determinants of player acceptance of mobile social 
network games: An application of extended technology acceptance model. Telematics and Informatics, 
31(1), 3–15. doi:10.1016/j.tele.2013.07.001
Park, H. J., & Kim, S. H. (2012). A Bayesian network approach to examining key success factors of 
mobile games. Journal of Business Research.
Pavlou, P. A., & Fygenson, M. (2006). Understanding and predicting electronic commerce adoption: 
An extension of the theory of planned behavior. Management Information Systems Quarterly, 115–143.
Peng, F., Wu, C. H., & Liao, H. Y. (2014, January). Adoption Intention of Mobile Real Time Location-
Based Advertising Service for 3G Cell Phone Users in Taiwan. In The 8th International Conference on 
Knowledge Management in Organizations (pp. 97-108). Springer Netherlands.
Petrova, K., & Qu, H. (2007, July). Playing mobile games: Consumer perceptions. In Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. 
e-Business (ICE-B 2007). INSTICC Press.
Portio Research. (2013). What apps are people using? Retrieved from http://www.portioresearch.com/
en/blog/what-apps-are-people-using.aspx
Prata, W., de Moraes, A., & Quaresma, M. (2012). User’s demography and expectation regarding 
search, purchase and evaluation in mobile application store. Work (Reading, Mass.), 41, 1124–1131. 
PMID:22316870
Qureshi, I., Fang, Y., Ramsey, E., McCole, P., Ibbotson, P., & Compeau, D. (2009). Understanding online 
customer repurchasing intention and the mediating role of trust–an empirical investigation in two devel-
oped countries. European Journal of Information Systems, 18(3), 205–222. doi:10.1057/ejis.2009.15
Richins, M.L., & Root-Shaffer, T. (1988). The Role of Involvement and Opinion Leadership in Consumer. 
Academic Press.
Robbins, S. S., & Stylianou, A. C. (2003). Global corporate web sites: An empirical investigation of 
content and design. Information & Management, 40(3), 205–212. doi:10.1016/S0378-7206(02)00002-2
Sayid, O., Echchabi, A., & Aziz, H. A. (2012). Investigating Mobile Money Acceptance in Somalia: An 
Empirical Study. Pak. J. Commer. Soc. Sci, 6(2), 269–281.
Schierz, P. G., Schilke, O., & Wirtz, B. W. (2010). Understanding consumer acceptance of mobile pay-
ment services: An empirical analysis. Electronic Commerce Research and Applications, 9(3), 209–216. 
doi:10.1016/j.elerap.2009.07.005
Sedek, M., Abdullah, Y., Mahat, J., & Zainal, N. (2012, March). Individual Characteristic In Online 
Gaming And Mobile Application Use Among Students In Higher Education Institution: A Comfirma-
tory Factor Analysis. In Prosiding Seminar Majlis Dekan IPTA (Vol. 1, No. 1).

70
Social and Technical Perspective of Individual’s Intention to Purchase Mobile Application
﻿
See-To, E. W., & Ho, K. K. (2014). Value co-creation and purchase intention in social network sites: 
The role of electronic Word-of-Mouth and trust–A theoretical analysis. Computers in Human Behavior, 
31, 182–189. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2013.10.013
Shankar, V., Urban, G. L., & Sultan, G. (2002). Online trust: A stakeholder perspective, concepts, 
implications, and future directions. The Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 11(3–4), 325–344. 
doi:10.1016/S0963-8687(02)00022-7
Sheth, J. N., Newman, B. I., & Gross, B. L. (1991). Why we buy what we buy: A theory of consumption 
values. Journal of Business Research, 22(2), 159–170. doi:10.1016/0148-2963(91)90050-8
Shih, Y. Y., & Chen, C. Y. (2013). The study of behavioral intention for mobile commerce: Via integrated 
model of TAM and TTF. Quality & Quantity, 47(2), 1009–1020. doi:10.1007/s11135-011-9579-x
Soh, C., Kien, S. S., & Tay-Yap, J. (2000). Enterprise resource planning: cultural fits and misfits: is ERP 
a universal solution? Communications of the ACM, 43(4), 47–51. doi:10.1145/332051.332070
Soscia, I., Arbore, A., & Hofacker, C. F. (2011). The impact of trial on technology adoption: The case of mo-
bile TV. Journal of Research in Interactive Marketing, 5(2/3), 226–238. doi:10.1108/17505931111187820
Sweeney, J. C., & Soutar, G. N. (2001). Consumer perceived value: The development of a multiple item 
scale. Journal of Retailing, 77(2), 203–220. doi:10.1016/S0022-4359(01)00041-0
Tabbane, R. S., & Hamouda, M. (2013). Impact of eWOM on the Tunisian consumer’s attitude towards 
the product. In Advances in Business-Related Scientific Research Conference (pp. 20-22).
Taylor, D. G., Voelker, T. A., & Pentina, I. (2011). Mobile Application Adoption by Young Adults: A 
Social Network Perspective. Academic Press.
Thakur, R., & Srivastava, M. (2013). Customer usage intention of mobile commerce in India: An empiri-
cal study. Journal of Indian Business Research, 5(1), 52–72. doi:10.1108/17554191311303385
The International Telecommunication Union. (2011). Retrieved from www.itu.int/ITU-D/ict/facts/2011/
material/ICTFactsFigures2011.pdf
Turel, O., Serenko, A., & Bontis, N. (2010). User acceptance of hedonic digital artifacts: A theory of 
consumption values perspective. Information & Management, 47(1), 53–59. doi:10.1016/j.im.2009.10.002
U.S. Small Business Adminitration. (2014). The Importance of Keeping Your Customers Happy. Retrieved 
from http://www.impactbnd.com/blog/the-importance-of-keeping-your-customers-happy
Venkatesh, V., Morris, M. G., Davis, G. B., & Davis, F. D. (2003). User acceptance of information 
technology: Toward a unified view. Management Information Systems Quarterly, 425–478.
Wang, C. Y., Chang, H. C., Chou, S. C. T., & Chen, F. F. (2013). Acceptance and Willingness to Pay for 
Mobile TV Apps. Academic Press.
Wang, T., Oh, L. B., Wang, K., & Yuan, Y. (2013). User adoption and purchasing intention after free 
trial: an empirical study of mobile newspapers. Information Systems and e-Business Management, 1-22.

71
Social and Technical Perspective of Individual’s Intention to Purchase Mobile Application
﻿
Wang, Y., Meister, D. B., & Gray, P. H. (2013c). Social influence and knowledge management systems 
use: Evidence from panel data. Management Information Systems Quarterly, 37(1), 299–313.
Wang, Y. S. (2008). Assessing e‐commerce systems success: A respecification and validation of the 
DeLone and McLean model of IS success. Information Systems Journal, 18(5), 529–557. doi:10.1111/
j.1365-2575.2007.00268.x
Wasserman, T. (2010). Software engineering issues for mobile application development. FoSER 2010.
Week, B. (2012). Piracy Cuts Into Paid App Sales. Retrieved from http://www.businessweek.com/ar-
ticles/2012-11-01/piracy-cuts-into-paid-app-sales
Word-of-Mouth. (n.d.). An Implicit Model Made Explicit. Advances in Consumer Research. Association 
for Consumer Research (U. S.), 15, 32–36.
Wu, J. H., & Wang, S. C. (2005). What drives mobile commerce?: An empirical evaluation of the revised 
technology acceptance model. Information & Management, 42(5), 719–729. doi:10.1016/j.im.2004.07.001
Wu, J. H., Wang, S. C., & Lin, L. M. (2007). Mobile computing acceptance factors in the healthcare 
industry: A structural equation model. International Journal of Medical Informatics, 76(1), 66–77. 
doi:10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2006.06.006 PMID:16901749
Xin, D., Mao, J., & Liu, M. (2010, May). The effects of parasocial relationships in the adoption of 
mobile commerce application: A conceptual model. In E-Business and E-Government (ICEE), 2010 
International Conference on (pp. 149-152). IEEE. doi:10.1109/ICEE.2010.45
Yan, Z., Liu, C., Niemi, V., & Yu, G. (2010). Effects of displaying trust information on mobile ap-
plication usage. In Autonomic and Trusted Computing (pp. 107–121). Springer Berlin Heidelberg. 
doi:10.1007/978-3-642-16576-4_8
Yan, Z., Zhang, P., & Deng, R. H. (2012). TruBeRepec: A trust-behavior-based reputation and recom-
mender system for mobile applications. Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, 16(5), 485–506. doi:10.1007/
s00779-011-0420-2
Yang, K. (2010). Determinants of US consumer mobile shopping services adoption: Implica-
tions for designing mobile shopping services. Journal of Consumer Marketing, 27(3), 262–270. 
doi:10.1108/07363761011038338
Yang, K. (2012). Consumer technology traits in determining mobile shopping adoption: An application 
of the extended theory of planned behavior. Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services, 19(5), 484–491. 
doi:10.1016/j.jretconser.2012.06.003
Yankee Group. (2011). App Piracy Is Hurting Android Developers’ Bottom Lines. Retrieved from http://
www.yankeegroup.com/about_us/press_releases/2011-09-08-1.html
Zeithaml, V. A. (1988, July). Consumer perceptions of price, quality and value: A means-end model and 
synthesis of evidence. Journal of Marketing, 52(3), 2. doi:10.2307/1251446
Zhou, T. (2011). The impact of privacy concern on user adoption of location-based services. Industrial 
Management & Data Systems, 111(2), 212–226. doi:10.1108/02635571111115146

72
Social and Technical Perspective of Individual’s Intention to Purchase Mobile Application
﻿
Zhou, T. (2013). The effect of flow experience on user adoption of mobile TV. Behaviour & Information 
Technology, 32(3), 263–272. doi:10.1080/0144929X.2011.650711
Zhou, T. (2013). Understanding the effect of flow on user adoption of mobile games. Personal and 
Ubiquitous Computing, 17(4), 741–748. doi:10.1007/s00779-012-0613-3

73
Copyright © 2016, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter  4
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-4666-9438-5.ch004
ABSTRACT
Mobile learning (ML) fosters engaging personalized learning where students can optimize their under-
standing and learning gratification via wireless mobile devices. Although there are studies conducted on 
the research trends on ML, not much studies were conducted on the cutting-edge researches pertaining to 
Collaborative ML. Collaborative ML is significant because it promotes active learning and cooperative 
skills. This paper aims to analyze the state-of-the-art research conducted in the span of five years for 
identifying the trends and focuses in Collaborative ML. The systematic literature review is conducted 
based on Knowledge Discovery Database model capitalizing data mining as the main research meth-
odology. Findings were based on top ten Impact Factor Journals on Educational Technology indexed 
in the ISI Web of Knowledge. The SLR discovered ten main areas that were discussed pertaining to 
Collaborative ML which are Motivation, Students’ Acceptance, Pedagogy, Assessment, Tools, Social 
Networking, Gaming, Knowledge Sharing, Special Needs and Communications.
INTRODUCTION
The emergence of a post-industrial information age and the explosive growth give impetus to the evolu-
tion of harnessing information and knowledge. Exponential growth of technological gadget and influx of 
mobile technologies provide expansive platform for researchers to look at their potentials in optimizing 
teaching and learning productivity, effectiveness and gratification. The robust development of mobile 
technologies has led to incorporation of mobile devices in learning ecosystems worldwide (Ariffin, 
2011). As opined by Sharples (2010), one of the potential approaches is Mobile Learning (ML) where it 
is defined as utilization of “advanced mobile technologies, such as high bandwidth infrastructure, wire-
less technologies, smart devices,wearable and handheld devices.” To frame it in the context of learning 
Collaborative Mobile Learning:
A Systematic Literature Review
Nor Fadzleen Sa’don
Universiti Teknologi Malaysia, Malaysia
Noorminshah A. Iahad
Universiti Teknologi Malaysia, Malaysia

74
Collaborative Mobile Learning
﻿
paradigm, ML is interweaving the learning transitions in daily life sans formalized learning setting and 
scaffold learning process via portable tools, beyond the classroom boundaries. Due to the widening body 
of knowledge on ML, there is a need to refine and offer updated reviews on state-of-the-art researches 
on ML by conducting meta-analysis on empirical studies conducted on ML, especially in reputable and 
significantly cited Impact Factor Journals on Education Technology.
The convergence of the mobile devices with existing educational technologies provides learners with 
greater flexibility by making homogenous learning activities available and accessible by heterogeneous 
mobile devices (smart devices). The term M-learning is coined to describe the convergence of mobile 
technologies with E-learning and we can achieve this by utilizing wireless connectivity. In business, for 
example, the importance of m-learning has been raised as many companies look into mobile technolo-
gies to support mobility of their Knowledge Management (KM) activities. The advent of M-Learning 
created an environment of anywhere, anytime learning. With the advancement of hardware technologies 
now users could have wearable computing. Which actually support the concept of internet of things 
and inventually brings learning to everywhere with gadgets like (Smart Watches, optical head-mounted 
display (OHMD),Mobile ECG, Biometrics wrist bands, etc.
ML is novel in that it facilitates delivery of learning to the right person, at the right time, in the right 
place using portable electronic devices.(Ally, Schafer, Cheung, McGreal, Tin, 2007). M-learning is E-
learning where different mobile devices are used for educational purposes. In this chapter we consider 
M-learning is extension of E-learning.
With key features like portability, ubiquity, and customization of these mobile technologies enables 
us to put the power of knowledge literally in the hands of today’s society, by enabling them to have 24/7 
access to acquire and ascertain study materials via a mobile device, takes away the constraints of always 
having to be in a “classroom environment” for learning to be effective.
This chapter presents a Systematic Literatiure Review (SLR) of Collaborative Mobile Learning based 
on the Knowledge Discovery in Database (KDD) Process (Marban et. al., 2008). First, this chapter 
defined ML and its past reviews. Secondly, the objectives and scope of the SLR are outlined. Next, the 
research design is discussed in detail and the outcomes of the SLR are presented. Finally, the contribu-
tions, recommendations for future research and the limitations of this research are highlighted.
LITERATURE REVIEW
Definition of ML
The concept of Mobile Learning derived from the mobile revolution of the late 1990s which changed 
the distance student from a citizen who chooses not to go to campus but within the parameter of the 
premise (Sharples, 2012). ML is akin to mobile devices optimizes for learning purposes where it is a 
device that has ubiquitous features which can be utilized in any places, sans physical constraints yet 
have a communication systems. It is about using the massive growth of mobile technologies to benefit 
learning and learners. Parallel with the development of computer technology, mobile phone goes one step 
further and it is remarked as a new organ in evolutionary of time line because it have directly integrates 
with the brain.ML refers to the use of mobile or wireless devices for the purpose of learning while on 
the move (Sharples & Vogel, 2011). Typical examples of the devices used for mobile learning include 
cell phones, smart phones, palmtops, and handheld computers; tablet PCs, laptops, and personal media 

75
Collaborative Mobile Learning
﻿
players can also fall within this scope (Kukulsa-Hulme, 2010).The incorporation of mobile learning has 
been extensively studied and comparative studies on the instrumental values on education have been 
analyzed in order to increase the engagement and learner’s gratification. In the context of collaborative 
learning, the learners engaged most with learning that they could do together, either by sharing phones 
or by passing things between phones.
Past Reviews on ML
There are many methods chosen in analyzing past empirical studies via meta-analysis, data mining, abstract 
mining, code analysis and SLR. For this research, SLR is chosen as the research methodology for this 
paper. It is defined as “a systematic, explicit, comprehensive” (Fink, 2007) and retrievable technique in 
identifying and synthesizing existing body of completed and recorded work produced by researchers and 
scholars. SLR was conducted on top ten Impact Factor journals on Educational Technology (Scimago, 
2014) in order to analyze the research conducted on the aforementioned topic. By conducting SLR, it 
may offer extensive perspective for educators and researchers into state-of-the-art trends on ML.
Prior to this research, there were several significant reviews conducted on ML. Wu et. al. (2012) car-
ried out an SLR on trends of ML and discovered that past empirical studies on ML predominantly studied 
two aspects in literature review; gauging the effectiveness of ML and developing ML framework, tool 
or system. From these two aspects, a review on seamless ML was carried out by Wong and Looi (2011) 
where parameters and constraints of ML were studied and analyzed. A review conducted by Hwang and 
Tsai (2011) utilized text mining to analyze six major education technology journals and reviewed the 
factors contributing to the success of ML in various countries. Despite myriad of research conducted 
on ML, it is discovered from empirical studies that majority of the reviews conducted were generally 
focusing on the overview of ML and SLR is not widely optimized to analyze state-of-the-art researches 
on current trends of ML. Due to the burgeoning importance imposed on the influence of highly cited 
researches in Impact Factor journals, there is a need to upgrade and review the latest research on ML 
and identify the trends that researchers and educators need to pay attention pertaining to ML.
OBJECTIVES
This chapter aims to carry out a Systematic Literature Review of empirical researches pertaining to ML. 
Other objectives comprise to:
1. 	
Identify the patterns and trends of ML from top Educational Technologies journals.
2. 	
Find out the methodologies and results of the studies on ML.
3. 	
Identify and suggest future works for Collaborative ML.
SCOPE AND LIMITATION OF STUDY
The SLR conducted on collaborative ML is limited to the parameter of five years span of published 
researches. The parameter is chosen in order to select the state of the art research conducted from repu-

76
Collaborative Mobile Learning
﻿
table accredited publications which are the top ten Impact Factor Journals on Educational Technology. 
The literatures are selected from Impact Factor Journals due to its credibility and the research is then 
refined to focusing on the top topic of trends on ML.
RESEARCH DESIGN
The method chosen is Systematic Literature Review (SLR). SLR “aggregates all existing evidence on 
a research question” (Kitchenham et. al., 2009) and provides the state-of-the-art findings and evident-
based guidelines for researches. In the context of this study, SLR is conducted on prior empirical re-
searches, models and theoretical frameworks on existing literature on ML from the span of five years 
(2010-2014). The reason for choosing SLR is apart from helping researcher to find solutions, it gives 
practitioners the guidelines in developing pragmatic and appropriate tangible solutions in a specific 
context. In the context of this research, Knowledge Discovery in Database (KDD) Process (Marban et. 
al., 2008) is implemented to retrieve the required data on VLE management. KDD refers to the overall 
process of discovering useful knowledge from data, and data mining refers to a particular step in this 
process.(Fayyad, Piatetsky-Shapiro, Symth, 2006) It involves five steps: data selection, pre-processing, 
data transformation, data mining and results analysis. Figure 1 illustrates the stages conducted by the 
research in identifying the research patterns conducted on ML.
1. 	
Data Selection: The SLR was conducted based from top ten ISI Journals of Educational Technology. 
The journals were chosen based on indexed ranking on ISI Web of Knowledge. The journals chosen 
were Computer and Education, Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, International Journal of 
Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, British Journal of Educational Technology, Interactive 
Learning Environments, Educational Technology and Society and Educational Technology 
Research and Development. All of the journals used in this research is tabulated in Table 1. Within 
the parameter of this research, the journals are identified as database and each journal is labeled 
from D1-D10 based on the latest ranking (Scimago, 2014). This is to ensure the credibility of the 
literature and higher impact on this research.
Figure 1. Stages of the knowledge discovery in database

77
Collaborative Mobile Learning
﻿
2. 	
Pre-Processing: At this stage, it involves collecting only necessary data and eliminating noise or 
unrelated data. Pertaining to selection parameter, the articles are filtered chronologically where 
only the ones published from the span of the last five years (2010-2014) are selected for the state-
of-the-art element and validity to the current educational settings. From this process, 991 papers 
are selected specifically based on the topics pertaining to ML trends, in order to identify the main 
focus and issues extracted by myriad of scholars and researchers.
3. 	
Data Transformation: This stage refers to having a unified logical view of the wide variety of data 
and databases from the references gathered. In the context of this research, it involves mapping of 
the chunks and clusters of data and organizing them to a single naming convention. This research 
is based from the data collected from the literature. Based from the 991 publications, keywords 
were identified in order to identify research patterns conducted on ML. From the publications, 
collaborative ML tops the focus of research and it was featured in all of the top ten publications.
4. 	
Data Mining: At this stage, a particular data-mining method is chosen in order to further analyze 
and refine the respective factors. Based on KDD model (Fayyad, Piatetsky-Shapiro, and Smyth, 
1996), the method can be: summarization, classification, regression or clustering. For this research, 
summarization is chosen as it is seen as the most suitable method in identifying further patterns in 
collaborative ML. Summarization is conducted by extracting the data from the abstract and body 
of literature. This is to analyze the gist of the research that leads to dispersion of theories and sug-
gested models, framework and studies done on collaborative ML.
5. 	
Result Analysis: The last stage involves documentation and visualization of the data analyzed. 
The extracted patterns of information are synthesized with the data selection objectives, in order 
to achieve the intended results. In the context of this research, the summarization of research done 
on collaborative ML are compared and analyzed to further find the similar patterns, issues and 
proliferate potential studies in near future.
Table 1. Top 10 impact factor journals for educational technology
ID
Database
Publisher
Impact Factor
D1
Computer & Education
Elsevier
3.720
D2
The Internet and Higher Education
Elsevier
3.257
D3
International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative 
Learning
Springer
1.717
D4
Journal of Computer Assisted Learning
Wiley
1.632
D5
Australasian Journal of Educational Technology
Australasian Society for 
Computers in Learning in 
Tertiary Education
1.363
D6
British Journal of Educational Technology
Wiley
1.313
D7
Interactive Learning Environments
Taylor & Francis Online
1.302
D8
Educational Technology and Society
International Forum of 
Educational Technology & 
Society
1.171
D9
Educational Technology Research and Development
Springer
1.155
D10
Learning, Media and Technology
Taylor & Francis Online
0.644

78
Collaborative Mobile Learning
﻿
DATA COLLECTION
•	
Databases Search: The data pool comprised 10 high-ranking journals on education technolo-
gy based on ISI Web of Knowledge, conducted via manual electronic search. The ranking sys-
tem is used to select the database for the review to enhance the credibility of the state-of-art 
researches. The journals chosen were Computer and Education, Journal of Computer Assisted 
Learning, International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, British Journal 
of Educational Technology, Interactive Learning Environments, Educational Technology and 
Society and Educational Technology Research and Development.
•	
Search Terms: Keyword mining was the technique chosen in the scope of database search. (Ngai, 
Xiu and Chau, 2009) opined that extracting or detecting hidden patterns or information from large 
databases via keyword mining helps to narrow down the gist of the research focus. The search 
terms that was used in the first stage was “mobile learning” to gauge possible trends, outcomes 
and current empirical researches conducted pertaining to ML. The search was within the scope 
of five years span (2010-2014) in order to seek the state-of-art researches. The term “mobile 
learning” was used in order to determine the scope and trends of ML. After reviewing the out-
put based from keyword mining, the search is comprehensively extended to the abstracts of the 
reviewed empirical research. From the output of the search, the search term is further refined to 
“Collaborative ML” where abstract mining is done. This refers to analyzing the abstracts of the 
papers that match the search parameter. From the abstracts, refined search within Collaborative 
ML is deduced and comparatively analyzed.
•	
Selection of Papers for Inclusion in the Review: A number of further criteria were specified to 
select appropriate studies for inclusion in the review. From the 10 ISI top journals in Education 
Technology, the meta-analysis must comply with 4 inclusion criteria as listed below:
◦◦
Include empirical evidence relating to collaborative ML.
◦◦
Dated from January 2010 to March 2014.
◦◦
Include an abstract.
◦◦
Set within the parameter of educational institutions.
Using these four conditions, 799 papers met the inclusion criteria and were identified as relevant to 
the current review. Table 2 displays the data coding of the data pool on journals of Education Technol-
ogy with tabulated analysis of papers reviewed. They were analyzed for relevance to the four criteria 
identified prior to the analysis. In order to analyze the ten top IS journals on education technology, each 
database is labeled accordingly from D1 to D10. The labeling is according to the ranking of the jour-
nals based on certified IF rankings. This is to expedite the analysis procedure via Mauban’s Knowledge 
Database Analysis (2010).
After analyzing the research patterns, collaborative ML ranked as the most coveted topic for all the 
databases chosen for the review. Collaborative ML was featured in all the 10 IF journals and focused 
in empirical studies for 75 times compared to other seven keywords. Further data mining is conducted 
on Collaborative ML in order to identify the areas that are focused in prior empirical researches, using 
Mauban’s classification method via abstract mining. In this context, each abstract of the paper that was 
discussing Collaborative ML is examined to further identify the areas discussion and designation. Figure 
2 describes the summary of areas in Collaborative ML via this technique.

79
Collaborative Mobile Learning
﻿
Table 2. Total number of papers identified from each database and number shortlisted as relevant
ID
Database
No. of Paper 
Identified in Search
No. of Paper Meeting the 
Inclusion Area
D1
Computer & Education
348
158
D2
The Internet and Higher Education
295
181
D3
International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative 
Learning
78
45
D4
Journal of Computer Assisted Learning
40
1
D5
Australasian Journal of Educational Technology
49
29
D6
British Journal of Educational Technology
9
3
D7
Interactive Learning Environments
34
26
D8
Educational Technology and Society
68
37
D9
Educational Technology Research and Development
18
16
D10
Learning, Media and Technology
17
6
Total
911
799
Table 3. Keyword frequency on ML from the databases (2010-2014)
Keywords
Frequency Used in Articles
Frequency Used in No. of Top 10 IS Journals
Collaborative Learning
75
10
Assessment
57
8
Management
56
8
Personalized learning
45
7
Inquiry learning
41
7
Gaming
31
6
Ubiquitous Learning
16
6
Augmentation
5
6
Figure 2. Summary of areas in collaborative ML via abstract mining (2010-2014)

80
Collaborative Mobile Learning
﻿
DISCUSSION OF AREAS IN COLLABORATIVE 
MOBILE LEARNING SLR (2010-2014)
In order to identify the trends of Collaborative ML, hierarchical taxonomy was conducted via abstract 
mining from 799 papers that were considered relevant and matched the inclusion criteria of SLR con-
ducted in this research. From 799 papers, abstract mining output revealed that Collaborative ML is the 
most coveted topic in the database specified which is followed by Assessment, Management, Personalized 
Learning, Inquiry Learning, Gaming, Ubiquitous Learning as well as Augmentation. In order to have an 
in-depth meta-analysis of the empirical researches conducted, abstracts of the 75 data pool on Collabora-
tive ML was cross-analyzed, compared and discussed to ascertain the patterns, trends and findings on 
the areas. As shown in Figure 3, via abstract mining, 75 papers were identified 10 main areas that were 
discussed pertaining to Collaborative ML which are:
1. 	
Motivation,
2. 	
Students’ Acceptance,
3. 	
Pedagogy,
4. 	
Assessment,
5. 	
Tools,
6. 	
Social Networking,
7. 	
Gaming,
8. 	
Knowledge Sharing,
9. 	
Special Needs, and
10. 	 Communications.
Figure 3. Hierarchical taxonomy on SLR conducted on ML & Collaborative ML via abstract mining

81
Collaborative Mobile Learning
﻿
•	
Motivation: Via abstract mining, motivation in Collaborative ML is the top area discussed by 
researchers in the entire database analyzed. Majority of the papers discussed on intrinsic and 
extrinsic motivation where the motivation and engagement in learning may derive from the stu-
dents themselves or influenced by myriad factors such as teachers, peers, learning ethos, tools 
and non-physical elements such as word engagement (Wong et. al, 2010), body language (Yan 
and Sie, 2010) and interactive communication between humans or non-human contacts. In this 
context, mobile devices are utilized to eliminate learning inhibition, verbal incompetency as well 
as improve psycho-metric efficiency. According to Tsai (2010), students perform better when 
teacher intervene during the Collaborative ML by providing verbal engagement or learning sup-
port. This is supported by a study conducted by Blasco-Arcas et. al (2013) which investigate how 
interactivity impacts learning engagement during Collaborative ML. Via verbal and non-verbal 
communication, motivation and learning engagement are fortified through exploration of learn-
ing spaces within collaborative learning groups and mobile peer learning. Apart from scores and 
achievement assessed via ML, motivation can be influenced via verbal and non-verbal communi-
cation shared by peers and facilitators during collaborative session.
•	
Students’ Acceptance: Students’ acceptance is the second most coveted area in researches on 
Collaborative ML in the database analyzed. From the papers, all of the researchers aimed to 
identify the factors that influence students’ acceptance of Collaborative ML and they are then 
narrowed down by the use of various methods, techniques and mobile tools that expedite mobile 
learning in secondary and higher education. Cheung and Vogel (2013) discovered that the ability 
to share information during Collaborative ML have higher influence in students’ acceptance to-
wards mobile learning and collaborating with their peers. Cheng (2014) used gaming as a platform 
to identify students’ acceptance in Collaborative ML and discovered that the level of acceptance 
varies on students’ learning performance but generally, the ease of use and user-friendliness of 
the learning tools (games) can highly influence the students’ attitudes and openness in embracing 
Collaborative ML. Apart from that, Liaw, Hatala and Huang (2010) discovered in their studies that 
there are many ways that Collaborative ML can immensely improve students’ acceptance towards 
the teaching and learning process. Through their studies, they discovered that by implementing 
Collaborative ML, it helps “enhance learners’ satisfaction, encourage learners’ autonomy, em-
powering system functions, and enriching interaction”.
•	
Pedagogy: In the context of pedagogy, this area studies methods and ways of teaching by imple-
menting Collaborative ML. Martin and Ertzberger (2013) conducted an experimental study on 
“Here and Now” ML where it studied how ML is used to affect students’ learning performance 
and attitude. The outcome of the research indicated that students preferred authentic learning 
environment via appropriate ML techniques and methods. Apart from that, some of the tech-
niques used are Jigsaw and Fishbowl Collaborative Learning techniques (Andreas et. al, 2010) 
can supplement and/or augment face to face interactions, improving upon previous approaches in 
distance collaboration and communication. Meanwhile, Wang (2010) studies how online shared 
workspaces can support collaborative ML. It is discovered that it can act as a catalyst to share 
learning materials, brainstorm and discuss as well as coordinate their learning collaboration.
•	
Assessment: Based on meta-analysis conducted, majority of the papers that focused on assess-
ment in Collaborative ML identify assessment as one of the key focuses in planning an effective 
ML. Assessment for Collaborative ML can be categorized into formative and summative format 
and be embedded extrinsically or intrinsically in ML. Hwang and Chang (2011) proposed a forma-

82
Collaborative Mobile Learning
﻿
tive assessment-based approach for improving the learning achievements of students. From their 
research, the end result concluded that formative assessment in Collaborative ML helps to pro-
mote students’ interest and learning performance. From a small to large scale assessment method, 
Looi et. al. (2014) had designed a mobile learning curricular for Singaporean secondary education 
which can assess students’ performance in ML. From the action research done, it is discovered 
that by embedding Collaborative ML, students perform better as they set the learning pace rather 
than conformed to the generalized pace set by the teacher or facilitator. Nonetheless, Hwang et. 
al. (2011) discovered that there is a need to customize assessment based on several factors such as 
students’ learning pace, socio-cultural suitability, infrastructure, readiness and tools.
•	
Collaborative ML Tools: Based from the data pool via abstract mining, the mobile tools and 
devices that were studied comprise smartphones, tablets, Ipod and other handheld devices. Viberg 
and Grönlund (2013) studied how these mobile devices escalate learners’ motivation and gratified 
positive attitudes towards Collaborative ML. Mobile tools and devices were discovered to enhance 
digital fluency (Wang, Wiesemes and Gibbons, 2012), learning inquisition (Ahmed and Parson, 
2013) and social knowledge construction (Lan et. al, 2012). The tools act as platform for students 
to collaborate with their peers and the devices may be used as primary or secondary learning aid 
during the teaching and learning process. Apart from that, using ML tools for collaborative learn-
ing positively engaged the learners (Al-Fahad, 2009) as well as scaffold the learning process that 
may not be effectual using conventional methods of the past (Jones, Scanlon and Clough, 2013).
•	
Social Networking: Social networking is identified as the most popular platform for Collaborative 
ML (Lan et. al, 2012). Social networking provides online asynchronous discussion via mobile de-
vices that has high popularity rate and likeability among students. Brito (2012) conducted focus-
group research that analyzed patterns, factors and drawbacks of Collaborative ML conducted via 
social networking and discovered that students exhibits both “metacognitive knowledge and per-
sonal epistemological observations” due to their familiarity and constant engagement with ML 
devices. As a result, these enhances learning motivation as well as give learners myriad options 
on methods of interaction, personalized learning as well as neutralized the perception that social 
networking benefits would tower solely towards non-academic purposes. A research conducted 
by Cheon et. al. (2012) studied how ML readiness is gauged by Social Networking platforms and 
findings showed that learners have higher acceptance and level of readiness in conducting col-
laborative learning via online asynchronous discussion even with minimal facilitation and limited 
technical support.
•	
Gaming: Gaming is one of the main areas discussed in Collaborative ML where its usage, limita-
tions and potentials in optimizing learning competence were identified as vital aspects in motivat-
ing the use of ML amongst students. Majority of the games reviewed from the data pool are utiliz-
ing Second Life as the platform for data collection and analysis. Cheng (2014) uses Second Life 
as a catalyst to conduct case study on identifying students’ acceptance in Collaborative ML where 
the virtual gaming platform to engage asynchronous discussion, collaborative learning, problem 
solving, risk management as well as enhance metacognitive skills. The study showed that gaming 
enhances cognitive skills as well as contribute positive learning attributes towards Collaborative 
ML. Apart from that, other façade of gaming is studied where pedagogical aspects of gaming 
were analyzed to examine the transferability of the Jigsaw and Fishbowl collaborative learning 
techniques to the Second Life platform (Andreas, Tsiatsos, Terzidou and Pomportsis, 2010). 
Meanwhile, gaming element is also implemented to scaffold vocabulary learning (Sandberg, 

83
Collaborative Mobile Learning
﻿
Maris and Hoogendoorn, 2014) where learners were able to enhance their vocabulary competence 
via gaming as well as outperform other learners who were using conventional methods such as 
dictionary and lexical references. Gaming is widely used to enhance interactivity (Belotti, Berta, 
Gloria and Ozolina (2011) as well as improve learners’ engagement and motivation. (Liu and Chu, 
2010).
•	
Knowledge Sharing: Based from abstract mining conducted, knowledge sharing is considered as 
bridging the learning gap by collaborating with peers and facilitator via mobile devices and col-
laborative methods. Sue et. al. (2010) studied the use of knowledge sharing in Collaborative ML. 
The outcome of their research concluded that knowledge sharing enhancement during collabora-
tive activities via mobile devices increase learning achievement, shared gratification as well as 
increase motivation to conduct verbal and non-verbal interaction with their peers. Ryu and Parson 
(2012) uses knowledge sharing as a mechanism to gauge the benefits in Collaborative ML where 
it is found to incite risk taking as well as expedite higher motivation in collaborating with their 
peers. Sung, Hwang and Chiu (2012) deduced knowledge sharing to provide intrinsic engagement 
to explore new disciplines and learning areas that might not be expedited promptly via conven-
tional learning methods.
•	
Special Needs: There is also a growing interest towards utilizing Collaborative ML for special 
needs. Fernández-López et. al. (2013) opined that students with special needs require learning 
alternative to cope with physical shortcomings that might be offered via ML. Collaborative ML 
offers a platform to enhance behavioural support, cognitive flexibility as well as metacognitive 
scaffolding that conforms to the personalized learning environment and ethos. Looi et. al (2010) 
discussed on how Collaborative ML can leverage sustainable learning readiness for students with 
Special Needs as mobile devices are equipped with augmented reality enhancement, larger and 
more vivid visualization optimization as well as adjustable audio capacity.
•	
Communication: Pertaining to Communication, it is categorized into verbal and non-verbal com-
munications that are synthesized using asynchronous discussion platforms as well as synchronous 
platform. Chiu & Hsiao (2010) studied the communication differences during Collaborative ML 
for primary school students and the outcome of the research revealed that it generated active learn-
ing and active communication as there is abundant discussion, particularly for continuing task, 
managing procedure and coordinating efforts.
The communication level were categorized based from four qualities; passive or reticent, frequently 
off-task, actively participating, and knowledge emphasizing. The research is parallel to the case study 
conducted by Sung, Hwang, Liu and Chu (2014) where it improves self-efficacy as well as enhances 
self-esteem and collaboration engagement for future learning activities and assessment.
LIMITATIONS
The current review has a number of limitations. As with all reviews it was limited by the search terms 
used, the journals included and the time period of papers published. However the papers discussed in 
this literature review provide a snapshot of empirical research on outcomes and impacts of Collabora-
tive ML and the parameters that surround the research areas. Apart from that, the review is conducted 
from the Educational Technological perspective. Future review could be conducted from the Informa-

84
Collaborative Mobile Learning
﻿
tion Systems paradigm. Besides that, the review excluded speculative and theoretical papers because it 
is vital to identify the outcomes and issues of Collaborative ML that could be analyzed and rectified in 
future studies. While many aspects of Collaborative ML are relevant to improving learning quality, the 
rest eight areas identified from the 799 papers on ML are equally important to be studied and analyzed.
CONTRIBUTION
As a contribution, this research offers educators and researchers an updated SLR on the current state-of-
the-art researches on ML, specifically Collaborative ML. It would assist researchers to identify the issues, 
patterns of research areas as well as gauge the solution to engage refined methods, system or framework 
in eliminating any defect, problem or shortcoming in implementing ML for teaching and learning in the 
classrooms. Apart from that, this SLR provides extensive overview on past empirical researches from 
the top ten IF Journals that provide a high quality input on future studies on Collaborative ML.
FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTION
According to the SLR conducted, game-based mobile learning, Augmented Reality with virtual infor-
mation and Virtual world will be the areas to focus for future research. We will see more shareable ML 
objects/activities/resources. Researchers are working on how we could make use of users/learners own 
devices as well. Bring your own device (BYOD) concept will gain popularity.
In addition, as gamification in a collaborative learning environment is gaining more attention, this 
can be further explored beyond the utilization of Second Life. Mobile based gaming and gamification 
in the context of learning is believed to gain attention in the future.
CONCLUSION
The Systematic Literature Review conducted enables researchers and educators to identify latest trends. 
In conclusion, mobile learning is immanent in the dynamics of education and will revolutionize the 
pace and impact the learning boundaries. In order to identify the trends and better prepare for the needs 
and roles of ML for future education, it is imminent that SLR is conducted that review the latest focus 
on mobile learning. Based on the SLR conducted, Collaborative ML is the top trend pertaining to ML 
and further analysis and discussion on the literature are conducted. For future work, the authors hope to 
conduct feasibility analysis on Collaborative ML and gauge its impact on teaching and learning process 
to bridge learning gap.
REFERENCES
Ahmed, S., & Parsons, D. (2013). Abductive science inquiry using mobile devices in the classroom. 
Computers & Education, 63, 62–72. doi:10.1016/j.compedu.2012.11.017

85
Collaborative Mobile Learning
﻿
Ally, M., McGreal, R., Schafer, S., Tin, T., & Cheung, B. (2007). Use of mobile learning technology to 
train ESL adults. Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Mobile Learning.
Andreas, K., Tsiatsos, T., Terzidou, T., & Pomportsis, A. (2010). Fostering Collaborative Learning In 
Second Life: Metaphors And Affordances. Computers & Education, 55(2), 603–615. doi:10.1016/j.
compedu.2010.02.021
Blasco-Arcas, L., Buil, I., Hernandez-Ortega, B., & Sese, F. J. (2013). Using Clickers In Class. The Role 
Of Interactivity, Active Collaborative Learning And Engagement In Learning Performance. Computers 
& Education, 62, 102–110. doi:10.1016/j.compedu.2012.10.019
Cheng, G. (2014). Exploring Students’ Learning Styles In Relation To Their Acceptance And Attitudes 
Towards Using Second Life In Education: A Case Study In Hong Kong. Computers & Education, 70, 
105–115. doi:10.1016/j.compedu.2013.08.011
Cheung, R., & Vogel, D. (2013). Predicting User Acceptance Of Collaborative Technologies: An Ex-
tension Of The Technology Acceptance Model For E-Learning. Computers & Education, 63, 160–175. 
doi:10.1016/j.compedu.2012.12.003
Chiu, C. H., & Hsiao, H. F. (2010). Group Differences In Computer Supported Collaborative Learning: 
Evidence From Patterns Of Taiwanese Students’ Online Communication. Computers & Education, 54(2), 
427–435. doi:10.1016/j.compedu.2009.08.026
Fayyad, U., Piatetsky-Shapiro, G., & Smyth, P. (1996). From data mining to knowledge discovery in 
databases. AI Magazine, 17(3), 37.
Fernández-López, Á., Rodríguez-Fórtiz, M. J., Rodríguez-Almendros, M. L., & Martínez-Segura, M. J. 
(2013). Mobile Learning Technology Based On Ios Devices To Support Students With Special Educa-
tion Needs. Computers & Education, 61, 77–90. doi:10.1016/j.compedu.2012.09.014
Fink, A. (2005). Conducting Research Literature Reviews: From the Internet to Paper (2nd ed.). Aca-
demic Press.
Hwang, G. J., & Chang, H. F. (2011). A Formative Assessment-Based Mobile Learning Approach To 
Improving The Learning Attitudes And Achievements Of Students. Computers & Education, 56(4), 
1023–1031. doi:10.1016/j.compedu.2010.12.002
Kim et al. (2014). Effects on mobile instant messaging on collaborative learning processes and outcomes: 
The case of South Korea Journal of Educational Technology & Society, 17 (2), 31–42.
Kitchenham, B., Pearl Brereton, O., Budgen, D., Turner, M., Bailey, J., & Linkman, S. (2009). System-
atic literature reviews in software engineering–A systematic literature review. Information and Software 
Technology, 51(1), 7–15. doi:10.1016/j.infsof.2008.09.009
Lan, Y. F., Tsai, P. W., Yang, S. H., & Hung, C. L. (2012). Comparing The Social Knowledge Construction 
Behavioral Patterns Of Problem-Based Online Asynchronous Discussion In E/M-Learning Environments. 
Computers & Education, 59(4), 1122–1135. doi:10.1016/j.compedu.2012.05.004

86
Collaborative Mobile Learning
﻿
Liaw, S. S., Hatala, M., & Huang, H. M. (2010). Investigating Acceptance Toward Mobile Learning To 
Assist Individual Knowledge Management: Based On Activity Theory Approach. Computers & Educa-
tion, 54(2), 446–454. doi:10.1016/j.compedu.2009.08.029
Marban, O., Mariscal, G., & Segovia, J. (2009). A Data Mining & Knowledge Discovery Process Model. 
Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery in Real Life Applications. IN-TECH, 2009, 8.
Martin, F., & Ertzberger, J. (2013). Here And Now Mobile Learning: An Experimental Study On The 
Use Of Mobile Technology. Computers & Education, 68, 76–85. doi:10.1016/j.compedu.2013.04.021
Ngai, E. W., Xiu, L., & Chau, D. C. (2009). Application of data mining techniques in customer rela-
tionship management: A literature review and classification. Expert Systems with Applications, 36(2), 
2592–2602. doi:10.1016/j.eswa.2008.02.021
Sandberg, J., Maris, M., & Hoogendoorn, P. (2014). The Added Value Of A Gaming Context And Intel-
ligent Adaptation For A Mobile Learning Application For Vocabulary Learning. Computers & Education, 
76, 119–130. doi:10.1016/j.compedu.2014.03.006
Sharples, M., Taylor, J., & Vavoula, G. (2010). A Theory Of Learning For The Mobile Age. In Medi-
enbildung In Neuen Kulturräumen (pp. 87–99). Vs Verlag Für Sozialwissenschaften. doi:10.1007/978-
3-531-92133-4_6
Su, A., Yang, S. J., Hwang, W. Y., & Zhang, J. (2010). A Web 2.0-Based Collaborative Annotation System 
For Enhancing Knowledge Sharing In Collaborative Learning Environments. Computers & Education, 
55(2), 752–766. doi:10.1016/j.compedu.2010.03.008
Tsai, C. W. (2010). Do Students Need Teacher’s Initiation In Online Collaborative Learning? Computers 
& Education, 54(4), 1137–1144. doi:10.1016/j.compedu.2009.10.021
Wang, R., Wiesemes, R., & Gibbons, C. (2012). Developing Digital Fluency Through Ubiquitous Mobile 
Devices: Findings From A Small-Scale Study. Computers & Education, 58(1), 570–578. doi:10.1016/j.
compedu.2011.04.013
Wong, L. H., & Looi, C. K. (2011). What Seams Do We Remove In Mobile-Assisted Seamless Learn-
ing? A Critical Review Of The Literature. Computers & Education, 57(4), 2364–2381. doi:10.1016/j.
compedu.2011.06.007
ADDITIONAL READING
Keengwe, J., & Maxfield, M. B. (2015). Advancing Higher Education with Mobile Learning Technologies: 
Cases, Trends, and Inquiry-Based Methods. Hershey, PA: IGI Global; doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-6284-1
Nouri, J., Cerratto-Pargman, T., Eliasson, J., & Ramberg, R. (2013). Exploring the Challenges of Support-
ing Collaborative Mobile Learning. In D. Parsons (Ed.), Innovations in Mobile Educational Technologies 
and Applications (pp. 178–194). Hershey, PA: Information Science Reference; doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
2139-8.ch013

87
Collaborative Mobile Learning
﻿
Ryu, H., & Parsons, D. (2009). Innovative Mobile Learning: Techniques and Technologies. Hershey, 
PA: IGI Global; doi:10.4018/978-1-60566-062-2.ch001
KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Augmented Reality: Augmented reality (AR) is a live direct or indirect view of a physical, real-world 
environment whose elements are augmented (or supplemented) by computer-generated sensory input 
such as sound, video, graphics or GPS data.
Bring Your Own Device: Refers to the policy of permitting students to bring personally owned 
mobile devices such as smart phones, laptops and tablets in classrooms, and to use those devices to ac-
cess course related materials.
Collaborative: To work with another person or a group in accomplishing a task.
Gamification: It is the use of game thinking and game mechanics in non-game contexts to engage 
users in solving problems and increase users’ self contributions.
Mobile Learning: Learning across multiple contexts, through social and content interactions, using 
personal electronic devices.
Systematic Literature Review: A research question that tries to identify, appraise, select and syn-
thesize all high quality research evidence relevant to a particular topic.
Wearable Computing: Wearable computers, also known as body-borne computers or wearables are 
miniature electronic devices that are worn by the bearer under, with or on top of clothing.

88
Copyright © 2016, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter  5
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-4666-9438-5.ch005
ABSTRACT
United Nations reported the importance of wayfindng as part of providing sustainable and beneficial 
accessibility to the public in built environment such as a hospital. Despite this, the survey conducted 
in this study found that current wayfinding system in hospitals does not meet the requirements of the 
Malaysian demography which is multilingual and multicultural. Furthermore, the various literacy lev-
els in this country make the design more challenging. The objective of this study is to design, develop 
and test a hospital interactive wayfinding system (HIWS) that is targeted towards the West Malaysian 
population. Using the established symbols that has been validated by other studies and from the survey 
feedback obtained, the HIWS was designed and developed and tested with 24 Malaysian users using the 
lab based user experience testing. Although the results seems promising whereby 83% of users liked the 
system, the qualitative feedback revealed various improvements to the system, that would be valuable to 
the design and development team to improve HIWS.
INTRODUCTION
Wayfinding system is a method for users to find ways to their desired destination that is not based 
merely on signage. It is a complex system that includes environment and behavioral aspect enabling 
users to interpret and endure their surroundings to get to their destination without long thoughts. The 
growth of population, trend and the expansion of technology precipitate the development of effective 
communication to fulfil the needs of people with various levels of literacy, memorizing ability and 
social culture. This requires a universal system that can easily be understood by various levels of age, 
Design of a Hospital Interactive 
Wayfinding System:
Designing for Malaysian Users
Ashok Sivaji
MIMOS Berhad, Malaysia
Hizbullah Kampo Radjo
MIMOS Berhad, Malaysia
Mohd-Faizal Amin
MIMOS Berhad, Malaysia
Mohd Azrin Hafizie Abu Hashim
MIMOS Berhad, Malaysia

89
Design of a Hospital Interactive Wayfinding System
﻿
literacy, language, culture and gender. Human’s high demand and level of persona had created a need 
of optimal user experience (UX), a crucial factor in the development of a highly effective Interactive 
Wayfinding System (IWS). International standards such as ISO 21542:2011 (“ISO 21542:2011 Building 
construction -- Accessibility and usability of the built environment,” 2011) specifies a range of require-
ment and recommendation for signage and wayfinding for internal and external environment. A United 
Nations report by (Rapley, 2013) has also emphasized the importance of wayfinding as part of providing 
sustainable and beneficial accessibility to global public in built environment, transport systems and in 
information and communication technologies (ICT). Wayfinding has become important for both outdoor 
and indoor building environments. For instance, in the design of shopping malls, various color themes 
has been used to indicate various areas to ease wayfinding in the shopping mall. Study (Ashok Sivaji, 
Downe, Mazlan, Soo, & Abdullah, 2011) found that when it comes to the design of shop layout, some 
shopping mall owners pay attention to the Gestalt principle of similarity(Soegaard, 2010), which indeed 
assist the consumer’s in wayfinding. This is achieved by advocating similar design concepts in terms of 
shop label and color scheme which helps the consumer to form and associate with the shopping theme 
(whether shopping for souvenirs or clothes, or food) within the shopping mall.
According to (Mollerup, 2009), there are few reason why people have difficulty in finding their way 
around the hospital. Firstly, hospitals accommodate large real estate and complicated built environments. 
Secondly, the rapid nature of change and development in hospital environment to meet the changing 
needs of the demography. Thirdly, the usage of medical terminology for signage that is not familiar to 
visitor and/or patients. In the design of The Royal Children’s Hospital in Melbourne, Australia design-
ers and architects (Whittle, 2009) have created design inspired by nature that stimulates and engages 
children mentally and socially. For instance, it was shown in (Whittle, 2009) that dappled colors helps 
wayfinding. Additionally, views up and out of the street provide simple and strong wayfinding cues with 
consistent connection to external landmarks. Wayfinding has widely been used for inpatient and staffs 
to ease their way around when under stressful conditions (Sansom & Brooks, 2012). A good wayfinding 
system can be installed in hospitals to benefit patrons as it promotes ‘healing’ by enabling patrons to be 
in control of an environment to find healing. The key factor is to reduce stress, anxiety and fear, which 
are common feelings that undermine the body’s ability to heal (Arthur & Passini, 1992).
The objective of this chapter is to firstly understand the requirement and challenges faced in a gov-
ernment hospital in Malaysia. To achieve this objective, a survey was conducted among the patients and 
visitors to a hospital. Based on the feedback, the second objective is to design a prototype IWS system 
and the third objective is to validate the design based on some established UX methods.
The scope of this chapter is only for the specialist clinics of a hospital. Hence the requirement gather-
ing was confined to Malaysians ranging from three major ethnics, which are Malay, Chinese and Indians 
(including Punjabis) who do not suffer from visual impairment. This study was confined to Peninsular 
or West Malaysian population; hence it does not involve other Bumiputra who are mainly settled in East 
Malaysia.
BACKGROUND
Wayfinding was initially intended for outdoor environment. An urban planner Kevin Lynch in his in-
fluential book, The Image of the City, penned the term wayfinding. Lynch claimed that wayfinding is 
about forming mental images of our environmental surrounding based on sensation and memory (Lynch, 

90
Design of a Hospital Interactive Wayfinding System
﻿
1960). He used the concept of image ability to evaluate city form and to recommend principles for city 
design. Romedi Passini, environmental psychologist and also an architect prolonged Lynch’s theory to 
signage, architectural spaces, and other graphic communications. Passini made the first empirical study 
of wayfinding process, in his doctoral dissertation in man-environment relation (Arthur & Passini, 1992). 
As the era evolves, wayfinding has become important for indoor such as shopping malls, hospitals (Mol-
lerup, 2009; Sansom & Brooks, 2012; Whittle, 2009). The usage of signage as a form of wayfinding in 
hospital has been studied by (Basri & Sulaiman, 2013). It was found that ergonomically, the height of 
the signage does not meet the directional purpose of the staffs and visitors. Hence, this study proposes 
the use a wayfinding information system, which could be used as a mobile application. The similarity of 
this proposal to that of the hospital information system (Ismail et al., 2010) is that it is a software based 
system. The difference however is that while (Ismail et al., 2010) compared and contrasted the various 
systems in Serdang, Selayang and UKM Medical Center, those system were targeted towards manag-
ing and administrating the financial and clinical aspects such as digital records of patients to improve 
decision making by care provider; the system discussed in this chapter is more for facilitating wayfind-
ing for patients and visitor in a large real estate such as the various medical centers in Malaysia. It is 
imperative for medical center to have a vision to become a center of excellence through the integration 
of healthcare, smart partnership and service satisfaction rendered. With the mission of providing the 
best and professional service from the heart with the use of advanced and sophisticated technology, the 
medical center could easily serve a large population from various walks of life.
Figure 1 shows the list of services offered by a typical medical Center. In Malaysia, it is common for 
medical centers that provide this array of services built with the purpose of serving about half a million 
population from surroundings areas and spans hundreds of square meters of total area. With the range 
Figure 1. List of services offered by typical medical center

91
Design of a Hospital Interactive Wayfinding System
﻿
of services provided across many departments within the large area to a large population, this study 
proposes a wayfinding user interface (UI) for a hospital or medical Center known as Hospital Interactive 
Wayfinding System (HIWS).When it comes to the design of a system, the waterfall model could be used 
in the software development cycle, which comprises of requirement gathering, workflow prototyping, 
users interface design, code development and testing.
DESIGN, DEVELOPMENT, AND TESTING OF HOSPITAL 
INTERACTIVE WAYFINDING SYSTEM (HIWS)
Literature Review
This section reviews the various literature and issues involving designing a wayfinding system for a 
multilingual and multicultural population with various levels of literacy. It also reviews related works 
and policies in developed nations to tackle some of the challenges associate with conventional way 
finding systems
Wayfinding System in a Multilingual and Multicultural Society
Wayfinding strategies should communicate effectively to the broadest group possible, including people 
with a wide range of sensory, language, intellectual abilities, ages, social and cultural backgrounds 
(Arthur & Passini, 1992). It is necessary and intuitive process enabling users to perceive and organize 
their environment. Nevertheless, the investment in wayfinding systems is the least devoted, compared 
to other categories of planning. The process is dynamic and it is more than generating a static mental 
map of an area claimed by Arthur and Passini. They postulated that wayfinders are a sequential process 
of decision-making navigating their journeys. Design consistency in signage technology is an important 
aspect of guidance and wayfinding systems because it enables users to identify the forms of the particular 
systems. Wayfinding is about effective communication, and relies on a succession of communication 
clues delivered through our sensory system of visual. One such cue is a signage, which facilitate users 
to identify the signs and enable them to navigate their ways.
Malaysian comprise of a multilingual and multicultural society. According to the Department of 
Statistics, with population strength of 28.1 million in 2009 at annual growth rate of 1.8%, the literacy 
rate in the country is at 97.3% in 2010; whereby literacy rate is defined by the attendance in school, but 
not necessarily completion. Among the Malaysian citizens however, from the 21.5 million who attended 
a formal schooling system, only 70% of the citizens have completed up to secondary school which is 
equivalent to SPM or GCE ‘O’ Levels. The remaining 17% have completed either a Pre-University 
certificate (equivalent to STPM or GCE ‘A’ Levels) or Certificate, Diploma, Degree or Postgraduate 
(Educational and Social Characteristics of the Population 2010, 2014) from a polytechnic or university. 
In 2010, the ethnic composition of Malaysia comprise of Malays (54.5%), Other Bumiputra (12.8%), 
Chinese (24.5%), Indian (7.3%) and Others (0.9%). (“Intercensal Mid-Year Population Estimates Ma-
laysia and States,” 2014).
The multi-linguism in Malaysia has been intensified with colonialism, immigration and nation’s 
language policy (Brown & Asmar, 2006). The national language policy has emphasized both Malay 

92
Design of a Hospital Interactive Wayfinding System
﻿
and English in education, social and professional lives of Malaysian, (Brown & Asmar, 2006). In terms 
of language, the official language of Malaysia is Bahasa Malaysia (Malay), with English as the second 
language. Although, the country contains speakers of 137 living languages, it is common for Malaysian 
to speak Manglish, which is a colloquial form of English with heavy Malay, Chinese, and Tamil influ-
ences (“myGovernment - The Government of Malaysia’s Official Portal,” n.d.). Hence, it is common for 
education to take place within a multilingual environment. With this also comes the challenges to policy 
makers in many areas such as in the road and building signages, which should cater for a multilingual 
population (Brown & Romaine, 2006).
Wayfinding System in Hospitals
Issues such as low literacy rate and language standardization for a multi-lingual population remain a 
challenge in the design of a wayfinding system. The situation becomes more crucial in a hospital envi-
ronment as the lack of understanding of language could create health risk to the citizens. Additionally, 
in the medical industry, there is the extra burden of medical terminologies on top of language barrier. 
This also creates productivity loss to the medical practitioners and administrative staffs who get que-
ried on how to get to a particular destination or specialist clinic. The literacy and multilingual issues 
have also surfaced in the United States, whereby the 2000 census reported that 4.13% of the population 
could neither speak English well or at all, which created a burden to the health care industry. This lead 
to the establishment of the national program, known as Hablamos Juntos, or “We speak together”, with 
the aim to promote adoption of graphical symbols in health care facilities. The target audience for this 
program are the public, with low literacy and with limited English proficiency (Berger & Juntos, 2005).
From the first phase of testing the Universal Symbol in Health Care (USHC), it was found that symbols 
can be more effective than text based signage in assisting patient and visitors in finding their way around 
the health care facility. As a result of further comprehensive research, design, testing at various sites 
with multilingual diverse group of users and redesign for consistency, a comprehensive 50 symbol set 
was designed as shown in Figure 2. The successes of the effectiveness of these symbols were attributed 
to the user experience (UX) analysis.
In another study, (Rooke, Tzortzopoulos, Koskela, & Rooke, 2009) found that it is possible to embed 
other forms of knowledge in hospital signage such as prominent landmarks and colors as cue. This study 
believes that strategically placing prominent landmarks or cues could minimize stress, confusion and 
frustration during the wayfinding in complex environment such as large hospital areas with many services 
and facilities as shown in Figure 1. Another study proposed the use of a Thorough Life Management to 
ensure the sustainability of a wayfinding system for all stages of the product life-cycle (Rooke, Koskela, 
& Tzortzopoulos, 2010). In a more recent report by (Foley, 2012), in an attempt to improve communica-
tion with the changing needs of the diverse community culturally and linguistically, a new wayfinding 
system will be designed incorporating aspects of culture and arts. This project which is to take place at 
the Western Sydney Local Health District will mainly target those with low medical and English literacy 
skills. The sustainability of these projects are promising and in line with Australia’s National Art and 
Health Framework(Meeting of Cultural Ministers - National Arts and Health Framework, 2014),which 
includes efforts in improving wayfinding system in hospital.

93
Design of a Hospital Interactive Wayfinding System
﻿
The Design, Development, and Testing of HIWS
Winston W. Royce has defined waterfall model in 1970 (www.princeton.edu). It is a sequential design 
process, which the progress is seen as flowing steadily downwards like a waterfall. The flow will go 
through the phases of requirement analysis, design process, implementation of the system, verification and 
maintenance. The method is widely used for software project in defining research process for the system
User Requirement Elicitation
Before the design and development efforts take place, it is important to understand the requirement of 
the user. The practice of user centered analysis (UCA), user centered design (UCD) and testing begins 
with the user requirement elicitation. The first step is to correctly identify the users or stakeholder for the 
HIWS. The targeted users of the HIWS are the Malaysian patients and visitors who use the services of 
the medical center. As proposed by (Cheng & Atlee, 2007), since requirement gathering is a challenging 
activity, it is proposed that a partnership be established between researcher with practitioners such as 
software system designers, developers, testers during the user requirement elicitation.
Figure 2. Universal symbol in health care
Adopted from (Berger & Juntos, 2005).

94
Design of a Hospital Interactive Wayfinding System
﻿
User Research: Survey Design and Interview
In a report compiled by the User Experience (UX) Professionals Association (Sherman, 2009), UX 
professional from 34 countries comprising of UX practitioners, usability professionals, user researchers, 
UCD practitioner, interface designer, UX Manager / Director, Information Architect from the US, UK, 
Canada, Spain and Australia, it was found that the UX techniques most often used included
1. 	
User research such as interviews and surveys (75%);
2. 	
Heuristic/expert review (74%);
3. 	
Interface/interaction design (70%).
As proposed by (Cheng & Atlee, 2007), in this study, the partnership was established by having set 
up a team comprising of a user experience (UX) researcher, user interface designer, interaction designer, 
programmer and tester. Another proposal by the (Cheng & Atlee, 2007) is that researchers need to think 
beyond the current requirement engineering and software engineering knowledge and capabilities and 
include collaborators from other discipline. This is where the UX researcher who has knowledge and 
experience in user centered analysis, design and testing could fit in. Based on the common practice in 
developed countries and the benefits of user research, the team visited the hospital and interviewed the 
subjects and recorded the feedback using a survey (Gray & Malins, 2004; Sherman, 2009; Ashok Sivaji 
& Soo, 2013). In total, one hundred successful samples were gathered. The survey was divided into four 
(4) sections to gauge the levels of perception, understanding and familiarization from the patients and 
visitors to the specialist clinics within the medical center:
Section A: Demography.
This section comprises of 7questions and is targeted towards understanding the demography such as 
the gender, age range, ethnicity, nationality and spoken language. Knowing the demography provides 
some insight into the possibility of developing a system that is preferred by mobile or smartphone users 
or even users for those who are internet savvy. The Internet User Survey 2012 from MCMC (“Inter-
net User Survey 2012,” 2012) shows that the top 3 locations respondents of internet access are from 
home (63.1%), workplace (34.8%) and on-the-go (24.3%). The same survey found that Malaysian use 
multiple devices to access the internet. From here, it is clear that Malaysian would expect optimal user 
experience regardless of which device or location the internet being accessed. The purpose of asking 
the ethnicity, spoken language and literacy level is to confirm the various challenges that could impact 
them and whether a visual based system could be the solution to uncover the problems faced. The reason 
for asking the statistics on the visit frequency is to understand their behavioral change with respect to 
the frequency of visits.
Section B: Level of perception towards the medical center’s specialist clinics signage system.
The purpose of these questions is to gauge the effectiveness level of the existing wayfinding system. 
It comprise of question to understand the suitability of the typography, readability and consistency 
used in the existing system. The questions set are also aimed at gauging the level of awareness of the 
respondent in the usage of color codes and the user opinion and ratings on the signage used currently 
at the medical center.

95
Design of a Hospital Interactive Wayfinding System
﻿
Section C: Level of understanding on the medical terminology.
Section C measures the level of hospital patrons’ knowledge of the medical terminologies used to 
categorize the various departments as shown in Figure 1. In total 16 medical terminologies are shown 
with textual and visual signage as shown in Table 2 respectively. Indirectly this is to measure their pref-
erence level in using textual signage with and without visual cue.
Section D: Level of aestheticizing, cognitive and familiarization of ICT gadgets.
Section D measures whether the hospital patrons’ prefer a two dimensional or a three dimensional 
representation. It also measure their familiarization with ICT gadgets such as smartphone, laptop or tablets
Problem Statement Derived from Outcome of User Research
From the respondents of the survey, 56% comprise of patients while the remaining 44% accompanied 
the patients to the specialist clinic. Among them 27% are visiting the clinics for the first time, while 
the majority (73%) of respondents make regular visits. The breakdown of the frequency of visits to the 
clinic is shown in Table 1. To understand further whether the users are familiar with ICT, when asked 
only 67% or two thirds of the responded answered ‘Yes’ to being familiar with computers, smartphones 
and tablet users. This is an important finding as it reveals that one third of the respondents are not really 
ready for a mobile apps based system, commonly found in a smartphone or tablet.
To understand further, how respondents feel about the current signage, two questions were asked. 
The first question attempts to understand how helpful were the current signage used in the hospital. 
The results revealed that 28% agree (19% agree, 9% strongly agree) that the signage were helpful, 12% 
were unsure while the majority of 60% disagree (45% disagree, 15% strongly disagree) that the existing 
signage were helpful in guiding the patients or visitors to the specialist clinic (First graph in Table 2). 
When it came to the rating of the existing signage system of the hospital, 22% found it to be good (9% 
very good, 13% good), 24% unsure while a majority of 54% found the system bad (37% bad, 17% very 
bad) (Second graph in Table 2). The respondents also provided some qualitative feedbacks to support their 
responses during the survey. The next section summarizes both the literatures and qualitative feedback.
Previous studies have found that there is a common misunderstanding between medical terminologies 
used by health care providers (HCP) and patients. Study by (Lerner, Jehle, Janicke, & Moscati, 2000) 
found that HCP need to be clear and conscious with the medical terminologies and vocabulary used 
especially when communicating with the young, urban and poorly educated. Another study proposes 
the use of nursing informatics in assessing patient’s terms for health-related matters, which could in-
volve a multi-disciplinary efforts including linguist, medical librarian, nurses and patients from varying 
culture, ethnic background and education levels (Zielstorff, 2003). Based on the qualitative feedback 
obtained from the survey respondents, it was found that more than half of the respondents (63%) are not 
Table 1. Frequency of visits to the specialist clinic
Number of Visit
1st
2nd – 3rd
4th – 5th
6th – 7th
> 8th
Number of Respondents
27
32
23
10
8

96
Design of a Hospital Interactive Wayfinding System
﻿
continued on following page
Table 2. Finding from preliminary study
1. Is the current signage system used at medical center 
helpful in guiding you to the specialist clinics?
Respondents feedback on the existing signage system effectiveness in 
guiding them to the specialist clinics.
2. How would you rate the current signage system in 
medical center?
Respondents ratings on the current signage system.
3. Are you familiar with medical terminologies such as 
(Cardiology, Ophthalmology, Oral Surgery, Orthopedic, 
Nephrology)
Familiarity with medical terminologies.

97
Design of a Hospital Interactive Wayfinding System
﻿
familiar with the medical terminology such as Cardiology, Ophthalmology, Oral Surgery, Orthopedic 
and Nephrology. Unfortunately, these terminologies are currently used in the signages across the medi-
cal center and even in the service offered by a typical medical center as shown in Figure 1. When an 
alternative is provided to the respondent, it was interesting to note that more than half the respondents 
or 57% responded positively to being able to now understand the medical terminology / classification 
of various departments. The preliminary findings are similar to that reported by the Hablamos Juntos 
program (Berger & Juntos, 2005) whereby
•	
Comparing the respondent’s demography in Table 1, it could be seen that, most respondents to the 
medical center found that the existing signage system is not helpful and not effective in guiding 
them to the specialist clinics. As shown in the first graph of Table 2, 45% of respondents disagreed 
and a further 15% strongly disagree that the current signage was helpful. As such the ratings on the 
existing signage system was more skewed towards being ‘Not Sure’(24%) or ‘Bad’(37%) or Very 
Bad (17%), as shown in the second graph in Table 2. This was seen on respondents who were not 
only on the first time visit but also for regular patients as shown in Table 1. Furthermore, when 
asked on how they rate the current signage in the medical center, it was found that in total 54% of 
respondents provide negative ratings.
•	
In terms of familiarity of medical terminologies used to label the specialist clinic, there is a signif-
icant increase from 24% (third graph in Table 2) to 57% (fourth graph in Table 2) in terms of usage 
of Universal Symbol in Health Care (USHC) as a visual aid to textual signage. At the same time, 
there is also a significant drop from 63% (third graph in Table 2) to 34% (fourth graph in Table 2) 
in terms of respondent not being familiar when the USHC is used as an aid as a visual signage.
4. Are you familiar with medical terminology guided by an 
icon such as
Adapted from (Berger & Juntos, 2005).
Proposed Medical Terminology with a visual aid(icon) and textual.
Table 2. Continued

98
Design of a Hospital Interactive Wayfinding System
﻿
User Centered Analysis
Based on the survey respondents, it was found that most of public hospital patron is from middle income 
group, pensioners and government servants accompanying their children or parents. They prefer public 
hospital because it cost much less than the private hospital. Based on observation, it is the trend that most 
public hospital patron age 40 below do have Internet gadget (smartphone, tablet or laptop). Less of age 
50 and above have Internet gadget. Based on the analysis from the survey and observation conducted, 
it was found that a visual and web based interactive wayfinding system is feasible. At this point, the 
risk or limitation of this study is foreseen. As shown in fourth graph in Table 2, even the visual based 
icons are used, 33% respondents were not familiar and 10% are not sure when the medical terminology 
is guided with icons. The adoption of appropriate UX, design and psychology principle as described in 
the next section could minimize this risk.
Designing the User Interface
Visual communication is communication with visual aids. It is a conveyance of ideas and information 
that relies on vision presented with two-dimensional images. It relies both on eyes that function and on 
a brain that interprets all sensory information received. According to (Lester, 2013), an active curious 
mind remembers and uses visual messages in thoughtful and innovative ways. Visual communication is 
very effective by implementing UX elements. In an e-Commerce study by (Ashok Sivaji, Downe, et al., 
2011), UX elements such as social presence, emotional, trust, word of mouth are found enhance UX on 
top of fundamental psychology principle such as Gestalt Theory and Fitt’s Law. A great UX will excite 
user to do what they want to do, passionate and engage with it. According to another study by (Garrett, 
2010), UX elements comprise of the following:
•	
Surface Plane,
•	
Skeleton Plane,
•	
Structure Plane,
•	
Scope Plane,
•	
Strategy Plane.
For this chapter, this GUI design is based on Garret’s UX elements.
Surface Plane
In developing a comprehensive and usable IWS, various disciplines must be considered and carefully 
thought for the Surface Plane that is the GUI. There are three components of good GUI design. The 
components are aesthetic design, information design and interface design. Aesthetic design is more 
about appropriately designing a user interface. Information designs is about preparing the information 
about the medical center IWS in the best possible way for users (patient, visitor) to efficiently and ef-
fectively digests and comprehend information. Interface design is the makeup of how users can interact 
with medical center IWS. Good interface design is about making the experience of using the IWS easy, 
intuitive and effective. This includes icons, color, typography, animation and sound. Icons used for IWS 
function as buttons, which load the following page that shows the direction of patrons’ desired special-
ist clinics. The icons is based on Hablamos Juntos (Berger & Juntos, 2005), which could be a viable 

99
Design of a Hospital Interactive Wayfinding System
﻿
and an effective communication tool, particularly for a country with low literacy and limited English 
proficiency. For a Malaysian context, the icons could be usable and adequate for hospital patrons with 
limited medical terminology proficiency and speak multi languages.
Typography is part of IWS. During the survey conducted to analyze the effectiveness of typography 
used in current wayfinding system at the medical center, it was found that the current typography used 
was applicable and has good readability as shown in Table 3. With these findings, the current typography 
which is ‘Sans Serif’ font was decided to be used as part of the design of the newly proposed wayfind-
ing system.
Storyboards
Storyboards are graphic organizers form of illustration in sequence for the purpose pre-visualizing of 
a HIWS. The main page shows the IWS title with design elements animation on the background as an 
attraction element. The rest of the pages show presentation of the desired direction to specialist clin-
ics. Table 4 shows the storyboard for the main page, oral surgery page and pediatrics page. It reflects a 
typical scenario of how the hospital visitor would carry out activities that would lead them to achieving 
their goals. In this case, a scenario could be
•	
A patient visiting one specialist to consult for oral surgery
•	
Followed by bringing his/her child to the pediatrics clinic
Skeleton Plane
The skeleton of the user interface includes the placement of buttons, illustrations and text. The skeleton 
is designed to optimize the composition of these elements for the best effect and efficiency so that user 
remembers what is desired and find it when required. Buttons are place at the bottom of the page to cater 
for left and right-handed patrons. If the buttons are on the left side of the page, right-handed patrons 
might not be comfortable using it and vice versa. The title of the IWS and hospital logo on the main 
page is prominently at the center of the page to make it noticeable, as shown in Figure 3. For the rest of 
the pages, the title for every location is displayed with prominent text at the top of the pages to make it 
noticeable for the patrons. The animated of the floor plan is at the center of the page as shown in Figure 
4, making it a focal point for patron to focus in finding their way to their desired specialist clinics.
Structure Plane
The skeleton is a concrete expression of the more abstract structure of the site. The skeleton might de-
fine the placement of the interface elements on the page; the structure would define how users arrive at 
Table 3. Respondents rating of the current typography
Type of Answers
Very Good
Good
Not Sure
Bad
Very Bad
Typography application
32
39
17
12
0
Readability
18
74
8
0
0

100
Design of a Hospital Interactive Wayfinding System
﻿
the desired page and where they could go when they finish. The skeleton might define the arrangement 
of navigational items allowing the users to browse what they desire. This is shown in the flow chart as 
shown below in Figure 5.
Scope Plane
The features and functions of HIWS define by structure to fit together, which composed the scope of 
IWS. HIWS offer a feature that enables users to play the same page again by touching the same button. 
Users can also go to another page without going back to the main page. If the page is left idle for more 
than 60 seconds it will automatically go back to the main page.
Table 4. Storyboarding
No.
Descriptive Text
Main Page (Refer to Figure 6)
1
Text indicates the guide to specialist clinics with hospital logo displayed on light blue frame. Icons represent the specialist 
clinics with text of medical terminology function as buttons at the bottom of the main frame.
2
Animated design elements loops on the background.
Oral Surgery Page (Refer to Figure 7)
1
Oral surgery button changed to light green (colour code for oral surgery for the respective hospital) when touched.
2
The light blue frame horizontally compress to the top of the main frame as the text of specialist clinics indicator disappears 
while the text of door number and floor level for oral surgery gradually appears on it. The visual of the floor plane horizontally 
compress and floor outline vertically compress appear below the light blue frame.
3
The visual of the floor plane horizontally decompress and floor outline vertically decompress below the light blue frame.
4
The floor plane and floor outline form to an isometric view below the light blue frame. Corresponding indicator of oral surgery 
gradually appear with respect the colour code of the department within the hospital while the registration counter gradually 
appear and moves down from the top indicating the location of the clinic. Human icon and ‘Anda di sini’ indicator gradually 
appear.
5
Human icon moves to the registration counter where the location is and the indicator ‘Destinasi anda’ gradually appears. The 
human icon animation will loop for 60 seconds. This page will automatically go back the main page if it is idle more than 60 
seconds. The whole animation of this page will repeat if oral surgery button is touched.
Paediatrics Page (Refer to Figure 8)
1
Paediatrics button changed to light brown (colour code for paediatrics for the respective hospital) when touched.
2
The light blue frame horizontally compress to the top of the main frame as the text of specialist clinics indicator disappears 
while the text of door number and floor level for paediatrics gradually appears on it. The visual of the floor plane horizontally 
compress and floor outline vertically compress appear below the light blue frame.
3
The visual of the floor plane horizontally decompress and floor outline vertically decompress below the light blue frame.
4
The floor plane and floor outline form to an isometric view below the light blue frame. Indicator of paediatrics gradually 
appears with respect to the department’s colour code while the registration counter gradually appears and moves down from the 
top indicating the location of the clinic. Human icon and ‘Anda di sini’ indicator gradually appear.
5
Human icon moves to the registration counter where the location is and the indicator ‘Destinasi anda’ gradually appears. The 
human icon animation will loop for 60 seconds. This page will automatically go back the main page if it is idle more than 60 
seconds. The whole animation of this page will repeat if paediatrics button is touched.

101
Design of a Hospital Interactive Wayfinding System
﻿
Figure 4. Skeleton showing placement of specialist clinics with animated 2D floor plan
Figure 3. Skeleton showing placement of specialist clinics

102
Design of a Hospital Interactive Wayfinding System
﻿
Strategy Plane
The icons that are used to represent the medical terminology enable patrons easily identify the specialist 
clinic. With a User Centric research in gathering requirement and identifying the problem faced by the 
patron, an appropriate design and development strategy is devised based on the Malaysian demography.
Development of the HIWS
The system is developed using Hype 2.0.1, which is a tool to develop web site prototype. All the images 
and design elements were developed using Adobe Illustrator CS6 and converted to Portable Network 
Graphics (PNG) files with Adobe Photoshop CS6. All the medical terminology used in a hospital could 
be applied in the GUI to enable patrons to associate the current signage system with HIWS.
Image Development
All images in the GUI design of HIWS were developed using Adobe Illustrator. Based on the location 
of the specialist clinics, whether within the same floor or multi-floor, the images could be designed. 
For the HIWS, the images of two levelled floor was designed which encompasses the floor plans that 
included the specialist clinics within the medical center, the specialist clinics indicators, the medical 
icons and the human icon that is animated in Hype. Due the Adobe Illustrator CS6 vector format, the 
images need to be converted as raster format files that enable them to be imported into Hype 2.0.1. All 
the images developed with Adobe Illustrator CS6 were converted to PNG.
Figure 5. Flow chart showing navigation items

103
Design of a Hospital Interactive Wayfinding System
﻿
GUI Development
The GUI for HIWS was developed using Hype 2.0.1. Each of the interfaces for the specialist clinics in 
HIWS was constructed in one scene.
The animations and actions of the GUI were developed in the scene frame with three different layers 
of timeline for all specialist clinics pages. Each layers consist of the animation of the specialist clinics 
floor plan, the human icon animation which show the direction to the specialist clinics desired and the 
automatic revert to main page when the GUI of the specialist clinics are left idle for more than sixty 
seconds. Figure 6, 7 and 8 shows the GUI for the Main Page, Oral Surgery and Pediatrics.
The GUI is exported as HTML5 when completed. During the export process the HoSIWS.html file is 
developed with HTML script, Font script and JAVA script. The system compiled all the images together 
into a folder named HoSIWS.hyperesource. The files and the folder is compiled together in one folder 
to enable it to be displayed using a web browser. The HIWS will be displayed when HoSIWS.html file 
is clicked and the system will link all the images gathered in HoSIWS.hyperesource.
User Experience Testing
According to (Sherman, 2009), among the commonly used evaluation and/or testing techniques include
•	
Heuristic or expert review (Chrimes, Kitos, Kushniruk, & Mann, 2014; Ashok Sivaji, Abdullah, 
& Downe, 2011);
•	
Informal usability testing (Ashok Sivaji et al., 2014);
•	
Lab based user experience testing (Ashok Sivaji, Abdullah, Downe, & Ahmad, 2013).
Figure 6. Sequence of images and animated design element in the main page

104
Design of a Hospital Interactive Wayfinding System
﻿
Figure 7. Sequence of images and animation for oral surgery specialist clinic
Figure 8. Sequence of images and animation for pediatric clinic

105
Design of a Hospital Interactive Wayfinding System
﻿
This study involves performing lab based usability testing using eye tracking which is less prevalent. 
One of the reason for this is the cost of ownership of an eye tracker system is high as compared to other 
techniques which do not rely on using an eye tracker (Rapley, 2013; A. Sivaji & Soo, 2012). However, there 
are some advantages in using an eye tracker. Firstly, since the target audience for this study are Malaysian 
and previous study have found that they suffer from high power distance, there are high tendencies for 
users to hold back their feedback during the usability testing (Hofstede, 2010; Ashok Sivaji & Ahmad, 
2014). Additionally, studies have shown that eye tracking is able to capture visual cues represented in 
heat map and gaze plots. When incorporated with Retrospective Think Aloud, the eye tracking analysis 
is beneficial in uncovering insights from respondent’s verbal and non-verbal feedback (Bojko, 2006; 
Goh et al., 2013; Jacob & Karn, 2003; Olmsted-Hawala, Holland, & Quach, 2014; Rashid, Soo, Sivaji, 
Naeni, & Bahri, 2013; Ashok Sivaji & Ahmad, 2014).
The user experience test (UET) gives a direct input on how real users use the system. It measures the 
usability or ease of use with the application of aesthetic design, information design and interface design. 
The test involves carefully creating a scenario of realistic situation, wherein the person perform a list 
of task using HIWS being tested while observers watch and take notes. The objective is to observe how 
people function in a realistic manner. With this, the system designer and developer can directly see the 
problems faced by users or whether the system meets their requirements.
Some of the metrics measured during the UET include
•	
The degree of the system meeting the requirements that were elicited in the previous section dur-
ing the user research
•	
System effectiveness in ensuring user is able to complete the task
•	
System efficiency in ensuring the user is able to complete the task effectively and also in a shortest 
time as possible
The testing was conducted in an independent Software Testing laboratory that has been accredited by 
the Department of Standards Malaysia. MIMOS Software Testing Laboratory is the first organization in 
Malaysia to be recognized with the International Standard ISO/IEC 17025:2005 in Software Testing in 
December 2013. This accreditation, under the Laboratory Accreditation Scheme of Malaysia (SAMM), 
demonstrates technical competence for a defined scope and the operation of a laboratory quality manage-
ment system. The accreditation scope covers Functional, Performance, Security and Usability testing 
(“Accolades & Accreditations,” 2013, “Standards Malaysia Recognises MIMOS As The First Malaysian 
Lab To Receive MS ISO/IEC Accreditation Certificate For Software Testing,” 2014). Under the scope 
of usability testing, user experience test was conducted in a lab that has been featured in the Global 
Usability Studies(Yeo et al., 2011)
User Recruitment
To facilitate the user recruitment and test setup, a UX research and testing tool known as Mi-UXLab 1.0 
(formerly known as URANUS) was used (A. Sivaji & Soo, 2012). Previous UX research in e-Commerce 
(Goh et al., 2013; Tzuaan & Sivaji, 2014) and industrial ergonomics (Ashok Sivaji, Shopian, Nor, Chuan, 
& Bahri, 2013) has shown how using such an automated tool could improve UX research data gathering 
productivity and accuracy. Since the Hospital Interactive Wayfinding System (HIWS) is designed for 

106
Design of a Hospital Interactive Wayfinding System
﻿
users of various walks of life, the targeted audience recruited was from various levels of income and 
literacy level, who represent the Malaysian ethnic group which is Chinese, Indians and Malays.
As shown in the Literacy Column of Table 5, the category of literacy is based on High, Medium and 
Low. High literacy comprise of users who have completed up to minimum of tertiary education such as 
an undergraduate, postgraduate or professional degree, while medium tertiary comprise of users who 
have completed up to a diploma level and those who are below a diploma level of education will fall 
under the low category level. In this study, a total of 24 subjects were recruited equally based on low (8 
users), medium (8 users) and high (8 users) literacy level respectively (First graph in Table 5). These 
subjects comprise of various age groups to reflect the visitors and / or patients who visit the hospital, as 
shown in the age group column of Table 5 (Second graph in Table 5). The users comprise demography 
of Malaysian from the midrange to the lower income group such as of students, technician, engineers, 
drivers, security guard and administrative assistant.
Table 5. Demography for user experience test
No
Demography
Frequency
Analysis
Literacy (Highest Qualification (Multi-Literacy))
1
Low
Anything below Diploma
8
Literacy levels of subjects for user experience test.
Medium
Minimum Pre-U or 
Diploma Studies
8
High
Minimum Degree 
(Undergraduate)
8
Age Group
2
Range
21-30
10
Age distribution for user experience test.
31-40
5
41-50
7
51-60
2
continued on following page

107
Design of a Hospital Interactive Wayfinding System
﻿
In terms of usage of technology or computer literacy, the majority of users are familiar with the 
smartphone (30%), laptop (25%), desktop 20% and hand phone (17%). Table 6 shows that 21 out of 
24 or 88% of users are familiar with multiple devices which correspond to the internet usage survey 
by (“Internet User Survey 2012,” 2012). This is despite the users having various levels of literacy and 
comprising of various age groups. A small portion of users (2 out of 24) are only familiar with basic 
handphone. These users have close to no experience in using neither the internet nor the computer. A 
handful of users ranging from 8% are familiar with tablet (Third graph in Table 5).
The gathering of the demography data was successfully done using the Mi-UXLab survey module. 
This survey module was previously used to also conduct employee 360 degrees self-assessment surveys, 
health awareness survey and also attendance tracking. The Mi-UXLab survey enables survey data to be 
collected for open ended questions, multiple choice questions, matrix questions, ranking questions and 
Likert scale questions.
Test Setup and Scenario Based Testing
After completing the user recruitment, the usability analyst would schedule the appropriate timing for 
the users to take the test. Test is conducted with one user at a time, with the assistance of a moderator. 
Before the test starts, a briefing was conducted and user was required to sign a consent form on their 
agreement in participating with the test and the results could be used for the improvement of HIWS 
while their identity being anonymous.
Although, the users spoke multiple languages such as Cantonese, English, Malay, Mandarin and 
Tamil, the common language spoken is English and Malay. Hence the moderation was conducted in 
Manglish, which is a combination of English and Malay.
The various tasks to be performed are updated in Mi-UXLab, which will interact with the eye tracker 
(Tobii Studio and T60) to prompt the various scenarios, questions and user interface. The test comprise 
of the following scenario to resemble what happens in a hospital environment:
No
Demography
Frequency
Analysis
Types of Device/Computer Literacy (Yes/No)
3
Device
Laptop/Yes
18
Multiple device experience.
Smartphone Android/Yes
15
Desktop/Yes
14
Hand phone/No
12
Smartphone(IOS)/Yes
5
Tablet(Android)/Yes
4
Tablet(IOS)/Yes
2
Smartphone Blackberry/
Yes
1
Table 5. Continued

108
Design of a Hospital Interactive Wayfinding System
﻿
Task 1: You will have to visit the hospital for oral surgery in order to receive some treatment.
Task 2: After the treatment, proceed to the pharmacy to collect medications.
Task 3: Review each and every icon and let us know what you think each icon means.
1. 	
Post Task Questionnaire (Close Ended):
a. 	
The way finding system is able to help me find the specialist clinic.
b. 	
The way finding system is easy to use.
c. 	
The symbols or icons used helps you to find the specialist clinic.
d. 	
Do you like the way finding system?
The similar scenarios are repeated for the various specialist clinics such as Cardiology, Cardiotho-
racic, Medical and Dermatology, Non-invasive Cardiology Laboratory Ophthalmology, Oral Surgery, 
Orthopedic and Nephrology, Obstetrics and Gynecology, Otorhinolaryngology, Urology, and Specialist 
Clinic Pharmacy.
Table 6. Multiple device experience
User
Desktop
Hand-
Phone
Laptop
Tablet
Smart-Phone
No.
Android
(IOS)
Android
Blackberry
(IOS)
1
NO
YES
YES
NO
NO
NO
NO
YES
2
YES
NO
YES
NO
NO
YES
NO
NO
3
YES
NO
YES
NO
NO
YES
NO
NO
4
YES
NO
YES
NO
NO
YES
YES
NO
5
YES
NO
YES
NO
NO
YES
NO
NO
6
NO
NO
YES
NO
NO
YES
NO
NO
7
YES
YES
YES
NO
NO
NO
NO
NO
8
YES
NO
YES
NO
NO
YES
NO
NO
9
YES
YES
NO
NO
NO
NO
NO
NO
10
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
NO
YES
11
NO
NO
YES
NO
NO
NO
NO
YES
12
YES
YES
YES
NO
NO
YES
NO
NO
13
YES
NO
YES
YES
NO
YES
NO
YES
14
NO
YES
NO
NO
NO
NO
NO
NO
15
NO
NO
NO
NO
NO
YES
NO
NO
16
YES
NO
YES
YES
NO
YES
NO
NO
17
YES
YES
YES
NO
NO
NO
NO
NO
18
YES
YES
YES
NO
YES
NO
NO
YES
19
NO
YES
NO
NO
NO
NO
NO
NO
20
NO
NO
NO
NO
NO
YES
NO
NO
21
NO
YES
NO
NO
NO
YES
NO
NO
22
NO
YES
YES
NO
NO
NO
NO
NO
23
NO
NO
YES
YES
NO
YES
NO
NO
24
YES
YES
YES
NO
NO
YES
NO
NO

109
Design of a Hospital Interactive Wayfinding System
﻿
Test Results for Task 1
While performing the first scenario, on the effectiveness of the users being able to identify the special-
ist clinic, it was found that 79% of the respondents were successful in their first attempt in locating the 
clinic, as shown in Figure 9. The remaining 21% could not identify the specialist clinic in the first go. 
These 5 respondents could not identify the icons used for the following specialist clinic:
•	
Ear Specialist;
•	
Heart diagnosis;
•	
Pregnancy related illness;
•	
Kidney related diseases;
•	
Fever related illness;
These five respondents were given a second chance to identify the clinic and 2 out of 5 of them were 
successful in identifying the pregnancy and kidney related illness icons. The remaining 3 respondents 
could still not identify the appropriate clinic in the second attempt. These comprise of users 17 to 21. 
The reasons given for their choice are described in Table 7.
Figure 10 shows the time taken for all users. In terms of time taken for performing the task, in aver-
age users took about 55 seconds to perform the task. User 14 took only 16 seconds to correctly identify 
the dermatology clinic while user 7 took as long as 146 seconds to correctly identify the same clinic. 
Although user 14 identified the correct clinic in the fastest time, the user felt the icon used is not relevant. 
Refer to Table 7 for more qualitative feedback.
Feedback Capture after Task for Task 1
After completion of Task 1, Mi-UXLab system would automatically prompt the users to feedback their 
experience while performing the tasks. Table 7 summarizes their feedback.
Figure 9. Success rate in first attempt for locating specialist clinic

110
Design of a Hospital Interactive Wayfinding System
﻿
Figure 10. Time taken to perform Task 1
Table 7. Qualitative feedback from users while performing Task 1
User No.
Feedback: How Well You Found the System Responding to Your Choice?
1
Confuse icon “Klinik Perubatan dan Klinik Dermalogi” dengan “Klinik Oftalmologi” sebab icon “Klinik Perubatan 
dan Klinik Dermatologi” tunjuk sakit tekak juga seperti icon “Klinik Oftalmologi”.
2
N/A
3
N/A
4
N/A
5
N/A
6
N/A
7
N/A
8
N/A
9
N/A
10
Direction need to be showed. Since there is playground near to pediatrik clinic, I find that it is child clinic as well the 
teddy bear icon. I don’t know the term pediatrik and others as well. I have not came across the term during my studies.
11
The 2 icon of Klinik Nefrologi dan Klinik Urologi represent kidney specialist.
12
The icon represent mouth problem so I assume it is to treat sore throat.
13
I have no idea whether the term and icon is relevant. I click on It based on eye icon. I don’t know my current position.
14
The icon of Klinik Dermatologi is not relevant and I don’t know what it is.
15
The term used Klinik Nefrologi dan Neurologi not understandable.
16
I know the dermatologi related to skin problem but I am not sure right now. The icon of dermatologi looks like pimples 
problem.
17
I chose this icon because the icon shows that it is ear ache. I don’t understand the word Klinik dermatologi. I am not 
sure whether the icon and the terms are relevant or not.
18
I chose it because it should be the general treatment. I don’t know what the icon of pharmacy is.
19
I chose it because it shows heart.
20
I chose it because it shows pregnant women In the icon.
21
Because there is icon/ picture representation.
continued on following page

111
Design of a Hospital Interactive Wayfinding System
﻿
Eye Tracking Analysis for Task 1
Based on the eye tracking data, it could be seen that users mostly fixate at the relevant areas of interest 
when tasked to visit a specialist clinic. As shown in Table 8, the darker spots on the heat map shows 
areas of high interest from other areas fixated by the users.
Test Results for Task 2
While performing the second scenario, on the effectiveness of the users being able to identify the phar-
macy, it was found that 92% of the respondents were successful in their first attempt in locating the 
pharmacy, as shown in Figure 11. The remaining 8% could not identify in the first go but were successful 
in the second attempt.
Figure 12 shows the time taken by the users to perform Task 2. The maximum amount of time was 
taken by user 7, being 118 seconds while the fastest time taken is only 5 seconds by user 24. While user 
7 was only successful in the second attempt, user 5 could identify the correct pharmacy icon in the first 
attempt. The average time task for Task 2 35.55 seconds, which is 19.5 seconds faster than for Task 1.
User No.
Feedback: How Well You Found the System Responding to Your Choice?
22
There is icon/ picture representation.
23
Ear is usually associate with throat and eye.
24
There is an icon representing kidney
Table 7. Continued
Figure 11. Success rate in first attempt for locating pharmacy

112
Design of a Hospital Interactive Wayfinding System
﻿
Table 8. Heat map generated from eye tracking analysis for Task 1
User
Scenario 1
Heatmap
1
Klinik Pediatrik

113
Design of a Hospital Interactive Wayfinding System
﻿
Feedback Capture after Task for Task 2
Similar to Task 1, Mi-UXLab will prompt for user feedback at the completion of the Task 2. This is 
summarized in Table 9.
Test Results for Task 3
After performing Task 1 and 2, it was found that although many users could complete the task, as shown 
in Figure 9 and 11, the FCAT shows that they were not really satisfied with the icons used. Taking into 
account this feedback, from user 10 onwards, a new task was included that is to gather feedback on each 
and every icons from the users. Table 10 shows the results for the review of various icons by each user.
Table 9. Qualitative feedback from users while performing Task 2
User No.
Feedback: How Well You Found the System Responding to Your Choice?
1
Not suitable icon for “Farmasi Klinik Pakar”. Selalunya icon farmasi ada gambar macam tumbuk guna lesung.
2
N/A
3
N/A
4
N/A
5
N/A
6
N/A
7
N/A
8
N/A
9
N/A
10
I can find clinic easily.
11
The icon not relevant to pharmacy. I don’t know what icon represented by Farmasi Klinik Pakar
12
The icon represent pharmacy.
13
I have no idea what the icon represent.
14
The icon of pharmacy looks like garbage bin. It is better to show pills.
Figure 12. Time taken to perform Task 2
continued on following page

114
Design of a Hospital Interactive Wayfinding System
﻿
User No.
Feedback: How Well You Found the System Responding to Your Choice?
15
The icon is not relevant to pharmacy and I also don’t know what is general icon for pharmacy as well.
16
The Farmasi Klinik pakar not relevant with the icon and the icon should be something like pill.
17
I chose it because it is written pharmacy.
18
I chose it because, other options look too specific to certain treatment whereas this Farmasi Klinik Pakar looks like for 
general purpose or treatment.
19
I chose the icon because it is written pharmacy. I don’t know what is the icon or picture is and it should be represented with 
some pills.
20
I chose it because of the Pharmacy term which I know. I don’t know what the icon for.
21
Understand the term Farmasi but not relevant to the icon.
22
I chose it because of the Pharmacy term which I know. Not sure what the icon for.
23
I chose it because of the Pharmacy term which I know. Not sure what the icon for.
24
Understand Farmasi but doesn’t understand the icon used.
Table 10. Qualitative feedback from users while performing Task 3
User No.
Review Each and Every Icon and Let Us Know What You Think Each Icon Means
1
N/A
2
N/A
3
N/A
4
N/A
5
N/A
6
N/A
7
N/A
8
N/A
9
N/A
10
Not sure the icon for Klinik Geneologi is for men or women. I see the klink perubatan icon which is the doctor picture as 
general specialist. When I look at the klinik dermatologi picture it represent teeth ache specialist. Not sure what is Klinik 
Otorinolaringologi specialise in. The pharmacy icon is not relevant to pharmacy term and i have no idea what is that icon 
is.
11
The term Klinik Pembedahan Mulut not relevant to the icon. Klinik pediatrik term and the icon are relevant. Klinik 
Pembedahan dan Klinik Otopedik term and icon are relevant. Klinik Obsterik dan Klinik Ginekologi term and icon 
not relvant and I don’t know the icon is what as well. Klinik Perubatan dan Klinik Dermatologi icon represent they are 
specialist in pimples. I dont know what is Klinik Otorinolaringologi.
12
Icon of Klinik Pembedahan Mulut not relevant to the term used. Klinik dermatologi icon is not relevant as it show teeth 
ache. Klinik Otorinolaringologi don’t know what is the term is.
13
I don’t know what is the Klinik Pediatrik term meaning. Klinik pembedahan icon looks like someone massaging. Klinik 
dermatologi looks like specialise in mouth symptom. I don’t know what is the term Klinik oftalmologi meaning. I seriosly 
don’t have any idea what is Klinik Otorinolaringologi. The makmal diagnostik looks relevant something like diagnostik but 
the term kardiologi makes me confuse.
14
The term Klinik Pembedahan Mulut not relevant to the icon. The icon of Klinik pembedahan mulut need to be changed. 
Klinik pediatrik term and the icon teddy bear are not suitable.I don’t know what is the term Klinik Karidoterasik is. I don’t 
have any idea what is Klinik Otorinolaringologi. Makmal diagnostik kardiologi is specialise in MRI and so on.
continued on following page
Table 9. Continued

115
Design of a Hospital Interactive Wayfinding System
﻿
Post Task Questionnaire
After the completion of all tasks, three sets of post task questions were used while rated by a 5 Point 
Likert scale as shown in Figure 13, 14 and 15. Figure 13 shows that 8% and 58% of users strongly agree 
and agree that the way findings system is able to help them find the specialist clinic, while the remaining 
21% and 13% were unsure and disagreed that the system was helpful. From here, it could be summarized 
that 66% of users agree that the system is helpful while the remaining are either unsure or disagree that 
the system is useful.
As shown in Figure 14, 17% and 67% of users strongly agree and agree that the way finding system is 
easy to use, while the remaining 16% disagree that the system is easy. In summary, 84% of users found 
the system easy to use and 83% of users like to use the system as shown in Figure 14 and 16.
The symbols or icons used comprise of the entire system. Figure 15 shows that 17% and 41% strongly 
agree and agree to the statement that the symbols or icons used could help them find the specialist clinic, 
which is an overall 58% agreement on the symbol and icon design, which was based on the studies con-
ducted in the US by Hablamos Juntos (Berger & Juntos, 2005).
User No.
Review Each and Every Icon and Let Us Know What You Think Each Icon Means
15
I don’t know what is Klinik Dermatologi specialise in and the icon is not relevant. I don’t understand what is the meaning 
of Klinik Oftalmologi. I don’t understand what is the meaning of Klinik Otorinolaringologi. Don’t know what is Makmal 
Diagnostik Kardiologi specialise in but I know its for diagnosis. The terminology used for all the icon is basic but it is just 
we depend on the pciture or icon.
16
The term Klinik Pembedahan Mulut not related to the icon as it shows teeth instead of mouth. The Klinik Pediatrik term 
shows me that it is child specialise whereby the icon or picture not at all. I don’t know what is Klinik Otopedik. But 
when look at the picture it looks like they are bone specialise. I dont know what Klinik Otorinolaringologi specialise in 
but i think it should be mouth ache. Makmal Diagnostik Kardiologi more like R&D stuff. The terminology very hard to 
understand especially for village people.
17
The term Klinik Pembedahan Mulut not related to the icon as it shows teeth instead of mouth. Suppose it should show 
mouth icon. I don’t know what is Klinik Pediatrik. I don’t know what is makmal diagnostik kardiologi is for. Basically, I 
don’t understand most of the terminology.
18
The term Klinik Pembedahan Mulut and icon not relevant and the term should be some sort of dental name. Klinik 
Pembedahan icon looks like someone massaging. They need to separate the Klinik Perubatan and Klinik Dermatologi into 
different options as there is huge distinction in their treatment specialisation. The dermatologi icon looks like someone 
slappig on the face. I dont know what is the term Klinik Otorinolaringologi is. Makmal Diagnostik kardiologi is maybe 
specialise in heart or fitness.
19
I don’t know what is Klinik Otorinolaringologi is for as well the icon. I don’t know what Makmal Diagnostik Kardiologi 
specialise in.
20
The term Klinik Pembedahan Mulut not related to the icon. Because mouth and teeth are different. I don’t understand 
the term Klinik Otopedik. I don’t know what is the icon that represented for Klinik Dermatologi. Makmal Diagnostik 
kardiologi is for any kind of research.
21
The term Klinik Pembedahan Mulut not related to the icon. Thinks that Klinik Dermatologi represents toothache.
22
The term Klinik Pembedahan Mulut not relevant to the icon. No obvous distinction between the two icon for Kilinik 
Neufrologi dan Klinik Urologi (2 icon seems to represent kidney). Icon for dermatologi seems to be representing clinic for 
tooth. Doesn’t seems to understand some of the terminologies used. Makmal Diagnostik kardiologi seems to represent a 
lab.
23
The icon for Klinik Pembedahan Mulut is relevant to the icon used. Don’t know the term for Urologi. Not sure of the term 
Klinik Perubatan dan Dermatologi
24
The icon for Klinik Pembedahan Mulut is relevant to the icon used. Thinks that icon for dermatologi represent mouth 
problems. Icon for Kilnik Otorinolaringologi seems to represent clinic for breathing problem(pernafasan).
Table 10. Continued.

116
Design of a Hospital Interactive Wayfinding System
﻿
Based on the qualitative feedback obtained and shown in Table 7, 9 and 10, which is based from 
a Malaysian demography, further improvement in terms of design and development could take place 
to the improvement of the effectiveness, helpfulness, ease of use and suitability of the HIWS system. 
When the finding from the user experience test (Figure 15) is compared to the survey conducted, it is 
not a surprise that the symbols do not appeal to the some of the respondents as shown in Table 11. One 
of the reasons for this is that the symbol used as a basis is based on the demography in the United States 
(US), instead from Malaysia. Both survey and user experience test users came to a similar agreement 
Figure 13. The way finding system is able to help 
me find the specialist clinic
Figure 14. The way finding system is easy to use
Figure 16. Do you like the way finding system?
Figure 15. The symbols or icons used helps you 
find the specialist clinic

117
Design of a Hospital Interactive Wayfinding System
﻿
on the suitability of the symbols used, which is 57% and 58% respectively. However in terms of level of 
disagreement, there are lower levels of disagreements during the User Experience Test.
The pie chart in Figure 16 shows that 83% of the users like the HIWS. The reasons as provided by 
the users include:
•	
It enables estimation of a location.
•	
It enables direction to specific clinic.
•	
The like the icon, colors used and animation.
•	
Its simple and easily understandable.
•	
User friendly.
•	
Easy to find destination and location to clinic.
•	
Overall, it’s easy to use and required less effort (no. of click).
•	
User friendly, good and nice interface, clear icon and picture.
•	
The logo is easy to understand with textual description.
•	
Interactive system is helpful to users.
•	
It makes convenient to locate direction to the specialist clinic.
However 17% of the users dislikes the system, the reason provided include
•	
Although overall the system looks good, it needs improvement in terms of usage of attractive 
colors and icons and more interesting interaction elements.
•	
There is no guiding arrows to clearly navigate the users to the targeted location.
•	
Unsuitable terminologies used.
•	
System is not user friendly, icons used do not correspond well to the terminology used for the 
specialist clinic.
•	
The design of the icon or pictures are not user friendly.
•	
Do not understand the application of the system.
FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTIONS
This project is meant for the single kiosk use, which is recommended to be place near the escalator in the 
specialist clinics. There is a prospect to integrate the HIWS with the Total Hospital Information System 
(THIS) in the future. By having a data based system the kiosk can be place at many location for the use 
of the whole hospital. If this wayfinding system is uploaded to a website, QR code can be implemented 
Table 11. Qualitative feedback from users while performing Task 3
How Much Do You Agree that the Symbols or Icons Used Help You Find the Specialist 
Clinic?
Method
Agree
Disagree
Neutral
Survey (Fourth graph in Table 2)
57%
34%
9%
User Experience Test (Figure 15)
58%
25%
17%

118
Design of a Hospital Interactive Wayfinding System
﻿
for smartphone users. In this way patron do not have to go to the kiosk if they forgot the direction midway 
to their desired specialist clinics. Besides serving as interactive wayfinding system, online registration 
maybe made via this system without going to the registration counter. This will reduce waiting time, 
which currently occurs at the hospital. Patron can even search for their desired direction prior to visiting 
the specialist clinics. This will reduce much stress experienced by the patrons. Indirectly it could assist 
our government concern of inadequate integrated planning of health information system.
Some of the limitations of this study include:
1. 	
The study does not represent entire Malaysian population and is only confined to West Malaysia, 
since the location of testing was conducted in Kuala Lumpur and it was difficult to find subjects 
from East Malaysia. Having excluded the diverse ethnic group such as from:
a. 	
Sabah and W.P. Labuan:
i. 	
Kadazan/Dusun,
ii. 	
Bajau,
iii. 	 Murut,
iv. 	 Other Bumiputra.
b. 	
Sarawak:
i. 	
Iban,
ii. 	
Bidayuh,
iii. 	 Melanau,
iv. 	 Other Bumiputra.
who comprise of up to 13%, this study was designed to focus on the 87% of the population. It is 
recommended to perform similar studies take into account their feedback.
2. 	
The sample size used for the testing is not sufficient and should be increased once the next iteration 
of design and development is completed based on the current feedback.
CONCLUSION
In conclusion, the study has met all its intended objectives. From the survey conducted, the first objec-
tive of understanding the Malaysian requirement and challenges faced in a government hospital has been 
gathered. From this, it could be seen that the majority of users found that the signage used with visual 
aid increased the familiarity with the specialist clinics. Based on design guidelines, the various icons and 
suitable fonts were used to design the system. This is followed by development of a web based interac-
tive system. The final objective of validating the system was achieved by conducting a lab based user 
experience test to determine the effectiveness and time taken by the respondents in using the HIWS. In 
general, it could be seen that the system developed has met the requirements of majority of users. On 
the positive note, 79% of users were successful in their first attempt to find the specialist clinic with an 
average time taken of 55.05 seconds, which is less than a minute. This is also supported by the heatmap 
generated from the eye tracker as shown in Table 8. The success rate for finding the pharmacy was even 
higher at 92% with an average time taken of 35.55 seconds. In addition to this, 66% of users agree that 
the system is helpful in finding the specialist clinic and 86% reported that the system is easy to use. 
However, when it came to the appropriateness of symbols used, the number was lower whereby only 58% 

119
Design of a Hospital Interactive Wayfinding System
﻿
agreed that it was helpful, although in overall 83% like the way finding system. Based on the qualitative 
feedback obtained and Figure 15, significant localization efforts needs to be placed on redesigning the 
symbols and icons used which will boost the acceptance rate in the helpfulness of HIWS.
REFERENCES
Accolades & Accreditations. (2013). MIMOS Berhad. Retrieved August 04, 2014, from http://www.
mimos.my/corporate/accolades-accreditations/
Arthur, P., & Passini, R. (1992). Wayfinding: people, signs, and architecture. McGraw-Hill, Incorporated.
Basri, A. Q., & Sulaiman, R. (2013). Ergonomics Study Of Public Hospital Signage. In Advanced En-
gineering Forum (Vol. 10, pp. 263–271). Trans Tech Publ. doi:10.4028/www.scientific.net/AEF.10.263 
doi:10.4028/www.scientific.net/AEF.10.263
Berger, C., & Juntos, H. (2005). Universal Symbols in Health Care Workbook: Executive Summary: 
Best Practices for Sign Systems. Hablamos Juntos.
Bojko, A. (2006). Using Eye Tracking to Compare Web Page Designs: A Case Study. Journal of Us-
ability Studies, 1, 112–120. Retrieved from http://www.upassoc.org/upa_publications/jus/2006_may/
bojko_eye_tracking.html?pagewanted=all
Brown, K., & Asmar, H. O. (2006). Malaysia: Language Situation. In Encyclopedia of Language & 
Linguistics (pp. 462–464). doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/01695-3
Brown, K., & Romaine, S. (2006). Language Policy in Multilingual Educational Contexts. In Encyclo-
pedia of Language (pp. 584–596). Linguistics; 10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/00646-5
Cheng, B. H. C., & Atlee, J. M. (2007). Research Directions in Requirements Engineering. Future of 
Software Engineering, 2007. FOSE, 07. doi:10.1109/FOSE.2007.17
Chrimes, D., Kitos, N. R., Kushniruk, A., & Mann, D. M. (2014). Usability testing of Avoiding Diabetes 
Thru Action Plan Targeting (ADAPT) decision support for integrating care-based counseling of pre-
diabetes in an electronic health record. International Journal of Medical Informatics, 83(9), 636–647. 
doi:10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2014.05.002 PubMed doi:10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2014.05.002 PMID:24981988
Educational and Social Characteristics of the Population 2010. (2014). Department of Statistics Malaysia. 
Retrieved from http://www.statistics.gov.my/portal/download_Population/files/census2010/education/5.
Tables.pdf
Foley, M. (2012). NSW HEALTH Annual Report 2011 – 12. NSW Ministry of Health. Retrieved from 
http://www.health.nsw.gov.au/publications/Publications/annual_report12/HealthAR_2012.pdf
Garrett, J. J. (2010). Elements of User Experience, The: User-Centered Design for the Web and Beyond. 
Pearson Education. Pearson Education.

120
Design of a Hospital Interactive Wayfinding System
﻿
Goh, K. N., Chen, Y. Y., Lai, F. W., Daud, S. C., Sivaji, A., & Soo, S. T. (2013). A comparison of usability 
testing methods for an e-commerce website: A case study on a Malaysia online gift shop. In Proceedings 
of the 2013 10th International Conference on Information Technology: New Generations, ITNG 2013 
(pp. 143–150). IEEE. doi:10.1109/ITNG.2013.129 doi:10.1109/ITNG.2013.129
Gray, C., & Malins, J. (2004). Visualizing research. A Guide to the Research.
Hofstede, G. (2010). Geert hofstede. National Cultural Dimensions.
Intercensal Mid-Year Population Estimates Malaysia and States. (2014). Department of Statistics Ma-
laysia, 7. Retrieved from http://www.statistics.gov.my/portal/download_Population/files/Anggaran_Pen-
duduk_Pertengahan_Tahun_Antara_Banci2001_2009.pdf
Internet User Survey 2012. (2012). Malaysian Communications and Multimedia Commision. Retrieved 
from http://www.skmm.gov.my/Resources/Statistics/Internet-users-survey.aspx
Ismail, A., Jamil, A. T., Rahman, A. F. A., Madihah, J., Bakar, A., & Saad, N. M. (2010). The Imple-
mentation of Hospital Information System (HIS) in Tertiary Hospitals in Malaysia: A Qualitative Study. 
Malaysian Journal of Public Health Medicine, 10(2), 16–24.
ISO 21542:2011 Building construction -- Accessibility and usability of the built environment. (2011). 
ISO (International Organization for Standardization). Retrieved from http://www.iso.org/iso/cata-
logue_detail?csnumber=50498
Jacob, R. J. K., & Karn, K. S. (2003). Eye tracking in human-computer interaction and usability research: 
Ready to deliver the promises. Mind, 2(3), 4.
Lerner, E. B., Jehle, D. V., Janicke, D. M., & Moscati, R. M. (2000). Medical communication: Do our 
patients understand? The American Journal of Emergency Medicine, 18(7), 764–766. doi:10.1053/
ajem.2000.18040 PubMed doi:10.1053/ajem.2000.18040 PMID:11103725
Lester, P. (2013). Visual communication: Images with messages. Cenage Learning. Cengage Learning.
Lynch, K. (1960). The image of the city (Vol. 11). MIT Press.
Meeting of Cultural Ministers - National Arts and Health Framework. (2014). Council of Australian 
Governments Standing Council on Health (SCoH) including the Australian Health Workforce Ministe-
rial Council (AHWMC). Retrieved from http://www.ahmac.gov.au/cms_documents/National Arts and 
Health Framework.pdf
Mollerup, P. (2009). Wayshowing in hospital. Australasian Medical Journal, 1(10), 112–114. doi:10.4066/
AMJ.2009.85
myGovernment - The Government of Malaysia’s Official Portal. (n.d.). Malaysian Administrative 
Modernisation and Management Planning Unit (MAMPU). Retrieved July 31, 2014, from https://www.
malaysia.gov.my/en/about-malaysia?subCatId=3208956&type=2&categoryId=3208945
Olmsted-Hawala, E., Holland, T., & Quach, V. (2014). Eye Tracking in User Experience Design. Elsevier; 
doi:10.1016/B978-0-12-408138-3.00003-0 doi:10.1016/B978-0-12-408138-3.00003-0

121
Design of a Hospital Interactive Wayfinding System
﻿
Rapley, C. E. (2013). Accessibility and Development: environmental accessibility and its implications 
for inclusive, sustainable and equitable development for all. Department of Economic and Social Af-
fairs, United Nations.
Rashid, S., Soo, S., Sivaji, A., Naeni, H. S., & Bahri, S. (2013). Preliminary Usability Testing with 
Eye Tracking and FCAT Analysis on Occupational Safety and Health Websites. Procedia: Social and 
Behavioral Sciences, 97, 737–744. doi:10.1016/j.sbspro.2013.10.295 doi:10.1016/j.sbspro.2013.10.295
Rooke, C. N., Koskela, L. J., & Tzortzopoulos, P. (2010). Achieving a lean wayfinding system in com-
plex hospital environments: Design and through-life management. In Proceedings of the 18th Annual 
Conference of the International Group for Lean Construction (pp. 233–242). National Building Research 
Institute, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology.
Rooke, C. N., Tzortzopoulos, P., Koskela, L. J., & Rooke, J. A. (2009). Wayfinding: embedding knowledge 
in hospital environments. In HaCIRIC (pp. 158–167). London, UK: Imperial College Business School.
Sansom, M., & Brooks, E. (2012). WorldHealthDesign-Architecture-Culture-Technology. International 
Academy of Design and Health.
Sherman, P. (2009). UPA 2009 Salary Survey. User Experience Professionals Association. Retrieved 
from http://usabilityprofessionals.org/usability_resources/surveys/SalarySurveys.html
Sivaji, A., & Ahmad, W. F. W. (2014). Benefits of Complementing Eye-Tracking Analysis with Think-
Aloud Protocol in a Multilingual Country with High Power Distance. In Current Trends in Eye Tracking 
Research (pp. 267–278). Springer. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-02868-2_21 doi:10.1007/978-3-319-02868-
2_21
Sivaji, A., & Soo, S. (2012). Website user experience (UX) testing tool development using Open 
Source Software (OSS). 2012 Southeast Asian Network of Ergonomics Societies Conference (SEANES). 
doi:10.1109/SEANES.2012.6299576
Sivaji, A., & Soo, S. (2013). Understanding, Enhancing and Automating HCI Work Practices: Malaysian 
Case Studies. Procedia: Social and Behavioral Sciences, 97, 656–665. doi:10.1016/j.sbspro.2013.10.285 
doi:10.1016/j.sbspro.2013.10.285
Sivaji, A., Abdollah, N., Soo, S., Chuan, N.-K., Nor, Z. M., Rasidi, S.-H., & Yoong, S.-W. (2014). Mea-
suring Public Value UX based on ISO/IEC 25010 Quality Attributes. In 3rd International Conference 
on User Science and Engineering 2014 (i-USEr 2014). IEEEXplore. doi:10.1109/IUSER.2014.7002677 
doi:10.1109/IUSER.2014.7002677
Sivaji, A., Abdullah, A., & Downe, A. G. (2011). Usability testing methodology: Effectiveness of 
heuristic evaluation in E-government website development. In Proceedings - AMS 2011: Asia Model-
ling Symposium 2011 - 5th Asia International Conference on Mathematical Modelling and Computer 
Simulation (pp. 68–72). IEEE.
Sivaji, A., Abdullah, M. R., Downe, A. G., & Ahmad, W. F. W. (2013). Hybrid usability methodology: 
Integrating heuristic evaluation with laboratory testing across the software development lifecycle. In 
Proceedings of the 2013 10th International Conference on Information Technology: New Generations, 
ITNG 2013, (pp. 375–383). IEEE. doi:10.1109/ITNG.2013.60 doi:10.1109/ITNG.2013.60

122
Design of a Hospital Interactive Wayfinding System
﻿
Sivaji, A., Downe, A. G., Mazlan, M. F., Soo, S. T., & Abdullah, A. (2011). Importance of incorporat-
ing fundamental usability with social & trust elements for e-commerce website. In ICBEIA 2011 - 2011 
International Conference on Business, Engineering and Industrial Applications, (pp. 221–226). Retrieved 
from http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=5994248&isnumber=5994212
Sivaji, A., Shopian, S., Nor, Z. M., Chuan, N.-K., & Bahri, S. (2013). Lighting does Matter: Preliminary 
Assessment on Office Workers. Procedia: Social and Behavioral Sciences, 97, 638–647. doi:10.1016/j.
sbspro.2013.10.283 doi:10.1016/j.sbspro.2013.10.283
Soegaard, M. (2010). Gestalt principles of form perception. Interaction-Design. Org, 8.
Standards Malaysia Recognises MIMOS As The First Malaysian Lab To Receive MS ISO/IEC Accredi-
tation Certificate For Software Testing. (2014). BERNAMA. Retrieved August 04, 2014, from http://
www.bernama.com/bernama/v7/newsindex.php?id=1011837
Tzuaan, S. S., & Sivaji, A. (2014). Measuring Malaysian M-Commerce User Behaviour. Computer and 
Information Sciences (ICCOINS), 2014 International Conference. IEEE.
Whittle, K. (2009). The Nature of Healing. International Academy of Design and Health. Retrieved 
July 29, 2014, from http://www.designandhealth.com/events/singapore-congress-kristen-whittle.aspx
Yeo, A. W., Chiu, P.-C., Lim, T.-Y., Tan, P.-P., Lim, T., & Hussein, I. (2011). Usability in Malaysia. 
In Global usability (pp. 211–222). Springer. doi:10.1007/978-0-85729-304-6_12 doi:10.1007/978-0-
85729-304-6_12
Zielstorff, R. D. (2003). Controlled vocabularies for consumer health. Journal of Biomedical Informatics, 
36(4-5), 326–333. doi:10.1016/j.jbi.2003.09.015 PubMed doi:10.1016/j.jbi.2003.09.015 PMID:14643728
KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Hablamos Juntos: A project funded by the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, and administered by 
the UCSF Fresno Center for Medical Education & Research, a major educational and clinical branch of 
the UCSF School of Medicine. Targeted towards the Latino population, it is aimed at improved patient 
and medical care provider communication.
Mi-UXLab: Formerly known as URANUS, it is a software designed by MIMOS User Experience 
Lab to facilitate user experience testing, heuristic evaluation, survey and Kansei engineering. It has been 
used in user experience research, design and testing projects in various domains and purposes such as 
e-Government, e and m-Commerce, industrial ergonomics, Human Resource Information System, Cloud 
Computing, Mobile Testing and Cultural UX.
SAMM (Skim Akreditasi Makmal Malaysia): A National Laboratory Accreditation Scheme set 
up by the Malaysian Government on August 15th 1990 managed by the Department of Standards Ma-
laysia. SAMM accredits almost every testing facility and technology such as software testing. A SAMM 
endorsed test report gives confidence that the test was done in accordance with the stated specification, 
test or calibration method and correct test environment.

123
Design of a Hospital Interactive Wayfinding System
﻿
Universal Symbol in Health Care (USHC): A universal symbol comprising of 50 symbols that 
was found to be more effective than text based signage in assisting patient and visitors in finding their 
way around the health care facility.
User Experience (UX) Professionals Association: An international association devoted to assisting 
new and established professionals in the user experience disciplines.
User Experience (UX): Designing the User Experience comprise of User Centered Analysis, User 
Centered Design, Development and Testing. It is a well-established method commonly referred to in 
the field of Human Computer Interaction (HCI) under the Association of Computing and Machinery 
(ACM) classification.
Wayfinding System: A method for users to find ways to their desired destination that is not based 
merely on signage. It is a complex system that includes environment and behavioral aspect enabling users 
to interpret and endure their surroundings to get to their destination without long thoughts.

124
Copyright © 2016, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter  6
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-4666-9438-5.ch006
ABSTRACT
Previous studies have shown that mobile device is capable of providing navigation aid for both pedes-
trian and in-car. Crucial to this, is navigation application supported by the mobile platform. This paper 
proposes a mobile application intended for navigation aid. The application is design using a generic 
software development process. The application will enable user to navigate within certain vicinity. This 
will help users to easily find an unfamiliar place. Other function are integrated in the application, such 
as tasks function for setting the schedule visit, prayer function for du’a and additional information about 
certain places. The system is developed using the MIT apps inventor software as the main platform, plus 
the adobe Photoshop for the maps and route purposes. The system works on android platform only. The 
system is implemented for use in the Kulliyyah of Information and Communication Technology (KICT), 
International Islamic University Malaysia.
INTRODUCTION
There are many existing product that actually have the same idea and method of providing navigation by 
ICT based (Dang, Iwai, Tobe, Umeda, & Sezaki, 2013; WIKIPEDIA, 2013). Most of the existing product 
uses the same features and principle of navigating which is to provide the route to the intended place in 
the shortest and easiest way. The concept of this application is actually based on the user to find ways 
in a building or big shopping mall where user can easily get lost or finds it difficult to locate a shop or 
place. Some of the example of existing applications are; Setia City Mall application, One Utama Shop-
Developing a Mobile 
Navigation Aid
Mohamad Azrix
International Islamic University Malaysia, 
Malaysia
Noor Walid
International Islamic University Malaysia, 
Malaysia
Akram Zeki
International Islamic University Malaysia, 
Malaysia
Jameel Jameel Yalli
International Islamic University Malaysia, 
Malaysia

125
Developing a Mobile Navigation Aid
﻿
ping Complex, Sunway Lifestyle Application, Fast Mall Application and Aisle 4111. These are several 
existing application that have been the references for this study.
The study was able to compare and relate between applications to overcome problems faced at the 
current time. By this, all the advantages and disadvantages could be seen in a more detailed environment 
(Indoorlbs, 2013; WIKIPEDIA, 2013). As stated above, it is clearly that all this application has been 
well developed with all its functions which has make the human life more convenient. However, only a 
few problems still exists in these applications and because of these problems, users are not fully satisfied 
with the application and from what the study has observed, users tend to refer back to the navigation 
board in the mall for finding their way. By going through this process, this study understood more on 
the application and what needs to be done to improve the application that is being developed. Thus, the 
developed application could be more convenient to use and meets its requirement as a navigation system.
A case point is the Kulliyyah of Information and Communication and Technology (KICT) which 
new building was launched on the 11th May 2012 (IIUM, 2013). It is a new atmosphere for the students 
especially for those who have just joined the Kulliyyah to be familiar with the big new building. Consists 
of many big blocks and wings, it may not be easy for the students to find the lecture venues, the lectur-
ers offices, the cafeteria, the main hall, Musolla and the resource center. Although there are signboards 
here and there but they are neither much user-friendly nor easy to find as the building is big and fill with 
classes and labs that could be very confusing at times. During class interchange, the students only have 
ten minutes to find their classes and for new students finding venues would consume time and would 
only result in late attendance to class. Furthermore, lecturers also get confuse sometimes as they have 
many different classes in a day. The only reminder for them is a manual note of a time table. In addition, 
after having a hard time finding the particular venues, students may get tired which would effect in the 
students’ participation and performance.
Thus the objectives of the studies are, first to study the students’ problems in finding ways to respected 
venues, second is to conduct research on the best platform for development, third will be to develop the 
application that is embedded with several necessary features and functionalities, and lastly is to conduct 
the usability test on the developed prototype. The scope of this study is focusing on the development of 
mobile application that can provide navigation which will help user to find the shortest way to intended 
venues. The study area involved in the project is the route which the user is to take using the least time 
and energy. This project is carried out in the KICT building which required the researcher to really 
understand and analyze the best route to take. It also includes the easiest and simplest way to get to the 
intended venue. Since the project is technology-based, it needs to research various technologies and 
the capabilities that each technology offers. The project also needed to find the most suitable mobile 
platform to develop this project.
Based on the existing products that are available in the market, there are some parts of these applica-
tions that can be improvise to make the product more usable and functions better. As the product created 
is not based on a shopping mall, there are few changes that can be done to fulfil the criteria of the product 
to the advantage of the user. A reminder shall be created for the user to remind him/her on classes or 
exam at an exact place and time with a miniature map. Other than that, the proposed application will 
be more detailed in navigating to the user destination. The application will also update on the event and 
exam and even tutorial venues for all subjects for the student to take note. The application will also be 
linked with the KICT repository for fast viewing for the users. The application proposed by the project 
will run on all Android operating system which can be found in most smartphones today.

126
Developing a Mobile Navigation Aid
﻿
The target audiences for the project are the students of KICT in IIUM. There are approximately 
1200 students currently taking courses at the building and it is estimated to be more in the future. The 
application does not only close its usage only to students but to all who are interested in exploring the 
building of KICT which could be lecturers, visitors and guests. The main target of the project is to the 
students and lecturers in KICT. The project would also provide many different functions in the applica-
tion that can be used by all users.
OVERVIEW OF EXISTING MOBILE NAVIGATION PROTOTYPES
The authors of (Robertson & Cipolla, 2004) presented an indoor navigation system by using a Near 
Field Communication (NFC) technology. Their system is based to work in an indoor environment with 
the ability to navigate all through a building or complex. The NFC enables an easy and efficient trans-
fer of data for indoor navigation systems. This is done by just touching tags which are spread over the 
structure. Some of the benefits of proposed system have been outlined such as its potentiality to increase 
the usability of the system.
Another prototype was invented by the authors of (Liu, Moskowitz, Greenwood, Lieberman, & Wood, 
2002) where a navigation system is able to navigate in an urban city using a mobile telephone equipped 
with a camera. In this work, camera intrinsic parameters have been assumed known. A set of data about 
the views of the buildings was stored which the system referred to locate a place. This method is rich 
because it is based on a novel wide-baseline matching algorithm which can be able to identify the cor-
responding building facades in two views even if there are significant changes in the viewpoint of the 
buildings and lighting. In the event that some buildings (and parts of buildings) are very similar, then 
this system may be not be able to distinguish between some viewpoints without more information, e.g. 
extra query views. For this reason, a big data bank is required. Another thing is that when conducting 
more than one view at a time, then matching between the query view and every nearby database view 
will be slow.
In a similar work, the system can compute the focal length and coefficients of radial distortion for 
the query view automatically using vanishing points (Liu et al., 2002). However, there I need to explore 
the possibility of extracting database views using a camera which could attach to a vehicle in motion. 
But using an inertial car navigation system, it should be produced in such a way that views can be reg-
istered automatically in the world coordinating system. Also Ordinance Survey map data could be used 
to provide the approximate location of dominant building facades.
A similar project is prototyped in a patent where an object provides a navigation aid for vehicle which 
is designed with simplicity and does not detract the driver’s attention from the road. It has finite num-
ber navigation choices allowable to the user within a predetermined set of preferences or information. 
According to this prototype, the options can be extracted based on a set of preferences and according 
to the driver’s geographical location. It has an itinerary which approximates all intermediate stops on 
an external computing system. Standalone personal computer (PC) or network (Web or Internet) based 
system can be used in such project. Information can be downloaded from such computing systems and 
saved or transferred to an external smart card or a personal digital assistant (PDA). The information is 
further transferred to the vehicle navigation system. This application is commercialized and become in 
use such as in rental cars equipped with a vehicle navigation system. A booth located at the car rental 

127
Developing a Mobile Navigation Aid
﻿
agency may be employed to feed the information into a smart card which the customer then inserts into 
the vehicle navigation system of rental car (Reitmayr & Schmalstieg, 2004).
(Feiner, MacIntyre, Höllerer, & Webster, 1997) Developed a navigation system that uses Augmented 
Reality [AR] for collaborative navigation. Many researchers believed that AR is an excellent user interface 
for mobile navigation applications. This is because it allows in depth information browsing of remote 
and urban location (Feiner et al., 1997). In AR the user’s perception of the real world is brought close 
to reality by using enhanced entities such as 3D objects and spatialized audio. These entities functions 
in real-time to provide instant feedback to the user and give the impression of natural interaction. AR 
as a user interface is a very rich interface especially when the computer has access to information about 
locations so that it can merge the virtual entities with real world objects in a believable manner.
It can browse information in an urban environment. They incorporate a navigation function which 
allows for roaming through a city and guides them to selected destinations. Browsing through the informa-
tion gives the users details about objects in the surrounding. The system features support collaboration. 
Their designed system does not only concentrate on the user interface aspects but also provides a scalable 
infrastructure to support mobile applications. For this function, they also developed a 3-tier architecture 
that manages a common data model for a set of applications. Credit is given to the designers because of 
its Internet application frameworks that consist of a central storage layer using a common data model. 
There is a transformation layer that is responsible for filtering and adapting the data to the requirements 
of a particular application on request (Feiner et al., 1997).
Navigation and information searching are two common themes used for demonstrating wearable 
computing and mobile augmented reality. The Touring Machine by (Thomas, Demczuk, Piekarski, 
Hepworth, & Gunther, 1998), described by (Suomela & Lehikoinen, 2000), and the Context Compass 
by (Davies, Cheverst, Mitchell, & Friday, 1999) presented a new pedestrian navigation and how it can 
benefit the heads-up displays and AR interfaces. Another example of a navigation system application 
is the GUIDE project by (Baillot, Brown, & Julier, 2001) that presents roaming tourists with location 
based information on Lancaster. Mobile users could also create world models in the BARS project but 
only in well controlled indoor environments (Julier et al., 2000).
All recently developed ARs shows demonstrations with small amount of data sets which is typically 
entered manually and do not require data warehousing. Related work by (Addlesee et al., 2001) conducts 
research on the issue of selecting appropriate data for display, from their findings; they describe a data-
base and gives a description logic that can be used to store a model of the floor of a building. Another 
firm 33 sentient computing project described by (Newman, Ingram, & Hopper, 2001) implore a CORBA 
run-time infrastructure in order to model a live environment that can serve as a distributed software 
objects with the ability to update locations and attributes of objects frequently. (Rothermel & Leonhardi, 
2002) Has similar project with a set of AR applications. (Rothermel & Leonhardi, 2002) Run another 
important research project which introduced the problem of establishing a world model for location- 
and context-aware applications. An efficient solution was provided with regards to location based data.
DEVELOPMENT APPROACH
The study has decides to develop this application using Rapid Application Development (RAD) model. 
This RAD model is a model for software process. This model is being selected because it uses iterative 
prototyping and suitable for resource constraints project (Mortimer, 1995). Figure 1 shows the RAD 

128
Developing a Mobile Navigation Aid
﻿
model that has been used to implement the SDLC. Besides that, it uses minimal planning and analysis 
and focus more on prototyping. This model is more effective to be implemented compare to the other 
SDLC model because it is designed for tight time-scale project development. The author only has two (2) 
semesters to accomplish this project and this is one of the reasons why the author chooses to use RAD 
model. RAD model is more applicable than Waterfall model because the researcher can continuously 
work with the prototyping until it meets the user needs. This is important because the prototyping of the 
application usually change from time to time according to the users requirements. However, not all the 
phases in SDLC are included due to time constraints. Therefore, this paper will only include six (6) phases 
of the RAD model, which are planning, analysis, design, prototyping cycle, testing and implementation.
For developing the application, the study needed a computer as the main platform for running the 
software and developing the coding for the application. An internet connection that would support the 
study in developing the application as information and references. The project is to develop an Android 
application, thus, an Android Smartphone is needed for testing the application as a prototype on the 
phone., furthermore, several specification have been required:
•	
Eclipse Software: has been used for developing and constructing coding of java language and 
html. This will be that platform for the researcher to create the system step by step. This software 
will also help in developing the webpage for the administration to use in updating the system.
•	
Apps-Inventor Software: has been used for developing the application interface and its coding 
language to help the researcher. The Apps-Inventor will also guide the researcher on how to de-
velop the application and publish the application on the network.
•	
Adobe Photoshop Software: has been used for designing or creating the maps and the route 
for the venue navigation purpose which is for better view or navigation in term of graphical and 
images.
IMPLEMENTATION AND OUTPUT
This section will discuss in details about the project as a whole complete system of the KICT Mini Navi-
gation Application. It includes the preview of the user interface in details and the function of each step 
of the project. In this part, the project will benchmark the function of the application to other existing 
product in the market which is in the same field of usage. By this, the study will present the full project 
Figure 1. Diagram of Rapid Application Approach (RAD)

129
Developing a Mobile Navigation Aid
﻿
based on the research that has been done previously. The project will discuss about the application and 
the system of the application and related platforms as well. Based on the analysis and study made before, 
designs and structure of the system was estimated and produced. These following diagrams were created 
as a graphical representation of the system and for the preparation for the actual system development.
Figure 2 shows the flowchart for application user as when the user owned the application. User will 
interacts with the application’s interface first then only he/she will see the three main functions which 
are navigation, reminder, and event. For the navigate function, the user will be allow to enter the venue 
that they want to navigate, then the application will show the maps and guide the user to the destination 
by giving the direction. Next, the user can add, view or delete a task for any kind of event or task that 
the user wants to be reminded and the application will help the user to show the venue. Moreover for the 
prayer, the user can view some prayer regarding a travel or looking for places, and ease them to make it 
as practice to always make prayer. It is just an extra function for the application as also the IIUM func-
tion for several information about IIUM itself.
Figure 3 shows the menu for the application user which the user can navigate venues, view prayers, 
view IIUM information and view or add or remove task that the user itself set before. Figure 4 below 
show the sequence diagram for the system where it starts with the navigation function. When the user 
wants to navigate, first they have to select their current location and the location of where they want to 
Figure 2. Flow chart for the application

130
Developing a Mobile Navigation Aid
﻿
go, and then the application will show the map as well as the description of the route. Next, the user can 
create or add tasks and the application will save it.
In viewing the tasks, the application will straight away show the tasks that have been entered by the 
user in the previous session. If the tasks have been done, the user can just click the check button. If the 
user wants to add or remove the tasks, the application can save the task and it will automatically display 
in the tasks list. Furthermore if the user intends to read some prayers such as that of travelling or looking 
for places, he/she can just click the button and the application will show some of the contents. Finally 
the user can view some information regarding IIUM as they click the IIUM button. This ERD shows 
the relationship between each of the tables, the dependencies and how each attributes from the tables 
relates itself to the other.
Figure 5 shows the platform that was used to create the android application by using the MIT TOOL 
software for creating application on Android Operating System (OS) known as the APPS INVENTOR. 
The Apps Inventor uses the concept of Drag-and-Drop to create the background features and the func-
tions. The background features, images and buttons are added for the later purposes.
Figure 6 shows the features added and the required actions and arguments to perform the desired 
function in the application. The JAVA compiler is used to compile the code of the application and runs 
it on an emulator as a real application. The features will results with the actions and arguments provided. 
Based on the project, the system output will be presented as an android base application, thus, some of 
Figure 3. User menu

131
Developing a Mobile Navigation Aid
﻿
the features will be present as the output as the application, starting from the first function which is the 
du’a, then the navigation function through the reminder function. Below are some of the outputs of the 
application.
Figure 7 is the main page of the Android application created. The first image will be an opening 
screen showing the name of the production. The second image is the main front screen that will display 
the function provided in the application. For each button will lead to different function action on dif-
ferent page. The above Figure also displays the main function of the application which is to navigate to 
intended locations. The SELECT button allows the user to select intended destinations. This will help 
the user to navigate and locate the intended destination.
Figure 8 is the next feature provided in the application, the figure displays the map from block to 
the 2D layer of the level of the block and a 3D image of the intended location. This will help the user in 
identifying the location of destination in detail. Understanding the structure of the level will facilitate 
the user in navigating.
DISCUSSION
Technology has introduced us to a new way of navigation. With the smart device and with the latest 
satellite connection, we are able to view and zoom a map from the large scale paper view to the size of 
Figure 4. Sequence diagram for the system

132
Developing a Mobile Navigation Aid
﻿
Figure 5. Screenshots of apps inventor site
Figure 6. Screenshots of project canvas of the logical function

133
Developing a Mobile Navigation Aid
﻿
the palm of your hand. A satellite alone can serve this purpose but it will require big and sophisticated 
devices which of course won’t be portable. But can be better use by some firms. For instance, the de-
partment and defense and state security in the united stated and other countries make use of a satellite 
with which they can view and zoom a particular place on the other side of the planet. Navigation is 
important as it helps one to move from one place to another without getting lost. As time goes by, many 
new buildings and roads are built. Routes keep changing as the development keeps progressing. People 
might also easily get lost by following different route. Not surprising that user may also get lost inside 
the building as the future buildings are very big and multiple floors. Also some buildings are complex 
by the nature they are built and some by the number of decorations pasted in it. The applications created 
in this research paper are a one step ahead to find a solution to this kind of problem. By stating within 
the campus, the research paper showed that students easily get lost inside the building making it late to 
class. This study shows us that such technology with the proper device could be developed to help the 
Figure 7. Screenshots of the first user interface of the application
Figure 8. Screenshots of the map and description of the navigation process

134
Developing a Mobile Navigation Aid
﻿
students navigate easily from their smart phones inside the campus and especially inside the building. 
There are some applications that have been created for this purposes, however, it does not follow the 
current trend of technology as most of them just provide a miniature map. From the current application 
that is available, it can be adapted and improvised to form a better application based on the understand-
ing of the advantages and disadvantages of each application. It might be easy for those who are familiar 
with the place or area but not for those who does not have good sense of direction. People may also face 
the same scenario when it comes to new buildings
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE ENHANCEMENT
This research work has been done to assist the students of Kulliyyah of Information Communication and 
Technology, IIUM to solve their problem of getting lost in the new buildings and get them to be familiar 
with the routes besides keeping them updated with the events going on at the Kulliyyah. This study 
has proposed a Mini Navigation Application to help the users to find the shortest way to reach to their 
destination. This application may be helpful for students, lecturers and the new comers. The users will 
be updated of the events going on around in the Kulliyyah. This application is made to be installed in 
the hand phones and will not only ease one to find the shortest route yet but makes it easier. This study 
has also found out that the wireless connection provided by the Kulliyyah is sufficient enough to support 
the application. The proposed application may not be the first to be used by others outside since one of 
its kind has been launched by other companies to navigate to other places. Sunway Pyramid Shopping 
Centre, One Utama Shopping Centre and Setia City Mall have used this kind of application earlier. 
However, there are still problems faced by the users such as lack of sufficient bandwidth, data not being 
updated regarding new sections, lack simplicity and not user friendly are common problems of using the 
application. This research shows some features that can be installed to solve the current problems faced. 
Some new features have been included in the application to make it more reliable. The application will 
be monitored by the administrator who can add news and update the application. The application will be 
using the phones memory to save any reminder created by the user. The application needs to be down-
loaded in order to use it. A proper connection to the internet whether it is cellular connection or Wi-Fi 
connection will be needed in order to properly use the application. With the existence of this application, 
it will help the user to navigate in the KICT building and may be expanded to a wider coverage in the 
future. The project developed is an Android platform application. It means that only Android platform 
device can use this application. Although, there are other platforms such as IOS, Windows and Symbian 
platform, the android remains the most common today. The project should be enhanced in the future by 
developing the same application that caters all platforms. This will encourage different platform users 
to buy the application as their device will supports it. The project is still a prototype as the application 
can only be complete after placing it in the market. Many features and functions can be added to the 
application. For now, the application only caters for KICT building in IIUM. The project should cover 
the whole IIUM and its buildings. Then it can also go beyond to cover other universities campuses. This 
project only navigates the user inside a huge building by showing blocks, routes and images of the loca-
tion. For now, the project does not provide a real-time navigation. For future enhancement, the navigation 
should be in real-time mode so that it will be more accurate, more reliable and more interactive to use. 
More research and testing need to be done to develop real-time function for the project. The project can 

135
Developing a Mobile Navigation Aid
﻿
improve the selection of colors images and also basic functions to adapt to the requirements of modern 
users. Making the application more interactive will encourage the user to use with more positive vibe. 
The project still needs more research to make it more user friendly application. This will help them to 
navigate without any problems of searching buttons and reading description
REFERENCES
Addlesee, M., Curwen, R., Hodges, S., Newman, J., Steggles, P., Ward, A., & Hopper, A. (2001). Imple-
menting a sentient computing system. Computer, 34(8), 50–56. doi:10.1109/2.940013
Baillot, Y., Brown, D., & Julier, S. (2001). Authoring of physical models using mobile computers. 
In Wearable Computers, 2001. Proceedings. Fifth International Symposium on (pp. 39–46). IEEE. 
doi:10.1109/ISWC.2001.962094
Dang, C., Iwai, M., Tobe, Y., Umeda, K., & Sezaki, K. (2013). A framework for pedestrian comfort 
navigation using multi-modal environmental sensors. Pervasive and Mobile Computing, 9(3), 421–436. 
doi:10.1016/j.pmcj.2013.01.002
Davies, N., Cheverst, K., Mitchell, K., & Friday, A. (1999). Caches in the air’: disseminating tourist 
information in the GUIDE system. In Mobile Computing Systems and Applications, 1999. Proceedings. 
WMCSA’99. Second IEEE Workshop on (pp. 11–19). IEEE.
Feiner, S., MacIntyre, B., Höllerer, T., & Webster, A. (1997). A touring machine: Prototyping 3D mobile 
augmented reality systems for exploring the urban environment. Personal Technologies, 1(4), 208–217. 
doi:10.1007/BF01682023
IIUM. (2013). About IIUM. Retrieved February 10, 2013, from http://www.iium.edu.my/about-iium/
management,2013
Indoorlbs. (2013). Indoor navigation app. Retrieved April 2, 2013, from http://www.indoorlbs.com/p/
indoor-navigation-systems.html
Julier, S., Lanzagorta, M., Baillot, Y., Rosenblum, L., Feiner, S., Hollerer, T., & Sestito, S. (2000). In-
formation filtering for mobile augmented reality. In Augmented Reality, 2000.(ISAR 2000). Proceedings. 
IEEE and ACM International Symposium on (pp. 3–11). IEEE.
Liu, T.-K., Moskowitz, P. A., Greenwood, M. C., Lieberman, L. I., & Wood, D. A. (2002, February 19). 
System for personalized mobile navigation information. Google Patents.
Newman, J., Ingram, D., & Hopper, A. (2001). Augmented reality in a wide area sentient environment. 
In Augmented Reality, 2001. Proceedings. IEEE and ACM International Symposium on (pp. 77–86). 
IEEE. doi:10.1109/ISAR.2001.970517
Reitmayr, G., & Schmalstieg, D. (2004). Collaborative augmented reality for outdoor navigation and 
information browsing. Academic Press.
Robertson, D., & Cipolla, R. (2004). An Image-Based System for Urban Navigation. Academic Press.

136
Developing a Mobile Navigation Aid
﻿
Rothermel, K., & Leonhardi, A. (2002). Maintaining world models for context-aware applications. In 
International conference on advances in communication and control (pp. 235–245). Academic Press.
Suomela, R., & Lehikoinen, J. (2000). Context compass. In Wearable Computers, The Fourth Interna-
tional Symposium on (pp. 147–154). IEEE. doi:10.1109/ISWC.2000.888481
Thomas, B., Demczuk, V., Piekarski, W., Hepworth, D., & Gunther, B. (1998). A wearable computer 
system with augmented reality to support terrestrial navigation. In Wearable Computers, 1998. Digest 
of Papers. Second International Symposium on (pp. 168–171). IEEE. doi:10.1109/ISWC.1998.729549
Wikipedia. (2013). Android platform. Retrieved February 14, 2013, from http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Android_platforml

137
Copyright © 2016, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter  7
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-4666-9438-5.ch007
ABSTRACT
The indisputable fact is that touch screen mobile devices flooded the marketplace and that they have 
become an essential element in the enormous number of fields and applications. But a huge presence, 
as well as daily use, does not necessarily unambiguously reflect their optimal usability. Therefore, it is 
essential to adopt appropriate research methodologies that can evaluate the usability of mobile device 
interfaces. The main focus of the study was to examine a practical tool for usability assessment in a 
mobile work context which has to be simple and above all, proved to give a single score as its outcome. 
To achieve this goal System Usability Scale (SUS) was applied to test the Tablet PC usability. This study 
contributed with the proposal of a framework for usability testing which could help, both practitioners and 
researchers to make decisions how to improve the usability of interfaces on touch screen mobile devices.
INTRODUCTION
The fact that mobile devices with touch screens flooded the marketplace is indisputable, so they have 
become an essential element not only in the field of entertainment and ubiquitous information exchange, 
but also in the business environment, and most of all, they are currently much more represented in the 
field of education.
But a huge presence, as well as daily use by various populations, does not necessarily unambigu-
ously reflect the optimal usability of these devices. Taking into account that the motives underlying 
System Usability Scale 
Implementation for Interfaces 
on Mobile Touch Screen 
Devices Assessment
Svetlana Čičević
University of Belgrade, Serbia
Slobodan Mitrović
University of Belgrade, Serbia
Milkica Nešić
University of Nis, Serbia
Andreja Samčović
University of Belgrade, Serbia

138
System Usability Scale Implementation for Interfaces
﻿
the choice of touch screen mobile devices, ranging from mobile and smart phones, to the Tablet PCs, 
are very diverse, and often under the influence of comprehensive advertising, a need arises to examine 
how useful these devices really are for all these users. Although these applications offer a number of 
advantages in terms of portability and convenience, it could be that they do so at the cost of usability. 
This paper is aiming at shedding light on one among the most popular mobile devices – Tablet PC us-
ability measurement framework.
Although a fairly substantial body of research has grown up in the last few years on desktop and 
laptop usability, very few studies have reported on experiments with tablet PCs (Alvarez, Brown, & 
Nussbaum, 2010). Tablet PCs, mainly differ from touch screen mobile phones by having larger screens, 
which candidate them for much complex operations. Also, the fundamental difference between this 
kind of devices and regular PCs is the input method, regarding the usability. With direct manipulation, 
users can handle files and other objects as icons, dragging and clicking them by fingers instead of using 
mouse and similar input devices. Hands-on and tactile experience allows fast learning of the basic func-
tions and gestures such as tap and swipe (Pekkala, 2012). Nevertheless, there are some problems with 
using gestures as an input method: the lack of established standards for gestures and their actions and 
the developers’ ignorance about the universal usability principles (complying also with the new devices) 
(Pekkala, 2012). Gestures are non-standard, imprecise and unrepeatable by their nature as non-verbal 
communication. Tablet PCs have solved this problem caused by a lack of feedback, by integrating ele-
ments from the traditional Graphical User Interface (GUI). Still, there are some typical problems related 
to the size of touch screen display: a smaller screen reduces comprehension because users have to rely 
on their memory when trying to understand the content not fully presented within the viewable space. 
Also, they must scroll more frequently in order to reach the other parts of the content instead of simply 
glancing. Scrolling actions consume more time, leading to disrupting the order of memory sequences. It 
introduces the new problem of reacquiring the previous location on the display (Nielsen & Norman, 2012).
The facts mentioned above emphasize the need for systematic user experience evaluation, both in 
industry and academia. In this way, user experience evaluation has gained increasing attention in Human-
Computer Interaction (HCI). Without means to evaluate user experience, it is impossible to manage 
experience related aspects. When we aim to improve a system or want to gain an understanding of the 
user experience, we are also interested in users’ perceptions of the product’s qualities and their overall 
evaluative judgments of it (Väätäjä, Koponen, & Roto, 2009). To be able to reach beyond studying the 
instrumental aspects, practical tools that support the assessment of user experience are needed. It is still 
unclear what the appropriate methods and metrics are required for assessing user experience. This is 
partly due to the fact that there is still not an agreed definition for user experience, although standardiza-
tion work is ongoing (Väätäjä, Koponen, & Roto, 2009).
Since traditional guidelines and methods used in usability testing of desktop applications may not be 
directly applicable to a mobile environment, it is essential to develop and/or adopt appropriate research 
methodologies that can evaluate the usability of mobile devices. Therefore, it is crucial to implement user 
experience evaluation tools in such a way that they could efficiently assess the usability of interfaces. Bear-
ing this in mind, the goal of this chapter is to consider the implementation of the System Usability Scale 
(SUS) as one of the most commonly employed tool, in evaluation of mobile devices interface usability.
This chapter is structured as follows. After initial introductory considerations literature review upon 
mobile devices and usability in this field will be briefly summarized in Section 1. Afterwards, in Section 
2 the fundamental concepts and challenges of usability testing of mobile applications are introduced. 
Section 3 of the chapter outlines the case study conducted to investigate the usability of Tablet PC de-

139
System Usability Scale Implementation for Interfaces
﻿
vice. The results of the study can be found in Section 4. Finally, Sections 5 and 6 contain discussion and 
concluding remarks on usability assessment recommendations.
BACKGROUND
Usability Construct
Bevan (1995b) states that the meaning of the term usability generates some confusion and therefore it 
has to be thoroughly considered. According to Bevan, “Although the importance of usability as an objec-
tive is now widely recognized, it has proved difficult to operationalize usability. Thus usability has two 
complementary roles in design: as an attribute which must be designed into a product, and as the highest 
level quality objective which should be the overall objective of design. As with other quality objectives, 
it is necessary to set and evaluate measurable targets for usability, and to identify and rectify usability 
defects”. Although there are expectations related to the generalization and standardization of usability 
specifications, there are issues related to the individual experiments which make this term specific in 
some circumstances (depending on users, tasks and interface tested). Hence, usability is much deeper 
than the superficial features of the user interface (Macleod, 1994). From engineering perspectives, us-
ability is defined from two aspects which are hardware (physical) and software (system) (Han, Yun, 
Kwahk, & Hong, 2001). Usability has been increasingly recognized as a significant quality dimension to 
determine the success of mobile applications and defined as the capability of a product to be understood, 
learned, operated and be attractive to users when used to achieve certain goals with effectiveness and 
efficiency in specific environments (Gong & Tarasewich, 2004). Another widely accepted definition of 
the usability determines it as “the extent to which a product can be used with effectiveness, efficiency 
and satisfaction in a specified context of use” (Bevan & Macleod, 1994; ISO9241-11, 1998).
Usability, in the latter sense, is a synonym for usability engineering. In the (Mayhew, 1999) usability 
engineering is defined to be as consisted of four parts. The usability process can be divided into several 
different phases such as requirements analysis, followed by design/testing/development and installation.
Usability cannot be measured in absolute terms since it always depends on the context. The ISO 
definition enhances Nielsen’s definition that basically deals with user interfaces rather than application 
or service entities. Nielsen (1993) considers that usability has many aspects, and is often associated with 
the following 5 attributes:
•	
“Easy to Learn: The user can quickly go from not knowing the system to getting some work done 
with it.
•	
Efficient to Use: Once the user has learned the system, a high level of productivity is possible.
•	
Easy to Remember: The infrequent user is able to return to using the system after some period of 
not having used it, without having to learn everything all over.
•	
Few Errors: Users do not make many errors during the use of the system, or if they do make er-
rors they can easily recover from them. Also, no catastrophic errors should occur.
•	
Pleasant to Use: Users are subjectively satisfied by using the system; they like it.”
Satisfaction is a subjective measure of the user’s opinion about a particular interaction or interface, 
while effectiveness and efficiency are based on the measurement of user performance. Effectiveness 

140
System Usability Scale Implementation for Interfaces
﻿
refers to the user’s ability to achieve goals using the software, while efficiency refers to the time and effort 
it takes to achieve goals (Abran, Khelifi, Suryn, & Seffah, 2003). As Campbell (2011) in her doctoral 
dissertation cited, the construct of effectiveness refers to the ability of a user to accomplish whatever 
goal they had in using the system. Measures of effectiveness are measures of accuracy and the ability 
of users to accomplish their goals; they also tend to be based on qualitative performance differences, 
rather than speed differences.
Like satisfaction, effectiveness has no single universally accepted measure. Bevan and MacLeod 
(1994) calculated effectiveness by multiplying the percentage of sub-goals completed by the percent-
age correctness of the completed goals. The construct of efficiency refers to the amount of resources 
(including time) required to accomplish a particular task.
Measures of efficiency are dependent on the number of steps, as well as on the amount of time that 
user needs to perform a particular task. These measures are roughly analogous to measures of response 
time in behavioral research. Bevan and MacLeod (1994) describe the efficiency measure as fraction of 
effectiveness measure and the total time required. It seems that learnability shows a weak relationship to 
efficiency of use. Finally, The International Ergonomics Association Council (2000) has adopted official 
definition for usability “as a central concept in Human Factors, which refers to how easy a product is 
to learn and use by its user population. The approach through which usability is integrated throughout 
product development is termed User-Centered Design or Usability Engineering.”
An effective usability test has to be able to elicit feedback from users about whether they use an 
application without difficulty, how they like using the application, as well as evaluate the levels of task 
performance achieved by users. The characteristics of mobile applications and the unique features of Tablet 
PCs become the main challenges in usability measurement. Usability guidelines for mobile applications 
are still lacking and relatively unexplored and unproven. In the past, most studies used the technology 
acceptance model (TAM) to survey the subjective perception of users in using information technology. 
The usability test was also used to assess the ease of use of mobile user interfaces (Lin, 2013) which may 
create particular problems typical for mobile environments. However, user acceptance of mobile services 
is not just based on usability but includes also other interrelated issues. The main usability challenges 
for mobile devices and services targeted at consumers are related to the wide variation of users, the 
restrictions of the devices and technical infrastructures, and the demanding contexts of use. Dunlop & 
Brewster (2002) and Kaasinen (2009) listed five main challenges for human-computer interaction design 
regarding mobile devices: Designing for mobility (the changeable working environment), Designing for 
widespread population (considering mobile technologies as devices instead like computers), Designing 
for limited input/output facilities (small screens at the first place, and other interfaces which are hard 
to use while moving), Designing for (incomplete and varying) context information- possible problems 
associated with implying information from sensors, and lastly, Designing for user multitasking at levels 
unfamiliar to most desktop users.
Nowadays, the study of usability evaluations for mobile devices is becoming an emerging research 
area in Human Computer Interaction (Duh, Tan, & Chen, 2006).
Ease of use is important, but the services should also provide clear value to the user and they should 
be trustworthy and easy to adopt. Mobile usage situations vary a lot in terms of the technical, physical 
and social context of use. Thus the services cannot be designed only for specific contexts of use but need 
to be adapted to different users and usage situations (Kaasinen, 2005). The ubiquity and penetration of 
mobile devices raise new usability concerns. The usability of small-screen devices is an important but 
sophisticated demand, especially when taking user diversity into account (Ziefle & Bay, 2008).

141
System Usability Scale Implementation for Interfaces
﻿
Usability and User Experience
While interacting with a product or a service, people have diverse experiences, which constitute user 
experience in general (Alben, 1996; Arhippainen & Tähti, 2003; Desmet & Hekkert, 2007; Kuniavsky, 
2003). As experience is a comprehensive term, the common concept and definition of user experience 
have still not been accepted by researchers and experts community (Chamorro-Koc, Popovic, & Em-
mison, 2009; Law, Roto, Vermeeren, Kort, & Hassenzahl, 2008). Elements that significantly influence 
user experience could be generally summarized as usability, affect, and user value (Hassenzahl & Trac-
tinsky, 2006; Thüring & Mahlke, 2007; Park, Han, Kim, Cho, & Park, 2013). User experience can be 
obtained according to the characteristics of systems and the internal state of users in specific situations, 
as suggested by (Tractinsky, 2006). User previous knowledge and expectations affect the momentary user 
experience, which then becomes a comprehensive user experience by changing the user attitudes and 
emotions (Roto, 2006). Furthermore, (Hekkert, 2006) divided user experience into three sub concepts: 
aesthetic experience, experience of meaning, and emotional experience. In this way, the concept of af-
fective satisfaction is used to measure subjective feelings or impressions toward a product or service. An 
empirical model for affective engineering uses variables consisting of human interface elements (HIEs) 
and affective satisfaction dimensions. HIEs are design elements of products which influence user sat-
isfaction (Han S. H., Yun, Kim, & Kwahk, 2000). In another word, user experience includes usability, 
but also encompasses a more emotional dimension: for example, the desire, joy, meaning, reflection, 
value or frustration that a user undergo. The mobile user experience covers the users’ perceptions and 
feelings before, during and after their interaction with mobile system or device, from low-end feature 
phone to high-definition tablet.
However, usability is increasingly being used to refer specifically to the ease with which users can 
complete intended tasks, and is closely associated with usability testing. Moreover, user experience 
captures all of the psychological and behavioral aspects of users’ interactions with products or systems.
Thus, usability testing methods, usually measure system performance based on well-defined usability 
criteria. Those criteria could be defined according to the definitions and attributes of usability, and empiri-
cal metrics. Collected data on a measured performance are often based on the observation of individual 
users performing specific tasks with the product or service (e.g., completion time and number of errors).
In the focus of the most usability studies in the HCI area are performance-related dimensions, which 
are based on empirical testing methods and using objective measures. However, image/impression-related 
dimensions focus mostly on the subjective aspect of usability, which has not been treated as extensively. 
Since the dimensions in this category are quite compatible with subjective assessment, a usability 
questionnaire would be an appropriate measurement method to quantify these usability dimensions. Us-
ability goals (e.g., effectiveness, efficiency, learnability) have been said to be positively correlated with 
how people evaluate their user experience with technology, e.g., satisfying, enjoyable (Rogers, Sharp, 
& Preece, 2011). However, these correlations depend in a complex way on the application domain, the 
user’s experience and the context of use.
Several investigations (Bevan & Macleod, 1994; Shami, Leshed, & Klein, 2005; Thomas & Macredie, 
2002) attempted to identify additional variables that may impact usability, led to the conceptual emergence 
of context of use, also referred to as contextual usability. Good few frameworks encapsulating context 
have been proposed (Han S. H., Yun, Kwahk, & Hong, 2001; Lee & Benbasat, 2003; Sarker & Wells, 
2003; Tarasewich, 2003; Yuan & Zheng, 2005) containing different elements, such as four contextual 
factors (User, Technology, Task/Activity, and Environment) described as impacting usability. In the 

142
System Usability Scale Implementation for Interfaces
﻿
second group of elements, there are key usability dimensions (Effectiveness, Efficiency, Satisfaction, 
Learnability, Flexibility, Attitude, Operability, etc.) involved. In the area of mobile applications and/or 
mobile devices, four variables (user, task/activity, environment and technology) were often used for the 
qualitative review of empirical research regarding usability assessment.
Measuring Usability
Effectively measuring the usability of any product requires choosing the right metric, applying it, and 
effectively using the information it reveals. Measuring the User Experience provides the first single 
source of practical information to enable usability professionals and product developers to do just (Tullis 
& Albert, 2008). They organize dozens of metrics into six categories: performance, issues-based, self-
reported, web navigation, derived, and behavioral/physiological, and provide step-by-step guidance for 
measuring the usability of any type of product using any type of technology.
Usability testing methods and results have evolved over the last 35 years. With new advancements 
being introduced every year, it is important to understand the present state of the field and opportuni-
ties for further improvement. Usability testing is an important method for examining how system users 
understand and use a system to complete a specific task (Bailey, Wolfson, Nall, & Koyani, 2009). This 
research method is used by system developers to test and evaluate automated tools ranging from infor-
mation systems, web-based questionnaires, and websites. Dean, Schwerin, Robbins, & Bourne (2004) 
present details of the research-based methods and metrics which are being used to ensure that usability 
recommendations are data-driven and performance-based. By focusing on the types of usability metrics 
being captured during usability tests, the attempts will be made to illustrate how usability researchers 
can quantify measure the performance of a system and use these measurements to make meaningful 
changes. An effective usability test has to be able to elicit feedback from users about whether they use 
an application without difficulty, how they like using the application, as well as to evaluate the levels of 
task performance achieved by users (Singh & Yadav, 2013). Thus, task analysis should be performed. 
There is a need for knowledge upon users that would be using the application and what is the mobile 
task that the users need to perform. Finally the researchers need to know what the users expect out of 
the device. There are many methods for assessing usability, including heuristic evaluations, cognitive 
walkthroughs, usability testing, and comparison against existing guidelines. Deciding which method to 
use is difficult and depends on the objectives of the overall evaluation process.
The most widely employed usability testing methods are think-aloud protocol, co-discovery, perfor-
mance measurement, and field studies, all of which are techniques available not only for usability stud-
ies but also for numerous other fields of study. Inquiry methods are used to measure various usability 
dimensions and attributes involving communication between the users and the evaluators, through the 
questionnaires and interviews. The most common usage of inquiry methods is for the measurement 
of user satisfaction. One of the few widely used methods for assessment usability, particularly mobile 
usability, is the Day Reconstruction Method (DRM), which was applied by (Karapanos, Zimmerman, 
Forlizzi, & Martens, 2009) for evaluation of users’ daily experience episodes with iPhones. The DRM 
was developed by (Kahneman, Krueger, Schkade, Schwarz, & Stone, 2004) as a more practical version 
of The Experience Sampling Method (ESM). ESM was employed to obtain information on people’s 
feelings several times a day (Csikszentmihalyi & Larson, 1987).
Finstad (2010) developed the Usability Metric for User Experience (UMUX) for Subjective usability 
measurement. UMUX is a four-item Likert scale, as a shortened version of the ten-item System Usability 

143
System Usability Scale Implementation for Interfaces
﻿
Scale, modified to measure the three dimensions of usability defined by the ISO 9241-11 standard: ef-
fectiveness, efficiency, and satisfaction.
One of the most frequently used rating scales for measuring user experience is AttrakDiff questionnaire 
(User Interface Design GmbH, 2014; Bargas-Avila & Hornbaek, 2011; Hassenzahl, 2004). It is 7-point 
semantic differential scale that measures the perceptions of pragmatic and hedonic quality, related to 
product quality. Employment of questionnaires in usability research has numerous advantages among 
which one of the most desirable features is providing the feedback from the users’ point of view (Annett, 
2002; Baber, 2002; Kirakowski, 2003). Another big advantage is possibility to compare the measures or 
the scores across applications, users, and various tasks being evaluated (Kirakowski, 2003). Above all, 
it is a quick and cost-effective way to obtain scores comparable with those collected by other inquiry 
methods. Further advantage is that there are many usability aspects or dimensions for which no estab-
lished objective measurements exist, and those could only be reached through subjective assessment.
Novel electronic products, services and applications emerged new the need for evaluation of usability 
dimensions involving attractiveness, sensuality (Hofmeester, Kemp, & Blankendaal, 1996), pleasure and 
displeasure in product use (Jordan, 1998), as well as emotional usability (Logan, 1994). Since the human 
interaction with the products has become one of the most important demands in product design process, in 
the field of HCI, the experiential perspective has become the crucial point of interest (Hassenzahl, 2010; 
Hassenzahl & Tractinsky, 2006). This is of particular importance in the case of mobile devices, since 
the novel concepts include smart features (driven by software, touch screen hardware, Internet services 
and connectivity), as well as obvious limitations and challenges of interfaces characteristics. Hence, 
new perspectives on usability concept and testing methods have been suggested by several researchers.
In the area of internet services and applications, number of questionnaires have been developed, such 
as Website Analysis and Measurement Inventory (WAMI) for website usability (Kirakowski & Cierlik, 
1998), Measuring Usability of Multi Media Systems (MUMMS) for the evaluation of multimedia products, 
and the Usability Questionnaire for Online Shops (UFOS) (Konradt, Wandke, Balazs, & Christophersen, 
2003) for measuring usability in online purchasing behavior. Recently, a variety of studies investigate user 
value of mobile phones and services (Leitner, Wolkerstorfer, Sefelin, & Tscheligi, 2008). With respect 
of mobile device interfaces, empirical mobile usability studies have been directed on investigating task 
characteristics, technology, and environment and user characteristics. There are three different aspects 
of mobile device interfaces - the external interface, user interface, and service interface. User interface 
components comprise the target construct. In order to improve mobile phone function access, studies 
measuring task completion time and error rate based on the different styles of interfaces (e.g., voice 
command) or menu (various menu hierarchies) were performed (Buchanan, et al., 2001).
Not surprisingly, the evaluation of user experience with questionnaires in mobile work context has 
concentrated mainly on usability aspects. Usability is a much narrower concept than user experience 
in that it typically just refers to the ease of use of the design features of the device. User experience, on 
the other hand, is defined as including the user’s thoughts and feelings about their interaction with the 
device as well.
Usability testing is an evaluation method used to measure how well users can use a specific system. It 
provides a third-party assessment of the ease with which end-users view content or execute an application 
on a mobile device (Joelsson, 2008). Usability testing is undeniably linked to the software development 
and user acceptance. The characteristics of mobile applications and the unique features of Tablet PCs 
become the main challenges in usability measurement. Numerous usability models and methods have been 
created in many different areas (Mayhew, 1999). Although various models and methods which could be 

144
System Usability Scale Implementation for Interfaces
﻿
applied in usability assessments are useful, still they have some limitations. Certain questionnaires have 
been deployed in evaluation of the usability of specific software systems. While usability helps mobile 
application easy to work, it cannot be directly measured. It has been examined by measuring various 
different usability metrics and parameters as well.
To better understand factors contributing to usability, studies have explored correlations between dif-
ferent types of measure (Raita & Oulasvirta, 2011). The Metrics for Usability Standards in Computing 
(MUSiC) (Bevan, 1995; MacLeod, Bowden, Bevan, & Curson, 1997) model was concerned specifically 
with defining measures of software usability, many of which were integrated into the original ISO 9241 
standard. Examples of specific usability metrics in the MUSiC framework include user performance 
measures, such as task effectiveness, temporal efficiency and length or proportion of productive period.
These studies have found mixed evidence for the relatedness of objectively and subjectively measured 
usability, but they have also been criticized for methodological weaknesses (Hornbæk & Lai-Chong 
Law, 2007). This evidence challenges the view that users’ subjective assessment reflects objectively 
measured usability (Nielsen & Levy, 1994), as well as the attempts to reduce usability to one simple 
usability score formed by summarizing subjective and objective measures (Sauro & Kindlund, 2005).
One among several measurable quality attributes that pretends to form the bigger construct we call 
“usability” is subjective satisfaction. Quantitative measures like performance metrics are harder to col-
lect than simpler usability insights. One of the simplest means of testing usability is to ask users – to 
sample their subjective views. The construct of satisfaction refers to the subjective feeling of enjoyment 
or accomplishment that a person gets from an interaction. Satisfaction is generally measured using survey 
instruments, such as the Questionnaire for User Interface Satisfaction-QUIS (Chin, Diehl, & Norman, 
1988; Norman, Shneiderman, & Harper, 2003) which assess user’s satisfaction with given interface or 
interaction. Similar is the Post-Study System Usability Questionnaire (PSSUQ) (Lewis, 1990; 1992; 
2002) which measures users’ perceived satisfaction with a product or system. Competitors to the QUIS 
include the Software Usability Measurement Inventory - SUMI (Kirakowski, 1996), that measures us-
ers’ perception of the Efficiency, Affect, Helpfulness, Control and Learnability of a system, but does 
not have a hierarchical structure like the QUIS. And, finally, the System Usability Scale (SUS), which 
is a very short inventory designed for quick assessment of system usability (Brooke, 1996). The SUS 
is frequently used because of its short length and ease of administration. The presented questionnaire 
assesses user’s perception of the pragmatic (usability and task and goal achievement) qualities and an 
overall judgment of appeal. SUS has been used across a wide range of user interfaces, including standard 
OS-based software interfaces, Web pages and Web applications, cell phones, landline phones, modem 
and networking equipment, pagers, IVRs, speech systems, and video delivery hardware and software. 
The survey provides a single score on a scale that is easily understood by the wide range of people (from 
project managers to computer programmers) who are typically involved in the development of products 
and services and who may have little or no experience in human factors and usability.
Mobile and wireless communication technologies have enabled the provision of innovative services for 
individuals, organizations and society, while at the same time they have spawned a plethora of research 
opportunities (Kourouthanassis & Georgiadis, 2014). Tablet PCs proved to be highly helpful for efficient 
communication among workers in field conditions in real-time, reducing costly paperwork, eliminating 
data entry errors, tracking various locations, optimizing asset utilization and improving customer service. 
Technical usability evaluation is pointless, only real user studies are valid for assessing different data 
entry techniques. This can be achieved in a structured way by using a questionnaire.

145
System Usability Scale Implementation for Interfaces
﻿
Some of the before mentioned traditional usability questionnaires (i.e., SUMI, QUIS, and PSSUQ) 
did not cover the variables (i.e., dimensions) which may be of interest for mobile usability assessment, 
like human information processing characteristics. However, taking into account all usability dimen-
sions that are relevant may lead to the adoption of a long list of items that should be incorporated in a 
comprehensive questionnaire. Lin, Choong, & Salvendy (1997) listed even 48 individual dimensions in 
their classification of usability dimensions. Usability questionnaire tailored specifically to mobile prod-
ucts developed by (Ryu & Smith-Jackson, 2006), the Mobile Phone Usability Questionnaire (MPUQ) 
comprises 72 items.
Obviously, the practical usage of such kind of questionnaires could be very demanding for both, 
evaluators and subjects, in laboratory and especially in field conditions, despite the fact that their imple-
mentation could give us very detailed picture of the device being evaluated.
For this reason, there is essential interest to employ the questionnaire which is easy to apply, not time 
and resource consuming, and most of all, with the feature to give a simple outcome that could be easily 
interpreted. The System Usability Scale (SUS) is the metric that meets the above mentioned criteria.
Concerns about usability, touch technologies and mobile devices provided the background needs for 
the study presented in this chapter.
FIELD STUDY
The main focus of the study was to examine how the attributes of tablet device impact its practical ap-
plication, as well as how the respondents perceived its usability. This is due to the fact that usability is of 
particular importance for devices and applications aimed at consumers and the marketplace. Robustness, 
reliability and usability must be treated more critically than they are currently, as these factors will have 
a significant impact on their success. The following sections discuss the participants, the tasks, design 
procedures and the course of the experiment performed in this study.
Ten subjects (5 female and 5 male) voluntarily participated in the experiment. They have been cho-
sen among a greater number of the participant candidates as representatives of population without any 
experience in using Tablet PC before they took part in the study. Selection has been performed through 
the interviews, according to predefined criteria summarized as follows. In most of the usability studies 
students were chosen as participants while they are most familiar with mobile devices, have the highest 
experience and are most willingly to adapt to the change in user interface. But, taking into account the 
fact that some devices, such as mobile phones are utilized by all age groups and levels of society give 
reasons for criteria applied to employ inexperienced participants.
The part of the experiment (Mitrović, et al., 2012; Čičević, Mitrović, & Perišić, 2013) took place in a 
Laboratory for Ergonomics and Traffic Psychology at the University of Belgrade - Faculty of Transport 
and Traffic Engineering. Microclimate and light conditions in the experimental room were maintained 
constant. First, participants were given information about the procedure of the experiment, followed by 
written instructions on how to complete a series of various tasks. The investigation was conducted through 
three phases: in the first phase, the participants were asked to complete a spatial ability test. The second 
phase comprised of several types of specific spatial tasks, that each of the participants was assigned in 
the following steps: finding targets on schematic diagrams and satellite maps, tabular data reading and 
updating, in the end. During experiment several parameters were analyzed: the overall time of seven 

146
System Usability Scale Implementation for Interfaces
﻿
tasks execution, accuracy and total number and type of gestures needed for each task completion. The 
subjects were each given a tablet PC, with an 8.4” touch screen that has been chosen for testing, because 
this size of the display was recognized to be suitable from the ergonomics point of view. Even Jakob 
Nielsen, one of the greatest professionals in the field of user experience research suggests that would be 
ideal to create yet a third design optimized for mid-sized devices (Nielsen, 2012). The third phase of the 
experiment included the Questionnaire distributed to the subjects, at the end of the field study, in order 
to understand users’ usage behaviors of mobile technology. The questionnaire System Usability Scale 
(SUS) is based on usability testing and evaluation methods, where the respondents indicated the degree 
of agreement or disagreement with each of the 10 statements on a 5 point scale. These statements actu-
ally cover a variety of aspects of system usability, such as the need for support, training, and complex-
ity, and thus have a high level of face validity for measuring usability of a system. According to Sauro 
(2011a) SUS is not dependent on technology and it has been tested not only with hardware and websites 
but also on consumer software, mobile phones and even with yellow-pages. Sauro also states that SUS 
has become an industry standard. The SUS, reflect a strong need in the usability community for a tool 
that could quickly and easily collect a user’s subjective rating of a product’s usability (Sauro, 2011b).
The Experiment Phase One: Visuospatial Ability Testing
In this phase of the experiment, the participants were asked to complete a spatial ability test, the visuo-
spatial task that has not been studied extensively in normal individuals - Benton’s Judgment of Line 
Orientation test. The adaptation of the original task, the web-based Judgment of Line Angle and Posi-
tion task (JLAP), described fully in (Collaer, Reimers, & Manning, 2007) was used. It requires finer 
discrimination of lines, imposes a time limit, and was adapted for group and online testing. Participants 
saw a sequence of 20 test items, each showing one target line at a specific angle above a matching array.
They estimate the position and angle (orientation) of target lines by matching each one of the 20 lines 
to an identical line from a semicircular array of choices. The responses were realized by clicking on one 
of the lines in the matching array. Accuracy feedback was given after all 20 trials had been completed, 
with possible accuracy scores ranging from 0 to 20.
The Experiment Phase Two: Performing Spatial Tasks on Tablet PC
After solving the visuospatial task, each of the participants was assigned several types of specific spa-
tial tasks: finding targets on schematic diagrams and satellite maps, as well as tabular data reading and 
updating (Figure 1). At the beginning of the experiment, naive participants were asked to familiarize 
themselves with the Tablet PC interface. They practiced using the device until they were proficient. The 
behavior of the subjects during this phase of the experiment was recorded by video camera, especially 
finger gestures on the Tablet PC display.
The gestures which have been monitored, were classified into following groups: scrolling (left, right, 
up, down and diagonal), zooming (in, out and reset – special zoom-out button), and function buttons 
tapping (z - tasks list, t - tabular data and g - satellite maps access). The seven tasks, that have been ana-
lyzed, were divided into 3 groups according to the type and mode of information representation (map, 
schema or tabular data) (Figure 1).

147
System Usability Scale Implementation for Interfaces
﻿
The Experiment Phase Three: Usability Testing
This phase included the usability of the Tablet PC interface evaluation, by means of the well-known 
questionnaire - System Usability Scale - SUS (Brooke, 1986). The System Usability Scale was released 
by John Brooke for the first time in 1986, as part of the usability engineering program in integrated 
office systems development at Digital Equipment Co Ltd., Reading, United Kingdom. About a decade 
after its first occurrence it appears in a chapter describing SUS to a book on usability engineering in 
industry (Brooke, 1996). SUS had a great success among usability practitioners since it is a quick and 
easy to use measure for collecting users’ usability evaluation of any system. The scale has been made 
freely available for use in usability assessment. The only prerequisite for its use is that any published 
report should acknowledge the source of the measure. It consists of ten-item scale giving a global as-
sessment of Usability. Prior to use the questionnaire is revised by experts with significant experiences in 
the related fields. The selected statements actually cover a variety of aspects of system usability, such as 
the need for support, training, and complexity, and thus have a high level of face validity for measuring 
usability of a system.
The goal of this experimental phase was to estimate users’ subjective impressions about the system 
and their degrees of satisfaction. The immediate response to each item, rather than thinking about items 
for a long time was required from the subjects. Participants responded to each of 10 questions by cir-
cling a number ranging from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree) in order to indicate the level of 
agreement or disagreement with the statements. Five out of ten statements were positive, e.g., “I found 
the various functions in this system were well integrated“, the other five statements were negative, e.g., 
“I thought there was too much inconsistency in this system“.
The current SUS questionnaire items are presented below in the order, as follows:
1. 	
I think that I would like to use this system frequently.
2. 	
I found the system unnecessarily complex.
3. 	
I thought the system was easy to use.
4. 	
I think that I would need the support of a technical person to be able to use this system.
5. 	
I found the various functions in this system were well integrated.
6. 	
I thought there was too much inconsistency in this system.
7. 	
I would imagine that most people would learn to use this system very quickly.
Figure 1. The experiment phase 2: type and mode of information representation

148
System Usability Scale Implementation for Interfaces
﻿
8. 	
I found the system very cumbersome to use.
9. 	
I felt very confident using the system.
10. 	 I needed to learn a lot of things before I could get going with this system.
After submission, the collected answers to the items were scored in order to determine the overall 
scale score. For reporting results, a scoring template was used that turns the raw individual survey ratings 
across multiple users of a specific product into a single SUS score based on Brooke’s standard scoring 
method. The data processing procedure was carried in the following manner. The formula is offered 
for transferring the subjective impressions of users into the objective data information for analysis. The 
calculation procedure of the SUS score, involves first summing the score contributions from each item. 
Each item’s score contribution range from 0 to 4. For items 1,3,5,7 and 9 the score contribution is the 
scale position minus 1. For items 2,4,6,8 and 10, the contribution is 5 minus the scale position. Finally, 
the sum of the scores should be multiplied by 2.5 to obtain the overall value of SUS (Brooke, 1996).
Thus, overall SUS scores range from 0 to 100 in 2.5-point increments. The higher score indicate the 
more useful system which the users can more easily interact with (Brooke, 1996; İşman & İşbulan, 2010). 
SUS yields a single number representing a composite measure of the overall usability of the system 
being estimated. SUS questionnaire, as a whole, reflects participants’ estimates of the overall usability 
of an interface, regardless of the type of interface. As such, the individual statements that compose the 
SUS are secondary to the discussion of the instrument, in favor of the emergent score (Bangor, Kortum, 
& Miller, 2008).
FINDINGS
The following sections discuss the study results for visuospatial ability, spatial task performances and 
usability of mobile devices.
The visuospatial ability test used in this study measures one aspect of spatial thinking. As perfor-
mances on task, the number of correct answer was used, i.e. the mean scores. As expected, performance 
measures such as time to complete a task and gestures were positively correlated with spatial ability. 
The mean JLAP scores showed moderate but statistically significant correlation with both, the total 
time (r= -0.567, p < 0.04) and the total number of gestures (r= -0.651, p < 0.02) on 7 tasks, which were 
performed in second phase of the experiment. The results of the second experiment are analyzed in both, 
the qualitative and quantitative way, as follows.
Qualitative analysis included data from video camera recordings and feedback from participants. 
What was first observed on the basis of these data is that the majority of the respondents were articulat-
ing their thoughts, i.e., thinking aloud, even though they were not given instructions to do so. They have 
pronounced the text of the task, repeated it for several times, trying to establish what they need to do. 
It seemed as they are seeking for approval and confirmation from the experimenter. Here are some of 
their statements cited: “Now I will go back to the table”, “It is the satellite map, isn’t it?”, “This is the 
object, Am I right?”, “I need now to increase this slightly”. When reading the text of the task all of the 
respondents moved their fingers as if they underline the text, while when looking for the information in 
tables they were zooming in and out their representation. Generally they emphasized loudly when they 
find the desired object, using one finger, predominantly, the index finger for scrolling, while usually 

149
System Usability Scale Implementation for Interfaces
﻿
zooming with both hands. Men sometimes used their thumb to scroll. Female respondents were talking 
much more than males. The most difficult for subjects was to find objects on satellite map. Also, it took 
a longer time to find information in tables because they are of the largest size in comparison to the maps 
and schemas. They performed zooming when working with schemas, most of the time.
Further analysis of the experimental data confirmed that task performances are related to the type 
and mode of information representation (map, schema or tabular data). Besides, the results revealed for 
significant correlation between the overall time and number of gestures (especially for similar tasks, 
Figure 2).
Also, the overall SUS scores showed moderate but statistically significant correlation with the mean 
spatial ability scores (r = 0.548, p < 0.03), as well as the Learnable dimension of SUS (r = 0.609, p < 
0.02). In other words, participants with better spatial abilities evaluated the Tablet PC as more usable in 
comparison to those whose spatial abilities were of lower level.
Usable dimension mean scores of SUS showed moderate significant negative correlation with the 
number of gestures on the first experimental task (r = -0.506, p < 0.05). The first task entailed linking 
information presented on the scheme with the location of objects on satellite map. This finding reflects 
the fact that, the more usable the system is, then less gestures are needed to accomplish the task.
On the other hand, Usable dimension mean SUS scores were significantly negatively correlated with 
the total completion time of the sixth task in the experiment (r = -0.506, p < 0.05). This task involved 
the retrieval of data presented tabular form. This is the very important finding because, although it took 
a longer time to find information in tables because they are of the largest size in comparison to the maps 
and schemas, this time consuming task did not interfere with the perception of usability of the device 
being evaluated. In other words, higher SUS scores were related to less time required to find the neces-
sary data in tables.
Figure 2. Task execution time and corresponding number of gestures regarding the task type

150
System Usability Scale Implementation for Interfaces
﻿
Spatial ability is often cited as being one of the best predictors of human-computer performance. 
Performance measures such as time to complete a task or number of gestures when working with mobile 
touch screen device proved to be positively correlated with spatial ability.
Users in our experiment performed zooming when working with schemas, which means that they are 
forced to either rely on their mental model of the information space or to perform repetitive and time 
consuming zoom-in and zoom-out operations to reorient themselves.
The pattern of ability/performance correlations reflects the differential task demands. Thus, closer 
inspection of the cognitive requirements of a task may reveal what interventions could be most useful 
when designing mobile touch screen devices interfaces.
The results of the tasks performed in the second experimental phase showed that the participants, on 
first-time use of Tablet PC achieved good results in terms of series of task completion and also that task 
performances are related to the type and mode of information representation (map, schema or tabular 
data). This means that the subjects did not experience any problem interacting with this kind of device, 
i.e. the Tablet PC proved to show effectiveness.
In the third phase of experiment the results of post processing procedures were compared to the 
previous scores, benchmarks from the industry or to the overall SUS average values gathered from the 
earlier researches of Sauro (2011a). Particular interest was recognized for the measures of central ten-
dency, among them the overall SUS scores distributions, which were not identical (the mean Overall 
SUS scores of 70.14, 62.1 and 68), as were introduced from (Bangor, Kortum, & Miller, 2008) and the 
(Lewis & Sauro, 2009) as well as for our study (respectively).
They abstracted average ratings from over 500 studies, where the mean SUS score has been 68 (Sauro, 
2010) as in our study. Besides the confidence intervals did not overlap, and also similar differences for 
the first and third quartile. The difference in central tendency between the data sets is most likely due to 
the different types of users, products, and tasks included in the data sets. The items selected for the SUS 
were those that provided the strongest discrimination between the systems. In his original paper, Brooke 
(1996) reported strong correlations among the selected items (absolute values of r ranging from 0.7 to 
0.9), but he did not report any measures of reliability or validity. For these reasons, he cautioned against 
assuming that the SUS was any more than a unidimensional measure of usability. An early assessment 
(using coefficient alpha) of the SUS indicated a reliability of 0.85 (Lucey, 2004)
Taking the above mentioned into account, the findings from Bangor, Kortum, & Miller (2008) and 
Lewis & Sauro (2009), studies are shown in Table 1. The SUS descriptive statistics for Tablet PC from 
the field experiment are summarized in Table 2, as follows:
More recent estimates using larger samples have found its reliability to be just over 0.9 (0.91 from 
Bangor et al., 2008, using 2,324 cases; 0.92 from Lewis & Sauro (2009), using 324 cases). Cronbach’ 
Alpha for the SUS version employed in the present study is 0.87.
By inspection of the mean Overall SUS scores it could be seen that Statement 7 (“I would imagine 
that most people would learn to use this system very quickly”) received the most extreme answers of all 
responses (this is one of two questions to which the respondents did not give neutral answers, as well 
as for the Statement 4: “I think that I would need the support of a technical person to be able to use this 
system”), while Statement 3 (“I thought the system was easy to use”) showed the lowest mean Overall 
scores (Figure 3).
Performing a t-test on the standardized results shows that Statement 7 differs significantly from the 
responses on Statement 3 (t= 2.3772, p< 0.04). Participants tended to give Statement 7 a rating that was 
about average with respect to their other ratings.

151
System Usability Scale Implementation for Interfaces
﻿
Table 1. SUS statistics from (Bangor, Kortum, & Miller, 2008; Lewis & Sauro, 2009)
Bangor et al. 
Lewis and Sauro
Statistic
Overall
Overall
Usable
Learnable
Minimum
0
7.5
0
0
Maximum
100
100
100
0
Mena
70.14
62.1
59.44
72.72
Variance
471.32
494.38
531.54
674.47
Standard deviation
21.71
22.24
23.06
25.97
Standard error of the mean
0.45
1.24
1.28
1.44
Skewness
NA
−0.43
−0.38
−0.8
Kurtosis
NA
−0.61
−0.6
−0.17
First quartile
55
45
40.63
50
Median
75
65
62.5
75
Third quartile
87.5
75
78.13
100
Interquartile range
32.5
30
37.5
50
Critical z (99.9%)
3.09
3.09
3.09
3.09
Critical d (99.9%)
1.39
3.82
3.96
4.46
99.9% confidence interval upper limit
71.53
65.92
63.4
77.18
99.9% confidence interval lower limit
68.75
58.28
55.48
68.27
Table 2. SUS statistics for tablet PC usability evaluation (authors study)
Statistic 
Overall
Usable
Learnable
Minimum
30
37.5
0
Maximum
87.5
87.5
100
Mean
68
67.5
70
Variance
371.94
293.40
1006.25
Standard deviation
19.29
17.13
33.44
Standard error of the mean
6.09
5.42
10.57
Skewness
-1.32
-1.13
-1.25
Kurtosis
0.72
0.33
0.59
First quartile
66.88
66.41
46.88
Median
72.5
70.31
87.5
Third quartile
79.38
78.13
87.5
Interquartile range
12.5
11.72
40.63
Critical z (99.9%)
3.08
3.08
3.08
Critical d (99.9%)
18.76
16.69
32.56
99.9% confidence interval upper limit
97.16
93.40
120.55
99.9% confidence interval lower limit
38.84
41.60
19.45

152
System Usability Scale Implementation for Interfaces
﻿
This finding could mean that there are characteristics of the statements that tend to result in gener-
ally positive or negative ratings. It could also be that participants tend to more strongly disagree with 
negative statements (Figure 4) than they agree with positive ones (Figure 5). Finally, a third possible 
explanation is that participants had a bias toward the left side of the survey, as suggested by Friedman 
& Amoo (1999). The responses have a clear negative skew (-1.32, for Overall scores, the values for 
Usable and Learnable dimensions were quite similar). The highest average scores show females on 10th 
question and the lowest for the 2nd and 9th Statement. Males show the highest scores on the 4th, and 
then for Statements 3 and 9. For the 1st, 2nd and 7th Statement, males and females achieved equal mean 
scores. The greatest differences were shown for 4th, 6th and 10th questions, where women have higher 
average scores (Figure 6).
Figure 4. Percent of users that chose Disagree and Strongly Disagree alternatives
Figure 3. Mean overall SUS scores for tablet

153
System Usability Scale Implementation for Interfaces
﻿
In the spirit of the relative (as opposed to an absolute) measurement of usability, there are recom-
mendations to grade on a curve in which a SUS score of 68 is at the center of the range (Sauro & Lewis, 
2012). Summarizing the results, the mean Overall SUS score for Tablet PC, gathered in the study is 68, 
the median is 72.5, the maximum is 87.5 and the minimum is 30. These scores indicate that this kind of 
device has been proven to be usable. Females tend to show higher mean Overall scores than males, these 
differences remain for the learnable, but could not be applied to usable dimension (Figure 7).
Figure 5. Percent of users that chose Agree or Strongly Agree alternatives
Figure 6. SUS scores distributions according to gender

154
System Usability Scale Implementation for Interfaces
﻿
However, the results failed to show significant gender differences in mean SUS Overall scores, as 
well as for usable and learnable dimension. The great advantage of Tablets is that they are intuitive 
products and using them does not require much prior training, over and above, that taps into the skills 
that young people have developed thanks to other similar devices (Plaza & Pérez Plaza, 2012). Thus, lack 
of previous experience obviously is not the factor that will have an impact on the SUS results. On the 
other hand, a big limiting factor refers to those who were unfamiliar with OS, i.e. completing any task 
took extra time to perform basic functions such as saving and finding files. Hardware issues involved 
managing the device itself (for example, charging batteries due to limited autonomy of cheaper versions).
The Dimensional Aspects of Usability
This one-dimensional aspect of the SUS is both a benefit and a drawback, because the questionnaire 
is necessarily quite general. The traditional unidimensional structure (Kirakowski & Corbett, 1994; 
Brooke, 1996; Bangor, Kortum, & Miller, 2008) has been challenged by the more recent view of (Lewis 
& Sauro, 2009), assuming Learnability and Usability as independent factors. According to Lewis & 
Sauro (2009), eight items load on the usability factor and two items on the learnability factor. The two 
learnability items are 4 (“I think that I would need the support of a technical person to be able to use 
this system”) and 10 (“I needed to learn a lot of things before I could get going with this system”). They 
stated that without any extra work SUS can provide not just the existing global score but also scores on 
two subscales; usability and learnability. Sauro (2011a) provides the following rules to calculate scores 
for usability and learnability:
1. 	
Start with scaling the scores the same way as with the regular SUS.
Figure 7. Mean SUS scores for usable and learnable dimension according to gender

155
System Usability Scale Implementation for Interfaces
﻿
2. 	
Learnability: Total the scores for items 4 and 10 and multiply result by 12.5, which will scale the 
result from 0 to 100.
3. 	
Usability: Total scores for the rest eight items and multiply the result by 3.125 to scale the result 
from 0 to 100.
The results of the experiment with Tablet PC, into the factor structure of the SUS show that it would 
be possible to use the new Usable subscale in place of the Overall SUS. These findings are also in ac-
cordance with the Sauro & Lewis (2012). The Overall scale and Usable subscale had an extremely high 
correlation (r = 0.974), and the reduction in reliability in moving from the 10-item Overall SUS to the 
eight-item. However, high correlation between the Overall scale and Learnable subscale has been dem-
onstrated as well (r = 0.887), although scores on the learnability scale indicate higher mean values than 
the scores of the two other scales (Figure 7).
In order to compare the ability of SUS to identify the usability of various mobile devices - phones 
types and the Tablet PC, the Technique for Order Preferences by Similarity to an Ideal Solution (TOP-
SIS) was employed (Cicevic, Mitrovic, & Nesic, 2014). The results showed that mobile phone devices’ 
overall SUS scores have lower values than those one in Tablet PC experiment, but it could be noticed 
that they are almost equal comparing the cases with and without touch screen (57 vs. 58, respectively). 
The Usability dimension scores are higher for devices using keyboards in everyday functioning, while 
the Learnability dimension is shown to be greater among touch screen mobile phones (Figure 8).
Similar results are also recorded regarding the correlation between the Overall scale and Usable 
subscale, for mobile phones with touch screen (r = 0.949). Similarity of the dimensions represented by 
mean SUS scores in Figure 8 indicates that the use of different devices which belong to the same class 
(with touch screen functionality) produce the similar operational and subjective experience. This could 
be also verified on the basis of the correlation coefficient value between the Overall scale and Learnable 
subscale scores, which is slightly lower (r = 0.755).
Figure 8. SUS scores for overall scale, usable and learnable subscales for mobile phones with touch 
screen, keyboard mobile devices and tablet PCs

156
System Usability Scale Implementation for Interfaces
﻿
The very high correlations were also detected between overall SUS scores and Usability sub-scores 
(r=0.954), on one side, and between Overall SUS scores and the Learnability sub-scores (r=0.904) on 
the other side, regarding the use of mobile devices without touch screens. The ratios between Overall 
SUS score and mentioned sub-scores show that these types of devices are perceived as highly usable 
but less learnable.
Among all types of devices which were taken into consideration in the current study, only Tablet PC 
type showed satisfactory usability with the respect to the mean values of the overall Usability SUS scores. 
On the other hand, very high and statistically significant correlations were detected between the Overall 
and Usability SUS scores, regardless of the type of device (e.g. Tablet PCs and mobile devices with and 
without touch screen). We may conclude that the two-factor model with correlated factors outperformed 
both the factor models proposed in the literature to account for the measurement model of the SUS.
In this study we were interested in how the above mentioned attributes of tablet device impact its 
practical application, as well as how the respondents perceived its usability, especially in comparing to 
other similar mobile devices.
Also, according to the numerical results of TOPSIS, the final rank of alternatives (ratings of the device 
usability) show that from the perspective of the usability, Tablet PC is the most preferred device, followed 
by Smartphone and mobile phones with numerical keyboard, respectively (Table 3). This is confirmed 
by significant correlation (r = 0.99861) between ranking values, obtained by SUS and TOPSIS methods.
Obviously, the average SUS score has been the highest for the Tablet PC. Mobile devices showed 
significantly lower overall SUS scores values than one in Tablet PC experiment, but it could be noticed 
that they are almost equal comparing the cases with and without touch screen (Figure 8).
DISSCUSION
The experiment has been conducted through three phases in order to investigate the relationships be-
tween spatial abilities, performances on various spatial tasks and usability of touch screen devices. The 
motivation for the first phase inclusion is based on assumption that spatial abilities are associated with 
performances on various cognitive tasks. On the other hand the success in performing various spatial 
tasks (phase two) are related to the usability of the system on which they are performed (phase three). 
Hence, none of the results which are obtained by each of experimental phases should not be considered 
separately from each other, but in the light of their mutual relationships.
Spatial ability is often cited as being one of the best predictors of human-computer performance. 
Besides, the performance measures such as time to complete a task or number of gestures when work-
Table 3. Ranks of various types of mobile device according to the SUS and TOPSIS
Device Type
Overall SUS Score
TOPSIS Cj Value Rank
Ranking 
Order
Tablet PC
68
0.880299
1
Smartphone
56.34615
0.193081
2
Keyboard mobile
56.25
0.172786
3
QWERTY mobile
55.75758
0.188002
4

157
System Usability Scale Implementation for Interfaces
﻿
ing with mobile touch screen device proved to be positively correlated with spatial ability. Users in our 
experiment performed zooming when working with schemas, which means that they are forced to either 
rely on their mental model of the information space or to perform repetitive and time consuming zoom-in 
and zoom-out operations to reorient themselves. But, this time consuming task did not interfere with the 
perception of usability of the mobile touch screen device interfaces. Analysis of the experimental data 
confirmed that task performances are related to the type and mode of information representation (map, 
schema or tabular data). The results show the influence of the clarity of task demands on performances 
measured as total task completion time, as well as, the total number of gestures. The best results were 
achieved on tasks which structure was simple and clear. In this case, object on schema has been identi-
fied more efficiently than object which has to be located on satellite map, because schema has clear 
visual structure (black objects on white background) comparing to the satellite picture, presented in 
full range of colors with the presence of blurry elements. Similar results were gathered in searching for 
particular data in tables, which are also represents of clear graphical forms. However, tasks comprised 
mixed demands (e.g. table/schema or table/schema/map) required more time and gestures to be solved. 
The above mentioned was supported by the correlation coefficients between total task completion time 
and total number of gestures, for all seven experimental tasks. These findings are in accordance with 
correlations between usability scores and number of gestures, as well as with total completion time, when 
task demands were involved searching for information on schemas and tables. This should be taken in 
account during touch screen interface design process.
Finally, there is a need for verification the overall preferences (which are related to the usability) 
among various types of mobile devices. Is SUS sensitive enough to make the differences between various 
types of mobile devices, through the evaluation of their usability? The positive answer to the question 
is confirmed by significant correlation between the SUS and the TOPSIS methods.
Although Usability, as many constructs in scientific world is complex, this does not mean that it could 
not be measured by simple metrics, which, in case of mobile devices, has to incorporate the elements 
of various human abilities and performances. Similar to the results found in Campbell’s study (2011), 
the findings suggest that spatial ability is a useful way to characterize users and to improve usability 
testing. The answer that is related to the question “Whether system is to be usable?” depends on two 
factors - the system itself, and the person attempting to use it. The system is only “usable” in case that 
a particular user can use it, but care should be taken that what may be usable for one person could be 
incomprehensible to another.
Usability testing is under the influence of at least two contributing factors that may affect the testing 
outcome: the tasks to be accomplished by the user and the metrics used to assess performance.
It could be argued that the most important individual differences, as well as, the best predictors of 
users/performances (in handling any device or interface usability), are cognitive and experiential ones.
Albeit spatial visualization ability has frequently been linked to performance with computer sys-
tems, and though this ability is generally assumed to be higher in men than in women, it fails to prove 
for systematic gender differences in performances. Campbell and Norman (2007) found no difference 
between males and females, although they did find a large spatial visualization effect and a difference 
in spatial visualization performance between genders. Such findings suggest that observed gender dif-
ferences might be due to differences in spatial ability. Taking into account even so mixed results, gender 
can still be considered as important demographic variable to report in usability studies, but it does not 
always predict performance with information systems.

158
System Usability Scale Implementation for Interfaces
﻿
Further support for the idea that spatial visualization reflects reasoning ability comes from the types 
of interactions with the devices that spatial visualization ability affects. Vicente, Hayes, and Williges 
(1987) found that spatial visualization, followed by vocabulary, was the best predictor of efficiency in a 
hierarchical database search task. Pak, Rogers, & Fisk (2006) encountered no effect of spatial visualiza-
tion on navigating a hierarchical web structure. A huge number of these results pointed out advantages 
of users with higher spatial visualization ability and their effects on efficiency, in other words, users 
with better spatial skills tend to be more efficient at finding information.
Obviously, regardless of which construct one is interested in, spatial abilities make a difference in 
performance on usability tests. This finding implies that it is important when testing usability, to find 
participants who are diverse not only in background factors but also with respect to cognitive abilities. 
Especially in cases where mobile devices with different screen sizes are tested, a wide range of individu-
als with different spatial abilities is necessary in order to get accurate quantitative estimates of perfor-
mance. Since spatial ability may also affect which cognitive processes are employed for interaction with 
a particular device or interface, it could also be important to gather qualitative measures of interaction 
strategy. However, besides indisputable significance of spatial abilities in mobile devices context, user 
experience turned out potential relationship with SUS ratings. Such kind of association was found by 
Sauro (2011b), on the basis of over 1100 users visiting 62 Web sites (airlines, rental cars, retailers, and 
the like). In fact, users who had been to the Web site previously rated these Web sites as much as 11% 
more usable than those who had never been to these Web sites prior to rating them with SUS. Thus, in 
view of these findings, and taking into account that in the present study significant correlation has been 
found between spatial abilities of non-experienced subjects and their SUS scores, a particularly important 
conclusion arises that Tablet PC confirmed its usability.
CONCLUSION
•	
Results from this study demonstrate that participants, on first-time use of Tablet PC achieved 
good results in terms of series of task completion, which means that they did not experience any 
problem interacting with this kind of device, i.e. the system (Tablet PC) proved to show the ef-
fectiveness dimension.
•	
The findings of this study reflect the two very important facts: first, the more usable the system is, 
then less gestures are needed to accomplish a task, and second, higher usability scores (measured 
by SUS) are related to the less time required to find the necessary data presented on mobile touch 
screen device, especially when designed interface consists of clear forms.
•	
Likewise, conclusion could be drawn, as from previous studies (Bangor, Kortum, & Miller, 2008; 
Kirakowski & Corbett, 1994), that SUS has been demonstrated to be a reliable and valid instru-
ment in measuring usability.
•	
Also, it shows the feature of robustness even with a small number of participants (Tullis & Stetson, 
2004). SUS revealed its distinct advantage of being technology agnostic, meaning it can be used 
to evaluate a wide range of hardware and software systems (Brooke, 2013; Kortum & Acemyan, 
2013)
•	
On the other hand, given the wide variety of hardware and software options combined with the 
range of user preferences and spatial abilities, no one feature, display, or component is likely to be 

159
System Usability Scale Implementation for Interfaces
﻿
definitively optimal (Pingel & Clarke, 2005), but having a good knowledge about the end users of 
technology one can strive to make it more usable and learnable.
•	
The pattern of ability/performance correlations reflects the differential task demands. Thus, closer 
inspection of the cognitive requirements of a task may reveal what interventions could be most 
useful when designing mobile touch screen devices interfaces.
•	
Even in cases where tasks are time consuming there is no interference with the perception of us-
ability of the mobile touch screen device interfaces.
•	
The SUS has shown to be able to distinguish between various types of mobile devices, hence it 
could be successfully used for mobile usability assessment.
FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTIONS
The work presented here suggests several lines of future research that are needed in order to further 
understand both the SUS and the usage of mobile touch screen devices. In the short run, extending the 
findings from one type of tasks to others, as well as applications and devices is fairly straightforward, 
though the outcomes may change (both the performances and usability) based on the characteristics of 
the interfaces and tasks being involved. In the long run, as future interfaces may use different kinds of 
screen technology, so screen size may not be the most important consideration, the key emphasis will 
be on interactivity which will immediately affect all the crucial dimensions of usability. Therefore, the 
variation due to individual differences among users must be seriously taken into account both by system 
designers, and also when one designs a usability test.
Numerous studies and research results accumulating serve to enhance our understanding of mobile 
usability research and also provide the basis for a research agenda in this field. This domain would 
benefit by having a further emphasis placed on the careful selection of the present as well as the future 
users′ characteristics (cognitive aptitude, their mental models formation feature, physical ability, just to 
mention a few) when studying mobile usability.
This study offers several contributions and implications for both researchers and practitioners.
Furthermore, the identification prerequisites of a common usability measurement metric in a mobile 
work context, which has to be easy and cost effective to apply, not time consuming, providing genuine 
feedback from users (about the degree of difficulty and the level of user satisfaction in using the appli-
cation), and most of all, proved to give a simple outcome which could be easily interpreted. In turn, the 
framework and the findings of this study could be used as the basis for continuing research that aims to 
enhance our understanding of mobile usability considerations and measurement.
Through an enhanced understanding of these issues, both practitioners and researchers can make 
informed recommendations and decisions to improve the usability of touch screen mobile devices. 
Focusing on the usability and evaluating the experiential aspects helps for gain a loyal customer base.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is partially supported by the Ministry of the Science and Technological development of the 
Republic of Serbia under No. 036012, No. 036022, No. 036006 and No. 179002.

160
System Usability Scale Implementation for Interfaces
﻿
REFERENCES
Abran, A., Khelifi, A., Suryn, W., & Seffah, A. (2003). Usability Meanings and Interpretations in ISO 
Standards. Software Quality Journal, 11(4), 325–338. doi:10.1023/A:1025869312943
Alben, L. (1996). Quality of Experience: Defining the Criteria for Effective Interaction Design. Interac-
tion, 3(3), 11–15. doi:10.1145/235008.235010
Alvarez, C., Brown, C., & Nussbaum, M. (2010). Comparative study of netbooks and tablet PCs for 
fostering face-to-face collaborative learning. Computers in Human Behavior, 834–844.
Annett, J. (2002). Subjective rating scales: Science or art? Ergonomics, 45(14), 966–987. 
doi:10.1080/00140130210166951 PMID:12569049
Arhippainen, L., & Tähti, M. (2003). Empirical evaluation of user experience in two adaptive mobile 
application prototypes. Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Mobile ldots, (pp. 27-34). 
Retrieved from http://www.ep.liu.se/ecp/011/007/ecp011007.pdf
Baber, C. (2002). Subjective evaluation of usability. Ergonomics, 45(14), 1021–1025. 
doi:10.1080/00140130210166807 PMID:12569060
Bailey, R., Wolfson, C., Nall, J., & Koyani, S. (2009). erformance-Based Usability Testing: Metrics That 
Have the Greatest Impact for Improving a System’s Usability. Proceedings of the 1st International Confer-
ence on Human Centered Design (pp. 3-12). Berlin: Springer-Verlag doi:10.1007/978-3-642-02806-9_1
Bangor, A., Kortum, P., & Miller, J. (2008). An Empirical Evaluation of the System Usability Scale. In-
ternational Journal of Human-Computer Interaction, 24(6), 574–594. doi:10.1080/10447310802205776
Bargas-Avila, J. A., & Hornbaek, K. (2011). Old Wine in New Bottles or Novel Challenges: A Critical 
Analysis of Empirical Studies of User Experience. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 2689–2698). New York, NY: ACM. doi:10.1145/1978942.1979336
Bevan, N. (1995a). Measuring usability as quality of use. Software Quality Journal, 4(2), 115–150. 
doi:10.1007/BF00402715
Bevan, N. (1995b). Usability is Quality of Use. 6th International Conference on Human Computer 
Interaction. Elsevier.
Bevan, N., & Macleod, M. (1994). Usability measurement in context. Behaviour & Information Tech-
nology, 13(1-2), 132-145.
Brooke, J. (1986). System Usability Scale. Academic Press.
Brooke, J. (1996). SUS: a quick and dirty usability scale. In B. T. P. W. Jordan (Ed.), Usability Evalua-
tion in Industry. London: Taylor and Francis.
Brooke, J. (2013). SUS: A Retrospective. Journal of Usability Studies, 8(2), 29–40.
Buchanan, G., Farrant, S., Jones, M., Thimbleby, H., Marsden, G., & Pazzani, M. (2001). Improving mobile 
internet usability. Proceedings of the 10th international conference on World Wide Web, (pp. 673-680).

161
System Usability Scale Implementation for Interfaces
﻿
Campbell, S. (2011). Users’ spatial abilities affect interface usability outcomes. PhD Thesis.
Campbell, S., & Norman, K. (2007). Strategy, Spatial Visualization Ability, and Performance on Web-
site Navigation. Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting. SAGE 
Publications. doi:10.1177/154193120705101303
Chamorro-Koc, M., Popovic, V., & Emmison, M. (2009). Human experience and product usability: 
Principles to assist the design of user–product interactions. Applied Ergonomics, 40(4), 648–656. 
doi:10.1016/j.apergo.2008.05.004 PMID:18653170
Chin, J., Diehl, V., & Norman, K. (1988). Development of an instrument measuring user satisfaction of 
the human-computer interface. Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (pp. 213-218). New York, NY: ACM. doi:10.1145/57167.57203
Cicevic, S., Mitrovic, S., & Nesic, M. (2014). Advantages and challenges of tablet PC’s usage. Yugoslav 
Journal of Operations Research, 24(2).
Čičević, S., Mitrović, S., & Perišić, D. (2013). Usability Measurement Framework for Mobile Touch 
Screen Devices in Transportation and Logistics. Proceedings of XI Balkan Conference on Operational 
Research (BALCOR 2013) (pp. 398-405). Belgrade, Serbia: NEWPRESS d.o.o.
Collaer, M. L., Reimers, S., & Manning, J. T. (2007). Visuospatial performance on an Internet line 
judgment task and potential Hormonal markers: Sex, sexual orientation, and 2D:4D. Archives of Sexual 
Behavior, 36(2), 177–192. doi:10.1007/s10508-006-9152-1 PMID:17380373
Csikszentmihalyi, M., & Larson, R. (1987, September). Validity and reliability of the Experience-Sam-
pling Method. The Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 175(9), 526–536. doi:10.1097/00005053-
198709000-00004 PMID:3655778
Dean, E., Schwerin, J., Robbins, M., & Bourne, J. (2004). Usability testingofthe U.S.Navy’s performance 
management system. Research Triangle Park.
Desmet, P., & Hekkert, P. (2007). Framework of Product Experience. International Journal of Design, 
1(1), 57–66.
Duh, H., Tan, G., & Chen, V. (2006). Usability evaluation for mobile device: a comparison of laboratory 
and field tests. Proceedings of the 8th conference on Human-computer interaction with mobile devices 
and services (MobileHCI ‘06) (pp. 181-186). New York: ACM. doi:10.1145/1152215.1152254
Dunlop, M., & Brewster, S. (2002). The Challenge of Mobile Devices for Human Computer Interaction. 
Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, 6(4), 235–236. doi:10.1007/s007790200022
Finstad, K. (2010). The Usability Metric for User Experience. Interact. Comput., 22(5), 323-327. 
10.1016/j.intcom.2010.04.004
Friedman, H., & Amoo, T. (1999). Rating The Rating Scales. Journal of Marketing Management, 9(3), 
114–123.
Gong, J., & Tarasewich, P. (2004). Guidelines for handheld mobile device interface design. Proceedings 
of the 2004 DSI Annual Meeting (pp. 3751-3756). Boston: Decision Sciences Institute.

162
System Usability Scale Implementation for Interfaces
﻿
Han, S. H., Yun, M. H., Kim, K.-J., & Kwahk, J. (2000). Evaluation of product usability: Development 
and validation of usability dimensions and design elements based on empirical models. International 
Journal of Industrial Ergonomics, 26(4), 477–488. doi:10.1016/S0169-8141(00)00019-6
Han, S. H., Yun, M. H., Kwahk, J., & Hong, S. W. (2001). Usability of consumer electronic products. 
International Journal of Industrial Ergonomics, 28(3), 143–151. doi:10.1016/S0169-8141(01)00025-7
Hassenzahl, M. (2004). The interplay of beauty, goodness, and usability in interactive products. Human-
Computer Interaction, 19(4), 319–349. doi:10.1207/s15327051hci1904_2
Hassenzahl, M. (2010). Experience Design: Technology for All the Right Reasons. Morgan and Claypool 
Publishers.
Hassenzahl, M., & Tractinsky, N. (2006). User experience - A research agenda. Behaviour & Informa-
tion Technology, 25(2), 91–97. doi:10.1080/01449290500330331
Hassenzahl, M., & Tractinsky, N. (2006). User experience - a research agenda. Behaviour & Information 
Technology, 25(2), 91-97. 10.1080/01449290500330331
Hekkert, P. (2006). Design aesthetics: Principles of pleasure in design. Psychological Science, 48(2), 157.
Hofmeester, G. H., Kemp, J. A., & Blankendaal, A. C. (1996). Sensuality in Product Design: A Struc-
tured Approach. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
(pp. 428–435). New York, NY: ACM. doi:10.1145/238386.238595
Hornbæk, K., & Lai-Chong Law, E. (2007). Meta-analysis of correlations among usability. Proceedings 
in Computer Human Interaction.
International Ergonomics Association (IEA) Council. (2000). What is Ergonomics. Retrieved September 
10, 2008, from http://www.iea.cc/browse.php?contID=what_is_ergonomics
ISO9241-11: Guidance on Usability1998International Organisation for Standardisation, Geneva, Swit-
zerland.
İşman, A., & İşbulan, O. (2010). Usability level of distance education website (sakarya university sample). 
Turkish Online Journal of Educational Technology, 9(1), 243–258.
Joelsson, T. (2008). Mobile Web Browser Extensions. Utilizing local device functionality in mobile web 
applications. Stockholm: K T H Information and Communication Technology.
Jordan, P. W. (1998). An introduction to usability. CRC Press.
Kaasinen, E. (2005). User acceptance of mobile services - value, ease of use,trust and ease of adoption. 
VTT Publications.
Kaasinen, E. (2009). User Acceptance of Mobile Services. International Journal of Mobile Human 
Computer Interaction, 1(1), 79–97. doi:10.4018/jmhci.2009010105
Kahneman, D., Krueger, A. B., Schkade, D. A., Schwarz, N., & Stone, A. A. (2004). A survey method 
for characterizing daily life experience: The day reconstruction method. Science, 306(5702), 1776–1780. 
doi:10.1126/science.1103572 PMID:15576620

163
System Usability Scale Implementation for Interfaces
﻿
Karapanos, E., Zimmerman, J., Forlizzi, J., & Martens, J.-B. (2009). User Experience over Time: An 
Initial Framework. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
(pp. 729–738). New York, NY: ACM. doi:10.1145/1518701.1518814
Kirakowski, J. (1996). The software usability measurement inventory: Background and usage. In W. Jordan, 
B. Thomas, & A. Weerdmeester (Eds.), Usability measurement in industry. London: Taylor and Francis.
Kirakowski, J. (2000). Questionnaires in usability engineering. Cork, Ireland: Human Factors Research 
Group.
Kirakowski, J. (2003, January). Taking the measure of user-centred design. Cutter IT Journal, 16, 21–27.
Kirakowski, J., & Cierlik, B. (1998). Measuring the Usability of Web Sites. Proceedings of the Human 
Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting, 42(4), 424-428. Retrieved from http://pro.sagepub.
com/content/42/4/424
Kirakowski, J., & Corbett, M. (1994). SUMI: The Software Usability Measurement Inventory. British 
Journal of Educational Technology, 24(3), 210–212. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8535.1993.tb00076.x
Konradt, U., Wandke, H., Balazs, B., & Christophersen, T. (2003). Usability in online shops: scale con-
struction, validation and the influence on the buyers’ intention and decision. Behaviour & Information 
Technology, 22(3), 165-174.
Kortum, P., & Acemyan, C. (2013). How Low Can You Go? Is the System Usability Scale Range Re-
stricted? Journal of Usability Studies, 9(1), 14–24.
Kourouthanassis, P. E., & Georgiadis, C. K. (2014). Analysing m-commerce research: technology, ap-
plications and research themes. International Journal of Mobile Computing, 1-11.
Kuniavsky, M. (2003). Observing the User Experience: A Practitioner’s Guide to User Research (Morgan 
Kaufmann Series in Interactive Technologies). San Francisco, CA: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc.
Law, E., Roto, V., Vermeeren, A. P., Kort, J., & Hassenzahl, M. (2008). Towards a Shared Definition 
of User Experience. CHI ‘08 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems, (pp. 2395-
2398). doi:10.1145/1358628.1358693
Lee, Y. E., & Benbasat, I. (2003). Interface Design for Mobile Commerce. Communications of the ACM, 
46(12), 48–52. doi:10.1145/953460.953487
Leitner, M., Wolkerstorfer, P., Sefelin, R., & Tscheligi, M. (2008). Mobile multimedia: identifying user 
values using the means-end theory. Proceedings of the 10th international conference on Human computer 
interaction with mobile devices and services, (pp. 167-175). doi:10.1145/1409240.1409259
Lewis, J. (1990). Sychometric Evaluation of a Post-study System Usability Questionnaire: The PSSUQ 
(Tech. Report 54.535). Boca Raton, FL: International Business Machines Corp.
Lewis, J. (1992). Psychometric evaluation of the Post-Study system usability questionnaire: The PSSUQ. 
Proceedings of the Human Factors Society 36th Annual Meeting (pp. 1259–1263). Santa Monica, CA: 
Human Factors Society.

164
System Usability Scale Implementation for Interfaces
﻿
Lewis, J. (2002). Psychometric Evaluation of the PSSUQ Using Data from Five Years of. International 
Journal of Human-Computer Interaction, 14(3), 463–488. doi:10.1207/S15327590IJHC143&4_11
Lewis, J., & Sauro, J. (2009). The factor structure of the system usability scale. Proceedings of the In-
ternational Conference (HCII 2009) (pp. 94-103). San Diego CA: Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
Lin, C.-C. (2013). Exploring the relationship between technology acceptance model and usability test. 
Information Technology Management, 14(3), 243–255. doi:10.1007/s10799-013-0162-0
Lin, H., Choong, Y.-Y., & Salvendy, G. (1997). A proposed index of usability: A method for compar-
ing the relative usability of different software systems. Behaviour & Information Technology, 16(4-5), 
267–278. doi:10.1080/014492997119833
Logan, R. J. (1994). Usability in Practice (M. E. Wiklund, Ed.). San Diego, CA: Academic Press Profes-
sional, Inc.. Retrieved from http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=180981.180984
Lucey, T. (2004). Management Information Systems. Cengage Learning EMEA.
Macleod, M. (1994). Usability: Practical methods for testing and Improvement. Proceedings of the 
Norwegian Computer Society Software 94 Conference. Sandvika, Norway: Crown.
MacLeod, M., Bowden, R., Bevan, N., & Curson, I. (1997). The MUSiC performance measurement 
method. Behaviour & Information Technology, 16(4-5), 279–293. doi:10.1080/014492997119842
Mayhew, D. (1999). The Usability Engineering Lifecycle: A Practitioner’s Handbook for User Interface 
Design. San Francisco, CA: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc. doi:10.1145/632716.632805
Mitrović, S., Čičević, S., Pavlović, N., Janković, S., Aćimović, S., & Milinković, S. (2012). Evaluation 
of Tablet PC Usage for some Railway Infrastructure Inspection Tasks. In Proceedings of Papers: 20th 
International Symposuim EURO-Zel 2012 (pp. 180–087). Žilina, Slovakia: Tribun EU.
Nielsen, J. (1993). Iterative User Interface Design. IEEE Computer, 26(11), 32–41. doi:10.1109/2.241424
Nielsen, J. (2012, April 10). Mobile Site vs. Full Site. Retrieved March 2, 2014, from Nielsen Norman 
Group: http://www.nngroup.com/articles/mobile-site-vs-full-site/
Nielsen, J., & Levy, J. (1994). Measuring usability: Preference vs. performance. Communications of the 
ACM, 37(4), 66–75. doi:10.1145/175276.175282
Nielsen, J., & Norman, D. (2012). Mobile Usability. New Riders Press.
Norman, L., Shneiderman, B., & Harper, B. (2003). QUIS: The Questionnaire for User. University of 
Maryland Human Computer Interaction.
Pak, R., Rogers, W., & Fisk, A. (2006). Spatial ability subfactors and their influences on a computer-
based information search task. Human Factors: The Journal of the Human Factors and Ergonomics 
Society, 48(1), 154–165. doi:10.1518/001872006776412180 PMID:16696265
Park, J., Han, S. H., Kim, H. K., Cho, Y., & Park, W. (2013). Developing Elements of User Experience 
for Mobile Phones and Services: Survey, Interview, and Observation Approaches. Human Factors and 
Ergonomics in Manufacturing & Service Industries, 23(4), 279-293. 10.1002/hfm.20316

165
System Usability Scale Implementation for Interfaces
﻿
Pekkala, S. (2012). Usability evaluation of design solutions for tablet magazines. MSc Thesis.
Pingel, T., & Clarke, K. (2005). Assessing the usability of a wearable computer system for outdoor 
pedestrian navigation. AutoCarto 2005.
Plaza, B., & Pérez Plaza, M. (2012). Las tabletas en la educación: implica un cambio en la metodología 
la introducción de un nuevo dispositivo. En Revista Didáctica, Innovación y Multimedia.
Raita, E., & Oulasvirta, A. (2011). Too good to be bad: Favorable product expectations boost subjec-
tive usability ratings. Interacting with Computers, 23(4), 363–371. doi:10.1016/j.intcom.2011.04.002
Rogers, Y., Sharp, H., & Preece, J. (2011). Interaction Design: Beyond Human Computer Interaction. 
Wiley.
Roto, V. (2006). Web Browsing on Mobile Phones: Characteristics of User Experience. Helsinki Uni-
versity of Technology. Retrieved from http://books.google.rs/books?id=QuBQMQAACAAJ
Ryu, Y., & Smith-Jackson, T. L. (2006). Reliability and Validity of the Mobile Phone Usability Ques-
tionnaire (MPUQ). Journal of Usability Studies, 2(1), 39–53.
Sarker, S., & Wells, J. D. (2003). #dec#). Understanding Mobile Handheld Device Use and Adoption. 
Communications of the ACM, 46(12), 35–40. doi:10.1145/953460.953484
Sauro, J. (2010). A Practical Guide to Measuring Usability: 72 Answers to the Most Common Questions 
about Quantifying the Usability of Websites and Software. Denver, CO: Measuring Usability LLC.
Sauro, J. (2011a). A practical guide to the System Usability Scale (SUS): Background, benchmarks & 
best practices. Denver, CO: Measuring Usability LLC.
Sauro, J. (2011b). Measuring Usability with the System Usability Scale (SUS). Retrieved March 3, 2014, 
from Measuring Usability: http://www.measuringusability.com/sus.php
Sauro, J., & Kindlund, E. (2005). A method to standardize usability metrics into a single score. 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, (pp. 401-409). 
doi:10.1145/1054972.1055028
Sauro, J., & Lewis, J. (2012). Quantifying the user experience: Practical statistics for user research. 
Elsevier.
Shami, N., Leshed, G., & Klein, D. (2005). Context of Use Evaluation of Peripheral Displays (CUEPD). 
In M. Costabile, & F. PaternÃ2 (Eds.), Human-Computer Interaction - INTERACT 2005 (Vol. 3585, 
pp. 579-587). Springer Berlin Heidelberg. doi:10.1007/11555261_47
Singh, N., & Yadav, R. (2013). Field Testing of Mobile Applications. International Journal of Comput-
ers and Applications, 62(21), 1–7.
Tarasewich, P. (2003). #dec#). Designing Mobile Commerce Applications. Communications of the ACM, 
46(12), 57–60. doi:10.1145/953460.953489
The International Ergonomics Association (IEA). (n.d.). Retrieved March 10, 2014, from The Interna-
tional Ergonomics Association (IEA): http://www.iea.cc/about/index.html

166
System Usability Scale Implementation for Interfaces
﻿
Thomas, P., & Macredie, R. D. (2002). Introduction to the new usability. ACM Transactions on Computer-
Human Interaction, 9(2), 69–73. doi:10.1145/513665.513666
Thüring, M., & Mahlke, S. (2007). Usability, aesthetics and emotions in human–technology interaction. 
International Journal of Psychology, 42(4), 253-264. 10.1080/00207590701396674
Tractinsky, N. (2006). Aesthetics in Information Technology. Human Computer Interaction and Manage-
ment Information Systems: Foundations. Armonk, NY: ME Sharpe.
Tullis, T., & Albert, B. (2008). Measuring the User Experience, Collecting, Analyzing, and Presenting 
Usability Metrics. Morgan Kaufmann.
Tullis, T., & Stetson, J. (2004). A comparison of questionnaires for assessing website usability. Proceed-
ings of UPA 2004 Conference.
User Interface Design Gmb, H. (2014). User Interface Design GmbH. Retrieved from http://attrakdiff.
de/sience-en.html#arbeitsmodell
Väätäjä, H., Koponen, T., & Roto, V. (2009). Developing practical tools for user experience evaluation 
– a case from mobile news journalism. European Conference on Cognitive Ergonomics (ECCE ‘09) 
(pp. 240-247). ACM Press.
Vicente, K., Hayes, B., & Williges, R. (1987). Assaying and isolating individual differences in searching 
a hierarchical file system. Human Factors: The Journal of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society, 
29(3), 349–359. PMID:3623569
Yuan, Y., & Zheng, W. (2005, July). From stationary work support to mobile work support: a theoretical 
framework. Mobile Business, 2005. ICMB 2005. International Conference on, (pp. 315-321).
Ziefle, M., & Bay, S. (2008). Transgenerational Designs in Mobile Technology. In J. Lumsden (Ed.), 
Handbook of Research on User Interface Design and Evaluation for Mobile Technology (pp. 122-142). 
IGI-Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-59904-871-0.ch008
KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Evaluation: Evaluation is a process aimed to collect information in order to judge, document and 
drawing conclusions upon achievement level of individuals or products.
Learnability: A sub component of the construct of usability and denotes the ability of an interface 
to allow users to accomplish tasks on the first attempt.
Mobile Touch Screen Devices: Small dimensions devices equipped with electronic visual display that 
the user can control through simple or multi-touch gestures, lacking physical keys to support user input.
Spatial Abilities: Spatial ability generally includes the capacity to accurately perceive, represent, 
recall, generate, and transform spatial (nonverbal) information.
System Usability Scale: A questionnaire that could be used to take a quick measurement and evalu-
ations of any system or application usability perceived by its users.

167
System Usability Scale Implementation for Interfaces
﻿
Tablet PC: Hand held portable computing device with huge libraries of applications having larger 
display screen dimensions, with same functionalities as Mobile Touch Screen Device.
Usability: In the broadest sense could be defined as the capability of a product to be understood, 
learned, operated and be attractive to users when used to achieve certain goals with effectiveness and 
efficiency in specific environments.
User Experience: User experience includes usability, but also encompasses a more emotional di-
mension.

168
Copyright © 2016, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter  8
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-4666-9438-5.ch008
ABSTRACT
User centric design on mobile devices has gained tremendous attention in recent time. One of the as-
pects that is very critical to making mobile applications and interface handy is to inculcate linguistic 
approach to the outputs and design. This work examines the requirements and prospects of presenting 
location authority in linguistic form. Traditional approaches include geometric and its extension in 
the form of topological or symbolic location authority. Despite the inclusion of topological systems to 
compensate for the inadequacies of the classical geometrical approaches, the role quantitative refer-
ence plays in location authority is still extensive yet not completely in tune with the natural cognitive of 
human mind. The present work examines the imperative for linguistic approach to location authority. It 
sought to evaluate the rationale for perception based linguistic approach to location authority relative 
to landmarks or points of interest. Efforts were also made to identify the prospects as well as challenges 
in the implementation on location based devices.
LOCATION AUTHORITY
Location authority is any set of referents for location references used to describe locations for location-
based services (Shafer, 2003). Every location based system requires the representation of the location in 
effective and efficient scheme. The original approach was based on geometrical models, viz; longitude, 
latitude, and altitude, and has been employed in Global Positioning Systems (GPS) and other Global 
Navigation Satellite System (GLONASS) devices. The standards for geometrical model is developed 
Linguistic Location Authority:
An Intricate Imperative
Akeem Olowolayemo
International Islamic University Malaysia, Malaysia
Abu Osman Md Tap
International Islamic University Malaysia, Malaysia
Teddy Mantoro
USBI – Sampoerna University, Indonesia

169
Linguistic Location Authority
﻿
under the World Geodetic System versions, previous, in the series include WGS60, WGS66, WGS72, 
while the latest was based on WGS84 (Shafer, 2003). The WGS84 has remained the standard location 
authority for use in cartography, geodesy, and navigation. This is the current location authority imple-
mented on GPS enabled systems. Since its adoption, it has undergone many revisions and improvements. 
The underlying principle in geometrical approach is Euclidean. Geometrical systems, such as global 
positioning systems (GPS), designate location in coordinate form, viz; latitude, longitude and altitude. 
This has been utilized in different navigation systems mostly for outdoor environment. Generally, as 
can be obviously seen, though geometrical location authority is easier to develop and use for computers 
and easily manipulated graphically for humans, it is however deficient in conveying intrinsic meaning 
to ordinary humans (Shafer, 2003). This necessitated the idea of introducing topological referencing 
to cater especially for indoor environments where GPS systems may not be adequate. Topological on 
the other hand, can be expressed in hierarchical, descriptive or symbolic form, such as room name, in a 
particular floor, in a particular building or expressed as a displacement from some landmarks (Mantoro, 
2006). Topological systems utilize symbolic location labels to augment geometric systems or provide 
expressive location. This approach expresses location as a set of atoms in the location authority which 
are more meaningful to humans yet lack universality at present and are more complex to implement. In 
some cases, it might be added to provide names or labels to geometric location authority to facilitate 
better understanding by users. More specifically, hybrid location authority adopts or combines both ap-
proaches and it is the approach used by most powerful location authorities (Shafer, 2003).
Furthermore, topological referencing employs names of places to identify locations rather than coor-
dinate systems. Applications of topological or symbolic locations are prevalent in indoors as well as some 
outdoor spaces depending on the type of applications. Later extension to topological systems includes 
quantitative reference to landmarks, such as 20 metres to or away from a certain ‘important’ points often 
referred to as landmarks. This is due to the fact that some locations can only be referenced relative to 
a conspicuous location or landmark in its proximity. However, it is believed that numerical reference 
relative to landmark is not sufficiently human friendly. This is because generally, when responding to 
the question “where are you?”, people respond with a spatial frame in mind relative to the enquirer. The 
emphasis undertone the scale between the respondent and the questioner as well as the distance apart 
or relative to a well know location. In this viewpoint, such response is different for two people inside 
a building, indoors; or for two communicators in the same locality, or two people in places link up by 
main roads, or two people in different points in a big city or from different geographical boundaries. 
Therefore, factors such as relative sizes, point of view and so on, help determine the scale of reference 
and are crucial to understanding spatial reasoning. Hence, modelling location authority in these scales 
should be distinct as well as requires intricate efforts.
This work introduces a linguistic or qualitative reference to landmarks as an imperative, though 
complicated in implementation, to foster more meaningful location authority. The methodology employs 
perception-based linguistic approach to locations relative to landmarks to extend location authority with 
a view to making it more user-friendly. This is vital because when people respond to the question “where 
are you?” They naturally respond in linguistic labels or statements such as “I am close to Landmark A” 
rather than “I am 5m to Landmark A” etc, when topological extension is adopted. Therefore, it is argued 
that positioning and navigation systems should incorporate linguistic description of distances rather than 
the present quantitative distances, such as 5m to Landmark A to describe displacement from landmarks. 
This study underscores the relevance of computing with words (CWW) approach to model locations 
relative to landmarks to provide linguistic referencing for mobile navigation systems as an ‘interpretation’ 

170
Linguistic Location Authority
﻿
of the present quantitative metrics relative to landmarks. Location authority interval data from selected 
subjects were elicited in linguistic forms to model distances. Different scales were identified based on 
the description of space between two communicators in the illustration provided above. Specifically 
indoor environment, outdoor neighborhood environment, city, interstate as well as between geographi-
cal boundaries were categorized. Two views were also classified, viz; Gradual Egocentric and Static 
Universal Frames. In gradual egocentric perspectives, people gradually readjust distances uniformly in 
a frame depending on the distance and the new position on the distance. This implies that irrespective of 
the distance, starting distance may be seen as “far”, consequently, around middle of the path is seen as 
“close”, etc. In Static universal frames, a regular static frame is adopted for distances between a pair of 
stationary points, or between an entity and a stationary landmark. A brief description of these systems, 
scales and frames is given in the next subsections.
Geocentric Coordinates (X, Y, Z)
While there are various representations of positions on the earth surface in 2-D or 3-D, one of the com-
mon method of representing a point on earth is using geocentric coordinates (x, y, z) defining a 3D. This 
is also known as 3D Cartesian coordinates. The system has its origin at the mass-centre of the Earth with 
the X- and Y-axes in the plane of the equator (Knippers, 2009). The X-axis passes through the meridian 
of Greenwich, and the Z-axis coincides with the Earth’s axis of rotation. The three axes are mutually 
orthogonal, thereby form a right-handed system. Using geocentric coordinates a position on the surface 
of the Earth can be defined, take for example, a point P in Figure 1 (Knippers, 2009).
It should be noted that the rotational axis of the Earth changes its position over time (referred to as 
polar motion). In order to compensate for these changes, a mean position of the pole, specifically, in the 
year 1903 has been adopted to define the ‘Conventional International Origin’ (CIO). This mean position 
was based on several observations spanning from 1900 until 1905 (IERS, n.d.).
Figure 1. An illustration of the geocentric coordinate system: (a) spatial geographic coordinates (φ, λ, 
h); (b) spatial cartesian or geocentric coordinates (x, y, z)
(Knippers, 2009).

171
Linguistic Location Authority
﻿
Topological Referencing
Topological referencing has been proposed to augment geometrical location authority where the lat-
ter has been seen to be inappropriate or inadequate in describing locations in some applications. The 
underlying principle in geometrical approach is Euclidean. As can be seen from Figure 1, it is obvious 
that geometrical location authority is easier to develop and use for computers and easily manipulated 
graphically for humans, it is however deficient in conveying intrinsic meaning to ordinary humans. This 
necessitated the idea of topological referencing. Topological on the other hand, can be expressed in hier-
archical, descriptive or symbolic form, such as room name, in a particular floor, in a particular building 
or expressed as a displacement from some landmarks (Mantoro, 2006). This approach expresses location 
as a set of atoms in the location authority which are more meaningful to humans yet lack universality at 
present and are more complex to implement.
Considering a displacement from a point of interest or landmark, for instance, “I am close to location 
or landmark X”. Obviously, “close” is a fuzzy variable which can only be resolved as such, because the 
understanding despite clear to human mind is complex quantitatively. Location authority as an extension 
of the existing symbolic topological approaches might be better resolved using fuzzy approach. This is 
especially imperative in cases where users’ description and references between points of interest is the 
inclination and preference to provide a more friendly location authority.
Qualitative Spatial Reasoning
The closest concept of research to linguistic approximation of location authority or distances from 
landmarks is qualitative spatial reasoning (Clementini, Felice, & Hernández, 1997). Qualitative spatial 
reasoning is an approach that sought to represent positions and distances between two positions in quali-
tative forms, rather than in quantitative numerical forms. Consideration for linguistic approximation of 
distances and positions has not been given attention until late 90s, despite its popularity and application 
in systems that involve scalar quantities. The emergence of qualitative spatial reasoning (Cohn, 1995; 
Cohn & Renz, 2008; Hernández, Clementini, & Felice, 1995; Mossakowski & Moratz, 2012) focusing 
on the possibility of representing positional and distance information. Initial scepticism (Forbus et al, 
1991) contributed to the hesitation that greeted the idea of applying qualitative approach to distances, 
due to the doubtful nature of its possibility and applicability despite its obvious logical consistency 
with human natural understanding. However, later research effort into this approach has shown some 
promising results.
Major challenges arise as a result of understanding how best to represent objects and relationships 
between objects in linguistic form. Generally, objects are defined by topology, size, shape and relation 
to other objects – topological, orientation, and distance apart and are classified as points, line or area 
oriented (Brimicombe & Li, 2009). For convenience, it is seen necessary initially to consider objects 
that can be represented as points such that extensions in such cases can be ignored while distances apart 
are the main focus rather than spaces that delineate a location. This is primarily due to the uncertainties 
inherent in representing the boundaries of an object. Humans generally think about space in abstract 
qualitative form, organized in hierarchy, by these means capturing representation of global features and 
relations, rather than complete details of a spatial environments or numeric quantitative formats, which 
are more appropriately modelled qualitatively (Clementini et al, 1997; Hernandez, 1995; Chase and Chi, 

172
Linguistic Location Authority
﻿
1981; Hart & Moore, 1973). Positional information is broadly classified into orientation and distance 
relations to positions (Downs & Stea, 1973).
Spatial knowledge has been classified based on two perspectives. The first class considers spatial 
knowledge as route or survey knowledge while the other class identifies spatial knowledge in terms 
of egocentric, allocentric and geocentric views (Hart and Moore, 1973). Route knowledge is based 
on reference from known landmarks while survey knowledge is more of hierarchical form identifying 
the most important visited landmarks followed by others lesser ones. Egocentric, on the other hand, is 
centred on the observer or organism, where spatial reasoning depends on a number of factors such as 
relative sizes and shapes, the position of other objects, the frame of reference, and the effort required to 
get from one point to another rather than only on their absolute positions or the metric distance between 
these positions (Clementini et al., 1997). Different reasoning hinged on spatial, temporal, economic, and 
perceptual, is employed when abstractly deducing a measure of the effort needed to go from one point 
to another in terms of, respectively, metric distance, travel time, costs to be invested, spatial perception 
(Clementini et al., 1997).
In allocentric frames of reference, locations and orientations are specified in reference to features 
of a spatial environment without direct consideration for the viewer’s position, but rather relative to 
well-known reference structures. The geocentric frame is relative to a coordinated system of reference 
frames. Another point of view is the existence of multiple frames of reference, within different space 
(Lynch, 1960).
Generally, responding to the question “where are you?”, people respond with a spatial frame in mind 
relative to the questioner. Such response is different for two people inside a building, indoors; from 
people in the same locality, or places link up by main roads, to different points in a big city or from dif-
ferent geographical boundaries. Therefore, factors such as relative sizes, point of view and so on, help 
determine the scale of reference and are crucial to understanding spatial reasoning.
The field of qualitative spatial reasoning is built on qualitative physics, cognitive sciences, linguistics 
and artificial intelligence (AI). Building on insights from cognitive science, linguistics, and early AI 
approaches to the representation of spatial knowledge, and qualitative physics. Earlier work includes ap-
plication of qualitative spatial reasoning to directional orientation information (Freksa & Zimmermann, 
1992; Freksa, 1992), which was later extended to orientation, position, and distance (Canter & Tagg, 
1975; Cohn, 1996).
Later representation of relative position of objects at arbitrary angles based on four directions and 
four quadrants centred on the reference object was introduced by Mukerjee & Joe, (1990). Furthermore, 
Frank (1992) proposed qualitative spatial reasoning about distances and cardinal directions identifying 
a set of distance such as close and far and direction symbols (North, South, East, and West), including 
basic axioms as well as inverse and compose operations.
Qualitative distances and orientations models were later introduced by Jong (1994), where he identi-
fies different granularity level for distances and directions. However, the granularity level for distances 
and directions can be independently modelled, such that the number of distinctions about directions is 
not affected by the number of granularity levels in distances, and the other way round. The work by Jong 
differentiated three distinct models; the all-answer model, the likely-answer model, and the single-answer 
model, for distances and directions in qualitative reasoning. In this case, it is thought to proposed to elicit 
subjective information using three levels – the best-answer, next-likely answer, and least but probable 
answer, to model the uncertainties in the linguistic authority.

173
Linguistic Location Authority
﻿
Applications of Fuzzy Logic to Qualitative Reasoning in Spatial Analysis
Initial applications of fuzzy logic to qualitative reasoning in spatial analysis have been proposed by 
several authors. Of particular relevance, the works of Dutta (1991), Altman (1994) and Jorge & Vaida 
(1996) have proposed the use of linguistic variables as an alternative to model spatial information directly 
or to augment available qualitative frameworks. Linguistic variables represent quantitative variables in 
qualitative forms. Thereby making it possible to characterize qualitative representation by “making only 
as many distinctions as necessary” since “linguistic characterizations are, in general, less specific than 
numerical ones” (Zadeh, 1973).
In addressing a situation of imprecise, incomplete or possibly conflicting information about some 
given objects, which is the main purpose of fuzzy systems (Zadeh, 1976), Dutta, (1991) proposed spatial 
constraints that address differences between position and motion models. He proposes a classification 
of position spatial constraints into propositional or qualitative approach using natural language, metri-
cal or range constraints classified using quantitative model represented in fuzzy triangular membership 
forms, this approach quantitatively specified range and visual constraints or graphically depicting a 
fuzzy area where an object is located. These constraints are then transformed into appropriate possibility 
distribution, represented in two-dimensional on the X and Y axes, which are generally approximated by 
triangular membership function in fuzzy numbers format (mean value, left spread, right spread). Finally, 
a spatial reasoning representation is obtained by aggregation of the joint possibility distributions using 
compositional rule of inference proposed by Freksa & Zimmermann (1992).
In the work of Altman (1994) which focused more specifically on GIS, fuzzy approaches were used 
to depict regions to model the relative concentration of some particular feature attribute at a particular 
location. The approach proposed treatment for imprecise data (e.g., near) and “hard” data (e.g., less than 
5km) and a way to appropriately convert from the former to the latter. Distance and directional metrics 
were formulated including their respective analysis and treatment methods. It proposed a different per-
spective to understanding distance between two fuzzy regions as a fuzzy set developed from distances 
between elements in the Cartesian product of the two sets, and whose membership is the minimum 
membership of each element pair in the product is not scalar unlike other approaches. The uncertainty 
in this case is primarily from the spatial boundaries of the regions not focused on the fuzziness in the 
position of objects in the region.
Later an approach based on fuzzy relational path algebra or semirings was introduced by Jorge & 
Vaida (1996). This approach extends qualitative distance and direction functions that were first proposed 
by Frank (1992). The semirings approach was intended to model fuzzy set theory and the relational 
algebras similar to those proposed by Frank (1992) and Smith & Park (1992). Despite well intentioned, 
the use of fuzzy approaches, that is, type-1 fuzzy logic, which results in a single number, does not com-
pletely depict the contextual information that it is intended to encode. This generally limits the ability 
to adequately articulate the reasoning result of the defuzzification process. As a result, efforts to address 
this shortcoming have been proposed by authors such as Clementini et al., (1997). In particular, they 
proposed a two-dimensional qualitative positional information representation framework which tries to 
present selective inclusion of distinction depending on its relevance in a particular context being mod-
eled which was intended to allow for a more flexible framework that addresses the various levels of 
granularity and scales of reasoning.

174
Linguistic Location Authority
﻿
Landmark-Based Location Authority
The use of landmarks as reference points for localisation and navigation have been utilised extensively 
in the field of robot localisation and navigations. In systems that use this approach, landmarks are placed 
as references to compute the location of the robot. Landmarks in this regard, are features or objects in 
the environment that a robot can detect. It is possible to analyse a robot’s sensor readings to determine 
and locate the existence of various landmarks in the particular environment. Given the positions of 
known landmarks, the positions of a mobile robot can be estimated using this information. Based on 
landmarks detected in the environment, a history database of information is used for location matching 
in the environment to localise the robot.
Landmarks for localisation can generally be considered to be artificial or natural (Baptista, 2012; 
Goldberg et al., 2005). Artificial landmarks are objects or sensors situated in the vicinity of the robots 
environment that provide sensor readings such as beacons or bar-codes. Natural landmarks are features 
that forms part of the target environment. They constitute objects available in the robots environments 
detected by vision systems to localised the robot or designate its pathways. Using landmark-based lo-
calisation offers a simple approach to determination of robot localisation, and has been likened to human 
navigational abilities. These factors account for the popularity of this approach as one of the most widely 
used localisation system and have been applied extensively in grid-based, or geometrical systems, as 
well as topological frameworks. Other areas of application of landmark-based localisation where natural 
or artificial landmarks have been applied include landmark maps.
Landmarks can also be categorised into active and passive landmarks. In robotics, active landmarks, 
which are also referred to beacons, are landmarks that have the capability to relay out positional infor-
mation to the robot and the environment due to the availability of sensors. In such instances, a robot can 
sense the positional information sent out by the active landmark and employ that to estimate its posi-
tion. Passive landmarks on the other hand do not relay signals to robot. In this situation, the robot has to 
actively search for these landmarks in its paths to obtain information needed for position measurements. 
To achieve this, a prior modelling of the environment is required. However, such models are not likely 
to be accurate or complete.
Perception-Based Localisation
As can be noticed from the approaches in the preceding section, there is inherent vagueness or uncertainty 
in the use of landmarks for robot localization. In the process of navigation, a robot perceives landmarks 
and uses these sets of landmarks to establish its own locations. Therefore, for every point during navi-
gation, the robot perceives a belief about its own positions as well as directions at every instance. At 
every point, the robot’s belief about its positional information is inherently complex and may not be 
represented in crisp form, but rather as a fuzzy set encompassing the sets of all likely locations with 
each of the locations having membership degree which corresponds to the likelihood of being the actual 
location. Taking a cue from this, human navigation is similar in some respect though different in that 
the perception here is natural rather than in the case of robot where physical means such as sensors are 
employed. In human navigations, landmarks are “any features of the environment which are relatively 
stable and conspicuous” (Dillon et al, 1993).
Navigations generally have been said to be in four levels of representation based on psychology. 
These levels of cognitive maps are schemata, landmarks, routes and surveys (Dillon et al, 1990, 1991; 

175
Linguistic Location Authority
﻿
McKnight et al, 1990). The work of Tolman (1948) suggests that the human mind functions in the form 
of a cognitive map by internalising the analogue of the physical layout of the environment “worked over 
and elaborated… into a tentative cognitive-like map of the environment indicating routes and paths and 
environmental relationships” (Tolman, 1948).
The human mind scans through a new environment in exploratory manner noting the landmarks, 
the routes and survey knowledge of the environment until a familiar cognition is formed. Landmark 
knowledge provides the primary skeletal framework that cognitive maps are built in human mind. Route 
knowledge on the other hand is the knowledge required to navigate from one point in a path to another, 
using landmark knowledge of the environment to navigate between those points until a destination is 
reached. It is also the knowledge that makes it possible to provide route directions to others not familiar 
with the environment, or someone who which to locate a point in the environment.
From the foregoing, it is clear that landmark knowledge is crucial to navigation and that navigation 
in human, robots, etc. are based on the use of landmarks to gain a better understanding of how to move 
from one point to another within their environment. Evidence from the above underscores the importance 
of landmarks to navigation in animate and inanimate objects. Present systems implemented on naviga-
tion devices describe distances from landmarks in crisp quantitative terms. This is adequate for robots 
and machines, in spite of the uncertainties in the computations of their locations. However, to human 
mind, the precise quantitative distance do not really count but rather a linguistic abstraction of such 
quantitative terms is internalised and articulated by humans. When localisation gadgets displays location 
information such as “move a distance of 35m, then turn to the left”, the user do not actually reckon with 
the ‘precise’ quantitative distance “35m”. What human mind does is to linguistically approximate the 
distance to something like “move a little bit further, then turn to the left”. In describing distances from 
a landmark, people will normally say “close to” rather than “2 metres to”, for example. The question 
therefore is why not present the distance information in linguistic form rather than in quantitative form 
since this has the prospects of being more user-friendly?
However, despite the potentials of expressing distance information in linguistic form, it is not un-
ambiguous. This is because there are a number of factors that affects perception of distance. These 
factors include perspectives and circumstance, especially that which accounting for the effort required 
to transverse the distance such as spatial (metric distance), temporal (travel time), economic (cost to be 
invested) and perpetual (spatial perception) (Clementini et al., 1997).
Owing to the aforementioned, in an attempt to present distances from landmarks in linguistic form, 
there is the need for a painstaking approach to gain insight into the best way to model distances taking 
into consideration the factors highlighted.
Two probable approaches to perception based linguistic location authority are discussed in the sub-
sequent subsections.
Static Universal and Gradual Egocentric Frames
With respect to the cognitive processing of spatial information, work such Barkowsky, (2002) identified 
four characteristics of spatial knowledge representations stated thus:
… (1) geographic knowledge representations in the human mind are constructed on demand, that (2) this 
construction is based on underdetermined knowledge from long-term memory, that (3) this knowledge 

176
Linguistic Location Authority
﻿
is stored in a fragmentary, hierarchically structured form, and that (4) the resulting representation in 
working memory is a visual mental image.
From the foregoing, linguistic perception frames can be classified into two, viz; the Gradual Egocen-
tric and the Static Universal Frames. The gradual egocentric frame of reference is proposed especially 
for outdoor or cross country location references relative to landmarks or points of interests. The general 
notion of gradual gradation hinges on the fact that people gradually readjust distances uniformly in a 
frame depending on the distance and the new position on the distance. For instance, if the distance at 
the starting point to a point of interest is say for example 20km, the user’s articulation will likely be 
“intermediate” or “close”, once he is near the middle of the journey. There is a general premonition that 
the starting point is the “very far” or at least “far”. The initial distance notwithstanding, the perception is 
similar whether the distance is 100km or 10km. The gradual gradation is relative to changing positions 
on well predetermined starting and ending points. The new positions are often compared to the initial 
stating distance between the starting points. This perception is also subtly present in indoor environment. 
However, some of the distances to points of interests in indoor environment can be better linguistically 
summarised into identifiable linguistic terms using a combination of the allocentric and geocentric frames 
of reference. This is also applicable to non-well-defined starting and ending points, such as changing 
points or landmarks in outdoor environments. These other sets of references are more appropriate for 
localisation of an entity relative to several landmarks in a location-based services. Consider the scenario 
in Figure 2, the mobile entity at the centre can be perceived as ‘close’ to Landmarks #1, #2, and #4 us-
ing the Static Universal Frame. Similarly, Landmark 3 may be perceived as ‘intermediate’ to Landmark 
#3. Now, suppose the mobile entity moves in the direction of Landmark #3, up to midpoint between 
its original position and Landmark #3, then the articulation of the new distance from the Landmark is 
readjusted in comparison with the initial position using the Gradual Egocentric as well as some subtle 
Static Universal Frame.
Figure 2. An illustration of the Gradual Egocentric and Static Universal Frames

177
Linguistic Location Authority
﻿
THE RATIONALE FOR LINGUISTIC LOCATION AUTHORITY
Location in the context-awareness application needs the modelling of the physical environment and the 
representation of the location (Harter & Hopper, 1994; Schmidt, Beigl & Gellersen, 1999). An effec-
tive and efficient location representation method is required to successfully implement this. Classical 
approaches use geometric and topological (Jiang & Steenkiste, 2002; Shafer, 2003). Later extension 
included quantitative reference to landmarks, such as 20m to a landmark (Mantoro, 2006). Furthermore, 
location authority or positioning referencing can broadly be divided into geometric or coordinate system 
based on satellite communications, and symbolic or topological referencing, for places where global 
navigation satellite system (GLONAS) may not be feasible, and especially when user-friendliness is key. 
Present navigation systems present distance information in quantitative terms, which can be regarded 
as not completely friendly. This is because when people respond to the question “where are you?” They 
naturally respond in linguistic labels or statements such as “I am close to Lab A” rather than “I am 5m to 
Lab A” etc. Therefore, it is argued that positioning and navigation systems should incorporate linguistic 
description of distances rather than the present quantitative distances, such as 5m to Road A.
As is it is presently obtained in positioning gadgets such as GPS devices often used for positioning 
references, navigation, and location updates in location aware applications, present outputs in coordinates 
and numerical forms, such as 20m from/to a point of interest or landmark. However, to human mind, 
the 20m is reprocessed into some linguistic variables such as almost there, close or far, etc. This implies 
that human mind does not measure precisely or cannot “reckon” the 20m in crisp measurement; it just 
imagines it and linguistically approximates such distances. Hence, the pertinent question is “why can’t 
the outputs from GPS and other devices be provided in linguistic forms that are more appropriate and 
realistic to humans, while at the same time not enforcing unrealistic standards in such approximations. 
In the case of distances from landmarks, the idea therefore, is to provide linguistic representation of 
distance approximations between a user and other entities, such as facilities of interest and landmarks, 
in location-aware system for indoor space. It is therefore strongly considered that users understanding of 
distance approximation in linguistic form would be more appropriate and better simplify distances for 
location authority. The main requirement in this regard is to understudy the general ways of language 
references used by people to approximate distances in linguistic form.
APPROACHES TO LINGUISTIC LOCATION AUTHORITY
However, Location Authority standardization is a challenging yet continuous process. Users refer to 
location with references to landmarks, such as “the office behind the main stairwell”, more than “I am 
on latitude and longitude so, so and so”, which are rather complex (Shafer, 2003). Therefore, an ap-
proach that could simplify this complexity and make conveying locations more meaningful especially 
with inexactness and imprecision is imperative, thereby making location authority more user friendly. 
Fuzzy logic proposed by Zadeh, (1965), an extension and as opposed to classical crisp logic of “Yes” or 
“No”, “True” or “False” or binary 1 or 0, allows intermediate truth values between 0 and 1. Using Lin-
guistic variables “variables whose values are not numbers but words or sentences in a natural or artificial 
language”(Zadeh, 1973), based on fuzzy logic, allows variability of instances such as full, high, near 
etc to be accommodated instead of the classical crisp values. Zadeh (1999) proposed the computation 
involving inexactness and imprecision referred to as Computing with Words. This approach is suitable 

178
Linguistic Location Authority
﻿
for computing in which there is inherent complexity in dealing with imprecise information (Mendel et 
al., 2010).
Location authority in indoor space using topological approach in which users’ description and natural 
references is the inclination and preference to provide a more friendly location authority would be better 
resolved using fuzzy Computing with Words, a system which
… greatly enhances the capability of computational methodologies to deal with imperfect information, 
that is, information which in one or more respects is imprecise, uncertain, incomplete, unreliable, vague 
or partially true (Zadeh, 2009).
This approach is proposed in this research with the conviction that it is well in tune with human 
cognition.
THE PERCEPTION-BASED APPROACH TO LINGUISTIC LOCATION AUTHORITY
It should be recognised however that there is inherent complexity in representing distance based on hu-
man perception. This indicates that there is the need to address the uncertainty that arise in modelling 
distances in this form. Sources of uncertainty in distance approximation include consideration for dif-
ferent scales (Clementini, et al, 1997; Hernández, et al, 1995) and the size of the space such as within 
indoors, outdoor, a suburb, highway distance, distances between cities, from a given country. What is an 
agreeable close or far etc in each scale, and especially in indoors utilising the appropriate frame? What 
variations is allowed among the linguistic values, taking into consideration the overlap between such 
linguistic values, for example, very close and close, between close and intermediate or between interme-
diate and far or between far and very far? The accuracies of the positioning devices or the localization 
algorithms, uncertain boundaries of places as well as unequal spaces within places of reference which 
makes it complex to actually determine the starting and ending points in any two places under consid-
eration and the precise distances between any two points. The aforementioned and many more calls for 
an appraisal of how linguistic approximation or qualitative distance representation can be implemented 
in handheld mobile localization devices in effective and efficient way.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTIONS
This work proposes a linguistic or qualitative location authority relative to landmarks as an improvement 
for more meaningful location authority. The perception-based linguistic approach to distances has been 
explored to give a background of emerging process to extend location authority in order to make loca-
tion authority more user-friendly. This is considered reasonable due to the natural way people respond 
to location references questions. Often, people employ linguistic labels or statements instead of direct 
quantitative terms of the distances between them to landmarks in the vicinity. Present positioning gadgets 
present location references in quantitative distances hat positioning and navigation systems should incor-
porate linguistic description of distances which is not completely in tune with human cognitive capability.
The relevance of computing with words (CWW) approach to model linguistic referencing for mobile 
navigation systems relative to landmarks to implement a perception of the present quantitative metrics 

179
Linguistic Location Authority
﻿
relative to landmarks is given prominence in this work. An approach such as eliciting location authority 
interval data from subjects is considered worthwhile to model distances in linguistic forms (Olowolay-
emo, Md Tap, & Mantoro, 2014). It was also considered imperative to differentiate scales between 
two communicators. It is noteworthy that a distance of 40 metres may be ‘intermediate/medium’ in an 
indoor environment, but a 40 metres distance in an outdoor neighborhood environment may be consid-
ered as ‘very close’. Therefore, a linguistic label such as ‘close’ will have different quantitative range in 
different environment. The scales identified include indoor, outdoor, city, interstate as well as beyond 
geographical boundaries.
Furthermore, space perception is also dependent on spatial frames. Two spatial frames were proposed. 
The two frames considered appropriate are the Static Universal and Gradual Egocentric Frames. Static 
universal frame considers the static distance between two points of interest in a general regular frame 
for distances between a pair of stationary points, or between an entity and a stationary landmark. In 
gradual egocentric perspectives on the other hand, people gradually readjust distances uniformly in a 
frame depending on the distance and the new position on the distance. This implies that irrespective of 
the distance, the starting distance is often seen as “far”, consequently, around middle of the path is seen 
as “close”, and the perception continues gradually until ‘I am almost there’ and ‘I am there’ are used.
The thought presented in this chapter opens a number of promising areas to be exploited for future 
opportunities in location authority for location-based services. Regarding the perception based linguistic 
location authority from landmarks, the first most pertinent work is to evaluate how best to implement 
these systems for all the scales cited such as indoor, outdoor environments, intra and intercity as well 
as beyond a geographical boundary if these approaches would become universal on GPS devices and 
other similar systems.
A further work also vitally important is the need to collate and re-evaluate all distance code words 
used by people and attempt to determine their intervals using this approach to generate a complete com-
puting with words (CWW) code words for distances. It is believed that a comprehensive exploration of 
the words will enable adequate user friendly choices to be relayed to users of the systems.
Extensive evaluation of the approaches highlighted is imperative to understand how best these 
models can be implemented. Gradual gradation utilising egocentric frame are clearly needed to model 
distances from landmarks where the starting and ending points are determined aforehand and one of the 
target points is mobile. For indoor environment, geocentric and allocentric frames should be explored 
to provide linguistic summarisation.
REFERENCES
Altman, D. (1994). Fuzzy set theoretic approaches for handling imprecision in spatial analysis. Interna-
tional Journal of Geographical Information Systems, 8(3), 271–289. doi:10.1080/02693799408902000
Baptista, C. (2012). Barcode-based Localization of Low Capability Mobile Robots in Structured Envi-
ronments Master in Electrical and Computer Engineering Juri Committee. Instituto Superior Tecnico, 
Universidade Tecnica de Lisboa.
Brimicombe, A. J., & Li, C. (2009). Location-Based Services and Geo-Information Engineering. Chich-
ester: Wiley.

180
Linguistic Location Authority
﻿
Canter, D., & Tagg, S. K. (1975). Distance estimation in cities. Environment and Behavior, 7(1), 59–80. 
doi:10.1177/001391657500700102
Clementini, E., Di Felice, P., & Hernández, D. (1997). Qualitative representation of positional informa-
tion. Artificial Intelligence, 95(2), 317–356. doi:10.1016/S0004-3702(97)00046-5
Cohn, A. G. (1995). The challenge of qualitative spatial reasoning. ACM Comput. Surv., 27(3), 323–325. 
doi:10.1145/212094.212112
Cohn, A. G., & Renz, J. (2008). Article. Qualitative Spatial Representation and Reasoning, 6526(7), 
551–596. doi:10.1016/S1574-6526(07)03013-1
Dillon, A., Mcknight, C., & Richardson, J. (1993). Space - the Final Chapter or Why Physical Repre-
sentations are not Semantic Intentions. In A. Dillon, C. Mcknight, & J. Richardson (Eds.), Hypertext: 
A psychological Perspective. Chicago: Ellis Horwood.
Dillon, A., Richardson, J., & McKnight, C. (1990). Navigation in hypertext: a critical review of the 
concept. In D. Diaper, D. Gilmore, G. Cockton, & B. Shackel (Eds.), Human-Computer Interaction-
INTERACT’90 (pp. 587–592). North Holland: Amsterdam: North Holland.
Dillon, A., Richardson, J., & McKnight, C. (1991). Institutionalising human factors in the design process: 
the ADONIS experience. In Contemporary Ergonomics ’91 (pp. 421–426). London: Taylor and Francis.
Downs, R. M., & Stea, D. (1973). In R. M. Downs & D. Stea (Eds.), Image and Environment: Cognitive 
Mapping and Spatial Behavior (pp. 8–26). Chicago: Aldine Press.
Dutta, S. (1991). Approximate spatial reasoning: Integrating qualitative and quantitative constraints. 
International Journal of Approximate Reasoning, 5(3), 307–330. doi:10.1016/0888-613X(91)90015-E
Forbus, K., Nielsen, P., & Faltings, B. (1991). Qualitative Spatial Reasoning: The CLOCK Project. 
Artificial Intelligence, 51(1-3), 1–3. doi:10.1016/0004-3702(91)90116-2
Frank, A. U. (1992). Qualitative spatial reasoning about distances and directions in geographic space. 
Journal of Visual Languages and Computing, 3(4), 343–371. doi:10.1016/1045-926X(92)90007-9
Freksa, C. (1992). Using orientation information for qualitative spatial reasoning. In A. U. Frank, I. 
Campari, & U. Formentini (Eds.), Theories and Methods of Spatio-Temporal Reasoning in Geographic 
Space SE - 10 (Vol. 639, pp. 162–178). Springer Berlin Heidelberg; doi:10.1007/3-540-55966-3_10
Freksa, C., & Zimmermann, K. (1992). On the utilization of spatial structures for cognitively plausible and 
efficient reasoning. In IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man and Cybernetics (pp. 261–266). 
doi:10.1109/ICSMC.1992.271766
Goldberg, A. V., Harrelson, C., Kaplan, H., & Werneck, R. F. (2005). Reach for A*: Efficient Point-to-
Point Shortest Path Algorithms. ALENEX, 6(2), 129–143.
Gottsegen, J., Montello, D., & Goodchild, M. F. (1999). A comprehensive model of uncertainty in spatial 
data. In Spatial accuracy assessment: Land information uncertainty in natural resources (pp. 175–181).
Hart, R. A., & Moore, G. T. (1973). The development of spatial cognition: A review. In B. Stea & R. 
Downs (Eds.), Image and Environment, Chicago (pp. 226–234). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

181
Linguistic Location Authority
﻿
Harter, A., & Hopper, A. (1994). A distributed location system for the active office, 62–70.
Hernández, D., Clementini, E., & Di Felice, P. (1995). Qualitative distances. In A. Frank & W. Kuhn 
(Eds.), Spatial Information Theory A Theoretical Basis for GIS SE - 4 (Vol. 988, pp. 45–57). Springer 
Berlin Heidelberg; doi:10.1007/3-540-60392-1_4
International Earth Rotation and Reference Systems Service. (n.d.). Polar motion. Federal Agency for 
Cartography and Geodesy. Retrieved from http://www.iers.org/IERS/EN/Science/EarthRotation/Polar-
Motion.html.
Jiang, C., & Steenkiste, P. (2002). A Hybrid Location Model with a Computable Location Identifier for 
Ubiquitous Computing. In Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Ubiquitous Computing 
(pp. 246–263). London: Springer-Verlag. doi:10.1007/3-540-45809-3_20
Jong, J. H. (1994). Qualitative reasoning about distances and directions in geographic space. University 
of Maine.
Jorge, J., & Vaida, D. (1996). A fuzzy relational path algebra for distances and directions. In Proceedings 
of the ECAI-96 Workshop on Representation and Processing of Spatial Expressions. Budapest, Hungary.
Knippers, R. (2009). Coordinate systems. Retrieved from http://kartoweb.itc.nl/geometrics/coordinate 
systems/coordsys.html
Lynch, K. (1960). The Image of the City. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Mantoro, T. (2006). Distributed Support for Intelligent Environments. The Australian National University.
McKnight, C., Dillon, A., & Richardson, J. (1990). A comparison of linear and hypertext formats in 
information retrieval. In R. McAleese & C. Green (Eds.), HYPERTEXT: State of the Art (pp. 10–19). 
Oxford: Intellect.
Mossakowski, T., & Moratz, R. (2012). Qualitative reasoning about relative direction of oriented points. 
Artificial Intelligence, 180–181(0), 34–45. doi:10.1016/j.artint.2011.10.003
Mukerjee, A., & Joe, G. (1990). A qualitative model for space. In The American Association for Artifi-
cial Intelligence (AAAI) Proceedings of the Eighth National Conference on Artificial Intelligence (pp. 
721–727).
Olowolayemo, A., Md Tap, A. O., & Mantoro, T. (2014). Linguistic Approximations of Distances for 
Indoor Location Authority. In Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on ICT4M. Sarawak. 
doi:10.1109/ICT4M.2014.7020644
Schmidt, A., Beigl, M., & Gellersen, H.-W. (1999). There is more to context than location. Computers 
& Graphics, 23(6), 893–901. doi:10.1016/S0097-8493(99)00120-X
Shafer, S. A. N. (2003). Location Authorities for Ubiquitous Computing. In Workshop on Location-Aware 
Computing, Ubicomp’03 (pp. pp. 13–15). Seattle.
Smith, T. R., & Park, K. K. (1992). Algebraic approach to spatial reasoning. International Journal of 
Geographical Information Systems, 6(3), 177–192. doi:10.1080/02693799208901904

182
Linguistic Location Authority
﻿
Tolman, E. C. (1948). Cognitive maps in rats and men. In R. M. Downs & D. Stea (Eds.), Image and 
Environment, Cognitive mapping and spatial behaviour. Chicago: Edward Arnold. doi:10.1037/h0061626
Zadeh, L. (1973). Outline of a New Approach to the Analysis of Complex Systems and Decision 
Processes. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, SMC-3(1), 28–44. doi:10.1109/
TSMC.1973.5408575
Zadeh, L. A. (1965). Fuzzy sets. Information and Control, 8(3), 338–353. doi:10.1016/S0019-
9958(65)90241-X
Zadeh, L. A. (1976). The Linguistic Approach and Its Application to Decision Analysis. In Y. C. Ho & 
S. K. Mitter (Eds.), Directions in Large-Scale Systems SE - 20 (pp. 339–370). Springer. doi:10.1007/978-
1-4684-2259-7_20
Zadeh, L. A. (1999). From computing with numbers to computing with words. From manipulation of 
measurements to manipulation of perceptions. Circuits and Systems I: Fundamental Theory and Ap-
plications. IEEE Transactions on. doi:10.1109/81.739259
Zadeh, L. A. (2009). Toward extended fuzzy logic–A first step. Fuzzy Sets and Systems, 160(21), 
3175–3181. doi:10.1016/j.fss.2009.04.009
ADDITIONAL READING
Brimicombe, A. J., & Li, C. (2009). Location-Based Services and Geo-Information Engineering. Chich-
ester: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Clementini, E., Di Felice, P., & Hernández, D. (1997). Qualitative representation of positional informa-
tion. Artificial Intelligence, 95(2), 317–356. doi:10.1016/S0004-3702(97)00046-5
Cohn, A. G. (1995). The challenge of qualitative spatial reasoning. ACM Comput. Surv., 27(3), 323–325. 
doi:DOI=10.1145/212094.212112
Cohn, A. G., & Renz, J. (2008)... Qualitative Spatial Representation and Reasoning, 6526(07), 551–596. 
doi:10.1016/S1574-6526(07)03013-1

183
Linguistic Location Authority
﻿
Dillon, A., Mcknight, C., & Richardson, J. (1993). Space - the Final Chapter or Why Physical Repre-
sentations are not Semantic Intentions. In A. Dillon, C. Mcknight, & J. Richardson (Eds.), Hypertext: 
A psychological Perspective. Chicago: Ellis Horwood.
Downs, R. M., & Stea, D. (1973). In R. M. Downs & D. Stea (Eds.), Image and Environment: Cognitive 
Mapping and Spatial Behavior (pp. 8–26). Chicago: Aldine Press.
Mendel, J. M. (1999). Computing with words, when words can mean different things to different people. 
Rochester, NY: Proc. 3rd Int. ICSC Symp. Fuzzy Logic Appl.
Mendel, J. M. (2003). Fuzzy sets for words: a new beginning. The 12th IEEE International Conference 
on Fuzzy Systems, 2003. FUZZ ’03., 1.
Mendel, J. M. (2007). Computing with words and its relationships with fuzzistics. Information Sciences, 
177(4), 988–1006. doi:10.1016/j.ins.2006.06.008
Mendel, J. M., & Wu, D. (2010). Perceptual Computing: Aiding People in Making Subjective Judgments. 
Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-IEEE Press. doi:10.1002/9780470599655
KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Allocentric Frames: Frames of reference specified in reference to features of a spatial environment 
without direct consideration for the viewer’s position, but rather relative to well-known reference structures.
Egocentric Frames: A frame centred on the observer or organism, where spatial reasoning depends 
on a number of factors such as relative sizes and shapes, the position of other objects, the frame of refer-
ence, and the effort required to get from one point to another rather than only on their absolute positions 
or the metric distance between these positions (Clementini et al., 1997).
Geocentric Frame: A frame of reference that is relative to a coordinated system of reference frames.
Landmarks: “Any features of the environment which are relatively stable and conspicuous” (Dillon 
et al., 1993). Landmarks can be natural or artificial.
Location Authority: Any set of referents for location references used to describe locations for 
location-based services (Shafer, 2003). Often expressed in the form of geometrical, topological/symbolic 
or hybrid schemes.
Location-Based Services: Any application services that exploit the position of a mobile terminal 
or other entities.

184
Copyright © 2016, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter  9
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-4666-9438-5.ch009
ABSTRACT
Attendance management for educational institutions is very important; it gives clear picture of students 
who regularly attend classes. Participating in academic activities such as lectures, laboratory experi-
ments by students affects their academic performance. However, the conventional way of attendance 
registration is time consuming and prone to proxy attendance. The process involves the lecturer pass-
ing a paper to the students in a class to write their names and sign, or find their names in the paper to 
sign along their names. Several technologies like Biometric, RFID, NFC, etc can be used to simplify 
and improve the attendance system, since user identification is the most important aspect that needs to 
be handled cautiously in this type of applications. In this work we propose a smart attendance system 
using NFC that will simplify the attendance process, by simply touching a poster or the lecturer’s NFC 
based mobile device in the class.
INTRODUCTION
Attendance management for educational institutions is very important; it gives the lecturer as well 
as the management clear picture of students who regularly attend classes. Participating in academic 
activities such as lectures, laboratory experiments by students affects their academic performance 
(Newman‐Ford, Fitzgibbon, Lloyd, & Thomas, 2008). It became necessary to monitor the attendance 
Managing Students’ 
Attendance using NFC-
Enabled Mobile Phones
Media Anugerah Ayu
USBI – Sampoerna University, Indonesia
Barroon Ismaeel Ahmad
International Islamic University Malaysia, Malaysia
Teddy Mantoro
USBI – Sampoerna University, Indonesia

185
Managing Students’ Attendance using NFC-Enabled Mobile Phones
﻿
of students in institutions where attendance is part of continuous assessment or requirement for writing 
the final exam. However, the conventional way of attendance registration is time consuming and prone 
to proxy attendance. The process involves the lecturer passing a paper to the students in a class to write 
their names and sign, or find their names in the paper to sign along their names. In this situation some 
students may deceive the lecturer by signing attendance for their friends who are not present in the class. 
Another way which is more difficult and time consuming is the lecturer calling names from the list of 
the students that are enrolled into the course, and mark present for each and every student who is in the 
class. Suppose you have a class with 100+ students, how many minutes from the time allocated to that 
class will be wasted? Another difficult task associated with this traditional method is arrangement and 
computation of the attendance record. These are some of the challenges that call for an improvement in 
the conventional attendance process. Several technologies like Biometric, RFID, NFC, etc can be used 
to simplify and improve the attendance system, since user identification is the most important aspect that 
needs to be handled cautiously in this type of applications. In this work we propose a smart attendance 
system using NFC that will simplify the attendance process, by simply touching a poster or the lecturer’s 
NFC based mobile device in the class.
NFC TECHNOLOGY
NFC is a new, short range, high frequency, low bandwidth, and wireless communication technology. 
NFC communication is activated by touching two NFC enabled devices together, or bringing them into 
close range. The range is usually within 10cm, and it operates at the frequency of 13.56 MHz. The data 
transfer rate is 106, 212, or 424kbit/s. NFC is based on Radio frequency Identification (RFID) thus its 
communication involves initiator and a target, the initiator actively generates a Radio Frequency (RF) 
field that can be used as a signal to power a passive target. The initiator (active) has its own internal 
power that can be used to power the ICs that generate the outgoing signal; while the target (passive) 
has only ICs with no internal power, which makes it to be in different forms like tags, stickers or cards 
(Coskun, Ok, & Ozdenizci, 2011).
NFC support three modes of operation in order to exchange information between NFC devices/tags, 
they are: reader/writer mode, card emulation mode, and peer to peer mode. Reader/writer mode allows 
one way transmission of data between active and passive devices. In this case the active devices like 
smartphone either read data from or write to passive devices such as tags or stickers. Peer-to-peer mode 
on the other hand allows the exchange of information between two NFC-enabled devices. Here any of 
the devices can be active or passive depending on the operation. When a device is sending information it 
becomes active while when it is receiving then it changes to passive state. Card emulation mode allows 
the NFC device to act as a contactless card which can be read using NFC reader device (“Near Field 
Communication,” n.d.). This makes the NFC device to serve as a credit card, ticket, identification card, 
etc. One popular application of NFC is Smart Poster. The concept of Smart Poster is to keep information 
like URL, phone number, SMS into a tag and attached the tag to a physical object. This information can 
be accessed by touching the tag with NFC enabled device. (Smart Poster References) The Smart Poster 
has some actions that can initiate phone call, launch URL, or send SMS. In our proposed system two 
modes of operation will be used: Reader/writer mode (like smart poster) and Peer-to-Peer mode (like 
android beam). Another popular application of NFC is in financial transaction where it serves as a credit 
card. Other applications include reading and managing health care data, changing phone settings, ac-

186
Managing Students’ Attendance using NFC-Enabled Mobile Phones
﻿
cess control, user identification, transfer of personal and private information, etc. NFC forum pictorially 
show some of the applications of NFC in Figure 1. NFC forum is a non-profit association formed by 
NXP Semiconductors, Sony and Nokia in 2004 that deal with developing NFC specifications, promoting 
implementation and creating awareness about NFC (NFC Forum, 2007)
We consider using close range communication technology to implement the attendance system, 
since with close range students must be physically present in the class before they register their pres-
ence. NFC was chosen from the available close range technologies because it is easy to connect and use, 
it also requires no configuration before connection. Implementing NFC based systems is cheap since 
many devices like smartphones are NFC enabled, hence no extra device is required. Table 1 presents 
the comparison of NFC with other similar technologies (Suparta, 2012).
NFC devices and tags are categorised into active or passive. Active are those that can send and 
receive information to/from other devices and tags, they can also communicate with other active or pas-
sive devices. They have the ability to generate their own power in order to carryout the transmission. 
Figure 1. NFC applications (“NFC in Action,” n.d.).
Table 1. Comparison of NFC with other similar technologies
NFC
RFID
IrDA
Bluetooth
Setup time
< 0.1 ms
< 0.1 ms
~0.5sec
~6 sec
Range
Up to 10 cm
Up to 3m
Up to 5m
Up to 30m
Usability
Human centric, easy, 
intuitive, fast
Item centric, easy
Data centric, easy
Data centric, medium
Selectivity
High, given, security
Partly given
Line of sight
Who are you?
Use cases
Pay, get access, share, 
initiate service, easy 
set up
Item tracking
Control and exchange 
data
Network for data 
exchange, 
headset
Consumer experience
Touch, wave and simply 
connect
Get information
Easy
Configuration needed

187
Managing Students’ Attendance using NFC-Enabled Mobile Phones
﻿
Smartphone is an example of active devices that can not only send and receive information but modi-
fies it in addition. Passive on the other hand can only send information to active device when using the 
power generated from the active devices. Unlike active devices that can communicate with either active 
or passive, passive devices can only communicate with active devices. Passive devices include tags, 
stickers, wristbands, cards, etc. For instance, consider sign on a wall or an advertisement where people 
touch to read information using their smartphone. Since passive devices do not need their own power 
source, this makes them suitable for smart posters.
NFC tag is a module that contains small microchips for information storage. Different types of tags 
exist, which determine the volume of information that can be stored and the type of operation that can 
be performed on the tag. Five types of tag were defined; four by NFC forum and 1 by NXP as described 
in Table 2 (“NFC Tag Types,” 2011; “NFC Tags,” n.d.).
Similarly, NFC forum defined a common data exchange format known as NFC Data Exchange 
Format (NDEF). This format can be used to store various items like URL, telephone number, MIME 
type objects, etc. NDEF data is encapsulated into NDEF message (represented by a class NdefMessage) 
which contain one or more NDEF records (represented by a class NdefRecord). NDEF record contains 
a payload described by a type, a length, and an optional identifier in a header (Ortiz, 2008).
ATTENDANCE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM
In an effort to improve attendance registration system, researchers worked on the improvement from 
different perspective. Some systems are computer-based which may be online or offline system. For 
Table 2. NXP and NFC forum tag types
NFC Forum
NXP Specification
Type 1
Type 2
Type 3
Type 4
MIFARE Classic
Standard
ISO/IEC 
14443 A
ISO/IEC 14443 A
JIS X 6319-4 
(FeliCa)
ISO/IEC 14443 A 
and B
ISO/IEC 14443 A
Memory
96 Bytes
48 Bytes / 144 Bytes
1, 4, 9 KB
4 KB / 32 KB
768 Bytes / 3584 Bytes / 
192 Bytes
Speed
106 kbit/s
106 kbit/s
212 kbit/s or 
424 kbit/s
Up to 424 
kbit/s.
106 kbit/s
Data Access
Read and re-
write
Read and re-write
Pre-configured 
to be either read 
and re-writable, or 
read-only
Pre-configured 
to be either read 
and re-writable, or 
read-only
Read and re-write, and user 
can toggle read and write 
permissions using sector 
keys.
Protection
Can configure 
to be read-
only
Can configure to be 
read-only
Can configure to be read 
only or non-readable 
without key
Compatibility
Innovision 
Topaz
NXP MIFARE 
Ultralight 
NXP MIFARE 
Ultralight C
Sony FeliCa
NXP DESFire 
NXP SmartMX 
with JCOP
NXP MIFARE Classic 1k/ 
NXP MIFARE Classic 4k/ 
NXP MIFARE Classic mini

188
Managing Students’ Attendance using NFC-Enabled Mobile Phones
﻿
instance, a desktop application developed by Jain, Joshi, and Sharma (n.d.) in which all the list of reg-
istered students for a particular course will be displayed when the lecturer start the application. The 
attendance registration is done by clicking a check box next to the name of students that are present, 
and then a register button is clicked to mark their presence. Another similar project was proposed, but 
in this case the student will have to register individually using client server socket program from their 
device (laptop) (Mattam, Karumuri, & Meda, 2012). Registering the attendance by proxy is eliminated 
in the first project since the lecturer will see each and every student in the class, while in the latter case 
student snapshot is taking by the client application. Even though in both projects the time wastage is also 
there, but still it is an improvement on the manual process since attendance data can be stored safely and 
reports can be easily generated. However, Zhang, Gong, Cao, and Chen (2007) are with the opinion that 
attendance management is ignored by current educational administration management system, focusing 
only on register management, education plan, course management, etc. as a result they developed at-
tendance management system using VisualStudio.NET and Oracle. Their system is web based that used 
card technology for student’s identification, and registering attendance into the database.
Mohamed Basheer and Raghu (2012) designed a fingerprint device that is used in fingerprint at-
tendance system. The students mark their presence by placing their finger on the device’s sensor. The 
system components are:
•	
Handheld device which was constructed and controlled by microcontroller (PIC18F4550) with 
components (fingerprint module, Real Time Clock RTC, buttons, Graphic Liquid Crystal Display 
GLCD, Memory, etc).
•	
Host computer with GUI application for managing the attendance, the application is used to trans-
fer the students’ data to the device. The attendance details can be accessed through USB interface 
and finally store in to the database. (Mohamed Basheer & Raghu, 2012).
On the other hand, BIS Software presents a commercial system based on RFID for attendance man-
agement for schools and colleges. The system can send SMS and email alert to parents/guardians of the 
students automatically. The student will register at the gate by touching RFID device with their RFID 
tag and send the data to BISAM server in the school. The server will process the attendance data and 
send an SMS to the parents/guardians of the absentee student through BISAM SMS gateway server. 
The system also has Time Manager Software for managing employees’ attendance and HR related func-
tionalities (“BISAM-BIS Attendance Management System,” n.d.). In a two similar works, RFID reader 
was designed with microcontroller, transceiver chip, serial communication IC, LCD, USB interface, 
power supply module, etc as components. When a staff touches the reader with their card the data is 
sent to PC manager application which will validate the data and extract information like staff ID and 
access time into the database (Geng, Li, & Liu, 2012). While in (Lim, Sim, & Mansor, 2009), when a 
student touch the reader it sends the data to the microcontroller for comparison with the ID stored in 
the microcontroller’s memory; if ID exist the name, ID and attendance will be displayed on the LCD 
then transfer the data to PC via RS323 port (Lim et al., 2009). Also Kassim, Mazlan, Zaini, and Salleh 
(2012) proposed another system based on RFID where the RFID terminal read the student ID, date and 
time; and store it into a database in an online server.

189
Managing Students’ Attendance using NFC-Enabled Mobile Phones
﻿
NFC APPLICATIONS
The NFC-based applications simplify various human day-to-day activities by simply touching an object 
fixed or integrated with NFC tag. For instance, SmartTouch is one of the early NFC projects that focuses 
on NFC technology which was coordinated by VTT Technical Research Centre Finland; applications 
in various areas were developed under this project such as mobile payment and ticketing, smart poster, 
attendance system for schools, home use, household access control and security, blood glucose meter, 
etc. (Ylisaukko-oja, Hillukkala, Strommer, Siira, & Tormanen, 2009). NFC-enabled services were pi-
loted in schools in Oulu. Some of the services include VIKSU Info Channel that provides homework 
assignment, meeting, and timetable functionalities. Another project is attendance supervision for sec-
ondary and primary school. This service will allow lecturers, administrators and parents to instantly 
know the attendance status of their children. Laanila upper secondary school students were used for 
pilot test whereby they will touch a tag on the teacher’s desk with their NFC-enabled phone to register 
their attendance. They receive a response immediately on their phone. The system by default mark the 
student absent if they did not log in by touching the tag. The system initially calculate lateness after 3 
minutes of the starting time, but later changed to 3 minutes after first student register since the teachers 
can themselves sometimes be late due to other responsibilities. The primary school attendance is aim at 
providing parents real-time information about their children’s arrival and departure. Children at Hintta 
Primary School were given NFC card holding their information that will be used to touch a reader that 
will register their arrival or departure and their parents can check it online or choose to receive the 
information as an SMS. The card can also be used to touch the teacher’s phone in order to control the 
attendance for afternoon care centre (Rouru-Kuivala, 2009). Data was collected from the users in order 
to find their experience when using the system; also the analysis revealed that the system will benefit 
mainly parents and teachers (Ervasti, Isomursu, & Kinnula, 2009).
European Higher Education Area (EHEA) is working on promoting the modernization of the universi-
ties throughout Europe, the Technical University of Cartagena worked on developing and implementation 
of Smart University model for realization of intelligent environment. This project has two goals: creating 
a ubiquitous computing system where relation between people, practice, and technology happen as a part 
of a natural interaction paradigm, and to deliver applications that replace some of the tasks that cause the 
teachers, students, and other staff to spend time daily. Two projects were developed they are attendance 
registering system and administrative payment system (like matriculation charges, transcript of record, 
certified document charges etc) which are all based on NFC. The hardware used in the project includes 
NFC-based active devices (Nokia 6212 and Samsung Nexus S), NFC-enabled passive devices (Topaz, 
Touchatag, and Nokia), NFC readers (ACS-ACR-122U), and NFC Server Hosts linked to the university 
network which handle the communication with the readers. This host runs the software applications that 
provide access to the reader. In the attendance system each room has NFC reader which is connected 
to teacher’s PC connected with the university’s network. The students and teachers must download and 
install the mobile application on their phones that will be automatically run on touching the reader. The 
teacher will activate the lecture group. When the students and teachers application started they will fill 
a form and transfer the data to the server through the reader, and receive a response also via the reader 
(Bueno-Delgado, Pavon-Marino, De-Gea-Garcia, & Dolon-Garcia, 2012).

190
Managing Students’ Attendance using NFC-Enabled Mobile Phones
﻿
NFC-BASED ATTENDANCE SYSTEMS
Contactless technology specifically NFC can be utilized to make university life easier. Therefore, Budapest 
University of Technology and Economics (BME) introduced NFC-based student attendance monitoring 
system (Benyo, Sodor, Doktor, & Fordos, 2012; Benyó, Sódor, Doktor, & Fordos, 2012). The system 
can be used to track attendance percentage, in order to put the university’s rule concerning writing exam 
without a certain attendance percentage into practice. Biometric identification is added to NFC to avoid 
impersonation. The students register their attendance from a terminal that has NFC and fingerprint 
reader using only card that stores student ID and fingerprint. The terminals store the attendance data and 
it periodically send the data during the day to a backoffice system. The terminals as well as backoffice 
store timetable and identification policy. The backoffice generates the report from the data received from 
the terminals. The terminal is capable of storing attendance data for a complete semester (Benyo et al., 
2012). Similarly, a mobile phone attendance system for small office employees was presented (Patela 
& Jainb, 2013). The employee will touch the NFC-enabled mobile device with their card, and then the 
employee data (ID, Photo, Time in/Time out, and Date) will be sent to the backend system.
Ninomiya, Ito, Flanagan, and Hirokawa (2012) proposed a design of NFC and Social Network Ser-
vice (SNS) based Event management attendance system. In their system the meeting participant when 
registering for the event will provide their SNS ID (twitter). The goal of the system is to bridge the gap 
between SNS ID and User using NFC and SNS, since in some situations the participants may be friends 
in a particular SNS without knowing it while they are in the event. The organizers prepares NFC tags 
with meeting and session names on the tag, and the participants are assumed to have smart phones or 
tablets with NFC capability. Although the participants register their SNS ID in the pre-meeting registra-
tion website, when they attend they will download application software in their NFC enabled device. 
The meeting name, session name, and SNS ID must be set by the participant in the application. When 
the participants touch the tag in the session a message will be send to a server notifying it that the user 
is in the meeting. The NFC device of the user will receive the SNS ID of the participants who are in the 
meeting and those that are supposed to attend. With this information the organizers will have the list of 
those that attend the meeting.
From the works above it appears that some of the systems developed require the use of computer for 
attendance registration, while others involve the use of fingerprint, RFID or NFC readers. Therefore, we 
are proposing an easy to use web based attendance registration system that will require no device other 
than NFC-enabled device like phone.
THE TOUCHIN SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT
The NFC-based attendance system offers students an easy way of registering their presence in a class 
which allow lecturers to fully focus on their teaching. The system has two main components which are 
the mobile client and the web server.

191
Managing Students’ Attendance using NFC-Enabled Mobile Phones
﻿
Mobile Client Development
The mobile part of the attendance application was developed for android supported devices. Java and 
Android SDK are everything you need to start NFC android application development. The Java Develop-
ment Kit (JDK) and Java Runtime Environment (JRE) can be downloaded from Oracle website at http://
www.oracle.com/technetwork/java/javase/downloads/index.html. The Android SDK can be downloaded 
from Android developer website at http://developer.android.com/sdk/index.html. Once the Java and 
Android SDK are installed, the next task is to start the Android SDK in order to install the Android 
Virtual Device (AVD) and remaining tools such as the Android APIs. It is recommended to download 
and use Eclipse IDE for Android application development as it contains sample projects, editors, debug 
output pane, etc. Android Development Tools (ADT) plug-in is the interface between the Eclipse IDE 
and Android SDK which need to be installed from the Eclipse IDE. This integration is now simplified 
by downloading and installing Eclipse ADT bundle from http://developer.android.com/sdk/index.html, 
which include Android SDK Tools, Eclipse, ADT plug-in, etc. (Please note: The essential requirement 
for NFC communication is to enable NFC from the device’s setting and unlock the device’s screen).
Web Server Development
The web server part of the system developed using a server side programming language of PHP, a cli-
ent side scripting of JavaScript with a MySQL database system. The following describes the design of 
the web server.
Use Case
Use case defines how the actors or users of a system interact with the system. In this application we 
have three actors, namely administrator, lecturer, and student. These three users communicate with the 
system through eight defined use cases. The cases are manage system, update user, set academic year, 
create course, assign course, create schedule, register course, and register attendance. The interaction 
between the users and system is pictorially presented in Figure 2.
•	
Manage System: Managing the system is the responsibility of the administrator. This include 
managing all users and their access rights.
•	
Update User: Lecturers and students will update their profile after it has been created by the ad-
ministrator. For students it involves registering their device ID which will be done automatically 
when students update their profile using their NFC-based mobile devices.
•	
Set Academic Year: At the beginning of every session and/or semester the administrator will set 
relevant information that reflect the current academic session and semester.
•	
Create Course: Administrator and lecturer will create courses that students would register later. 
The courses information that include credit hours, semester, etc. can be modified when the need 
arise.
•	
Assign Course: Courses will be assigned to lecturers by administrator or lecturers themselves.
•	
Create Schedule: Lecture schedule will be created by administrator or the lecturer taking a course 
or section of a course. The information that make up the schedule include day and time of the 
class.

192
Managing Students’ Attendance using NFC-Enabled Mobile Phones
﻿
•	
Register Course: Students will register courses based on their study plan, available schedule and 
convenience.
•	
Register Attendance: Students will register attendance during classes.
Database Design
The MySQL database consist of seven tables, which are: academicyear, attendance, course, groups, 
registration, schedule, and users. The ERD showing relationships that exist among the entities in the 
database is shown in Figure 3.
•	
Groups table has user group name and privilege that control how the features in the attendance 
application are presented to each user group.
•	
Academic year (academicyear) is a table that keeps information about semester and session. It 
contains three fields a unique and auto increment field aid, session and semester. This tables is 
linked to schedule, registration, and attendance tables.
•	
Users table (users) keeps information about all the users of the system. The table is composed of 
six fields uid, name, deviceid, designation, username, and password. User ID (uid) is a unique field 
which serve as the primary key. Name (name) keeps user’s fullname. Device ID (deviceid) field 
stores the students’ device id, but since the table contains all the users (staff/students) therefore 
the default value can be NULL in case of staff or student who don’t use NFC device. Designation 
(designation) field has values like student and staff that is used to differentiate between the type 
of users. Username (username) and password (password) keep login credentials for the users of 
the system.
Figure 2. Use case diagram for the attendance system

193
Managing Students’ Attendance using NFC-Enabled Mobile Phones
﻿
•	
Course table (course) store records about courses that the students will register. It has four fields 
course code (ccode), course id (cid), course title (title), and course tutor (tutor). Course code and 
course title are properties of each course defined by the department. Although course code sup-
pose to be unique for each course but additional variable (cid) is defined to ensure that courses are 
distinct and they can be linked to other tables. Tutor field stores the name of the lecturer teaching 
a particular course.
•	
Group (group) table keeps users group and their privileges. It has two fields name and privilege. 
This table is linked with users table, because each user must belong to a particular group.
•	
Registration (registration) table keeps student registration information. The table contains three 
fields uid, cid, and aid. In this table student is linked with course in a particular session/semester.
•	
Lecture schedule for courses is stored in schedule table. The table has six fields, a unique field 
called sid, cid and aid foreign keys from course and academic year tables respectively, date, start 
time, and end time. For a scheduled course lecture, cid will represent the course, aid will represent 
the session and semester for which the course runs. While the date, lecture start time, and lecture 
end time will be stored in date, stime, and etime respectively.
Figure 3. Entity Relationship Diagram (ERD) for the database

194
Managing Students’ Attendance using NFC-Enabled Mobile Phones
﻿
Whenever a student register an attendance the record will be stored on attendance table. The table 
contains five fields namely uid, sid, aid, status, and late. The moment student register for a course, his/
her corresponding record will be created in attendance table. The record will have absent as status value 
by default. When the student register for an attendance the record will be update by changing the status 
value to present and insert the difference between the time student registers and the lecture start time 
into late field.
THE TOUCHIN SYSTEM OVERVIEW
The system has two main modules as shown in Figure 4. The modules are reader module and web server 
module. Each of these modules has hardware and software components. Essentially, the hardware com-
ponents for the reader module are NFC-enabled mobile devices and tags, while for web server module 
is only a computer that can host web services. Whereas, the software required in the reader module is 
the client application that will be installed on NFC-enabled devices. The software requirement for web 
server module is basically the web based attendance application.
Figure 4. TouchIn system overview

195
Managing Students’ Attendance using NFC-Enabled Mobile Phones
﻿
Reader Module
This module is responsible for reading the student information like student ID from either student’s 
NFC-enabled mobile device or a tag. If the student is using NFC-enabled mobile device then the stu-
dent ID is retrieved from a file stored in the device. But if the student is using an NFC tag in the form 
of card or wristband then the student ID will be retrieved from the tag. Furthermore, for NFC-enabled 
mobile device user; device ID is used as a way of verifying the student. This ID is read from the device 
and passes together with the student ID into the server. Apart from student ID, course code is another 
important field that is needed for the attendance registration. The course code and the address (URL) 
of the web based application are stored in an NFC tag before starting any class. The type of tag used in 
this work is NFC forum type 2 (MIFARE) tag with 716 bytes size. Therefore, the main student activities 
in the attendance system are enrolment and attendance registration. The students need to register their 
personal details with the system before enrolling into a class.
Student registration into the system depend on the type of access the student want; if the student is 
going to use his NFC-based phone then he will have to register his phone using the screen in Figure 5 
so as to get the device Id. Device Id is a unique number for every mobile phone.
In developing this system issue of not having NFC-enabled device by some students and or unstable 
Internet service were taking into consideration; this is because all these two (NFC-enabled device and 
Internet) are mandatory requirements for the system. Consequently three different scenarios will be 
discussed related to the two issues.
Figure 5. TouchIn mobile registration screen

196
Managing Students’ Attendance using NFC-Enabled Mobile Phones
﻿
The Student Has an NFC-Enabled Device and Internet
In this case a tag will be attached to a paper carrying the course detail similar to Smart Poster; the tag 
will store the URL for the attendance system and the course code. Also the student will have to download 
and install two applications on their devices. The first application requires the students to enter their 
student ID and click a button for registration. When this form is sent the student’s device ID will be 
registered in the server and at the same time create a file in the device with the student ID. The second 
application is the one that will be automatically started when the tag is touched as depicted in Figure 6. 
This application will read the student ID from the file created, the device ID, and also the content of the 
tag. The URL from the tag will be launched and the student ID, course code, device ID will be loaded 
into a form and automatically submit the form for further processing.
The Student Has an NFC-Enabled Device but Has No Internet
In this scenario the lecturer must also have NFC-enabled device, and both the devices must support beam 
functionality. Here the lecturer and student will install two applications. The lecturer before starting any 
class will run the first application that will set the course code, after which the device will be kept by 
the side in an active mode. The first application that the student will install will register the device ID 
and create a file with student ID in their device as in the previous case. Then, when the students want to 
register for attendance they will run the other application that will fetch the student ID from the file, read 
the device ID and beam (send) it to the lecturer’s device by simply touching the device. Subsequently, 
the application in the lecturer’s device will retrieve the course code and add it to the received student 
information. The same application will launch the URL of the attendance system and submit all the 
details into the server. Figure 7a shows the student mobile device after the application is started, waiting 
for the student to touch the screen in order to beam (send) the data. While Figure 7b shows the response 
after sending the data to the server.
Figure 6. Smart poster touched by student’s phone

197
Managing Students’ Attendance using NFC-Enabled Mobile Phones
﻿
The Student Has Neither an NFC-Enabled Device Nor the Internet
Since the students are assumed not to have NFC-enabled device, an NFC tag will be issued to the student 
carrying their student ID, or NFC tag will be embedded into their student card. So in this situation, the 
lecturer must have NFC-enabled device that each time the students want to register for the attendance 
they will touch the lecturer’s device. Figure 8 shows the communication between the student tag and 
lecturer’s mobile device.
From the three scenarios discussed we can clearly see that the best option is the first case. This is 
because the students can be verified with their device ID, and they can get a response immediately on 
Figure 7. Beaming data between student’s and lecturer’s NFC-enabled phones
Figure 8. Touching lecturer’s phone by student NFC tag or integrated NFC card

198
Managing Students’ Attendance using NFC-Enabled Mobile Phones
﻿
whether their attendance registration is successful or not. Another advantage is, we can have more than 
one smart poster for a larger class to reduce the waiting time for the registration. In the second case, we 
can still verify the students with their device ID but they cannot get a response. Also, for larger classes 
there will be delay in the process since every student will use the lecturer’s mobile device. The last sce-
nario is the least secured especially if student is using a tag since only the student ID is kept in the tag, 
but it will be a bit more secured if using NFC tag integrated into student ID. However, this has same 
limitation as in the second scenario.
Web Server Module
This is the processing engine for our proposed system, since this is where all the operations concerning 
attendance registration is done. The only hardware required in this module is a computer that should 
always be online, and has the facilities needed for hosting web services. In other word, a computer that 
can host our web based attendance application. The application receives a request from either student or 
lecturer, and reply with a response depending on the request. A typical request is like attendance regis-
tration by a student. We have collection of tables in the database for keeping related records separately.
To gain access into the application the users must login with their username and password as illus-
trated in Figure 9.
Figure 9. TouchIn web attendance system login page

199
Managing Students’ Attendance using NFC-Enabled Mobile Phones
﻿
Information about the lecturers, students as well as the courses is stored in the database. We have three 
different users of the application; administrator, lecturers, and students. The administrator is responsible 
for managing the remaining two users. At the beginning, the administrator will create the users with basic 
information that they can update later, set the semester, and create courses for the program. The lecturers 
will assign to themselves the courses they are taking in a semester, and create a course schedule. Later 
the lecturer can generate and print different types of attendance report as depicted in Figure 10. Course 
schedule information must include date, beginning and end of class time, etc. The students must register 
for courses before they are allowed to attend a class. Each time a student register for a course an entry 
will be automatically created in the attendance table with absent as a default status value. This default 
value can only be changed when the student register for attendance for that class.
THE TOUCHIN SYSTEM PROCESS
There are steps that need to go through in implementing the TouchIn attendance system in action. In 
this section we explain only the process from when the lecturer’s device receives student information, 
since the process prior to thi this has been explained in Section 7.1.
Figure 10. A sample of TouchIn generated attendance report

200
Managing Students’ Attendance using NFC-Enabled Mobile Phones
﻿
When the lecturer’s NFC-enabled device send the information (Student ID, device ID, and Course 
code) to the server, the data is processed and perform the appropriate operation. The processing include: 
checking the database for existence of the student ID, matching the student ID with the registered device 
ID, making sure the student register for that course, confirming the course schedule, etc. The current 
date and time is obtained from the server in order to compare with the date and time in the schedule. 
In any of the above case, if the condition fails an error message will be sent to either student or lecturer 
depending on the situation. Conversely, if all the conditions are satisfied then the student status from 
absent will change to present and number of minutes student is late will also be recorded in the database. 
The flow of the whole process is represented in Figure 11.
Figure 11. Attendance registration process

201
Managing Students’ Attendance using NFC-Enabled Mobile Phones
﻿
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Managing students’ attendance effectively is an important issue in education institutions. This is due to 
the fact that in most institutions attendance is part of student’s continuous assessment or is a condition 
that student must met before they are allowed to sit for final examination. Another justification is that 
attending the class shows their commitments to the course that they are enrolled to, which make moni-
toring it is crucial as part of the whole education process.
The system presented in this paper has shown big potentials in improving the present day attendance 
registration system used in many education institutions and completely eliminate paper work, which 
supports the go-green campaign. Furthermore, technology that is already close to students’ everyday 
life is utilised without additional hassle to them. Other benefits include eliminating the chance of losing 
attendance data, different attendance report can be easily generated by a click of a mouse, simplifying 
the decision making process related to attendance, etc. This means that the system offers more effective 
and efficient way in recording, monitoring as well as report generating in the management of students 
attendance. One of the major distinct characteristic of our proposed system is that the hardware needed 
is only NFC tag and NFC-enabled mobile device. This is as oppose to most systems where other devices 
like NFC or RFID reader is required. In the future the system will be implemented in a real institution 
setup in order to validate it. The system can also be improved by updating the client application in re-
ceiving response and be able to reply back directly from the application.
REFERENCES
Benyo, B., Sodor, B., Doktor, T., & Fordos, G. (2012). Student attendance monitoring at the university 
using NFC. Paper presented at the Wireless Telecommunications Symposium (WTS). doi:10.1109/
WTS.2012.6266137
Benyó, B., Sódor, B., Doktor, T., & Fordos, G. (2012). University life in contactless way-NFC use cases 
in academic environment. Paper presented at the Intelligent Engineering Systems (INES), 2012 IEEE 
16th International Conference on. doi:10.1109/INES.2012.6249887
BISAM-BIS Attendance Management System. (n.d.). Retrieved from http://www.softwarehouse.co/
school-attendance-brochure.pdf
Bueno-Delgado, M., Pavon-Marino, P., De-Gea-Garcia, A., & Dolon-Garcia, A. (2012). The smart uni-
versity experience: An NFC-based ubiquitous environment. Paper presented at the Innovative Mobile 
and Internet Services in Ubiquitous Computing (IMIS), 2012 Sixth International Conference on.
Coskun, V., Ok, K., & Ozdenizci, B. (2011). Near Field Communication (NFC): From Theory to Prac-
tice. John Wiley & Sons.
Ervasti, M., Isomursu, M., & Kinnula, M. (2009). Experiences from NFC supported school attendance 
supervision for children. Paper presented at the Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and 
Technologies, 2009. UBICOMM’09. Third International Conference on. doi:10.1109/UBICOMM.2009.9

202
Managing Students’ Attendance using NFC-Enabled Mobile Phones
﻿
Geng, S., Li, G., & Liu, W. (2012). Design and Implement of Attendance Management System Based on 
Contactless Smart IC Card. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the 2012 International Conference on 
Computer Science and Electronics Engineering-Volume 03. doi:10.1109/ICCSEE.2012.196
Jain, S. K., Joshi, U., & Sharma, B. K. (n.d.). Attendance Management System. (Masters), Rajasthan Tech-
nical University, Kota. Retrieved from http://www.iisjaipur.org/iiim-current-08/mca_iv_sem_pro_eva/15.
project%20attendence%20managemnt%20system.pdf
Kassim, M., Mazlan, H., Zaini, N., & Salleh, M. K. (2012). Web-based student attendance system using 
RFID technology. Paper presented at the Control and System Graduate Research Colloquium (ICSGRC). 
doi:10.1109/ICSGRC.2012.6287164
Lim, T., Sim, S., & Mansor, M. (2009). RFID based attendance system. Paper presented at the Industrial 
Electronics & Applications, 2009. ISIEA 2009. IEEE Symposium on. doi:10.1109/ISIEA.2009.5356360
Mattam, M., Karumuri, S. R. M., & Meda, S. R. (2012). Architecture for Automated Student Attendance. 
Paper presented at the T4E. doi:10.1109/T4E.2012.39
Mohamed Basheer, K. P., & Raghu, C. V. (2012). Fingerprint attendance system for classroom needs. 
Paper presented at the Annual IEEE India Conference, India.
Near Field Communication. (n.d.). Retrieved October 2014, 2014, from https://developer.android.com/
guide/topics/connectivity/nfc/index.html
Forum, N. F. C. (2007). Near Field Communication and the NFC Forum: The Keys to Truly Interoper-
able Communications [White paper]. Retrieved October 23, 2014, from http://nfc-forum.org/wp-content/
uploads/2013/11/The-Keys-to-Truly-Interoperable-Communications.pdf
Newman‐Ford, L., Fitzgibbon, K., Lloyd, S., & Thomas, S. (2008). A large‐scale investigation into the 
relationship between attendance and attainment: A study using an innovative, electronic attendance 
monitoring system. Studies in Higher Education, 33(6), 699–717. doi:10.1080/03075070802457066
NFC in Action. (n.d.). Retrieved October 25, 2014, from http://nfc-forum.org/what-is-nfc/nfc-in-action/
Ninomiya, H., Ito, E., Flanagan, B., & Hirokawa, S. (2012). Bridging SNS ID and user using NFC and 
SNS: Design of NFC and SNS based event attendance management system. Paper presented at the Anti-
Counterfeiting, Security and Identification (ASID), 2012 International Conference on. doi:10.1109/
ICASID.2012.6325346
Ortiz, C. E. (2008). An Introduction to Near-Field Communication and the Contactless Communication 
API. Retrieved October 24, 2014, from http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/articles/javame/nfc-140183.
html
Patela, S. B., & Jainb, N. K. (2013). Near Field Communication (NFC) based Mobile Phone Attendance 
System for Employees. Paper presented at the International Journal of Engineering Research and Technology.
Rouru-Kuivala, O. (2009). NFC for children. In T. Tuikka & M. Isomursu (Eds.), Touch the Future with 
a Smart Touch.

203
Managing Students’ Attendance using NFC-Enabled Mobile Phones
﻿
Suparta, W. (2012). Application of Near Field Communication Technology for Mobile Airline Ticketing. 
Journal of Computer Science, 8(8), 1235. doi:10.3844/jcssp.2012.1235.1243
NFC Tag Types. (2011). Retrieved October 23, 2014, from http://www.nfc.cc/technology/nfc-tag-types/
NFC Tags. (n.d.). Retrieved October 24, 2014, from http://www.nevakarten.de/nfc_tags/
Ylisaukko-oja, A., Hillukkala, M., Strommer, E., Siira, E., & Tormanen, V. (2009). Smart NFC Interface 
Platform and its Applications. In T. Tuikka & M. Isomursu (Eds.), Touch the Future with a Smart Touch.
Zhang, Z., Gong, P., Cao, L., & Chen, Y. (2007). Information Technologies and Applications in Educa-
tion. Paper presented at the First IEEE International Symposium on Digital Object Identifier.

204
Copyright © 2016, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter  10
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-4666-9438-5.ch010
ABSTRACT
Water meter reader is an essential tool for water company, which is responsible for the distribution 
of clean water to the public and monitor its customer’s water consumption. Theoretically water meter 
should collect water consumption data in accurate and accountable manners. The problem is, in practice, 
sometimes the record is inaccurate and makes the customers feel uncertain of the water bill that they 
have to pay. Several factors contributed to this problem, including the officers made mistake in recording 
the number from water meter or sometimes the officer did not visit the customers and reporting based on 
the estimation of the water consumption. This chapter proposed a framework to record the water meter 
data by capturing images in a small mobile device. A prototype, as a proof of concept, of water meter 
mobile apps was developed to allow the water meter data to read and collected easily to make the billing 
processed in a more accurate manner but less hassle.
INTRODUCTION
Clean water is the most important need for human being to survive. Unfortunately, in terms of quality 
and quantity, the amount and availability of clean water is not easy to predict while the demand always 
increasing. In Indonesia, to get clean water, people have to register to Regional Water Company (PAM) 
as a state-owned company that provides clean water. There are 400 units of PAM which expected to be 
able to improve its performance to meet clean water demand that is increasing along with the population 
growth. Considering the current population (240 million people), there should be an improvement in 
Mobile Water Meter System 
in Android Environment
Wiwin Windihastuty
Universitas Budi Luhur, Indonesia
Teddy Mantoro
USBI – Sampoerna University, Indonesia
Media Anugerah Ayu
USBI – Sampoerna University, Indonesia

205
Mobile Water Meter System in Android Environment
﻿
the water supply system. This system should be able to establish an effective method to manage water 
consumption data so that the officers can effectively and efficiently collect the information required. 
Unfortunately, at this present time, PAM is still collecting data manually by sending the officers to each 
customer. There are some issues related to water usage data from water meter that is inputted into data-
base, such as inconsistency of the water usage data, the time to collect the water usage data from water 
meter and inaccuracy of the water usage data collected manually.
In Korea, the majority of 16 million houses use mechanical water meter. The member of the utility’s 
staff have to access periodically the water meter and the value of the metered volume. This approach, 
the use of mechanical water meter, raised many issues including cost, time, errors, accessibility, and 
readability (Sin et al., 2009).
The water meter officers are the officers assigned to read and record the water meter data at custom-
ers’ place and input the number to computer program to calculate the water bill. This system has several 
weaknesses such as lack of evidence that the officers are actually visiting the customers, and the record 
is not analyzed and verified properly because of inadequate application.
With the development of information technology system and PAM’s effort to improve its service to 
the customers, there’s a need to design an accurate, fast, and precise tool by utilizing mobile computing 
capability in supporting the information management system in PAM Office. The implementation of 
computerization of a massive and complex system which consists of inter-related subsystems makes 
PAM management becomes complicated and challenging especially for the supply and demand of 
clean water resources. This followed by the improvement of service delivery in speed and accuracy and 
facilities. Developing a computer based information management system in PAM is one of appropriate 
alternative solution. Poor planning or inappropriate stages in a computer based information system can 
create a problem to the company. Therefore, specific information management system for PAM should 
be developed seriously by an experienced professional.
Related Work
The technology in the area of water meter has been developed for many years. This development includes 
the arrow-pointer and the reading meter.
As the state-of-the-art technology for reading water meter, electric, or gas automatic meter reading 
(AMR) read the raw data automatically from the remote place. This process usually was designed without 
any intervention from the users. Cao et al. (2008) developed a remote real time automatic meter reading 
(AMR). This systems utilized remote AMR sensor to measure the water supply based on wireless sen-
sor network (WSN). The sensors of RF and ZigBee were used for a short distance transmission which 
has the water meter sensor data, as for a long distance transmission CDMA cellular network was used.
While Wasi-ur-Rahman et al. (2009) uses a technique for remotely reading electricity meter readings 
and transmit using short message service (SMS) protocol under global system for mobile communica-
tions (GSM) networks, for delivery service for water billing system, Islam and Wasi-ur-Rahman (2009) 
integrated water meter system with prepaid billing system along with monitoring of the water meter 
readings automatically from a remote place. Their experiments was resulting the remote metering which 
promises fast and accurate billing system.

206
Mobile Water Meter System in Android Environment
﻿
Shin et al. (2009), developed the walk-by meter reading system of digital water meter and outside 
indicator based on ubiquitous computing. The objective of their study is to economically efficient in 
reading data for water meter system using block system. Their study shows that the meter reading system 
for stable water supply.
Automatic water flow meter has been developed, it also used in regulating irrigation water applica-
tion. This water flow meter involves supplying water according to the crop requirement, quantity that 
can be held by the soil and is available to the crop at rates tolerated according to the soil characteristics 
(Sood et al. 2013).
Billing is a critical function of both the Electricity and the Water Boards towards getting a meter 
read. Meter reading, in some case, give problem such as calculation errors, delays in system updating 
and fault tracking.
Mobile Based Electricity Billing System (MoBEBIS) was developed as a mobile based system to col-
lect, process and notify consumers for their electricity consumption. This development was implemented 
in Sri Lanka. Based on their study the burden on the meter reader is lessened. Customer interaction with 
the company is improved and customers can easily view their current electricity usage using their mobile 
phones (Rathnayaka et al., 2013).
(Tanvir et al. 2011) developed AMR with four basic units. i.e. reading unit, communication unit, data 
receiving and processing unit and billing system. As in Bangladesh, they need to cover wide area, Wimax 
transceiver was used for wireless communication between meter end and the server end. This study 
targeting AMR, which is low cost, high performance, highest data rate, highest coverage area and most 
appropriate for Bangladesh perspective. The AMR with identification was developed by Guo et al. 2011.
The effort to develop the intelligent water meter reading was proposed by Guo et al. (2011). They 
designed a water meter ID identifying and reading system based on RFID technology. The anti-metal 
UHF tags was used as the data transmitter and hand-held data reader as the Data receiver which can 
reach more than 1 meter. They didn’t use foundry iron, as the transmit signals will be interfered with the 
iron if we use ordinary UHF tags.
Mechanical water meter also used arrow-pointer. Hsia et al., (2013) present a low-cost arrow sensor 
for reading water meter by embedding an electrical circuit into the body of a conventional mechanical 
water meter. They try to find the highest sensitivity between the sensing pad and the detection circuit 
by analyzing the best frequency with transfer functions.
APPLICATION DESIGN FOR WATER METER READER
PAM Problems
Previously PAM uses manual data management system, until recently water meter reader system with 
android based smartphone is developed. In general, the officers visit the customers to manually check 
the water meter, and they input the data into computer program manually. The process of data input 
have some issues, such as inconsistency of the data, the time to collect the data from water meter and 
inaccuracy of the data collected manually. In addition, there is lack of evidence that the officer visited 
the customers.

207
Mobile Water Meter System in Android Environment
﻿
Proposed Solution
PAM tries to minimize the issues by developing a customer’s water meter reader system using android 
based smartphone. Figure 1 presents the water meter reader was photographed with the smartphone 
then the photo is sent to the server. This approached provides data accuracy of each customer. This tool 
is able to store data from water meter reader, images, data location through GPS feature. With record 
of physical images of the water meter and customers’ house, as well as the GPS location that are sent 
through smartphone in real time mode. This way, the system is expected to have the capability to moni-
tor the field officers live.
Data Recording Flow:
1. 	
The officer receives recording area.
2. 	
The officer visit the area under his jurisdiction and take picture of the water meters in the area.
3. 	
The picture of water meter and the data from water meter which has been inputted into the computer 
are sent to the office for validation.
4. 	
If the number in the picture is identical with the data, the water billing process is started.
5. 	
If the number in the picture is different with the data, then the data is adjusted with the number in 
the picture.
Mobile application will be used by the officer to record the number in the customer’s water meter. 
Each record will be directly collected by the officer, the data includes customer’s ID number, number 
in water meter and picture of water meter. Automatically the system application will record other ad-
ditional information such as: record time, location (latitude and longitude), and synchronization time 
with server. When there is no internet connection, the data will be temporarily saved in the device. Soon 
when the officer has a connection, the data will be sent to the server for billing purpose. In case of the 
slow connection, the data will be sent to the server earlier, while the water meter picture will be sent later.
Figure 1. Data collection from water meter reader using smartphones

208
Mobile Water Meter System in Android Environment
﻿
Water meter mobile apps is an application to input data from water meter, while for billing and pay-
ment process, there will be another application in the server. Billing application will be communicated 
with Accounting Information System, therefore the data entering the billing application will be auto-
matically read and adjusted in Accounting Information System. Application design mobile recording 
meters is presented in Figure 2.
TECHNOLOGY AND CONCEPT
Mobile Device APIs
API development for mobile is conducted to ensure the coding process is running after every required 
data is analyzed. Based on the above interface mobile development, the required API is as follow:
1. 	
API Login: This API will receive user name and password as its parameter, however, for security 
reason the password will be scrambled. This encryption process will consume the resource (both 
server and device), therefore it needs a simple but powerful encryption method. The encryption 
that will be used are among others include Base64, Md5, Blowfish.
2. 	
API for Water Meter Recording: This API will receive Customer’s ID number, the latest water 
meter number and Picture of the water meter. This API will send the “success” result and the ID 
of the record when the data has been accepted and saved in the database. As for the water meter 
picture, the data saved is only the location or the location where the picture is saved, not the binary 
of the picture itself.
Figure 2. Water meter mobile application

209
Mobile Water Meter System in Android Environment
﻿
3. 	
API for Meter Recording History: This API will receive and send the meter recording history 
conducted by an officer. This API will also send other data such as Device ID and Location. In 
addition to that, this API will be flexible toward other parameters such as field name and sort. This 
API will be able to filter and sort the data in according to the parameter input.
4. 	
API for Message Box: This API will send push message to one device. This push message plat-
form is used so that the device does not need to be synchronized with the server all the time, the 
device will act as receiver from server. This API is using platform that available in Google for OS 
Android, that is Google Cloud Messaging (GCM)
5. 	
API for Synchronization: This API in a one direction API, it means that this API only receives 
data sent by device. This API will resend fail or success message in according to the result of the 
running operations. The synchronization is conducted in stages for each data. This steps is taken 
so if the connection is failed and not all data has been sent, the process can be continued when the 
connection is on again.
6. 	
All API Will Be using Basic Authentication Method: As for the HTTP, several API will use 
GET method (for query or data retrieving) and POST (to send data). Other method (such as PUT 
and DELETE) will not be used in this API.
Selection of Technology
The technologies used to develop this system are:
1. 	
Data Integration: Data integration used Tornado. Tornado is a Python based web framework and 
it has asynchronous web library. This framework was originally developed by FriendFeed, however 
now it is developed further by Facebook Development Team. The reason to choose Tornado for 
data integration because it has non-blocking network I/O features, therefore its scale of capability 
range from 10 to hundreds of connection simultaneously.
2. 	
Web Server: In order to use web application, NginX will be used as the web server. NginX is 
HTTP/Web Server with high capability and acts as reverse proxy server. In addition, Nginx is free 
and open-source. The reason to choose Nginx is because this server has been used by more than 
22.22 million active sites in various domains. Nginx is also known for its stable performance, with 
lots of features, easy configuration and low resources.
3. 	
Mobile Application: The mobile application at this stage will be fully developed using Android 
platform. The reason to choose this platform is because it is fully supported by the Developer 
(Google inc) and also it’s open source. The use of Android for mobile application is because the 
device available in market are relatively affordable, therefore it is expected that the application can 
be easily used (Damaya et al., 2014).
In addition to the technologies that will be applied directly to the system, other supporting technolo-
gies will also be used in the system development, such as;
1. 	
GIT: Server versioning to manage source code from application. The server versioning itself will 
use free service from http://bitbucket.org.
2. 	
Capistrano: Used to conduct application staging and also as a tool to conduct System Integration 
Test.

210
Mobile Water Meter System in Android Environment
﻿
3. 	
Eclipse: Used as application editor, thus the coding process can be easily performed.
Other technologies to be used are:
1. 	
PHP Framework: Is symphony used as the framework in PHP programming environment.
2. 	
Database Engine: Database as the core of this system is MySQL. The features and other capability 
should be aligned with the system’s needs.
3. 	
Desktop Application: The discussion on the technology used depends on the platform issues of 
each computers that are directly used by Users. Two platforms that are commonly used are Linux 
and Windows. The language options that will be used are Java and PHP.
SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE AND INFRASTRUCTURE 
FOR WATER MATER APPLICATION
As for the system architecture and infrastructure, as presented in Figure 3, the architecture design for 
PAM water meter reading system can be described as the following:
1. 	
The design allows the system to run on multiple platforms (desktop, web and mobile).
2. 	
The system can be dispersed in water companies (PAM managed by themselves) and the data can 
be integrated with the central database in the Data Center.
3. 	
PAM can also entrust their data to the Data Center (PAM only use a dummy terminal in his office).
Figure 3. System architecture water meter reading application

211
Mobile Water Meter System in Android Environment
﻿
4. 	
Data Consolidator is a sub-system that will collect data that is local PAM, then combined before 
the data will be integrated with the main database at Data Centre.
5. 	
For PAM that do not have adequate infrastructure, web applications can be accessed from anywhere 
with an internet connection using the user has been registered by the User Administrator at Data 
Centre.
6. 	
To provide value-added, there will be an application to developed specifically for the mobile to the 
needs of the majority of users who are in the field (such as the Registrar Meter).
Registar meter is on the front-end user applications i.e. application Registrar Water Meter Reader 
Tool PAM that has been installed on the mobile device.
This section serves as an interface between the system attendant. Development of the system interface 
is built using the Eclipse IDE and the Android SDK java language programming.
Web service is a medium-sized applications (middle application) that serves as a liaison between 
the frontend application with a database server in the process of database usage. Web Services is an 
implementation of the architecture model of the N-Tier service oriented. Differences Web Services 
with other N-Tier approach is in terms of infrastructure and documents used as data exchange format. 
In the implementation, Web Services does not have the look, because Web Services are included in the 
Business-Service tier. That is only available in the Web Services functions that can later be used by 
other applications as Web Services using XML document format to exchange data. Because XML is 
a text -based document formats, the Web Services enable on going communication between different 
applications in different platforms. Web Services can be implemented in different types of plate form 
by using any programming language, and can be used by different applications using any programming 
language with any platform. The application can communicate with a Web Service using communication 
protocols, including HTTP, XML, SOAP, UDDI (Universal Description Discovery and Integration), and 
WSDL (Web Services Description Language).
Application server is a server for storing application. There is a backend application that serves as 
a web-based data management on the database server in the use of databases, and web-based front end 
application that serves to Applications Tool Registrar Water Meter Readers PAM. In this section, the 
application was built using the PHP programming language.
The database server is a backend application that serves to store data that is used by the service 
(Admin). This section is implemented using MySQL.
GPS in this architecture is another actor who moves in the outer radio station that serves to notify 
the existence of a good officer position with the latitude and longitude coordinates. Access network 
connection that is used to integrate with GPS users or users to the base stations via mobile devices can 
use the mobile network GPRS/EDGE/UMTS.
The information system cannot function well without adequate support of infrastructure. Infrastruc-
ture components play an important role in information technology. The infrastructure components are 
including media data exchange, data storage media and data processing media. Infrastructure architec-
ture will ensure the proper work of the system information optimally. As a result, the capacity of the IT 
infrastructure will be in accordance with the performance of the information system.

212
Mobile Water Meter System in Android Environment
﻿
Infrastructure design generally divided into two parts, as follows:
1. 	
IT Infrastructure Architecture PAM: Infrastructure architecture is contained in each company 
users. Infrastructure in this PAM system will be the host of PAM information systems used by 
other companies related to PAM. This infrastructure is owned and managed by others in relevance 
to the PAM business.
2. 	
IT Infrastructure Architecture Data Centre: Infrastructure architecture is in Data Centre. In 
this infrastructure, the host system PAM information that would receive a performance report of 
water companies, perform data processing performance and display performance data PAM. This 
infrastructure is owned and managed by the PAM host.
The design of this infrastructure is as minimal as possible and can be developed based on the needs. 
Architecture development can be carried out based on data growth, in this case, based on the incremental 
of the number of customers. This infrastructure consists of two servers. Application server application 
serves to host and perform data processing at the level of business logic and database server functions 
to store data in the database and performing data processing or back-end database level. Distribution 
server has a function to distribute the workload and isolate potential system disruption.
Both servers are connected into a computer network. The user PAM architecture must build a LAN 
network system with a strong structured and layered by utilizing the core switch. The server connected to 
the LAN core switch network while the user can be connected to the access switch, which is connected to 
the core switch. Users will access the system through the network application. No installation is required 
on the user side of the application, because the application is developed using web-based approach.
Data exchange between PAM associated with Data Centre is done through a network of Virtual Private 
Network (VPN). VPN network should not be used for other data communications, it is only between 
the outside of PAM and Data Centre. This network is protected by a firewall, an intrusion prevention 
system and detection system (IPS/IDS) from hacker attacks and those that are not authorized. Antivirus 
and anti-spyware were installed on the servers and workstations that will access a system to avoid virus 
attacks, trojans and malware.
The user of PAM system also required an update to the system used to ensure the performance and 
security of information systems. Updates and patches are provided periodically by Data Centre and 
informed to the user PAM the system. The coordination and technical assistance to be provided Data 
Centre system updates via the service desk system. The following is a diagram of the architecture for 
the system infrastructure in PAM.
In this architecture, the devices have a minimum specification that must be met, the minimum speci-
fication calculated such that the system performance can be optimized. Improved device specification 
can be done by PAM by considering the improvement of the performance, i.e. increased capacity, the 
volume of data processing and internal policies of each PAM. The following is the minimum specs PAM 
system infrastructure architecture.

213
Mobile Water Meter System in Android Environment
﻿
Table 1. Minimum specs of PAM system infrastructure
No.
Devices
Specification
Amount
1
VPN Connection
1 Mbps Symmetric 
1
2
Firewall
1
3
IPS/IDS
1
4
Switch
24 Port 10/100 Mbps 
Rackmount 
Manageable
1
5
Application Server
Quad Core Processor 
Intel Xeon 
2 NIC 10/100/10 Gb 
Memory 8 MB 
Storage 1 TB 
Support RAID 1 & 5
1
6
Database Server
Quad Core Processor 
Intel Xeon 
2 NIC 10/100/10 Gb 
Memory 8 MB 
Storage 1 TB 
Support RAID 1 & 6
1
Figure 4. PAM network architecture

214
Mobile Water Meter System in Android Environment
﻿
RESULT AND DISCUSSION
The mobile application that was developed, provide several features to read the numbers on the image 
record water meters from the customer and then the instruments can send those images through the 
android-based smartphones, as shown in Figure 5.
Android-based App image readers on the meter recorder has limitation, in Figure 6, smartphone is 
a mobile device. The limitations are as the following:
1. 	
Disorders Transmission: Many factors could cause signal interference in mobile computing 
devices such as weather, terrain and distance of the tool mobile computing with the transmitter 
signal closest point. Besides signal reception inside the tunnel, in some buildings and rural areas 
are often poor signals.
2. 	
Lack of Bandwidth: Internet access to this equipment is generally slower than wired connections, 
using technologies such as GPRS, EDGE and 3G networks are new came out technologies. High-
speed wireless LAN is not expensive, but has a very limited range.
3. 	
Use of Power: When an electrical outlet or portable generator is not available, mobile computers 
must rely entirely on battery power. However un-expensive backup batteries such as power bank 
can be used nowadays, it is available in the market at minimum cost.
4. 	
The User Interface Tool: The screen and keyboard are likely to be small sometimes make it 
difficult to use such device. Alternate input methods like voice input or handwriting recognition 
requires training to use it. In this case, the image was used taken from camera.
Figure 5. Android-based app for data input from water meter image

215
Mobile Water Meter System in Android Environment
﻿
Based on the above limitation, the testing is done in several PAM in terms of the use of the system 
and the results of the use of the system. Table 2 presents system usage result of testing in percentage.
The alternative solution for the above constraints and limitations, the synchronous data feature was 
developed. The water meter data was sent directly to the server if there is an internet connection or the 
data can be stored temporarily on the device. As shown in Figure 7, synchronization was used to transmit 
data that previously was stored on the device to the server. During the data transmission, a report will 
be shown if the data has been received all, part or none at all. Synchronization has preferences i.e. auto-
matic, performed by the user, or periodically, which can be set according to the situation on the ground.
To avoid human error after the data is sent to the server, the package data is verified by the officers 
manually at headquarters. If the data is from the ground and numbers in the image is appropriate or 
match, the billing will be process based on the available record data meter, and then the result will be 
sent to the branch office to be billed to the customer.
Figure 6. The results of the use water meter system application
Table 2. The limitation of mobile application usage
Interruption of Transmission
Lack of Bandwidth
Battery Usage
Human Error
PAM A
40
10
10
40
PAM B
20
30
10
20
PAM C
20
30
10
30
PAM D
10
20
10
10

216
Mobile Water Meter System in Android Environment
﻿
As the results, this system gives a lot of benefits to PAM, these include the following:
1. 	
Time: In terms of time, a lot of time processing was saved. Registrar meters do not need to create 
a report that includes the area of recording. Officers at headquarters do not have to calculate how 
much water usage for each customers, then they only do the verification of the water meter data 
set, and the system will be able to calculate customer bills.
2. 	
Fees: Costs incurred at the beginning was quite big for the first investment, but this is normal, 
especially for the server and some smartphones but after that PAM can reduce operating costs by 
saving hours of work on the registrar meters.
3. 	
Accuracy of Data: The accuracy of the data is a priority for this system. Data record meter will 
increase the data accuracy after the process verification using image record meter instruments.
The results of application usage PAM’s system in a few PAM is shown in Table 3 and Figure 8, 
System Usage result of testing in percentage.
Figure 7. Synchronization data feature in mobile app
Table 3. The results of the use water meter system application
Cost
Time
Accuracy
PAM A
40
50
70
PAM B
20
30
50
PAM C
30
40
60
PAM D
40
60
60

217
Mobile Water Meter System in Android Environment
﻿
CONCLUSION
Water meter reader applications may improve the performance of PAM Company effectively. This water 
meter application is expected to provide fast, precise, accurate and efficient data reading for customers. 
There is still a shortage of applications, where the officers are also asked to input the customer number 
and record number of the meter.
As the follow up from this development, PAM company is expected to hold socialization and training 
to all users of information systems applications. The level of security of information systems needs to be 
improved because there are several sensitive data including the financial transactions. It is also necessary 
to build a backup data systems regularly to reduce the risk of permanent data loss.
The digital image for water meter with the image recognition can be developed from the mobile de-
vice. This application will recognize the meter reading shown through the image. Officers do not need 
to enter data of water meter and admin services do not need to verify the meter record numbers. The 
application will read the number on the image and send it to the server from the ground then the server 
process it to produce a customer’s bill automatically.
For further development, the system needs to be added in relation to water leakage to facilitate the 
monitoring and prevention of water leakage.
REFERENCES
Cao, L., Tian, J., & Liu, Y. (2008). Remote Real Time Automatic Meter Reading System Based on 
Wireless Sensor Networks. 3rd International Conference on Innovative Computing Information and 
Control. doi:10.1109/ICICIC.2008.443
Dayama, R., Chatla, A., Shaikh, H., & Kulkarni, M. (2014). Android Based Meter Reader using OCR. 
International Journal of Computer Science and Mobile Computing, 3(3), 536–539.
Figure 8. The results of the use water meter system application

218
Mobile Water Meter System in Android Environment
﻿
Guo, J., Li, H., & Yu, P. (2011). Water Meter ID Identifying and Reading System Based on RFID 
Technology. Fourth International Symposium on Computational Intelligence and Design (ISCID). 
doi:10.1109/ISCID.2011.48
Hsia, S., Sheu, M., & Chang, Y. (2013). Arrow-Pointer Sensor Design for Low-Cost Water Meter. IEEE 
Sensors Journal, 13(4), 1281–1287. doi:10.1109/JSEN.2012.2232038
Islam, N. S., & Wasi-ur-Rahman, M. (2009). An intelligent SMS-based remote Water Metering Sys-
tem. 12th International Conference on Computers and Information Technologypp. doi:10.1109/IC-
CIT.2009.5407279
Rathnayaka,, M.R.M.S.B., & Jayasinghe,, I.D.S., EnitJayanth, Swarnajith, S.I., Manamendra, M.A.S.C., 
& Wimalaratne, G. (2013). Mobile Based Electricity Billing System (MoBEBIS). International Journal 
of Scientific and Research Publications, 3(4), 1–5.
Shin, G.-W., Hong, S.-T., & Lee, Y.-W. (2009). Walk-by meter reading system of digital water meter 
based on ubiquitous. Journal of Institute of Control, Robotics and Systems, 15(7), 688–693. doi:10.5302/J.
ICROS.2009.15.7.688
Sood, R., Kaur, M., & Lenka, H. (2103). Design and Development of Automatic Water flow Meter. 
International Journal of Computer Science, Engineering and Applications, 3(3), 49-59.
Tanvir, A., Suzan, M., Manirul, I., & Rakib, U. (n.d.). Automatic Electric Meter Reader System: A Cost-
Feasible Alternative Approach In Meter Reader For Bangladesh Perspective Using Low-Cost Digital 
Wattmeter And Wimax Technology. International J. Eng. Tech, 8(3), 800-807.
Wasi-ur-Rahman, M., Rahman, M. T., Khan T.H., & Kabir, S.M.L. (2009). Design of an intelligent SMS 
based remote metering system. International Conference on Information and Automation.

219
Copyright © 2016, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter  11
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-4666-9438-5.ch011
ABSTRACT
The usefulness of mobile phones nowadays has gone beyond making calls and sending text messages. 
In fact, most of applications available on desktop computer are presently easily accessible on mobile 
devices, especially smartphone based on Androids, iOS, and Windows phone platforms. However, at 
the same time, malware is increasingly becoming pervasive on a mobile platform for financial, social 
and political exploitation. This chapter examines the trends of mobile malware and different efforts of 
anti-malware writers and researchers in addressing mobile malware on smartphones.
INTRODUCTION
Malware writers have continuing to model their malware towards mobile applications due to the per-
vasiveness of these important tools and its various benefits. Days have gone when mobile phones were 
using for calling and sending text messages. Several operations like financial transaction, internet bank-
ing, email and text messaging, information communication, private and corporate activities, effective 
data storage, audio and video coverage, e-commerce, e-government, e-transaction, multimedia among 
others are now available on the mobile phones most especially smartphones. Smartphones are designed 
to perform virtually all the functions that can be carried out on the desktop computers. The most popular 
operating system (OS) that allow smartphones to perform these functions are Android by Google, iOS 
by Apple and Windows 7 OS. The paper examined the trend of malware on the Android phone and iOS 
due to their acceptability and ubiquity.
The Trend of Mobile 
Malwares and Effective 
Detection Techniques
Olawale Surajudeen Adebayo
International Islamic University Malaysia, Malaysia
Normaziah Abdul Aziz
International Islamic University Malaysia, Malaysia

220
The Trend of Mobile Malwares and Effective Detection Techniques
﻿
Malwares are malicious applications or software targeted at operating system or internet. Mobile 
malwares are malicious software specifically designed to target the mobile operating system. Smartphone 
malwares along the line are malicious executable designed to hamper the normal operation of smart-
phones like Androids, iOS, and windows 7 phones for various reasons like financial gain, challenges 
or system testing and information stealing. Efforts have been made by several researchers to develop 
malware detection system to bring about eradication or reduction to the dastard effects of malware on 
the smartphones. Detection systems are the system design including antimalware algorithm, intrusion 
detection system, etc. to bring solution to the malware problem. However, old malware detections bank 
on the signature, IP addresses and anomaly behaviours to detect malware whereas malware writers are 
evolving new strategy every day.
As anti-malware writers are successfully developing various algorithms against existing malware, 
malware writers also continue to change their stealthy and obfuscation techniques in order to hide their 
malicious code. The task of preventing mobile facilities therefore lies on device’s security mechanism, and 
the stakeholders’ education. For example, some malwares rely on user interaction before their execution, 
while others exploit the bugs in the operating system of these important facilities. Moreover, Analysis 
of malware has to do with identifying the instances of malware by different classification schemes us-
ing the attributes of known malware characteristics (Adebayo, Mabayoje, Mishra, & Osho, 2012). The 
remaining part of the paper is arranged as follows; section two is used to discuss the related researches 
to this work. In section three and four, mobile application operating system and Security fundamentals 
were examined respectively. Existing malware detection techniques were examined in section V. Future 
work was discussed in section six, section seven was used to highlight recommendations. Finally, the 
paper concluded with section nine.
BACKGROUND
This research studies the existing literatures on the trend of android malware, its analysis and detection 
system. The usefulness of mobile facilities such as smartphones has increased their target by malware 
over time. This, in order hand has made the field of malware detection a daunting task most especially 
on a mobile platform. A malware is a computer program that has various kinds of malicious intents 
(Karami et al., 2013). Mobile malware on the other hand is malicious software that is specifically de-
signed to attack mobile facilities i.e. mobile phones and smartphones (Buennemeyer et al., 2013). Some 
commonly known Malware categories are viruses, trojans and worms. Malicious programs present an 
incessant threat to the privacy and security of sensitive data and the availability of critical services at 
crucial point in time (Adebayo et al., 2012). The first observable feature adopted by malware most detec-
tor at the outset of smartphone is battery power consumption (Thanh, 2013; Blasing et al., 2010; Eder 
et al., 2013). The technique was basically to the mobile phone power consumption and compares it with 
the normal power consumption in order to detect occurrence of anomaly. The first malware specifically 
written for Symbian OS platform was discovered (Cabir) in 2004. After the infection successfully carried 
out by Cabir malware and its variants (Kim et al., 2008, pp. 239-252), researchers proposed approaches 
and developed different mechanisms in order to detect malware on a mobile phone. With the advent of 
smartphones, malware has consistently double on the mobile phone due to its ubiquity.
The F-Secure’s Threat report (Yap, 2013) stated that the number of Android malware has been dou-
bling year-on-year since 2011 up to the first quarter of 2013. In a bid to curtail the effect of malware 

221
The Trend of Mobile Malwares and Effective Detection Techniques
﻿
on android smartphone, (Karami, Mohamed, Parnian, & Angelos, 2013, pp. 18-20) in a paper titled 
Behavioral Analysis of Android Applications Using Automated Instrumentation, presented effective 
security inspection mechanisms for identification of malicious applications for Android mobile applica-
tions, where they developed a comprehensive software inspection framework for android smartphone. 
This system only works on android phone. In an attempt to identify the effectiveness of application 
hardening (app. hardening) on the mobile platform and examining the limitation of malware on a mobile 
platform, (Adolphi, 2012) investigated the effectiveness of application isolation on the mobile platform. 
This work only considered virus and malware group of malware on mobile platform. Another work by 
(Yu et al., 2013) evaluated popular commercial anti-virus tools anomaly based detection using decision 
based tree. (Abhijit, Xin, Kang & Taejoon, 2008) proposed a behavioural detection on mobile handsets 
using a support vector machine (SVM) algorithm to build a behavioural malware detection system that 
work on a platform dependent operating system like Symbian phones. In the same vein, the behavioural-
based Android malware detection system by (Abela et al., 2013) was designed to categorize different 
Android applications in the market.
(Bläsing, Schmidt, Batyuk, Camtepe, & Albayrak, 2010) also develop an Android Application Sandbox 
system for suspicious software detection using dynamic, single API, clustering and fake API injection 
techniques. This application only works on an android platform. (Eder, Rodler, Vymazal, & Zeilinger, 
2010) developed an expandable and modular framework for analyzing Android applications called 
ANANAS. The application takes care of common needs for dynamic malware analysis and provides 
an interface for the development of plugins a framework for analyzing Android applications. (Holla & 
Katti, 2013, pp. 486 – 490) discussed Android mobile platform for the mobile application development, 
layered approach and the details of its security information. (Walenstein, Deshotels, & Lakhotia, 2012, 
pp. 51–52) proposes an approach for selecting features of mobile malware by using knowledge of mali-
cious program structure to heuristically identify malicious portions of applications
Analysis carried out by Cyber Security of Malaysia report (Amsden and Varol, November 2013, pp. 
1029-1034), revealed the variant of malware, which include SMS.Trojan, and Geinimi. The report re-
vealed that while SMS.Trojan was like Hello world code of SDK and used to send fraudulent messages 
to some host, Geinimi was a malware that used to capture information on an android phone like IMEI 
number, IMSI number, Contacts, Personal information among others. (Shetty, 2013) also analysed a 
malware called iCalender.apk using static analysis and found out that this malware was designed to send 
suspicious messages to a designated number for a malicious purpose without the knowledge of the victim.
According to the static and dynamic analysis carried out on DroidKungFu2-A using a reverse engi-
neering technique, (Varghese, 2011) was able to identify DroidKungFu2-A as a malware designated to 
send an unauthorized message from legitimate user’s mobile to a certain number. Geinimi also according 
to (Varghese, 2011) was a bot that connect with a remote server and delete and steal sms, and make an 
unauthorised call. In another paper by (Meurer & Wismuller, 2012) titled An Infrastructure for Permission-
Based Filtering of Android Apps, Presented APEFS, an infrastructure that enables a user to filter apps 
by permissions before trying to install them. This infrastructure simplifies the usage of the permission 
system by allowing users to think about security and privacy before even searching for an application.
(Thanh, 2013, pp. 213-224) based on the samples classified malware into existing families or addi-
tion of a new family using collection of 58 malware families and 1485 malware samples and introduced 
three different techniques to analyse the samples. (Rastogi, Chen, & Enck, 2013) developed DroidCha-
meleon, a systematic framework with various transformation techniques, and used it to test ten popular 
commercial anti-malware applications for Android worrisome. The results showed that none of these 

222
The Trend of Mobile Malwares and Effective Detection Techniques
﻿
tools is resistant against common malware transformation techniques. V. Rastogi et al. [44] developed 
Apps Playground which is a framework for automated dynamic security analysis Android applications 
to analyse applications for both malware and grayware.
(Zhou & Jiang, May 2012) characterized existing Android malware based on their attributes. In 
another paper, (Zhou, Wang, Zhou, & Jiang, February 2012) studied the detection of malicious applica-
tions on popular Android Markets by proposing permission based behavioural footprinting scheme to 
detect new samples of known Android malware families and applying heuristics-based filtering scheme 
to identify certain inherent behaviours of unknown malicious families. (Grace, Zhou, Zhang, Zou, & 
Jiang, 2012) proposed a proactive scheme to spot zero-day Android malware by relying on malware 
samples and their signatures, by specifically developed an automated system called RiskRanker to scal-
ably analyze whether a particular app exhibits dangerous behaviour (e.g., launching a root exploit or 
sending background SMS messages). The output was then used to produce a prioritized list of reduced 
apps that merit further investigation.
(Vala, Sarga, & Benda, 2013) examined the recent advances in reverse engineering popular mobile 
operating systems, namely iOS and Android. (Burguera, Zurutuza, & Nadjm-Tehrani, 2011) developed 
a framework for collection of traces from an unlimited number of real users based on crowdsourcing 
that was used to analyze the data collected in the central server using two types of data sets: those from 
artificial malware created for test purposes, and those from real malware found in the wild (malware 
contained in Steamy Window and Monkey Jump 2 applications). The method shown to be an effective 
means of isolating the malware and alerting the users of a downloaded malware.
(Meyer, Freudiger, & Hubaux, 2011) examines the development phases (submission, update, us-
age, development, validation, download and ranking), the misbehaviour that a developer could do like 
sandbox escape, developer impersonation, multiple download and ranking, social engineering etc. The 
work suggested that data filters and sandboxes will become standards in the smartphone as firewalls do 
in computers. (Yan, Li, Li, & Deng, 2009, pp. 242– 249) study the state of-the-art of mobile malware, 
as well as the progress of academic research and industrial effort against mobile malware. This research 
also analyzes three potential directions for effective malware detection and prevention on mobile phones. 
(Enck et al., 2010) developed a Taintdroid to provide users with adequate control over and visibility 
into how third-party applications use their private data. The framework analyses the behaviours of ap-
plication using sufficient contextual information about the data that leaves a device and its destination. 
(Anubis, 2014) is the Windows operating system malware analysis version that analyse applications on 
a windows for malware. A modified version of Anubis for Androids applications is called Codename 
Andrubis (Lindorfer, 2014). This malware detector on the Androids however lacked in public expository 
of its inner architecture for further research analysis
Droidscope (Yan & Yin, 2012) is another malware analysis tool built on top of QEMU and relies on 
introspection of an emulated system running the application in question. This detector uses dynamic 
analysis techniques to detect malware and exports APIs. (Zhao, Zhang, Wang, & Yuan, 2013) uses artificial 
immunology to develop a framework for malware detection based on dynamic behaviours of smartphone 
applications. In a bid to describe the execution events essential to malware infection strategies of files 
and processes, (Morales, Main, Luo, Xu, & Sandhu, 2011) built an MiT rules abstract approach, using 
strong and weak bonds between processes and files, which are based on transitivity of information and 
creator/created relationships. The rules were implemented on the Windows Vista operating system using 
a custom built tool named MiTCoN which was used in a small scale analysis and infection tree creation 
of a diverse set of 5800 known malware samples

223
The Trend of Mobile Malwares and Effective Detection Techniques
﻿
(Shang, 2012, pp. 29–33) used an optimal control theory to derive optimal strategy of the botnet 
herder as a feedback on the rate of infection with predetermined levels of entrance and defence. The 
derived optimal policies from this research gave useful information for the detection and prevention of 
botnet attacks.
1. MOBILE APPLICATION OPERATING SYSTEM 
(SYMBIAN, ANDROIDS, IOS, WINDOW 7)
These are operating systems which increase the smartness of the mobile phones. The phones operating 
using these operating systems virtually have capability and potential to perform most functions avail-
able on the desktop computer through the aid of internet and other communication facilities. The basic 
operating system allows smartphones to perform these functions are Symbian operating system, windows 
operating system from Microsoft, Android operating system from Google, and iOS from Apple. Android 
operating system being an open source OS can be obtained through its official market (Googleplay, 2013) 
and other open market i.e. (Appstore, 2013), (GetJar, 2013). Windows operating system can be obtained 
from Microsoft while iOS is a closed operating system and can only be installed on the iPhone or other 
apple products through the permission of the Apple incorporation.
2. SMARTPHONES’ SECURITY FUNDAMENTALS
Smartphones Malware Vulnerabilities
The smartphones’ vulnerabilities can be classified into two basic categories: Basic implementation errors 
or design flaws and Lack of permission control (Yan, Li, Li, & Deng, 2009).
•	
Basic Implementation Errors: The design errors usually occurred as a result of improper valida-
tion of input parameters. An unrecognized code in SMS and Caller ID is an example of certain 
vulnerability that may crash type of smartphones. Other vulnerability could be insecure exception 
handlers for hardware failures, which may be exploited by mobile malwares.
•	
Lack of Permission Control: on the other hand cause by the unrestrictive designed of some mo-
bile operating system, where mobile malware can exploit the high level privilege, if it is allow to 
run by the user like in Android operating system. Some of the identified vulnerabilities are listed 
below with their exploit name.
Smartphones Assets and Entry Points
The potential threat on the smartphone is usually determined by the important assets and entry points that 
are exploitable by malware on particular smartphone. Malware on the smartphones possesses permission 
that is granted to normal application (Adolphi, 2012) since administrative privileges are only obtainable 
on the mobile platform with the use of root exploit. Therefore, malware can only infect the smartphone 
through the available and accessible applications on the smartphone. The interaction possibilities that exist 
between these assets which can compromise the assets referred to as entry points. Due to the complexity 

224
The Trend of Mobile Malwares and Effective Detection Techniques
﻿
in the nature of finding the threat on a smartphone, research in (Adolphi, 2012) proposed analyzing all 
data flow from the entry points to the assets of a system which might not be feasible on a large system. 
Assets of a smartphone include application data, application services, and application data and flow. On 
the other hand, the entry points on a smartphone could be filesystem, I/O operations (memory or hard 
drive), communication devices (TCP/IP), user interface, and program execution.
Smartphones Application (Android and iOS) Protection Mechanism
There are different protection mechanisms by different smartphone operating system provided to en-
hance their security. Common protection mechanism include Sandboxing, Permission, Code signing, 
Encryption, Memory protection etc.
Sandboxing
A sandbox is a security mechanism that prevents the operation or action of one application from affect-
ing or inhibiting the operation of another. Sandboxing is therefore, a process or measure put in place 
to ensure that one application cannot disturb or inhibit the operation of another application. Sandbox is 
generally designed to implement the principle of less privilege that is every program and every user of 
the system should operate using the least set of privileges necessary to complete the job.” (Saltzer, & 
Schroeder, 1975).
The POSIX permission from the underlined Linux kernel is being used by Android to assign a unique 
identifier to different user (Klement, 2011) in order to ensure access control for user system calls as 
well as assign permissions for different operations like reading, writing and application execution. This 
permission can be assigned to an individual or group of users which give authority to an individual or 
group of users to have access to an application at a point in time. Sandboxing, however in iOS is provided 
by the Apple through the use of Apple XNU sandbox framework, used in Mac OS X. The implementa-
tion of sandboxing on the desktop however allows the examined packets to be forwarded to its intended 
destination (Casey, 2013) or be deleted if it deem malicious or forward to the virtual environment, which 
could be later deleted by the system administrator for total rebuilt.
Permissions
In order to run some applications on the smartphone, there is need to provide additional permissions 
such as to browse a page on the internet or require information from a GPS receiver. These types of 
applications enforce the user to exit from the sandbox. In order to protect the critical infrastructures as 
being done by sandbox, user shall require additional permission, which is varying according to different 
mobile platform as illustrated by (Oberheide & Jahanian, 2010). The basic two basic permissions offer 
by Android phone are permission to the system resources and permission to the other components of 
the application. iOS on the other hand provided permission to the high level functionality, which are 
only granted during application runtime. Another permission strategy by iOS is in form of entitlements. 
Entitlement is a permission that is granted to an application independent of sandbox rules and without 
involving the user (Adolphi, 2012).

225
The Trend of Mobile Malwares and Effective Detection Techniques
﻿
Code Signing
Code signing is the process of signing executables and scripts digitally to authenticate the identity of 
software writer. Code signing becomes necessary in order to ensure the integrity of an application, to 
ascertain the identity of the code writer and to ensure that only examined and approved applications 
are installed on the system. The code signing verification in Android is usually done by the developer 
whenever a user attempts to install an application. In addition, code signing also takes place whenever 
an application is need to be updated to ensure that update is from the trusted developer (Barrera & Van, 
2010). However, the problem associated with the code signing is in the use of key where attacker can 
download an application, repackage it and sign it with his own key (Davi, Dmitrienko, Sadeghi, & Wi-
nandy, 2010). Another problem associated with code signing is that user can be cajoled to run unsigned 
or invalidated code, which can revealed the private key of the user.
Code signing in iOS is usually performed by the Apple after the approval of such application for 
Apple store. However, developer can download provisional profile that contains his certificate during 
the development of code, which enable him to sign with his key. Code signing in iOS is purposefully 
to ensure the integrity of application and to enforce user to install only application that is signed and 
approved by Apple.
Encryption
Mobile encryption is a technique of transforming data or plaintext on the mobile phone into an unintel-
ligible form before storing it on the phone or sending it over an insecure network to the receiver. The 
Advance Encryption Standard 128 serves as a protection for the encrypted key and prevents unauthorized 
access and storage of data without user legitimate password. Latest versions of android phone, Android 
3.0 and above provide full filesystem encryption, which encrypted user data in the kernel using dmcrypt 
implementation of AES128 with CBC and ESSIV: SHA26 (Online). The encryption password together 
with a random salt was hashed repeatedly with SHA1, using the standard PBKDF2 algorithm to decrypt 
the filesystem key and resist forms of password guessing attacks.
Due to the nature of usefulness of smartphone which include storage of vita information like account 
information, private medical data, and personal calendars (Online, March 2014), it is very imperative 
to install mobile encryption software, to ensure the security of these vita assets in case smartphone is 
hacked. Mobile encryption software converts the data to be stored on the smartphone into an unintel-
ligible form so that even if hacker hack and have access to the data on the system, such data will be 
meaningless. Mobile encryption software, much like the traditional security and encryption software 
scans websites and downloads for potential threats. In addition, this software filters phone calls and text 
messages in order to encrypt useful files and information. Popular mobile encryption software includes 
Kaspersky Mobile Security, AVG Mobilation Anti-Virus, Norton Mobile Security, NQ Mobile Security, 
ESET Mobile Security, McAfee Mobile Security, F-Secure Mobile Security and many others. More of 
these Mobile security software can be found (Online).

226
The Trend of Mobile Malwares and Effective Detection Techniques
﻿
Memory Protection Management
Memory protection is done in order to safeguard the information store on the memory and to ensure the 
recovery of data in case a user forgot password on the smartphone. In order to protect the data on the 
memory devices, data could be backed up or memory could be locked up to avoid unauthorized access 
to the information it contains. Several features and tools were included in Android that makes security 
issues relating to memory abuses stiffer. These tools were embedded in the development packages of 
Android like SDK, Compilers, Davilk, and other Operating System and they strengthen the security 
capacity of memory.
The memory management protection tools of the Androids include Propolice (a tool incorporated in 
Android 1.5 to prevent stack buffer overruns), the safe_iop (tool reduces the integer overflows), OpenBSD 
calloc (prevent the occurrence of integer overflows during memory allocation and prevent double free 
vulnerabilities and mass consolidation attacks). Other tools are Position Independent Executable (PIE) 
support, dmesg_restrict enabled which avoid leaking kernel addresses, FORTIFY_SOURCE that protect 
system code, Read-only relocations, Format string vulnerability protection, Linux mmap_min_addr that 
control null pointer dereference privilege escalation (Online).
Mobile Malware Attacks
Attacks on a smartphone basically are for financial (cash stealing and diversion) and political gain (in-
formation manipulation). Financial gain is a kind of attack aims at defrauding the users of their financial 
value. It could direct the account information or financial transaction to an unwanted destination or ac-
count. Information stealing on the other hand is an attack aims at possessing access to vital information 
of an authentic user of the system. This attack may use system SMS, MMS, or email to open backdoor 
(Bose & Shin, 2006) for malware writer or system hacker. Denial of service is another attack that crashes 
and reboots mobile phone (Yan, Li, Li, & Deng, 2009). Trojan horse is a type of malware that usually 
attack the smartphone using the exploits available code on the internet. Destruction attack targets towards 
deleting the system important files or vita user data for challenges purposes or system testing.
Mobile Malware Method of Propagation
•	
User Interaction: This is a method whereby malware lure its host to interact with it in order to 
cause execution.
•	
Social Engineering Techniques: These techniques include embedding malware in a game, sys-
tem patch malware, sending pretentious messages to authorize user etc. to lure user to run mal-
ware on a smartphone.
•	
Software Download: malware may hide inside pdf files or other files and infect the phone during 
downloading.

227
The Trend of Mobile Malwares and Effective Detection Techniques
﻿
5. EXISTING MALWARE DETECTION TECHNIQUES AND APPROACHES
Existing Malware Detection Techniques
Signature Based
This approach to malware detection adopts a syntactic-level of code instructions in order to detect malware 
by analyzing the code during program compilation. This technique usually covers complete program 
code and within a short period of time. However, this method has limitation by ignoring the semantics 
of instructions, which allows malware obfuscation during the program’s run-time (Adebayo, Mabayoje, 
Mishra, & Osho, 2012). A pattern-marching approach by (Davi, Dmitrienko, Sadeghi, & Winandy, 2011,, 
pp. 346–360) such as commercial antivirus is an example of signature-based malware detection where 
the scanner scans for a sequence of byte within a program code to identify and report a malicious code.
Behavioural Based
Behavioural based malware detection adopts the attributes of malware for effective detection based on 
predefined classification algorithm for malicious attributes. This approach does not only perform sur-
face scanning but also identify the malware’s action. The approach generates database of a malicious 
behaviours by studying a distinct number of families of malware on a target operating system (Adebayo, 
Mabayoje, Mishra, & Osho, 2012). The study in (Abhijit, Xin, Kang & Taejoon, 2008) develops a two 
stage mapping technique that constructs signatures at run-time from the monitored system event and API 
calls. The system trains a classifier using a support vector machines (SVMs) to distinguish a malicious 
program from normal application behaviours. This detection system is capable of detecting metamorphic 
malware which keep reproducing.
Heuristic Approaches
This approach use some defined rules and algorithm in order to detect malicious characteristics in the 
binary code. This approach is commonly used in temporal logic formal presentation of malware.
Trends of Malware Detection Approaches
Blacklisting Approach
Traditional anti-virus is characterized with the use of known bad files as their signature in order to detect 
those files or software that are malicious. Immediately such file is encountered during file scanning, the 
detection mechanism in the detection model will raise alarm and thereby tag the file as malicious. The 
mechanism works by creating and storing database of existing known bad files and compare such with 

228
The Trend of Mobile Malwares and Effective Detection Techniques
﻿
the scanned files and programs. Existing blacklisting approaches includes signature based, behavioural 
based and heuristic based malware detection. These approaches are very fast in detection, effective and 
may involve little cost. However, the approaches are not enough to detect malware on the smartphone 
because most Android malware is only triggered by certain phone events or user interaction.
These approaches are also facing challenges by a large chunk of malware being release daily on the 
internet by malware writers. In addition, the rate at which malware writer is using stealth technique to 
evade detection and morph their malware make this technique less effective and call for an improved 
approach. Therefore, there is need to combine the simulation of various smartphone events and user 
interactions together with classification techniques in order to complement the previous detection on 
the smartphone.
Application Whitelisting Approach
Application whitelisting is another approach of attempting to block malicious files and programs by 
allowing only known good files and programs and disallow others. The general concept is to permit 
only known good files and tag other files and programs as malicious as against the traditional malware 
detectors that block known bad files and programs and allow other files. Whitelisting approach is the 
reverse model of antivirus algorithm by denies all executable files but allows only known good files. 
This is accomplished by creating a list of known or approved file hashes and only allowing files with 
approved hashed to execute (Beechey & Caudle, 2011).
Application whitelisting is one of necessary tool to deal with malware, since many blacklisting ap-
proaches has fail to detect zero-day malware as malware writer continue to use stealth techniques to 
obfuscate and morph their malicious code in order to evade detection. Among major present stakeholders 
in the provision of application whitelisting are Bit9 parity, Coretrace Bouncer, Faronics Anti-Executable, 
Microsoft AppLocker, McAfee Application Control, Servant Protection, Lumension Application Control 
etc. Bit9 parity is best known for their Global Software Registry that consist of file hashes and other 
pieces collection of file metadata such as product, publisher and trust level (available at http://www.bit9.
com). Parameters to indicate known good files and software in application whitelisting include digitally 
signed files, whitelist logs, collection of trusted sites, parity software, anti-virus or intrusion detection 
logs, attribute of threats, files larger than 1 MB, centralize log of executable files on workstations etc.
Application Isolation Approach
This is a technique of isolating data to a particular application on a window phone. Application isola-
tion technique helps to prevent other application like malware that could access legitimate application’s 
data and transmit it to its writer (Online). This technology provides a dictionary-based model for storing 
application setting that enable private folder and files creation, and storage of relational data in a local 
database using LINQ to S (Online). The question of applying this technique in other smartphone operat-
ing system to protect malware or other unwanted or malicious applications remains a quest of research.
Virtual Environment Malware Detection
Malware detection from a virtual machine (Meurer & Wismuller, 2012, pp. 1–11) correlates suspicious 
network activity with suspicious registry access in order to detect Malware with a higher confidence 

229
The Trend of Mobile Malwares and Effective Detection Techniques
﻿
and lower false positives. The solution lies on the ability to modify a virtual machine to directly access 
the host operating system. The VMs is having and reading higher security level than the host operating 
system. The host feeds network packets to the VM analysis while all other writes to the VM from the 
host were disallowed. VM monitors can boot individual programs into separated, individual Machines, 
which boot directly into the program, without any user interfaces or shells. Putting all components in 
a virtual machine and allowing the RegBAM direct access to the host’s registry as against (Meurer & 
Wismuller, 2012, pp. 1–11) that access host from virtual.
6. FUTURE WORK
The researchers intend to carry out a comprehensive analysis of malware on an android smartphone, 
classifying malware using data mining technique and developing a detection system for the detection of 
android malware by combining supervised and unsupervised leaning strategies.
7. RECOMMENDATIONS
The followings are some of the recommendations for the effective use of smartphone for the protection 
against malware:
•	
User Education: Since many malware can only request for the user permission before installing 
themselves on the phone, hence a need to sensitise the users to be wary of strange application that 
may want to trick them into getting installing.
•	
Download and Install software and application from approved and trusted sources.
•	
Use of mobile anti-malware software.
8. CONCLUSION
This research reviews existing literatures on the detection of malware on a mobile platform most espe-
cially those using android operating system. The researchers examined several existing approaches in the 
analysis, detection and classification of malware in a bid to identify weaknesses and propose consolidated 
approach. The research finally highlighted best practices to prevent forms of attacks on a smartphone.
REFERENCES
Abela, K. J., Angeles, L., Kristopher, D. E., Alas, D., Raynier, P., Tolentino, J. R., & Gomez, M. (2013). 
An Automated Malware Detection System for Android using Behavior-based analysis. International 
Journal of Cyber-Security and Digital Forensics, 2(2).
Abhijit, B., Xin, H., Kang, G. S., & Taejoon, P. (2008). Behavioral detection of Malware on Mobile 
Handsets. ACM.

230
The Trend of Mobile Malwares and Effective Detection Techniques
﻿
Adebayo, O. S., Mabayoje, M. A., Mishra, A., & Osho, O. (2012). Malware Detection, Supportive 
Software Agents and Its Classification Schemes. International Journal of Network Security & Its Ap-
plications, 4(6), 33–49. doi:10.5121/ijnsa.2012.4603
Adolphi, B. (2012). Cross-Platform Evaluation of Mobile App Hardening. (Master’s Thesis). Gjøvik 
University College.
Amazon. (2014, December 20). Appstore for android. Retrieved from http://www.amazon.com/mobile-
apps/b?ie=UTF8\&node=2350149011
Amsden, N., & Varol, C., (2013). Malware Detection from a Virtual Machine. International Journal of 
Computer and Information Technology, 2(6), 1029-1034.
Anubis: Analyzing unknown binaries. (2014, June 10). Retrieved from http://anubis.iseclab.org/
Barrera, D., & Van, O. P., (2010). Secure software installation on smartphones. IEEE Security & Pri-
vacy, 9(3), 42–48.
Beechey, J., & Caudle, R. (2011). Application Hardening: Panacea or Propaganda. The SANS Institute 
InfoSec Reading Room.
Blasing, T., Schmidt, A., Batyuk, L., Camtepe, S. A., & Albayrak, S. (2010). An android application 
sandbox system for suspicious software detection. In 5th International Conference on Malicious and 
Unwanted Software (Malware 2010), Nancy, France. doi:10.1109/MALWARE.2010.5665792
Bose, A., & Shin, K. G. (2006). On Mobile Viruses Exploiting Messaging and Bluetooth Ser-vices. 
Securecomm and Workshops, 1(10).
Buennemeyer, T. K., Nelson, T. M., Clagett, L. M., Dunning, J. P., Marchany, R. C., & Tront, J. G. (2008). 
Mobile device profiling and intrusion detection using smart batteries. In Proceedings of the Proceed-
ings of the 41st Annual Hawaii International Conference on System, Sciences, HICSS ‘08. doi:10.1109/
HICSS.2008.319
Burguera, I., Zurutuza, U., & Nadjm-Tehrani, S. (2011). Crowdroid: Behavior-Based Malware Detection 
System for Android. In Proceedings of the 1st ACM workshop on Security and Privacy in Smartphones 
and mobile devices. doi:10.1145/2046614.2046619
Cabir. (2014, June 12). Smartphone Malware. Retrieved from http://www.f-secure.com/v-descs/cabir.shtml
Casey, B. (2013). Network Security “Why sandboxing technology is integral for advanced malware 
detection” (2013, November 19). Retrieved from http://searchsecurity.techtarget.com/tip/Why- sand-
boxing-technology-is-integral-for-advanced-malwaredetection?asrc=EM_ERU_24919192&utm_
medium=EM&utm_source=ERU&utm_campaign=20131118_ERU%20Transmission%20for%20
11/18/2013%20(UserUniverse:%20582281)_myka-reports@techtarget.com&src=5183365
Christodorescu, M., Jha, S., Maughan, D., Song, D., & Wang, C. (2007). Malware Detection: Advance 
Information Security. Academic Press.
Davi, L., Dmitrienko, A., Sadeghi, A., & Winandy, M. (2011). Privilege escalation attacks on Android. 
Information Security.

231
The Trend of Mobile Malwares and Effective Detection Techniques
﻿
Eder, T., Rodler, M., Vymazal, D., & Zeilinger, M. (2013). A Framework For Analyzing Android Ap-
plications. Workshop on Emerging Cyber threats and Countermeasures ECTCM, 2013. Retrieved from 
http://arxiv.org/find/all/1/all:+ANANAS/0/1/0/all/0/1
Enck, W., Gilbert, P., Chun, B., Cox, L. P., Jung, J., McDaniel, P., & Sheth, A. N. (2010). TaintDroid: 
An Information-Flow Tracking System for Realtime Privacy Monitoring on Smartphones. 9th USENIX 
Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI’10).
F-secure. Cabir. (2013, June 12). Retrieved from http://www.f-secure.com/v-descs/cabir.shtml
Getjar. (2015, June 30). Retrieved from http://www.getjar.com/
Googleplay. (2015, June 30). Retrieved from https://play.google.com/store
Grace, M., Zhou, Y., Zhang, Q., Zou, S., & Jiang, X. (2012). Risk Ranker: Scalable and Accurate Zero-
day Android Malware Detection. Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Mobile Systems, 
Applications and Services (MobiSys 2012). doi:10.1145/2307636.2307663
Holla, S., & Katti, M. M. (2013). Android based Mobile Application and Its Security. International 
Journal of Computer Trends and Technology, 3(3), 486 – 490.
Karami, M., Mohamed, E., Parnian, N., & Angelos, S. (2013). Behavioral Analysis of Android Applica-
tions Using Automated Instrumentation. In Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Software 
Security and Reliability (SERE). doi:10.1109/SERE-C.2013.35
Kim, H., Smith, J., & Shin, K. G. (2008). Detecting Energy-greedy Anomalies and Mobile Malware 
Variants. In Proceeding of the 6th international conference on Mobile systems, applications, and services, 
MobiSys ‘08. ACM. doi:10.1145/1378600.1378627
Klement, S. (2011). Sicherheitsaspekte der Google Android Platform. (Master’s thesis). Universität Bremen.
Lindorfer, M. (2012). Andrubis: A tool for analyzing unknown android applications. Retrieved from 
http://blog.iseclab.org/2012/06/04/andrubis-a-tool-for-analyzing-unknown-android-applications
Meurer, S., & Wismuller, R., (2012). An Infrastructure for Permission-Based Filtering of Android Apps. 
Academic Press.
Meyer, S., Freudiger, J., & Hubaux, J., (2011). Misbehavior in Mobile Application Markets: Security 
and Cooperation in Wireless Networks Mini-project. EPFL.
Microsoft Patterns & Practices. (2015, August 28). Using Isolated Storage on the Phone. Retrieved from 
http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/hh821020.aspx
Mobile Encryption Software Review Article. (2015, August 28). Retrieved from http://mobile-encryption-
software-review.toptenreviews.com/learning-center.html/download.pdf
Morales, J. A., Main, M., Luo, W., Xu, S., & Sandhu, R. (2011). Building malware infection trees. 6th 
International Conference on Malicious and Unwanted Software.

232
The Trend of Mobile Malwares and Effective Detection Techniques
﻿
Oberheide, J., & Jahanian, F. (2010). When mobile is harder than fixed (and vice versa): demystifying 
security challenges in mobile environments. In Proceedings of the Eleventh Workshop on Mobile Com-
puting Systems & Applications. doi:10.1145/1734583.1734595
Rastogi, V., Chen, Y., & Enck, W. (2013). Evaluating Android Anti-malware against Transformation 
Attacks. Technical Report NU-EECS-13-01.
Rastogi, V., Chen, Y., & Enck, W. (2013). AppsPlayground: Automatic Security Analysis of Smartphone 
Applications. Proceedings of the third ACM conference. Retrieved from dl.acm.org
Saltzer, J., & Schroeder, M. (1975). The protection of information in computer systems. Proceedings of 
the IEEE, 63(9), 1278–1308. doi:10.1109/PROC.1975.9939
Schmidt, A. U. (2012). MOBISEC 2012, Institute for Computer Sciences. Social Informatics and Tele-
communications Engineering, LNICST, 107, 1–11.
Shang, Y. (2012). Optimal attack strategies in a dynamic botnet defense model. Applied Mathematics 
and Information Sciences, 6, 29–33.
Shetty, D. (2013, June 12). Demystifying the Android Malware. Retrieved from http://packetstormsecurity.
org/files/view/104458/demystifying-android.pdf
Technopedia. (2013, November 12). Mobile Malware. Retrieved from http://www.techopedia.com/
definition/29477/mobile-malware
Thanh, H. L. (2013). Analysis of Malware Families on Android Mobiles: Detection Characteristics Rec-
ognizable by Ordinary Phone Users and How to Fix It. Journal of Information Security, 4(4), 213–224. 
doi:10.4236/jis.2013.44024
Vala, R., Sarga, L., & Benda, R. (2013). Security Reverse Engineering of Mobile Operating Systems: A 
Summary. Recent Advances in Computer Science.
Varghese, V. J. (2011). Dissecting Andro Malware. SAN Institute, School of Computer and Electronic 
Engineering, University of Essex.

233
The Trend of Mobile Malwares and Effective Detection Techniques
﻿
Walenstein, A., Deshotels, L., & Lakhotia, A. (2012). Program Structure-Based Feature Selection for 
Android Malware Analysis MOBISEC 2012, LNICST 107. Institute for Computer Sciences, Social In-
formatics and Telecommunications Engineering.
Yan, L. K., & Yin, H. (2012). Droidscope: seamlessly reconstructing the OS and dalvik semantic views 
for dynamic android malware analysis. In Proceedings of the 21st USENIX conference on Security 
symposium, ser. Security’12 (pp. 29–29). Berkeley, CA: USENIX Association. Retrieved from http://
dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2362793.2362822
Yan, Q., Li, Y., Li, T., & Deng, R. (January, 2009). A comprehensive study for RFID malwares on mobile 
devices. In 5th Workshop on RFID Security (RFIDsec 2009 Asia).
Yan, Q., Li, Y., Li, T., & Deng, R., (January, 2009). Insights into malware detection and prevention on 
mobile phones. Security Technology, 242 – 249.
Yap, V. (2013, December 12). Conficker is Most Detected Threat in Malaysia. Retrieved from http://
www.liveatpc.com/conficker-is-most-detected-threat-in-malaysia/
Yu, W., Zhang, H., & Xu, G. (2013). A study of malware detection on smart mobile devices. Proceed-
ings of the Society for Photo-Instrumentation Engineers, 8757.
Zhao, M., Zhang, T., Wang, J., & Yuan, Z. (2013). A Smartphone Malware Detection Framework based 
on Artificial Immunology. Journal of Networks, 8(2), 469–472.
Zhou, Y., & Jiang, X. (2012). Dissecting Android Malware: Characterization and Evolution. Proceedings 
of the 33rd IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy.
Zhou, Y., Wang, Z., Zhou, W., & Jiang, X. (2012). Hey, You, Get Off of My Market: Detecting Malicious 
Apps in Official and Alternative Android Markets. Proceedings of the 19th Network and Distributed 
System Security Symposium (NDSS 2012).

234
Copyright © 2016, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter  12
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-4666-9438-5.ch012
ABSTRACT
Mobile Ad Hoc Network (MANET) is a collection of communication devices or nodes that wish to com-
municate without any fixed infrastructure. The nodes in MANET themselves are responsible for dynami-
cally discovering other nodes to communicate. A number of challenges like open peer-to-peer network 
architecture, stringent resource constraints, shared wireless medium, dynamic network topology etc. are 
posed in MANET. In this research, we identify the existent security threats an ad hoc network faces, the 
security services required to be achieved and the countermeasures for attacks in each layer. To accomplish 
our goal, we have done literature survey in gathering information related to various types of attacks and 
solutions, as well as we have made comparative study to address the threats in different layers. Finally, 
we have identified the challenges and proposed solutions to overcome them. There is no general algo-
rithm that suits well against the most commonly known attacks such as wormhole, rushing attack, etc.
1. INTRODUCTION
Mobile Ad Hoc Network (MANET) is the category of wireless networks which do not require any fixed 
infrastructure or base stations or in other words Mobile Ad Hoc Network is a collection of wireless mobile 
communication devices or nodes that communicate with each other without any fixed infrastructure or 
centralized administration. The nodes in MANET themselves are responsible for dynamically discovering 
other nodes to communicate. In MANET, it may be necessary for one wireless mobile node to enlist other 
hosts in forwarding a packet to its destination due to the limited transmission range of wireless network 
interfaces. Each wireless mobile node operates not only as a host but also as a router forwarding packets 
for other wireless mobile nodes in the network that may not be within the direct transmission range of 
each other. Each node participates in an ad hoc routing protocol that allows it to discover multi-hop paths 
Issues Related to Network 
Security Attacks in Mobile 
Ad Hoc Networks (MANET)
Rakesh Kumar Singh
G. B. Pant Institute of Himalayan Environment and Development (GBPIHED), India

235
Issues Related to Network Security Attacks in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks (MANET)
﻿
through the network to any other node. This type of wireless networking of Mobile ad hoc network is 
also called infrastructureless networking, since the mobile nodes in the network dynamically establish 
routing among themselves to form their own network on the fly.
Now-a-days, Mobile ad hoc network (MANET) is one of the recent active fields and has received 
marvelous attention because of their self-configuration and self-maintenance capabilities. While early 
research effort assumed a friendly and cooperative environment and focused on problems such as wire-
less channel access and multihop routing, security has become a primary concern in order to provide 
protected communication between nodes in a potentially hostile environment. MANET has not well 
specified defense mechanism, so malicious attacker can easily access this kind of network. Although 
security issues in Mobile Ad-hoc Networks (MANETs) have been a major focus in the recent years, the 
development of most secure schemes for these networks has not been entirely achieved till now. This 
chapter will provide an overview about the security issues and optimum solutions in each layer of MA-
NET with challenges. In this chapter, we will identify the existent security threats an ad hoc network 
faces, the security services required to be achieved and the countermeasures for attacks in each layer. To 
accomplish our goal, we will carry out an extensive literature survey in gathering information related to 
various types of attacks and solutions, as well as we shall go through the comparative study to address 
the threats in different layers. The results of this research will enable us to minimize the attacks on each 
layer of MANET efficiently.
Although the ongoing trend is to adopt ad hoc networks for commercial uses due to their certain 
unique properties, the main challenge is the vulnerability to security attacks. A number of challenges like 
open peer-to-peer network architecture, stringent resource constraints, shared wireless medium, dynamic 
network topology etc. are posed in MANET. As MANET is quickly spreading for the property of its 
capability in forming temporary network without the aid of any established infrastructure or centralized 
administration, security challenges has become a primary concern to provide secure communication.
Figure 1. Structure of Mobile Ad Hoc Network (MANET)

236
Issues Related to Network Security Attacks in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks (MANET)
﻿
2. BACKGROUND
Although mobile ad hoc networks have several advantages over the traditional wired networks, on the 
other sides they have a unique set of challenges. Firstly, MANETs face challenges in secure communica-
tion. Secondly, mobile nodes without adequate protection are easy to compromise. An attacker can listen, 
modify and attempt to masquerade all the traffic on the wireless communication channel as one of the 
legitimate node in the network. Thirdly, static configuration may not be adequate for the dynamically 
changing topology in terms of security solution. Finally, lack of cooperation and constrained capability is 
common in MANET which makes anomalies hard to distinguish from normalcy. In general, the MANET 
is particularly vulnerable due to its fundamental characteristics of open medium, dynamic topology, and 
absence of central authorities, distribution cooperation and constrained capability.
In order to secure communication in such networks, understanding the liable security attacks to 
MANET is a great task and concern. MANETs suffer from a variety of security attacks and threats such 
as: Denial of Service (DoS), flooding attack, wormhole attack, blackhole attack, and so forth. MANET 
is open to vulnerabilities as a result of its basic characteristics like: no point of network management, 
topology changes vigorously, resource restriction, no certificate authority or centralized authority, to 
mention a few. Previous studies show that there are different categories of attacks on MANET such as 
Passive and Active attacks, Internal and External attacks and the Routing and Packet Forwarding attacks. 
Some of these attacks are termed as single attacks while some are referred to as attacks on multiple 
nodes and are malicious.
3. COMMUNICATION IN MOBILE AD HOC NETWORK
Conventional networks use dedicated nodes to carry out basic functions like packet forwarding, routing, 
and network management. In mobile ad hoc networks these are carried out collaboratively by all available 
nodes. Nodes on MANETs use multi-hop communication: nodes that are within each other’s radio range 
can communicate directly via wireless links, while those that are far apart must rely on intermediate 
nodes to act as routers to relay messages. Mobile nodes can move, leave and join the network and routes 
need to be updated frequently due to the dynamic network topology.
For example, node X can communicate with node Y by using the shortest path X-P-Q-Y as shown in 
Figure 2 (the dashed lines show the direct links between the nodes). If node P moves out then alterna-
tive route to node Y will be X-R-S-Q-Y. The variety of new protocols has been developed for finding/
Figure 2. Communication between nodes in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks (MANETs)

237
Issues Related to Network Security Attacks in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks (MANET)
﻿
updating routes and generally providing communication between end points. However these new routing 
protocols, based on cooperation between nodes, are vulnerable to new forms of attacks. Unfortunately, 
many proposed routing protocols for MANETs do not consider security. Moreover their specific features 
like the lack of central points, the dynamic topology, the existence of highly-constrained nodes, presents 
a particular challenge for security.
Many researches have been done to counter and detect attacks against existing MANET routing proto-
cols, including work on secure routing protocols and intrusion detection systems. However, for practical 
reasons the proposed solutions typically focus on a few particular security vulnerabilities since providing 
a comprehensive solution is non-trivial. If we are to develop more general solutions we must first have 
a comprehensive understanding of possible vulnerabilities and security risks in MANETs. After that we 
will move forward to security solutions proposed to prevent and detect attacks in MANETs.
4. ADVANTAGES OF MOBILE AD HOC NETWORK
The following are the main advantages of the MANET:
1. 	
Low Cost of Deployment: As the name suggests, ad hoc networks can be deployed on the fly, thus 
requiring no expensive infrastructure such as copper wires, data cables, etc.
2. 	
Fast Deployment: When compared to WLANs, ad hoc networks are very convenient and easy to 
deploy requiring less manual intervention since there are no cables involved.
3. 	
Dynamic Configuration: Ad hoc network configuration can change dynamically with time. For 
the many scenarios such as data sharing in classrooms, etc., this is a useful feature. When compared 
to configurability of LANs, it is very easy to change the network topology.
5. APPLICATIONS OF MOBILE AD HOC NETWORK
Mobile Ad Hoc Network has several interesting applications and some of them are listed below:
1. 	
Battlefield: In a battlefield, communication between soldiers and vehicles can be carried out using 
mobile ad hoc networks. In such networks, the soldier troops might communicate with each other 
using hand-held devices. The vehicle mounted devices can be equipped with power sources for 
“recharging” these mobile devices.
2. 	
Rescue Operation: In scenarios such as fire fighting or avalanche rescue operations, a quick 
deployment of nodes is required. Mobile ad hoc networks can be used in such scenarios for com-
munication between the workers.
3. 	
Event Coverage: Scenarios such as a press conference might need reporters to share data amongst 
other reporters. In such cases, multimedia traffic might be exchanged between nodes such as laptops, 
PDAs, etc.
4. 	
Classroom: In a classroom, students and instructors can set up a mobile ad hoc wireless network 
to share data using laptops.
5. 	
Inter-Group Communication and Cooperative Work: Dynamic formation of collaborative work 
groups, in business, academic and commercial environments, among others.

238
Issues Related to Network Security Attacks in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks (MANET)
﻿
6. 	
Personal Area Networks (PAN): Establishment of network communication for small-scale en-
vironments via peer-to-peer communication, eliminating or reducing the need to install network 
connection and interconnection devices.
6. GENERAL ISSUES IN MOBILE AD HOC NETWORK
In a mobile ad hoc network, all the nodes co-operate amongst each other to forward the packets in the 
network and hence, each node is effectively a router. Thus one of the most important issues is routing. 
Some of issues are described below:
1. 	
Distributed Network: A MANET can be considered as a distributed wireless network without any 
fixed infrastructure. By distributed, it is meant that there is no centralized server to maintain the 
state of the clients, similar to peer-to-peer (P2P) networks. Furthermore wireless networks typically 
have lower bandwidths than wired networks. Attackers can exploit this feature, consuming network 
bandwidth with ease to prevent normal communication among nodes
2. 	
Dynamic Topology: The nodes are mobile and hence the network is self-organizing. Due to this, 
the topology of the network keeps changing with time. Hence the routing protocols designed for 
such networks must also be adaptive to the changes in the topology.
3. 	
Power Awareness: Since the nodes in a mobile ad hoc network typically run on batteries and de-
ployed in hostile terrains, they have stringent power requirements. This implies that the underlying 
protocols must be designed to conserve battery life, or in other words, they must be power aware.
4. 	
Addressing Scheme: The network topology keeps changing dynamically and hence the address-
ing scheme used is quite significant. A dynamic network topology entails a ubiquitous address-
ing scheme, which avoids any duplicate addresses. Mobile IP is currently being used in cellular 
networks where a base station handles all the node addressing. However, such a scheme doesn’t 
apply to mobile ad hoc networks due to their decentralized nature.
5. 	
Network Size: Commercial applications of mobile ad hoc networks such as data sharing in confer-
ence halls, meetings, etc. are an attractive feature of mobile ad hoc networks. However, the delay 
involved in the underlying protocols places a strict upper bound on the size of the network.
6. 	
Security: Security in a mobile ad hoc network is of prime importance in scenarios of deployment 
such as battlefield. The three goals of security - confidentiality, integrity and authenticity are very 
difficult to achieve since every node in the network participates equally in the network.
7. 	
Cooperativeness: Routing algorithms for MANETs usually assume that nodes are cooperative and 
non-malicious. As a result, a malicious attacker can easily become an important routing agent and 
disrupt network operations by disobeying the protocol specifications.
8. 	
Lack of a Clear Line of Defence: MANETs do not have a clear line of defence; attacks can come 
from all directions. The boundary that separates the inside network from the outside world is not 
very clear on MANETs.

239
Issues Related to Network Security Attacks in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks (MANET)
﻿
7. PRESENT TRENDS AND CHALLENGES IN MANET
Now-a-days, Mobile ad hoc network (MANET) is one of the recent active fields and has received marvel-
ous attention because of their self-configuration and self-maintenance capabilities. While early research 
effort assumed a friendly and cooperative environment and focused on problems such as wireless channel 
access and multihop routing, security has become a primary concern in order to provide protected com-
munication between nodes in a potentially hostile environment. Recent wireless research indicates that 
the wireless MANET presents a larger security problem than conventional wired and wireless networks. 
Although mobile ad hoc networks have several advantages over the traditional wired networks, on the other 
sides they have a unique set of challenges. Firstly, MANETs face challenges in secure communication. 
For example the resource constraints on nodes in ad hoc networks limit the cryptographic measures that 
are used for secure messages. Thus it is susceptible to link attacks ranging from passive eavesdropping to 
active impersonation, message replay and message distortion. Secondly, mobile nodes without adequate 
protection are easy to compromise. An attacker can listen, modify and attempt to masquerade all the traf-
fic on the wireless communication channel as one of the legitimate node in the network. Thirdly, static 
configuration may not be adequate for the dynamically changing topology in terms of security solution. 
Various attacks like DoS (Denial of Service) can easily be launched and flood the network with spurious 
routing messages through a malicious node that gives incorrect updating information by pretending to 
be a legitimate change of routing information. Finally, lack of cooperation and constrained capability is 
common in wireless MANET which makes anomalies hard to distinguish from normalcy.
In general, MANET is particularly vulnerable due to its fundamental characteristics of open medium, 
dynamic topology, and absence of central authorities, distribution cooperation and constrained capability.
8. VULNERABILITIES IN MANET
The following are the few vulnerabilities associated with MANET:
•	
Wireless Links: First of all, the use of wireless links makes the network susceptible to attacks 
such as eavesdropping and active interference. Unlike wired networks, attackers do not need phys-
ical access to the network to carry out these attacks. Furthermore wireless networks typically have 
lower bandwidths than wired networks. Attackers can exploit this feature, consuming network 
bandwidth with ease to prevent normal communication among nodes.
•	
Dynamic Topology: MANET nodes can leave and join the network, and move independently. As 
a result the network topology can change frequently. It is hard to differentiate normal behaviour of 
the network from anomaly/malicious behaviour in this dynamic environment. For example, a node 
sending disruptive routing information can be a malicious node, or else simply be using outdated 
information in good faith. Moreover mobility of nodes means that we cannot assume nodes, espe-
cially critical ones (servers, etc.), are secured in locked cabinets as in wired networks. Nodes with 
inadequate physical protection may often be at risk of being captured and compromised.

240
Issues Related to Network Security Attacks in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks (MANET)
﻿
•	
Cooperativeness: Routing algorithms for MANETs usually assume that nodes are cooperative 
and non-malicious. As a result, a malicious attacker can easily become an important routing agent 
and disrupt network operations by disobeying the protocol specifications. For example, a node 
can pose as a neighbour to other nodes and participate in collective decision-making mechanisms, 
possibly affecting networking significantly.
•	
Lack of a Clear Line of Defence: MANETs do not have a clear line of defence; attacks can come 
from all directions. The boundary that separates the inside network from the outside world is not 
very clear on MANETs. For example, there is no well-defined place where we can deploy our traf-
fic monitoring, and access control mechanisms. Whereas all traffic goes through switches, routers, 
or gateways in wired networks, network information in MANETs is distributed across nodes that 
can only see the packets sent and received in their transmission range.
•	
Limited Resources: Resource constraints are a further vulnerability. There can be a variety of 
devices on MANETs, ranging from laptops to handheld devices such as PDAs and mobile phones. 
These will generally have different computing and storage capacities that can be the focus of new 
attacks. For example, mobile nodes generally run on battery power. This has led to emergence of 
innovative attacks targeting this aspect. Furthermore, the introduction of more security features 
into the network increases the computation, communication and management load. This is a chal-
lenge for networks that are already resource-constrained.
9. LITERATURE SURVEY AND RELATED WORK
The literature survey provides a framework for establishing the importance of the study. Within the 
context of a quantitative research approach, the literature survey occupies a substantial amount of time 
and effort. It provides direction for the research questions and hypotheses. To understand the current 
security issues regarding MANET, the literature survey was the essential starting step, which helped us 
gain in-depth knowledge about different security threats related to MANET. Extensive literature review 
has been carried out to meet out our research objectives by visiting the libraries of various organizations 
and by exploring secondary information which is available on public domain/Internet. It has been found 
that number of research on the security aspects of MANET have been carried out in other countries in past 
but in context of India, very less research work has been done on Mobile Ad Hoc Networks (MANETs).
Kamaljit Lakhtaria (2012) from Sir Padampat Singhania University, Udaipur, India in his book 
“Technological Advancements and Applications in Mobile Ad-Hoc Networks: Research Trends” has 
worked on the recent technological advancements and applications in Mobile Ad-Hoc Networks and 
he has also describe physical level security aspects in MANET. Kamanshis Biswas and Md. Liakat Ali 
(2007) from Blekinge Institute of Technology, Sweden in his research “Security Threats in Mobile Ad 
Hoc Network” has provided the comprehensive study on the layer based security issues in MANET. 
Zhou and Haas (1999) from Cornell University, Ithaca, New York in their research “Securing Ad Hoc 
Networks” have proposed using threshold cryptography for providing security to the ad hoc network.
Hubaux et al. (2003) from Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Lausanne (EPFL), Lausanne, Swit-
zerland in his research “Secure Tracking of Node Encounters in Multi-Hop Wireless Networks” have 
defined a method that is designed to ensure equal participation among members of the ad hoc group, 

241
Issues Related to Network Security Attacks in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks (MANET)
﻿
and that gives each node the authority to issue certificates. Sanzgiri, et al. (2002) from University of 
California, Santa Barbara, CA in his research “A Secure Routing Protocol for Ad Hoc Networks” has 
proposed a secure routing protocol ARAN which is based on certificates and successfully defeats all 
identified attacks. Hongmei Deng, Wei Li, and Dharma P. Agrawal (2002) form University of Cincin-
nati, United States in their research “Routing Security in Wireless Ad Hoc Networks” have focused on 
the routing security issues in MANETs and have described a solution of ‘black hole’ problem.
George Aggelou (2009) in his book “Mobile Ad Hoc Networks: From Wireless LANS to 4G Net-
works” has provided various routing protocols with security aspect of MANET and also described the 
data link layer based error detection and correction techniques. Bin Xie and Anup Kumar (2004) in 
their research “A Framework for Internet and Ad hoc Network Security” have proposed the security is-
sues in different protocol stack of MANET with routing protocol discovery. Ramanarayana Kandikattu 
and Lillykutty Jacob (2007) in their research “Secure Internet Connectivity for Dynamic Source” have 
described dynamic source routing (DSR) protocols based on MANET.
Hongmei Deng, Wei Li, and Dharma P. Agrawal (2002) from University of Cincinnati, United 
States in their research “Routing Security in Wireless Ad Hoc Networks” have proposed many security 
threats and effective countermeasure in MANET. Distributed protocols like the link-layer protocols 
and network-layer protocols used in multi-hops wireless (MANET) channels communication assume 
that the nodes are cooperative in the synchronization process. Attackers can interrupt the network by 
violating the protocols requirement because MANET assumes trust and cooperation; it does not enforce 
node cooperation. Despite of the different specific attacks on MANET such as Denial-of-Service (DoS), 
impersonation, Node hijacking and so on that have been exposed, the attacks involving multiple nodes 
seem to have received little attention. One of the possible reasons could be that most researchers tend 
to adopt ideas about security measures from wired networks to ad hoc networks and forget that security 
issues regarding MANET are more complicated since MANET is unable to rely on pre-existing infra-
structure. Therefore, the existing security solutions for wired network cannot be directly applied to the 
MANET. In a black hole attack, several malicious nodes falsely claim a new route to the destination 
in order to absorb all packets coming from the source. To combat this kind of routing protocol attack, 
Hongmei et al. proposed a solution that revolved around waiting and checking the replies from all other 
neighbouring nodes and then deciding on the safe route.
Wang and Li (2002) from New York in his research “Group mobility and partition prediction in 
wireless ad-hoc networks” have describe the problem of network partitioning among a group of mobile 
nodes that are requesting and downloading information on demand from a centralized service. Their 
goal is to provide service coverage even when the network is partitioned by replicating the service to 
appropriate nodes before a partition takes place. They employ a partition prediction scheme to predict 
partitioning in the network before it occurs. They describe a situation where their scheme could be use-
ful. Consider a museum where visitors equipped with wireless devices gather to view an exhibition. The 
museum provides an electronic guide that contains information about items on exhibition and maps. The 
wireless devices held by the visitors collectively form an ad-hoc network. As the visitors move around 
to view the various items on display, they connect to the guide via multi-hop wireless links to request 
and download desired information on demand. However, as the visitors move around, the topology of 
the ad-hoc network changes dynamically.

242
Issues Related to Network Security Attacks in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks (MANET)
﻿
10. RESEARCH GAP
•	
Research in Other Countries on MANET: Number of research have been carry out in past in 
many countries on the subjects “Routing Protocols, Internet Connectivity in MANET, Routing 
Algorithms, MANET Challenges, Security Aspects of MANET, Distributed Data Caching 
in MANET, Multi-Path Algorithms, Energy Conservation in MANET, TCP over MANET, 
Cryptography Techniques, etc. But no research has been done on “Layer based security threats 
and countermeasures in MANET”.
•	
Research in INDIA on MANET: Less research work has been carried out in India on MANET 
(mostly research work has been done on routing protocols based algorithms and security, etc.).
11. SECURITY ASPECTS IN MOBILE AD HOC NETWORKS
Operating in open and shared media, wireless communication is inherently less secure than wired com-
munication. In addition, since mobile wireless devices usually have limited resources, such as bandwidth, 
storage space, processing capability and energy – enforcement of security is difficult. In comparison with 
fixed-infrastructure wireless networks, security management for mobile ad hoc networks is more challeng-
ing due to unreliable communication, intermittent connections, node mobility, and constantly changing 
topology. A complete security solution should include three components of prevention, detection, and 
reaction, and provide security properties of authentication, confidentiality, non-repudiation, integrity, 
and availability. The following requirements need to be considered for secure real-time communications:
•	
Confidentiality: Confidentiality ensures that classified information in the network is never dis-
closed to unauthorized entities. Sensitive information, such as strategic military decisions or lo-
cation information requires confidentiality. Leakage of such information to enemies could have 
devastating consequences.
•	
Integrity: Integrity guarantees that a message being transferred between nodes is never altered 
or corrupted. Data can be altered either intentionally by malicious nodes in the network or ac-
cidentally because of benign failures, such as radio propagation impairment or through hardware 
glitches in the network.
•	
Availability: Availability implies that the requested services (e.g. bandwidth and connectivity) are 
available in a timely manner even though there is a potential problem in the system. Availability of 
a network can be tempered for example by dropping off packets and by resource depletion attacks.
•	
Authenticity: Authenticity is a network service to determine a user’s identity. Without authentica-
tion, an attacker can impersonate any node, and in this way, one by one node, it can gain control 
over the entire network.
•	
Non-Repudiation: Non-repudiation ensures that the information originator cannot deny having 
sent the message. Non-repudiation is useful for detection and isolation of compromised nodes.
Ad-hoc networks are an emerging area of mobile computing. The wireless nature of communication 
and lack of any security infrastructure results in several security related issues. In this research we attempt 

243
Issues Related to Network Security Attacks in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks (MANET)
﻿
to analyze the security aspects and solutions of mobile ad-hoc network. Compared with WLANs, the 
security management in mobile ad hoc networks is much tougher due to the following characteristics:
•	
Resource Constraints: The wireless devices usually have limited bandwidth, memory and pro-
cessing power. This means costly security solutions may not be affordable in mobile ad hoc 
networks.
•	
Unreliable Communications: The shared-medium nature and unstable channel quality of wire-
less links may result in high packet-loss rate and re-routing instability, which is a common phe-
nomenon that leads to throughput drops in multi-hop networks. This implies that the security 
solution in mobile ad hoc networks cannot rely on reliable communication.
•	
Node Mobility and Dynamic Topology: The network topology of mobile ad hoc network may 
change rapidly and unpredictably over time, since the connectivity among the nodes may vary 
with time due to node departures, node arrivals, and the mobility of nodes. This emphasizes the 
need for secure solutions to be adaptive to dynamic topology.
•	
Scalability: Due to the limited memory and processing power on mobile devices, the scalability 
is a key problem when we consider a large network size. Performance in mobile ad hoc networks 
is strongly related to the strength of security. However, without satisfactory network performance, 
security is meaningless.
There are some ultimate goals regarding security solutions with respect to Mobile ad hoc networks 
or we can say there are some security services which should be fulfill in order to enforce security like 
authentication, confidentiality, integrity to mobile users.
12. MOTIVATION
In wireless networking, there are two main architectures: infrastructure (single-hop) networks and mobile 
ad hoc (multi-hop) networks (MANETs). Infrastructure networks include cellular networks and wire-
less local area networks. Users are connected via base stations/access points and backbone networks. 
Although users can handover between base stations or access points and roam among different networks, 
their mobility is limited within the coverage areas of the base stations or access points. Mobile Ad hoc 
networks exclude the use of a wired infrastructure. Mobile nodes can form arbitrary networks “on the 
fly” to exchange information without the need of pre-existing network infrastructure. Mobile Ad hoc 
networks can extend communication beyond the limit of infrastructure-based networks. A fundamental 
problem in Mobile ad hoc networks is the security threats in each layer level of MANET.
The security requirements depend largely on the mission and operating conditions of the MANET. 
Secure threats and vulnerabilities in the field of mobile ad hoc networks is one of the most emerging 
areas of research. Achieving the foolproof security countermeasures for each layer of mobile ad hoc 
networks is a challenging task due to the unique network characteristics such as, lack of central authority, 
rapid node mobility, frequent topology changes, insecure operational environment, shared radio channel 
and limited availability of resources.

244
Issues Related to Network Security Attacks in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks (MANET)
﻿
In this research, we will propose the security issues and performance evaluation of identified solu-
tions in MANET that the proposed scheme successfully defeats all the identified threats and achieves a 
good security at the cost of acceptable overhead.
13. NEED OF STUDY
Mobile ad hoc network has been a challenging research area for the last few years because of its dynamic 
topology, power constraints, limited range of each mobile host’s wireless transmissions and security 
issues etc. If we consider only a stand-alone MANET then it has limited applications, because the con-
nectivity is limited to itself. MANET user can have better utilization of network resources only when 
it is connected to the Internet. But, global connectivity adds new security threats to the existing active 
and passive attacks on MANET. A connection could be disrupted either by attacks on any of the layer 
of MANET and due to this reason, almost all possible attacks on the traditional ad hoc networks also 
exist in mobile ad hoc networks. Whatever the attacks are, the attackers will exhibit their actions in the 
form of refusal to participate fully and correctly in communication between the mobile nodes according 
to the principles of integrity, authentication, confidentiality and cooperation.
Network based security issues have not been discussed in earlier studies of MANET so that I have 
proposed the layer based security issues with optimum solutions and challenges in our research.
14. NEED OF SECURITY IN MANET
Designing a foolproof security protocol for ad hoc routing is a very challenging task due its unique 
characteristics such as, shared radio channel, insecure operational environment, lack of central author-
ity and association rules among nodes and limited availability of resources. A brief discussion on how 
each of the above mentioned characteristics causes difficulty in providing security in ad hoc wireless 
network is given below.
•	
Shared Radio Channel: Unlike the wired networks where a separate dedicated transmission line 
can be provided between a pair of end users, the radio channel used for communication in ad hoc 
networks is broadcast in nature and shared by all nodes in the network. Data transmitted by a node 
is received by all the nodes within its direct transmission range. So a malicious node can easily 
obtain data being transmitted in the network.
•	
Insecure Operational Environment: The operational environment in which MANETs are gener-
ally used may not be always secure, for example, a battle field. In such environment, nodes may 
move in and out of hostile and insecure enemy territory, where they would be highly vulnerable 
to security attacks.
•	
Lack of Central Authority: In wired networks or infrastructure based wireless networks it would 
be possible to monitor the network traffic through routers or base stations and implement security 

245
Issues Related to Network Security Attacks in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks (MANET)
﻿
mechanisms at those points. Since MANETs don’t have any such central points, these mechanisms 
can’t be applicable to them.
•	
Lack of Association Rules: In MANET, since nodes can leave or join the network at any point of 
time, if no proper authentication mechanism is used for associating nodes with the network intrud-
ers can easily join the network and carry out attacks.
•	
Limited Availability of Resources: Resources such as bandwidth, battery power and computa-
tional power are scare in ad hoc networks. Hence, it is difficult to implement complex cryptogra-
phy-based security mechanisms in such networks
A security analysis of emergent properties in ad-hoc networks is essential for several reasons. First, 
many emergent properties represent new features of ad-hoc networks that are fundamental to ensuring 
network security and robustness. For instance, these properties may be used to help establish or revoke 
trust relations that are necessary for both node and message authentication. Second, some emergent 
properties are undesirable and may lead to security violations and, for this reason; their detection and 
handling help maintain the security and robustness of the network. Third, inadequate assessment of 
emergent properties such as false detection may also lead to security and robustness violations. Fourth, 
the understanding of the characteristics of emergent properties helps determine the scalability and re-
silience of ad-hoc networks.
Layer based security issues have not been provided in earlier studies of MANET so that I have pro-
posed the layer based security issues with optimum solutions and challenges in our research.
15. PROBLEM STATEMENT
This research is focused on the overall security threats and challenges in Mobile ad hoc networks (MA-
NET). The solutions of the current problems are also reported here so that one may get direction. Studies 
on MANET have focused more on single attacks. In the meanwhile some attacks involving multiple 
nodes have received little attention since they are unanticipated and combined attacks. There have been 
no proper definition and categorization of these kinds of attacks (multiple node attacks) in MANET. 
Some mitigation plans have been proposed to counteract against some form of multiple node attacks; 
thus, there is need to figure out the consequences of the category of collaborative attacks and their pos-
sible mitigation plans. The following questions will be addressed in this research:
•	
What are the vulnerabilities and security threats in MANET?
•	
How the security services like confidentiality, integrity and authentication can be achieved from 
mobile ad hoc networks? What steps should be taken?
•	
What are the countermeasures? How the security of the entire system is ensured?
Because mobile ad hoc networks have far more vulnerabilities than the traditional wired networks, 
security is much more difficult to maintain in the mobile ad hoc network than in the wired network.

246
Issues Related to Network Security Attacks in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks (MANET)
﻿
16. OBJECTIVES AND SCOPE
In this research, we will discuss different security aspects and how these security issues can be resolved? 
The security issues will be analyzed from individual layers namely application layer, transport layer, 
network layer, data link layer and physical layer. This research will provide a good understanding of the 
current security threads and optimum solutions of the MANETs. The broad objectives of the research are:
•	
To study and analysis of security threats and vulnerabilities in Mobile Ad Hoc Network (MANET).
•	
To achieve optimum solutions and countermeasures for the security threats in MANET.
•	
To study and enlisting the challenges of MANET.
17. SCOPE OF RESEARCH
Wireless mobile ad hoc nature of MANET brings new security challenges to network design. Mobile 
ad hoc networks, due to their unique characteristics, are generally more vulnerable to information and 
physical security threats than wired networks or infrastructure-based wireless networks. In this research, 
we explore the various security requirements (goals) for wireless ad hoc network and the different types 
of threats an ad hoc network faces. We identify the new challenges and opportunities posed by this new 
networking environment and explore new approaches to secure its communication. In this research we 
have lot of scope to focus on the fundamental security problems of the Mobile ad hoc network.
18. FORMULATION OF HYPOTHESIS
A hypothesis is a prediction of expected outcomes, it states the relationships between variables that the 
researcher expects to find as a result of the study or in other words we can say that a hypothesis is an 
educated guess or proposition that attempts to explain a set of facts or natural phenomenon. The func-
tions of hypotheses are as follows:
•	
The formulation of hypothesis provides a study with focus. It tells us what specific aspects of a 
research problem to investigate.
•	
A hypothesis tells us what data to collect and what not to collect, thereby providing focus to the 
research.
•	
As it provides a focus, the construction of a hypothesis enhances objectivity in a study.
•	
A hypothesis may enable us to add to the formulation of a theory. It enables us to specifically 
conclude what is true or what is false.
•	
Goal of a Hypothesis: Regardless of the type of hypothesis, the goal of a hypothesis is to help 
explain the focus and direction of the research. As such, a hypothesis will:
◦◦
State the purpose of the research,
◦◦
Identify what variables are used.
•	
Parameters of a Good Hypothesis: In order to be a good hypothesis that can be tested or studied, 
a hypothesis:
◦◦
Needs to be logical,

247
Issues Related to Network Security Attacks in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks (MANET)
﻿
◦◦
Must use precise language,
◦◦
Should be testable with research or experimentation.
The following hypothesis will be considered in our research:
1. 	
MANET is vulnerable to security attacks. Security aspects which are associated with MANET will 
be analyzed through literature review.
2. 	
Each layer of MANET namely application layer, transport layer, network layer, data link layer and 
physical layer are affected with the security threats. Each layer of MANET will be analyzed to find 
out the security threats and optimum solutions with challenges.
3. 	
Security threats could be minimized by opting some available solutions/ countermeasures and 
detection techniques. Available solutions and detection techniques will be analyzed for each layer 
of MANET for their impact.
4. 	
There are some challenges associated with MANET. Challenges which are associated with MANET 
will be analyzed through earlier studies.
5. 	
The hypothetical security attacks in each layer of MANET are given in Table 1.
The above hypothesis will be tested after obtaining the outcomes and results of the research and will 
also be included in the thesis. If above hypothesis becomes true then this research will provide a good 
understanding of the current security threads and optimum solutions with challenges of MANET.
19. RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
Research methodology defines the research activity, development of research activity and measurements 
used to advance the research work by implementing these measures which assist to achieve the objectives 
of the research. During the starting phase, we will carry out extensive literature survey; the information 
gained in this phase will play important inputs for the research and further we will go through the fol-
lowing studies and analysis to find out our research objectives:
•	
Complete study and analysis of each layer of MANET.
•	
Identification of security threats and vulnerabilities in each layer.
•	
Discover best solutions and countermeasures for security threats.
•	
Analysis of challenges in MANET.
Table 1. Hypothetical layer wise security attacks in MANET
MANET Layers
Attack (Hypothetical)
Application Layer
Data Corruption, Viruses and Worms
Transport Layer
TCP/UDP SYN Flood
Network Layer
Black Hole
Data Link Layer
Monitoring, Traffic Analysis
Physical Layer
Eavesdropping

248
Issues Related to Network Security Attacks in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks (MANET)
﻿
•	
Research output and thesis.
In this research, we are not only going to define and categorize collaborative security attacks in MA-
NET, but we are also going to identify the performance impact in MANET under a collaborative attack 
as well as which mitigation plans can be used to alleviate this kind of attack.
20. ATTACKS IN MOBILE AD HOC NETWORK
At the highest level, the security goals of MANETs are not that different from other networks: most 
typically authentication, confidentiality, integrity, availability, and non-repudiation. Authentication is 
the verification of claims about the identity of a source of information. Confidentiality means that only 
authorized people or systems can read or execute protected data or programs. It should be noted that the 
sensitivity of information in MANETs may decay much more rapidly than in other information. In MA-
NETs security goals of a system can change in different modes. The characteristics of MANETs make 
them susceptible to many new attacks. At the top level attacks can be classified according to network 
protocol stacks. Table 2 gives a few examples of attacks at each layer. Some attacks could occur in any 
layer of the network protocol stack, e.g. jamming at physical layer, hello flood at network layer, and 
SYN flood at transport layer are all DoS attacks. Because new routing protocols introduce new forms 
of attacks on MANETs.
The attacks can be classified as passive or active attack:
1. 	
Passive Attacks: In a passive attack an unauthorized node monitors and aims to find out informa-
tion about the network. The attackers do not otherwise need to communicate with the network. 
Hence they do not disrupt communications or cause any direct damage to the network. However, 
they can be used to get information for future harmful attacks. Examples of passive attacks are 
eavesdropping and traffic analysis.
a. 	
Eavesdropping Attacks: This attack is also known as disclosure attacks, are passive attacks 
by external or internal nodes. The attacker can analyze broadcast messages to reveal some 
useful information about the network. Solutions protecting the radio interface from attacks 
such as eavesdropping (and jamming) attacks have been proposed in the literature, e.g. spread 
spectrum communication and frequency hopping.
b. 	
Traffic Analysis: This is not necessarily an entirely passive activity. It is perfectly feasible 
to engage in protocols, or seek to provoke communication between nodes. Attackers may 
Table 2. Some attacks on the protocol stack in MANET
Layer
Attack
Application
Data corruption, viruses and worms
Transport
TCP/UDP SYN flood
Network
Hello flood, black hole
Data Link
Monitoring, traffic analysis
Physical
Eavesdropping, active interface

249
Issues Related to Network Security Attacks in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks (MANET)
﻿
employ techniques such as RF direction finding, traffic rate analysis, and time-correlation 
monitoring. Traffic analysis in mobile ad hoc networks may reveal:
i. 	
The existence and location of nodes.
ii. 	
The communications network topology.
iii. 	 The roles played by nodes.
iv. 	 The current sources and destination of communications.
v. 	
The current location of specific individuals or functions
2. 	
Active Attacks: These attacks cause unauthorized state changes in the network such as denial of 
service, modification of packets, and the like. These attacks are generally launched by users or 
nodes with authorization to operate within the network. We classify active attacks into four groups: 
dropping, modification, fabrication, and timing attacks. It should be noted that an attack can be 
classified into more than one group.
a. 	
Dropping Attacks: Malicious or selfish nodes deliberately drop all packets that are not des-
tined for them. While malicious nodes aim to disrupt the network connection, selfish nodes 
aim to preserve their resources. Dropping attacks can prevent end-to-end communications 
between nodes, if the dropping node is at a critical point. It might also reduce the network 
performance by causing data packets to be retransmitted, new routes to the destination to be 
discovered, and the like. Unfortunately most routing protocols have no mechanism to detect 
whether data packets have been forwarded or not. However, they can be detected by neigh-
boring nodes through passive acknowledgement or hop-by-hop acknowledgement at the data 
link layer.
b. 	
Modification Attacks: Insider attackers modify packets to disrupt the network. For example, 
in the sinkhole attack the attacker tries to attract nearly all traffic from a particular area 
through a compromised node by making the compromised node attractive to other nodes. It 
is especially effective in routing protocols that use advertised information such as remaining 
energy and nearest node to the destination in the route discovery process. A sinkhole attack 
can be used as a basis for further attacks like dropping and selective forwarding attacks. A 
black hole attack is like a sinkhole attack that attracts traffic through itself and uses it as the 
basis for further attacks. The goal is to prevent packets being forwarded to the destination. If 
the black hole is a virtual node or a node outside the network, it is hard to detect.
c. 	
Fabrication Attacks: Here the attacker forges network packets. In fabrication, attacks are 
classified into “active forge” in which attackers send faked messages without receiving any 
related message and “forge reply” in which the attacker sends fake route reply messages in 
response to related legitimate route request messages.
d. 	
Timing Attacks: An attacker attracts other nodes by causing itself to appear closer to those 
nodes than it really is. DoS attacks, rushing attacks, and hello flood attacks use this technique. 
Rushing attacks occur during the Route Discovery phase. In all existing on-demand protocols, 
a node needing a route broadcasts Route Request messages and each node forwards only the 
first arriving Route Request in order to limit the overhead of message flooding. So, if the 
Route Request forwarded by the attacker arrives first at the destination, routes including the 
attacker will be discovered instead of valid routes. Rushing attacks can be carried out in many 
ways: by ignoring delays at MAC or routing layers, by wormhole attacks, by keeping other 
nodes’ transmission queues full, or by transmitting packets at a higher wireless transmission 
power. The hello flood attack is another attack that makes the adversary attractive for many 

250
Issues Related to Network Security Attacks in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks (MANET)
﻿
routes. In some routing protocols, nodes broadcast Hello packets to detect neighboring nodes. 
These messages are received by all one-hop neighbour nodes, but are not forwarded to further 
nodes. The attacker broadcasts many Hello packets with large enough transmission power that 
each node receiving Hello packets assumes the adversary node to be its neighbour. It can be 
highly effective in both proactive and reactive MANET protocols.
21. SECURITY ARCHITECTURE FOR MANETS:
A layered architecture can provide such advantages as modularity, simplicity, flexibility, and standard-
ization of protocols. Follow this thought; we present here a layered secure architecture for MANETs in 
Table 3. The table depicts five-layer security architecture for MANETs, and the functionalities of each 
layer are illustrated as below:
SL1 – Trust Infrastructure Layer: Refers to the basic trust relationship between nodes, for example, 
like a well deployed PKI environment. Since in MANETs, there is no centralized authority to help 
establish the trust relationship between communicating nodes, the security mechanisms in this 
layer are expected to be constructed in a distributed manner and are the basic building block of 
the whole security system. Thus, SL1 poses a great challenge to system security designers. The 
security association established in trust infrastructure layer must serve for the upper layer security 
mechanisms.
SL2 – Communications Security Layer: Refers to the security mechanisms applied in transmitting data 
frames in a node-to-node manner, such as security protocol WEP working in data link layer in OSI 
model, or physical protection mechanisms like frequency hopping. Security Mechanisms deployed 
in this layer may keep data frame from eavesdropping, interception, alteration, or dropping from 
unauthorized party along the route from the source to the destination.
SL3 – Routing Security Layer: Refers to security mechanisms applied to routing protocols. In MANET, 
nodes exchange information about their knowledge of neighborhood connectivity and construct 
a view of the network topology so that they can route the data packets to the correct destinations. 
Every node is required to participate in the routing activity and routing is an important part to keep 
the network connected. Hence, SL3 is of particular significance in MANETs. In fact, the routing 
security layer involves two aspects: secure routing and secure data forwarding. In secure routing 
aspect, nodes are required to cooperate to share correct routing information to keep the network 
connected efficiently; in secure data forwarding aspect, data packets on the fly should be protected 
from tampering, dropping, and altering by any unauthorized party.
Table 3. Security layers for Mobile Ad Hoc Networks (MANETs)
SL – 5 
End-to-End Security
SL – 4 
Network Security
SL – 3 
Routing Security
SL – 2 
Communications Security
SL – 1 
Trust Infrastructure

251
Issues Related to Network Security Attacks in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks (MANET)
﻿
SL4 – Network Security Layer: Refers to the security mechanisms used by the network protocols 
which perform sub-network access operations from end system to end system. For example, we 
can achieve the security services like peer entity authentication, confidentiality and integrity as 
the network layer security protocol IPSec provides
SL5 – End-to-End Security Layer: Refers to end system security, such as SSL, SSH, and any applica-
tion-specific security protocol. The security protocols in this layer is independent of the underlying 
networking technology since the related security mechanisms are restricted to only intended parties. 
The provision of any security service in this layer is highly dependent upon security requirements 
related to specific applications.
22. COUNTERMEASURES
Table 4 summarizes the attacks and concern issues and Table 5 represents the countermeasures in each 
layer in MANET.
23. FUTURE DIRECTIONS
A significant amount of research has been devoted to study security issues as well as countermeasures 
to various attacks in MANET. However, we believe that there is still much research work needed to 
be done in the area. The underlying rationale is that, existing security solutions are well-matched with 
specific attacks, these solutions have proven to be useful to defend against known attacks, but eventu-
ally they fail to counteract unanticipated or combined attacks. In this thesis, we try to discover multiple 
node attacks and categorize them as direct or indirect collaborative attacks but we still have doubts that 
there could be some other kind of attacks that can be classified as collaborative attacks. Thus, further 
research would be carried out in order to validate the theoretical model: the definition of collaborative 
attacks and in identifying other collaborative attacks (currently not covered). Due to time constraints, 
Table 4. Security attacks on each layer in MANET
Layer
Attacks
Security Issues
Application layer
Repudiation, data corruption
Detecting and preventing viruses, worms, malicious 
codes, 
and application abuses
Transport layer
Session hijacking, SYN flooding
Authentication and securing end-to-end or point-to-
point 
communication through data encryption
Network layer
Wormhole, blackhole, Byzantine, flooding, resource 
consumption, 
location disclosure attacks
Protecting the ad hoc routing and forwarding protocols
Data link layer
Traffic analysis, monitoring, disruption MAC 
(802.11), WEP 
Weakness
Protecting the wireless MAC protocol and providing 
link 
layer security support
Physical layer
Jamming, interceptions, eavesdropping
Preventing signal jamming denial-of-service attacks

252
Issues Related to Network Security Attacks in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks (MANET)
﻿
we only simulate the blackhole attack on MANET to show how this attack impacts the regular operation 
in MANET. Therefore, in order to further establish the consequences of collaborative attacks, another 
direction for future work would be to simulate other types of collaborative attacks, e.g., wormhole, sybil 
and routing table overflow attacks and compare the results. Such studies may result in a more complete 
picture of how network performance is affected during a specific collaborative attack or even combined 
collaborative attacks. The aforementioned research is quite challenging but interesting to conduct. Finally, 
the development of a mitigation plan capable of defending against various collaborative attacks would 
be considered as another important direction for future work.
Existing solutions in MANET are well-suited only for specific attack. They can cope well with 
known attacks but there are many unanticipated or combined attacks remaining undiscovered. Resource 
consumption DoS attack is still unclear to the researchers. More research is needed on secure routing 
protocol, robust key management, trust based systems, integrated approaches to routing security, data 
security in different level and cooperation enforcement. Existing routing protocols are subject to a variety 
of attacks that can allow attackers to influence a victim’s selection of routes or enable denial-of service 
attack. So, necessity of secure routing protocol is inevitable. Cryptography is one of the most common 
security mechanisms and its strength relies on the secure key management. The public cryptography 
scheme depends upon centralized CA (Certificate Authority) which is known as a security weak point 
in MANET. Symmetric cryptography is efficient but suffers from potential attack on key distribution. 
Hence, efficient key agreement and distribution in MANET is an ongoing research area. Finally, Build-
ing a sound trust-based system and integrating it to the current preventive approaches, solution of the 
node selfishness problem can be considered in future research. Identifying new security threats as well 
as new countermeasures demands more research in MANET.
Table 5. Security threats and countermeasures
Layers
Attacks
Countermeasures
Application layer
Lack of cooperation attacks, Malicious code 
attacks (virus, worms, spywares, Trojan 
horses) etc.
Cooperation enforcement (Nuglets, Confidant, CORE) 
mechanisms, Firewalls, IDS etc.
Transport layer
Session hijacking attack, SYN flooding 
attack, TCP ACK storm attack etc.
Authentication and securing end-to-end or point-to-point 
communication, use of public cryptography (SSL, TLS, 
SET, PCT) etc.
Network layer
Routing protocol attacks (e.g. DSR, AODV 
etc.), cache poisoning, table overflow attacks, 
Wormhole, blackhole, Byzantine, flooding, 
resource consumption, impersonation, 
location disclosure attacks etc.
Source authentication and message integrity mechanisms 
to prevent routing message modification, Securing routing 
protocols (e.g. IPSec, ESP, SAR, ARAN) to overcome 
blackhole, impersonation attacks, packet leashes, SECTOR 
mechanism for wormhole attack etc.
Data link layer
Traffic analysis, monitoring, disruption MAC 
(802.11), WEP weakness etc.
No effective mechanism to prevent traffic analysis and 
monitoring, secure link layer protocol like LLSP, using 
WPA etc.
Physical layer
Jamming, interceptions, eavesdropping
Using Spread spectrum mechanisms e.g. FHSS, DSSS etc.

253
Issues Related to Network Security Attacks in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks (MANET)
﻿
24. CONCLUSION
In this research we will try to deal with security issues in Mobile ad hoc networks. A Mobile ad hoc 
network has open media nature and free mobility that’s why it needs much more prone with respect to 
security risks e.g. intrusions, information disclosure and denial of service etc. A Mobile ad hoc network 
needs high level of security as compare to the traditional wired networks. MANET has not well specified 
defense mechanism, so malicious attacker can easily access this kind of network. Although security issues 
in Mobile Ad-hoc Networks (MANETs) have been a major focus in the recent years, the development 
of most secure schemes for these networks has not been entirely achieved till now.
This research will provide an overview about the security issues and optimum solutions in each layer 
of MANET with challenges. In this research, we will identify the existent security threats an ad hoc 
network faces, the security services required to be achieved and the countermeasures for attacks in each 
layer. To accomplish our goal, we will carry out an extensive literature survey in gathering information 
related to various types of attacks and solutions, as well as we shall go through the comparative study to 
address the threats in different layers. The results of this research will enable us to minimize the attacks 
on each layer of MANET efficiently.
REFERENCES
Biswas & Ali. (2006). Security threats in Mobile Ad Hoc Network. School of Engineering, Blekinge 
Institute of Technology, Sweden.
Camp, T., Boleng, J., & Davies, V. (2002). A Survey of Mobility Models for Ad Hoc Network Research. 
Wireless Communication & Mobile Computing, 2(5).
Chiang, Wu, Liu, & Gerla. (1997). Routing in Clustered Multihop, Mobile Wireless Networks with Fad-
ing Channel. IEEE Singapore International Conference on Networks, SICON’97.
Deng, H., Li, W., & Agrawal, D. P. (2002). Routing security in wireless ad hoc networks. IEEE Com-
munications Magazine, 40, 70-75.
Deng, H., Li, W., & Agrawal, D. P. (2002). Routing Security in Wireless Ad Hoc Network. IEEE Com-
munications Magazine, 40(10).
Jakobsson, M., Wetzel, S., & Yener, B. (2004). Stealth Attacks on Ad Hoc Wireless Networks. In Proc. 
of IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference. IEEE. doi:10.1109/VETECF.2003.1285396
Kong, J., Zerfos, P., Luo, H., Lu, S., & Zhang, L. (2001). Providing robust and Ubiquitous Security 
support for Mobile Ad Hoc Networks. In Proceedings of the 9th International conference on Network 
Protocols (ICNP).

254
Issues Related to Network Security Attacks in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks (MANET)
﻿
Mobile Ad Hoc Networks. (2009). From Wireless LANS to 4G Networks. Tata McGraw Hill Education 
Private Limited.
Papadimitratos, P., & Haas, Z. (2002). Secure routing for mobile ad hoc networks (SRP). SCS Commu-
nication Networks and Distributed Systems Modeling and Simulation Conference.
Perkins, C. E., Royer, E., & Das, S. R. (2000). Ad hoc on demand distance vector (AODV) routing. 
Internet Draft.
Routing Security in Wireless Ad Hoc Networks. (2002). University of Cincinnati.
Sanzgiri, K., Dahill, B., Levine, B., Shields, C., & Belding-Royer, E. (2002). A Secure Routing Pro-
tocol for Ad Hoc Networks. Proc. of IEEE International Conference on Network Protocols (ICNP). 
doi:10.1109/ICNP.2002.1181388
Secure Tracking of Node Encounters in Multi-Hop Wireless Networks. (2003). Swiss Federal Institute 
of Technology Lausanne (EPFL).
Securing Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks. (2007). School of Computer and Communication Sciences, EPFL.
Security Threats in Mobile Ad Hoc Network. (2007). Blekinge Institute of Technology.
Stajano, F., & Anderson, R. J. (1999). The resurrecting duckling: Security issues for ad-hoc wireless 
networks. In 7th Security Protocols Workshop.
Technological Advancements and Applications in Mobile Ad-Hoc Networks. (2012). Research Trends. 
Sir Padampat Singhania University.
Wu, B., Chen, J., Wu, J., & Cardei, M. (2006). A Survey of Attacks and Countermeasures in Mobile Ad 
Hoc Networks. Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Florida Atlantic University.
Yang, H., Luo, H., Ye, F., Lu, S., & Zhang, L. (2004). Security in mobile ad hoc networks: challenges 
and solutions. In Proc. IEE Wireless Communication. UCLA.
Zapata. (2002). Secure Ad hoc On-Demand Distance Vector Routing. ACM Mobile Computing and 
Communications Review, 6(3), 106-107.
Zhou, L., & Haas, Z. J. (1999). Securing ad hoc networks. IEEE Network, 13, 24-30.
KEY TERMS AND DEFINTIONS
A Media Access Control Address (MAC Address): A unique identifier assigned to network inter-
faces for communications on the physical network.
ACK: As an abbreviation that may refer to ACK, a flag used in the Transmission Control Protocol 
(TCP) to acknowledge receipt of a packet.

255
Issues Related to Network Security Attacks in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks (MANET)
﻿
Ad Hoc On-Demand Distance Vector (AODV) Routing: A routing protocol for mobile ad hoc 
networks (MANETs) and other wireless ad-hoc networks.
Black Hole: A region of space from which nothing, not even light, can escape. The theory of general 
relativity predicts that a sufficiently compact mass will deform spacetime to form a black hole.
Direct-Sequence Spread Spectrum (DSSS): A modulation technique. As with other spread spectrum 
technologies, the transmitted signal takes up more bandwidth than the information signal that is being 
modulated. The name ‘spread spectrum’ comes from the fact that the carrier signals occur over the full 
bandwidth (spectrum) of a device’s transmitting frequency. 802.11b use DSSS signaling.
Dynamic Source Routing (DSR): A routing protocol for wireless mesh networks. It forms a route 
on-demand when a transmitting computer requests one. However, it uses source routing instead of rely-
ing on the routing table at each intermediate device.
Frequency-Hopping Spread Spectrum (FHSS): A method of transmitting radio signals by rapidly 
switching a carrier among many frequency channels, using a pseudorandom sequence known to both 
transmitter and receiver.
Internet Protocol Security (IPsec): A protocol suite for securing Internet Protocol (IP) communica-
tions by authenticating and encrypting each IP packet of a communication session.
Intrusion Detection System (IDS): A device or software application that monitors network and/or 
system activities for malicious activities.
Jamming: Interfering with communications or surveillance.
Network Eavesdropping: Or network sniffing is a network layer attack consisting of capturing packets 
from the network transmitted by others’ computers and reading the data content in search of sensitive 
information like passwords, session tokens, or any kind of confidential information.
Nuglet: Of technical use in Telecom field the sender loads the packets that is sending with certain 
amount of nuglets.
SSL (Secure Sockets Layer): A commonly-used protocol for managing the security of a message 
transmission on the Internet.
SYN Flood: A form of denial-of-service attack in which an attacker sends a succession of SYN 
(synchronize) requests to a target’s system in an attempt to consume enough server resources to make 
the system unresponsive to legitimate traffic.
Transport Layer Security (TLS): A protocol that ensures privacy between communicating applica-
tions and their users on the Internet.
Wi-Fi Protected Access (WPA) and Wi-Fi Protected Access II (WPA2): Two security protocols and 
security certification programs developed by the Wi-Fi Alliance to secure wireless computer networks.
Wired Equivalent Privacy (WEP): A weak security algorithm for IEEE 802.11 wireless networks.
Wormhole: A hypothetical topological feature of spacetime that would be, fundamentally, a “shortcut” 
through spacetime. For a simple visual explanation of a wormhole, consider spacetime visualized as a 
two-dimensional (2D) surface. If this surface is folded along a third dimension, it allows one to picture 
a wormhole “bridge”.

Issues Related to Network Security Attacks in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks (MANET)
256
APPENDIX: LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
MANET: Mobile Ad Hoc Network.
DoS: Denial of Service.
LAN: Local Area Network.
WLAN: Wireless Local Area Network.
PAN: Personal Area Network.
PDA: Personal Digital Assistant.
P2P: Peer-to-Peer.
TCP: Transmission Control Protocols.
MAC: Medial Access Control.
PKI: Public Key Infrastructure.
WEP: Wired Equivalent Privacy.
SSL: Secure Sockets Layer.
SSH: Secure Shell.
TLS: Transport Layer Security.
UDP: User Datagram Protocol.
WPA: Wi-Fi Protected Access.
FHSS: Frequency-hopping spread spectrum.
DSSS: Direct Sequence Spread Spectrum.
DSR: Dynamic Source Routing.
AODV: Ad hoc On-Demand Distance Vector.
IDS: Intrusion Detection System.

257
Copyright © 2016, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter  13
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-4666-9438-5.ch013
ABSTRACT
The use of smartphone is pervasive. With device pocketability driving user engagement throughout the 
day, it is highly probable that smartphones will replace daily items (e.g., keys and credit cards) that 
people now carry around. The idea presented here is a significant step in this direction. This chapter 
details the authors’ design and development of a smartphone access control system using Near Field 
Communication (NFC) Encrypted Steganography Graphical Password (ESGP). The primary objec-
tive is to leverage the technical capability of NFC-enabled smartphones in developing a two-factor 
authentication system connecting physical resources (i.e., premises) and virtual resources (i.e., pass-
word knowledge). This involves a novel integration of token-based, graphical-password authentication, 
cryptography and steganography. The second objective is to evaluate users’ behavior intention to use 
the system. New insights for researchers and business world interested in the unified solutions for NFC-
compatible smartphone, access control and mobile security are provided.
INTRODUCTION
A smartphone is a quintessential device in today’s world. In fact, smartphones are omnipresent in people’s 
daily life (Xia, Ding, Li, Kong, Yang & Ma, 2013). According to International Data Corporation (IDC) 
(International Data Corporation, 2013), more than half of the population in the United States uses smart-
phones. More interestingly, it is found that 79 percent of smartphone users carry their phones with them 
for all but two hours of their waking day (International Data Corporation, 2013). The use of smartphone 
Mobile Embedded System:
Your Door Key Evolved with Your 
Smartphone – A User Evaluation of 
a Two-Factor Authentication
Pei-Lee Teh
Monash University, Malaysia
Huo-Chong Ling
Multimedia University, Malaysia
Soon-Nyean Cheong
Multimedia University, Malaysia
Pervaiz K. Ahmed
Monash University, Malaysia

258
Mobile Embedded System
﻿
has become engrained in people’s daily behavior. Given that smartphones are pocketable, people engage 
with smartphones whilst engaging in everyday activities such as reading, ticketing and purchasing. It is 
likely that smartphones will supplant loose items (e.g., keys, credit cards and paper-based money) that 
people are now carrying around (Opperman & Hancke, 2011).
Currently systems that enable individuals to access any physical or virtual facilities have a signifi-
cant limitation since they are relatively inflexible and lack interoperability (Bauer, Garriss, McCune, 
Reiter, Rouse & Rutenbar, 2005). For example, access to premises such as home and office is usually 
linked to the possession of a hardware key or a smartcard both of which are not interoperable (Bauer et 
al., 2005). In contrast, access to virtual resources relies on knowledge-based password or token-based 
authentication (e.g., SecureID) for generating time-varying passwords (Bauer et al., 2005). The primary 
goal of this chapter is to propose an access control system that utilizes the always-in-hand smartphone as 
a two-factor authentication technology to consolidate access control to both physical as well as virtual 
resources. In addition, the chapter assesses user’s behavioral intention to use the proposed system. The 
motivation of this chapter is twofold. First, it is important to consider smartphones and people (users) as 
mutually dependent and dynamically emergent phenomena. The authors believe that smartphones can 
transmute into two-factor authentication devices that represent a shift in lifestyle for smartphone users. 
Currently, authentication behavior is determined by user habits but with increased smartphone usage, 
the usability of keys and smartcards is changing. The authors do not expect smartphones to completely 
replace other token-based authentication systems. Nonetheless, smartphones provide an alternative 
that could complement the conventional access control system using old-fashioned key, smartcard and 
password knowledge that do not interoperate. Second, when integrated well, smartphones are able to 
incorporate two-factor authentication technology. This chapter aims to address the security issue that 
underlies such smartphone authentication system. Specifically, this chapter presents an ingenious design 
and development of a two-factor smartphone authentication system, incorporating recognition-based 
graphical password, steganography and cryptography techniques. This proposed system is named as 
Near Field Communication (NFC) Encrypted Steganography Graphical Password (ESGP) smartphone 
access control system. This system is engineered as a practical, secure NFC-enabled smartphone access 
control to both physical and virtual resources.
This chapter is organized as follows: In the background section, the authors review related work on 
two-factor authentication systems, graphical passwords, steganography and cryptography techniques. 
This section also presents the architecture of NFC ESGP smartphone access control system, and its 
authentication protocol. This is followed by the experiment setting and user evaluation of the proposed 
system. The results and analysis are discussed in the section of system evaluation and recommendation. 
This chapter concludes by elucidating research implications and future research directions.
BACKGROUND
NFC and Access Control System
NFC technology is a wireless non-contact use of Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) technology 
(Özdenizci, Aydin, Coskun & Ok, 2010). The distinguishing characteristic of NFC is that it is a wireless 
communication interface with a short distance of about 10 centimeters (Haselsteiner & Breitfuß, 2006). 
NFC technology uses a short-range half duplex communication protocol, enabling easy and secure 

259
Mobile Embedded System
﻿
communication between two compatible devices (Coskun, Özdenizci & Ok, 2012). In particular, NFC 
technology enables a touch-based paradigm, in which users can use mobile services and applications 
such as making payment, opening a website etc by touching NFC-enabled devices (e.g., an NFC tag, 
NFC reader etc) with their NFC smartphones (Coskun et al., 2012).
In recent times, NFC has become a popular research area for academic scholars and industrial prac-
titioners due to its tremendous growth and innovative applications (Coskun et al., 2012). In a review 
paper, Özdenizci et al. (2010) categorize NFC academic literature into four groups:
1. 	
NFC theory and development (e.g., policy, legal and ethical issues);
2. 	
NFC infrastructure (e.g., network and communication);
3. 	
NFC applications and services (e.g., reader/writer model applications, card emulation applications 
and peer-to-peer mode applications); and
4. 	
NFC ecosystem (e.g., NFC economics and strategy).
This chapter contributes to the third category, that is, the NFC applications and services. Drawing 
from the area of card emulation mode application, this chapter offers a new design artifact (i.e., NFC 
ESGP smartphone access control system) supported with user evaluation results.
The proliferation of NFC-compatible smartphones has enabled the realization of an ubiquitous envi-
ronment for users to interact with other devices. Leveraging on NFC-equipped smartphones, researchers 
have introduced various NFC-compatible card emulation applications such as TaggyNet (Aziza, 2010), 
NFC enabled Context-Aware Smart-Home environment (NCASH) (Chang, Chang, Hung & Tsai, 2010), 
mCoupons (Dominikus & Aigner, 2007), NFCTicket (Ghiron, Sposato, Medaglia & Moroni, 2009), smart 
postal application (Zhe, 2010), university Smart Poster (Miraz, Ruiz & Gómez-Nieto, 2009a, 2009b), 
Tapango (Neefs, Schrooyen, Doggen & Renckens, 2010) and NFC-equipped automotive environment 
(Steffen, Preiβinger, Schollermann, Müller & Schnabel, 2010). For instance, Aziza (2010) proposed 
TaggyNet, a mobile phone application that offers advertising and location-based services. Chang et al. 
(2010) developed NFC enabled Context-Aware Smart-Home environment (NCASH) for NFC phone-
driven, personalized, context-aware smart spaces. For micro-payment or ticketing services, Dominikus 
and Aigner (2007) introduced mCoupons that can be downloaded from a poster/newspaper tagged with 
a passive NFC device to a mobile device. Ghiron et al. (2009) designed the NFC Ticketing application 
that enables users to buy tickets for public transportation using a mobile phone.
Although these applications help to address heterogeneous needs of smartphones users, and improve 
their digital lifestyle, the security mechanisms of these applications remain under-discussed, if not 
neglected. Interestingly, a number of home security companies have introduced new door lock mecha-
nisms such as Yale digital lock with Personal Identification Number (PIN) keypad (Yale Digital Lock, 
2014), Kwikset Kevo with biometric finger-touch (Business Wire, 2014) and August Smart Lock with 
Bluetooth technology (August Smart Lock, 2014). These new commercial products are mostly built on 
Bluetooth technology but according to Wognsen, Karlsen, Calverley, Follin, Thomsen & Hüttel (2014), 
the built-in security of the Bluetooth is deficient.
NFC ESGP smartphone access control system is an effort to leverage on the technical capability of 
NFC-enabled smartphones in developing a two-factor authentication system connecting both physical 
resources (i.e., premises) and virtual resources (i.e., password knowledge). This area of work is not lim-
ited to this chapter alone. Past and recent studies (Ali Fahmi, Kodirov, Ardiansyah, Choi & Lee, 2013; 
Bauer et al., 2005; Beaufour & Bonnet, 2004; Gunson, Marshall, Morton & Jack, 2011; Ravi, Stern, 

260
Mobile Embedded System
﻿
Desai & Iftode, 2004; Wognsen et al., 2014) have published projects that deploy mobile phones as digital 
keys. For example, in collaboration with MVC-Data, Wognsen et al. (2014) introduced a cryptographic 
protocol and a prototype implementation that enables door locks to interact with a central server using 
the Internet connections of Android smartphones. Ali Fahmi et al. (2013) introduced an authentication 
system using ear biometrics for smartphone users. Gunson et al. (2011) assessed user evaluation of the 
single-factor and two-factor authentication methods of a portable keyfob-style device. In the mid-2000s, 
Beaufour & Bonnet (2004) implemented a prototype digital key system on a Bluetooth-enabled mobile 
phone. Ravi et al. (2004) proposed a protocol named Service Discovery, Interaction and Payment Protocol 
(SDIPP) for payment via smartphone. Bauer et al. (2005) proposed Grey, a set of software extensions 
built on proof-carrying authorization (PCA) for smartphone users.
Conjecturing upon the capabilities and security of these systems, the authors postulate that NFC 
ESGP smartphone access control system provides a more useful and secure platform for a NFC-enabled 
smartphone access control system. Table 1 highlights the differences between the proposed system and 
those of the existing access control systems. At the core of the proposed system is the novel unified 
two-factor authentication approach based on two credentials, viz.
1. 	
Steganography key stored inside the memory of NFC-enabled smartphone (i.e. token-based), and
2. 	
ESGP scheme (i.e. knowledge-based).
Upon touching on the access reader, user selects a steganography key residing on user’s smartphone 
which acts as a digital key to unlock the door and then supplies correct graphical password through the 
display of NFC-enabled smartphone.
Table 1. A comparison on research published on access control system and techniques
Authors
Two-Factor 
Authentication
Authentication Method
Use of 
Cryptography
Use of 
Steganography
Smartphones and 
Steganography Key
Graphical 
Password
This study
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Wognsen et al. 
(2014)
No
No 
(use smartphones but without 
steganography key)
No
Yes
No
Gunson et al. 
(2011)
Yes
No 
(use keyfob device but without 
steganography key)
No
No
No
Bauer et al. (2005)
Yes
No 
(use Grey-enabled device but 
without steganography key)
No
Yes
No
Ravi et al. (2004)
Yes
No 
(use smartphones but without 
steganography key)
No
Yes
No
Beaufour and 
Bonnet (2004)
Yes
No 
(use smartphones but without 
steganography key)
No
Yes
No

261
Mobile Embedded System
﻿
Two-Factor Authentication
Authentication is a process to identify and verify if a person or a device should be authorized to access 
an application or a system (Almuairfi, Veeraraghavan & Chilamkurti, 2013). Multifactor authentication 
is an authentication method involving more than one form of authenticator (Gunson et al., 2011). In 
general, authentication mechanism can be classified into three categories (Almuairfi et al., 2013; Gunson 
et al., 2011; Suo, Zhu & Owen, 2005):
1. 	
Token-Based Authentication (What You Have): A physical token unique to the individual (e.g., 
physical keys, smartcards (magnetic stripe (Magstripe), radio frequency identification (RFID), 
NFC), electronic tokens, ATM card).
2. 	
Knowledge-Based Authentication (What You Know): A specific information or knowledge 
possessed by the individual (e.g., numeric password through keypad).
3. 	
Inherence-Based Authentication (What You Are): A specific intrinsic property of the individual 
(e.g., fingerprint, palm, face, iris, voice and gesture).
Token-based authentication method using hardware device such as keys, credit cards and smart cards, 
are commonly used in people’s daily life. Some token-based authentication systems are unified with 
knowledge-based authentication for better security protection (Suo et al., 2005). For instance, a user is 
required to supply both card and PIN code to execute an automated teller machine (ATM) transaction. 
In the system, the use of NFC-compatible smartphones and steganography key is considered a token-
based authentication scheme.
Knowledge-based authentication relies on the use of text-based, alphanumerical-based or graphical-
based passwords. In the real world, mobile devices mainly deploy PIN-based authentication as these 
handheld devices do not provide standard QWERTY keyboard for users to easily input their text-based 
passwords (Chang, Tsai & Lin, 2012). PIN is known as the de facto authentication technique because 
of its advantage of ease of operation, lower cost and interoperability with various platforms (Dunphy, 
Heiner & Asokan, 2010). However, secure codes which are made up of a long and random combination 
of alphanumeric keys impose memory burden to users (De Angeli, Coventry, Johnson & Renaud, 2005). 
This is further supported by a survey study of mobile telephone users by Clarke and Furnell (2005) that 
posit PIN-based authentication as a less-than-ideal authentication mechanism. The idea of graphical-
based password was first introduced by Blonder (Blonder, 1996) to address memorability and security 
problems (Biddle, Chiasson & Van oorschot, 2012; Wiedenbeck, Waters, Birget, Brodskiy & Memon, 
2005). Over the years, the graphical-based password authentication has evolved into two mechanisms 
namely, recognition-based graphical authentication and recall-based graphical authentication (Chang et 
al., 2012; Mihajlov & Jerman-Blažič, 2011). Within the community of security experts, graphical-based 
password is recognized as a more robust user authentication technique compared to text-based password 
(Davis, Monrose & Reiter, 2004) and alphanumeric strings (Wiedenbeck et al., 2005). This magnifies 
the importance of deploying graphical-based passwords in the proposed access control system.
Inherence-based authentication includes biometric mechanisms that are characterized by two sub-
groups, physiological biometrics (e.g., fingerprints, iris scanning etc) and behavioral biometrics (e.g., 
voice patterns, signature recognition etc) (Furnell, Dowland, Illingworth & Reynolds, 2000). However, 
biometric authentications require more resources and endure several usability challenges (Vu & Gruteser, 
2013). For instance, additional financial cost and hardware are needed for biometrics readers (Clarke & 

262
Mobile Embedded System
﻿
Furnell, 2005), and palmprint acquisition devices are required to operate under visible-lighting condi-
tions (Zhang, Guo, Lu, Zhang, Liu & Zuo, 2011). Hygiene problems and reliability in identifying users 
accurately due to external factors such as a scar or dirt on the finger or on the reader may also result in 
system malfunction (Asha & Chellappan, 2012; Jain et al., 2004). From the users’ perspective, biometrics 
techniques raise issues of consumer privacy (De Angeli et al., 2005). Given the practical disadvantages 
of inherence-based authentication, this system design disregarded the use of inherence-based authenti-
cation in the system design.
At a higher level, two-factor authentication remains the benchmark in computer security (Kemshall, 
2011). The proposed system is built on two-factor authentication involving a token-based authentica-
tion (What the user has – NFC-compatible smartphone and steganography key) and a knowledge-based 
authentication (What the user knows – Graphical passwords). Table 2 summarizes the advantages and 
disadvantages of different type of authentication systems.
Graphical Password, Steganography, and Cryptography
This subsection presents a brief description on how and why the graphical password, steganography and 
cryptography techniques are integrated in the proposed system.
Authentication for access is dependent on identification systems (Schuba & Spafford, 1994). Con-
ventional way to authenticate user is to prompt the user for their username and password is widely 
adopted in many authentication systems. However, this approach to authentication is quite vulnerable 
if the password chosen is weak. Studies have shown that users have tendency to select passwords that 
are easy to remember (Adams & Sasse, 1999). This may result in password being easily guessed by 
attackers. Moreover, passwords can also be stolen through illegal installation of spyware or key-logger. 
This led to the development of graphical authentication mechanism which is based on cognometrics 
approach (Mihajlov & Jerman-Blažič, 2011). Cognometric approach is also known as recognition-based 
system (Ahamed & Hariharan, 2012; Suo et al., 2005). In a recognition-based graphical password sys-
tem, users have to identify previously seen images as their passcode (Wiedenbeck et al., 2005) as an 
alternative solution to text. An assortment of images (e.g., faces, daily objects, icons etc) can be used in 
a recognition-based graphical password scheme (Biddle et al., 2012). Images are used as an alternative 
approach to text-based authentication since humans are able to better memorize images such as human 
Table 2. Summary of advantages and disadvantages of different authentication systems
Authentication Systems
Advantages
Disadvantages
Key, card 
(Token-based)
Very easy to operate, 
low maintenance cost (reader)
Inconvenience (need to bring key, card), minimum security
Keypad 
(Knowledge-based)
Easy to operate, convenience
Expensive (keypad cost), need to remember PIN, average 
security (shoulder surfing), average maintenance cost
Graphical password 
(Knowledge-based)
Easy to operate, convenience
Need to remember graphics as password
Biometric 
(Inherence-based)
Easy to operate, 
very convenience, high security
Very expensive, high maintenance cost, hygiene and 
reliability problems
Proposed System 
(Token-based + Knowledge-
based)
Easy to operate, convenience, high 
security (two-level of authentications), 
low maintenance cost
Expensive (reader cost), need to remember Graphics as 
password

263
Mobile Embedded System
﻿
faces, favorite objects etc. than alphanumeric codes, which reduces the tendency of choosing insecure 
password (Angeli et al., 2005). Besides, it is harder for attackers to steal pictures compared to text based 
code. Furthermore, if the set of images is sufficiently large, then the password space will be higher than 
the text based. In the proposed system, users are given the option to use face or non-face images as their 
graphical password.
During the first phase of graphical password enrolment, users are required to preselect three images 
in sequence, from a set of images. These three images will be stored as the specified user portfolio. The 
user is then required to select a new image (i.e. cover-photo) that will be encoded into a steganography 
key (i.e. stego-photo) used in the proposed system in the second phase of graphical password enrolment. 
Graphical-based password does not, by itself, fully address the security threats typical of text-based 
password (Biddle et al., 2012). Although graphical passwords are easier for users to remember, they 
are also easy for attackers who stand behind the legitimate users to memorize. The problem is referred 
to as shoulder surfing. To alleviate the risk of shoulder surfing, various solutions have been proposed 
(Hayashi et al., 2008; Hasegawa & Tanaka, 2009). However, most of the existing solutions are complex 
and time consuming. Hence, one more layer of security is added in the form of the steganography key 
to the authentication protocol using steganography and cryptography techniques. Steganography and 
cryptography are closely associated in spycraft techniques (Johnson & Jajodia, 1998). The term steg-
anography is derived from a Greek word which denotes “Covered Writing” (Cheddad, Condell, Curran 
& Kevitt, 2010). Steganography is the concealment of information within various types of host object 
such as image, audio, video or text to form a stego-object. There are two processes in the steganographic 
method, namely embedding and extraction processes. During the embedding process, the stegosystem 
encoder accepts two inputs, namely the information to be embedded and the host object to generate a 
stego-object as its output. During the extraction process, the stegosystem decoder accepts a stego-object 
and then extracts the embedded information from it.
Cryptography, on the other hand, is the scrambling of information from plain text into an unintelligent 
format called cipher text using a secret key (Fergusan, Schneier & Kohno, 2010). The same secret key 
is then needed to decipher the cipher text into its original plain text. Therefore, steganography is often 
combined with cryptography to increase the security of the overall communication process as it is more 
difficult for an adversary to detect a random pattern of encrypted information in the stego-object (Kat-
zenbeisser & Petitcolas, 2000). Cryptography is used to scramble the information whereas steganography 
is employed to hide the existence of the scrambled information.
In the proposed system, cryptography is deployed to scramble a passcode so that readers cannot un-
derstand, and conceal the scrambled text (i.e., cipher text) on an image (i.e., cover-photo) using technical-
steganography method in order to generate a stego-photo, which is termed “steganography key”. The 
section on system architecture discusses the encoding and decoding processes of these techniques in detail.
System Architecture
The NFC ESGP smartphone access control system is composed of the following devices:
1. 	
NFC-Compatible Smartphone: To enable the user to interact with the system for authentication 
by selecting the graphical password and steganography key.
2. 	
NFC Reader: To decode and initiate the SAC application running on NFC-compatible smartphone.

264
Mobile Embedded System
﻿
3. 	
Controller Board and Servo Motor with Door Lock: To receive control signal from home server 
that lock or unlock the door.
4. 	
Server: To host the User Management application (i.e., user account registration or deletion) 
and Middleware application (i.e., steganography key generation, steganography key decoding for 
passcode authentication, control signals transmission to hardware devices).
5. 	
Wi-Fi Local Area Network: To enable network communication between NFC-compatible smart-
phone and the system.
6. 	
Stego Access Control (SAC) Application: To enable the user (client) to supply graphical password 
running and choose the correct steganography key on smartphone.
Figure 1 shows the layout and information flow of the NFC ESGP smartphone access control system. 
Figure 2 and Figure 3 capture the front view and back view of the real-world hardware set-up consisting 
of a NFC reader, servo motor, controller board, Universal Serial Bus (USB) to Universal Asynchronous 
Receiver/Transmitter (UART) interface, Light Emitting Diodes (LED), alarm installed at the door. Using 
a two-factor authentication, the door can be unlocked by touching a NFC-compatible smartphone onto 
a NFC reader installed at the door.
The proposed system is designed for two types of users namely, administrator and normal users. 
Administrators can manage the application by deleting or adding legitimate users. Normal user is 
restricted to account registration. Password enrolment in the system is a simple procedure involving 
two phases: graphical password enrolment and steganography key (i.e., stego-photo) enrolment. For 
the graphical password enrolment, a user is given a set of face images for selection (see Figure 4). The 
user is required to input his or her graphical password through identifying an orderly sequence of three 
photos from the face images (see Figure 5). Hence, this orderly sequence of three photos will form the 
user’s graphical password. For the steganography key enrolment, a user is required to select a new im-
Figure 1. Technological flow of NFC ESGP smartphone access control system

265
Mobile Embedded System
﻿
Figure 2. Front view of NFC ESGP smartphone access control system
Figure 3. Back view of NFC ESGP smartphone access control system

266
Mobile Embedded System
﻿
age, which is different from those selected in the password enrolment phase. Using the web camera, 
the user takes a photo of this selected image (see Figure 6). Once the image enrolment is complete, the 
system will immediately generates a unique steganography key (i.e., stego-photo) using steganography 
and cryptography techniques, which will be further discussed in the Registration and Encoding Processes 
section. Using the WiFi connection, the user then downloads this steganography key to his or her NFC-
compatible smartphone through Quick Response (QR) code which is then saved in the smartphone. QR 
code (Flick2Know, 2013) is a static and non-powered technique that can be used to store a large amount 
of different types of data, such as alphanumeric characters, symbols, binary, and control codes. In this 
case, an URL linking to the user’s unique steganography key is generated in the form of QR code so 
that a user can easily scan and decode the code using his or her smartphone. The steganography key is 
then downloaded and saved into the user’s smartphone.
The NFC ESGP smartphone access control system is ingeniously designed with a two-factor authen-
tication method. To unlock the door, a user is needed to provide two means of identification:
1. 	
Knowledge-based authentication (i.e., graphical password which the user has to correctly recognize) 
and
2. 	
Token-based authentication (i.e., NFC-compatible smartphone and steganography key which is 
stored in the phone).
Figure 4. Sample screen from graphical password enrolment

267
Mobile Embedded System
﻿
Figure 5. Sample screen from graphical password authentication
Figure 6. Sample screen from steganography key enrolment

268
Mobile Embedded System
﻿
At the beginning of the unlocking process, a user first taps NFC-enabled smartphone on the NFC 
reader. The SAC application will be launched and the user is prompted for a recognition-based graphi-
cal password (see Figure 7). With the provision of valid graphical password, the user is then required to 
select the correct steganography key residing in a pool of images in his or her smartphone (see Figure 
8). This increases the difficulty of a third party (i.e. an intruder) to identify the correct steganography 
key used in the authentication. The selected steganography key and the graphical password are then 
Figure 7. Sample screen of graphical password interface on Sony Smartphone with NFC ESGP smart-
phone access control system
Figure 8. Sample screen of steganography key interface on Sony Smartphone with NFC ESGP smart-
phone access control system

269
Mobile Embedded System
﻿
sent to Middleware application for system verification. To this end, successful authentication will send 
the control signal to the controller board via USB to UART interface to unlock the door. Unsuccessful 
authentication will trigger the alarm and switch on the LED to signal security breakdown.
Authentication Protocol
This sub-section describes the two main processes embedded in the proposed NFC ESGP smartphone 
access control system. The proposed system consists of User Management application (server) to man-
age and register users through a personal computer, SAC application (client) for supplying graphical 
password and Middleware application (server) to encode and decode access passcode prior to unlocking 
a door lock. The notations are given in Table 3.
Registration and Encoding Processes
Figure 9 illustrates the registration and encoding processes through the User Management application. 
During the registration process, an orderly sequence of three faces is chosen by user from a 3 x 3 grid 
of faces as a graphical password (gPass). Each face in the 3 x 3 grid corresponds to a specific decimal 
number and thus the three faces chosen by the user, form a decimal number ranging from 111 to 999. 
After that, the user’s photo in the form of either self-portrait or any random object is captured. It is cho-
sen as the host photo (hPhoto) for the generation of the steganography key at a later stage. The chosen 
graphical password and host photo are sent to the server for encoding.
During the encoding process, the graphical password is used as a symmetrical key in the Advanced 
Encryption Standard (AES) implementation with a key size of 256 bits to encrypt an access passcode 
(aPass) supplied by the server to obtain an encrypted access passcode (EaPass). AES has been adopted 
by the U.S. government as the de facto encryption standard for secure and classified data encryption 
and decryption, and 256-bit key size resist brute force attack better than key sizes of 128 and 192 bits 
(Fergusan, Schneier & Kohno, 2010). Since AES with 256-bit key is used, the chosen graphical password 
has to fulfill the requirement of having 256 bits of symmetrical key size (i.e. 32 bytes or characters). 
Therefore, it is fed into a Secure Hash Algorithm-256 (SHA-256) to produce a 256-bit key. SHA-256 
Table 3. Notations used in the proposed NFC ESGP smartphone access control system
gPass
Graphical password
hPhoto
Host photo
aPass
Access passcode
EaPass
Encrypted access passcode
sKey
Steganography key
z ← Enc(x, y)
Encryption of x with key y to obtain z
x ← Dec(z, y)
Decryption of z with key y to obtain x
z ← Emb(x, y)
Embedding of x into y to obtain z
x ← Ext(z)
Extraction of x from z

270
Mobile Embedded System
﻿
(Fergusan et al., 2010) is a hash function that transforms an arbitrary set of data into a single fixed length 
value or hash of 256 bits.
The encrypted passcode is then embedded into the host photo using steganography technique to 
obtain a unique stego-photo that acts as a digital key, hence the term steganography key (sKey). The 
steganography technique used in the proposed system is the Least Significant Bit (LSB) substitution in 
the spatial domain because of its fast decoding speed as compared to transform domain techniques, such 
as Discrete Cosine Transform (DCT) and Discrete Wavelet Transform (DWT) (Cheddad et al., 2010; 
Goel, Rana & Kaur, 2013; Shejul & Kulkarni, 2011). This is a critical factor; since the door unlocking 
process involves a time pressure to respond. Smartphone users will not accept increase execution times 
to unlock the door. DCT and DWT techniques are technically more complicated, resulting in slower 
performance compared to LSB substitution technique (Goel et al., 2013; Shejul & Kulkarni, 2011). The 
steganography key is then transmitted to a user’s smartphone through wireless connection via QR code. 
The steganography key is a secure token that can be used by the system to authenticate users.
Decoding and Verification Processes
Figure 10 shows the decoding and verification processes by the SAC and Middleware applications. During 
the first step, user taps NFC-enabled smartphone in front of the NFC reader/tag. An NFC data is then 
sent to the smartphone to initiate and launch the SAC application. The user provides the graphical pass-
Figure 9. Registration and encoding processes

271
Mobile Embedded System
﻿
word (gPass) that they have chosen during the registration process as well as the correct steganography 
key (sKey) residing in a pool of images in the smartphone. As mentioned earlier, the purpose of storing 
the steganography key in a pool of images is to increase the difficulty of a third party (i.e. an intruder) 
to identify the correct steganography key used in the authentication. Both the graphical password and 
steganography key are then sent to the Middleware application (server) through a wireless connection 
to begin the decoding process.
During the decoding process, the system first extracts the encrypted access passcode (EaPass) from 
the user’s steganography key. Then, the encrypted access passcode is decrypted using the user’s graphi-
cal password as the symmetrical key to the decryption process. The decrypted access passcode (aPass) 
is compared with the access passcode stored in the server for verification purposes. If both passcodes 
are matched, then access signal is sent to unlock the door. Otherwise, intruder signals are sent to other 
external devices (e.g., alarm and LED) that serve as the system’s feedback mechanism. Once these 
feedback mechanisms are activated, an alarm is triggered and the LED will be turned on.
Figure 10. Decoding and verification processes

272
Mobile Embedded System
﻿
System Evaluation and Recommendations
A user evaluation of NFC ESGP smartphone access control system was conducted from the theoretical 
lens of Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) and Protection Motivation Theory (PMT). The aim of the 
user evaluation was to examine the contributing factors that influence use of the proposed system. Figure 
11 shows the hypothesized evaluation model, and its constituent variables. A survey instrument was 
developed from well-established literature (Chau, 1996; Davis, 1989; Ifinedo, 2012; Venkatesh, Morris, 
Davis & Davis, 2003). Items measuring perceived ease of use and perceived usefulness were adapted 
from (Chau, 1996; Davis, 1989; Venkatesh et al., 2003). Perceived vulnerability and perceived security 
were assessed using items modified from (Ifinedo, 2012). The user’s behavioral intention to use NFC 
ESGP smartphone access control system was measured using three new survey items. All questionnaire 
items were assessed using a seven-point Likert scale. The survey items are presented in the Appendix.
User evaluation was performed with 40 participants (30 males and 10 females). The age groups of 
the participants include: 37.5 percent was between 18 and 24 years old, 42.5 percent were between 25 
and 34 years old, 12.5 percent were between 35 and 44, and the remaining 7.5 percent was aged over 
45 years old. In the sample, 27.5 percent of participants had used smartphone for about one year, 22.5 
percent had more than one year but less than two years of smartphone experience, 17.5 percent had 
more than two years but less than three years of experience, 10 percent had more than three years but 
less than four years of experience, and remaining 22.5 percent had more than five years of experience. 
The first phase of the evaluation entailed a briefing session and a system demonstration by researchers. 
In the second phase, the participants were required to register their user accounts, and subsequently 
unlock the door with a NFC-compatible smartphone. In the final phase, the participants were requested 
to complete a paper-based survey questionnaire.
The hypothesized evaluation model was empirically tested with Structural Equation Modeling (SEM) 
(Arbuckle, 2005). SEM is known as path analysis, covariance structure analysis and latent variable 
analysis. SEM is a statistical methodology that adopts a confirmatory approach to the data analysis of 
a structural model (Byrne, 2001). There are three characteristics of SEM that support the use of SEM 
Figure 11. Research model

273
Mobile Embedded System
﻿
in this analysis. First, SEM combines the strengths of multiple regression analysis, factor analysis and 
multivariate analysis of variance (ANOVA) in one model that can be assessed simultaneously (Hair, 
Black, Babin & Anderson, 2010; Schumacker & Lomax, 2004; Hoyle & Smith, 1994). Second, SEM 
can represent both observed (measured) and unobserved (latent) variables in the relationships and cor-
rect for measurement error in the model (Hair et al., 2010). Third, the overall measures of model fit can 
be generated using SEM (Kline, 2005; Peyrot, 1996). In this study, the unstandardized estimates are 
reported. The standardized estimates are the statistical results calculated with standardized variables, 
while unstandardized estimates are generated from unstandardized variables such as variables in their 
original units rather than expressed as Z scores (Kline, 2005). Given that the most widely used estima-
tion methods in SEM assume the analysis of unstandardized estimates, Kline (2005) posits that there is 
a strong preference in the SEM literature for using unstandardized estimates. Support for this assertion 
comes from numerous SEM-based studies (e.g., Matthews, Bulger & Barnes-Farrell, 2010; Grizzle, 
Zablah, Brown, Mowen & Lee, 2009; Branstetter, Horn, Dino & Zhang, 2009; Cugnetto, Saab, Llabre, 
Goldberg, McCalla & Schneiderman, 2008; Bontis, Booker & Serenko, 2007; Hopwood, 2007; Lack-
ner, Jaccard & Blanchard, 2005; Dholakia, Bagozzi & Pearo, 2004) that have reported unstandardized 
estimates in the results.
To assess the degree of measurement error, the reliability and validity of the survey items were checked. 
Reliability is concerned with the consistency of the constructs whereas validity measures how well the 
concept is defined by the constructs (Hair et al., 2010). As presented in Table 4, all values of Cronbach’s 
alpha and composite reliability were above 0.70, meeting the rules of thumb of reliability test suggested 
by Nunnally and Bernstein (Nunnally & Bernstein, 1994) and Bagozzi and Yi (1988). Convergent and 
discriminant validity were used to assess the validity of measurement instrument. Convergent Validity 
refers to the set of survey items of a variable that should converge or share a high proportion of variance 
in common (Hair et al., 2010). Discriminant Validity refers to the ability to distinguish between variables 
(Hair et al., 2010). For convergent validity, all the coefficients of average variance extracted were higher 
than 0.50, a cutoff point recommended by Fornell and Larcker (1981). Table 5 provides an evidence 
of discriminant validity, in which all the square roots of average variance extracted values were greater 
than the off diagonal coefficients in the correlation table. Table 6 and Figure 12 present the SEM results. 
All hypotheses (H1 through H5) were supported, except for H4. Perceived ease of use was found to be 
positively related to perceived usefulness (β = 0.687, p < 0.001). Perceived ease of use was negatively 
related to behavioral intention to use the proposed system (β = -1.284, p < 0.05). Perceived usefulness 
had a significant positive relationship with behavioral intention to use the new system (β = 2.160, p < 
Table 4. Research scales, reliability, and validity results
Scales
No. of Items
Cronbach 
Alpha
Composite 
Reliability
Average Variance 
Extracted
Perceived ease of use
6
0.951
0.962
0.808
Perceived usefulness
3
0.886
0.930
0.817
Perceived vulnerability
3
0.727
0.846
0.648
Perceived security
3
0.944
0.965
0.902
Behavioral Intention to use NFC ESGP 
smartphone access control system
3
0.924
0.953
0.872

274
Mobile Embedded System
﻿
Table 5. Correlation analysis and discriminant analysis
PE
PU
PV
PS
BI
PE
0.899
PU
0.77**
0.904
PV
0.376*
0.626**
0.805
PS
0.613**
0.821**
0.677**
0.949
BI
0.585**
0.864**
0.656**
0.800**
0.934
Note: * Correlations are significant at the 0.05 level (2-tailed); ** Correlations are significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed); Values in italic 
are square roots of the Average Variance Extracted; PE=Perceived ease of use; PU=Perceived usefulness; PV=Perceived vulnerability; 
PS=Perceived security; BI=Behavioral Intention to use NFC ESGP smartphone access control system.
Table 6. Structural equation modeling results of hypotheses test
Hypotheses 
Causal Path
Path Coefficients
Standard Errors
Critical Ratios
p-Value
H1
PE → PU
0.687
0.100
6.878
0.000***
H2
PE→BI
-1.284
0.539
-2.382
0.017*
H3
PU→BI
2.160
0.752
2.874
0.004**
H4
PV→BI
-0.507
0.319
-1.591
0.112
H3
PS→BI
1.001
0.398
2.515
0.012*
Note: * p < 0.05; ** p < 0.01; *** p < 0.001; Model fit indices: normed chi square = 1.445; normed fit index = 0.816; Tucker Lewis 
index = 0.912; comparative fit index = 0.932; PE=Perceived ease of use; PU=Perceived usefulness; PV=Perceived vulnerability; 
PS=Perceived security; BI=Behavioral Intention to use NFC ESGP smartphone access control system.
Figure 12. Research model with results

275
Mobile Embedded System
﻿
0.01). Perceived security was positively related to behavioral intention (β = 1.001, p < 0.05). Perceived 
vulnerability did not have a significant relationship with behavioral intention (β = -0.507, p > 0.05).
The findings showed that three factors (i.e., perceived ease of use, perceived usefulness and perceived 
security) predict the users’ intention to use NFC ESGP smartphone access control system. Examining 
the three predictors of behavioral intention, perceived usefulness emerged to be the strongest positive 
determinant of behavioral intention. This is followed by perceived security as the second positive pre-
dictor of behavioral intention. These findings offer essential insights that users weigh usefulness and 
security as significant attributes for their behavioral intention to use NFC ESGP smartphone access 
control system. Perceived ease of use was found to be negatively related to behavioral intention. The 
result is consistent with Gunson et al. (2011), who conclude that the gain of higher security provided 
by a two-factor authentication system is offset by lower rating for ease of use. This is normal because a 
robust authentication system can often be more inherently difficult for the legitimate user to access the 
system (Mihajlov & Jerman-Blažič, 2011). Taken together, the results ratified that NFC ESGP smart-
phone access control system is regarded as a useful and secure system, thereby indicating a favorable 
acceptance of two-factor authentication using NFC-enabled smartphone.
FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTIONS
The current study has five research limitations that must be taken into consideration. First, the proposed 
system is NFC-compatible smartphone specific. It would be difficult to offer this system to users with non 
NFC-integrated smartphones. However, to increase user population, the ongoing research will enhance the 
current system design and development for a broader range of mobile devices including non-NFC-based 
smartphones such as Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE)-enabled smartphone. Second, the current system 
security authentication design is suitable for a single user (primary user). The system does not provide 
a standard key to any secondary legitimate user(s) who can access the control system. Into the future, 
the system will be enhanced to tailor for multiple users inhabiting a shared physical environment (e.g., 
workplace or home environment). Third, cost of ownership of the proposed system is still expensive as 
it relies on a home server to decode steganography key prior sending control signal to unlock a door. To 
reduce the implementation cost, a single board computer such as Raspberry PI (Raspberry PI Founda-
tion, 2015) which only cost USD 35 can be used to replace home server to process steganography key 
and unlock a door lock. Raspberry PI can be installed either next to a door lock or embedded within 
the door lock. Fourth, the current study collected the data in a cross-sectional manner. This limits the 
establishment of causality among the relationships studied. Future researchers should collect longitudinal 
data to explore the causal inferences in the proposed model. Fifth, the survey instrument used in this 
study is perceptual. The findings of this study could be made more robust if future studies extend this 
study through collection of objective data.
CONCLUSION
This chapter contributes to the security literature and business value of mobile devices in two ways. 
First, the proposed system is valuable for security experts and mobile developers who are interested in 
extending smartphone functionality. The system contributes in the conceptualization and development 

276
Mobile Embedded System
﻿
of design principles for developing a useful and secure access control system. The system is modeled in 
accordance with the properties of pervasive devices such as NFC-compatible smartphones that are likely 
to have a greater acceptance by the smartphone community. The touch-to-unlock mechanism enables the 
access control system to connect physical resources (i.e., premises) and virtual resources (i.e., password 
knowledge) in real-time. More importantly, the proposed system is integrated with the two-inlay design 
of cryptography and steganography for user security. In future, this design architecture can be used in 
other security domains. Second, the findings of the system evaluation show that users use the proposed 
system because of its usefulness and security. For practitioners, the findings reveal that it is important 
for system developer to improve the fit between the usefulness and security of the access control system.
REFERENCES
Adams, A., & Sasse, M. A. (1999). Users are not the enemy. Communications of the ACM, 42(12), 
40–46. doi:10.1145/322796.322806
Ahamed, B. B., & Hariharan, S. (2012). Integration of sound signature authentication system. Interna-
tional Journal of Security and Its Applications, 6(4), 77–86.
Ali Fahmi, P. N., & Kodirov, E., Ardiansyah, C. D., & Lee, G. (2013). Hey home, open your door, I’m 
back! Authentication system using ear biometrics for smart home. International Journal of Smart Home, 
7(1), 173–182.
Almuairfi, S., Veeraraghavan, P., & Chilamkurti, N. (2013). A novel image-based implicit password 
authentication system (IPAS) for mobile and non-mobile devices. Mathematical and Computer Model-
ling, 58(1–2), 108–116. doi:10.1016/j.mcm.2012.07.005
Angeli, A. D., Coventry, L., Johnson, G., & Renaud, K. (2005). Is a picture really worth a thousand 
words? Exploring the feasibility of graphical authentication systems. International Journal of Human-
Computer Studies, 63(1-2), 128–152. doi:10.1016/j.ijhcs.2005.04.020
Arbuckle, J. L. (2005). Amos 6.0 Users’ Guide. Amos Development Corporation.
Asha, S., & Chellappan, C. (2012). Biometrics: An overview of the technology, issues and applications. 
International Journal of Computers and Applications, 39(10), 35–52. doi:10.5120/4859-7134
August Smart Lock. (2014). Welcome to August Smart Lock. Retrieved May 29, 2014, from http://www.
august.com
Aziza, H. (2010). NFC technology in mobile phone next-generation services. In Second International 
Workshop on Near Field Communication (NFC). doi:10.1109/NFC.2010.18
Bagozzi, R., & Yi, Y. (1988). On the evaluation of structural equation models. Journal of the Academy 
of Marketing Science, 16(1), 74–94. doi:10.1007/BF02723327
Bauer, L., Garriss, S., McCune, J. M., Reiter, M. K., Rouse, J., & Rutenbar, P. (2005). Device-enabled 
authorization in the Grey system. In J. Zhou, J. Lopez, R. Deng, & F. Bao (Eds.), Information Security 
(pp. 431–445). Springer Berlin Heidelberg. doi:10.1007/11556992_31

277
Mobile Embedded System
﻿
Beaufour, A., & Bonnet, P. (2004). Personal servers as digital keys. In Proceedings of the Second IEEE 
Annual Conference on Pervasive Computing and Communications (pp. 319-328). doi:10.1109/PER-
COM.2004.1276869
Biddle, R., Chiasson, S., & Van Oorschot, P. C. (2012). Graphical passwords: Learning from the first 
twelve years. ACM Computing Surveys, 44(4), 1–41. doi:10.1145/2333112.2333114
Blonder, G. E. (1996). Graphical password. United States Patent Number 5,559,961.
Bontis, N., Booker, L. D., & Serenko, A. (2007). The mediating effect of organizational reputation on 
customer loyalty and service recommendation in the banking industry. Management Decision, 45(9), 
1426–1445. doi:10.1108/00251740710828681
Branstetter, S. A., Horn, K., Dino, G., & Zhang, J. (2009). Beyond quitting: Predictors of teen smoking 
cessation, reduction and acceleration following a school-based intervention. Drug and Alcohol Depen-
dence, 99(1-3), 160–168. doi:10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2008.07.011 PMID:18804924
Business Wire. (2014). Kwikset® Kevo™ revolutionizes the door lock using smartphone and 
Touch-to-Open™ Technology. Retrieved May 29, 2014, from http://www.businesswire.com/news/
home/20130730005823/en/Kwikset%C2%AEKevo%E2%84%A2-Revolutionizes-Door-Lock-Smart-
phone-Touch-to-Open%E2%84%A2#.U4bkBfmSzV8
Byrne, B. M. (2001). Structural Equation Modeling with AMOS: Basic Concepts, Applications, and 
Programming. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Inc.
Chang, T. Y., Tsai, C. J., & Lin, J. H. (2012). A graphical-based password keystroke dynamic authen-
tication system for touch screen handheld mobile devices. Journal of Systems and Software, 85(5), 
1157–1165. doi:10.1016/j.jss.2011.12.044
Chang, Y. S., Chang, C. L., Hung, Y. S., & Tsai, C. T. (2010). NCASH: NFC phone-enabled per-
sonalized context awareness smart-home environment. Cybernetics and Systems, 41(2), 123–145. 
doi:10.1080/01969720903584241
Chau, P. Y. K. (1996). An empirical assessment of a modified technology acceptance model. Journal 
of Management Information Systems, 13(2), 185–204.
Cheddad, A., Condell, J., Curran, K., & Kevitt, P. M. (2010). Digital image steganography: Survey and 
analysis of current methods. Signal Processing, 90(3), 727–752. doi:10.1016/j.sigpro.2009.08.010
Clarke, N. L., & Furnell, S. M. (2005). Authentication of users on mobile telephones – A survey of at-
titudes and practices. Computers & Security, 24(7), 519–527. doi:10.1016/j.cose.2005.08.003
Coskun, V., Özdenizci, B., & Ok, K. (2012). A survey on near field communication (NFC) technology. 
Wireless Personal Communications, 1–36. doi:10.1007/s11277-012-0935-5
Cugnetto, M. L., Saab, P. G., Llabre, M. M., Goldberg, R., McCalla, J. R., & Schneiderman, N. (2008). 
Lifestyle factors, body mass index, and lipid profile in adolescents. Journal of Pediatric Psychology, 
33(7), 761–771. doi:10.1093/jpepsy/jsm108 PMID:18024982

278
Mobile Embedded System
﻿
Davis, D., Monrose, F., & Reiter, M. K. (2004). On user choice in graphical password schemes. In Pro-
ceedings of the 13th USENIX Security Symposium.
Davis, F. D. (1989). Perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use, and user acceptance of information 
technology. Management Information Systems Quarterly, 13(3), 319–340. doi:10.2307/249008
De Angeli, A., Coventry, L., Johnson, G., & Renaud, K. (2005). Is a picture really worth a thousand 
words? Exploring the feasibility of graphical authentication systems. International Journal of Human-
Computer Studies, 63(1–2), 128–152. doi:10.1016/j.ijhcs.2005.04.020
Dholakia, U. M., Bagozzi, R. P., & Pearo, L. K. (2004). A social influence model of consumer partici-
pation in network- and small-group-based virtual communities. International Journal of Research in 
Marketing, 21(3), 241–263. doi:10.1016/j.ijresmar.2003.12.004
Dominikus, S., & Aigner, M. (2007). mCoupons: An application for near field communication (NFC). 
In 21st International Conference on Advanced Information Networking and Applications Workshops 
(AINAW ‘07). doi:10.1109/AINAW.2007.230
Dunphy, P., Heiner, A. P., & Asokan, N. (2010). A closer look at recognition-based graphical passwords 
on mobile devices. In Proceedings of the Sixth Symposium on Usable Privacy and Security. Redmond, 
WA: ACM. doi:10.1145/1837110.1837114
Fergusan, N., Schneier, B., & Kohno, T. (2010). Cryptography engineering: Design principles and 
practical applications. John Wiley and Sons.
Flick2Know. (2013). QR Codes. Retrieved March 13, 2015, from http://www.flick2know.com/QRCodes
Fornell, C., & Larcker, D. F. (1981). Evaluating structural equation models with unobservable variables 
and measurement error. JMR, Journal of Marketing Research, 18(1), 39–50. doi:10.2307/3151312
Furnell, S. M., Dowland, P. S., Illingworth, H. M., & Reynolds, P. L. (2000). Authentication and supervision: 
A survey of user attitudes. Computers & Security, 19(6), 529–539. doi:10.1016/S0167-4048(00)06027-2
Ghiron, S. L., Sposato, S., Medaglia, C. M., & Moroni, A. (2009) NFC ticketing: A prototype and us-
ability test of an NFC-based virtual ticketing application. In First International Workshop on Near Field 
Communication (NFC ‘09). doi:10.1109/NFC.2009.22
Goel, S., Rana, A., & Kaur, M. (2013). Comparison of image steganography techniques. International. 
Journal of Computers and Distributed Systems, 3(1), 20–30.
Grizzle, J. W., Zablah, A. R., Brown, T. J., Mowen, J. C., & Lee, J. M. (2009). Employee customer orien-
tation in context: How the environment moderates the influence of customer orientation on performance 
outcomes. The Journal of Applied Psychology, 94(5), 1227–1242. doi:10.1037/a0016404 PMID:19702367
Gunson, N., Marshall, D., Morton, H., & Jack, M. (2011). User perceptions of security and usability 
of single factor and two-factor authentication in automated telephone banking. Computers & Security, 
30(4), 208–220. doi:10.1016/j.cose.2010.12.001
Hair, J. F. Jr, Black, W. C., Babin, B. J., & Anderson, R. E. (2010). Multivariate Data Analysis: A Global 
Perspective (7th ed.). Pearson Education Inc.

279
Mobile Embedded System
﻿
Hasegawa, M., Tanaka, Y., & Kato, S. (2009). A study on an image synthesis method for graphical 
passwords. In Proceedings of 2009 International Symposium on Intelligent Signal Processing and Com-
munication Systems (ISPACS 2009). doi:10.1109/ISPACS.2009.5383758
Haselsteiner, E., & Breitfuß, K. (2006). Security in near field communication (NFC). In Workshop on 
RFID security.
Hayashi, E., Christin, N., Dhamija, R., & Perrig, A. (2008). Use your illusion: Secure authentication 
usable anywhere. In Proceedings of the Fourth Symposium on Usable Privacy and Security (SOUPS 
2008). doi:10.1145/1408664.1408670
Hopwood, C. J. (2007). Moderation and mediation in structural equation modeling: Applications for early 
intervention research. Journal of Early Intervention, 29(3), 262–272. doi:10.1177/105381510702900305
Hoyle, R. H., & Smith, G. T. (1994). Formulating clinical research hypotheses as structural equation 
models: A conceptual overview. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 62(3), 429–440. 
doi:10.1037/0022-006X.62.3.429 PMID:8063970
Ifinedo, P. (2012). Understanding information systems security policy compliance: An integration of the 
theory of planned behavior and the protection motivation theory. Computers & Security, 31(1), 83–95. 
doi:10.1016/j.cose.2011.10.007
International Data Corporation. (2013). Always connected: How smartphones and social keep us engaged: 
An IDC research report. Retrieved November 12, 2013, from http://www.idc.com/prodserv/custom_so-
lutions/download/case_studies/PLANBB_Always_Connected_for_Facebook.pdf
Jain, A. K., Ross, A., & Prabhakar, S. (2004). An introduction to biometric recognition. IEEE Transac-
tions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology, 14(1), 4–20. doi:10.1109/TCSVT.2003.818349
Johnson, N. F., & Jajodia, S. (1998). Exploring steganography: Seeing the unseen. Computer, 31(2), 
26–34. doi:10.1109/MC.1998.4655281
Katzenbeisser, S., & Petitcolas, F. A. (2000). Information hiding techniques for steganography and 
digital watermarking. Norwood, MA: Artech House.
Kemshall, A. (2011). Why mobile two-factor authentication makes sense. Network Security, 2011(April), 
9–12. doi:10.1016/S1353-4858(11)70038-1
Kline, R. B. (2005). Principles and Practice of Structural Equation Modeling (2nd ed.). New York: The 
Guilford Press.
Lackner, J. M., Jaccard, J., & Blanchard, E. B. (2005). Testing the sequential model of pain processing in 
irritable bowel syndrome: A structural equation modeling analysis. European Journal of Pain (London, 
England), 9(2), 207–218. doi:10.1016/j.ejpain.2004.06.002 PMID:15737813
Liu, Q., Sung, A. H., Ribeiro, B., Wei, M., Chen, Z., & Xu, J. (2008). Image complexity and feature 
mining for steganalysis of least significant bit matching steganography. Information Sciences, 178(1), 
21–36. doi:10.1016/j.ins.2007.08.007

280
Mobile Embedded System
﻿
Matthews, R. A., Bulger, C. A., & Barnes-Farrell, J. L. (2010). Work social supports, role stressors, 
and work-family conflict: The moderating effect of age. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 76(1), 78–90. 
doi:10.1016/j.jvb.2009.06.011
Mihajlov, M., & Jerman-Blažič, B. (2011). On designing usable and secure recognition-based graphical au-
thentication mechanisms. Interacting with Computers, 23(6), 582–593. doi:10.1016/j.intcom.2011.09.001
Miraz, G. M., Ruiz, I. L., & Gómez-Nieto, M. A. (2009a). How NFC can be used for the compliance of 
European higher education area guidelines in European universities. In First International Workshop 
on Near Field Communication (NFC ‘09). doi:10.1109/NFC.2009.9
Miraz, G. M., Ruiz, I. L., & Gómez-Nieto, M. A. (2009b). University of things: Applications of near 
field communication technology in university environments. The Journal of E-working, 3(1), 52–64.
Neefs, J., Schrooyen, F., Doggen, J., & Renckens, K. (2010). Paper ticketing vs. electronic ticketing 
based on off-line system ‘Tapango’. In Second International Workshop on Near Field Communication 
(NFC). doi:10.1109/NFC.2010.24
Nunnally, J. C., & Bernstein, I. H. (1994). Psychometric Theory. McGraw-Hill Inc.
Opperman, C. A., & Hancke, G. P. (2011). Biometric recognition using NFC-enabled smartphones. 
Retrieved May 29, 2014, from http://www.satnac.org.za/proceedings/2011/papers/Work_In_Progress/
Network_Services/223.pdf
Özdenizci, B., Aydin, M., Coskun, V., & Ok, K. (2010). NFC research framework: A literature review 
and future research directions. In Proceedings of the 14th International Business Information Manage-
ment Association (IBIMA) Conference.
Peyrot, M. (1996). Causal analysis: Theory and application. Journal of Pediatric Psychology, 21(1), 
3–24. doi:10.1093/jpepsy/21.1.3 PMID:8820070
Raspberry P. I. Foundation. (2015). Raspberry PI 2 Model B. Retrieved March 14, 2015, from http://
www.raspberrypi.org/products/raspberry-pi-2-model-b/
Ravi, N., Stern, P., Desai, N., & Iftode, L. (2004). Accessing ubiquitous services using smart phones. 
Retrieved May 29, 2014, from http://www.cs.rutgers.edu/~iftode/smph04.pdf
Schuba, C. L., & Spafford, E. H. (1994). Countering abuse of name-based authentication. Computer 
Science Technical Reports. Retrieved May 29, 2014, from http://docs.lib.purdue.edu/cstech/1130
Schumacker, R. E., & Lomax, R. G. (2004). A Beginner’s Guide to Structural Equation Modeling (2nd 
ed.). Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Inc.
Shejul, A. A., & Kulkarni, U. L. (2011). A secure skin tone based steganography using wavelet transform. 
International Journal of Computer Theory and Engineering, 3(1), 16–22. doi:10.7763/IJCTE.2011.V3.277
Steffen, R., Preißinger, J., Schollermann, T., Müller, A., & Schnabel, I. (2010). Near field communication 
(NFC) in an automotive environment: Use cases, architecture and realization. In Second International 
Workshop on Near Field Communication (NFC). doi:10.1109/NFC.2010.11

281
Mobile Embedded System
﻿
Suo, X., Zhu, Y., & Owen, G. S. (2005). Graphical passwords: A survey. In Proceedings of the 21st An-
nual Computer Security Applications Conference (ACSAC 2005). doi:10.1109/csac.2005.27
Venkatesh, V., Morris, M. G., Davis, G. B., & Davis, F. D. (2003). User acceptance of information 
technology: Toward a unified view. Management Information Systems Quarterly, 27(3), 425–478.
Vu, T., & Gruteser, M. (2013). Personal touch-identification tokens. Pervasive Computing, IEEE, 12(2), 
10–13. doi:10.1109/MPRV.2013.33
Wiedenbeck, S., Waters, J., Birget, J. C., Brodskiy, A., & Memon, N. (2005). PassPoints: Design and 
longitudinal evaluation of a graphical password system. International Journal of Human-Computer 
Studies, 63(1–2), 102–127. doi:10.1016/j.ijhcs.2005.04.010
Wognsen, E. R., Karlsen, H. S., Calverley, M., Follin, M. N., Thomsen, B., & Hüttel, H. (2014). A se-
cure relay protocol for door access control. Retrieved May 29, 2014, from http://people.cs.aau.dk/~erw/
srpdac.pdf
Xia, F., Ding, F., Li, J., Kong, X., Yang, L. T., & Ma, J. (2013). Phone2Cloud: Exploiting computation 
offloading for energy saving on smartphones in mobile cloud computing. Information Systems Frontiers, 
1–17. doi:10.1007/s10796-013-9458-1
Yale Digital Lock. (2014). Yale – the world’s favourite lock. Retrieved May 29, 2014, from http://www.
yalelock.com/en/yale/com/About-Yale
Zhang, D., Guo, Z., Lu, G., Zhang, L., Liu, Y., & Zuo, W. (2011). Online joint palmprint and palmvein 
verification. Expert Systems with Applications, 38(3), 2621–2631. doi:10.1016/j.eswa.2010.08.052
Zhe, L. (2010). NFC enabled smart postal system. In Second International Workshop on Near Field 
Communication (NFC). doi:10.1109/nfc.2010.9
KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Advanced Encryption Standard: A de facto encryption standard for secure and classified data 
encryption and decryption.
Authentication: A process to identify and verify if a person or a device should be authorized to 
access an application or a system.
Bluetooth Low Energy/Bluetooth Smart: A set of standards for smartphones and devices to ex-
change data wirelessly over short distances similar to classic Bluetooth but with considerably reduced 
power consumption and cost to form personal area networks.
Cipher Text: Scrambled or encrypted text as a result of encryption process in cryptography.
Convergent Validity: Measure of the degree to which a set of survey items of a variable should 
converge or share a high proportion of variance in common.
Cover-Photo: An original photo.
Cryptography: The art or practice of converting a plain text into a cipher text.
Decryption: A process of converting a cipher text into a plain text.
Discriminant Validity: Extent to which a variable is distinct from other variables.

282
Mobile Embedded System
﻿
Encryption: A process of converting a plain text into a cipher text.
Graphical Password: An authentication method using images, graphics instead of letters, digits or 
special characters.
Mobile Security: The protection of mobile devices from threats and vulnerabilities associated with 
wireless computing.
Near Field Communication: A set of standards for smartphones and devices to establish radio com-
munication with each other by touch-to-connect mechanism within short-range distances.
Plain Text: Ordinary readable text.
Reliability: Measure of the degree to which a set of survey items of a variable is internally consistent 
in their measurements.
Secure Hash Algorithm-256: A hash function that transforms an arbitrary set of data into a single 
fixed length value or hash of 256 bits.
Smartphone: A mobile phone with advanced computing capability and connectivity than the basic 
features of mobile phones.
Steganography Key: A stego-photo generated from the ESGP scheme that acts as a digital key to 
unlock door.
Steganography: The art or practice of concealing a message within another image.
Stego-Photo: A cover-photo with embedded message.
Structural Equation Modeling: A multivariate technique integrating aspects of factor analysis and 
multiple regressions that enables the researchers to simultaneously study a series of interrelated depen-
dence relationships among the variables.
Validity: Measure of the degree to which a set of survey items of a variable accurately represents 
what it is supposed to.

Mobile Embedded System
283
APPENDIX
Perceived Ease of Use
(1=strongly disagree; 7=strongly agree).
1. 	
Learning to operate the NFC ESGP smartphone access control system is easy for users.
2. 	
Users find it easy to get the NFC ESGP smartphone access control system to do what they want it 
to do.
3. 	
User’s interaction with the NFC ESGP smartphone access control system is clear and understandable.
4. 	
Users find the NFC ESGP smartphone access control system to be flexible to interact with.
5. 	
It is easy for users to become skillful at using the NFC ESGP smartphone access control system.
6. 	
Users find the NFC ESGP smartphone access control system easy to use.
Perceived Usefulness
(1=strongly disagree; 7=strongly agree).
1. 	
Using the NFC ESGP smartphone access control system improves the security of premises.
2. 	
Using the NFC ESGP smartphone access control system improves the digital lifestyles of users.
3. 	
Users would find the NFC ESGP smartphone access control system useful in their life.
Perceived Vulnerability
(1=strongly disagree; 7=strongly agree).
1. 	
I could fall victim to shoulder surfing (people looking over my shoulder to obtain my password).
2. 	
I believe that using the NFC ESGP smartphone access control system will reduce illegal access to 
my premises.
3. 	
Access control may be compromised if I do not pay adequate attention to security.
Perceived Security
(1=strongly disagree; 7=strongly agree).
1. 	
Using NFC ESGP smartphone access control system through my smartphone is an effective way 
to deter unauthorized user attacks.
2. 	
Using NFC ESGP smartphone access control system through my smartphone will prevent unau-
thorized user from gaining access to my premises.
3. 	
Enabling the NFC ESGP smartphone access control system using my smartphone will improve 
security of my premises.

Mobile Embedded System
284
Behavioral Intention to Use NFC ESGP Smartphone Access Control System
If the NFC ESGP smartphone access control system becomes available: (1=strongly disagree; 7=strongly 
agree).
1. 	
I am likely to use the NFC ESGP smartphone access control system to improve my security.
2. 	
I will look into new technologies such as NFC ESGP smartphone access control system to improve 
security.
3. 	
I intend to take as many precautions as possible to prevent unauthorized access to my premises.

285
Copyright © 2016, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter  14
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-4666-9438-5.ch014
ABSTRACT
This chapter discusses the use of unattended sensors and its use in marine environment. The authors 
present challenges of designing a marine sensor in harsh environments and a case study in implement-
ing a marine sensor to study hypoxia. Hypoxia is a world-wide anthropogenic phenomenon related to 
pollution. The authors describe the construction of an inexpensive sensor buoy system, Oxybuoy, de-
signed for long-term unattended oxygen sensor measurements. The technology is available to construct 
such sensor buoys. The authors showed a prototype based on commercial off-the shelf components: 
an embedded PC, an optical dissolved oxygen sensor, a temperature sensor, a Wi-Fi transmitter and a 
satellite transmitter. Its total cost is around $5,000 to construct, program and test a proof of concept of 
such sensor. The authors describe the buoy’s architectural design and three experiments that the authors 
carried out to demonstrate its viability.
INTRODUCTION
Unattended sensors can be divided into several classes based on their size and capabilities. Microsensors 
are small scale devices with low power requirements, processing, communication and storage capacity. 
Midsize sensor nodes have a higher power requirement but they have greater communication, storage 
and processing capabilities. There are a large number of diverse applications, where both microsensors 
and midsize sensors can be used successfully. In this chapter, the authors describe the most common 
architecture and applications for microsensors and for midsize sensors. The authors then focus on marine 
based applications of these sensors.
Unattended Sensors in 
Marine Environments:
Oxybuoy for Hypoxia Study
Rizal Mohd Nor
International Islamic University Malaysia, Malaysia
Mikhail Nesterenko
Kent State University, USA

286
Unattended Sensors in Marine Environments
﻿
Microsensors
The advances of processor manufacturing and sensing technology have enabled the construction of 
microsensors for the use in sensor networks. Researchers today are able to deploy these microsensors 
devices equipped with sensors and radio transmitters to measure the physical phenomena in the envi-
ronment, gather data, relay to human operators as well as use actuators to influence this environment 
(Culler, Estrin, & Srivastava, 2004; Estrin, Govindan, Heidemann, & Kumar, 1999; Culler & Hong, 
2004). Microsensors can be used in a wide range of applications from military surveillance (Arora, et 
al., 2004; Chhabra, Kushalnagar, Metzler, & Sampson, 2004; Maroti, Simon, Ledeczi, & Sztipanovits, 
2004) to environmental monitoring (Oliver, Smettem, Kranz, & MAyer, 2005; Mainwaring, Culler, 
Polastre, Szewczyk, & Anderson, 2002; Brennan, Mielke, Torney, & Maccabe, 2004).
A single microsensor is limited in terms of processing speed, storage capacity and communication 
bandwidth. However, this makes their manufacturing cost very low. Due to their low cost, microsensors 
can be deployed in large numbers: hundreds, thousands or even hundreds of thousands of units. In such 
large numbers, the intended sensor nodes tend to be located closer to the observed phenomenon. The 
collected sensor data provides a far greater resolution than a few large scale sensors are able to provide. 
These allow the microsensor technology to provide solutions to problems that were previously impossible 
to solve. The most common application of sensor networks is monitoring (Oliver, Smettem, Kranz, & 
MAyer, 2005; Mainwaring, Culler, Polastre, Szewczyk, & Anderson, 2002; Brennan, Mielke, Torney, 
& Maccabe, 2004; Arora, et al., 2005; Batalin, et al., 2004; He, et al., 2004; Tolle, et al., 2005). Among 
the most frequently used devices are Berkeley prototype sensor nodes called motes (Crossbow Technol-
ogy Inc.). Motes are a convenient research and development platform because they are flexible and easy 
to operate. There are several families of motes: Mica, Mica2, Mica2Dot and MicaZ. All of them share 
a common Atmel AT-Mega128L microprocessor with a 32 kHz crystal and 4 Mhz crystal except for 
Mica2 which has a higher crystal clock of 7.37 MHz. The motes have a 10-bit ADC, two UART chan-
nels, an SPI bus and an I2C bus. All of them have an external serial flash memory of 512 KBytes. The 
motes have 3 programmable LEDs, except Mica2Dot, which has only one LED, to help in debugging. 
All motes have I/O connectors to interface with sensors and a programming board. Mica has an RFM 
TR1000 radio transceiver and is capable of radio communication in the frequency range from 902--928 
MHz and 433.1 434.8 MHz. Mica2 and Mica2Dot provide better communication capabilities with the 
Chipcon CC1000 radio transceiver. They could operate on frequencies ranges which was from 868--870 
MHz, 902--928 MHz, 433.1 434.8 MHz and 313.9 316.1 MHz. MicaZ provided a better range with a 
higher frequency in the range of 2400–2483.5 MHz using the Chipcon CC2420 transceiver. MicaZ is 
also the first in Mica family to support the IEEE 802.15.4 protocol.
All of the motes models run the TinyOS operating system (Hill, et al., 2000) which was specifically 
designed for such resource constrained devices. TinyOS is designed to be power efficient, modular, 
has a small memory footprint and is capable of supporting concurrency-intensive operations. Although 
TinyOS does not provide any hard real-time guarantees, it does support real-time query and feedback 
control of physical world. An application in TinyOS is a combination of the scheduler and a graph of 
components compiled into one executable. The architecture is event-driven with a single shared stack. 
TinyOS does not have kernel and user space differentiation.
Motes have frequently been used on land for monitoring purposes. One of the first successful de-
ployments of motes is the habitat monitoring application developed by Mainwaring et al. (2002). This 
application recorded the temperature and humidity in a nature preserve. Mica motes were deployed 

287
Unattended Sensors in Marine Environments
﻿
on the Great Duck Island, located 15 km South of the Mount Desert Island, Maine. Mica motes were 
equipped with photo resistors, temperature sensors, barometric pressure sensors, humidity sensors and 
thermistors. The island is a protected area which is restricted to human presence. Therefore, the use of 
unattended microsensors was desirable. The use of these sensors allowed researchers to gather long term 
data at a greater scale and resolution. This micro-scale data enables biologist to improve and control the 
habitat. Szewcyzk et al. (2004) later extended their deployment with higher number of nodes to study 
the use of microsensors on a large scale.
Tolle et al. (2005) used Mica2Dot to monitor micro-climate in Redwood coastal canopy. The mi-
crosensors were deployed throughout a 70 meter high redwood tree to monitor temperature, light and 
humidity. Results were later gathered to perform analysis of spatial and temporal trends. The analysis 
provides valuable information for studying the micro-climatic conditions in the coast of redwood trees.
Chazko and Ahmad (2005) used Mica2 motes to create a sensor network to get an early warning 
system for fire endangered areas. The use of micro-sensors deployed in fire endangered areas can pro-
vide real-time data for bush firefighting. They indicated that microsensor networks can be use in hostile 
environments.
Kim et al. (2007) showed that microsensors can also be used for infrastructure health monitoring. 
The sensors were equipped with two accelerometers to measure vibrations and detect movements in two 
axis on the bridge. A total of 59 nodes were deployed. One of the challenges is filtering out the noise. 
Temperature sensors were used to calibrate the accelerometers for operation at different temperatures. To 
achieve desirable quality of data, extensive analog and digital signal processing techniques were imple-
mented. Another challenge is to transmit the data with minimum jitter: the required sampling rate was 
higher than the transmitting rate, hence the device have to alternate between sampling and transmitting.
Priya and Inman (2009) from Energy Harvesting Technologies described promising use of energy 
harvesting sensor network devices. They designed, developed and demonstrated the use of a structural 
health monitoring system for military helicopters. The devices are designed for long term operation, 
without the need of a battery. They harvest energy from vibrations using micro fiber composite mate-
rial. The devices have strain sensors to measure strain on the structure and a 2 MByte flash memory to 
save the compressed data. The data is transmitted to the nearest gateway when available using Wi-Fi 
transceiver via IEEE 802.15.4 protocol. The device is able to handle high sampling rates and capable of 
operating in energy saving mode when there is insufficient energy to be harvested.
Ramanathan et al. (2006) described the use of Mica2 modes for a soil sensing system. The researchers 
provided a systematic design description of a robust sensing system suited for the challenges of harsh 
agricultural environment. The researchers described 3 separate long term deployment of sensors at a rice 
paddy field in Bangladesh, James Reserve and San Joanquin River basin in California. They presented 
techniques to maximizing sensor yield by improving calibration techniques and dealing with calibra-
tion drift. They have managed to increase the yield of the network of sensors to achieve a delivery ratio 
of 91% by implementing a delay-tolerant network and monitoring data flow from one node to another.
Midsize Sensors
The emergence of low power processors for embedded computers like Gumstix (Gumstix Inc.), Rasp-
berry Pi (Raspberry Pi Foundation) and Stargate (Crossbow Technology Inc.) enabled a wide variety 
of applications from PDAs and cellphones to sensors, actuators and robotics. These devices are less 
resource constrained. They usually have greater processing power, larger memory storage, and better 

288
Unattended Sensors in Marine Environments
﻿
communication range than microsensors. However, these devices have a higher power requirement. 
Midsize sensors may require a large battery source or a solar panel.
The advantage of using these midsize sensors is their capability to interface other devices and to 
ease programming. Embedded computers such like the Gumstix, Raspberry Pi and Stargate has several 
serial communication ports, a general purpose input output (GPIO) bus, an I2C bus, ADC channels and 
IEEE 802.11 communication capabilities. These extra features allow them to be easily integrated with 
other devices such as sensor, actuator or a GPS. The embedded computer usually supports full-fledged 
operating system such as Linux operating system or the Windows CE. Unlike regular PCs, midsize sen-
sors are robust and can operate in harsh conditions.
For example, the Gumstix board is capable of operating at low temperature of -25° Celsius to a high 
temperature of 85° Celsius. Williams, Viguria and Howard (2008) relied on Gumstix embedded chip for 
operating a robotic mobile sensor network to take measurements in the arctic. The weather data from 
glacial regions can provide important and valuable information on global climate change. Acquiring 
these data is challenging because of the harsh environment and inaccessible terrain. Traditional meth-
ods of human expeditions to collect data have been short duration, limited in area, slow and dangerous. 
Another traditional method such as fixed weather stations provides continuous data feed. However, it 
has low spatial resolution. Hence a robotic mobile sensor network was desirable to provide greater reso-
lution on specific regions of the arctic. The Gumstix boards were mounted on a RC snowmobile. The 
Gumstix board can interface with weather sensor units, GPS control and camera feedback to navigate 
the harsh terrain of the arctic. For low level control on navigational motors, I2C communication is used 
with microcontrollers. Mobile sensor nodes communicate with one another using the IEEE 802.11 Wi-
Fi communication protocol.
The Raspberry Pi sensor is also known to be used in harsh environments as well. Cagnetti, Leccese, 
and Daniele (2013) demonstrated the use of a Raspberry Pi to realize an inexpensive vineyard protec-
tion system against hailstorm. Their system could perform autonomously local activities to physically 
control the protection of the vineyard and transmit information toward a remote control. Each row in 
the vineyard has an umbrella designed by the authors which protects the product without hindering 
daily mechanical activities typical of a modern vineyard. The Raspberry Pi is used as a central unit to 
control communications and designed to run for long period of time while operating in harsh outdoor 
temperatures and exposure to high humidity.
Midsize sensors are small enough to be used as wearable computers. Fraser et al. (2007) utilized the 
Gumstix board to create a wearable device to track in 2D and 3D, the locations of a marker pen. The 
sensor were carefully disguised as a marker pen and helped in keeping track of a presenters’ drawing on a 
screen. The marker pen was equipped with a Gumstix board, battery, Bluetooth aerial, and an ultrasonic 
receiver to help in 3D positioning and tracking of the marker pen. To create a system capable of tracking 
the pen around the display, 6 transmitters were used to send ultrasonic pulses which are received by the 
Gumstix embedded computer. The Gumstix calculates the time differential to determine the receiver’s 
position with respect to the known transmitter locations. The researchers were able to demonstrate im-
provements in response time, accuracy, and predictability of their tracking application.
Gumstix is designed with flexibility in mind. This makes Gumstix an attractive platform for sensor 
applications. Hughes et al. (2006) used the Gumstix board in creating a flood monitoring network where 
external sensors are attached to a Gumstix processor to detect dangerous water levels. Flood is a growing 
problem which causes loss of billions of dollars by affecting land use and damaging properties. The dam-
ages incurred correlates with the warning time, depth and the flow speed of the flood. A current method 

289
Unattended Sensors in Marine Environments
﻿
to detect and measure water levels is sparse and does not cover sufficient flood areas. Therefore, there is 
a need to develop a flood monitoring sensor network to improve measurements of areas with high risk 
for flood and improve flood prediction models to mitigate this loss. There were 4 types of sensors used 
on the flood monitoring sensor. The pressure base depth sensor with lighting strike protection and the 
conductivity-based pollution sensor connect via the Analog to Digital Converter (ADC) channels on the 
Gumstix board. The ultrasound-based flow monitoring sensor interfaced the Gumstix board via RS232. 
The digital camera for image-based flow measurement is connected to the Gumstix board via Ethernet 
port. The sensor nodes were powered by a 12V 7Ah gel battery and a 12V solar array. The researchers 
demonstrated benefits on having such a sensor network in reconfiguring flood models.
Marine Application of Sensor Nodes
Challenges of Marine Sensor Design
Marine based sensors pose a new set of challenges for sensor network deployment. Electronics can eas-
ily become damaged when coming in contact with water. Thus, the packaging in marine based sensors 
is particularly important. The packaging should withstand constant dynamic movement of the sensor 
as well as insulate the device from moisture. Wires from the electronics connecting to external sensors 
should be carefully designed to assure safety of equipment from water penetrating into the casing.
The second challenge is providing power. Supplying wired power to a marine based sensor is seldom 
feasible. Replacing batteries is also cumbersome as it requires visiting the sensor at the place of deploy-
ment. This is either expensive or otherwise undesirable. Using solar panels is a viable solution but it 
increases the sensor cost.
Communication is a major challenge for marine based sensors. The communication means for marine 
sensors are limited. If the device is underwater, one of the most common way to communicate with it is 
by using an acoustic modem (Wills, Ye, & Heidemann, 2006). Wills et al. (2006) described extensive 
use of acoustic modems between marine sensors. However, acoustic modems have a number of short 
comings: their range is limited, their susceptible to noise and their latency is high. Hence their usage is 
only feasible for short range communication.
Another option is to use IEEE 802.11 wireless communication protocol. For this the antenna needs 
to be installed above the water surface. However, the antenna needs to be placed high enough so that the 
Fresnel zone is unaffected by the water surface. Fresnel zone is an area around the line-of-sight between 
two RF antennas within which obstructions degrade the strength of the signal. The surface of the water 
itself is such an obstruction. The radius of the Fresnel Zone is largest at the midpoint between the anten-
nas and smallest at the endpoints at the two antennas. The radius of the Fresnel Zone at the midpoint 
between the two antennas is given by Equation 1
h
L
F
=
×
72 1
4
.
 
(1)
where h  is the radius of the Fresnel zone in feet, L  is the distance between the antennas in miles, and 
F  is the frequency of the RF signal in GHz. A common guideline is that the Fresnel zone must be at 
least 60% clear of obstructions, so the 72.1 multiplier in the above equation is commonly substituted 
with 43.3 to give the 60% radius of the Fresnel zone. Hence, the further apart the antennas are, the 

290
Unattended Sensors in Marine Environments
﻿
higher they need to be placed. This requires the construction of high mast which makes the deployment 
expensive. For example, for two antennas 1 mile apart transmitting at 2.437GHz using IEEE 802.11b 
communication protocol, the Fresnel radius at the middle of the 1 mile link would be about 13.9 feet. 
Therefore, the antennas should be placed at least 13.9 feet high. Another option for communication for 
marine sensors is satellite modems. However, satellite communication can be expensive if there is a lot 
of data to be transmitted.
Marine Sensor Deployments
There is a number of midsize and microsensor marine deployment reported in literature. Bokser et al. 
(2004) used Mica2 to develop a small submarine robot for the experiments in underwater sensor net-
works. Besides Mica2, the submarine robot had a pressure sensor, a thermistor and a propulsion piston to 
change its’ buoyancy. The robot was capable of maintaining desired depth level in the water by sensing 
the pressure on the pressure sensor and maintaining its’ depth by activating the pistons to react to any 
change in pressure. The experiment demonstrated the viability of using microsensors for underwater 
sensor networks.
Graber et al. (2000) described a compact buoy called the ASIS capable of measuring atmospheric 
data in the open ocean. Gobat et al. (2001) reported on the development of an extensive military meteo-
rological buoy system. Guinasso et al. (2001) and Bender et al. (2007) described a series of large buoy 
deployments for surface current measurements. Wallinga et al. (2003) described a buoy platform that 
can accommodate up to 100 sensors. This is a large-size buoy which requires solar batteries to power the 
equipment. Blain et al. (2004) described the design of a DO sensor MAREL buoy. The design was done 
using a membrane-based DO sensor. Such sensors are sensitive to bio-fouling and long-term measure-
ment drift. The buoy contains a system of bio-fouling prevention that involves pumping the water from 
the desired depth to the surface for measurement, then automatic periodic flushing of the sensor with 
an anti-bacterial chlorinated solution. There is also the need for extensive sensor calibration to account 
for measurement drift. The data was transmitted from the MAREL buoy to shore using wireless LAN 
technology. Voigt et al. (2007) described their experiences building an array of temperature-measuring 
buoys connected by a wireless LAN.
In their position paper, Akyildiz Pompili and Melodia (2005) described the challenges of gathering 
sensor data in the marine environment. Wood, Rees and Pfeiffer (2007) described a design of a self-
propelled float or a canoe that can follow a certain route and en route, lower the sensor with a winch 
to a desired depth and take measurements. Another automated sensor gathering system is described by 
Vasilescu et al. (2005). It involves robotic submarine, optical and acoustic communication, etc. These 
designs may be too expensive and complicated, however it proves the use of microsensors and midsize 
sensors in a harsh environment.
BACKGROUND
A Case Study for Hypoxia
Hypoxia, i.e. dissolved oxygen (DO) depletion in the lower part of the water column caused by terrestrial, 
mostly anthropogenic, nutrient loading is an emerging national and global problem (Diaz & Rosenberg, 

291
Unattended Sensors in Marine Environments
﻿
2008). Reduced oxygen availability negatively affects biological resources, including fish (Thomas, 
Rahman, Khan, & Kummer, 2007) and commercially important invertebrate species (O’Connor & 
Whitall, 2007). To mitigate the environmental impact of hypoxia, the phenomenon requires extensive 
study. However, the dynamics of hypoxia development is poorly understood. Hypoxia tends to occur in 
large areas of coastal waters. For example, in the northern Gulf of Mexico, the hypoxic zone can reach 
20,000 km2 (Walker & Rabalais, 2006).
Traditional approaches to monitor DO concentrations rely on using research vessels to collect water 
samples for subsequent chemical analysis or to trawl DO sensors behind the vessel. These approaches 
necessarily limit the resolution of time-series data as they are expensive due to the vessel operating costs 
and man power involved. The resolution of the data is limited further due to the measurements being 
weather-dependent as the ship carrying DO sampling gear cannot be operated in rough seas. Furthermore, 
it is impossible to measure DO concentration in several diverse locations simultaneously with a single 
research vessel. The lack of data that can match the scale of the phenomena hinders the study and the 
efforts to correctly model hypoxia.
Remote sensing is commonly used in large-scale oceanographic studies. For example, Pearce and Pat-
tiaratchi (Pearce & Pattiaratchi, 1997) discuss various satellite image processing techniques to determine 
sea-surface temperature, surface chlorophyll distribution and ocean’s currents. However, satellite data 
require ground truthing and are limited to the ocean surface, whereas hypoxia develops in bottom waters. 
Unlike sea temperature and phytoplankton photopigments, DO does not have a proxy suitable for remote 
observations. Relationships between satellite-measured chlorophyll and hypoxia are confounded by the 
interaction of physical processes with the seasonal cycle of nutrient-enhanced productivity (Walker & 
Rabalais, 2006). The limitations of traditional approaches stress the need for new high-resolution real-
time monitoring tools.
An unattended buoy system becomes an attractive option. An array of such buoys deployed in coastal 
areas can record the DO concentration around the clock at multiple locations simultaneously and relay 
the data to the researcher. The technical requirements for such a buoy are as follows. A buoy needs to be 
capable of independent operation for up to four months -- the time hypoxia occurs. It needs to be posi-
tioned 10 to 40 miles of shore and capable of sensing DO at depths of up to 50 meters. Four to six times 
per day sampling rate is acceptable. All these parameters are well within what present-day technology 
allows. However, the market for such buoys is so small that the commercial companies have to charge 
large premiums to recoup their development costs. Another commercial strategy is to develop a sensor 
platform that could be used for a variety of studies. Such platform tends to contain features that are not 
necessary for hypoxia study. Both approaches push the price of a commercial buoy outside the price 
range where extensive hypoxia studies become feasible. Meanwhile, advances in consumer electronics 
and sensor technology enable such buoy construction from commercial off-the-shelf components at costs 
that make large hypoxia studies practical.
Oxybuoy
The Oxybuoy is designed to operate autonomously to measure oxygen concentration in a body of water 
for extended duration. Illustrated in Figure 1, the Oxybuoy is equipped with COTS (commercial off-the-
shelves) components to measure oxygen concentration, measure water temperature, record and manage 
data collected, manage power usage, facilitate satellite communication transmission, and interaction 
with a data server for data consolidation.

292
Unattended Sensors in Marine Environments
﻿
Oxybuoy can be deployed far away from the shore as it uses a satellite modem to transfer the data to a 
data center anywhere in the world. Figure 2 illustrates the consolidation of data across several Oxybuoys 
deployed at sea. Consolidated data can be used to visualize the effect of hypoxia in higher resolution 
and extended area coverage.
The data center can also send certain commands to reprogram the deployed Oxybuoys. Messages can 
be sent to all deployed Oxybuoys or to individual buoy. These messages convey commands to change 
Figure 1. Oxybuoy packaging diagram
Figure 2. Data consolidation diagram

293
Unattended Sensors in Marine Environments
﻿
sampling times in case it is necessary to record the DO level at a different rate, for example when a rapid 
change of oxygen concentration is detected.
The data is sent to the data center where a server helps in extracting raw data and visualizes the data 
to a web browser. The server has a Linux operating system hosting an Apache web server (The Apache 
Software Foundation), a MySQL database server (MySQL) and a PHP (The PHP Group) script inter-
preter. The combination of these technologies, Linux, Apache, MySQL and PHP, is more commonly 
known as LAMP. Using the LAMP web architecture, PHP scripts was written on the host, to query the 
database for relevant information. JpGraph (Aditus Consulting), a graphing utility library was used to 
plot and present the data in real-time. The graph is then displayed on a web browser. The illustration of 
the whole architecture is shown in Figure 3. The output of the graph is displayed in a web browser as 
shown in Figure 4.
Design decisions. Our design decisions were dictated by the hypoxia study requirements and the need 
to keep the buoy cost as low as possible. The authors used an optical dissolved oxygen sensor. This type 
of DO sensor, although relatively expensive, has fewer problems with bio-fouling and loss of calibration 
than the commonly used membrane-based DO sensors do. There is a relatively limited amount of data 
to be collected during DO monitoring. Coupled with low sampling rate, it allowed the authors to use 
simple sealed batteries and avoid having to install solar panels.
As for their communications, Oxybuoy needs to be deployed in such distances from the shore that 
cellular networks are not reachable. Wireless communication at such distances requires high masts and 
other design options that would make the cost of the buoy prohibitively expensive. However, due to the 
limited data rate, the authors are able to use commercial satellite network for data transmission.
Figure 3. Data center software architecture

294
Unattended Sensors in Marine Environments
﻿
Figure 4. Data visualization on a web page using JPGraph

295
Unattended Sensors in Marine Environments
﻿
Oxybuoy components can be purchased from well-known vendors at high volumes, thereby making 
the construction of Oxybuoy even cheaper. For the prototype, the cost of each component is listed in 
Figure 5.
OXYBUOY IMPLEMENTATION
Architecture Description
The Oxybuoy electronics design contains the following main components: Gumstix Marvell XScale 
PXA270 processor embedded system (Gumstix Inc.), PIC12F683 Microcontroller (Microchip Technol-
ogy Inc.), 9601-D-N Satellite Modem (Nal Research Corporation), RS232 to SDI Converter, Marvell 
88W8385 802.11(b and g) wireless card, D-OPTO optical sensor (YSI Inc., n.d.), switching relay and a 
switching voltage regulator. Oxybuoy architecture diagram is shown in Figure 6.
The main data processing and control over the other devices is carried out by the Gumstix embedded 
system. Two Gigabyte SD flash card connected to the Gumstix provides data storage for the system. 
The optical sensor is controlled via SDI-12 sensor communication standard. To connect the sensor to 
the Gumstix, the authors use RS232 to SDI-12 converter. For real-time transmission of data, a satellite 
modem is used. The satellite modem is connected directly to one of Gumstix serial ports. The satellite 
modem allows real-time data to be transmitted to a server for data consolidation. The wireless card allows 
backup and debugging communication channel to the system. The PIC processor is used to implement 
the low-power operation of the system. Gumstix and PIC processors complement each other. Gumstix 
provides flexible user and programmer interface and ease of data storage and retrieval while PIC has 
low power consumption.
Figure 5. Oxybuoy cost breakdown

296
Unattended Sensors in Marine Environments
﻿
Electric Power Design
There are two modes of the system operation: active sampling mode and power saving sleep mode. 
The system alternate between these two modes. In the active sampling mode the system draws about 
350 mA, while in the sleep mode the system draws only 11 mA. The current drawn is measured using 
an ammeter connected in series with the device. During the sleep mode, the PIC microprocessor is the 
only component that remains powered on. The PIC microcontroller keeps track of the clock cycle for 
the next sampling time. The PIC has 1024-bit ADC connection to the battery. It is capable of reading 
the voltage level there. This information is helpful in determining the remaining charge left in the bat-
tery. The PIC is programmed to switch the system to the active sampling mode. It then sends the current 
battery voltage level to the Gumstix processor and waits for a 2-bit signal from it to indicate the sleep 
period. After receiving this signal, the PIC switches the system to sleep mode by powering down the 
remainder of the system.
Most of the system components require reliable 5V DC power. The DO sensor requires 8V power. The 
authors use a 5V 1A switching voltage regulator to provide stable voltage to the system. This regulator 
has conversion efficiency of up to 90% which helps to minimize power consumption.
Figure 6. Oxybuoy architecture diagram

297
Unattended Sensors in Marine Environments
﻿
Programming and Operation
Gumstix main processor runs an Open Embedded Linux operating system, a flavor of Linux for embedded 
systems, which allows the authors to easily interface programming environments on the Linux kernel. 
Programs and scripts are written and loaded into Open Embedded to handle communication between 
devices and system maintenance tasks. The system operation is as follows. When Gumstix is powered 
up, it receives the ADC battery power level data from the PIC processor. Then Gumstix communicates 
through the RS232 serial connector to the SDI-12 converter to request a reading from the DO sensor. 
After collecting the data, Gumstix requests the satellite modem to transmit the data to the base station. 
During satellite communication, the Gumstix checks the signal strength indicator.
If it is too low, the data is saved on the SD card and transmitted during the next communication 
session. After satellite communication, the Gumstix issues the command to the PIC informing it of the 
sampling rate and instructing it to power down the system.
During its uptime Gumstix powers up the wireless card and remains accessible over the wireless 
channel for status checks and configuration updates. Gumstix is programmed to receive control com-
mands from the satellite. In particular the sampling rate can be changed remotely. The algorithm for the 
satellite transmission is shown in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1. Oxybuoy Satellite Transmission Algorithm
function transmit(X) 
     Input: An n-element array of data from sensors 
     Output: Return 0 if transmit through satellite modem and 1 if save to 
memory card 
     Let n ← 0 
     while n 6 = 3 do 
     n ← n +1 
          if signal strength ≥ 3 //signal strength is between 0 to 5. 
               send(X) 
               return 0 
     save(X) //save to memory card 
     return 1 
function send(X) 
     Input: An n-element array of data from sensors 
     Output: Return 0 
     if mem card is not empty then 
          Y ← read card from memory 
          X ← X + Y 
          satellite send(X) //send X through satellite 
     else 
          satellite send(X) //send X through satellite 
     return 0

298
Unattended Sensors in Marine Environments
﻿
Buoy Construction and Sensor Device Container Description
To protect the electronics from water exposure the authors had to design the buoy packaging. The buoy 
packaging is shown in Figure 7 and Figure 8. The buoy casing is constructed using a 6” PVC pipe that 
can be purchased from any hardware store to work as an outer shell.
For the electronics container, the authors used a simple poster carrier pipe shown in figure 7. The 
electronics container is later fitted into the buoy. Styrofoam forms are used to keep the electronics from 
moving inside the casing. The outer pipe housed the electronics, ballast and the battery. The buoy was 
attached by a chain to a single anchor point. The outer shell was hermetically sealed at the bottom. The 
oxygen sensor, and the satellite antenna cables were fed through the silicone-sealed hole in the screw-
on pipe cover. This way all the possible orifices are above water. PVC pipe adhesives are used to glue 
together the pipe bottom end to make the internals of the buoy water proof. The authors also had to 
ensure that the buoy is submerged deep enough in the water so that it is stable yet the buoy cover with 
the instrument and antenna openings are high enough above the water level to prevent continuous contact 
with it. The correct weight of the ballast for the buoy would have to be carefully calculated.
The authors computed the weight of the ballast to have the buoy submerged about three-fourths in 
the water. The calculation is based on the amount of water the buoy displaces, and hence the amount 
of buoyancy it provides. The authors measured the volume of the pipes, and estimated the amount of 
water that would be displaced. The authors measured the weight of the buoy along with the weight of 
the equipment to be installed in the buoy. Lastly, the authors tested the ballast using weights. Sandbags 
were used as weights necessary to ne tune the amount of required ballast. After getting the correct mea-
surement for the ballast, the authors replaced the sandbags with the exact amount of weight.
Figure 7. Electronics packaging of Oxybuoy

299
Unattended Sensors in Marine Environments
﻿
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
This section describes the series of experiments that the authors carried out to determine the viability and 
performance of Oxybuoy. In the first experiment, the authors used a controlled laboratory environment to 
check the operation of the Oxybuoy’s electronics. In the second, the authors performed a test deployment 
in a small lake. In the third experiment, the authors ran an extended power usage measurement. The first 
experiment was wall powered while the last 2 experiments relied on the 12V DC, 7Ah sealed battery.
Controlled DO Lab Experiment
The objective of this experiment was to test the operation of the electronics of Oxybuoy in the controlled 
environment. The authors used a water tank in a fish physiology laboratory at the University of Akron 
equipped for hypoxia experiments. The DO concentration in the tank was maintained at a specific level. 
The tank had external thermometer and YSI (YSI Inc., n.d.) DO meter. Before the experiment, the authors 
calibrated their DO sensor according to the manufacturer instructions.
Minimal protective packaging was used for the electronic components (see Figure 9). Only the DO 
sensor itself was submerged. The authors configured Oxybuoy to use the wireless card to report the 
Figure 8. Lake deployment experiment

300
Unattended Sensors in Marine Environments
﻿
measurements every 20 minutes to the wireless bridge and on to the Data Center where the information 
was collected. The collected DO and temperature data are shown in Figure 10 and Figure 11.
The oscillation of temperature and DO concentration level is due to the design of the tank system: 
periodically a motor pumps fresh water into the tank. The temperature readings agree with the external 
meter measurements precisely while the DO concentration measurements agree with them approximately.
Bath Lake Deployment
The objective of this experiment was to test the complete operation of Oxybuoy in the target environment. 
The authors deployed the buoy in Bath Lake, a small eutrophuc lake within the Bath Nature Preserve near 
Akron, Ohio for 7 days. After the week-long deployment the design proved generally sound. Although, 
some moisture permeated the outer shell, the electronics was not damaged. The authors first tested the 
seal of the outer shell in a separate short deployment. Before the main deployment, the authors tested 
the operation of the electronic components through first wireless connection then through the satellite 
messages.
During the deployment, the authors did not use the multi-mode operation due to faulty communication 
port on their Gumstix board. The authors used active sampling mode only and allowed the buoy to run 
until the battery charge was exhausted. During the deployment, Oxybuoy reported DO measurements 6 
times per hour. Running in this mode, Oxybuoy remained operational and reported DO measurements 
for over 18 hours. The measurements are shown in Figure 12. For testing purposes Oxybuoy started 
transmitting the measurements before it was deployed. Thus, the early reported data differs from the 
Figure 9. Packaging of Oxybuoy electronics for the DO lab experiment

301
Unattended Sensors in Marine Environments
﻿
Figure 10. Temperature readings during the Oxybuoy lab experiment
Figure 11. Dissolved Oxygen concentration readings during the Oxybuoy lab experiment

302
Unattended Sensors in Marine Environments
﻿
rest. The reported temperature values agree with the expectations. The DO concentration was different 
from expected, which may have been due to the DO sensor lenses periodically touching the sediment.
Power Consumption Study
To estimate the lifetime of the buoy in multi-mode operation, the authors ran the electronics of the buoy 
in the simulated deployment. The electronics were configured to switch to data acquisition mode once 
an hour. The DO sensor was submerged into a small water container. The PIC processor recorded the 
battery power output and relayed it to the Gumstix processor. The Gumstix transmitted this value over 
the wireless network. The authors stopped the experiment when the battery power output fell below 8 
Figure 12. Oxybuoy measurements in the lake deployment experiment

303
Unattended Sensors in Marine Environments
﻿
Volts required by the DO sensor to operate. The results are shown in Figure 13. Oxybuoy produced the 
total of 155 samples. At the rate of sample per hour, Oxybuoy can operate over six days.
This result agrees with the calculations. The battery is rated at 7 Ah. For this amount of time the 
battery is able to provide at least 10.5 V. During the active sampling mode the average current draw of 
Oxybuoy is 350 mA. It takes about 6 minutes to sample the DO sensor and transmit the data. This allows 
120 samples. The authors are able to obtain more samples since the authors are able to use the battery 
until the voltage fell below 8 V. On the basis of the data obtained, the authors can predict the long term-
operation of the buoy. If the buoy samples every hour, its 4 month operation requires a 160 Ah battery. 
If only four times a day sampling is required, 28 Ah battery would be sufficient.
FUTURE ENHANCEMENT FOR LARGE SCALE DEPLOYMENT
The main goal of this project is to achieve a large scale deployment of Oxybuoy. Additionally, research-
ers across the globe could share their data with other deployed Oxybuoy in other marine areas affected 
by hypoxia. Researchers can therefore share data and track changes of hypoxia throughout the globe. 
Furthermore, each deployment should be flexible in getting upgrades and configuration setting from 
the research organizations maintaining the cluster of Oxybuoys being deployed. Since developing Oxy-
buoy is relatively cheap, a large scale deployment allows researchers to monitor hypoxia with a higher 
resolution in affected areas.
The problem with the current deployment is that it relies on a classic client-server model where each 
Oxybuoy collects data and transmits data to a server for consolidation. While this method may be suf-
Figure 13. Oxybuoy power consumption experiments

304
Unattended Sensors in Marine Environments
﻿
ficient for a relatively small scale deployment, it may not be able to handle large scale deployment for 
large number of Oxybuoy deployment, different cluster of deployment and across the globe sharing of 
data and monitoring.
In order to handle a large scale deployment, consolidation of data must be designed carefully to handle 
a large number of messages being sent by each Oxybuoy and various supporting applications requesting 
for data. Several considerations must be taken into account, particularly; the consolidation and sharing 
of data must follow Message-Oriented-Middleware (MOM) architecture. Instead of a single apache 
server handling data consolidation and request, a middleware running on a reliable server needs to be 
implemented. Furthermore, a message queue with non-blocking communication channel must be used 
to make sure that for every message sent, it is processed and handled safely without collision. In this 
case, every producer ie. the oxybuoy device, must be able to handle a client requesting for data. Or as 
another example, every communication between a client are safely sent to a cluster of oxybuoy devices 
for configuration updates or software updates.
Since the expectation of a large scale deployment involve several different research organizations, 
applications used to interact with the middleware must be responsible in maintaining message structure. 
Particularly, the middleware should be able to handle several different message formats with ease and 
provide loose coupling and decoupling of messages. The middleware in some sense should route messages 
from other application components through a simple and reliable principle of storing and forwarding of 
messages to the correct application services.
The messaging model can be either point-to-point or publish/subscribe. An example of a point-to-
point model works in a way where a client application used to maintain the Oxybuoy produce a mes-
sage requesting to get the status of a particular Oxybuoy device and that message is to be consumed by 
that Oxybuoy device. As for the publish/subscribe works in a way where an application service publish 
results from the database where it is consumed by client applications subscribing to monitor the data of 
specific clusters of Oxybuoys. A message oriented middleware can be implemented using commercial 
standards like IBMMQSeries, that handles message queue and support several different message formats.
CONCLUSION
In this chapter, the authors described the architecture and deployment history of a prototype buoy for 
dissolved oxygen sensing. The experiments demonstrate the viability of this sensor platform. In sum-
mary, marine sensors are expected to operate in harsh environments where the sensor device is prone to 
exposure to extreme weather conditions such as humidity, temperature and various weather threats like 
wind, rain or tide. Thus the concerns of implementing a marine sensor are not limited to the choice of 
processors, communication and power consumption, but should also include the choice of packaging and 
sensor materials being used. It is hope that their case study will help in giving researchers and system 
developers a guide in implementing their own type of marine sensor.

305
Unattended Sensors in Marine Environments
﻿
REFERENCES
Akyildiz, I. F., Pompili, D., & Melodia, T. (2005). Underwater acoustic sensor networks: Research chal-
lenges. Ad Hoc Networks, 3(3), 257–279. doi:10.1016/j.adhoc.2005.01.004
Arora, A., Dutta, P., Bapat, S., Kulathumani, V., Zhang, H., & Naik, V. et al. others. (2004). A line in the 
sand: A wireless sensor network for target detection, classification, and tracking. Computer Networks, 
46(5), 605–634.
Arora, A., Ramnath, R., Sinha, P., Ertin, E., Bapat, S., Naik, V.,.... others. (2005). Project exscal. Pro-
ceedings of the First IEEE international conference on Distributed Computing in Sensor Systems, (pp. 
393-394). doi:10.1007/11502593_33
Batalin, M., Rahimi, M., Yu, Y., Liu, D., Kansal, A., Sukhatme, G., & Estrin, D. et al. (2004, November). Call 
and response: Experiments in sampling the environment. Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference 
on Embedded Networked Sensor Systems, ({SenSys}) (pp. 25-38). ACM. doi:10.1145/1031495.1031499
Bender, L. C., & Norman,, L., Guinasso, J., Walpert, J. N., Martin, R. D., Hetland, R. D.,... Howard, 
M. K. (2007). Development, Operation, and Results From the Texas Automated Buoy System. Gulf of 
Mexico Science, 1, 33–60.
Blain, S., Guillou, J., Tréguer, P., Woerther, P., Delauney, L., Follenfant, E., & Vuillemin, R. et al. (2004). 
High frequency monitoring of the coastal marine environment using the \mbox{MAREL} buoy. Journal 
of Environmental Monitoring, 6(6), 569–575. doi:10.1039/b314073c PMID:15173911
Bokser, V., Oberg, C., Sukhatme, G., & Requicha, A. (2004, July). A Small Submarine Robot for Experi-
ments in Underwater Sensor Networks. Symposium on Intelligent Autonomous Vehicles.
Brennan, S. M., Mielke, A. M., Torney, D. C., & Maccabe, A. B. (2004). Radiation Detection with 
Distributed Sensor Networks. IEEE Computer, 37(8), 57–59. doi:10.1109/MC.2004.103
Cagnetti, M., Leccese, F., & Trinca, D. (2013). A New Remote and Automated Control System for the 
Vineyard Hail Protection Based on ZigBee Sensors, Raspberry-Pi Electronic Card and WiMAX. J. 
Agric. Sci. Technol. B, 3, 853–864.
Chaczko, Z., & Ahmad, F. (2005). Wireless Sensor Network Based System for Fire Endangered Areas. 
Information Technology and Applications, International Conference on, 2, 203-207.
Chhabra, J., Kushalnagar, N., Metzler, B., & Sampson, A. (2004). Sensor networks in intel fabrication plants. 
In J. A. Stankovic, A. Arora, & R. Govindan (Eds.), SenSys (p. 324). ACM. doi:10.1145/1031495.1031567
Culler, D. E., Estrin, D., & Srivastava, M. B. (2004). Guest Editors’ Introduction: Overview of Sensor 
Networks. IEEE Computer, 37(8), 41–49. doi:10.1109/MC.2004.93

306
Unattended Sensors in Marine Environments
﻿
Culler, D. E., & Hong, W. (2004). Introduction. Commun. ACM, 30-33.
Diaz, R. J., & Rosenberg, R. (2008). Spreading Dead Zones and Consequences for Marine Ecosystems. 
Science, 321(5891), 926–929. doi:10.1126/science.1156401 PMID:18703733
Estrin, D., Govindan, R., Heidemann, J. S., & Kumar, S. (1999). Next Century Challenges: Scalable 
Coordination in Sensor Networks. MOBICOM. doi:10.1145/313451.313556
Fraser, M., McCarthy, M. R., Shaukat, M., & Smith, P. (2007). Seconds matter: improving distrib-
uted coordination bytracking and visualizing display trajectories. CHI ‘07: Proceedings of the SIG-
CHI conference on Human factors in computing systems (pp. 1303-1312). New York, NY: ACM. 
doi:10.1145/1240624.1240822
Gobat, J. I., Weller, R. A., Way, B. S., Lord, J., Pritchard, M., & Smith, J. (2001). A Compact coastal 
ocean observing system for Kernel Blitz. Retrieved from http://hdl.handle.net/1912/36
Graber, H. C., Terray, E. A., Donelan, M. A., Drennan, W. M., & Van Leer, J. C. (2000). ASIS--A New 
Air--Sea Interaction Spar Buoy: Design and Performance at Sea. Journal of Atmospheric & Oceanic 
Technology, 17(5), 708. Retrieved from http://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=eih&
AN=5648732&site=ehost-live
Guinasso, N. J., Yip, J., Reid, R., Bender, L. I., Howard, M., Lee, L. I., & Martin, R. et al. (2001). Ob-
serving and forecasting coastal currents: Texas Automated BuoySystem (\mbox{TABS}). OCEANS, 
MTS/IEEE Conference and Exhibition. 2, 1318-1322.
Gumstix Inc. (n.d.). Gumstix Verdex Pro XM4-bt (with u.fl antenna). Gumstix Verdex Pro XM4-bt (with 
u.fl antenna).
He, T., Krishnamurthy, S., Stankovic, J., Abdelzaher, T., Luo, L., Stoleru, R.,... Krogh, B. (2004, 
June). Energy-Efficient Surveillance System Using Wireless Sensor Networks. Proceedings of the 
International Convference on Mobile Systems, Appications and Services ({MobiSys}). USENIX. 
doi:10.1145/990064.990096
Hill, J., Szewczyk, R., Woo, A., Culler, D., Hollar, S., & Pister, K. (2000, #nov#). System Architecture 
Directions for Networked Sensors. ACM SIG{\-}PLAN Notices, 35(11), 93-104.
Hughes, D., Greenwood, P., Coulson, G., & Blair, G. (2006). GridStix: Supporting Flood Prediction us-
ing Embedded Hardware and Next Generation Grid Middleware. In Proceedings of the 4th International 
Workshop on Mobile Distributed Computing (MDC’06).
Kim, S., Pakzad, S., Culler, D., Demmel, J., Fenves, G., Glaser, S., & Turon, M. (2007). Health monitor-
ing of civil infrastructures using wireless sensor networks. IPSN ‘07: Proceedings of the 6th interna-
tional conference on Information processing in sensor networks (pp. 254-263). New York, NY: ACM. 
doi:10.1145/1236360.1236395
Mainwaring, A., Culler, D., Polastre, J., Szewczyk, R., & Anderson, J. (2002, #sep# ~28). Wireless 
sensor networks for habitat monitoring. Proceedings of the First {ACM} International Workshop 
on Wireless Sensor Networks and Applications ({WSNA}-02) (pp. 88-97). New York: ACM Press. 
doi:10.1145/570738.570751

307
Unattended Sensors in Marine Environments
﻿
Maroti, M., Simon, G., Ledeczi, A., & Sztipanovits, J. (2004). Shooter Localization in Urban Terrain. 
IEEE Computer, 37(8), 60–61. doi:10.1109/MC.2004.104
Nal Research Corporation. (n.d.). 9601-D-N Satellite SBD Modem. Author.
O’Connor, T., & Whitall, D. (2007). Linking hypoxia to shrimp catch in the northern Gulf of Mexico. 
Marine Pollution Bulletin, 54(4), 460–463. doi:10.1016/j.marpolbul.2007.01.017 PMID:17360006
Oliver, R. C., Smettem, K., Kranz, M., & Mayer, K. (2005). A Reactive Soil Moisture Sensor Network: 
Design and Field Evaluation. International Journal of Distributed Sensor Networks, 1, 149-162.
Pearce, A., & Pattiaratchi, C. (1997). Applications of satellite remote sensing to the marine enviornment 
in Western Australia. Journal of the Royal Society of Western Australia, 80, 1–14.
Priya, S., & Inman, D. J. (2009). Energy Harvesting Wireless Sensors. Springer.
Ramanathan, N., Schoellhammer, T., Estrin, D., Hansen, M., Harmon, T., Kohler, E., & Srivastava, M. 
(2006, November). The Final Frontier: Embedding Networked Sensors in the Soil. UCLA.
Szewczyk, R., Mainwaring, A., Polastre, J., Anderson, J., & Culler, D. (2004). An analysis of a large 
scale habitat monitoring application. SenSys ‘04: Proceedings of the 2nd international conference on 
Embedded networked sensor systems (pp. 214-226). New York, NY: ACM. doi:10.1145/1031495.1031521
Thomas, P., Rahman, S., Khan, I. A., & Kummer, J. A. (2007). Widespread endocrine disruption and 
reproductive impairment in an estuarine fish population exposed to seasonal hypoxia. Proceedings of 
the Royal Biological Society, 274(1626), 2693–2702. doi:10.1098/rspb.2007.0921 PMID:17725976
Tolle, G., Polastre, J., Szewczyk, R., Culler, D., Turner, N., Tu, K.,... Hong, W. (2005, November). A 
macroscope in the redwoods. Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Embedded Networked 
Sensor Systems, ({SenSys}) (pp. 51-63). Sand Diego, CA: ACM. doi:10.1145/1098918.1098925
Vasilescu, I., Kotay, K., Rus, D., Dunbabin, M., & Corke, P. (2005). Data collection, storage, and retrieval 
with an underwater sensor network. Proceedings of the 3rd international conference on Embedded net-
worked sensor systems, (pp. 154-165). doi:10.1145/1098918.1098936
Voigt, T., Osterlind, F., Finne, N., Tsiftes, N., He, Z., Eriksson, J., & Hjort, K. et al. (2007). Sensor 
Networking in Aquatic Environments - Experiences and New Challenges. Second IEEE International 
Workshop on Practical Issues in Building Sensor Network Applications (pp. 793-798). IEEE Computer 
Society. doi:10.1109/LCN.2007.23
Walker, N. D., & Rabalais, N. N. (2006). Relationships among satellite chlorophylla, river inputs, and 
hypoxia on the Louisiana Continental shelf, Gulf of Mexico. Estuaries and Coasts, 29(6), 1081–1093. 
doi:10.1007/BF02781811
Wallinga, J. P., Pettirew, N. R., & Irish, J. D. (2003). The {GoMOOS} moored buoy design. Oceans, 
5, 2596–2599.
Williams, S., Viguria Jimenez, L. A., & Howard, A. M. (2008). A robotic mobile sensor network for 
achieving scientific measurements in challenging environments. Academic Press.

308
Unattended Sensors in Marine Environments
﻿
Wills, J., Ye, W., & Heidemann, J. (2006). Low-power acoustic modem for dense underwater sensor 
networks. WUWNet ‘06: Proceedings of the 1st ACM international workshop on Underwater networks 
(pp. 79-85). New York, NY: ACM. doi:10.1145/1161039.1161055
Wood, S., Rees, M., & Pfeiffer, Z. (2007, June). An Autonomous Self-Mooring Vehicle for Littoral and 
Coastal Observations. OCEANS. Europe, 1–6. doi:10.1109/OCEANSE.2007.4302216
KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Eutrophuc: Waters, soils, or habitats that are high in nutrients; in aquatic systems, associated with 
wide swings in dissolved oxygen concentrations and frequent algal blooms.
Fresnal Zone: The area around the visual line-of-sight that radio waves spread out into after they 
leave the antenna.
Hypoxia: A reduced oxygen content of air or a body of water detrimental to aerobic organisms.

﻿
Compilation of References
﻿
Abdallah, S. (2008). Information Ethics from an Islamic Perspective. IGI Global. Retrieved from http://books.google.
com/books?hl=en&lr=&id=H2VuBddvMLAC&oi=fnd&pg=PT372&dq=Information+Ethics+from+an+Islamic+P
erspective&ots=2H-JbrpxKh&sig=gIbwlgTIJAM-LC90plqwgbcfSEk
Abela, K. J., Angeles, L., Kristopher, D. E., Alas, D., Raynier, P., Tolentino, J. R., & Gomez, M. (2013). An Automated 
Malware Detection System for Android using Behavior-based analysis. International Journal of Cyber-Security and 
Digital Forensics, 2(2).
Abhijit, B., Xin, H., Kang, G. S., & Taejoon, P. (2008). Behavioral detection of Malware on Mobile Handsets. ACM.
About Android. (n.d.). Retrieved May 30, 2014, from http://www.apple.com/ios/what-is/
Abran, A., Khelifi, A., Suryn, W., & Seffah, A. (2003). Usability Meanings and Interpretations in ISO Standards. Soft-
ware Quality Journal, 11(4), 325–338. doi:10.1023/A:1025869312943
Accolades & Accreditations. (2013). MIMOS Berhad. Retrieved August 04, 2014, from http://www.mimos.my/corporate/
accolades-accreditations/
Adams, A., & Sasse, M. A. (1999). Users are not the enemy. Communications of the ACM, 42(12), 40–46. 
doi:10.1145/322796.322806
Addlesee, M., Curwen, R., Hodges, S., Newman, J., Steggles, P., Ward, A., & Hopper, A. (2001). Implementing a sentient 
computing system. Computer, 34(8), 50–56. doi:10.1109/2.940013
Adebayo, O. S., Mabayoje, M. A., Mishra, A., & Osho, O. (2012). Malware Detection, Supportive Software Agents 
and Its Classification Schemes. International Journal of Network Security & Its Applications, 4(6), 33–49. doi:10.5121/
ijnsa.2012.4603
Adelaar, K. A., & Himmelmann, N. (2005). The Austronesian Languages of Asia and Madagascar. Routledge. Retrieved 
from https://books.google.com.my/books?id=BAShwSYLbUYC
Adolphi, B. (2012). Cross-Platform Evaluation of Mobile App Hardening. (Master’s Thesis). Gjøvik University College.
Ahamed, B. B., & Hariharan, S. (2012). Integration of sound signature authentication system. International Journal of 
Security and Its Applications, 6(4), 77–86.
Ahmed, S., & Parsons, D. (2013). Abductive science inquiry using mobile devices in the classroom. Computers & Edu-
cation, 63, 62–72. doi:10.1016/j.compedu.2012.11.017
Akyildiz, I. F., Pompili, D., & Melodia, T. (2005). Underwater acoustic sensor networks: Research challenges. Ad Hoc 
Networks, 3(3), 257–279. doi:10.1016/j.adhoc.2005.01.004
309

Compilation of References
Al-alak, B. A. M., & Alnawas, I. A. M. (2010). Mobile marketing: Examining the impact of trust, privacy, concern 
and consumers’ attitudes on intention to purchase. International Journal of Business and Management, 5(3), 28–41. 
doi:10.5539/ijbm.v5n3p28
Albalawi, R. (2013). Evaluating Tangible User Interface-based Mobile-learning System For Young Children. ProQuest 
Dissertations and Theses. Retrieved from http://210.48.222.80/proxy.pac/docview/1441724917?accountid=44024
Alben, L. (1996). Quality of Experience: Defining the Criteria for Effective Interaction Design. Interaction, 3(3), 11–15. 
doi:10.1145/235008.235010
Ali Fahmi, P. N., & Kodirov, E., Ardiansyah, C. D., & Lee, G. (2013). Hey home, open your door, I’m back! Authentica-
tion system using ear biometrics for smart home. International Journal of Smart Home, 7(1), 173–182.
Aliyu, M., Mahmud, M., & Tap, A. O. M. (2010). Preliminary investigation of Islamic websites design & content feature: 
A heuristic evaluation from user perspective. User Science and Engineering (i-USEr), 2010 International Conference 
on. doi:10.1109/IUSER.2010.5716763
Alkhunaizan, A., & Love, S. (2012). What drives mobile commerce? An empirical evaluation of the revised UTAUT 
model. International Journal of Management and Marketing Academy, 2(1), 82–99.
Ally, M., McGreal, R., Schafer, S., Tin, T., & Cheung, B. (2007). Use of mobile learning technology to train ESL adults.
Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Mobile Learning.
Almuairfi, S., Veeraraghavan, P., & Chilamkurti, N. (2013). A novel image-based implicit password authentication system 
(IPAS) for mobile and non-mobile devices. Mathematical and Computer Modelling, 58(1–2), 108–116. doi:10.1016/j.
mcm.2012.07.005
Altman, D. (1994). Fuzzy set theoretic approaches for handling imprecision in spatial analysis. International Journal of 
Geographical Information Systems, 8(3), 271–289. doi:10.1080/02693799408902000
Alvarez, C., Brown, C., & Nussbaum, M. (2010). Comparative study of netbooks and tablet PCs for fostering face-to-face 
collaborative learning. Computers in Human Behavior, 834–844.
Alwahaishi, S., & Snášel, V. (2013). Consumers’ Acceptance and Use of Information and Communications Technol-
ogy: A UTAUT and Flow Based Theoretical Model. Journal of Technology Management & Innovation, 8(2), 61–73. 
doi:10.4067/S0718-27242013000200005
Amazon Appstore . (2014, June 16). Retrieved from http://www.amazon.com/mobile-apps
Amazon. (2014, December 20). Appstore for android. Retrieved from http://www.amazon.com/mobile-apps/
b?ie=UTF8\&node=2350149011
Amsden, N., & Varol, C., (2013). Malware Detection from a Virtual Machine. International Journal of Computer and 
Information Technology, 2(6), 1029-1034.
Andreas, K., Tsiatsos, T., Terzidou, T., & Pomportsis, A. (2010). Fostering Collaborative Learning In Second Life: 
Metaphors And Affordances. Computers & Education, 55(2), 603–615. doi:10.1016/j.compedu.2010.02.021
Angeli, A. D., Coventry, L., Johnson, G., & Renaud, K. (2005). Is a picture really worth a thousand words? Exploring 
the feasibility of graphical authentication systems. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 63(1-2), 128–152. 
doi:10.1016/j.ijhcs.2005.04.020
Annett, J. (2002). Subjective rating scales: Science or art? Ergonomics, 45(14), 966–987. doi:10.1080/00140130210166951 
PMID:12569049
310

Compilation of References
Anubis: Analyzing unknown binaries. (2014, June 10). Retrieved from http://anubis.iseclab.org/
App Store Metrics. (n.d.). Retrieved May 30, 2014, from http://148apps.biz/app-store-metrics/?mpage=catcount
Arbuckle, J. L. (2005). Amos 6.0 Users’ Guide. Amos Development Corporation.
Arhippainen, L., & Tähti, M. (2003). Empirical evaluation of user experience in two adaptive mobile application proto-
types. Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Mobile ldots, (pp. 27-34). Retrieved from http://www.ep.liu.
se/ecp/011/007/ecp011007.pdf
Armstrong, N., Nugent, C., Moore, G., & Finlay, D. (2010). Using smartphones to address the needs of persons with 
Alzheimer’s disease. Ann. Telecommun, 65(9-10), 485–495. doi:10.1007/s12243-010-0165-3
Arora, A., Ramnath, R., Sinha, P., Ertin, E., Bapat, S., Naik, V., . . .. others. (2005). Project exscal. Proceedings of the First 
IEEE international conference on Distributed Computing in Sensor Systems, (pp. 393-394). doi:10.1007/11502593_33
Arora, A., Dutta, P., Bapat, S., Kulathumani, V., Zhang, H., & Naik, V. et al. others. (2004). A line in the sand: A wireless 
sensor network for target detection, classification, and tracking. Computer Networks, 46(5), 605–634.
Arthur, P., & Passini, R. (1992). Wayfinding: people, signs, and architecture. McGraw-Hill, Incorporated.
Asha, S., & Chellappan, C. (2012). Biometrics: An overview of the technology, issues and applications. International 
Journal of Computers and Applications, 39(10), 35–52. doi:10.5120/4859-7134
August Smart Lock. (2014). Welcome to August Smart Lock. Retrieved May 29, 2014, from http://www.august.com
Ayduz, D. S. (2007). Calendars and Almanac in Islamic Civilization. Foundation for Science Technology and Civiliza-
tion, 1 - 14.
Aziza, H. (2010). NFC technology in mobile phone next-generation services. In Second International Workshop on Near 
Field Communication (NFC). doi:10.1109/NFC.2010.18
Baber, C. (2002). Subjective evaluation of usability. Ergonomics, 45(14), 1021–1025. doi:10.1080/00140130210166807 
PMID:12569060
Bagozzi, R., & Yi, Y. (1988). On the evaluation of structural equation models. Journal of the Academy of Marketing 
Science, 16(1), 74–94. doi:10.1007/BF02723327
Bailey, R., Wolfson, C., Nall, J., & Koyani, S. (2009). erformance-Based Usability Testing: Metrics That Have the Greatest 
Impact for Improving a System’s Usability.Proceedings of the 1st International Conference on Human Centered Design 
(pp. 3-12). Berlin: Springer-Verlag doi:10.1007/978-3-642-02806-9_1
Baillot, Y., Brown, D., & Julier, S. (2001). Authoring of physical models using mobile computers. In Wearable Comput-
ers, 2001. Proceedings. Fifth International Symposium on (pp. 39–46). IEEE. doi:10.1109/ISWC.2001.962094
Bakar, N. F. A., Ashrafia, S., Zeki, A. M., & Abubakar, A. I. (2013). Visual Interactive Islamic Learning System for 
Children. International Journal on Islamic Applications in Computer Science And Technology, 1(3), 17–23.
Bangor, A., Kortum, P., & Miller, J. (2008). An Empirical Evaluation of the System Usability Scale. International Journal 
of Human-Computer Interaction, 24(6), 574–594. doi:10.1080/10447310802205776
Bao, X. R., Sun, M. G., & Ding, L. Y. (2011, August). The Implementation and Application of Mobile Online Games in 
China: A Marketing Perspective. In Management and Service Science (MASS), 2011 International Conference on (pp. 
1-4). IEEE. doi:10.1109/ICMSS.2011.5999177
311

Compilation of References
Baptista, C. (2012). Barcode-based Localization of Low Capability Mobile Robots in Structured Environments Master 
in Electrical and Computer Engineering Juri Committee. Instituto Superior Tecnico, Universidade Tecnica de Lisboa.
Barbera, R. A., Doncel, L. M., & Sainz, J. (2008). Going Mobile on Games: Determinant on Payments. Academic Press.
Barendregt, B. A. (2009). Mobile Religiosity in Indonesia: Mobilized Islam, Islamized Mobility and the Potential of 
Islamic Techno Nationalism. In E. Alampay (Ed.), Living the Information Society in Asia. ISEAS Publishing and Inter-
national Development Research Centre.
Bargas-Avila, J. A., & Hornbaek, K. (2011). Old Wine in New Bottles or Novel Challenges: A Critical Analysis of Em-
pirical Studies of User Experience. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
(pp. 2689–2698). New York, NY: ACM. doi:10.1145/1978942.1979336
Barrera, D., & Van, O. P., (2010). Secure software installation on smartphones. IEEE Security & Privacy, 9(3), 42–48.
Basri, A. Q., & Sulaiman, R. (2013). Ergonomics Study Of Public Hospital Signage. In Advanced Engineering Forum 
(Vol. 10, pp. 263–271). Trans Tech Publ. doi:10.4028/www.scientific.net/AEF.10.263 doi:10.4028/www.scientific.net/
AEF.10.263
Batalin, M., Rahimi, M., Yu, Y., Liu, D., Kansal, A., Sukhatme, G., & Estrin, D. et al. (2004, November). Call and 
response: Experiments in sampling the environment.Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Embedded 
Networked Sensor Systems, ({SenSys}) (pp. 25-38). ACM. doi:10.1145/1031495.1031499
Bauer, L., Garriss, S., McCune, J. M., Reiter, M. K., Rouse, J., & Rutenbar, P. (2005). Device-enabled authorization in 
the Grey system. In J. Zhou, J. Lopez, R. Deng, & F. Bao (Eds.), Information Security (pp. 431–445). Springer Berlin 
Heidelberg. doi:10.1007/11556992_31
Beaufour, A., & Bonnet, P. (2004). Personal servers as digital keys. In Proceedings of the Second IEEE Annual Confer-
ence on Pervasive Computing and Communications (pp. 319-328). doi:10.1109/PERCOM.2004.1276869
Beechey, J., & Caudle, R. (2011). Application Hardening: Panacea or Propaganda. The SANS Institute InfoSec Read-
ing Room.
Bender, L. C., & Norman,, L., Guinasso, J., Walpert, J. N., Martin, R. D., Hetland, R. D., . . . Howard, M. K. (2007). 
Development, Operation, and Results From the Texas Automated Buoy System. Gulf of Mexico Science, 1, 33–60.
Benyo, B., Sodor, B., Doktor, T., & Fordos, G. (2012). Student attendance monitoring at the university using NFC. Paper 
presented at the Wireless Telecommunications Symposium (WTS). doi:10.1109/WTS.2012.6266137
Benyó, B., Sódor, B., Doktor, T., & Fordos, G. (2012). University life in contactless way-NFC use cases in academic 
environment. Paper presented at the Intelligent Engineering Systems (INES), 2012 IEEE 16th International Conference 
on. doi:10.1109/INES.2012.6249887
Berger, C., & Juntos, H. (2005). Universal Symbols in Health Care Workbook: Executive Summary: Best Practices for 
Sign Systems. Hablamos Juntos.
Bevan, N., & Macleod, M. (1994). Usability measurement in context. Behaviour & Information Technology, 13(1-2), 
132-145.
Bevan, N. (1995a). Measuring usability as quality of use. Software Quality Journal, 4(2), 115–150. doi:10.1007/BF00402715
Bevan, N. (1995b). Usability is Quality of Use.6th International Conference on Human Computer Interaction. Elsevier.
Biddle, R., Chiasson, S., & Van Oorschot, P. C. (2012). Graphical passwords: Learning from the first twelve years. ACM 
Computing Surveys, 44(4), 1–41. doi:10.1145/2333112.2333114
312

Compilation of References
BISAM-BIS Attendance Management System. (n.d.). Retrieved from http://www.softwarehouse.co/school-attendance-
brochure.pdf
Biswas & Ali. (2006). Security threats in Mobile Ad Hoc Network. School of Engineering, Blekinge Institute of Tech-
nology, Sweden.
Blackberry OS. (n.d.). Retrieved May 30, 2014, from http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/BlackBerry_OS
Blackberry World. (n.d.). Retrieved June 16, 2014, from https://appworld.blackberry.com/webstore/?lang=en&region=222
Blain, S., Guillou, J., Tréguer, P., Woerther, P., Delauney, L., Follenfant, E., & Vuillemin, R. et al. (2004). High frequency 
monitoring of the coastal marine environment using the \mbox{MAREL} buoy. Journal of Environmental Monitoring, 
6(6), 569–575. doi:10.1039/b314073c PMID:15173911
Blasco-Arcas, L., Buil, I., Hernandez-Ortega, B., & Sese, F. J. (2013). Using Clickers In Class. The Role Of Interactiv-
ity, Active Collaborative Learning And Engagement In Learning Performance. Computers & Education, 62, 102–110. 
doi:10.1016/j.compedu.2012.10.019
Blasing, T., Schmidt, A., Batyuk, L., Camtepe, S. A., & Albayrak, S. (2010). An android application sandbox system for 
suspicious software detection. In 5th International Conference on Malicious and Unwanted Software (Malware 2010), 
Nancy, France. doi:10.1109/MALWARE.2010.5665792
Blonder, G. E. (1996). Graphical password. United States Patent Number 5,559,961.
Bojko, A. (2006). Using Eye Tracking to Compare Web Page Designs: A Case Study. Journal of Usability Studies, 1, 112–
120. Retrieved from http://www.upassoc.org/upa_publications/jus/2006_may/bojko_eye_tracking.html?pagewanted=all
Bokser, V., Oberg, C., Sukhatme, G., & Requicha, A. (2004, July). A Small Submarine Robot for Experiments in Un-
derwater Sensor Networks.Symposium on Intelligent Autonomous Vehicles.
Bolton, R. N., & Drew, J. H. (1991). A multistage model of customers’ assessments of service quality and value. The 
Journal of Consumer Research, 17(4), 375–384. doi:10.1086/208564
Bontis, N., Booker, L. D., & Serenko, A. (2007). The mediating effect of organizational reputation on customer loyalty and ser-
vice recommendation in the banking industry. Management Decision, 45(9), 1426–1445. doi:10.1108/00251740710828681
Borges, M., Rita, P., & Pagani, M. (2011, June). A new conceptual framework to evaluate consumer adoption of mobile 
services: The case of Mobile TV. In Mobile Business (ICMB), 2011 Tenth International Conference on (pp. 173-184). IEEE.
Bose, A., & Shin, K. G. (2006). On Mobile Viruses Exploiting Messaging and Bluetooth Ser-vices. Securecomm and 
Workshops, 1(10).
Branstetter, S. A., Horn, K., Dino, G., & Zhang, J. (2009). Beyond quitting: Predictors of teen smoking cessation, 
reduction and acceleration following a school-based intervention. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 99(1-3), 160–168. 
doi:10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2008.07.011 PMID:18804924
Brennan, S. M., Mielke, A. M., Torney, D. C., & Maccabe, A. B. (2004). Radiation Detection with Distributed Sensor 
Networks. IEEE Computer, 37(8), 57–59. doi:10.1109/MC.2004.103
Brimicombe, A. J., & Li, C. (2009). Location-Based Services and Geo-Information Engineering. Chichester: Wiley.
Brooke, J. (1986). System Usability Scale. Academic Press.
Brooke, J. (1996). SUS: a quick and dirty usability scale. In B. T. P. W. Jordan (Ed.), Usability Evaluation in Industry. 
London: Taylor and Francis.
313

Compilation of References
Brooke, J. (2013). SUS: A Retrospective. Journal of Usability Studies, 8(2), 29–40.
Brown, K., & Asmar, H. O. (2006). Malaysia: Language Situation. In Encyclopedia of Language & Linguistics (pp. 
462–464). doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/01695-3
Brown, K., & Romaine, S. (2006). Language Policy in Multilingual Educational Contexts. In Encyclopedia of Language 
(pp. 584–596). Linguistics; 10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/00646-5
BSA Global Software Piracy Study. (2011). Retrieved from http://globalstudy.bsa.org/2011/index.html
Buchanan, G., Farrant, S., Jones, M., Thimbleby, H., Marsden, G., & Pazzani, M. (2001). Improving mobile internet 
usability.Proceedings of the 10th international conference on World Wide Web, (pp. 673-680).
Buennemeyer, T. K., Nelson, T. M., Clagett, L. M., Dunning, J. P., Marchany, R. C., & Tront, J. G. (2008). Mobile device 
profiling and intrusion detection using smart batteries. In Proceedings of the Proceedings of the 41st Annual Hawaii 
International Conference on System, Sciences, HICSS ‘08. doi:10.1109/HICSS.2008.319
Bueno-Delgado, M., Pavon-Marino, P., De-Gea-Garcia, A., & Dolon-Garcia, A. (2012). The smart university experience: 
An NFC-based ubiquitous environment. Paper presented at the Innovative Mobile and Internet Services in Ubiquitous 
Computing (IMIS), 2012 Sixth International Conference on.
Bunt, G. R. (2010). Surfing the App Souq: Islamic Applications for Mobile Devices. CyberOrient: Online Journal of 
the Virtual Middle East, 1.
Burguera, I., Zurutuza, U., & Nadjm-Tehrani, S. (2011). Crowdroid: Behavior-Based Malware Detection System 
for Android. In Proceedings of the 1st ACM workshop on Security and Privacy in Smartphones and mobile devices. 
doi:10.1145/2046614.2046619
Burhanudeen, H., Hamid, N. Z. A., Awal, N. M., & Mis, M. A. (2007). The Reality of Bahasa Melayu and Bahasa 
Indonesia in Academia. Academic Press.
Business Wire. (2014). Kwikset® Kevo™ revolutionizes the door lock using smartphone and Touch-to-Open™ 
Technology. Retrieved May 29, 2014, from http://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20130730005823/en/
Kwikset%C2%AEKevo%E2%84%A2-Revolutionizes-Door-Lock-Smartphone-Touch-to-Open%E2%84%A2#.U4bk-
BfmSzV8
Byrne, B. M. (2001). Structural Equation Modeling with AMOS: Basic Concepts, Applications, and Programming. 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Inc.
Cabir. (2014, June 12). Smartphone Malware. Retrieved from http://www.f-secure.com/v-descs/cabir.shtml
Cagnetti, M., Leccese, F., & Trinca, D. (2013). A New Remote and Automated Control System for the Vineyard Hail 
Protection Based on ZigBee Sensors, Raspberry-Pi Electronic Card and WiMAX. J. Agric. Sci. Technol. B, 3, 853–864.
Camp, T., Boleng, J., & Davies, V. (2002). A Survey of Mobility Models for Ad Hoc Network Research. Wireless Com-
munication & Mobile Computing, 2(5).
Campbell, S. (2011). Users’ spatial abilities affect interface usability outcomes. PhD Thesis.
Campbell, S., & Norman, K. (2007). Strategy, Spatial Visualization Ability, and Performance on Website Navigation.Proceed-
ings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting. SAGE Publications. doi:10.1177/154193120705101303
Canter, D., & Tagg, S. K. (1975). Distance estimation in cities. Environment and Behavior, 7(1), 59–80. 
doi:10.1177/001391657500700102
314

Compilation of References
Cao, L., Tian, J., & Liu, Y. (2008). Remote Real Time Automatic Meter Reading System Based on Wireless Sensor Net-
works. 3rd International Conference on Innovative Computing Information and Control. doi:10.1109/ICICIC.2008.443
Casey, B. (2013). Network Security “Why sandboxing technology is integral for advanced malware detection” (2013, 
November 19). Retrieved from http://searchsecurity.techtarget.com/tip/Why- sandboxing-technology-is-integral-
for-advanced-malwaredetection?asrc=EM_ERU_24919192&utm_medium=EM&utm_source=ERU&utm_cam-
paign=20131118_ERU%20Transmission%20for%2011/18/2013%20(UserUniverse:%20582281)_myka-reports@
techtarget.com&src=5183365
Cecez-Kecmanovic, D., Galliers, R. D., Henfridsson, O., Newell, S., & Vidgen, R. (2014). The Sociomateriality of 
Information Systems: Current status, future directions. Management Information Systems Quarterly, 38(3), 809–830.
Chaczko, Z., & Ahmad, F. (2005). Wireless Sensor Network Based System for Fire Endangered Areas. Information 
Technology and Applications, International Conference on, 2, 203-207.
Chamorro-Koc, M., Popovic, V., & Emmison, M. (2009). Human experience and product usability: Principles to as-
sist the design of user–product interactions. Applied Ergonomics, 40(4), 648–656. doi:10.1016/j.apergo.2008.05.004 
PMID:18653170
Chang, T. Y., Tsai, C. J., & Lin, J. H. (2012). A graphical-based password keystroke dynamic authentication system for 
touch screen handheld mobile devices. Journal of Systems and Software, 85(5), 1157–1165. doi:10.1016/j.jss.2011.12.044
Chang, Y. S., Chang, C. L., Hung, Y. S., & Tsai, C. T. (2010). NCASH: NFC phone-enabled personalized context aware-
ness smart-home environment. Cybernetics and Systems, 41(2), 123–145. doi:10.1080/01969720903584241
Charland, A., & Leroux, B. (2011). Mobile application development: Web vs. native. Communications of the ACM, 
54(5), 49–53. doi:10.1145/1941487.1941504
Chau, P. Y. K. (1996). An empirical assessment of a modified technology acceptance model. Journal of Management 
Information Systems, 13(2), 185–204.
Cheddad, A., Condell, J., Curran, K., & Kevitt, P. M. (2010). Digital image steganography: Survey and analysis of cur-
rent methods. Signal Processing, 90(3), 727–752. doi:10.1016/j.sigpro.2009.08.010
Chen, L. Y., & Lauffer, W. H. (2012). The Impact of Mobile Shopping Quality on Customer Satisfaction and Purchase 
Intentions: The IS Success Based Model. In the 8th International Symposium on Management, Engineering and Infor-
matics (MEI 2012). Academic Press.
Chen, R., Luo, X., Xu, H., & Zhang, W. (n.d.). The Conceptual Model of Mobile TV Service Adoption: A Triangulational 
Perspective. Academic Press.
Chen, W. K., Liu, S. T., & Hsu, W. H. (2013). The Factor of Personal Characteristic Influencing Consumers’ Acceptance 
of Mobile Shopping Apps. Academic Press.
Cheng, B. H. C., & Atlee, J. M. (2007). Research Directions in Requirements Engineering. Future of Software Engineer-
ing, 2007. FOSE, 07. doi:10.1109/FOSE.2007.17
Cheng, G. (2014). Exploring Students’ Learning Styles In Relation To Their Acceptance And Attitudes Towards Us-
ing Second Life In Education: A Case Study In Hong Kong. Computers & Education, 70, 105–115. doi:10.1016/j.
compedu.2013.08.011
Cheng, Y. H., & Huang, T. Y. (2013). High speed rail passengers’ mobile ticketing adoption. Transportation Research 
Part C, Emerging Technologies, 30, 143–160. doi:10.1016/j.trc.2013.02.001
315

Compilation of References
Chen, L. Y. (2012, July). Marketer Perceptions of Quality on the Success of Mobile Shopping System and Its Impact on 
Performance. In SRII Global Conference (SRII), 2012 Annual (pp. 29-33). IEEE. doi:10.1109/SRII.2012.14
Cheung, R., & Vogel, D. (2013). Predicting User Acceptance Of Collaborative Technologies: An Extension Of The Tech-
nology Acceptance Model For E-Learning. Computers & Education, 63, 160–175. doi:10.1016/j.compedu.2012.12.003
Chhabra, J., Kushalnagar, N., Metzler, B., & Sampson, A. (2004). Sensor networks in intel fabrication plants. In J. A. 
Stankovic, A. Arora, & R. Govindan (Eds.), SenSys (p. 324). ACM. doi:10.1145/1031495.1031567
Chiang, Wu, Liu, & Gerla. (1997). Routing in Clustered Multihop, Mobile Wireless Networks with Fading Channel. 
IEEE Singapore International Conference on Networks, SICON’97.
Chin, J., Diehl, V., & Norman, K. (1988). Development of an instrument measuring user satisfaction of the human-
computer interface.Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 213-218). 
New York, NY: ACM. doi:10.1145/57167.57203
Chiu, C. H., & Hsiao, H. F. (2010). Group Differences In Computer Supported Collaborative Learning: Evidence From 
Patterns Of Taiwanese Students’ Online Communication. Computers & Education, 54(2), 427–435. doi:10.1016/j.
compedu.2009.08.026
Choi, Y. K., & Totten, J. W. (2012). Self-construal’s role in mobile TV acceptance: Extension of TAM across cultures. 
Journal of Business Research, 65(11), 1525–1533. doi:10.1016/j.jbusres.2011.02.036
Chong, A. Y. L. (2013). Mobile commerce usage activities: The roles of demographic and motivation variables. Tech-
nological Forecasting and Social Change, 80(7), 1350–1359. doi:10.1016/j.techfore.2012.12.011
Chong, A. Y. L., Chan, F. T., & Ooi, K. B. (2012). Predicting consumer decisions to adopt mobile commerce: Cross 
country empirical examination between China and Malaysia. Decision Support Systems, 53(1), 34–43. doi:10.1016/j.
dss.2011.12.001
Chong, J. W. (2012). “Mine, Yours or Ours?”: The Indonesia-Malaysia Disputes over Shared Cultural Heritage. Sojourn. 
Journal of Social Issues in Southeast Asia, 27(1), 1–53.
Chrimes, D., Kitos, N. R., Kushniruk, A., & Mann, D. M. (2014). Usability testing of Avoiding Diabetes Thru Action 
Plan Targeting (ADAPT) decision support for integrating care-based counseling of pre-diabetes in an electronic health 
record. International Journal of Medical Informatics, 83(9), 636–647. doi:10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2014.05.002 PubMed 
doi:10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2014.05.002 PMID:24981988
Christodorescu, M., Jha, S., Maughan, D., Song, D., & Wang, C. (2007). Malware Detection: Advance Information 
Security. Academic Press.
Cicevic, S., Mitrovic, S., & Nesic, M. (2014). Advantages and challenges of tablet PC’s usage. Yugoslav Journal of 
Operations Research, 24(2).
Čičević, S., Mitrović, S., & Perišić, D. (2013). Usability Measurement Framework for Mobile Touch Screen Devices 
in Transportation and Logistics. Proceedings of XI Balkan Conference on Operational Research (BALCOR 2013) (pp. 
398-405). Belgrade, Serbia: NEWPRESS d.o.o.
Clarke, N. L., & Furnell, S. M. (2005). Authentication of users on mobile telephones – A survey of attitudes and practices. 
Computers & Security, 24(7), 519–527. doi:10.1016/j.cose.2005.08.003
Clementini, E., Di Felice, P., & Hernández, D. (1997). Qualitative representation of positional information. Artificial 
Intelligence, 95(2), 317–356. doi:10.1016/S0004-3702(97)00046-5
316

Compilation of References
Cohn, A. G. (1995). The challenge of qualitative spatial reasoning. ACM Comput. Surv., 27(3), 323–325. 
doi:10.1145/212094.212112
Cohn, A. G., & Renz, J. (2008). Article. Qualitative Spatial Representation and Reasoning, 6526(7), 551–596. doi:10.1016/
S1574-6526(07)03013-1
Collaer, M. L., Reimers, S., & Manning, J. T. (2007). Visuospatial performance on an Internet line judgment task 
and potential Hormonal markers: Sex, sexual orientation, and 2D:4D. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 36(2), 177–192. 
doi:10.1007/s10508-006-9152-1 PMID:17380373
Constantiou, I. D., & Mahnke, V. (2010). Consumer behaviour and mobile TV services: Do men differ from women in 
their adoption intentions? Journal of Electronic Commerce Research, 11(2), 127–139.
Coskun, V., Ok, K., & Ozdenizci, B. (2011). Near Field Communication (NFC): From Theory to Practice. John Wiley 
& Sons.
Coskun, V., Özdenizci, B., & Ok, K. (2012). A survey on near field communication (NFC) technology. Wireless Personal 
Communications, 1–36. doi:10.1007/s11277-012-0935-5
Costa, A., Laredo, J. L., Novais, P., Corchado, J. M., & Neves, J. (2010). iGenda: An Event Scheduler for Common Users 
and Centralised Systems. AISC, 73, 55–62.
Csikszentmihalyi, M., & Larson, R. (1987, September). Validity and reliability of the Experience-Sampling Method. The 
Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 175(9), 526–536. doi:10.1097/00005053-198709000-00004 PMID:3655778
Cugnetto, M. L., Saab, P. G., Llabre, M. M., Goldberg, R., McCalla, J. R., & Schneiderman, N. (2008). Lifestyle fac-
tors, body mass index, and lipid profile in adolescents. Journal of Pediatric Psychology, 33(7), 761–771. doi:10.1093/
jpepsy/jsm108 PMID:18024982
Culler, D. E., & Hong, W. (2004). Introduction. Commun. ACM, 30-33.
Culler, D. E., Estrin, D., & Srivastava, M. B. (2004). Guest Editors’ Introduction: Overview of Sensor Networks. IEEE 
Computer, 37(8), 41–49. doi:10.1109/MC.2004.93
Cyr, D., Head, M., & Ivanov, A. (2006). Design aesthetics leading to m-loyalty in mobile commerce. Information & 
Management, 43(8), 950–963. doi:10.1016/j.im.2006.08.009
Daily, E. M. (2013). The Promise of Mobile Technology for Public Religious Education. Religious Education (Chicago, 
Ill.), 108(2), 112–128. doi:10.1080/00344087.2013.767653
Dalby, P. (2006). Is there a process of spiritual change or development associated with ageing? A critical review of 
research. Ageing & Mental Health, 10(1), 4–12. doi:10.1080/13607860500307969 PMID:16338808
Dang, C., Iwai, M., Tobe, Y., Umeda, K., & Sezaki, K. (2013). A framework for pedestrian comfort navigation using 
multi-modal environmental sensors. Pervasive and Mobile Computing, 9(3), 421–436. doi:10.1016/j.pmcj.2013.01.002
Daud, N. A. (2013). Elderly Use Experiences and Perceptions On Online News and Communication Technology Devices. 
Masters Thesis.
Davies, N., Cheverst, K., Mitchell, K., & Friday, A. (1999). Caches in the air’: disseminating tourist information in the 
GUIDE system. In Mobile Computing Systems and Applications, 1999. Proceedings. WMCSA’99. Second IEEE Work-
shop on (pp. 11–19). IEEE.
Davi, L., Dmitrienko, A., Sadeghi, A., & Winandy, M. (2011). Privilege escalation attacks on Android. Information 
Security.
317

Compilation of References
Davis, D., Monrose, F., & Reiter, M. K. (2004). On user choice in graphical password schemes. In Proceedings of the 
13th USENIX Security Symposium.
Davis, F. D. (1989). Perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use, and user acceptance of information technology. Man-
agement Information Systems Quarterly, 13(3), 319–340. doi:10.2307/249008
Dayama, R., Chatla, A., Shaikh, H., & Kulkarni, M. (2014). Android Based Meter Reader using OCR. International 
Journal of Computer Science and Mobile Computing, 3(3), 536–539.
Dean, E., Schwerin, J., Robbins, M., & Bourne, J. (2004). Usability testingofthe U.S.Navy’s performance management 
system. Research Triangle Park.
Delone, W. H. (2003). The DeLone and McLean model of information systems success: A ten-year update. Journal of 
Management Information Systems, 19(4), 9–30.
Deng, H., Li, W., & Agrawal, D. P. (2002). Routing Security in Wireless Ad Hoc Network. IEEE Communications 
Magazine, 40(10).
Deng, H., Li, W., & Agrawal, D. P. (2002). Routing security in wireless ad hoc networks. IEEE Communications Maga-
zine, 40, 70-75.
Descheneaux, C., & Pigot, H. (2009). Interactive Calendar to Help Maintain Social Interactions for Elderly People and 
People with Mild Cognitive Impairments. ICOST, 2009, 117–124.
Desmet, P., & Hekkert, P. (2007). Framework of Product Experience. International Journal of Design, 1(1), 57–66.
Dholakia, U. M., Bagozzi, R. P., & Pearo, L. K. (2004). A social influence model of consumer participation in net-
work- and small-group-based virtual communities. International Journal of Research in Marketing, 21(3), 241–263. 
doi:10.1016/j.ijresmar.2003.12.004
Diaz, R. J., & Rosenberg, R. (2008). Spreading Dead Zones and Consequences for Marine Ecosystems. Science, 321(5891), 
926–929. doi:10.1126/science.1156401 PMID:18703733
Dillon, A., Richardson, J., & McKnight, C. (1990). Navigation in hypertext: a critical review of the concept. In D. Dia-
per, D. Gilmore, G. Cockton, & B. Shackel (Eds.), Human-Computer Interaction-INTERACT’90 (pp. 587–592). North 
Holland: Amsterdam: North Holland.
Dillon, A., Mcknight, C., & Richardson, J. (1993). Space - the Final Chapter or Why Physical Representations are not 
Semantic Intentions. In A. Dillon, C. Mcknight, & J. Richardson (Eds.), Hypertext: A psychological Perspective. Chi-
cago: Ellis Horwood.
Dillon, A., Richardson, J., & McKnight, C. (1991). Institutionalising human factors in the design process: the ADONIS 
experience. In Contemporary Ergonomics ’91 (pp. 421–426). London: Taylor and Francis.
Dinev, T., & Hart, P. (2006). An extended privacy calculus model for e-commerce transactions. Information Systems 
Research, 17(1), 61–80. doi:10.1287/isre.1060.0080
Dominikus, S., & Aigner, M. (2007). mCoupons: An application for near field communication (NFC). In 21st Inter-
national Conference on Advanced Information Networking and Applications Workshops (AINAW ‘07). doi:10.1109/
AINAW.2007.230
Dong-Her, S., Hsiu-Sen, C., Chun-Yuan, C., & Lin, B. (2004). Internet security: Malicious e-mails detection and protec-
tion. Industrial Management & Data Systems, 104(7), 613–623. doi:10.1108/02635570410550278
318

Compilation of References
Downs, R. M., & Stea, D. (1973). In R. M. Downs & D. Stea (Eds.), Image and Environment: Cognitive Mapping and 
Spatial Behavior (pp. 8–26). Chicago: Aldine Press.
Duh, H., Tan, G., & Chen, V. (2006). Usability evaluation for mobile device: a comparison of laboratory and field tests.
Proceedings of the 8th conference on Human-computer interaction with mobile devices and services (MobileHCI ‘06) 
(pp. 181-186). New York: ACM. doi:10.1145/1152215.1152254
Dunlop, M., & Brewster, S. (2002). The Challenge of Mobile Devices for Human Computer Interaction. Personal and 
Ubiquitous Computing, 6(4), 235–236. doi:10.1007/s007790200022
Dunphy, P., Heiner, A. P., & Asokan, N. (2010). A closer look at recognition-based graphical passwords on mobile devices. 
In Proceedings of the Sixth Symposium on Usable Privacy and Security. Redmond, WA:ACM. doi:10.1145/1837110.1837114
Dutta, S. (1991). Approximate spatial reasoning: Integrating qualitative and quantitative constraints. International Journal 
of Approximate Reasoning, 5(3), 307–330. doi:10.1016/0888-613X(91)90015-E
Eder, T., Rodler, M., Vymazal, D., & Zeilinger, M. (2013). A Framework For Analyzing Android Applications. Work-
shop on Emerging Cyber threats and Countermeasures ECTCM, 2013. Retrieved from http://arxiv.org/find/all/1/
all:+ANANAS/0/1/0/all/0/1
Education Section Programme Division. (2000). Defining Quality in Education. UNICEF Working Paper Series.
Education. (n.d.). Merriam-Webster.com. Retrieved March 04, 2014, from http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/
education
Educational and Social Characteristics of the Population 2010. (2014). Department of Statistics Malaysia. Retrieved 
from http://www.statistics.gov.my/portal/download_Population/files/census2010/education/5.Tables.pdf
Eid, M. I. (2011). Determinants of e-commerce customer satisfaction, trust, and loyalty in Saudi Arabia. Journal of 
Electronic Commerce Research, 12(1), 78–93.
Enck, W., Gilbert, P., Chun, B., Cox, L. P., Jung, J., McDaniel, P., & Sheth, A. N. (2010). TaintDroid: An Information-
Flow Tracking System for Realtime Privacy Monitoring on Smartphones. 9th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems 
Design and Implementation (OSDI’10).
Ervasti, M., Isomursu, M., & Kinnula, M. (2009). Experiences from NFC supported school attendance supervision for 
children. Paper presented at the Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies, 2009. UBICOMM’09. 
Third International Conference on. doi:10.1109/UBICOMM.2009.9
Ervasti, M., & Helaakoski, H. (2010). Case study of application-based mobile service acceptance and development in Fin-
land. International Journal of Information Technology and Management, 9(3), 243–259. doi:10.1504/IJITM.2010.030942
Escobar-Rodríguez, T., & Carvajal-Trujillo, E. (2014). Online purchasing tickets for low cost carriers: An application of 
the unified theory of acceptance and use of technology (UTAUT) model. Tourism Management, 43, 70–88. doi:10.1016/j.
tourman.2014.01.017
Estrin, D., Govindan, R., Heidemann, J. S., & Kumar, S. (1999). Next Century Challenges: Scalable Coordination in 
Sensor Networks. MOBICOM. doi:10.1145/313451.313556
Fan, Y. W., & Miao, Y. F. (2012). Effect of electronic word-of-mouth on consumer purchase intention: The perspective 
of gender differences. International Journal of Electronic BusinessManagement, 10(3), 175.
Fayyad, U., Piatetsky-Shapiro, G., & Smyth, P. (1996). From data mining to knowledge discovery in databases. AI 
Magazine, 17(3), 37.
319

Compilation of References
Feiner, S., MacIntyre, B., Höllerer, T., & Webster, A. (1997). A touring machine: Prototyping 3D mobile augmented 
reality systems for exploring the urban environment. Personal Technologies, 1(4), 208–217. doi:10.1007/BF01682023
Fergusan, N., Schneier, B., & Kohno, T. (2010). Cryptography engineering: Design principles and practical applica-
tions. John Wiley and Sons.
Fernández-López, Á., Rodríguez-Fórtiz, M. J., Rodríguez-Almendros, M. L., & Martínez-Segura, M. J. (2013). Mobile 
Learning Technology Based On Ios Devices To Support Students With Special Education Needs. Computers & Educa-
tion, 61, 77–90. doi:10.1016/j.compedu.2012.09.014
Fink, A. (2005). Conducting Research Literature Reviews: From the Internet to Paper (2nd ed.). Academic Press.
Finstad, K. (2010). The Usability Metric for User Experience. Interact. Comput., 22(5), 323-327. 10.1016/j.in-
tcom.2010.04.004
Flick2Know. (2013). QR Codes. Retrieved March 13, 2015, from http://www.flick2know.com/QRCodes
Foley, M. (2012). NSW HEALTH Annual Report 2011 – 12. NSW Ministry of Health. Retrieved from http://www.health.
nsw.gov.au/publications/Publications/annual_report12/HealthAR_2012.pdf
Forbus, K., Nielsen, P., & Faltings, B. (1991). Qualitative Spatial Reasoning: The CLOCK Project. Artificial Intelligence, 
51(1-3), 1–3. doi:10.1016/0004-3702(91)90116-2
Fornell, C., & Larcker, D. F. (1981). Evaluating structural equation models with unobservable variables and measure-
ment error. JMR, Journal of Marketing Research, 18(1), 39–50. doi:10.2307/3151312
Forum, N. F. C. (2007). Near Field Communication and the NFC Forum: The Keys to Truly Interoperable Communica-
tions [White paper]. Retrieved October 23, 2014, from http://nfc-forum.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/11/The-Keys-to-
Truly-Interoperable-Communications.pdf
Frank, A. U. (1992). Qualitative spatial reasoning about distances and directions in geographic space. Journal of Visual 
Languages and Computing, 3(4), 343–371. doi:10.1016/1045-926X(92)90007-9
Fraser, M., McCarthy, M. R., Shaukat, M., & Smith, P. (2007). Seconds matter: improving distributed coordination 
bytracking and visualizing display trajectories.CHI ‘07: Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in 
computing systems (pp. 1303-1312). New York, NY: ACM. doi:10.1145/1240624.1240822
Freksa, C. (1992). Using orientation information for qualitative spatial reasoning. In A. U. Frank, I. Campari, & U. 
Formentini (Eds.), Theories and Methods of Spatio-Temporal Reasoning in Geographic Space SE - 10 (Vol. 639, pp. 
162–178). Springer Berlin Heidelberg; doi:10.1007/3-540-55966-3_10
Freksa, C., & Zimmermann, K. (1992). On the utilization of spatial structures for cognitively plausible and efficient reason-
ing. In IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man and Cybernetics (pp. 261–266). doi:10.1109/ICSMC.1992.271766
Frey, J., & Fontana, A. (1993). The group interview in social research. In D. Morgan (Ed.), Successful Focus Groups: 
Advancing the State of the Art. Newbury Park, CA: Sage. doi:10.4135/9781483349008.n2
Friedman, H., & Amoo, T. (1999). Rating The Rating Scales. Journal of Marketing Management, 9(3), 114–123.
F-secure. Cabir. (2013, June 12). Retrieved from http://www.f-secure.com/v-descs/cabir.shtml
Furnell, S. M., Dowland, P. S., Illingworth, H. M., & Reynolds, P. L. (2000). Authentication and supervision: A survey 
of user attitudes. Computers & Security, 19(6), 529–539. doi:10.1016/S0167-4048(00)06027-2
320

Compilation of References
Gao, T., & Deng, Y. (2012, June). A study on users’ acceptance behavior to mobile e-books application based on UTAUT 
model. In Software Engineering and Service Science (ICSESS), 2012 IEEE 3rd International Conference on (pp. 376-
379). IEEE.
Gao, Q., Dai, Y., Fan, Z., & Kang, R. (2010). Understanding factors affecting perceived sociability of social software. 
Computers in Human Behavior, 26(6), 1846–1861. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2010.07.022
Garrett, J. J. (2010). Elements of User Experience, The: User-Centered Design for the Web and Beyond. Pearson Educa-
tion. Pearson Education.
Gartner. (2012). Gartner Says Free Apps Will Account for Nearly 90 Percent of Total Mobile App Store Downloads in 
2012. Retrieved from http://www.gartner.com/newsroom/id/2153215
Gefen, D., Karahanna, E., & Straub, D. W. (2003). Trust and TAM in online shopping: An integrated model. Manage-
ment Information Systems Quarterly, 27(1), 51–90.
Geng, S., Li, G., & Liu, W. (2012). Design and Implement of Attendance Management System Based on Contactless 
Smart IC Card. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the 2012 International Conference on Computer Science and 
Electronics Engineering-Volume 03. doi:10.1109/ICCSEE.2012.196
Getjar. (2015, June 30). Retrieved from http://www.getjar.com/
Ghiron, S. L., Sposato, S., Medaglia, C. M., & Moroni, A. (2009) NFC ticketing: A prototype and usability test of an 
NFC-based virtual ticketing application. In First International Workshop on Near Field Communication (NFC ‘09). 
doi:10.1109/NFC.2009.22
Gobat, J. I., Weller, R. A., Way, B. S., Lord, J., Pritchard, M., & Smith, J. (2001). A Compact coastal ocean observing 
system for Kernel Blitz. Retrieved from http://hdl.handle.net/1912/36
Goel, S., Rana, A., & Kaur, M. (2013). Comparison of image steganography techniques. International. Journal of Com-
puters and Distributed Systems, 3(1), 20–30.
Goh, K. N., Chen, Y. Y., Lai, F. W., Daud, S. C., Sivaji, A., & Soo, S. T. (2013). A comparison of usability testing 
methods for an e-commerce website: A case study on a Malaysia online gift shop. In Proceedings of the 2013 10th In-
ternational Conference on Information Technology: New Generations, ITNG 2013 (pp. 143–150). IEEE. doi:10.1109/
ITNG.2013.129 doi:10.1109/ITNG.2013.129
Goi, C. L. (2008). Review on the Implementation of Mobile Commerce in Malaysia. Journal of Internet Banking and 
Commerce, 13(2).
Goldberg, A. V., Harrelson, C., Kaplan, H., & Werneck, R. F. (2005). Reach for A*: Efficient Point-to-Point Shortest 
Path Algorithms. ALENEX, 6(2), 129–143.
Gong, J., & Tarasewich, P. (2004). Guidelines for handheld mobile device interface design.Proceedings of the 2004 DSI 
Annual Meeting (pp. 3751-3756). Boston: Decision Sciences Institute.
Googleplay. (2015, June 30). Retrieved from https://play.google.com/store
Gottsegen, J., Montello, D., & Goodchild, M. F. (1999). A comprehensive model of uncertainty in spatial data. In Spatial 
accuracy assessment: Land information uncertainty in natural resources (pp. 175–181).
Graber, H. C., Terray, E. A., Donelan, M. A., Drennan, W. M., & Van Leer, J. C. (2000). ASIS--A New Air--Sea Interac-
tion Spar Buoy: Design and Performance at Sea. Journal of Atmospheric & Oceanic Technology, 17(5), 708. Retrieved 
from http://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=eih&AN=5648732&site=ehost-live
321

Compilation of References
Grace, M., Zhou, Y., Zhang, Q., Zou, S., & Jiang, X. (2012). Risk Ranker: Scalable and Accurate Zero-day Android 
Malware Detection.Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Mobile Systems, Applications and Services 
(MobiSys 2012). doi:10.1145/2307636.2307663
Gray, C., & Malins, J. (2004). Visualizing research. A Guide to the Research.
Grizzle, J. W., Zablah, A. R., Brown, T. J., Mowen, J. C., & Lee, J. M. (2009). Employee customer orientation in context: 
How the environment moderates the influence of customer orientation on performance outcomes. The Journal of Applied 
Psychology, 94(5), 1227–1242. doi:10.1037/a0016404 PMID:19702367
Guinasso, N. J., Yip, J., Reid, R., Bender, L. I., Howard, M., Lee, L. I., & Martin, R. et al. (2001). Observing and 
forecasting coastal currents: Texas Automated BuoySystem (\mbox{TABS}). OCEANS, MTS/IEEE Conference and 
Exhibition. 2, 1318-1322.
Gumstix Inc. (n.d.). Gumstix Verdex Pro XM4-bt (with u.fl antenna). Gumstix Verdex Pro XM4-bt (with u.fl antenna).
Gunson, N., Marshall, D., Morton, H., & Jack, M. (2011). User perceptions of security and usability of single factor 
and two-factor authentication in automated telephone banking. Computers & Security, 30(4), 208–220. doi:10.1016/j.
cose.2010.12.001
Guo, J., Li, H., & Yu, P. (2011). Water Meter ID Identifying and Reading System Based on RFID Technology. Fourth 
International Symposium on Computational Intelligence and Design (ISCID). doi:10.1109/ISCID.2011.48
Guo, Y., & Barnes, S. (2011). Purchase behavior in virtual worlds: An empirical investigation in Second Life. Informa-
tion & Management, 48(7), 303–312. doi:10.1016/j.im.2011.07.004
Guo, Y., & Barnes, S. J. (2012). Explaining purchasing behavior within world of warcraft. Journal of Computer Infor-
mation Systems.
Ha, I., Yoon, Y., & Choi, M. (2007). Determinants of adoption of mobile games under mobile broadband wireless access 
environment. Information & Management, 44(3), 276–286. doi:10.1016/j.im.2007.01.001
Hair, J. F. Jr, Black, W. C., Babin, B. J., & Anderson, R. E. (2010). Multivariate Data Analysis: A Global Perspective 
(7th ed.). Pearson Education Inc.
Han, S. H., Yun, M. H., Kim, K.-J., & Kwahk, J. (2000). Evaluation of product usability: Development and validation of 
usability dimensions and design elements based on empirical models. International Journal of Industrial Ergonomics, 
26(4), 477–488. doi:10.1016/S0169-8141(00)00019-6
Han, S. H., Yun, M. H., Kwahk, J., & Hong, S. W. (2001). Usability of consumer electronic products. International 
Journal of Industrial Ergonomics, 28(3), 143–151. doi:10.1016/S0169-8141(01)00025-7
Harrison, R., Flood, D., & Duce, D. (2013). Usability of Mobile Applications: Literature Review and Rationale for a 
New Usability Model. Journal of Interaction Science, 1(1), 1–16. doi:10.1186/2194-0827-1-1
Harter, A., & Hopper, A. (1994). A distributed location system for the active office, 62–70.
Hart, R. A., & Moore, G. T. (1973). The development of spatial cognition: A review. In B. Stea & R. Downs (Eds.), 
Image and Environment, Chicago (pp. 226–234). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Harvard Business Review on Increasing Customer Loyalty. (2011). Boston, MA: Harvard Business Review.
Hasegawa, M., Tanaka, Y., & Kato, S. (2009). A study on an image synthesis method for graphical passwords. In Pro-
ceedings of 2009 International Symposium on Intelligent Signal Processing and Communication Systems (ISPACS 2009). 
doi:10.1109/ISPACS.2009.5383758
322

Compilation of References
Haselsteiner, E., & Breitfuß, K. (2006). Security in near field communication (NFC). In Workshop on RFID security.
Hassenzahl, M. (2004). The interplay of beauty, goodness, and usability in interactive products. Human-Computer 
Interaction, 19(4), 319–349. doi:10.1207/s15327051hci1904_2
Hassenzahl, M. (2010). Experience Design: Technology for All the Right Reasons. Morgan and Claypool Publishers.
Hassenzahl, M., & Tractinsky, N. (2006). User experience - A research agenda. Behaviour & Information Technology, 
25(2), 91–97. doi:10.1080/01449290500330331
Hawthorn, D. (2006). Designing Effective Interfaces for Older Users. University of Waikato.
Hayashi, E., Christin, N., Dhamija, R., & Perrig, A. (2008). Use your illusion: Secure authentication usable anywhere. In 
Proceedings of the Fourth Symposium on Usable Privacy and Security (SOUPS 2008). doi:10.1145/1408664.1408670
He, T., Krishnamurthy, S., Stankovic, J., Abdelzaher, T., Luo, L., Stoleru, R., . . . Krogh, B. (2004, June). Energy-Efficient 
Surveillance System Using Wireless Sensor Networks. Proceedings of the International Convference on Mobile Systems, 
Appications and Services ({MobiSys}). USENIX. doi:10.1145/990064.990096
Hekkert, P. (2006). Design aesthetics: Principles of pleasure in design. Psychological Science, 48(2), 157.
Hennig‐Thurau, T., Gwinner, K. P., Walsh, G., & Gremler, D. D. (2004). Electronic word‐of‐mouth via consumer‐opinion 
platforms: What motivates consumers to articulate themselves on the Internet? Journal of Interactive Marketing, 18(1), 
38–52. doi:10.1002/dir.10073
Hernández, D., Clementini, E., & Di Felice, P. (1995). Qualitative distances. In A. Frank & W. Kuhn (Eds.), Spatial 
Information Theory A Theoretical Basis for GIS SE - 4 (Vol. 988, pp. 45–57). Springer Berlin Heidelberg; doi:10.1007/3-
540-60392-1_4
Hidayat, T., Mahasena, P., Dermawan, B., Herdiwiijaya, D., Setyanto, H., Irfan, M., . . . Santoso, A. (2010). Developing 
Information System on Lunar Crescent Observations. ITB J. Sci., 42A(1), 67 - 80.
Hill, J., Szewczyk, R., Woo, A., Culler, D., Hollar, S., & Pister, K. (2000, #nov#). System Architecture Directions for 
Networked Sensors. ACM SIG{\-}PLAN Notices, 35(11), 93-104.
Ho, C. H., & Wu, T. Y. (2012). Factors Affecting Intent to Purchase Virtual Goods in Online Games. International 
Journal of Electronic Business Management, 10(3), 204.
Hofmeester, G. H., Kemp, J. A., & Blankendaal, A. C. (1996). Sensuality in Product Design: A Structured Approach. 
In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 428–435). New York, NY: 
ACM. doi:10.1145/238386.238595
Hofstede, G. (2010). Geert hofstede. National Cultural Dimensions.
Holla, S., & Katti, M. M. (2013). Android based Mobile Application and Its Security. International Journal of Computer 
Trends and Technology, 3(3), 486 – 490.
Hopwood, C. J. (2007). Moderation and mediation in structural equation modeling: Applications for early intervention 
research. Journal of Early Intervention, 29(3), 262–272. doi:10.1177/105381510702900305
Hornbæk, K., & Lai-Chong Law, E. (2007). Meta-analysis of correlations among usability. Proceedings in Computer 
Human Interaction.
Hourcade, J. P. (2007). Interaction Design and Children. Foundations and Trends® in Human-Computer Interaction, 
1(4), 277–392. doi:10.1561/1100000006
323

Compilation of References
Hoyle, R. H., & Smith, G. T. (1994). Formulating clinical research hypotheses as structural equation models: A con-
ceptual overview. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 62(3), 429–440. doi:10.1037/0022-006X.62.3.429 
PMID:8063970
Hsiao, K. L. (2013). Android Smartphone adoption and intention to pay for mobile Internet: Perspectives from software, 
hardware, design, and value. Library Hi Tech, 31(2), 3–3.
Hsia, S., Sheu, M., & Chang, Y. (2013). Arrow-Pointer Sensor Design for Low-Cost Water Meter. IEEE Sensors Journal, 
13(4), 1281–1287. doi:10.1109/JSEN.2012.2232038
Hsu, M. H., Chuang, L. W., & Hsu, C. S. (2014). Understanding online shopping intention: The roles of four types of 
trust and their antecedents. Internet Research, 24(3), 332–352. doi:10.1108/IntR-01-2013-0007
Hughes, D., Greenwood, P., Coulson, G., & Blair, G. (2006). GridStix: Supporting Flood Prediction using Embedded 
Hardware and Next Generation Grid Middleware. In Proceedings of the 4th International Workshop on Mobile Distrib-
uted Computing (MDC’06).
Hu, X., Wu, G., Wu, Y., & Zhang, H. (2010). The effects of Web assurance seals on consumers’ initial trust in an online 
vendor: A functional perspective. Decision Support Systems, 48(2), 407–418. doi:10.1016/j.dss.2009.10.004
Hwang, G. J., & Chang, H. F. (2011). A Formative Assessment-Based Mobile Learning Approach To Improving 
The Learning Attitudes And Achievements Of Students. Computers & Education, 56(4), 1023–1031. doi:10.1016/j.
compedu.2010.12.002
Ibarra, K. (2011). Designing Apps for Kids. UX Magazine. Retrieved June 02, 2014, from http://uxmag.com/articles/
designing-apps-for-kids
Ifinedo, P. (2012). Understanding information systems security policy compliance: An integration of the theory of planned 
behavior and the protection motivation theory. Computers & Security, 31(1), 83–95. doi:10.1016/j.cose.2011.10.007
IIUM. (2013). About IIUM. Retrieved February 10, 2013, from http://www.iium.edu.my/about-iium/management,2013
Improving Internet Access in Indonesia . (2012). Retrieved from Http://Www.Gbgindonesia.Com/En/Services/Article/2012/
Improving_Internet_Access_In_Indonesia.Php)
Indoorlbs. (2013). Indoor navigation app. Retrieved April 2, 2013, from http://www.indoorlbs.com/p/indoor-navigation-
systems.html
Inglis, E. A., Szymkowiak, A., Gregor, P., Newell, A. F., Hine, N., Shah, P., & Evans, J. et al. (2003). Issues surrounding 
the user-centred development of a new interactive memory aid. Information Society, 2, 226–234.
Insider, B. (2013). The Only Smartphones Worth Buying Right Now. Retrieved from http://www.businessinsider.com/
best-smartphones-2013-5?op=1
Intercensal Mid-Year Population Estimates Malaysia and States. (2014). Department of Statistics Malaysia, 7. Retrieved 
from http://www.statistics.gov.my/portal/download_Population/files/Anggaran_Penduduk_Pertengahan_Tahun_An-
tara_Banci2001_2009.pdf
International Data Corporation. (2013). Always connected: How smartphones and social keep us engaged: An IDC research 
report. Retrieved November 12, 2013, from http://www.idc.com/prodserv/custom_solutions/download/case_studies/
PLANBB_Always_Connected_for_Facebook.pdf
International Data Corporation. (2013). Retrieved from www.idc.com/research/Predictions13/downloadable/238044.pdf
324

Compilation of References
International Ergonomics Association (IEA) Council. (2000). What is Ergonomics. Retrieved September 10, 2008, from 
http://www.iea.cc/browse.php?contID=what_is_ergonomics
Internet User Survey 2012. (2012). Malaysian Communications and Multimedia Commision. Retrieved from http://www.
skmm.gov.my/Resources/Statistics/Internet-users-survey.aspx
Internet Users Percentage. (2015). Retrieved March 4, 2015, from http://www.worldbank.org
Islam, N. S., & Wasi-ur-Rahman, M. (2009). An intelligent SMS-based remote Water Metering System. 12th International 
Conference on Computers and Information Technologypp. doi:10.1109/ICCIT.2009.5407279
Ismail, A., Jamil, A. T., Rahman, A. F. A., Madihah, J., Bakar, A., & Saad, N. M. (2010). The Implementation of Hospital 
Information System (HIS) in Tertiary Hospitals in Malaysia: A Qualitative Study. Malaysian Journal of Public Health 
Medicine, 10(2), 16–24.
İşman, A., & İşbulan, O. (2010). Usability level of distance education website (sakarya university sample). Turkish Online 
Journal of Educational Technology, 9(1), 243–258.
ISO 21542:2011 Building construction -- Accessibility and usability of the built environment. (2011). ISO (International 
Organization for Standardization). Retrieved from http://www.iso.org/iso/catalogue_detail?csnumber=50498
ISO9241-11: Guidance on Usability 1998International Organisation for Standardisation, Geneva, Switzerland.
Ivan, I., & Zamfiroiu, A. (2011). Quality Analysis of Mobile Applications. Informatica Economica, 15(3), 136–152.
Jacob, R. J. K., & Karn, K. S. (2003). Eye tracking in human-computer interaction and usability research: Ready to 
deliver the promises. Mind, 2(3), 4.
Jain, S. K., Joshi, U., & Sharma, B. K. (n.d.). Attendance Management System. (Masters), Rajasthan Technical Univer-
sity, Kota. Retrieved from http://www.iisjaipur.org/iiim-current-08/mca_iv_sem_pro_eva/15.project%20attendence%20
managemnt%20system.pdf
Jain, A. K., Ross, A., & Prabhakar, S. (2004). An introduction to biometric recognition. IEEE Transactions on Circuits 
and Systems for Video Technology, 14(1), 4–20. doi:10.1109/TCSVT.2003.818349
Jakobsson, M., Wetzel, S., & Yener, B. (2004). Stealth Attacks on Ad Hoc Wireless Networks. In Proc. of IEEE Vehicular 
Technology Conference. IEEE. doi:10.1109/VETECF.2003.1285396
Janssen, C. (n.d.). Mobile Application (Mobile App). Retrieved from http://www.techopedia.com/definition/2953/mobile-
application-mobile-app
Jiang, C., & Steenkiste, P. (2002). A Hybrid Location Model with a Computable Location Identifier for Ubiquitous 
Computing. In Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Ubiquitous Computing (pp. 246–263). London: 
Springer-Verlag. doi:10.1007/3-540-45809-3_20
Joelsson, T. (2008). Mobile Web Browser Extensions. Utilizing local device functionality in mobile web applications. 
Stockholm: K T H Information and Communication Technology.
Johnson, N. F., & Jajodia, S. (1998). Exploring steganography: Seeing the unseen. Computer, 31(2), 26–34. doi:10.1109/
MC.1998.4655281
Jong, J. H. (1994). Qualitative reasoning about distances and directions in geographic space. University of Maine.
Jordan, P. W. (1998). An introduction to usability. CRC Press.
325

Compilation of References
Jorge, J., & Vaida, D. (1996). A fuzzy relational path algebra for distances and directions. In Proceedings of the ECAI-96 
Workshop on Representation and Processing of Spatial Expressions. Budapest, Hungary.
Julier, S., Lanzagorta, M., Baillot, Y., Rosenblum, L., Feiner, S., Hollerer, T., & Sestito, S. (2000). Information filter-
ing for mobile augmented reality. In Augmented Reality, 2000.(ISAR 2000). Proceedings. IEEE and ACM International 
Symposium on (pp. 3–11). IEEE.
Jung, Y., Perez-Mira, B., & Wiley-Patton, S. (2009). Consumer adoption of mobile TV: Examining psychological flow 
and media content. Computers in Human Behavior, 25(1), 123–129. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2008.07.011
Kaasinen, E. (2005). User acceptance of mobile services - value, ease of use,trust and ease of adoption. VTT Publications.
Kaasinen, E. (2009). User Acceptance of Mobile Services. International Journal of Mobile Human Computer Interac-
tion, 1(1), 79–97. doi:10.4018/jmhci.2009010105
Kahneman, D., Krueger, A. B., Schkade, D. A., Schwarz, N., & Stone, A. A. (2004). A survey method for characterizing 
daily life experience: The day reconstruction method. Science, 306(5702), 1776–1780. doi:10.1126/science.1103572 
PMID:15576620
Kamali, M. H. (2011). Classical and Contemporary Approaches to Education: An Islamic Perspective. Islam and Ci-
vilisational Renewal, 2(3), 447–467, 591–592. Retrieved from http://210.48.222.80/proxy.pac/docview/1314486643?a
ccountid=44024
Kamarudin, N., & Salam, S. (2012). Tajweed Understanding among Malaysian Muslims (preliminary findings). In 1st 
International Conference on Mobile Learning, Applications, and Services (mobilcase2012) (pp. 1–4).
Kappos, A., & Rivard, S. (2008). A three-perspective model of culture, information systems, and their development and 
use. Management Information Systems Quarterly, 601–634.
Karami, M., Mohamed, E., Parnian, N., & Angelos, S. (2013). Behavioral Analysis of Android Applications Using 
Automated Instrumentation. In Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Software Security and Reliability 
(SERE). doi:10.1109/SERE-C.2013.35
Karapanos, E., Zimmerman, J., Forlizzi, J., & Martens, J.-B. (2009). User Experience over Time: An Initial Framework. 
In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 729–738). New York, NY: 
ACM. doi:10.1145/1518701.1518814
Kassim, M., Mazlan, H., Zaini, N., & Salleh, M. K. (2012). Web-based student attendance system using RFID technology. 
Paper presented at the Control and System Graduate Research Colloquium (ICSGRC). doi:10.1109/ICSGRC.2012.6287164
Katzenbeisser, S., & Petitcolas, F. A. (2000). Information hiding techniques for steganography and digital watermark-
ing. Norwood, MA: Artech House.
Kauffman, R. J., Lai, H., & Ho, C. T. (2010). Incentive mechanisms, fairness and participation in online group-buying 
auctions. Electronic Commerce Research and Applications, 9(3), 249–262. doi:10.1016/j.elerap.2008.11.009
Keith, M. J., Babb, J., Lowry, P. B., Furner, C., & Abdullat, A. (2011). The Roles of Privacy Assurance, Network Ef-
fects, and Information Cascades in the Adoption of and Willingness to Pay for Location-Based Services with Mobile 
Applications. Network Effects, and Information Cascades in the Adoption of and Willingness to Pay for Location-Based 
Services with Mobile Applications.
Kelman, H. C. (1958). Compliance, Identification, and Internalization: Three Processes of Attitude Change. Journal 
of Conflict.
326

Compilation of References
Kemshall, A. (2011). Why mobile two-factor authentication makes sense. Network Security, 2011(April), 9–12. 
doi:10.1016/S1353-4858(11)70038-1
Khalifa, M., & Shen, K. N. (2008). Explaining the adoption of transactional B2C mobile commerce. Journal of Enterprise 
Information Management, 21(2), 110–124. doi:10.1108/17410390810851372
Khalifa, M., & Shen, K. N. (2008b). Drivers for transactional B2C m-commerce adoption: Extended theory of planned 
behavior. Journal of Computer Information Systems, 48(3), 111.
Kim et al. (2014). Effects on mobile instant messaging on collaborative learning processes and outcomes: The case of 
South Korea Journal of Educational Technology & Society, 17 (2), 31–42.
Kim, H., Smith, J., & Shin, K. G. (2008). Detecting Energy-greedy Anomalies and Mobile Malware Variants. In 
Proceeding of the 6th international conference on Mobile systems, applications, and services, MobiSys ‘08. ACM. 
doi:10.1145/1378600.1378627
Kim, C. S., Oh, E. H., Yang, K. H., & Kim, J. K. (2010). The appealing characteristics of download type mobile games. 
Service Business, 4(3-4), 253–269. doi:10.1007/s11628-009-0088-0
Kim, C., Tao, W., Shin, N., & Kim, K. S. (2010). An empirical study of customers’ perceptions of security and trust in 
e-payment systems. Electronic Commerce Research and Applications, 9(1), 84–95. doi:10.1016/j.elerap.2009.04.014
Kim, H. W., Chan, H. C., & Gupta, S. (2007). Value-based adoption of mobile internet: An empirical investigation. 
Decision Support Systems, 43(1), 111–126. doi:10.1016/j.dss.2005.05.009
Kim, M. J., Chung, N., & Lee, C. K. (2011). The effect of perceived trust on electronic commerce: Shopping online for 
tourism products and services in South Korea. Tourism Management, 32(2), 256–265. doi:10.1016/j.tourman.2010.01.011
Kim, M., & Qu, H. (2013). Travelers’ Behavioral Intention toward Hotel Self-Service Kiosks Usage. International 
Journal of Contemporary Hospitality Management, 26(2), 5–5.
Kim, S., Pakzad, S., Culler, D., Demmel, J., Fenves, G., Glaser, S., & Turon, M. (2007). Health monitoring of civil in-
frastructures using wireless sensor networks.IPSN ‘07: Proceedings of the 6th international conference on Information 
processing in sensor networks (pp. 254-263). New York, NY: ACM. doi:10.1145/1236360.1236395
King, N., & Horrocks, C. (2010). Interviews in qualitative research. Sage (Atlanta, Ga.).
Kirakowski, J., & Cierlik, B. (1998). Measuring the Usability of Web Sites. Proceedings of the Human Factors and 
Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting, 42(4), 424-428. Retrieved from http://pro.sagepub.com/content/42/4/424
Kirakowski, J. (1996). The software usability measurement inventory: Background and usage. In W. Jordan, B. Thomas, 
& A. Weerdmeester (Eds.), Usability measurement in industry. London: Taylor and Francis.
Kirakowski, J. (2000). Questionnaires in usability engineering. Cork, Ireland: Human Factors Research Group.
Kirakowski, J. (2003, January). Taking the measure of user-centred design. Cutter IT Journal, 16, 21–27.
Kirakowski, J., & Corbett, M. (1994). SUMI: The Software Usability Measurement Inventory. British Journal of Edu-
cational Technology, 24(3), 210–212. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8535.1993.tb00076.x
Kitchenham, B., Pearl Brereton, O., Budgen, D., Turner, M., Bailey, J., & Linkman, S. (2009). Systematic literature 
reviews in software engineering–A systematic literature review. Information and Software Technology, 51(1), 7–15. 
doi:10.1016/j.infsof.2008.09.009
Klement, S. (2011). Sicherheitsaspekte der Google Android Platform. (Master’s thesis). Universität Bremen.
327

Compilation of References
Kline, R. B. (2005). Principles and Practice of Structural Equation Modeling (2nd ed.). New York: The Guilford Press.
Knippers, R. (2009). Coordinate systems. Retrieved from http://kartoweb.itc.nl/geometrics/coordinate systems/coordsys.
html
Ko, E., Kim, E. Y., & Lee, E. K. (2009). Modeling consumer adoption of mobile shopping for fashion products in Korea. 
Psychology and Marketing, 26(7), 669–687. doi:10.1002/mar.20294
Kolsaker, A., & Payne, C. (2002). Engendering trust in e-commerce: A study of gender-based concerns. Marketing 
Intelligence & Planning, 20(4), 206–214. doi:10.1108/02634500210431595
Kong, J., Zerfos, P., Luo, H., Lu, S., & Zhang, L. (2001). Providing robust and Ubiquitous Security support for Mobile 
Ad Hoc Networks. In Proceedings of the 9th International conference on Network Protocols (ICNP).
Konradt, U., Wandke, H., Balazs, B., & Christophersen, T. (2003). Usability in online shops: scale construction, vali-
dation and the influence on the buyers’ intention and decision. Behaviour & Information Technology, 22(3), 165-174.
Kortum, P., & Acemyan, C. (2013). How Low Can You Go? Is the System Usability Scale Range Restricted? Journal 
of Usability Studies, 9(1), 14–24.
Kourouthanassis, P. E., & Georgiadis, C. K. (2014). Analysing m-commerce research: technology, applications and 
research themes. International Journal of Mobile Computing, 1-11.
Kumar, A. & Mukherjee, A. (2013). Shop while you talk: Determinants of purchase intentions through a mobile device. 
IJMM, 8(1), 23-37.
Kuniavsky, M. (2003). Observing the User Experience: A Practitioner’s Guide to User Research (Morgan Kaufmann 
Series in Interactive Technologies). San Francisco, CA: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc.
Kuo, Y. F., Wu, C. M., & Deng, W. J. (2009). The relationships among service quality, perceived value, customer sat-
isfaction, and post-purchase intention in mobile value-added services. Computers in Human Behavior, 25(4), 887–896. 
doi:10.1016/j.chb.2009.03.003
Kwong, S. W., & Park, J. (2008). Digital Music Services: Consumer Intention and Adoption. Service Industries Journal, 
28(10), 1463–1481. doi:10.1080/02642060802250278
Lackner, J. M., Jaccard, J., & Blanchard, E. B. (2005). Testing the sequential model of pain processing in irritable bowel 
syndrome: A structural equation modeling analysis. European Journal of Pain (London, England), 9(2), 207–218. 
doi:10.1016/j.ejpain.2004.06.002 PMID:15737813
Lai, I. K. (2013). Traveler Acceptance of an App-Based Mobile Tour Guide. Journal of Hospitality & Tourism Research 
(Washington, D.C.).
Lan, Y. F., Tsai, P. W., Yang, S. H., & Hung, C. L. (2012). Comparing The Social Knowledge Construction Behavioral 
Patterns Of Problem-Based Online Asynchronous Discussion In E/M-Learning Environments. Computers & Education, 
59(4), 1122–1135. doi:10.1016/j.compedu.2012.05.004
Lapcevic, B. (2013). Three common mobile app performance problems — and how to identify them. Academic Press.
Law, E., Roto, V., Vermeeren, A. P., Kort, J., & Hassenzahl, M. (2008). Towards a Shared Definition of User Experience. 
CHI ‘08 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems, (pp. 2395-2398). doi:10.1145/1358628.1358693
Lee, Y. E., & Benbasat, I. (2003). Interface Design for Mobile Commerce. Communications of the ACM, 46(12), 48–52. 
doi:10.1145/953460.953487
328

Compilation of References
Leitner, M., Wolkerstorfer, P., Sefelin, R., & Tscheligi, M. (2008). Mobile multimedia: identifying user values using the 
means-end theory.Proceedings of the 10th international conference on Human computer interaction with mobile devices 
and services, (pp. 167-175). doi:10.1145/1409240.1409259
Leong, L. Y., Ooi, K. B., Chong, A. Y. L., & Lin, B. (2011). Influence of individual characteristics, perceived usefulness 
and ease of use on mobile entertainment adoption. International Journal of Mobile Communications, 9(4), 359–382. 
doi:10.1504/IJMC.2011.041141
Lerner, E. B., Jehle, D. V., Janicke, D. M., & Moscati, R. M. (2000). Medical communication: Do our patients understand? 
The American Journal of Emergency Medicine, 18(7), 764–766. doi:10.1053/ajem.2000.18040 PubMed doi:10.1053/
ajem.2000.18040 PMID:11103725
Lester, P. (2013). Visual communication: Images with messages. Cenage Learning. Cengage Learning.
Lewis, J. (1990). Sychometric Evaluation of a Post-study System Usability Questionnaire: The PSSUQ (Tech. Report 
54.535). Boca Raton, FL: International Business Machines Corp.
Lewis, J., & Sauro, J. (2009). The factor structure of the system usability scale. Proceedings of the International Confer-
ence (HCII 2009) (pp. 94-103). San Diego CA: Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
Lewis, J. (1992). Psychometric evaluation of the Post-Study system usability questionnaire: The PSSUQ.Proceedings of 
the Human Factors Society 36th Annual Meeting (pp. 1259–1263). Santa Monica, CA: Human Factors Society.
Lewis, J. (2002). Psychometric Evaluation of the PSSUQ Using Data from Five Years of. International Journal of 
Human-Computer Interaction, 14(3), 463–488. doi:10.1207/S15327590IJHC143&4_11
Lewis, M. P., Simons, G. F., & Fennig, C. D. (2009). Ethnologue: Languages of the World (Vol. 9). Dallas, TX: SIL 
International.
Liang, T. P., & Yeh, Y. H. (2011). Effect of use contexts on the continuous use of mobile services: The case of mobile 
games. Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, 15(2), 187–196. doi:10.1007/s00779-010-0300-1
Liaw, S. S., Hatala, M., & Huang, H. M. (2010). Investigating Acceptance Toward Mobile Learning To Assist Individual 
Knowledge Management: Based On Activity Theory Approach. Computers & Education, 54(2), 446–454. doi:10.1016/j.
compedu.2009.08.029
Lim, D., Lee, H., Yoo, J., & Zo, H. (2013). Free to Paid: Purchase and Dropout Behavior of Mobile Application Users. 
Academic Press.
Lim, T., Sim, S., & Mansor, M. (2009). RFID based attendance system. Paper presented at the Industrial Electronics & 
Applications, 2009. ISIEA 2009. IEEE Symposium on. doi:10.1109/ISIEA.2009.5356360
Lin, C.-C. (2013). Exploring the relationship between technology acceptance model and usability test. Information 
Technology Management, 14(3), 243–255. doi:10.1007/s10799-013-0162-0
Lindorfer, M. (2012). Andrubis: A tool for analyzing unknown android applications. Retrieved from http://blog.iseclab.
org/2012/06/04/andrubis-a-tool-for-analyzing-unknown-android-applications
Lin, H., Choong, Y.-Y., & Salvendy, G. (1997). A proposed index of usability: A method for comparing the relative usability 
of different software systems. Behaviour & Information Technology, 16(4-5), 267–278. doi:10.1080/014492997119833
Liu, T.-K., Moskowitz, P. A., Greenwood, M. C., Lieberman, L. I., & Wood, D. A. (2002, February 19). System for 
personalized mobile navigation information. Google Patents.
329

Compilation of References
Liu, Q., Sung, A. H., Ribeiro, B., Wei, M., Chen, Z., & Xu, J. (2008). Image complexity and feature mining for steganaly-
sis of least significant bit matching steganography. Information Sciences, 178(1), 21–36. doi:10.1016/j.ins.2007.08.007
Liu, Y., & Li, H. (2011). Exploring the impact of use context on mobile hedonic services adoption: An empirical study 
on mobile gaming in China. Computers in Human Behavior, 27(2), 890–898. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2010.11.014
Li, Y. M., & Yeh, Y. S. (2010). Increasing trust in mobile commerce through design aesthetics. Computers in Human 
Behavior, 26(4), 673–684. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2010.01.004
Loebbecke, C., Huyskens, C., & Jarvenpaa, S. L. (2008, July). Adoption of Mobile TV Services Among Early Users: 
Convergence of Familiar Technologies and Emergence of Technology Induced Paradoxes. In Mobile Business, 2008. 
ICMB’08. 7th International Conference on (pp. 231-240). IEEE.
Logan, R. J. (1994). Usability in Practice (M. E. Wiklund, Ed.). San Diego, CA: Academic Press Professional, Inc.. 
Retrieved from http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=180981.180984
Lubis, M. A., Lampoh, A. A., & Yunus, , M., Shahar, S. N., Ishak, N. M., & Muhamad, T. A. (2011). The Use of ICT 
in Teaching Islamic Subjects in Brunei Darussalam. International Journal of Education and Information Technologies, 
5(1), 79–87.
Lucey, T. (2004). Management Information Systems. Cengage Learning EMEA.
Lu, H. P., & Su, P. Y. J. (2009). Factors affecting purchase intention on mobile shopping web sites. Internet Research, 
19(4), 442–458. doi:10.1108/10662240910981399
Lu, Y., Yang, S., Chau, P. Y., & Cao, Y. (2011). Dynamics between the trust transfer process and intention to use mo-
bile payment services: A cross-environment perspective. Information & Management, 48(8), 393–403. doi:10.1016/j.
im.2011.09.006
Lynch, K. (1960). The image of the city (Vol. 11). MIT Press.
Lynch, K. (1960). The Image of the City. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Macleod, M. (1994). Usability: Practical methods for testing and Improvement. Proceedings of the Norwegian Computer 
Society Software 94 Conference. Sandvika, Norway: Crown.
MacLeod, M., Bowden, R., Bevan, N., & Curson, I. (1997). The MUSiC performance measurement method. Behaviour 
& Information Technology, 16(4-5), 279–293. doi:10.1080/014492997119842
Mainwaring, A., Culler, D., Polastre, J., Szewczyk, R., & Anderson, J. (2002, #sep# ~28). Wireless sensor networks for 
habitat monitoring.Proceedings of the First {ACM} International Workshop on Wireless Sensor Networks and Applica-
tions ({WSNA}-02) (pp. 88-97). New York: ACM Press. doi:10.1145/570738.570751
Mantoro, T. (2006). Distributed Support for Intelligent Environments. The Australian National University.
Mäntymäki, M., & Salo, J. (2010). Trust, social presence and customer loyalty in social virtual worlds. Academic Press.
Marban, O., Mariscal, G., & Segovia, J. (2009). A Data Mining & Knowledge Discovery Process Model. Data Mining 
and Knowledge Discovery in Real Life Applications. IN-TECH, 2009, 8.
Marchick, A. (2014). 5 Ways to Increase Revenue and Engagement with Mobile Apps. Retrieved from: http://blog.marketo.
com/2014/07/5-ways-to-increase-revenue-and-engagement-with-mobile-apps.html
Maroti, M., Simon, G., Ledeczi, A., & Sztipanovits, J. (2004). Shooter Localization in Urban Terrain. IEEE Computer, 
37(8), 60–61. doi:10.1109/MC.2004.104
330

Compilation of References
Martin, F., & Ertzberger, J. (2013). Here And Now Mobile Learning: An Experimental Study On The Use Of Mobile 
Technology. Computers & Education, 68, 76–85. doi:10.1016/j.compedu.2013.04.021
Mattam, M., Karumuri, S. R. M., & Meda, S. R. (2012). Architecture for Automated Student Attendance. Paper presented 
at the T4E. doi:10.1109/T4E.2012.39
Matthews, R. A., Bulger, C. A., & Barnes-Farrell, J. L. (2010). Work social supports, role stressors, and work-family 
conflict: The moderating effect of age. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 76(1), 78–90. doi:10.1016/j.jvb.2009.06.011
Mayer, R. C., Davis, J. H., & Schoorman, F. D. (1995). An integrative model of organizational trust. Academy of Man-
agement Review, 20(3), 709–734.
Mayhew, D. (1999). The Usability Engineering Lifecycle: A Practitioner’s Handbook for User Interface Design. San 
Francisco, CA: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc. doi:10.1145/632716.632805
McIntyre, D. (2010, January 13). Apple App Store Has Lost $450 Million To Piracy. Retrieved August 28, 2014, from 
http://247wallst.com/apps-software/2010/01/13/apple-app-store-has-lost-450-million-to-piracy/
McKinsey. (2006). The ‘moment of truth’ in customer service. Retrieved from http://www.mckinsey.com/insights/orga-
nization/the_moment_of_truth_in_customer_service
McKnight, C., Dillon, A., & Richardson, J. (1990). A comparison of linear and hypertext formats in information retrieval. 
In R. McAleese & C. Green (Eds.), HYPERTEXT: State of the Art (pp. 10–19). Oxford: Intellect.
MCMC. (2005). Hand Phone Users Survey. Cyberjaya, Selangor: Malaysian Communications and Multimedia Commission.
Meeting of Cultural Ministers - National Arts and Health Framework. (2014). Council of Australian Governments Stand-
ing Council on Health (SCoH) including the Australian Health Workforce Ministerial Council (AHWMC). Retrieved 
from http://www.ahmac.gov.au/cms_documents/National Arts and Health Framework.pdf
Meurer, S., & Wismuller, R., (2012). An Infrastructure for Permission-Based Filtering of Android Apps. Academic Press.
Meyer, S., Freudiger, J., & Hubaux, J., (2011). Misbehavior in Mobile Application Markets: Security and Cooperation 
in Wireless Networks Mini-project. EPFL.
Microsoft Patterns & Practices. (2015, August 28). Using Isolated Storage on the Phone. Retrieved from http://msdn.
microsoft.com/en-us/library/hh821020.aspx
Mihajlov, M., & Jerman-Blažič, B. (2011). On designing usable and secure recognition-based graphical authentication 
mechanisms. Interacting with Computers, 23(6), 582–593. doi:10.1016/j.intcom.2011.09.001
Miraz, G. M., Ruiz, I. L., & Gómez-Nieto, M. A. (2009a). How NFC can be used for the compliance of European higher 
education area guidelines in European universities. In First International Workshop on Near Field Communication (NFC 
‘09). doi:10.1109/NFC.2009.9
Miraz, G. M., Ruiz, I. L., & Gómez-Nieto, M. A. (2009b). University of things: Applications of near field communica-
tion technology in university environments. The Journal of E-working, 3(1), 52–64.
Mishra, N. R., & Chavhan, R. K. (2012). Effectiveness of Mobile Learning on Awareness About Learning Disabil-
ity Among Student Teachers. Technology Enhanced Education (ICTEE), 2012 IEEE International Conference on. 
Doi:10.1109/ICTEE.2012.6208633
Mitrović, S., Čičević, S., Pavlović, N., Janković, S., Aćimović, S., & Milinković, S. (2012). Evaluation of Tablet PC Usage 
for some Railway Infrastructure Inspection Tasks. In Proceedings of Papers: 20th International Symposuim EURO-Zel 
2012 (pp. 180–087). Žilina, Slovakia: Tribun EU.
331

Compilation of References
Mobile Ad Hoc Networks. (2009). From Wireless LANS to 4G Networks. Tata McGraw Hill Education Private Limited.
Mobile Encryption Software Review Article. (2015, August 28). Retrieved from http://mobile-encryption-software-review.
toptenreviews.com/learning-center.html/download.pdf
Mobile Phone App Store Statistics. (2014). Retrieved March 13, 2014, from http://www.statisticbrain.com/mobile-phone-
app-store-statistics/
mobiThingking. (2013). Retrieved from http://mobithinking.com/mobile-marketing-tools/latest-mobile-stats/e
Mohamed Basheer, K. P., & Raghu, C. V. (2012). Fingerprint attendance system for classroom needs. Paper presented 
at the Annual IEEE India Conference, India.
Mohamed, B. (2005). Cultural Tourism Promotion and Policy in Malaysia. Paper presented at Korea, China, Japan, 
Philippines, Spain, Turkey, India and USA Joint World Cultural Tourism Conference.
Mohelska, H., & Tomaskova, H. (2010). The use of mobile application in the business environment in the Czech Re-
public. In Applied economics, business and development (AEBD): Proceedings of the world multiconference. Kantaoui, 
Sousse: World scientific and engineering academy and society.
Mollerup, P. (2009). Wayshowing in hospital. Australasian Medical Journal, 1(10), 112–114. doi:10.4066/AMJ.2009.85
Momtaz, Y. A., Hamid, T. A., Ibrahim, R., Yahaya, N., & Abdullah, S. S. (2012). Moderating effect of Islamic religiosity 
on the relationship between chronic medical conditions and psychological well-being among elderly Malays. Psychoge-
riatrcis, 12(1), 43–53. doi:10.1111/j.1479-8301.2011.00381.x PMID:22416828
Morales, J. A., Main, M., Luo, W., Xu, S., & Sandhu, R. (2011). Building malware infection trees. 6th International 
Conference on Malicious and Unwanted Software.
Moser, C., Fuchsberger, V., Neureiter, K., Sellner, W., & Tscheligi, M. (2011). Elderly’s Social Presence Supported by 
ICT’s. In IEEE International Conference on Privacy, Security, Risk, and Trust (pp. 738–741). IEEE Computing Society.
Mossakowski, T., & Moratz, R. (2012). Qualitative reasoning about relative direction of oriented points. Artificial Intel-
ligence, 180–181(0), 34–45. doi:10.1016/j.artint.2011.10.003
Mukerjee, A., & Joe, G. (1990). A qualitative model for space. In The American Association for Artificial Intelligence 
(AAAI)Proceedings of the Eighth National Conference on Artificial Intelligence (pp. 721–727).
myGovernment - The Government of Malaysia’s Official Portal. (n.d.). Malaysian Administrative Modernisation and 
Management Planning Unit (MAMPU). Retrieved July 31, 2014, from https://www.malaysia.gov.my/en/about-malaysi
a?subCatId=3208956&type=2&categoryId=3208945
Nal Research Corporation. (n.d.). 9601-D-N Satellite SBD Modem. Author.
Near Field Communication. (n.d.). Retrieved October 2014, 2014, from https://developer.android.com/guide/topics/
connectivity/nfc/index.html
Neefs, J., Schrooyen, F., Doggen, J., & Renckens, K. (2010). Paper ticketing vs. electronic ticketing based on off-line 
system ‘Tapango’. In Second International Workshop on Near Field Communication (NFC). doi:10.1109/NFC.2010.24
Neustaedter, C., Brush, A. B., & Greenberg, S. (2007). A Digital Family in the Home: Lessons from Field Trials of 
LINC. Proceedings Graphic Interface, 199 - 206.
Newman, J., Ingram, D., & Hopper, A. (2001). Augmented reality in a wide area sentient environment. In Augmented Real-
ity, 2001. Proceedings. IEEE and ACM International Symposium on (pp. 77–86). IEEE. doi:10.1109/ISAR.2001.970517
332

Compilation of References
Newman‐Ford, L., Fitzgibbon, K., Lloyd, S., & Thomas, S. (2008). A large‐scale investigation into the relationship 
between attendance and attainment: A study using an innovative, electronic attendance monitoring system. Studies in 
Higher Education, 33(6), 699–717. doi:10.1080/03075070802457066
NFC in Action. (n.d.). Retrieved October 25, 2014, from http://nfc-forum.org/what-is-nfc/nfc-in-action/
NFC Tag Types. (2011). Retrieved October 23, 2014, from http://www.nfc.cc/technology/nfc-tag-types/
NFC Tags. (n.d.). Retrieved October 24, 2014, from http://www.nevakarten.de/nfc_tags/
Ngai, E. W., Xiu, L., & Chau, D. C. (2009). Application of data mining techniques in customer relationship management: A 
literature review and classification. Expert Systems with Applications, 36(2), 2592–2602. doi:10.1016/j.eswa.2008.02.021
Nicholson, B., & Sahay, S. (2001). Some political and cultural issues in the globalisation of software development: Case 
experience from Britain and India. Information and Organization, 11(1), 25–43. doi:10.1016/S0959-8022(00)00008-4
Nicolaou, A. I., Ibrahim, M., & Van Heck, E. (2013). Information quality, trust, and risk perceptions in electronic data 
exchanges. Decision Support Systems, 54(2), 986–996. doi:10.1016/j.dss.2012.10.024
Nielsen, J. (2003). Usability 101: Introduction to usability. Academic Press.
Nielsen, J. (2012, April 10). Mobile Site vs. Full Site. Retrieved March 2, 2014, from Nielsen Norman Group: http://
www.nngroup.com/articles/mobile-site-vs-full-site/
Nielsen, J. (1993). Iterative User Interface Design. IEEE Computer, 26(11), 32–41. doi:10.1109/2.241424
Nielsen, J. (1994). Usability engineering. Morgan Kaufmann Pub.
Nielsen, J., & Levy, J. (1994). Measuring usability: Preference vs. performance. Communications of the ACM, 37(4), 
66–75. doi:10.1145/175276.175282
Nielsen, J., & Norman, D. (2012). Mobile Usability. New Riders Press.
Ninomiya, H., Ito, E., Flanagan, B., & Hirokawa, S. (2012). Bridging SNS ID and user using NFC and SNS: Design of 
NFC and SNS based event attendance management system. Paper presented at the Anti-Counterfeiting, Security and 
Identification (ASID), 2012 International Conference on. doi:10.1109/ICASID.2012.6325346
Noordin, M. F. (2009). ICT and Islam. IIUM Press.
Norman, L., Shneiderman, B., & Harper, B. (2003). QUIS: The Questionnaire for User. University of Maryland Human 
Computer Interaction.
Number of Android Apps. (n.d.). Retrieved May 30, 2014, from http://www.appbrain.com/stats/number-of-android-apps
Nunnally, J. C., & Bernstein, I. H. (1994). Psychometric Theory. McGraw-Hill Inc.
O’Connor, T., & Whitall, D. (2007). Linking hypoxia to shrimp catch in the northern Gulf of Mexico. Marine Pollution 
Bulletin, 54(4), 460–463. doi:10.1016/j.marpolbul.2007.01.017 PMID:17360006
Oberheide, J., & Jahanian, F. (2010). When mobile is harder than fixed (and vice versa): demystifying security chal-
lenges in mobile environments. In Proceedings of the Eleventh Workshop on Mobile Computing Systems & Applications. 
doi:10.1145/1734583.1734595
Oliver, R. C., Smettem, K., Kranz, M., & Mayer, K. (2005). A Reactive Soil Moisture Sensor Network: Design and Field 
Evaluation. International Journal of Distributed Sensor Networks, 1, 149-162.
333

Compilation of References
Olmsted-Hawala, E., Holland, T., & Quach, V. (2014). Eye Tracking in User Experience Design. Elsevier; doi:10.1016/
B978-0-12-408138-3.00003-0 doi:10.1016/B978-0-12-408138-3.00003-0
Olowolayemo, A., Md Tap, A. O., & Mantoro, T. (2014). Linguistic Approximations of Distances for Indoor Location 
Authority. In Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on ICT4M. Sarawak. doi:10.1109/ICT4M.2014.7020644
Opperman, C. A., & Hancke, G. P. (2011). Biometric recognition using NFC-enabled smartphones. Retrieved May 29, 
2014, from http://www.satnac.org.za/proceedings/2011/papers/Work_In_Progress/Network_Services/223.pdf
Ortiz, C. E. (2008). An Introduction to Near-Field Communication and the Contactless Communication API. Retrieved 
October 24, 2014, from http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/articles/javame/nfc-140183.html
Özdenizci, B., Aydin, M., Coskun, V., & Ok, K. (2010). NFC research framework: A literature review and future research 
directions. In Proceedings of the 14th International Business Information Management Association (IBIMA) Conference.
Pak, R., Rogers, W., & Fisk, A. (2006). Spatial ability subfactors and their influences on a computer-based infor-
mation search task. Human Factors: The Journal of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society, 48(1), 154–165. 
doi:10.1518/001872006776412180 PMID:16696265
Papadimitratos, P., & Haas, Z. (2002). Secure routing for mobile ad hoc networks(SRP).SCS Communication Networks 
and Distributed Systems Modeling and Simulation Conference.
Park, J., Han, S. H., Kim, H. K., Cho, Y., & Park, W. (2013). Developing Elements of User Experience for Mobile Phones 
and Services: Survey, Interview, and Observation Approaches. Human Factors and Ergonomics in Manufacturing & 
Service Industries, 23(4), 279-293. 10.1002/hfm.20316
Park, E., Baek, S., Ohm, J., & Chang, H. J. (2013). Determinants of player acceptance of mobile social network games: 
An application of extended technology acceptance model. Telematics and Informatics, 31(1), 3–15. doi:10.1016/j.
tele.2013.07.001
Parker-Pope, T. (2010, June 6). An ugly toll of technology: Impatience and forgetfulness. The New York Times. Retrieved 
from http://www.nytimes.com/2010/06/07/technology/07brainside.html?_r=0
Park, H. J., & Kim, S. H. (2012). A Bayesian network approach to examining key success factors of mobile games. 
Journal of Business Research.
Patela, S. B., & Jainb, N. K. (2013). Near Field Communication (NFC) based Mobile Phone Attendance System for 
Employees. Paper presented at the International Journal of Engineering Research and Technology.
Pavlou, P. A., & Fygenson, M. (2006). Understanding and predicting electronic commerce adoption: An extension of 
the theory of planned behavior. Management Information Systems Quarterly, 115–143.
Pearce, A., & Pattiaratchi, C. (1997). Applications of satellite remote sensing to the marine enviornment in Western 
Australia. Journal of the Royal Society of Western Australia, 80, 1–14.
Pekkala, S. (2012). Usability evaluation of design solutions for tablet magazines. MSc Thesis.
Peng, F., Wu, C. H., & Liao, H. Y. (2014, January). Adoption Intention of Mobile Real Time Location-Based Advertis-
ing Service for 3G Cell Phone Users in Taiwan. In The 8th International Conference on Knowledge Management in 
Organizations (pp. 97-108). Springer Netherlands.
Penprase, B. E. (2011). Stars That Bind: Civilization, Calendars, and the Sky. The Power of Stars, 133 - 168.
Pereira, O. R. E., & Rodrigues, J. J. P. C. (2013). Survey and Analysis of Current Mobile Learning Applications. ACM 
Computing Surveys, 46(2), 1–36. doi:10.1145/2543581.2543594
334

Compilation of References
Perkins, C. E., Royer, E., & Das, S. R. (2000). Ad hoc on demand distance vector (AODV) routing. Internet Draft.
Petrova, K., & Qu, H. (2007, July). Playing mobile games: Consumer perceptions. In Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. e-Business 
(ICE-B 2007). INSTICC Press.
Pew Research Center. (2015). U.S. smartphone use in 2015. Retrieved from http://www.pewinternet.org/2015/04/01/
us-smartphone-use-in-2015/
Peyrot, M. (1996). Causal analysis: Theory and application. Journal of Pediatric Psychology, 21(1), 3–24. doi:10.1093/
jpepsy/21.1.3 PMID:8820070
Phiriyapokanon, T. (2011). Is a big button interface enough for elderly users? Towards user interface guidelines for 
elderly users. Master Thesis.
Pingel, T., & Clarke, K. (2005). Assessing the usability of a wearable computer system for outdoor pedestrian naviga-
tion. AutoCarto 2005.
Plaza, B., & Pérez Plaza, M. (2012). Las tabletas en la educación: implica un cambio en la metodología la introducción 
de un nuevo dispositivo. En Revista Didáctica, Innovación y Multimedia.
Plowman, L., Stephen, C., & McPake, J. (2010). Supporting young children’s learning with technology at home and in 
preschool. Research Papers in Education, 25(1), 93–113. doi:10.1080/02671520802584061
Portio Research. (2013). What apps are people using? Retrieved from http://www.portioresearch.com/en/blog/what-
apps-are-people-using.aspx
Prata, W., de Moraes, A., & Quaresma, M. (2012). User’s demography and expectation regarding search, purchase and 
evaluation in mobile application store. Work (Reading, Mass.), 41, 1124–1131. PMID:22316870
Priya, S., & Inman, D. J. (2009). Energy Harvesting Wireless Sensors. Springer.
Qureshi, I., Fang, Y., Ramsey, E., McCole, P., Ibbotson, P., & Compeau, D. (2009). Understanding online customer 
repurchasing intention and the mediating role of trust–an empirical investigation in two developed countries. European 
Journal of Information Systems, 18(3), 205–222. doi:10.1057/ejis.2009.15
Raghavan, R. (1977). Ethno-Racial Marginality in West Malaysia: The Case of The Peranakan Hindu Meleka or Malaccan 
Chitty Community. Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde, 133(4), 438–458. doi:10.1163/22134379-90002605
Raita, E., & Oulasvirta, A. (2011). Too good to be bad: Favorable product expectations boost subjective usability ratings. 
Interacting with Computers, 23(4), 363–371. doi:10.1016/j.intcom.2011.04.002
Ramanathan, N., Schoellhammer, T., Estrin, D., Hansen, M., Harmon, T., Kohler, E., & Srivastava, M. (2006, November). 
The Final Frontier: Embedding Networked Sensors in the Soil. UCLA.
Rapley, C. E. (2013). Accessibility and Development: environmental accessibility and its implications for inclusive, 
sustainable and equitable development for all. Department of Economic and Social Affairs, United Nations.
Rashid, S., Soo, S., Sivaji, A., Naeni, H. S., & Bahri, S. (2013). Preliminary Usability Testing with Eye Tracking and 
FCAT Analysis on Occupational Safety and Health Websites. Procedia: Social and Behavioral Sciences, 97, 737–744. 
doi:10.1016/j.sbspro.2013.10.295 doi:10.1016/j.sbspro.2013.10.295
Raspberry P. I. Foundation. (2015). Raspberry PI 2 Model B. Retrieved March 14, 2015, from http://www.raspberrypi.
org/products/raspberry-pi-2-model-b/
335

Compilation of References
Rastogi, V., Chen, Y., & Enck, W. (2013). AppsPlayground: Automatic Security Analysis of Smartphone Applications. 
Proceedings of the third ACM conference. Retrieved from dl.acm.org
Rastogi, V., Chen, Y., & Enck, W. (2013). Evaluating Android Anti-malware against Transformation Attacks. Technical 
Report NU-EECS-13-01.
Rathnayaka,, M.R.M.S.B., & Jayasinghe,, I.D.S., EnitJayanth, Swarnajith, S.I., Manamendra, M.A.S.C., & Wimalaratne, 
G. (2013). Mobile Based Electricity Billing System (MoBEBIS). International Journal of Scientific and Research 
Publications, 3(4), 1–5.
Ravi, N., Stern, P., Desai, N., & Iftode, L. (2004). Accessing ubiquitous services using smart phones. Retrieved May 29, 
2014, from http://www.cs.rutgers.edu/~iftode/smph04.pdf
Raza, A. M. (2011). Ashura Day (10th Muharram). Retrieved 12 31, 2012, from Islamic Centre: http://www.islamic-
centre.org/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=133:ashura-day-10th-muharram&catid=19:islamic-
calendar&Itemid=42
Razak, F. H. A., Razak, N. A., & Ahmad, N. A. (2013, September). How Simple is Simple: Our Experience with Older 
Adult Users. Proceedings of the APCHI, 2013, 24–27.
Razak, F. H. A., Sulo, R., & Adnan, W. A. W. (2012). Mental Model of Older Adults for Reminder System. In Proceed-
ings of The 10th Asia Pacific Computer Human Interaction 2012. ACM.
Reimer, K. S., Dueck, A. C., Adelchanow, L. V., & Muto, J. D. (2009). Developing Spiritual Identity: Retrospective 
Accounts From Muslim,Jewish, and Christian Exemplars. International Handbook of Education for Spirituality, Care 
and Wellbeing, 3, 507 - 523.
Reitmayr, G., & Schmalstieg, D. (2004). Collaborative augmented reality for outdoor navigation and information brows-
ing. Academic Press.
Renaud, K., & Biljon, J. V. (2010). Worth-centred mobile phone design for older users. University Access Information 
Society.
Richins, M.L., & Root-Shaffer, T. (1988). The Role of Involvement and Opinion Leadership in Consumer. Academic Press.
Robbins, S. S., & Stylianou, A. C. (2003). Global corporate web sites: An empirical investigation of content and design. 
Information & Management, 40(3), 205–212. doi:10.1016/S0378-7206(02)00002-2
Robertson, D., & Cipolla, R. (2004). An Image-Based System for Urban Navigation. Academic Press.
Rogers, Y., Sharp, H., & Preece, J. (2011). Interaction Design: Beyond Human Computer Interaction. Wiley.
Rooke, C. N., Koskela, L. J., & Tzortzopoulos, P. (2010). Achieving a lean wayfinding system in complex hospital 
environments: Design and through-life management. In Proceedings of the 18th Annual Conference of the International 
Group for Lean Construction (pp. 233–242). National Building Research Institute, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology.
Rooke, C. N., Tzortzopoulos, P., Koskela, L. J., & Rooke, J. A. (2009). Wayfinding: embedding knowledge in hospital 
environments. In HaCIRIC (pp. 158–167). London, UK: Imperial College Business School.
Rothermel, K., & Leonhardi, A. (2002). Maintaining world models for context-aware applications. In International 
conference on advances in communication and control (pp. 235–245). Academic Press.
Roto, V. (2006). Web Browsing on Mobile Phones: Characteristics of User Experience. Helsinki University of Technol-
ogy. Retrieved from http://books.google.rs/books?id=QuBQMQAACAAJ
336

Compilation of References
Rouru-Kuivala, O. (2009). NFC for children. In T. Tuikka & M. Isomursu (Eds.), Touch the Future with a Smart Touch.
Routing Security in Wireless Ad Hoc Networks. (2002). University of Cincinnati.
Ruling on Taswir . (2013, February 6). Retrieved from http://salaf-us-saalih.com/2013/02/06/ruling-on-taswir-idolspainting-
drawingsculpturephotography-of-any-being-with-a-soul-shaikh-ibn-baaz-rahimahullaah/
Ryu, Y., & Smith-Jackson, T. L. (2006). Reliability and Validity of the Mobile Phone Usability Questionnaire (MPUQ). 
Journal of Usability Studies, 2(1), 39–53.
Saltzer, J., & Schroeder, M. (1975). The protection of information in computer systems. Proceedings of the IEEE, 63(9), 
1278–1308. doi:10.1109/PROC.1975.9939
Sandberg, J., Maris, M., & Hoogendoorn, P. (2014). The Added Value Of A Gaming Context And Intelligent Adaptation 
For A Mobile Learning Application For Vocabulary Learning. Computers & Education, 76, 119–130. doi:10.1016/j.
compedu.2014.03.006
Sansom, M., & Brooks, E. (2012). WorldHealthDesign-Architecture-Culture-Technology. International Academy of 
Design and Health.
Sanzgiri, K., Dahill, B., Levine, B., Shields, C., & Belding-Royer, E. (2002). A Secure Routing Protocol for Ad Hoc 
Networks. Proc. of IEEE International Conference on Network Protocols (ICNP). doi:10.1109/ICNP.2002.1181388
Sarker, S., & Wells, J. D. (2003). #dec#). Understanding Mobile Handheld Device Use and Adoption. Communications 
of the ACM, 46(12), 35–40. doi:10.1145/953460.953484
Sauro, J. (2011b). Measuring Usability with the System Usability Scale (SUS). Retrieved March 3, 2014, from Measuring 
Usability: http://www.measuringusability.com/sus.php
Sauro, J. (2010). A Practical Guide to Measuring Usability: 72 Answers to the Most Common Questions about Quantify-
ing the Usability of Websites and Software. Denver, CO: Measuring Usability LLC.
Sauro, J. (2011a). A practical guide to the System Usability Scale (SUS): Background, benchmarks & best practices. 
Denver, CO: Measuring Usability LLC.
Sauro, J., & Kindlund, E. (2005). A method to standardize usability metrics into a single score.Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, (pp. 401-409). doi:10.1145/1054972.1055028
Sauro, J., & Lewis, J. (2012). Quantifying the user experience: Practical statistics for user research. Elsevier.
Sayid, O., Echchabi, A., & Aziz, H. A. (2012). Investigating Mobile Money Acceptance in Somalia: An Empirical Study. 
Pak. J. Commer. Soc. Sci, 6(2), 269–281.
Schierz, P. G., Schilke, O., & Wirtz, B. W. (2010). Understanding consumer acceptance of mobile payment services: An 
empirical analysis. Electronic Commerce Research and Applications, 9(3), 209–216. doi:10.1016/j.elerap.2009.07.005
Schmidt, A. U. (2012). MOBISEC 2012, Institute for Computer Sciences. Social Informatics and Telecommunications 
Engineering, LNICST, 107, 1–11.
Schmidt, A., Beigl, M., & Gellersen, H.-W. (1999). There is more to context than location. Computers & Graphics, 23(6), 
893–901. doi:10.1016/S0097-8493(99)00120-X
Schuba, C. L., & Spafford, E. H. (1994). Countering abuse of name-based authentication. Computer Science Technical 
Reports. Retrieved May 29, 2014, from http://docs.lib.purdue.edu/cstech/1130
337

Compilation of References
Schumacker, R. E., & Lomax, R. G. (2004). A Beginner’s Guide to Structural Equation Modeling (2nd ed.). Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates Inc.
Secure Tracking of Node Encounters in Multi-Hop Wireless Networks. (2003). Swiss Federal Institute of Technology 
Lausanne (EPFL).
Securing Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks. (2007). School of Computer and Communication Sciences, EPFL.
Security Threats in Mobile Ad Hoc Network. (2007). Blekinge Institute of Technology.
Sedek, M., Abdullah, Y., Mahat, J., & Zainal, N. (2012, March). Individual Characteristic In Online Gaming And Mo-
bile Application Use Among Students In Higher Education Institution: A Comfirmatory Factor Analysis. In Prosiding 
Seminar Majlis Dekan IPTA (Vol. 1, No. 1).
See-To, E. W., & Ho, K. K. (2014). Value co-creation and purchase intention in social network sites: The role of elec-
tronic Word-of-Mouth and trust–A theoretical analysis. Computers in Human Behavior, 31, 182–189. doi:10.1016/j.
chb.2013.10.013
Shafer, S. A. N. (2003). Location Authorities for Ubiquitous Computing. In Workshop on Location-Aware Computing, 
Ubicomp’03 (pp. pp. 13–15). Seattle.
Shami, N., Leshed, G., & Klein, D. (2005). Context of Use Evaluation of Peripheral Displays (CUEPD). In M. Costa-
bile, & F. PaternÃ2 (Eds.), Human-Computer Interaction - INTERACT 2005 (Vol. 3585, pp. 579-587). Springer Berlin 
Heidelberg. doi:10.1007/11555261_47
Shang, Y. (2012). Optimal attack strategies in a dynamic botnet defense model. Applied Mathematics and Information 
Sciences, 6, 29–33.
Shankar, V., Urban, G. L., & Sultan, G. (2002). Online trust: A stakeholder perspective, concepts, implications, and 
future directions. The Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 11(3–4), 325–344. doi:10.1016/S0963-8687(02)00022-7
Sharples, M., Taylor, J., & Vavoula, G. (2010). A Theory Of Learning For The Mobile Age. In Medienbildung In Neuen 
Kulturräumen (pp. 87–99). Vs Verlag Für Sozialwissenschaften. doi:10.1007/978-3-531-92133-4_6
Shejul, A. A., & Kulkarni, U. L. (2011). A secure skin tone based steganography using wavelet transform. International 
Journal of Computer Theory and Engineering, 3(1), 16–22. doi:10.7763/IJCTE.2011.V3.277
Sherman, P. (2009). UPA 2009 Salary Survey. User Experience Professionals Association. Retrieved from http://usabili-
typrofessionals.org/usability_resources/surveys/SalarySurveys.html
Sheth, J. N., Newman, B. I., & Gross, B. L. (1991). Why we buy what we buy: A theory of consumption values. Journal 
of Business Research, 22(2), 159–170. doi:10.1016/0148-2963(91)90050-8
Shetty, D. (2013, June 12). Demystifying the Android Malware. Retrieved from http://packetstormsecurity.org/files/
view/104458/demystifying-android.pdf
Shih, Y. Y., & Chen, C. Y. (2013). The study of behavioral intention for mobile commerce: Via integrated model of TAM 
and TTF. Quality & Quantity, 47(2), 1009–1020. doi:10.1007/s11135-011-9579-x
Shin, G.-W., Hong, S.-T., & Lee, Y.-W. (2009). Walk-by meter reading system of digital water meter based on ubiquitous. 
Journal of Institute of Control, Robotics and Systems, 15(7), 688–693. doi:10.5302/J.ICROS.2009.15.7.688
Shoukry, L. H. (n.d.). Child-Centered Design of Educational Mobile Games for Arab Preschoolers. German University 
in Cairo. Retrieved from http://www.academia.edu/download/30640286/small.pdf
338

Compilation of References
Singh, N., & Yadav, R. (2013). Field Testing of Mobile Applications. International Journal of Computers and Applica-
tions, 62(21), 1–7.
Sivaji, A., & Ahmad, W. F. W. (2014). Benefits of Complementing Eye-Tracking Analysis with Think-Aloud Protocol in 
a Multilingual Country with High Power Distance. In Current Trends in Eye Tracking Research (pp. 267–278). Springer. 
doi:10.1007/978-3-319-02868-2_21 doi:10.1007/978-3-319-02868-2_21
Sivaji, A., & Soo, S. (2012). Website user experience (UX) testing tool development using Open Source Software (OSS). 
2012 Southeast Asian Network of Ergonomics Societies Conference (SEANES). doi:10.1109/SEANES.2012.6299576
Sivaji, A., & Soo, S. (2013). Understanding, Enhancing and Automating HCI Work Practices: Malaysian Case Studies. 
Procedia: Social and Behavioral Sciences, 97, 656–665. doi:10.1016/j.sbspro.2013.10.285 doi:10.1016/j.sbspro.2013.10.285
Sivaji, A., Abdollah, N., Soo, S., Chuan, N.-K., Nor, Z. M., Rasidi, S.-H., & Yoong, S.-W. (2014). Measuring Public 
Value UX based on ISO/IEC 25010 Quality Attributes. In 3rd International Conference on User Science and Engineering 
2014 (i-USEr 2014). IEEEXplore. doi:10.1109/IUSER.2014.7002677 doi:10.1109/IUSER.2014.7002677
Sivaji, A., Abdullah, A., & Downe, A. G. (2011). Usability testing methodology: Effectiveness of heuristic evaluation 
in E-government website development. In Proceedings - AMS 2011: Asia Modelling Symposium 2011 - 5th Asia Inter-
national Conference on Mathematical Modelling and Computer Simulation (pp. 68–72). IEEE.
Sivaji, A., Abdullah, M. R., Downe, A. G., & Ahmad, W. F. W. (2013). Hybrid usability methodology: Integrating 
heuristic evaluation with laboratory testing across the software development lifecycle. In Proceedings of the 2013 10th 
International Conference on Information Technology: New Generations, ITNG 2013, (pp. 375–383). IEEE. doi:10.1109/
ITNG.2013.60 doi:10.1109/ITNG.2013.60
Sivaji, A., Downe, A. G., Mazlan, M. F., Soo, S. T., & Abdullah, A. (2011). Importance of incorporating fundamental 
usability with social & trust elements for e-commerce website. In ICBEIA 2011 - 2011 International Conference on 
Business, Engineering and Industrial Applications, (pp. 221–226). Retrieved from http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/
stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=5994248&isnumber=5994212
Sivaji, A., Shopian, S., Nor, Z. M., Chuan, N.-K., & Bahri, S. (2013). Lighting does Matter: Preliminary Assessment on 
Office Workers. Procedia: Social and Behavioral Sciences, 97, 638–647. doi:10.1016/j.sbspro.2013.10.283 doi:10.1016/j.
sbspro.2013.10.283
Smith, T. R., & Park, K. K. (1992). Algebraic approach to spatial reasoning. International Journal of Geographical 
Information Systems, 6(3), 177–192. doi:10.1080/02693799208901904
Sneddon, J. N. (2003). The Indonesian Language: Its History and Role in Modern Society. Sydney: UNSW Press.
Soegaard, M. (2010). Gestalt principles of form perception. Interaction-Design. Org, 8.
Soh, C., Kien, S. S., & Tay-Yap, J. (2000). Enterprise resource planning: cultural fits and misfits: is ERP a universal 
solution? Communications of the ACM, 43(4), 47–51. doi:10.1145/332051.332070
Sood, R., Kaur, M., & Lenka, H. (2103). Design and Development of Automatic Water flow Meter. International Journal 
of Computer Science, Engineering and Applications, 3(3), 49-59.
Soscia, I., Arbore, A., & Hofacker, C. F. (2011). The impact of trial on technology adoption: The case of mobile TV. 
Journal of Research in Interactive Marketing, 5(2/3), 226–238. doi:10.1108/17505931111187820
Stajano, F., & Anderson, R. J. (1999). The resurrecting duckling: Security issues for ad-hoc wireless networks. In 7th 
Security Protocols Workshop.
339

Compilation of References
Stamato, C., & Moraes, A. d. (2012). Mobile Phones and Elderly People: a noisy communication. IOS Press.
Standards Malaysia Recognises MIMOS As The First Malaysian Lab To Receive MS ISO/IEC Accreditation Certificate 
For Software Testing. (2014). BERNAMA. Retrieved August 04, 2014, from http://www.bernama.com/bernama/v7/
newsindex.php?id=1011837
Steffen, R., Preißinger, J., Schӧllermann, T., Müller, A., & Schnabel, I. (2010). Near field communication (NFC) in 
an automotive environment: Use cases, architecture and realization. In Second International Workshop on Near Field 
Communication (NFC). doi:10.1109/NFC.2010.11
Su, A., Yang, S. J., Hwang, W. Y., & Zhang, J. (2010). A Web 2.0-Based Collaborative Annotation System For Enhancing 
Knowledge Sharing In Collaborative Learning Environments. Computers & Education, 55(2), 752–766. doi:10.1016/j.
compedu.2010.03.008
Suomela, R., & Lehikoinen, J. (2000). Context compass. In Wearable Computers, The Fourth International Symposium 
on (pp. 147–154). IEEE. doi:10.1109/ISWC.2000.888481
Suo, X., Zhu, Y., & Owen, G. S. (2005). Graphical passwords: A survey. In Proceedings of the 21st Annual Computer 
Security Applications Conference (ACSAC 2005). doi:10.1109/csac.2005.27
Suparta, W. (2012). Application of Near Field Communication Technology for Mobile Airline Ticketing. Journal of 
Computer Science, 8(8), 1235. doi:10.3844/jcssp.2012.1235.1243
Sweeney, J. C., & Soutar, G. N. (2001). Consumer perceived value: The development of a multiple item scale. Journal 
of Retailing, 77(2), 203–220. doi:10.1016/S0022-4359(01)00041-0
Szewczyk, R., Mainwaring, A., Polastre, J., Anderson, J., & Culler, D. (2004). An analysis of a large scale habitat moni-
toring application.SenSys ‘04: Proceedings of the 2nd international conference on Embedded networked sensor systems 
(pp. 214-226). New York, NY: ACM. doi:10.1145/1031495.1031521
Tabbane, R. S., & Hamouda, M. (2013). Impact of eWOM on the Tunisian consumer’s attitude towards the product. In 
Advances in Business-Related Scientific Research Conference (pp. 20-22).
Tanvir, A., Suzan, M., Manirul, I., & Rakib, U. (n.d.). Automatic Electric Meter Reader System: A Cost-Feasible Alterna-
tive Approach In Meter Reader For Bangladesh Perspective Using Low-Cost Digital Wattmeter And Wimax Technology. 
International J. Eng. Tech, 8(3), 800-807.
Tarasewich, P. (2003). #dec#). Designing Mobile Commerce Applications. Communications of the ACM, 46(12), 57–60. 
doi:10.1145/953460.953489
Taylor, D. G., Voelker, T. A., & Pentina, I. (2011). Mobile Application Adoption by Young Adults: A Social Network 
Perspective. Academic Press.
Technological Advancements and Applications in Mobile Ad-Hoc Networks. (2012). Research Trends. Sir Padampat 
Singhania University.
Technopedia. (2013, November 12). Mobile Malware. Retrieved from http://www.techopedia.com/definition/29477/
mobile-malware
Thakur, R., & Srivastava, M. (2013). Customer usage intention of mobile commerce in India: An empirical study. Journal 
of Indian Business Research, 5(1), 52–72. doi:10.1108/17554191311303385
Thanh, H. L. (2013). Analysis of Malware Families on Android Mobiles: Detection Characteristics Recognizable by 
Ordinary Phone Users and How to Fix It. Journal of Information Security, 4(4), 213–224. doi:10.4236/jis.2013.44024
340

Compilation of References
The International Ergonomics Association (IEA). (n.d.). Retrieved March 10, 2014, from The International Ergonomics 
Association (IEA): http://www.iea.cc/about/index.html
The International Telecommunication Union. (2011). Retrieved from www.itu.int/ITU-D/ict/facts/2011/material/ICT-
FactsFigures2011.pdf
Thomas, B., Demczuk, V., Piekarski, W., Hepworth, D., & Gunther, B. (1998). A wearable computer system with aug-
mented reality to support terrestrial navigation. In Wearable Computers, 1998. Digest of Papers. Second International 
Symposium on (pp. 168–171). IEEE. doi:10.1109/ISWC.1998.729549
Thomas, P., & Macredie, R. D. (2002). Introduction to the new usability. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human In-
teraction, 9(2), 69–73. doi:10.1145/513665.513666
Thomas, P., Rahman, S., Khan, I. A., & Kummer, J. A. (2007). Widespread endocrine disruption and reproductive 
impairment in an estuarine fish population exposed to seasonal hypoxia. Proceedings of the Royal Biological Society, 
274(1626), 2693–2702. doi:10.1098/rspb.2007.0921 PMID:17725976
Thüring, M., & Mahlke, S. (2007). Usability, aesthetics and emotions in human–technology interaction. International 
Journal of Psychology, 42(4), 253-264. 10.1080/00207590701396674
Tohit, N., Browning, C. J., & Radermacher, H. (2012). ‘We want a peaceful life here and hereafter’: Healthy ageing 
perspectives of older Malays in Malaysia. Ageing and Society, 32(03), 405–424. doi:10.1017/S0144686X11000316
Tolle, G., Polastre, J., Szewczyk, R., Culler, D., Turner, N., Tu, K., . . . Hong, W. (2005, November). A macroscope in 
the redwoods. Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Embedded Networked Sensor Systems, ({SenSys}) 
(pp. 51-63). Sand Diego, CA: ACM. doi:10.1145/1098918.1098925
Tolman, E. C. (1948). Cognitive maps in rats and men. In R. M. Downs & D. Stea (Eds.), Image and Environment, 
Cognitive mapping and spatial behaviour. Chicago: Edward Arnold. doi:10.1037/h0061626
Tractinsky, N. (2006). Aesthetics in Information Technology. Human Computer Interaction and Management Information 
Systems: Foundations. Armonk, NY: ME Sharpe.
Tsai, C. W. (2010). Do Students Need Teacher’s Initiation In Online Collaborative Learning? Computers & Education, 
54(4), 1137–1144. doi:10.1016/j.compedu.2009.10.021
Tullis, T., & Albert, B. (2008). Measuring the User Experience, Collecting, Analyzing, and Presenting Usability Metrics. 
Morgan Kaufmann.
Tullis, T., & Stetson, J. (2004). A comparison of questionnaires for assessing website usability.Proceedings of UPA 
2004 Conference.
Turel, O., Serenko, A., & Bontis, N. (2010). User acceptance of hedonic digital artifacts: A theory of consumption values 
perspective. Information & Management, 47(1), 53–59. doi:10.1016/j.im.2009.10.002
Tzuaan, S. S., & Sivaji, A. (2014). Measuring Malaysian M-Commerce User Behaviour. Computer and Information 
Sciences (ICCOINS), 2014 International Conference. IEEE.
U.S. Small Business Adminitration. (2014). The Importance of Keeping Your Customers Happy. Retrieved from http://
www.impactbnd.com/blog/the-importance-of-keeping-your-customers-happy
Ulwan, A. N. (2004). Child Education in Islam. Dar Al-Salam.
User Interface Design Gmb, H. (2014). User Interface Design GmbH. Retrieved from http://attrakdiff.de/sience-en.
html#arbeitsmodell
341

Compilation of References
Väätäjä, H., Koponen, T., & Roto, V. (2009). Developing practical tools for user experience evaluation – a case from 
mobile news journalism.European Conference on Cognitive Ergonomics (ECCE ‘09) (pp. 240-247). ACM Press.
Vala, R., Sarga, L., & Benda, R. (2013). Security Reverse Engineering of Mobile Operating Systems: A Summary. Recent 
Advances in Computer Science.
Varghese, V. J. (2011). Dissecting Andro Malware. SAN Institute, School of Computer and Electronic Engineering, 
University of Essex.
Vasilescu, I., Kotay, K., Rus, D., Dunbabin, M., & Corke, P. (2005). Data collection, storage, and retrieval with an un-
derwater sensor network.Proceedings of the 3rd international conference on Embedded networked sensor systems, (pp. 
154-165). doi:10.1145/1098918.1098936
Venkatesh, V., Morris, M. G., Davis, G. B., & Davis, F. D. (2003). User acceptance of information technology: Toward 
a unified view. Management Information Systems Quarterly, 425–478.
Vicente, K., Hayes, B., & Williges, R. (1987). Assaying and isolating individual differences in searching a hierarchical 
file system. Human Factors: The Journal of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society, 29(3), 349–359. PMID:3623569
Villar, M. A. (2012). 7 Essential Criteria for Evaluating Mobile Educational Applications. Creative Design of Learning 
Experiences. Retrieved July 07, 2014, from http://mayraixavillar.wordpress.com/2012/12/06/7-essential-criteria-for-
evaluating-mobile-educational-applications/
Voigt, T., Osterlind, F., Finne, N., Tsiftes, N., He, Z., Eriksson, J., & Hjort, K. et al. (2007). Sensor Networking in Aquatic 
Environments - Experiences and New Challenges.Second IEEE International Workshop on Practical Issues in Building 
Sensor Network Applications (pp. 793-798). IEEE Computer Society. doi:10.1109/LCN.2007.23
Vu, T., & Gruteser, M. (2013). Personal touch-identification tokens. Pervasive Computing, IEEE, 12(2), 10–13. 
doi:10.1109/MPRV.2013.33
Walenstein, A., Deshotels, L., & Lakhotia, A. (2012). Program Structure-Based Feature Selection for Android Malware 
Analysis MOBISEC 2012, LNICST 107. Institute for Computer Sciences, Social Informatics and Telecommunications 
Engineering.
Walker, N. D., & Rabalais, N. N. (2006). Relationships among satellite chlorophylla, river inputs, and hypoxia on the 
Louisiana Continental shelf, Gulf of Mexico. Estuaries and Coasts, 29(6), 1081–1093. doi:10.1007/BF02781811
Wallinga, J. P., Pettirew, N. R., & Irish, J. D. (2003). The {GoMOOS} moored buoy design. Oceans, 5, 2596–2599.
Wang, C. Y., Chang, H. C., Chou, S. C. T., & Chen, F. F. (2013). Acceptance and Willingness to Pay for Mobile TV 
Apps. Academic Press.
Wang, T., Oh, L. B., Wang, K., & Yuan, Y. (2013). User adoption and purchasing intention after free trial: an empirical 
study of mobile newspapers. Information Systems and e-Business Management, 1-22.
Wang, R., Wiesemes, R., & Gibbons, C. (2012). Developing Digital Fluency Through Ubiquitous Mobile Devices: 
Findings From A Small-Scale Study. Computers & Education, 58(1), 570–578. doi:10.1016/j.compedu.2011.04.013
Wang, Y. S. (2008). Assessing e‐commerce systems success: A respecification and validation of the DeLone and McLean 
model of IS success. Information Systems Journal, 18(5), 529–557. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2575.2007.00268.x
Wang, Y., Meister, D. B., & Gray, P. H. (2013c). Social influence and knowledge management systems use: Evidence 
from panel data. Management Information Systems Quarterly, 37(1), 299–313.
342

Compilation of References
Wasi-ur-Rahman, M., Rahman, M. T., Khan T.H., & Kabir, S.M.L. (2009). Design of an intelligent SMS based remote 
metering system. International Conference on Information and Automation.
Wasserman, T. (2010). Software engineering issues for mobile application development. FoSER 2010.
Week, B. (2012). Piracy Cuts Into Paid App Sales. Retrieved from http://www.businessweek.com/articles/2012-11-01/
piracy-cuts-into-paid-app-sales
What is iOS ? (n.d.). Retrieved May 30, 2014, from http://developer.android.com/about/index.html
Whittle, K. (2009). The Nature of Healing. International Academy of Design and Health. Retrieved July 29, 2014, from 
http://www.designandhealth.com/events/singapore-congress-kristen-whittle.aspx
Wiedenbeck, S., Waters, J., Birget, J. C., Brodskiy, A., & Memon, N. (2005). PassPoints: Design and longitudinal 
evaluation of a graphical password system. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 63(1–2), 102–127. 
doi:10.1016/j.ijhcs.2005.04.010
Wikipedia. (2013). Android platform. Retrieved February 14, 2013, from http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Android_platforml
Williams, S., Viguria Jimenez, L. A., & Howard, A. M. (2008). A robotic mobile sensor network for achieving scientific 
measurements in challenging environments. Academic Press.
Wills, J., Ye, W., & Heidemann, J. (2006). Low-power acoustic modem for dense underwater sensor networks.WUWNet 
‘06: Proceedings of the 1st ACM international workshop on Underwater networks (pp. 79-85). New York, NY: ACM. 
doi:10.1145/1161039.1161055
Windows Phone Application List. (n.d.). Retrieved May 29, 2014, from http://windowsphoneapplist.com/en/
Windows Phone. (n.d.). Retrieved May 30, 2014, from http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Windows_Phone
Wognsen, E. R., Karlsen, H. S., Calverley, M., Follin, M. N., Thomsen, B., & Hüttel, H. (2014). A secure relay protocol 
for door access control. Retrieved May 29, 2014, from http://people.cs.aau.dk/~erw/srpdac.pdf
Wong, C. K. (2014, September 3). 12 Facts You Might Not Know about Mobile in Malaysia. Retrieved from http://www.
ecommercemilo.com/2014/09/12-facts-mobile-malaysia.html#.Vd_1LxOqqkp
Wong, L. H., & Looi, C. K. (2011). What Seams Do We Remove In Mobile-Assisted Seamless Learning? A Critical 
Review Of The Literature. Computers & Education, 57(4), 2364–2381. doi:10.1016/j.compedu.2011.06.007
Wood, S., Rees, M., & Pfeiffer, Z. (2007, June). An Autonomous Self-Mooring Vehicle for Littoral and Coastal Observa-
tions. OCEANS. Europe, 1–6. doi:10.1109/OCEANSE.2007.4302216
Word-of-Mouth. (n.d.). An Implicit Model Made Explicit. Advances in Consumer Research. Association for Consumer 
Research (U. S.), 15, 32–36.
Wu, B., Chen, J., Wu, J., & Cardei, M. (2006). A Survey of Attacks and Countermeasures in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks. 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Florida Atlantic University.
Wu, D. (2011). Identifying Usability Issues in Personal Calendar Tools. NDT, 2011, 136–146.
Wu, J. H., & Wang, S. C. (2005). What drives mobile commerce?: An empirical evaluation of the revised technology 
acceptance model. Information & Management, 42(5), 719–729. doi:10.1016/j.im.2004.07.001
Wu, J. H., Wang, S. C., & Lin, L. M. (2007). Mobile computing acceptance factors in the healthcare industry: A struc-
tural equation model. International Journal of Medical Informatics, 76(1), 66–77. doi:10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2006.06.006 
PMID:16901749
343

Compilation of References
Xia, F., Ding, F., Li, J., Kong, X., Yang, L. T., & Ma, J. (2013). Phone2Cloud: Exploiting computation offloading for 
energy saving on smartphones in mobile cloud computing. Information Systems Frontiers, 1–17. doi:10.1007/s10796-
013-9458-1
Xin, D., Mao, J., & Liu, M. (2010, May). The effects of parasocial relationships in the adoption of mobile commerce 
application: A conceptual model. In E-Business and E-Government (ICEE), 2010 International Conference on (pp. 149-
152). IEEE. doi:10.1109/ICEE.2010.45
Yaakub, M. B. (2011). Knowledge Management from Islamic Perspective. Journal of Revelation and Science, 1(2), 
14–24. Retrieved from http://www.iium.edu.my/revival/index.php/revival/article/view/27
Yale Digital Lock. (2014). Yale – the world’s favourite lock. Retrieved May 29, 2014, from http://www.yalelock.com/
en/yale/com/About-Yale
Yan, L. K., & Yin, H. (2012). Droidscope: seamlessly reconstructing the OS and dalvik semantic views for dynamic 
android malware analysis. In Proceedings of the 21st USENIX conference on Security symposium, ser. Security’12 
(pp. 29–29). Berkeley, CA: USENIX Association. Retrieved from http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2362793.2362822
Yan, Q., Li, Y., Li, T., & Deng, R. (January, 2009). A comprehensive study for RFID malwares on mobile devices. In 5th 
Workshop on RFID Security (RFIDsec 2009 Asia).
Yan, Q., Li, Y., Li, T., & Deng, R., (January, 2009). Insights into malware detection and prevention on mobile phones. 
Security Technology, 242 – 249.
Yang, H., Luo, H., Ye, F., Lu, S., & Zhang, L. (2004). Security in mobile ad hoc networks: challenges and solutions. In 
Proc. IEE Wireless Communication. UCLA.
Yang, K. (2010). Determinants of US consumer mobile shopping services adoption: Implications for designing mobile 
shopping services. Journal of Consumer Marketing, 27(3), 262–270. doi:10.1108/07363761011038338
Yang, K. (2012). Consumer technology traits in determining mobile shopping adoption: An application of the extended theory 
of planned behavior. Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services, 19(5), 484–491. doi:10.1016/j.jretconser.2012.06.003
Yankee Group. (2011). App Piracy Is Hurting Android Developers’ Bottom Lines. Retrieved from http://www.yankeegroup.
com/about_us/press_releases/2011-09-08-1.html
Yan, Z., Liu, C., Niemi, V., & Yu, G. (2010). Effects of displaying trust information on mobile application usage. In 
Autonomic and Trusted Computing (pp. 107–121). Springer Berlin Heidelberg. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-16576-4_8
Yan, Z., Zhang, P., & Deng, R. H. (2012). TruBeRepec: A trust-behavior-based reputation and recommender system for 
mobile applications. Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, 16(5), 485–506. doi:10.1007/s00779-011-0420-2
Yap, V. (2013, December 12). Conficker is Most Detected Threat in Malaysia. Retrieved from http://www.liveatpc.com/
conficker-is-most-detected-threat-in-malaysia/
Yeo, A. W., Chiu, P.-C., Lim, T.-Y., Tan, P.-P., Lim, T., & Hussein, I. (2011). Usability in Malaysia. In Global usability 
(pp. 211–222). Springer. doi:10.1007/978-0-85729-304-6_12 doi:10.1007/978-0-85729-304-6_12
Ylisaukko-oja, A., Hillukkala, M., Strommer, E., Siira, E., & Tormanen, V. (2009). Smart NFC Interface Platform and 
its Applications. In T. Tuikka & M. Isomursu (Eds.), Touch the Future with a Smart Touch.
Yuan, Y., & Zheng, W. (2005, July). From stationary work support to mobile work support: a theoretical framework. 
Mobile Business, 2005. ICMB 2005. International Conference on, (pp. 315-321).
344

Compilation of References
Yu, W., Zhang, H., & Xu, G. (2013). A study of malware detection on smart mobile devices. Proceedings of the Society 
for Photo-Instrumentation Engineers, 8757.
Zadeh, L. (1973). Outline of a New Approach to the Analysis of Complex Systems and Decision Processes. IEEE Trans-
actions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, SMC-3(1), 28–44. doi:10.1109/TSMC.1973.5408575
Zadeh, L. A. (1965). Fuzzy sets. Information and Control, 8(3), 338–353. doi:10.1016/S0019-9958(65)90241-X
Zadeh, L. A. (1976). The Linguistic Approach and Its Application to Decision Analysis. In Y. C. Ho & S. K. Mitter 
(Eds.), Directions in Large-Scale Systems SE - 20 (pp. 339–370). Springer. doi:10.1007/978-1-4684-2259-7_20
Zadeh, L. A. (1999). From computing with numbers to computing with words. From manipulation of measurements to 
manipulation of perceptions. Circuits and Systems I: Fundamental Theory and Applications. IEEE Transactions on. 
doi:10.1109/81.739259
Zadeh, L. A. (2009). Toward extended fuzzy logic—A first step. Fuzzy Sets and Systems, 160(21), 3175–3181. 
doi:10.1016/j.fss.2009.04.009
Zain, N. Z. M., Mahmud, M., & Hassan, A. (2013). Utilization of Mobile Apps among Students with Learning Dis-
ability from Islamic Perspective. Information and Communication Technology for the Muslim World (ICT4M), 2013 5th 
International Conference on. doi:10.1109/ICT4M.2013.6518889
Zajicek, M. (2004). Successful and available: Interface design exemplars for older users. Interacting With Computers, 
16(3), 411–430. doi:10.1016/j.intcom.2004.04.003
Zapata. (2002). Secure Ad hoc On-Demand Distance Vector Routing. ACM Mobile Computing and Communications 
Review, 6(3), 106-107.
Zeithaml, V. A. (1988, July). Consumer perceptions of price, quality and value: A means-end model and synthesis of 
evidence. Journal of Marketing, 52(3), 2. doi:10.2307/1251446
Zhang, Z., Gong, P., Cao, L., & Chen, Y. (2007). Information Technologies and Applications in Education. Paper pre-
sented at the First IEEE International Symposium on Digital Object Identifier.
Zhang, D., Guo, Z., Lu, G., Zhang, L., Liu, Y., & Zuo, W. (2011). Online joint palmprint and palmvein verification. 
Expert Systems with Applications, 38(3), 2621–2631. doi:10.1016/j.eswa.2010.08.052
Zhao, M., Zhang, T., Wang, J., & Yuan, Z. (2013). A Smartphone Malware Detection Framework based on Artificial 
Immunology. Journal of Networks, 8(2), 469–472.
Zhe, L. (2010). NFC enabled smart postal system. In Second International Workshop on Near Field Communication 
(NFC). doi:10.1109/nfc.2010.9
Zhou, L., & Haas, Z. J. (1999). Securing ad hoc networks. IEEE Network, 13, 24-30.
Zhou, T. (2011). The impact of privacy concern on user adoption of location-based services. Industrial Management & 
Data Systems, 111(2), 212–226. doi:10.1108/02635571111115146
Zhou, T. (2013). The effect of flow experience on user adoption of mobile TV. Behaviour & Information Technology, 
32(3), 263–272. doi:10.1080/0144929X.2011.650711
Zhou, T. (2013). Understanding the effect of flow on user adoption of mobile games. Personal and Ubiquitous Comput-
ing, 17(4), 741–748. doi:10.1007/s00779-012-0613-3
345

Compilation of References
Zhou, Y., & Jiang, X. (2012). Dissecting Android Malware: Characterization and Evolution.Proceedings of the 33rd 
IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy.
Zhou, Y., Wang, Z., Zhou, W., & Jiang, X. (2012). Hey, You, Get Off of My Market: Detecting Malicious Apps in Of-
ficial and Alternative Android Markets.Proceedings of the 19th Network and Distributed System Security Symposium 
(NDSS 2012).
Ziefle, M., & Bay, S. (2008). Transgenerational Designs in Mobile Technology. In J. Lumsden (Ed.), Handbook of 
Research on User Interface Design and Evaluation for Mobile Technology (pp. 122-142). IGI-Global. doi:10.4018/978-
1-59904-871-0.ch008
Zielstorff, R. D. (2003). Controlled vocabularies for consumer health. Journal of Biomedical Informatics, 36(4-5), 
326–333. doi:10.1016/j.jbi.2003.09.015 PubMed doi:10.1016/j.jbi.2003.09.015 PMID:14643728
346

﻿
About the Contributors
﻿
Norshidah Mohamed is an Associate Professor of Management Information Systems and Operations 
Management at Prince Sultan University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. She has published papers in international 
refereed journals and conferences. This includes in Industrial Management & Data Systems, Computers 
in Human Behavior, Information Management and Computer Security, Campus-Wide Information Sys-
tems, Journal of Information Technology Research, International Journal of Mathematics and Computers 
in Simulation, Transforming Government, People, Process and Policy, Business Process Management 
Journal and International Journal of Electronic Government Research. Dr. Norshidah holds Doctor of 
Philosophy in Management Information Systems from the International Islamic University Malaysia, 
Master of Business Administration from Ohio University (USA), Bachelor of Science in Mathematics 
from University of Utah (USA), Graduate Certificate in Management Consultancy with full distinctions 
from the Institute of Management Consultants Singapore and Senior Management Development Program 
Certificate from Harvard Business School (USA) organized by the Harvard Alumni Club of Malaysia.
Teddy Mantoro is a professor and a researcher at the Faculty of Science and Technology, USBI-
Sampoerna University, Jakarta, Indonesia. He is a Senior Member of IEEE. He obtained a PhD, an 
MSc and a BSc, all in Computer Science. His PhD was awarded from the School of Computer Science, 
Australian National University (ANU), Canberra, Australia and MSc from Department of Computer 
Science, School of Advanced Technology, Asian Institute of Technology, Bangkok, Thailand. His re-
search interest is in pervasive/ubiquitous computing, context aware computing, mobile computing and 
intelligent environment. He has published 120+ papers including 78 papers in Scopus, and 4 computer 
science books + 12 books chapters. He was the founder and chair of the Integ Lab (Intelligent Environ-
ment Research Group), at KICT‐International Islamic University Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia 
(2009‐2012). Integ Lab has received 45 medals from national and international innovation technology 
competitions. He received 5 Gold, 9 Silver and 11 Bronze Medals (2009-present) for National and In-
ternational IT Innovation Competitions. He has filed 4 (four) patents in credit to his name. He has also 
received 20+ research grants to date.
Media Ayu was an associate professor at the Department of Information Systems, Faculty (Kulliyyah) 
of Information and Communication Technology (KICT), International Islamic University Malaysia, 
in Kuala Lumpur. Currently, she holds a position as the Head of Institute of Social Development and 
Community Outreach in Universitas Siswa Bangsa Internasional (USBI), Jakarta, Indonesia. She has 
published more than 70 research papers in international journals, conferences, book chapters and books 
in IT related areas. Besides, she has three patents pending to her credit in IT related research and innova-
347

About the Contributors
tion. Her research interest is set around the area of web application development, ubiquitous computing, 
mobile application for intelligent environment, activity recognition, ICT for teaching and learning, and 
decision support systems. Dr. Ayu is a member of IEEE and a senior member of IACSIT. She served 
as a Program Chair of The Third ICT4M Conference in 2010 which is indexed by SCOPUS. She has 
also served as a program committee member and a reviewer in some international conferences. She has 
received several awards from international and national innovation exhibition events for her research 
and innovation products.
Murni Mahmud is an Associate Professor at the Department of Information Systems, Kulliyyah 
(Faculty) of Information and Communication Technology, International Islamic University Malaysia. 
She is a researcher in the field of Human Computer Interaction (HCI). She is interested to research in 
the area of interaction design evaluation methods, usability and accessibility of website user interfaces; 
usability and accessibility of Information and technology tools/software for elderly and people with 
special needs. While enriching her knowledge in HCI, she is interested to research in Information Sys-
tems; the usage of communication and interaction tools. She is also exploring into the research areas: 
Electronic Government and Mobile Government, Virtual Reality, Software Engineering, Development 
and Brain Inspire Computing and learning HCI in Malaysia context. She has completed several research 
grant projects, which include Evaluation of Islamic Website, Museum and Virtual Reality. She started to 
develop interest in learning HCI when she worked with users and computers interfaces during her first 
job at Exxon-Mobil, Malaysia. Murni holds Doctor of Philosophy in Computation, Faculty of Humani-
ties, The University of Manchester, United Kingdom, Bachelor of Science in Computer Science and 
Master of Science in Computer Science from State University of New York at Binghamton, New York.
* * *
Fariza Hanis Abdul Razak is a HCI lecturer at UiTM Malaysia. She has been working in the field of 
Human Computer Interaction (HCI) for the past 12 years and has published most of her work related to 
user models, usability, and user experience. Her current work is centred on elderly and spiritual experience.
Mohd Azrin Hafizie Bin Abu Hashim is a Multimedia Designer attach to Human Interaction 
Technology, MIMOS Berhad since January 2013. His areas of responsibilities cover mostly Graphical 
User Interface (GUI) and adapting new multimedia technology by implementing User Experience (UX) 
design in his work. He holds Bachelor of Multimedia from University of Selangor in 2012 and Diploma 
in Civil Engineering in 2009. He advises on technology to be used for the research and implementations 
of user experience design. He advises on technology to be used for the technical implementations of the 
system and interface design for this paper.
Olawale Surajudeen Adebayo is a lecturer in the department of Cyber Security Science, Federal 
University of Technology Minna, Niger State Nigeria. He bagged MSc. in Computer Science from Uni-
versity of Ilorin, Nigeria in 2009. He also bagged Bachelor of Technology in Mathematics and Computer 
Science from Federal University of Technology Minna, Nigeria in 2004. He is presently a PhD research 
student at the department of Computer Science, Kulliyah of Information and Communication Technology, 
International Islamic University Malaysia. He is a reviewer to many local and international Journals. He 
is happily married with children.
348

About the Contributors
Ili Hawa Ahmad is a doctoral candidate in Information Systems at the Faculty of Computing Univer-
siti Teknologi Malaysia. She presently serves as an academic trainee at the Kulliyyah of Information and 
Communication Technology International Islamic University Malaysia (IIUM). She holds Bachelor and 
Master of Information Technology from IIUM. Her research interests include mobile commerce, mobile 
applications and behavioral intention relating to mobile applications. Her work has been published in 
IEEE and Computers in Human Behaviour Journal.
Pervaiz K. Ahmed is currently a Professor in the School of Business, Monash University, Malaysia. 
He has published extensively in international journals. He was senior editor of the European Journal of 
Innovation Management, International Journal of Business Governance and Ethics, International Jour-
nal of Management Concepts and Philosophy, and serves on the editorial board of several international 
journals. His research interests include management of innovation, knowledge and learning, business 
governance and ethics.
Mohd Faizal Amin has been a Senior Graphic Designer with MIMOS Berhad since 1998, leading 
the Graphic and Print Unit in Human Interaction Technology department. He received a Master Degree 
in Art and Design in 2013 and obtained Bachelor of Art & Design in 1991 from MARA University of 
Technology. He is a member of Human Factor and Ergonomics Society Malaysia (HFEM). He received 
an Award of Excellence for the AffinBank logo design, which currently used as AffinGroup corporate 
logo. He won Best Logo Design Award for Southeast Asian Network of Ergonomics Societies (SEANES), 
awarded by Human Factor and Ergonomic Malaysia (HFEM) society. He also received Copyright Cat-
egory award for Knowledge Grid logo design in National Intellectual Property Day in 2009 organised 
by Ministry of Domestic Trade and Consumer Affairs. He is also one of the team in designing Aggrow, 
a concept wheelbarrow awarded second runner up in professional category of product design from 
Malaysia Design Council in 2012.
Normaziah A. Aziz, obtained her Bachelor in Computer Science from the University of South Caro-
lina, USA, Masters in Computer Science from Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, and later her PhD from 
the Dept. of Artificial Intelligence, University of Edinburgh, Scotland, UK. She was a Senior Research 
Fellow and Head for the Knowledge Representation and Reasoning, in the AI lab at MIMOS, an R&D 
organization in Malaysia. Presently she is an Associate Professor in the Dept. of Computer Science, 
International Islamic University Malaysia. Her research work and interest are in the areas of Cognitive 
Modeling, Natural Language Processing, Digital Evidence Forensics and Malware analysis.
Soon-Nyean Cheong is currently a Senior Lecturer at the Faculty of Engineering, Multimedia Uni-
versity, Malaysia. He received his M.Eng.Sc from the Faculty of Engineering, Multimedia University. His 
teaching and research interests include web engineering, natural user interface, smarthome, educational 
technology and interactive multimedia content.
Svetlana Čičević earned her BSc degree from the Faculty of Philosophy, University of Belgrade, at 
Department of Psychology, in 1985; MSc in 1991 from Center of Multidisciplinary Studies, University of 
Belgrade, and PhD degree from Faculty of Philosophy, University of Niš, in 2004. She has been employed 
at Faculty of Transport and Traffic Engineering, University of Belgrade since 1987, and in November 
2010 was elected to the position of Associate Professor. At basic academic studies Dr. Čičević teaches 
349

About the Contributors
the subjects “Traffic Psychology”, “Foundations of Ergonomics”, “Human Resources Management”, 
“Customer behavior”, “Driver Behavior”, and “Psychology in Traffic” at master studies. Her scientific 
and research experience involves Traffic Psychology, Ergonomics, Human Factors and Traffic Safety, 
Traffic Signs Perception, Cognitive Information Processing, Operators’ Acoustic Speech Analysis in 
Field and Laboratory Conditions, Operators’ Mental Workload and Stress Assessment, Human Re-
sources Management, Learning Styles Assessment. She is author and co-author of eight monographs, 
one textbook and above 125 papers published in national or international journals, and also participated 
as a team member in the realization of many research projects, as well as seven Graduation and ten 
Master Theses. She is a member of the Serbian Psychological Society, Ergonomics Society of Serbia, 
and International Ergonomics Association.
Hizbullah Datuk Kampo Radjo holds a bachelor degree in Multimedia Communication from Open 
University Malaysia and diploma in commercial art from Malaysian Institute of Art. He is a Senior 
Graphic Designer for Human Interaction Technology department, MIMOS Berhad. He has been working 
with MIMOS as graphic designer since 1997. Prior to his attachment with MIMOS Berhad, he served 
as graphic designer and junior art director for few advertising agencies in Kuala Lumpur and Petaling 
Jaya. He was appointed as Malaysian representative as one of the judge for Web Design category at 
WorldSkills Competition 2003 held in Saint Gallen, Switzerland.
Ab Razak Che Hussin is a Senior Lecturer at Universiti Teknologi Malaysia. He received PhD in 
Computer Science in 2006 from the University of Manchester, United Kingdom. His research area is in 
e-commerce application, consumer behaviour and, information system adoption and implementation.
Noorminshah A. Iahad is a senior lecturer at the Information Systems Department, Faculty of 
Computing, Universiti Teknologi Malaysia (UTM). She received her PhD degree from the University 
of Manchester, United Kingdom. Her research interests focus on Cloud Computing in education and for 
SMEs, Computer Supported Collaborative Learning, and usage of mobile applications for health moni-
toring and management. She has graduated three PhD students and 2 Masters research students. She is 
a member of the Association for Information Systems and she is one of the Editors of the International 
Journal of Social Networking and Virtual Communities.
Barroon Isma’eel Ahmad is a research student at International Islamic University Malaysia. He 
received his BSc. from Usmanu Danfodiyo University Sokoto and MSc. from Ahmadu Bello University 
Zaria both in Computer Science in Nigeria. He is currently working with Ahmadu Bello University Zaria 
as a Computer Science lecturer. His research interest is in the area of Health Information Technology, 
Pervasive and Mobile Computing, Embedded Systems, Programming and eLearning. He is a member 
of IEEE, ACM, AIS, IACSIT, and NCS.
Huo-Chong Ling received his B.Eng. (Hons), M.Eng.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees from Multimedia Uni-
versity, Malaysia. He is currently a senior lecturer in the Faculty of Engineering, Multimedia University. 
His research interests include steganography, watermarking and access control system.
350

About the Contributors
Fitria Maulida Machfud, STP, is currently pursuing Master of Information Technology at Interna-
tional Islamic University Malaysia. She took her bachelor degree in Agroindustrial Technology at Bogor 
Agricultural University in Indonesia.
Slobodan Mitrović, PhD candidate, earned his BSc and MSc from the Faculty of Transport and 
Traffic Engineering, University of Belgrade at the Department of Telecommunication Traffic and Net-
works in 2002 and 2010, respectively. He achieved Designing Security for Microsoft Networks technical 
course in 2004, and earned Cisco Certified Networking Associate (CCNA) certificate in 2007. He has 
been employed at the Faculty of Transport and Traffic Engineering, University of Belgrade, since 2002 
at the position of Network Engineer. His scientific and research experience involves Internet technolo-
gies, Computer networking, Telecommunication Systems, and Network Security. He has published 1 
journal paper as co-author and over 20 conference presentations. He participated at the 5 domestic and 
1 international research projects.
Rizal Mohd Nor received a B.Sc. in Electrical Engineering from Johns Hopkins University, Mary-
land, USA and a second major from Johns Hopkins, a B.Sc. in Computer Engineering (2000). His first 
master’s degree was in Business Administration (MBA) from IIUM, Malaysia in 2004. He later decided 
to do his Masters and Ph.D in computer science in Kent State University, Kent, OH, USA. His research 
area is in Sensor Networks, Mobile Applications, Distributed Systems, and Self-stabilization.
Milkica Nešić, MD, PhD, finished study of Medicine in 1979 and defended her Master thesis entitled 
The role of interhemispheric asymmetry in discrimination of different tones quality and her PhD thesis 
entitled Physiological, psychological and acoustical correlates of exam stress at Medical Faculty, Univer-
sity of Niš. Also, she finished specialization in Neuropsychiatry in 1992 at Medical Faculty, University 
of Niš. She is Full Professor of Physiology and Neuroscience at Department of Physiology, Medical 
Faculty, University of Niš. Her subject is Physiological basis of Psychological processes for students 
of psychology at Department of Psychology, Faculty of Philosophy, University of Niš. She organized 
course for students and doctors of medicine and psychologist on Behavioral and cognitive neuroscience 
and seminar on Psychoneuroimmunoendocrinology of stress. She is a member of Serbian Association of 
Physiologists and Serbian Association of Anthropologists. She published over hundred scientific papers 
and handbook in the field of neurophysiology and neuropsychology.
Mikhail Nesterenko received his B.S. in Applied Mathematics from Moscow Engineering Physics 
Institute, Russia and a Ph.D. in Computer Science from Kansas State University. He has been with Kent 
State University since 1998 and his research interests are in distributed algorithms, distributed systems, 
and computer networks.
Akeem Olowolayemo is with the Intelligent Environment Research Group (INTEG), KICT, In-
ternational Islamic University Malaysia. He holds a B.Sc. (Hons) Degree in Computer Science, from 
Obafemi Awolowo University Ile-Ife, Nigeria (2000), a Masters (MIT) Degree in Information Systems, 
from International Islamic University Malaysia and currently pursuing a PhD (Computer Sc) in the 
same University. His research interests include Pervasive Computing, Location Awareness, Intelligent 
Environment and Machine Learning.
351

About the Contributors
Abu Osman Md. Tab is currently a researcher in the Intelligent Environment Research Group (IN-
TEG) and a professor in Mathematics at the Dept of Computer Science, KICT, International Islamic 
University Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur. He was awarded a PhD from University of Birmingham, UK, and 
MSc - Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa, USA. He has authored several research papers, several book 
and book chapters in the area of Fuzzy Logic and Mathematics.
Nor Fadzleen Sa’don is a PhD candidate at the Management of Technology department, Malaysia-
Japan International Institute of Technology (MJIIT), Universiti Teknologi Malaysia (UTM). She is a 
recipient of the Pro-Chancellor Award and Best Postgraduate Academic Award upon completion of 
her MSc in IT Management from UTM in 2014. Her research interests focus on Massive Open Online 
Courses (MOOCs), IT Governance, Mobile Computing and Knowledge Management. She is the current 
Assistant Secretary of the Malaysia Education Technology Association (META) 2014/2016. She has 
presented at conferences both home and abroad in the related areas, published journal papers and also 
contributed in writing two book chapters.
Andreja Samčović received the Diploma and the M.S. degrees in electrical engineering in 1989 and 
1995, respectively, from the Faculty of Electrical Engineering, University of Belgrade (former Yugo-
slavia), and the Ph.D. degree in 2005 from the Faculty of Transport and Traffic Engineering, University 
of Belgrade. He joined the Faculty of Transport and Traffic Engineering in 1991, working in the areas 
of electrical engineering, communications, and image coding. He was scholar at the TU Vienna (Aus-
tria, 1991/1992, 2006) and Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nuremberg (Erlangen, Germany, 
1999/2000). As a visiting university staff he visited TU Košice (Slovakia, 2007), TU Munich (Germany, 
2007), TU Cluj-Napoca (Romania, 2008), University of Oxford (England, 2008) and University Heriott-
Watt (Edinburgh, Scotland, 2009). He taught one master course at the University in Saint-Etienne (France) 
in 2012. In 2003 he served as a lecturer at the UniAdrion summer school in Ammoudia-Preveza, Greece. 
He participated at the bilateral projects with TU Košice and University of Ljubljana (Slovenia). He has 
published 20 journal papers and over 80 conference presentations, on different aspects of image coding 
and communications, as well as one monograph.
Rakesh Kumar Singh is working as a Scientist-D (Information Technology) in G.B. Pant institute of 
Himalayan Environment & Development, Kosi-Katarmal, Almora, Uttarakhand, India which is a premier 
research and development institute of Ministry of Environment, Forests & Climate Change, Government 
of India. He earned his Bachelor of Computer Applications (BCA) degree from MCRP University, Bho-
pal, India in 2000 and Master of Computer Applications (MCA) degree from UP Technical University, 
Lucknow, India in 2003. He also earned Master of Technology (M.Tech.) in Information Technology 
from KSO University, Karnataka, India in 2010 and Master of Philosophy (M.Phil.) in Computer Science 
from EIILM University, Sikkim, India in 2011. Presently, he is registered for Ph.D. (Information Technol-
ogy) research degree programme of Kumaun University, Nainital, India. He has served in SVBPUA&T, 
Meerut, India w.e.f. 16/12/2003 to 26/03/2007 as a Programme Assistant (Computer) and after that he 
joined GBPIHED, Almora, India as a Scientist-C w.e.f. 27/03/2007 to 31/12/2010 and Scientist-D w.e.f. 
01/01/2011 to till date. He is a life member of 16 national and international professional societies. He 
has published more than 25 research papers/popular articles in reputed national and international jour-
nals and presented research papers in various national conferences. He developed various technical and 
training manuals and also delivered many lectures/presentations in various workshops and conferences. 
352

About the Contributors
He also attended many national and international workshops and conference. He has more than 11 years 
R&D experience in the field of Computer Science and Information Technology. His area of interest is 
wireless networks, mobile computing, etc.
Ashok Sivaji is the Senior Staff Engineer and the lead of the User Experience Lab in MIMOS Ber-
had since 2009. He has gained experience in multinational organization such as Agilent Technologies 
(Keysight Technologies) and Texas Instrument in the United States and Malaysia from 2000 to 2009. He 
has over 15 years of experience in Human Computer Interaction and Software Development in various 
fields such as electronic instrument and semiconductor manufacturing and ICT. He has been success-
ful in filing patents, receiving merit awards and grants. Gaining an undergraduate degree in Electrical 
and Electronic Engineering from the University of Adelaide, Australia in 2000 and a master’s degree 
in information technology from University Technology PETRONAS, Malaysia in 2012, he actively 
publishes in ACM and IEEE conferences. He is also a Certified Trainer, ISO9001 Lead Auditor, Us-
ability Analyst and Tester who has served as a reviewer in the reputable ACM Transaction of Human 
Computer Interaction. In addition, he is continually invited as consultant, guest and adjunct lecturer to 
universities and industries in Malaysian and Singapore. As the technical manager, he was instrumental 
in MIMOS Software Testing Laboratory becoming the first organisation in Malaysia to be recognized 
with the International Standard ISO/IEC 17025:2005 in Software Testing in December 2013.
Pei-Lee Teh is a Senior Lecturer with the School of Business. Prior to joining Monash University, 
she was a Senior Lecturer in Multimedia University. She holds the degrees of Bachelor of Informa-
tion Technology, Master of Management, and a Ph.D. in Management. She is currently the Associate 
Editor of the Decision Sciences Journal of Innovative Education (DSJIE), and a member of the Edito-
rial Review Board of the Journal of Computer Information Systems, Industrial Management & Data 
Systems, International Journal of Modelling in Operations Management, and International Journal of 
Engineering Business Management. She is also the Chair of IEEE Malaysia Section Technology and 
Engineering Management Society (TEMS) (formerly known as Technology Management Council), 
and a member of the Association for Information Systems (AIS), Academy of Management (AOM), 
Institute for Operations Research and the Management Sciences (INFORMS), and Institute of Electrical 
and Electronics Engineers (IEEE). Her teaching and research interests cover Management Information 
Systems, Technology Management, Total Quality Management, Knowledge Management, Entrepreneur-
ship, Gerontechnology, Innovation and Learning. She has authored or co-authored papers published in 
over 50 international journals and conferences proceedings. Her work appears in journals such as Asia 
Pacific Journal of Management, Expert Systems with Applications, Journal of Computer Information 
Systems, Industrial Management & Data Systems, Total Quality Management & Business Excellence, 
Journal of Global Information Management, Pacific Asia Journal of the Association for Information 
Systems, Journal of Business Economics and Management, Educational Studies and etc.
Wiwin Windihastuty is a magister student at University Budi Luhur. Currently she is also with 
Regional Water Company (PAM). Her research interest is in the study of Mobile Computing for Water 
Management.
Akram M. Zeki is an associate Professor at Kulliyyah of Information and Communication Tech-
nology, International Islamic University Malaysia. He is supervising several PhD & Master Students; 
353

About the Contributors
His research interest including: ICT and Islam, Arabic Natural Processing, and signal Processing. He 
is leading few research grants in university level or under ministry of higher education and supervising 
many post graduate students.
354

  355
Index
A
ACK 254
Ad Hoc On-Demand Distance Vector (AODV) 
Routing 255
Advanced Encryption Standard 269, 281
Allocentric Frames 172, 179, 183
Android 2, 6-7, 11, 13, 19, 28, 49-50, 55, 124-125, 
128, 130-131, 134, 185, 191, 204, 206-207, 
211, 219, 221-226, 228-229, 260
Android Malware 220-222, 228-229
Android Smartphones 260
AODV 255
application design 10, 45, 52-53, 62, 206, 208
Apps Inventor 124, 130, 132
Attendance System 184-186, 188-190, 192, 195-
196, 198-199
Augmented Reality 84, 87, 127
Authentication 242-245, 248, 257-264, 266-269, 
271, 275, 281-282
Automatic Meter Reading 205
B
behavioral intention 47, 52, 55-56, 58, 60, 258, 272-
273, 275, 284
Black Hole 241, 255
Bring Your Own Device 84, 87
C
Child Computer Interaction 9, 25, 28
Cipher Text 263, 281-282
compatibility 45, 51-52, 55-56, 60, 62
Convergent Validity 273, 281
Cover-Photo 263, 281-282
Cryptography 240, 252, 257-258, 262-263, 266, 
276, 281
D
Data Center 292-293, 300
Decryption 269, 271, 281
Direct-Sequence Spread Spectrum (DSSS) 255
Discriminant Validity 273, 281
Dissolved Oxygen Sensing 304
DoS 236, 239, 241, 248, 252
Dynamic Source Routing (DSR) 241, 255
E
Egocentric Frames 175, 179, 183
Elderly Usability 31, 44
Elderly Users 30-31, 33-34, 36, 38, 41, 44
Encryption 224-225, 269, 281-282
Eutrophuc 300, 308
Evaluation 6, 10, 49, 103, 122, 138, 142-144, 146-
147, 157, 166, 179, 244, 257-260, 272, 276
eWOM 45, 59, 62
Exploit 183, 220, 222-223
F
Fiqh 1-2, 11, 25, 28
Frequency-Hopping Spread Spectrum (FHSS) 255
Fresnal Zone 308
G
Gamification 84, 87
Geocentric Frame 172, 183
GLONASS 168
Graphical Password 257-258, 260, 262-264, 266-
271, 282
GSM 205

356  
Index
H
Hablamos Juntos 92, 97-98, 115, 122
Hadith 3-4, 9, 14, 16, 19, 21-23, 28, 41
hospital signage 92
Hypoxia 285, 290-293, 299, 303, 308
I
Impact Factor Journals 73-76
Interface 1, 6, 25, 31, 36-38, 41, 44, 47, 91, 94, 
98-99, 105, 107, 127-129, 133, 138-139, 141, 
143-148, 157-158, 166, 168, 188, 191, 208, 
211, 221, 224, 258, 264, 268-269, 286, 288, 
295, 297
Internet Protocol Security (IPsec) 255
Intrusion Detection System (IDS) 255
iOS 2, 6-7, 13, 28, 134, 219-220, 222-225
Islamic Calendar 30-39, 41-42, 44
Islamic Mobile Application 1-2, 25, 28
J
Jamming 248, 255
L
Landmarks 89, 92, 168-172, 174-179, 183
Learnability 10, 49, 140-142, 144, 154-156, 166
Linguistic 5, 168-173, 175-179
Localization 119, 174, 178
Location Authority 168-171, 174-175, 177-179, 183
Location-Based Services 168, 176, 179, 183, 259
low literacy 92, 99
M
Malware 49, 54-55, 212, 219-223, 226-229
Malware detection 220-222, 227-228
MANET 234-237, 239-241, 243-248, 251-253
Marine Sensors 289-290, 304
medical terminologies 92, 95
Message Oriented Middleware 304
Microsensors 285-288, 290
Mini navigation 128, 134
Mobile Calendar 30-31, 33, 44
mobile commerce 46, 52-53, 57-58
mobile games 46-47, 50-51, 53, 58, 61, 63
Mobile Learning 8-9, 28, 73-75, 80, 84, 87
Mobile malware 219-222, 226
Mobile Operating System 4, 6, 28, 220
Mobile Security 225, 257, 282
Mobile Touch Screen Devices 137, 150, 159, 166
multilingual 5, 88, 91-92
Muslim Elderly 30-31, 33, 44
N
Near Field Communication (NFC) 126, 185, 257-
258, 282
Network Eavesdropping 255
NFC-enabled device 190, 195-197, 200
NFC Tag 187, 189, 195, 197-198, 201, 259
NFC technology 185, 189, 258-259
Nuglet 255
P
perceived value 45, 47, 51-53, 56-57, 62
Plain Text 263, 281-282
Positioning Systems 168-169
protection motivation theory 272
Q
Qualitative Spatial Reasoning 171-172
Qur’an 1-4, 9, 11, 20-21, 25, 28-29
R
Regional Water Company 204
Reliability 10, 47, 53-54, 145, 150, 155, 262, 273, 
282
Research Trends 73, 240
RFID 184-185, 188, 190, 201, 206, 258
Routing 234-239, 241, 244, 248, 252, 255
S
SAMM (Skim Akreditasi Makmal Malaysia) 122
Sandboxing 224
SDK 29, 191, 211, 221, 226
Secure Hash Algorithm-256 269, 282
Sensor Networks 286, 290
Shari’ah 1, 4, 6, 25, 29
Smartphone Operating System 224, 228
SMS 185, 188-189, 205, 221-222, 226
Spatial Abilities 149, 156, 158, 166
Spiritual Experience 41, 44
SSL (Secure Sockets Layer) 255
Steganography 257-258, 260-264, 266-271, 275-
276, 282
Steganography Key 260-264, 266-271, 275, 282
Stego-Photo 263-264, 266, 270, 282

  357
Index
Structural Equation Modeling 272, 282
Sunnah 1-2, 4, 11, 25, 29
survey 1, 6, 8, 11, 13, 25, 47, 88-89, 94-95, 98-99, 
107, 116, 118, 122, 126, 140, 144, 148, 152, 
172, 175, 234-235, 240, 247, 253, 261, 272-
273, 275, 281-282
Symbolic Location 168-169
SYN Flood 248, 255
Systematic Literature Review 73, 75-76, 84, 87
System Usability Scale 137-138, 142, 144-147, 166
T
Tablet PC 137-138, 145-147, 149-150, 153, 155-
156, 158, 167
technology acceptance model 47, 52, 140, 272
TouchIn 190, 194-195, 198-199
Transport Layer Security (TLS) 255
trust 45, 51, 54-55, 59-60, 62, 98, 228, 241, 245, 
252
U
Unattended Sensors 285
Universal Symbol in Health Care (USHC) 92, 123
Usability 10, 31, 44, 49, 62, 89, 94, 105, 107, 125-
126, 137-150, 153-159, 166-167, 258, 261
Usable Design 30-31, 33, 44
User Experience (UX) 44, 88-89, 92, 94, 103, 105, 
116-118, 122-123, 138, 141-143, 146, 158, 167
User Experience (UX) Professionals Association 94, 
123
V
Validity 146-147, 150, 273, 281-282
Virtual Private Network 212
Vulnerability 226, 235, 272, 275, 283
W
Water Meter Reader 204, 206-207, 211, 217
Wayfinding System 88-89, 91-92, 94, 98-99, 105, 
117-118, 123
Wearable Computing 74, 87, 127
Wi-Fi Protected Access (WPA) and Wi-Fi Protected 
Access II (WPA2) 255
Wired Equivalent Privacy (WEP) 255
Wormhole 234, 236, 252, 255


