Crossing the Border 
The Social and Engineering Design of Computer Integrated 
Manufacturing Systems 

The Springer Series on 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND SOCIETY 
Series Editor: KARAMJIT S. GILL 
Knowledge, Skill and Artificial Intelligence 
Bo Garanzon and Ingela Josefson (Eds.) 
Artificial Intelligence, Culture and Language: 
On Education and Work 
Bo Garanzon and Magnus Florin (Eds.) 
Designing Human-centred Technology: 
A Cross-disciplinary Project in Computer-aided Manufacturing 
H. H. Rosenbrock (Ed.) 
The Shape of Future Technology: 
The Anthropocentric Alternative 
Peter Bradner 
Artificial Intelligence and Human Institutions 
Richard Ennals 

J. Martin Corbett, Lauge Baungaard Rasmussen 
and Felix Rauner 
Crossing the Border 
The Social and Engineering 
Design of Computer 
Integrated Manufacturing 
Systems 
With 27 Figures 
Springer-Verlag 
London Berlin Heidelberg New York 
Paris Tokyo Hong Kong 

J. Martin Corbett, MA, AFBPsS 
Warwick Business School, University of Warwick, 
Coventry CV 4 7 AL, UK 
Lauge Baungaard Rasmussen, MA 
Institute of Social Science, Danish Technical University, 
DK-2800, Lyngby, Denmark 
Felix Rauner, MA, PhD 
Department of Vocational Education, Institute of Technology and 
Education, University of Bremen, 2800 Bremen 33, FRG 
ISBN-13: 978-3-540-19613-6 
DOl: 10.1007/ 978-1-4471-1778-0 
e-ISBN-13: 978-1-4471-1778-0 
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data 
Corbett, J. Martin 1956-
Crossing the border: the social and engineering design of computer integrated 
manufacturing systems. 
1. Manufacture. Applications of computer systems 
I. Title II. Rasmussen, Lauge Baungaard 1947-
III. Rauner, Felix 1941-
670.285 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Corbett, J. Martin, 1956-
Crossing the border: the social and engineering design of computer integrated 
manufacturing systemslJ. Martin Corbett, Lauge Baungaard Rasmussen, and Felix 
Rauner. 
p. em. - (The Springer series on artificial intelligence and society) 
Includes bibliographical references. 
1. Computer integrated manufacturing systems - Design and construction. 
2. Human engineering. I. Rasmussen, Lauge Baungaard. 1947-. II. Rauner, 
Felix. ill. Title. 
IV. Series. 
TS 155.6.C68 1991 
90-10082 
670'.285-dc20 
ClP 
Apart from any fair dealing for the purposes of research or private study, or criticism 
or review, as permitted under the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, this 
publication may only be reproduced, stored or transmitted, in any form or by any 
means, with the prior permission in writing of the publishers, or in the case of 
reprographic reproduction in accordance with the terms of licences issued by the 
Copyright Licensing Agency. Enquiries concerning reproduction outside those 
terms should be sent to the publishers. 
© Springer-Verlag London Limited 1991 
Typeset by Nuts and Muttons Typesetting Ltd, Linton, Cambridgeshire 
2128/3916-543210 Printed on acid-free paper 

Foreword 
The gap between the potential of technology and its reality has 
become a gaping chasm. It was in an attempt to bridge that chasm 
that Lucas workers embarked upon their extraordinary plan for 
socially useful production in the early 70s. The plan assumed 
international significance and its main proposals are now well 
known (Cooley 1987). One of its great strengths was that those 
involved began to think of themselves in their dual role in society: 
as producers and as consumers. They were therefore concerned at 
what they made, why they made it, and even questioned if they 
should make it at all. But they were also concerned about how they 
made things, e.g. the means of production. In the course of these 
discussions they initially suggested telechiric devices which "would 
respond to human knowledge and intelligence but would not 
objectivize it". 
In the highly creative discussions which ensued, there emerged 
the concept of human-centredness. To the best of my knowledge 
it was used for the first time in the English language in February 
1976 (by myself) at the press conference to launch the Lucas 
workers' plan for socially useful production. It was one strand 
which subsequently converged with two independent strands in 
Denmark and in Germany to provide a paradigmatic shift in 
designers' thinking; a shift which sought to deal with the problem 
of reducing human beings to abject machine appendages and 
thereby losing one of society's most precious assets which is the 
skill, ingenuity, creativity and intentionality of its people. 
The background to the convergence of these three traditions is 
vividly posed in the book. It may be said to be a European approach 
in the sense that it contrasts starkly with the Tayloristic form of 
production organization in the United States. It places the 
individual human being with his or her competence and 
motivations as a central tenet, but views the individual not in 
isolation but as part of a creative interaction with fellow human 
beings in a collaborative model of production. In doing so, it was 
able to draw on the rich variety of different traditions in Europe, 
and the resultant systems may be said to be those which can accord 
with different cultural and educational backgrounds and experi-
ences across Europe. 

vi 
Foreword 
A recent report highlights the importance of this diversity which 
it identifies as one of Europe's key strengths rather than 
weaknesses, and it advocates policies which will enhance these 
diversities rather than see Europe from 1992 decompose into the 
sort of melting pot one saw in the United States at the turn of the 
century (see the publication European Competitiveness in the 21st 
Century). Thus we may be seeing the emergence of European forms 
of manufacturing technology in an enlarged Europe which has a 
geographical area large and diverse enough, a market dynamic 
enough, an economy powerful enough and a cultural base rich and 
diverse enough to develop appropriate human-centred forms of 
technology rather than accept the notion of the one best way at the 
macro level. 
The concept of human-centred systems is by no means problem 
free as the authors freely admit - indeed a strength of the book is 
that it describes vividly the historical, epistemological, technological 
and organizational issues which gave rise to the idea in the first 
instance. They show it to be as yet a delicate plant which if uprooted 
from the fertile soil within which it germinated could well deform 
into a rather worthless variant of that other anaemic plant, "user 
friendliness". A full blooming of its potential is conditional upon 
its being located in an appropriate context. As such the book 
challenges much of the given wisdom and correctly cautions the 
reader that information technology has grown up in an 
environment of mathematical and natural sciences and has 
therefore been dominated by the positive epistemology of practice. 
This practice rests on three dichotomies: the separation of means 
and end, the separation of research from practice and the separation 
of knowing from doing. 
The challenge is not just at the level of the technical aspects of 
the design although these are fascinating. The book highlights and 
seeks to answer some of the problems involved in the organization 
and operation of multidisciplinary design teams. As the instigator 
of ESPRIT 1217, I was deeply conscious of the need to take a 
multidisciplinary approach to the design problem but was also 
aware that this had not been done previously and that tensions 
would be inevitable. It was evident from the outset that the 
engineers and the social scientists were using different cognitive 
maps. Furthermore, given that the project was to be completed in 
three years, and understanding the lead time in ordering and 
procuring the manufacturing hardware, the engineers felt pressed 
to make decisions very early on. In doing so, they were however 
closing off important options. The social scientists on the other 
hand were dealing with more timeless categories such as alienation 
and subordination. The tensions this created bordered on occasion 
in open conflict. Only the goodwill of all involved, and a shared 
intention to improve the quality of working life, transcended 
professional differences and provided for the rich synthesis which 
was the final outcome. 
But there were real difficulties en route. The book describes 

Foreword 
vii 
methods of overcoming these difficulties and of creating 
collaborative frameworks in which the different traditional 
approaches are transformed by interactions with the others. It 
would be difficult to overstate the importance of this process or 
indeed even to suggest that the project got beyond reaching even 
partial solutions in this key area of human and professional 
interaction in multidisciplinary design teams. It was precisely the 
crossing of these boundaries which made the project so challenging 
and exciting and also provided the title for this book. 
The book is a controversial one. Even with the hindsight of 
experience it offers no glib solutions, but rather highlights issues 
which others embarking on similar design programmes can take 
into account. That experience would not have been possible without 
the funding from the EEC for this £5 million project which now 
looks set to produce forms of manufacturing technology which 
accord much more closely with the reality of European industry 
which is based on small and medium-sized enterprises with highly 
skilled and flexible workforces. 
Although the issues raised here are within the context of 
manufacturing technology, I hold that they are in fact more 
universally applicable. At a time when there are models of 
universities as factories in which students are referred to as 
commodities, examinations as quality control procedures, gradua-
tion as delivery and the professors as operators (Cooley 1987), it 
behoves all professions to look carefully at the mechanistic concepts 
which are now beginning to dominate many professional areas. As 
new technology in the form of CAD, AI and expert systems is 
increasingly deployed, the real point at issue is if the systems will 
be computer-aided design or computer-controlled design and 
whether they are expert systems or expert replacement systems. 
Medicine, law and architecture, to mention but a few, are now 
confronted with these issues as AI and expert systems are 
increasingly contemplated for these profeSSional domains. 
Will the systems be designed as tools in the same sense in which 
Heidegger conceptualized it (Ehn 1988), or will they be machines 
which reduce human beings to abject appendage status? These are 
burning issues facing industrial society as we approach the year 
2000. Indeed, these are some of the issues which will define our 
humanity and determine the future of our species in the coming 
millenium. The twenty-first century is a mere ten years away and 
its coming provides a powerful and psychological stimulus to re-
examine the values, objectives and needs of our industrial society. 
It will constitute the end of an extraordinary millenium in which 
we have seen the decline of feudalism, the growth of our cities, 
industrial society and, above all, the development of that double-
edged weapon, Western science and technology. It has been a 
journey which displayed the great strengths and the weaknesses 
of modem science and technology in which the delinquent genius 
of our species has produced both the beauty of Venice and the 
hideousness of Chernobyl, the caring, diagnostic potential of the 

viii 
Foreword 
X-ray and the awesome destructiveness of the neutron bomb. 
This book vividly invites us to build on that which is creative 
and humanistic and caring in our manufacturing technology. It will 
be an important contribution to a profound debate which hopefully 
will lay the basis for forms of manufacturing technology which are 
appropriate to our species as we approach the twenty-first century, 
a century in which we shall have to move from economy of scale 
to economy of scope (European Competitiveness in the 21st Century). 
The book highlights three borders which have to be crossed. In 
doing so it implicitly identifies the greatest border of all - that in 
our own consciousness. 
Mike Cooley 
References 
Cooley MJE (1987) Architect or Bee? Chatto and Windus, London 
European competitiveness in the 21st century: the integration of work, culture and 
technology. A 95-page report available free from FAST, Rue de la Loi 200, B-1049 
Brussels, Belgium. 
Ehn P (1988) Work-oriented design of computer artefacts. Arbetslivscentrum, 
Stockholm 

Contents 
Introduction ................................................................ 
1 
1. 
The Work-Oriented Shaping Perspective: The Problem 
Setting and Perspectives ......................................... 
5 
1.1 
Do We Need a New Paradigm? ................................. 
5 
1.2 The Technique-Oriented Approach........................... 
6 
1.2.1 Background and Assumptions ......................... 
6 
1.2.2 Example....................................................... 
7 
1.2.3 "Weaknesses" in the Practical Implementation.... 
8 
1.3 The Sociotechnical Approach ................................... 
9 
1.3.1 Background and Assumptions ......................... 
9 
1.3.2 Examples ..................................................... 
10 
1.3.3 "Weaknesses" in the PracticalImplementation .... 
11 
1.4 The Human-Centred Approach ................................ 
12 
1.4.1 Background and Assumptions ......................... 
12 
1.4.2 Examples ..................................................... 
13 
1.4.3 Possible Limitations and Challenges of the 
Human-Centred Approach ............................. 
15 
1.5 Towards a Work-Oriented Shaping Approach ............. 
15 
1.6 Summary ............................................................. 
19 
2 
The Interdisciplinary Design of Computer-Integrated 
Manufacturing Systems: ESPRIT Project 1217 (1199) 
Part One .............................................................. 
21 
2.1 Introduction......... .. ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... .... ............ 
21 
2.2 Experiences of Interdisciplinary Collaboration During 
the First Year of the Project ...................................... 
23 
2.2.1 The UK CAM Group ...................................... 
23 
2.2.2 The Danish CAD Group .................................. 
26 
2.2.3. The German CAP Group ................................ 
29 
2.3 Evaluation of the First-Year Experiences in the Three 
National Groups.................................................... 
33 
2.3.1 National Differences....................................... 
33 
2.3.2 Critical Evaluation of Interdisciplinary 
Collaboration During the First Year of the 
Project ......................................................... 
34 

x 
Contents 
2.4 The "Shaping Paper" - Intentions, Reactions and 
Influence .............................................................. 
36 
2.4.1 Intentions: The International Social Science Group 
(ISSG) .......................................................... 
36 
2.4.2 The Social Shaping of Technology and Work ....... 
37 
A 
Introduction...... . . . . . .. ............ . . ........ .. .. ........ 
37 
B 
The Concept of Technological Shaping ............ 
38 
B.1 
Introduction............................................... 
38 
B.2 
The Role of Technological Rationality .............. 
39 
B.3 
Technological Rationality and the Mechanistic 
World Picture ............................................. 
41 
B.4 
Work and Personality from a Holistic 
Perspective ................................................ 
42 
B.4.1 
The Search for a New Paradigm ..................... 
42 
B.4.2 
The Concept of "Life-World" and "System" ..... 
43 
B.4.3 
The Concept of "Praxis" ............................... 
44 
B.4.4 
The Relation Between Mind and Body............. 
45 
B.4.5 
The Relationship between Working Conditions 
and the Personality...... ..... ....... .. ............ .... .. 
46 
B.5 
Fields of Technology Shaping ........................ 
47 
C 
Dimensions of Human-Centred Work............. 
50 
C.1 
Introduction... .............. .... ........ . ..... ...... ..... . 
50 
C.2 
The Relationship of Work and Technology ....... 
51 
C.3 
Work and Communication ........ ........... ..... .... 
52 
C.4 
Work and Learning ..................................... 
54 
C.4.1 
The Relationship Between Cultivation (Bildung) 
and Qualification ........................................ 
55 
o 
Methods for Evaluating and Shaping Computer-
Aided Technology and Work ......................... 
57 
0.1 
Introduction ............................................... 
57 
0.2 
A Scenario ................................................. 
60 
0.2.1 
Range of Products ....................................... 
60 
0.2.2 
The Factory................................................ 
60 
0.2.3 
The Production Island.................................. 
62 
0.2.4 The Workplace ........................................... 
63 
0.3 
The Scenario Related to the Dimensions and 
Criteria of Experiencing, Shaping and 
Evaluating Work......................................... 
64 
0.3.1 
The Normative Perspective of the Shaping 
Process ..................................................... 
64 
0.3.2 Dimensions of Work .................................... 
64 
0.3.3 
Example of How to Use the Dimensions of Work 
in the Shaping and Evaluation Process ............ 
69 
0.3.4 
Criteria for Human-Machine Interface Design.. 
72 
0.3.5 Summary.................................................. 
74 
0.4 
How to Shape and Evaluate Computer-Aided 
Technology and Work .................................. 
75 
0.4.1 
Typical Shortcomings of Conventional Methods 
of System Development ............................... 
75 

Contents 
xi 
D.4.2 The Search after Methods in Accordance with 
the New Paradigm ...................................... 
75 
E 
References ................................................. 
77 
2.4.3 Reactions of the Engineers to the Shaping Paper.... 
79 
2.4.4 The Influence of the Shaping Paper on the 
Project ......................................................... 
80 
3 
Interdisciplinary Collaboration in the Second Half of 
ESPRIT Project 1217 (1199) ...................................... 
83 
3.1 
Experiences of Interdisciplinary Collaboration at the 
National Level....................................................... 
83 
3.1.1 The British CAM Group .................................. 
83 
3.1.2 The Danish CAD Group.................................. 
84 
3.1.3 The German CAP Group ................................. 
87 
3.2 Experiences of Collaboration at the International Level... 
88 
3.2.1 The International Data Management Group ........ 
89 
3.3 Lessons Learned .................................................... 
93 
3.3.1 Constraints on Interdisciplinary Collaboration .... 
93 
3.3.2 Experiences of Improved Collaboration During the 
Project ......................................................... 
96 
4 
Crossing the Border...... ...... ........ .... .. .... ...... .. ...... .. .. 
99 
4.1 
Crossing the Border - A Tentative Definition............... 
99 
4.1.1 Fields of Action ............................................. 
99 
4.1.2 Agents Involved in the Shaping Process ............. 101 
4.1.3 Shaping Competence ..................................... 105 
4.2 
Participatory Systems Development .......................... 109 
4.2.1 Hierarchic-Sequential Design Tradition ............. 109 
4.2.2 The Limitations of Traditional Design ................ 113 
4.2.3 Technology Shaping ....................................... 114 
4.3 The Shaping Process............................................... 116 
4.4 Prospective Example of the Shaping Process as a Rolling 
Development ........................................................ 122 
4.4.1 Preparation of the Shaping Process ................... 123 
4.4.2 Future-Creating Workshops .......... .................. 123 
4.4.3 Shaping Workshops ....................................... 124 
4.4.4 Coordination of the Results of the Shaping 
Workshops .................................................. 126 
4.4.5 The Second Shaping Workshop........................ 127 
4.4.6 Seminar with Outside Experts. ......... .... ............ 127 
4.4.7 Conclusion ................................................... 128 
4.5 Summary and Conclusions ...................................... 128 
References......... ....... . .. .. . . .... ..... . . . .... .. . . . . ........... . .......... 133 
Subject Index............................................................... 136 

Introduction 
This book discusses and develops concepts and methods of interdisciplinary 
collaboration between engineers, social scientists and users in the process of 
developing "human-centred" production technology. The title Crossing the 
Border is intentionally ambiguous as it alludes to three "borders". 
The first and most important border which we attempt to cross is the 
conceptual, philosophical and methodological border which separates social 
science from engineering design. With few exceptions, the social scientific 
study of advanced manufacturing technology has concerned itself with the 
impact of the technology on jobs, skills, productivity, motivation, 
management style, organization structure, and so forth. In this approach to 
understanding factory life, technology is treated as a black box and an 
independent variable. Far fewer social scientists have focused their attention 
on the engineering design objectives, practices and methods (Le. the 
processes) which lay beneath the technology under scrutiny. Similarly, design 
engineers typically do not concern themselves with the human aspects of 
their artefacts once completed. Indeed, their training (and the same is generally 
true for social science training) encourages a bifurcation of the technical and 
social realms of working life. 
In this book we attempt to "cross the border" between social science and 
engineering design by opening up the black box which so often constitutes 
advanced manufacturing technology in most social science research and by 
exploring and developing concepts and methods with which social scientists, 
engineers and users may work together to design human-centred technology 
and humane computer-aided work systems. 
The second border, closely related to the first, is the border which separates 
conventional social science research (which takes a reactive stance to the world 
of technology and work) from applied research and development of a more 
proactive kind. We take the view that theory must lead to practice in a more 
direct way than has hitherto been the case in advanced manufacturing 
technology research. To take a simple example, if empirical investigations 
show that a given technology directly produces adverse stress reactions in a 
majority of users, then there is a case for redesigning that technology. The 
problems which are associated with this shift from reactive observation to 
proactive design or redesign supply one of the key themes of the book. 
The idea of shaping or redesigning technology in a human-centred manner 
is rooted in urgent social problems reflected in "inhumane" technology and 
its technocentric application to the labour process. This is not to suggest that 

2 
Crossing the Border 
the term human-centred is some kind of panacea. The term itself is not 
unproblematic. For, although it has taken less than a decade for "human-
centredness" to become an integral part of the "new factory" and "new 
production concepts" debate in Europe (particularly within the European 
Community), the expansive use and definitions of the term threaten to reduce 
it to a concept synonymous with "user friendly". Hence, one of the key 
objectives of this book is to clarify such misconceptions through definition 
(located in the historical critique of production technological development in 
advanced industrial societies), through the presentation of the fundamental 
argument supporting the human-centred concept, and by rendering it 
applicable to practical purposes. 
The third border of the title is the most tangible of the three and refers to 
the national borders (between the UK, Denmark and West Germany) which 
geographically and culturally separated ourselves as authors. On participating 
in the ESPRIT (European Strategic Program of Research in Information 
Technology) project described in later chapters, it became clear that substantial 
differences of emphasis and philosophy existed between the project 
participants based in the three countries involved. These differences were 
manifested not only between ourselves, but also between social scientists 
more widely and between the engineering designers. For this reason both 
the project and this book chartered some turbulent waters over their three-
year time-span. In the case of this book, we believe that the course which 
was eventually taken represents a constructive (although by no means 
definitive or exhaustive) synthesis of social science thinking within the three 
countries in the area of technology and work. However, as will become 
apparent during the reading of this book, we do not attempt to hide the 
differences and conflicts which arose during the project as a result of such 
differences. 
In this regard, the process of writing the book is worth noting. We (the 
authors) met each other for the first time in 1986 through our involvement in 
ESPRIT Project 1217 (1199) which began in the same year. As social scientists, 
we established ourselves as a design subgroup in order to develop a conceptual 
framework for the concept of human-centredness and to devise ways of 
translating this framework into usable design criteria or guidelines for our 
colleagues. Six months later (after numerous meetings in London, Bremen 
and Copenhagen) we produced a paper on "The Social Shaping of Technology 
and Work", included in Chapter 2 of this volume. 
It soon became apparent that the mere presentation of this paper was an 
insufficient contribution to the design process. Therefore, it was agreed that 
each of the three national interdisciplinary design groups should reflect upon 
and utilize the concepts outlined in the paper. This process was evaluated 
subsequently and is described in detail in Chapters 2 and 3. However, during 
the course of this evaluation it became clear that the discrepancy between the 
concepts within the "Shaping Paper" and actual design practice was far greater 
than anticipated (or desired). 
Thus we were forced to rethink and reappraise the dynamics of the design 
process (and our role within it). As a result, the Shaping Paper was developed 
by transforming the concept of human-centredness into a more holistic, 
participatory and interdisciplinary approach to human-centred computer-
integrated manufacturing (CIM) systems. During this process we often had 

Introduction 
3 
to cease writing and go back to the ESPRIT project and carry out experiments 
(such as the shaping workshops outlined in Chapter 4) before continuing with 
our deliberations and the completion of the book. Hence, the development 
of the human-centred design concept has, to a certain extent, been paralleled 
by the design methods we devised during the course of writing this book. In 
this sense the structure of the book mirrors the various stages of our own 
work process. 
Chapter 1 deals with the existing paradigm crisis in the field of technology 
and work. Three different perspectives are identified and assessed - the 
technique-oriented, the sociotechnical, and the human-centred approaches -
and a work-oriented approach is outlined. 
Chapters 2 and 3 focus on the interdisciplinary collaboration which 
developed within ESPRIT Project 1217 (1199) - entitled "Human-Centred CIM 
Systems" - between 1986 and 1989. The project personnel were based in three 
national design groups from the UK, Denmark and West Germany. Chapters 
2 and 3 describe the development of these interdisciplinary groups and of the 
various integrative, cross-national groups which were established. Using a 
combination of personal experience, project documentation and recorded 
interviews with project participants, these chapters highlight the differences 
in cultural tradition which often acted as barriers to collaboration. The 
importance of developing mechanisms to improve such collaboration is duly 
emphasized here. 
Chapter 4 deals with the problem of design method generalizability and 
addresses the question of how the experiences gained within the ESPRIT 
project may be transferred to, and further developed within, other research 
and development work in the area of computer-aided technology and work. 
One important issue here is the kind of attitudes and abilities required of 
social scientists, users and engineers to enable a fruitful collaboration in the 
design and development of humane computer-aided work systems. 
This final chapter also offers a number of meta-rules to guide 
interdisciplinary collaboration in the design of work technologies. These are 
exemplified by means of scenarios which demonstrate how such meta-rules 
may be translated into actual processes of integrated technology shaping. The 
book ends with a summary of some of our thoughts concerning the essential 
conditions necessary for fruitful prospective research and development project 
work. 

Chapter 1 
The Work-Oriented Shaping Perspective: 
The Problem Setting and Perspectives 
1.1 Do We Need a New Paradigm? 
In his book The Structure of Scientific Revolutions Thomas Kuhn (1970) coined 
the term "paradigm" for conceptual systems that dominate the thinking of 
scientific communities during certain specific periods of the evolution of 
science. Initially, each new paradigm has a positive and progressive role. 
Thus the Newtonian-Cartesian or mechanistic paradigm was so successful in 
its pragmatic technological applications that it became the ideal prototype for 
nearly all scientific thinking. Even disciplines like psychology, psychiatry and 
sociology quite consciously modelled themselves after it. 
It is well known that Freud was a member of the Helmholtz Society, whose 
explicit goal was to introduce into science the principles of Newtonian 
mechanics. The extreme example is behaviourism - an attempt to eliminate 
the element of consciousness as a legitimate object of scientific interest. Thus 
a paradigm may for a period be extremely powerful, clearly defining not only 
what reality is, but also what it is not and cannot possibly be. However, Kuhn 
proclaimed, sooner or later continued research will produce data that are 
incompatible with the leading paradigm. Reality is always much more 
complicated than any scientific theory, even the most sophisticated one. 
At first, all research challenging the dominant paradigm tends to be 
suppressed. The scientist who generates controversial data is criticized, 
isolated or even accused of cheating. When the new data hold in subsequent 
studies and are further confirmed by independent research, the discipline in 
question moves into a paradigm crisis. Out of the chaos of different 
alternatives, more or less "fantastic" theories, finally one of these emerges 
victorious as the new paradigm. This sequence of events is repeated again 
and again, Kuhn proclaims. 
Historical examples of major paradigm shifts are the transition from the 
geocentric astronomy to the heliocentric system of Copernicus and Galileo 
and, most recently, from the Newtonian mechanics to quantum-relativistic 
physics. 
As we shall describe in more detail later in this chapter, such a paradigm 
crisis in the field of work and technology seems to prevail at the moment. At 

6 
Crossing the Border 
least three perspectives are visible, based on different assumptions of the 
mutual priority of technical systems and human beings. 
Inspired by Numinen, we use the term "technique-oriented approach" to 
designate the perspective which places the machines or technically mediated 
communication before the human beings and direct personal communication 
(Numinen 1988). The term "sociotechnical approach" designates the 
perspective which seeks a point of equilibrium between the two. Finally, the 
term "human-centred approach" places human beings and direct personal 
communication before machines or technical-mediated communication, but 
still seeks a combination from that kind of priority. 
In the following sections of this chapter we intend to describe the above-
mentioned approaches in more detail. It should be clear, from the outset, that 
no single perspective can be understood without reference to the others. At 
the moment we are unable to formulate a new "victorious" paradigm. 
What we can do is to analyse the basic assumptions, strengths and 
limitations of the three approaches and, from this point of departure, discuss 
the fruitfulness of a multidisciplinary "shaping" perspective of work and 
technology. That means a perspective which intends to cross the borders 
between the technical and social sciences as well as between theoretical and 
practical knowledge through an action-based dialogue. We describe this 
concept in more detail at the end of this chapter. 
1.2 The Technique-Oriented Approach 
1.2.1 Background and Assumptions 
The technique-oriented approach is a "child" of the mechanistic model of the 
universe. This means the imagination of a universe of solid matter made of 
fundamental building blocks which, by definition, are indestructible. In this 
universe time is unidimensional, flowing from the past through the present 
to the future. It resembles a gigantic supermachine governed by linear chains 
of causes and effects. Therefore it is strictly deterministic. That means that 
we should be able to predict accurately any situation in the future, if we know 
all the factors operating in the present. 
Similar to the imagination of the universe, the human beings are viewed 
as biological machines. During the nineteenth century a number of attempts 
were made to codify and promote the ideas which could lead to the efficient 
organization and management of workers as if they were machines. 
Thus Adam Smith's The Wealth of Nations (Smith 1776), praising division of 
labour, was followed by Eli Whitney's public demonstration of mass 
production in 1801. Then, in 1832 Charles Babbage, inventor of one of the 
earliest forms of mathematical computer, advocated a scientific approach to 
organization (Babbage 1832). It was not until the twentieth century, however, 
that the mechanical approaches were synthesized in a more systematic way. 
Thus the German sociologist Max Weber observed the parallels between 
the mechanization of industry and the emerging bureaucratization of 
organizations. Bureaucracy was defined as a form of organization that 

The Work-Oriented Shaping Perspective 
7 
emphasizes precision, regularity, speed and efficiency achieved through the 
creation of fixed division of tasks, hierarchical structure and detailed rules for 
activities. The parallels to machines were clear and deliberate. The mechanistic 
model proved to be an extremely powerful concept and emerged further 
during the last four decades, during which information technology has been 
so widespread in nearly every aspect of working life. 
Regarding the field of work and technology, the ultimate dream is the fully 
automated factory. 
1.2.2 Example 
The thinking of the technique-oriented approaches may be further illustrated 
and reflected by an analysis of the ESPRIT -financed research project entitled 
Design Rules for a elM System. This study is only one of many, but is chosen 
as an example here because, at the present time, it seems to be the most 
systematic approach which clearly demonstrates how human beings as 
subjects nearly disappear in the technically integrated system (Yeomans et al. 
1985). 
The principal objective of this study was: 
to propose a European CIM system structure. In particular, it was proposed to address three 
separate but related goals: 
1. to modularize the total CIM system into functionally discrete subsystems. 
2. to describe the minimum functional specification of each subsystem. 
3. to identify the interrelationships that exist between any OM subsystem and all other 
subsystems. (Yeomans et al. 1985, p. 4) 
In an attempt to do so, Yeomans et al. define three strategies "necessary 
in reference to any elM undertaking": 
a processing strategy concerning the manner in which processing is to be distributed between 
a large number of different processing devices; 
a data strategy concerning the design and distribution of the total data so that all processors and 
procedures may have access to consistent and authoritative data values; 
a communications strategy concerning the network for a computerized manufacturing system 
built in such a way that all transmissions can take place within the required time frame. (Yeomans 
et al. 1985, pp. 7-8) 
Though not directly stated, it is obvious that the mechanistic model, or the 
machine metaphor, dominates Yeoman's way of thinking. Just as an engineer 
designs a machine by defining a network of interdependent parts and 
arranging them in a specific sequence and anchored by precisely defined 
points of resistance or rigidity, so Yeomans et al. intend to "modularize the 
total elM system into functionally discrete subsystems . . . and to identify 
interrelationships between them". 
The strength of this approach depends on the possibilities of standardizing 
and generalizing rules. And this again depends on the stability of the 
environment and the complexity of the organization in question. 
Even Yeomans et al. may doubt the realization of their approach, when 
they regret that so far "there is no generally accepted list of subsystems". 
There is not indeed any accepted understanding of the range of company 
activities which any subsystem should address (Yeomans et al. 1985, p. 2). 

8 
Crossing the Border 
As pointed out by Gareth Morgan: 
This approach works well only under conditions where machines work well: (a) when there is 
a straightforward task to perform, (b) when the environment is stable enough to ensure that the 
products produced will be appropriate ones, (c) when one wishes to produce exactly the same 
product time and again, (d) when preciSion is at a premium, (e) when the human 'machine' 
parts are compliant and behave as they have been designed to do. (Morgan 1986, p. 34) 
If one or more of the above conditions are not fulfilled, the limitations of 
this approach will be obvious. Moreover, there are several reasons for being 
sceptical about the "universal mode" which lay behind their approach. In 
general Yeomans et al. operate with "two quite different types of rules: rules 
that apply to particular subsystems and interfaces ('design rules') and rules 
that are generally applicable to all the subsystems of elM ('Maxims')" 
(Yeomans et al. 1985, p. 6). 
Firstly, it presupposes a universal model of integration of the different parts 
of the production system (there is always a model behind the "rules"). Thereby 
an implicit model monopoly and determinism is imposed, characteristic of 
the mechanistic model as mentioned above. Secondly, generally applicable 
rules may be an illusion even from a strictly functional perspective of 
implementing elM systems. Particular historical contexts of qualification 
structure in the firm involved, profile of products and existing organization 
of work, resources available and so on may be of essential importance, when 
making choices of if or how some parts of a elM system may be implemented. 
Being sceptical about the "maxims" approach is not the same as denying 
that rules can be more or less generally applied. The essential point is that 
they cannot be universally applied such as Yeomans et al. intend to do. 
1.2.3 "Weaknesses" in the Practical Implementation 
The technique-oriented approach to systems integration has so far resulted 
in an increase in both size and complexity of systems. Efforts have been made 
to keep systems structure within the limit of controllability. Thus the "top-
down principle" (i.e. starting from the system as a whole and then gradually 
specifying in greater and greater detail until actual implementation is possible) 
has created new kinds of problems. 
The increased complexity of the systems (as they became more and more 
integrated) has increased the need for documentation too. In order to survey 
and control this higher degree of complexity, new procedures had to be created 
which themselves contributed to the increasing number of items to be 
controlled. 
In most cases the technique-oriented approaches have failed to produce the 
desired results (Majchrzak 1988). More and more it became obvious - even 
among computer scientists, but essentially among industrial management 
circles - that reasons for this must lie in the failure to take sufficient account 
of the reality of work organization and the education of end-users. Owing to 
a lack of education and perhaps also a lack of motivation, the end-users were 
continuously found to be insufficiently "disciplined" to handle the systems 
correctly. Furthermore, old traditional structures of work organization created 
unanticipated constraints and wastage of resources. 

The Work-Oriented Shaping Perspective 
9 
Information technology has grown up in an environment of mathematics 
and the natural sciences, and has thereby been dominated by the positivistic 
epistemology of practice. This practice rests on three dichotomies: the 
separation of means and ends, the separation of research from practice, and 
the separation of knowing from doing. 
Yeomans et al.' s intention to develop universally applicable rules or maxims 
is clearly an example of separation of means and ends. The whole approach 
is very abstract and far from the practice of a typical organization. As Numinen 
(sarcastically) points out: "The model is 'out there' somewhere, awaiting its 
'discoverers' like the laws of nature or new continents. The model builder 
either succeeds in finding the 'correct' model or produces an erroneous one" 
(Numinen 1988, p. 65). 
The weaknesses expressed above do not make the technique-oriented 
approach obsolete or totally wrong. It means, however, that it is clearly 
insufficient as the only perspective for implementing new technology in the 
working life. It is necessary to become more conscious of its limits and allow 
other perspectives to influence the development. 
1.3 The Sociotechnical Approach 
1.3.1 Background and Assumptions 
The sociotechnical approach can be seen as a response to the challenges, 
which earlier ones failed to satisfy. The concept was created in the 1950s by 
members of the Tavistock Institute of Human Relations in England in an 
attempt to be aware of the interdependent qualities of the social and technical 
aspects of work. In their view, one element of this dual configuration always 
has important consequences for the other. This has been well illustrated by 
many Tavistock studies, for example one conducted by Trist and Bamforth 
on technological change in coal mining in England in the late 1940s. The 
assembly-line coal cutting created severe problems - destroying the informal 
social relations present in the mine. The resolution was to find means of 
reconciling human needs and technical efficiency (Trist and Bamforth 1948). 
The technical and the social systems of an organization are considered more 
or less equally important; neither system is subordinated to the other. This 
assumption is clearly a response to the defects of the technique-oriented 
approach discussed above. 
On the other hand, the sociotechnical approach is also a response to earlier 
work-oriented approaches of more or less mechanistic kind. In the first decades 
of the twentieth century, Taylor (1911) and other classical management 
theorists such as Fayol (1949), Mooney and Reiley (1931) and Gulick and 
Urwick (1937) saw organization of work as a technical problem. Motivation 
was viewed as a question of the "right" rate of payment. 
Much of the work-oriented research strategies since the late 1920s can be 
evaluated as an attempt to "repair" the social and productive inefficiencies of 
this perspective. The Hawthorne studies conducted under the leadership of 
Elton Mayo in the 1920s and 1930s identified the importance of informal and 

10 
Crossing the Border 
unplanned interactions existing along with the formal organization (Mayo 
1933). They showed the importance of paying close attention to the human 
aspect of production. 
Thus the idea of stimulating the productivity through satisfaction of social 
needs of the employees came in focus for a whole school of organizational 
psychologists like Frederick Herzberg (1966) and Douglas McGregor (1960). 
Different modifications of bureaucratic structures began to emerge. 
Especially the idea of making employees feel more important by giving 
them more autonomy, responsibility and "enriched" motivating jobs was 
articulated as an "alternative" to the technique-oriented and dehumanizing 
"scientific management". Developed in a number of ways, the idea became 
well known as a frame of reference for human resource management. 
During the 1960s and 1970s, these ideas became attractive to management 
in an attempt to increase productivity, and reduce absenteeism and turnover, 
without paying more money. The experiments of Volvo Kalmar in the 1970s 
and of Volvo Uddevalla in the 1980s present internationally well-known 
examples of including work satisfaction and health and safety aspects into 
the increasing technical functionality and quality of products. In parentheses 
it should be noted that the job redesigns at Volvo Kalmar were highly 
publicized in the 1970s, but with the benefit of hindsight the results now seem 
very idealized compared with reality. Whilst it is too early to evaluate the 
new experiment in Uddevalla, some lessons from Kalmar seem to have been 
learned. 
Niels Bjorn-Andersen has characterized the basic idea of sociotechnical 
approach as a threefold one (Bjorn-Anderson 1980): 
1. Job design includes other individual needs of the employees besides pay 
(hereby clearly distinct from Taylorism). 
2. Social and technical needs and goals are considered equally important. 
3. Instead of specialized individual tasks, the focus is on autonomous, self-
steeting groups. 
1.3.2 Examples 
In the early 1960s the sociotechnical approach was taken up and further 
developed in Scandinavia (Sandberg 1982; Ehn 1988). The Norwegian 
Industrial Democracy Project was initiated around 1960, approximately ten 
years after the initial Tavistock sociotechnical experiments. Between 1964 and 
1967 four experiments on work organization were carried out. The solutions 
were all of the group production type, including some planning activities, 
but primarily concerned with changes in job distribution and wage systems. 
The workers' interests gradually turned into resignation, since no important 
improvement in their situation seemed to come about (Ehn 1988, p. 264). 
In the late 1960s in Sweden, and at the beginning of the 1970s in Denmark, 
experiments were jointly initiated by the central unions and employee 
organizations. Several interesting ideas of work organization and employee 
participation came up, but the practical implementation left much behind. 
For example, the participation for democracy was in no sense included in the 
aims of the design at the well-known experiment at the Volvo Kalmar plant. 

The Work-Oriented Shaping Perspective 
11 
This was one of the reasons why, in the late 1970s, the Swedish union of 
employees (LO) refused to accept a joint sociotechnical programme for "new 
factories" . 
In contrast to the technical-oriented approach, the sociotechnical approach 
has a much more positive concept of the human being: he is a member of a 
group. He is generally perceived as an active, responsible person interested 
in doing "a good day's work", if the circumstances are sufficiently appealing 
to him. Furthermore, the unofficial communication network is considered just 
as important as the official one. At least some sociotechnical approaches tried 
to increase end-user influence and democratic participation. 
Thus, the sociotechnical approach contains many aspects which will later 
be developed in detail in this book. But it also contains several conceptual 
limitations. Treating the organization as two separated systems in equilibrium 
of some kind, in which the technical system was largely taken for granted, 
the questions were largely reduced to more adaptable social relations to the 
existing technical devices, or the management dominated decisions of the 
new production technology. The scope for changes therefore was rather 
limited from the beginning. 
In order to be consistent, the ontological status of increasing integration of 
technical systems and the built-in demand on the social system have never 
been seriously questioned in the sociotechnical approach. 
1.3.3 "Weaknesses" in the Practical Implementation 
Partly as a consequence of the conceptual limitations mentioned above, the 
sociotechnical approaches by and large accepted the technology as given in 
the practical context too. It improved the working conditions by managerial 
changes - job enlargement, job enrichment, etc., and particularly (semi-) 
autonomous work groups. Howard Rosenbrock (a member of the International 
Committee for the Quality of Working Life in the 1970s) quotes the assessment 
made by Norwegian sociotechnical specialist Einar Thorsrud: "Many 
experiments of this kind were conducted and the general experience was that 
they achieved local success, but did not spread through the organization, and 
died when the sociotechnical specialists were withdrawn" (personal 
communication) . 
The approaches often seem to promise more employee influence and work 
participation, in theory, than the real power relations in the experimenting 
plants were able to accept in practice. The workers involved often found that 
changes stopped before any substantial changes towards real influence had 
been achieved. Their initial interest or even enthusiasm therefore typically 
turned into resignation or even hostility towards the "soft" management 
strategies. As Numinen points out: "Small wonder that these good intentions 
were often regarded as a form of manipulation, intended to trick the users 
into accepting the system" (Numinen 1988, p. 104). 
On the other hand, this does not mean that the sociotechnical approach 
should be totally abandoned. As Pelle Ehn noted: "Many of the 'tools' that 
have been developed are extremely useful in analyzing work organization 
and production technology: and the job required and group autonomy criteria 
are, when taken seriously, really a challenge to design for democracy at work" 
(Ehn 1988, p.270). 

12 
Crossing the Border 
The point is that other perspectives may be needed as well. Though the 
sociotechnical approach in many ways changed the perception of the worker 
in a more positive direction, it did not really understand the importance of 
subjectively bounded knowledge in the work process. This aspect is, on the 
other hand, in focus in the third perspective, which we will analyse in the 
following section. 
1.4 The Human-Centred Approach 
1.4.1 Background and Assumptions 
In the 1970s the critical evaluation of the above-mentioned limitations of the 
sociotechnical approaches led to the so-called human-centred approaches. 
The common core of these approaches was that work culture-based knowledge 
and actions of human beings should be reflected in a dynamic way instead 
of being subsumed. 
In the UMIST project of a human-centred turning lathe, Howard Rosenbrock 
expressed his orientation regarding technological development: 
It should not use men and women to perform meaningless fragmented jobs which reduce them 
to automata. But this is not the same thing as suggesting a return to more primitive craftmanship 
days. The problem is rather to use the best technology that we know, but to make it an aid to 
those who work with it, so that their work becomes an enrichment, not an impoverishment of 
their humanity, and so that the resource which their abilities represent is used to the highest 
degree. (Rosenbrock 1977) 
Rosenbrock attempted in the academic realm to implement the idea of the 
shapability of technology into a research and development project. He 
designed an alternative lathe that was not based on a Tayloristic concept. 
Both the lathe and its CNC (computer numerical control) controller were 
geared towards preserving and furthering the qualifications of skilled workers. 
Rosenbrock's concept of alternative technological development rests on two 
basic ideas. The first of these he has called the "Lushai Hill effect": 
Our biggest danger lies in what I may perhaps call the Lushai Hill effect. Resting in the evening 
and looking back over the lower hills, it is easy to say, "At every fork we took the right-hand 
branch, and see how high we have climbed. Taking the right-hand must be the only way." 
Though, if we had sometimes taken the left-hand branch, we should in all probability be just as 
high and perhaps in a region which was in other ways richer, more friendly and more fertile. 
(Rosenbrock 1980) 
The second idea encapsulates the dynamic development of productivity. 
According to the latter, the immediate reinvestment of rationalization profits 
into further reduction of the number of skilled workers is bound, in the long 
run, to prove economically inferior to a strategy designed to put to the 
company's use the innovatory potential represented by its skilled workers. 

The Work-Oriented Shaping Perspective 
13 
1.4.2 Examples 
An example in this tradition is the Lucas Workers Plan for Socially Useful 
Production. As Mike Cooley reflects the process: 
What the Lucas workers did was to embark on an exemplary project which would inflame the 
imagination of others. To do so, they realized that it was necessary to demonstrate in a very 
practical and direct way the creative power of U ordinary people". . . The audit of their own skills 
and abilities, and the surveys in different factories and workshops analyzing and assessing the 
production equipment, product ranges and skills, represented an enormous extension of 
consciousness. (Cooley 1987, p. 139) 
Lucas Aerospace has had a noticeable impact on the British and international 
debates about alternative, socially compatible products. Highly qualified 
engineers, technicians and skilled workers, who lost their jobs following the 
closing down of an entire production sector, have turned their protest into 
constructive ideas concerning the production of socially useful items, thereby 
setting a signal noted in Britain and beyond. 
In the UK, this eventually led to a large-scale attempt by the Greater London 
Council (GLC) to develop a regional economic policy geared towards a use-
value-oriented product design. To this end, the London Technology Network 
was founded. Grouped around the London polytechnics, this aims at 
combining and putting to community's use the large-scale capacity for 
innovation represented by the competence of academics, the experience and 
skills of workers and unemployed people, the needs and desires of the 
population, of the various trades and of the community services. Technology 
shaping was viewed as one dimension in the shaping of London's social 
future, which was to be geared towards the needs, requirements and interests 
of the many people concerned. 
This large-scale experiment rested on a firm belief in the shapability of 
technology and in the need to govern the latter by means arrived at in a 
dialogue (and cooperation) involving academics from various disciplines, 
employees, users, producers and people in need. 
Both the London Technology Network (based on an idea of and set up by 
Mike Cooley) and Howard Rosenbrock's contributions to the shaping of 
technology represent two important strands from which the international 
initiative towards a human-centred eIM project evolved. The British ideas 
and initiatives excited a great deal of interest in Scandinavia and in West 
Germany among trade unionists and academics, not least because they were 
grappling with comparable problems. 
A Scandinavian project, UTOPIA, at the beginning of the 1980s had a similar 
objective. A Danish/Swedish research team consisting of both social scientists 
and computer specialists collaborated closely with the Unions of Printers in 
Sweden. The objective was the development of a demonstration example of 
how work quality such as highly skilled labour force, democratic decision 
process and high level of health and safety are compatible with high product 
quality. UTOPIA presented an education objective developed in parallel with 
the alternative systems: 
The education should make the printers able to participate in the implementation and adapation 
of the system. Furthermore it may shape a development process in which knowledge and 
experiences regarding using the system is transformed to a local further development of 

14 
Crossing the Border 
techniques and work organization. (UTOPIA Report 1981, pp. 27-28) 
In West Germany both IGM (metalworkers' union) and DGB (the top 
organization of German trade unions) had launched a discussion around the 
issues of "work and technology", mainly in order to press for a labour and 
technology policy geared towards a concept of shaping exceeding that 
underlying attempts at the humanization of work (HdA). True to the tradition 
of the HdA programme, up until 1983/4, this discussion remained essentially 
confined to the shaping and organization of the labour process and to the 
development of those technical items immediately relevant to it. 
The first Bremen symposium on Work and Technology provided the 
platform for academics from the humanities and engineering, for trade 
unionists, managers and politicians to take stock of the research and 
development in the area of work and technology and extensively to discuss 
the concept of technology shaping. Moreover, the symposium afforded the 
opportunity for a first exchange of ideas with Cooley, who reported on the 
London Technology Network both in the opening plenary session and in the 
strand on "production engineering". 
The Bremen symposium has stimulated academic debate around the issue 
of technology shaping and has added the latter concept to the work and 
technology offensive of the IGMIDGB which is geared towards shaping. This 
is an important source feeding into the HC-CIM project. 
The project initiative was immediately triggered off by a one-week study 
tour by a German group made up of social scientists, engineers and trade 
unionists who, following the Bremen symposium on work and technology, 
discussed with British colleagues the concept underlying the Technology 
Network, projects concerned with alternative production, and the UMIST 
research and development project. 
The evaluation report bears witness to the ambiguity of the participants' 
insights, impressions and feelings, having closely analysed the results of that 
trip. This is borne out by the following extract from the report: 
The model of the Greater London Enterprise Board (GLEB) along with its Technology Network 
is a fascinating experiment, which impresses chiefly by the commitment shown, and the pragmatic 
approach taken, by the people involved. Leaving aside the economic structures of the UK and 
EC as well as the pulls and constraints exerted by the world market, the initiators can quote a 
large number of good reasons in support of their attempt. This consists in a product-oriented 
initiative tailored to the needs and requirements of the population and the numerous small 
manufacturers. It is carried out in a close cooperation between academics and people possessing 
practical knowledge, it is decentralized, aiming at community-oriented innovation around 
polytechnics. We were fascinated and made doubtful alike by what we saw. Taking into account 
the economic and political structures of the UK in which these projects are embedded, one begins 
to have serious doubts as to their long-term viability. Our fascination, on the other hand, was 
due to the pragmatic commitment and the spontaneity which characterize these projects. This 
appears to us to be their particular strength and main weakness alike. After evaluating our visit, 
we were left with a number of open questions: 
Can the Technology Network serve as the model of socially compatible technology shaping? 
How can alternative economic policy for all London evolve out of individual, cleverly designed 
products? 
How are "alternative" products to be defined in the context of the GLEB model? 
Who is the historical subject of the alternative technology and labour policy implemented in the 
UK, and in London in particular? 
Could the alternative lathe developed by UMIST not equally well have been designed in any 
open-minded company? 

The Work-Oriented Shaping Perspective 
15 
At the end of the day, curiosity prevailed over theoretically founded 
scepticism, and pragmatic research interest as well as common commitment 
to labour and shaping-oriented research predominated over mere analysis. 
Thus it was that the He-CIM project came into being. 
1.4.3 Possible Limitations and Challenges of the Human-Centred 
Approach 
Human-centredness is an illusive concept. Behind the concept lies a 
questioning of the ways in which conventional manufacturing technology has 
been shaped, and a redefinition of the "socially desirable". In other words, 
although human-centred systems are technologically possible, tools and 
methods with which they may be constructed have themselves to be 
developed. 
This confronts engineers and social scientists within the project design team 
with a dilemma. For although human-centredness can be substantiated and 
explicated in numerous ways within social science and humanities, the concept 
does not lend itself to conventional empirical study and analysis. Human-
centredness is ultimately a subjective concept which cannot easily be translated 
into operational criteria. 
The tentative focus on a single human being or the man-machine interface 
which characterized much of the discussion in the UMIST tradition may limit 
the scope to the micro level. But a human-centred production cell could be 
incorporated into a work environment based on job simplification and 
deskilling. As will be described later this dilemma became a quite serious 
matter of concern in ESPRIT Project 1217. 
A challenge to the human-centred approach may be to go deeper into the 
shaping of the technical systems, thus deviating from the sociotechnical 
approach's "adaptation attitude". Another challenge may be to integrate 
theoretical and practical knowledge. But how to do this? As stated earlier 
there is no "one best way" to do this. At the moment we have no "victorious" 
paradigm to rely on. So far the human-centred approach contains important 
perspectives, but by no means an overall frame of reference for the 
development of work and technology. The "answer" at the moment may be 
to open the opportunities of new ways of collaboration between different 
scientific disciplines and people with practical knowledge of the field in 
question, and thereby gradually develop a combined understanding and 
strategy for development of work and technology. 
1.5 Towards a Work-Oriented Shaping Approach 
The "shaping perspective" is fundamentally rooted in the human-centred 
approach. This means that shaping of technology and work must be in 
accordance with the values of the human-ecological tradition (enrichment of 
work quality, use-values of products and ecological balance of energy 
processes in a broader sense). 
On the other hand, the shaping perspective faces the necessity to transcend 

16 
Crossing the Border 
TECHNOLOGY AS UNITY OF 
the technologically 
possible 
the socially desirable/ 
necessary 
scientific/technical 
knowledge 
experience-based 
technical knowledge 
scientific/ technical 
tools 
technical standards _----J 
Technical 
~ 
TECHNOLOGY 
-criteria 
-products 
Norms 
Orientations 
Social 
economic, social 
interests/wishes 
cultural orientations 
use-v8lue properties 
legal requirements 
Fig. 1.1. Technology as the unity of the technologically possible and the socially desirable. 
the individualistic man-machine perspective which has dominated the 
human-centred tradition so far, rooted as it is in the skills of the craftsperson. 
The challenge of the shaping perspective is not a romantic binding to the 
past. It is rather a combined transformation of the practical and theoretical 
knowledge into a new kind of collective skill formation and corresponding 
software and hardware development, based on the human-ecological 
tradition. 
The accentuation of the 
II shaping" aspect, rather than "effects", 
"consequences" and so on, demands a broader concept of technology. 
Fundamentally, technology is always a union of the technologically possible 
and the socially desirable. The relation is reciprocal in the sense that the 
technologically possible and the translation of social purposes into 
technological artefacts is dependent upon what is technologically possible to 
construct. 
Viewed from this perspective the shaping approach to work and technology 
becomes a matter of mutual exchanges of perspectives, imaginations, 
theoretical knowledge and practical experiences in order to re-unite the 
unfortunately separated "worlds", as a consequence of the powerful 

The Work-Oriented Shaping Perspective 
17 
domination of the mechanistic paradigm in Western science and technology 
over the last century. 
The idea of reuniting separate worlds may be illustrated in Fig. 1.1. The 
figure illustrates the necessity to reflect upon the following questions. What 
are the cultural, social and subjective orientations, wishes and interests 
governing the design and development of technology? What are the 
technological possibilities, and in what form are they available in terms of 
knowledge, tools, methods and abilities? How is it possible to use the different 
cultural, social and subjective orientations and interests of a multidisciplinary 
design team in a creative and emancipatory way? 
The continuously mutual exchanges of perspectives, so essential for the 
shaping approach, involve a multidisciplinary approach. Thus we are 
encouraged to learn how to think of situations from different viewpoints. 
Every discipline represents a viewpoint often of more or less metaphorical 
character. For example, the engineering viewpoint will typically be influenced 
by the machine metaphor stressing precision, speed, clarity, regularity, 
reliability and efficiency. The psychologist viewpoint may be influenced by 
the cognitive or psychoanalytic brain metaphor stressing connectivity, 
redundancy and capacity of self-organizing activities and double-loop 
learning. The sociologist viewpoint may be influenced by the political 
metaphor stressing divergent and convergent interests, conflicts and means 
of power and participation strategies in an attempt to find ways of practice. 
The anthropologist viewpoint may be influenced by the cultural metaphor 
stressing the symbolic meaning of day-to-day rituals, language, rules and 
informal networks and personal relations. 
Taken separately, every viewpoint produces one-sidedness. In highlighting 
certain interpretations or aspects of work and technology, it tends to force 
others into a background role. Our ability to achieve a comprehensive 
understanding as a platform for social shaping depends on an ability to see 
how these different aspects of working life may coexist in a complementary 
or even paradoxical way. 
Thus the technique-oriented, sociotechnical and human-centred approaches 
may be viewed as reflections of different aspects of work and technology 
rather than more or less victorious paradigms. Of course, this is not to deny 
that they also have the functions of paradigms. What is being stressed here 
is that the dogmatic use of only one of these perspectives may result in narrow-
minded or idealistic research. 
The human-centred approach has rediscovered the importance of 
subjectively bounded knowledge developed through mutual face-to-face 
communication and practicallearning-by-doing. The position of the individual 
is clearly more prominent than in the technique-oriented and sociotechnical 
approaches. The meaning of work is sought within individuals themselves. 
If a person is allowed to control and influence his or her way of working and 
its results, he or s~le will also show responsibility and produce products of 
sufficient quality. Responsible labour is a natural human activity. Therefore 
technology must be shaped in a way which supports the "whole person" to 
use and develop creativity, pleasure of work and special abilities. 
The sociotechnical approach has rediscovered the productivity-enhancing 
effects of semi-autonomous working groups and informal networks of 
commuication. Moreover, the importance of user participation as a means of 

18 
Crossing the Border 
gaining acceptance, improving the quality of the implemented technology 
and tentatively increasing the democratic effort to enhance the influence of 
groups at the shop-floor level has also been stressed, though not always 
successfully practised, by this approach. 
The technique-oriented approach has been the "Prugelknabe" (or 
"whipping boy"), because of its deterministic world view and obviously 
reductionistic understanding of the human being. 
On the other hand, this approach has introduced a number of important 
questions too. It has focused on aspects such as the problems of overall 
integration of different work areas and the rigidity of the traditional division 
of labour, and has generally broadened the scope by developing more or less 
sophisticated models of analysis, in particular the functional relations of 
planning and production as a connected system. While the human-centred 
approach traditionally has focused on the individual level and the 
sociotechnical approach has focused on the group level, the technique-
oriented approach has more and more developed models for overall system 
integration. 
Though these models may be criticized from different viewpoints, they have 
also provoked social scientists to realize limitations and new possibilities in 
their own understanding of work and technology. Therefore, these models 
are also important ingredients of a continuous shaping process. 
Rather than discussing the superiority of one of these approaches at the 
general level, the shaping perspective prefers to create a mutually stimulating 
and fruitful perspective and development environment through an open 
multidisciplinary, action-based research teamwork. As Morgan (1986) points 
out: "Rather than impose a viewpoint on a situation, one should allow the 
situation to reveal how it can be understood from other vantage points" (p. 
337). 
In order to do this, new methods of dialogue are needed. The stressing of 
dialogue is not accidental. The shaping perspective differs sharply from the 
"objectivistic" paradigm dominating technical-oriented approaches. Indi-
viduals are perceived as objects of modelling like anything else. If anything, 
they possess fruitful knowledge and potential resources of transcending 
limitations of work. They are subjects that are able to act and participate in 
a dialogue. Experience is analysed as if one's own experience were an object 
outside of oneself. Rather the "outer" and "inner" world are mutually 
fabricated in an active reciprocating process. The researcher is part of the 
shaping process, not standing outside as a "neutral observer". Therefore 
research is not only a question of analysing and evaluating, but also shaping 
new visions, processes and products in a continuous dialogue with people 
involved. Thus the shaping perspective necessitates crossing different kinds 
of ''borders'' established both in the scientific world and between theoretical 
and practical knowledge. 
The multidisciplinary approach may be an obvious opportunity to practise 
such an approach. However, it presupposes an open-ended mode of enquiry 
which enables problem setting and possible alternatives to emerge from the 
dialectical shifting of viewpoints or metaphors, rather than a mode of enquiry 
which focuses on isolated problems and/or piecemeal solutions. 
The real challenge, then, is to develop social and technical conditions and 
qualifications for such an open-ended mode of enquiry. This challenge 

The Work-Oriented Shaping Perspective 
19 
includes the practical experience of work. User participation sounds obvious, 
but may also involve a potential risk. As the Norwegian sociologist Stein 
Braten points out: 
If a model strong actor and a model weak actor are coupled in an open information exchange 
system, the former may be expected to gradually increase his control of the other actor. Offers 
of information are useful only to the extent that there is model capacity for processing the 
information offered. Thus a successful transition in the name of democratization to a more open 
communication structure may freeze - or even increase - the influence gap. (Braten 1983, p. 190) 
User participation in a work-oriented shaping process sounds obvious. But 
how to do it in practice? This is not only a question of more sophisticated 
methods and techniques, but also of common understanding and trust. The 
means ought not to be separated from the needs, as many experiences from 
different sociotechnical approaches from the 1960s and 1970s may have taught 
us. Or more precisely: user participation may include ends as well as means 
to reach the ends. If user participation has only an instrumental character, 
the feeling of manipulation and frustration will prevail sooner or later. 
Therefore the real core of the problem is how to establish the context and 
concrete methods by which user participation, in its most comprehensive 
form, can take place? This aspect will be further discussed in the following 
chapters. 
1.6 Summary 
As a summary the following questions give some insight into the common 
set of orientations and values behind the work-oriented shaping perpective. 
How to respect and reflect work culture-based knowledge and actions of 
employees and at the same time transcend rigid status traditions (e.g. white-
and blue-collar workers) in order to achieve new kinds of collective slcill 
formation? 
How to encourage a "bottom-up" participative approach and at the same 
time impose a holistic vision of better integrated overall process of organization 
and technical means of function? 
How to increase the capacity for self-organization and innovations 
emphasizing the special human abilities of learning from errors or deviations 
and question the rationality of the existing norms or rules of behaviour and 
at the same time include the technical opportunities to shape new ways of 
productive and qualitative work procedures? 
How to take into consideration that a changing process is not only change 
of technologies, structures and abilities of employees, but also images and 
orientations of management? 
How to develop multidisciplinary approaches to the shaping of technology 
and work that reintegrate the routines and imagination fantasy of skilled 
workers and designers and at the same time use the technological possibilities 
as much as possible to support the efficiency of this process? 
Though we do not believe we have the "final" answers to the questions, 
the following chapters in this book may stimulate further clarification and 
understanding of how to deal with the work-oriented shaping approach both 
in theory and in practice. 

Chapter 2 
The Interdisciplinary Design of Computer-
Integrated Manufacturing Systems: 
ESPRIT Project 1217 (1199) 
Part One 
2.1 Introduction 
The following two chapters focus on the interdisciplinary design processes 
which developed in ESPRIT Project 1217 (1199). 
The project, which began in May 1986, was based on the premise that a 
computer-integrated manufacturing (CIM) system will be more efficient, more 
economical, more robust and more flexible if a person is directly in charge 
than a comparable unmanned system. The project objectives were fivefold: 
1. Establish criteria for the design of human-centred CIM systems. 
2. Establish their economic and commercial competitiveness. 
3. Achieve a high level of flexibility and robustness in CIM systems. 
4. Define the training for a new type of multi-skilled worker. 
5. Demonstrate at a number of production sites that there are better means 
of organizing manufacturing, especially suited to Europe. 
Because the general orientation of the ESPRIT CIM initiative was towards 
the ideal of the peopleless factory, the acceptance of the project hinged on 
the committed support of trade unions (particularly the metalworkers union 
in West Germany) and on the competent presentation of a research proposal 
by engineers. However, the basic idea of human-centred technology shaping 
quickly gained support within the ESPRIT programme as it reflected a growing 
concern within the Commission of European Communities that Europe should 
develop its own manufacturing technology (rather than rely on imported 
technology from Japan and the USA). 
The initial proposal, submitted in 1984, entitled "Comprehensive criteria 
and exemplary prototype of a human-centred CIM system", was rejected by 
the ESPRIT directorate. The subsequent, less ambitious, proposal was 
accepted although funding was forthcoming for three rather than the proposed 

22 
Crossing the Border 
five years. As a result of this more limited funding, it was decided that the 
design and implementation of a full-blown CIM system at a user site was not 
possible. Instead, the partners would be grouped into three separate, but 
interlinking, national groups: a computer-aided manufacture (CAM) group 
in the UK, a computer-aided design (CAD) group in Denmark and a computer-
aided planning (CAP) group in West Germany. Each group would be 
responsible for building and demonstrating their particular CIM module. 
Each of the national groups contained social scientists as well as engineers, 
some with a university background and others with a software development 
or industrial company background. Coordination of work was the 
responsibility of a board comprising representatives from each partner. 
As well as being situated in different countries, the three groups had 
different cultural and philosophical perspectives and traditions which they 
brought to bear on their design work. Moreover, during the project both an 
International Social Science Group (ISSG) and a more technical International 
Data Management Group (IDMG) were established. These two groups 
contained representatives from each of the three countries. 
With detailed reference to the ESPRIT project, the following two chapters 
will describe and analyse the following themes: how the "modus vivendi" 
and especially the interdisciplinary collaboration and conflicts developed in 
each of the national groups; how these trends may be interpreted in relation 
to the historical context of the three groups, particularly in the first year of 
the project, and in relation to the influence of internal group dynamics and 
the ISSG and IDMG as the project progressed; and what lessons may be 
learned from these experiences of interdisciplinary collaboration with regard 
to the development of human-centred technology. 
The ensuing discussion follows the events which occurred during the three-
year life-span of the project in chronological sequence. Although this tends 
to give the discussions something of an open-ended feel, it has the advantage 
of giving the reader a clearer idea of how the interdisciplinary design process 
developed over time. In this chapter the experiences of interdisciplinary design 
during the first part of the project are outlined. This includes a full version 
of the original "Shaping Paper" written by the authors. This paper was to 
prove highly influential in focusing ideas and design methods in all national 
groups and is included here accordingly (see section 2.4.2). As will become 
apparent, our own ideas were to develop beyond those expressed in the 
"Shaping Paper". 
Sources for these two chapters include official project reports, discussion 
documents, published papers, minutes of meetings, project correspondence, 
tape-recorded interviews with key participants, and notes taken at workshops 
by the authors and others. 

The Interdisciplinary Design of Computer-Integrated Manufacturing Systems 
23 
2.2 Experiences of Interdisciplinary Collaboration 
During the First Year of the Project 
2.2.1 The UK CAM Group 
At the beginning of the ESPRIT project the CAM group comprised three 
partners: the Greater London Enterprise Board, UMIST, and the engineering 
subcontractor company RD Projects Ltd. The remit of this group was to design, 
develop and implement a human-centred CAM turning cell as part of an 
overall CIM system. The cell was to contain two computer numerically 
controlled (CNC) lathes, a cell controller and automatic parts and materials 
transfer equipment. 
At the start of the ESPRIT project, the CAM group generally felt that the 
knowledge and expertise which had been gained by the UMIST researchers 
could be readily transferred to the CAM group work. In addition, the RD 
Projects engineers had considerable experience in designing machine tool 
programming hardware and software. It therefore seemed that the two areas 
of expertise could be combined to form a solid foundation upon which to 
develop a multidisciplinary design method. This optimism was reflected in 
the absence of any provision for the employment of a full-time social scientist 
in the CAM work. 
The first six months of the project witnessed close collaboration between 
engineers from UMIST and the subcontractor in an effort to combine the best 
features and functions of the UMIST lathe programming and cutting 
technology software with the best features of the programming software and 
hardware developed by the subcontractors for one of their own machine tool 
controller designs. 
This collaboration took the form of monthly design meetings at which a 
social scientist was usually present in an advisory capacity. This group felt 
that the most fruitful input of human/organizational considerations could be 
made once a prototype had been developed during the first year. During this 
time no user company was formally contracted in the project. 
Within six months of starting the CAM work it became clear that the design 
process was becoming increasingly dominated by technical considerations. 
For example, the choice of the two CNC machines and the work-handling 
equipment for the CAM turning cell was made without consultation with 
social scientists. Part of the reason for this technically led approach to design 
stemmed from the subcontractor's engineers' disregard for the social science 
input because it was "lacking in specificity". Conversely, from the social 
science viewpoint, the chief obstacle in the CAM work was the engineers' 
view that, unaided, they could produce a human-centred system. 
The relationship between the social scientists and engineers became 
increasingly acrimonious, thereby creating a project management crisis. The 
crisis was resolved through the personal intervention of Rosenbrock, who 
initiated a series of weekly CAM group design meetings during which the 
engineers presented details of the major design options available at each stage 
of design (e.g. choice of work handler, software environments, and human-
machine interface design). The options available at each stage were then 
examined in detail by the group before a final decision was agreed. 

24 
.. Conveyor 
.<In.. 
Universal 
-
Grinder 
• 
Operator 
An'>. 
Universal 
-
Grinder 
Overhead 
workhan 
~ 
Crossing the Border 
Gantry 
dler 
r---------------------
I 
~~Clathe 
;.w.... 
cl 
-
I 
I 
I 
• 
Operator 
I 
I 
~ 
I-
I 
Cont g 
roller 
~ 
CNCLathe 
J 
I 
~I 
I ---------------------
~ 
Bar Saw 
Fig. 2.1. Proposed layout of the computer-aided manufacturing cell. 
Although extremely time-consuming, this series of meetings between 
December 1986 and April 1987 resulted in the establishment of a relatively 
harmonious relationship between group members and a mutual understand-
ing of the methods and constraints associated with different perspectives. As 
a result many important design choices were unanimously agreed by the 
group. The overall technical layout of the CAM cell, for example, was agreed 
and is shown in Fig. 2.1. Note that the provision of one operator to work on 
both CNC lathes was to remain a focus for debate between the social scientists 
and engineers (see below). 
However, there were notable disagreements within the group over the 
nature of the human-machine interface. These disagreements polarized 
between the engineers' preference for manual data input (MDI) by push-
button menu selection and the UMIST team's preference for MDI by analogue 

The Interdisciplinary Design of Computer-Integrated Manufacturing Systems 
ISIMULATEI 
x 
( 
--"1 
- -- -1 
__ ...J 
, 
.' 
.; .. 
REWIND 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
z 
BLOCKS 
Fig. 2.2. Visual display screen layout for the CAM lathe controller. 
PLAN 
SET-UP 
FACE 
tfr_R.q .LJ~_~}{:m 
PROFI LE 
25 
pointing device (e.g. tracker-ball or electronic hand-wheels). The issue was 
resolved through the adoption of a WIMP (Windows, Icons, Mouse and Pull-
down menus) interface using push-button menu selection rather than an 
analogue device (a mouse). An example of the resultant human-computer 
interface screen layout is shown in Fig. 2.2. 
This compromise solution was accepted by the UMIST team owing to the 
engineers' assertion that no analogue device was currently available which 
could both withstand the rigours of a shop-floor environment and was accurate 
enough to enable detailed part program editing. This compromise solution 
was accepted although all parties agreed that it was far from ideal. 
On the UMIST side it was felt that the opportunity to explore the possibilities 
of record-playback programming (Noble 1984) had been lost, as was the 
opportunity for operators to more directly manipulate machine tool control 
systems. The engineers, on the other hand, were aware of the time-consuming 
nature of such exploration. In addition, more detailed discussions revealed 
that the engineers were also evaluating design options (such asthe use of 
analogue devices) in terms of their own implicit criteria. Of these criteria, the 
criterion of "consistency" was the most referred to in connection with design 
decision-making. 
The engineers' interpretation of consistency focused on the need for 
interface controls and input devices to be used for as many related functions 

26 
Crossing the Border 
as possible. For example, the criteria are infringed in designs where an 
alphanumeric keyboard is used for data entry, a mouse is used for text editing, 
and an electronic hand-wheel or a light-pen is used for geometric data entry 
and editing. A better solution, in this example, is the use of just one device 
to carry out all data entry and editing (when technically or economically 
feasible). When it is pointed out that such a criterion could not be justified 
on ergonomic grounds, two of the engineers replied that this was probably 
due to the absence of any ergonomic studies in the area. It was clear that the 
criterion of "consistency" had a powerful subjective, even aesthetic, 
dimension to it in the minds of the engineers. 
As the project progressed the collaboration between the social scientists 
and engineers improved and became more productive. As a result the CAM 
design meetings were held far less frequently to enable development work 
to progress "more smoothly" . It was agreed that in addition to the 
development of decision aids for the calculation of cutting parameters and 
tool selection, the CAM cell operator(s) should be provided with software 
support for the micro scheduling of work within the cell. 
2.2.2 The Danish CAD Group 
The Danish CAD Group comprised three partners: the Institute of Social 
Sciences at the Technical University of Denmark, the Department of 
Mechanical Engineering in the Technical Institute, Copenhagen, and NEH 
Consulting Engineers. 
The remit of the group was to optimize "the alternative design methods to 
bring about the best from the designer, accommodating each designer's 
preferred method of working" (Technical Annex to ESPRIT proposal 1985). 
During the first six months of the project, the social science and engineering 
groups within the overall CAD group worked separately with very few 
established lines of communication and discussion. The engineers began work 
by evaluating state-of-the-art flat panel displays, graphic drivers and digitizers. 
The Hanover Fair was visited to closely examine products similar to the 
electronic drawing board concept which lay at the heart of the CAD work. 
Quite independently, the social scientists established three user groups 
comprising technical school teachers, industrial designers and industrial 
draughtsmen. 
At the first meeting between the social science and user groups the project's 
objectives were introduced and mutual expectations and benefits were 
discussed. At subsequent meetings, the positive and negative attributes of 
conventional CAD systems with regard to the design process were debated, 
in addition to possible principles for developing prospective job structures 
and work organization. 
During the first six months of the project 12 all-day meetings were conducted 
with these three user groups. It is worth noting that the project engineers did 
not participate in these meetings. They expected that the social scientist group 
would transform the results of the user group discussions into an operational 
form for subsequent software development. 
The meetings produced a detailed number of criticisms of existing CAD 
systems together with a list of suggestions for their improvement. This list 

The Interdisciplinary Design of Computer-Integrated Manufacturing Systems 
27 
was presented to the technical groups at an early stage of the project, although 
little notice was taken of these suggestions as the engineers perceived their 
primary task at this time to be the development of a drawing board prototype 
and CAD system interface hardware/software. 
The first meetings between the social science and engineering groups were 
held in an atmosphere of distrust, scepticism and misunderstanding. Hence 
the social science group feared that the engineers would develop their technical 
specifications and models too quickly, thereby making important technical 
decisions before the concept of human-centredness, and its related criteria, 
were developed. 
On the other hand, the engineers feared that the social scientists and the 
user groups would only generate unrealistic demands concerning technical 
specifications and software development. One engineer viewed human-
centred CAD merely as something different to systems currently on the 
market. Another engineer defined the concept as "a question of more or less 
user-friendly" . The general feeling appeared to be that once human-
centredness was confronted by criteria of technical feasibility it would "not 
be much different from the conventional automation approach". 
Moreover, the engineers feared that the social scientists would play the role 
of controlling their work without clearly specifying the criteria of human-
centredness. Therefore they continuously asked the social scientists to 
precisely define these criteria. During the early stages of the project the social 
scientists were not able to do this, thereby increasing the prejudice of the 
engineers towards a belief that "human-centredness is scarcely anything but 
a smart way of getting money". 
After six months of independent endeavour the engineers presented their 
ideas at a meeting to which all user group participants were invited. The 
technical groups had considered six different possible designs and presented 
the ''best solution" to the interdisciplinary group meeting. This consisted of 
a more advanced drawing board design (see Fig. 2.3). This drawing board 
design includes a drawing machine, a display and a digitizer. The display is 
of the flat panel display type showing the menu as an item and a text field, 
together with the geometrical contour of the drawing. The pencil is wireless 
so as not to disturb the user's free hand movements. A digitizing eraser makes 
it possible to erase any part of the drawing. The drawing board was intended 
for use in three modes - free-hand drawing, digitizing and keying input -
from which the designer was free to choose his or her preferred method of 
working. Whilst drawing, the display shows the window of the drawing at 
the tip of the stylus (on a 1:1 scale if desired). The idea is to reduce the 
"keyhole" effect associated with some conventional CAD systems. 
The users' response to the design was not very positive, partly owing to 
misunderstandings of the engineers' intentions, and partly because some of 
the users did not approve of combining CAD and drawing boards in the same 
system. It was therefore decided to arrange a user group meeting with only 
one representative from each of the three user groups present in an effort to 
go more deeply into the problem. At this meeting the representative from the 
designers' user group put forward an idea that was to have a significant 
impact on the CAD group. This designer suggested that the CAD group 
should develop an electronic sketch pad. This would be portable to allow the 
designer to discuss aspects of a product's design with people elsewhere in 

28 
Display 
Light pulse 
transmitting 
\:S P7i1 
Fig. 2.3. Advanced prototype computer-aided design system. 
Crossing the Border 
the organization. Such a sketch pad would greatly facilitate this process of 
interpersonal communication and discussion. Furthermore, the designers' 
user group representative seemed interested in testing out the idea in a 
practical organizational setting. 
This suggestion was an important catalyst to the work of the CAD group 
for two reasons. First, it offered a specific user-oriented tool as a clear goal 
for the engineers to work towards, thus motivating them to develop prototype 
software and to find appropriate hardware to achieve this goal. Second, it 
improved the relationship and collaboration between the social scientists and 
engineers. The presentation of a clear product triggered off intensive 
discussion between the different disciplines concerning the technical! 
economic feasibility of the sketch pad idea, its role as a medium of face-to-
face communication and how the research and development work should 
progress and be organized. 
The design "shift" occurred in September 1987 during an all-day meeting 
between the leaders of the three CAD groups, where it was decided that the 
electronic sketch pad suggestion put forward by a representative from the 
industrial designer user group represented the ideal design solution for the 
CAD project groups. After this meeting, the collaboration between the Danish 
groups began to develop in a positive and more constructive manner. 

The Interdisciplinary Design of Computer-Integrated Manufacturing Systems 
29 
2.2.3 The German CAP Group 
The German CAP Group was based at the University of Bremen and comprised 
three research and development groups located in the departments of 
Vocational Education, Production Systems Design and Organization, and 
Production Technology. In addition, the industrial company Krupp Atlas 
Electronik participated as an industrial partner. 
Before the start of the project, it was planned to allocate the research 
associates to the respective heads of these departments whilst taking them 
on as a group to encourage interdisciplinary teamwork. Unfortunately, it 
transpired that the academic interests of individual professors prevailed, so 
that vacancies were filled by specialist researchers (engineers, ergonomists 
and vocational educationalists). 
During the first six months of the project, the CAP group encountered only 
minor difficulties in collaboration. One unanticipated difficulty which faced 
the group during the early months of the project was caused by the different 
work practices and jargon used by the different specialisms. While the 
engineers consistently presented, communicated and documented their ideas 
through the use of diagrams, the social scientists and educationalists were 
more used to presenting their ideas in the form of written text. 
The expectations of the engineers with regard to the work of the social 
scientists was summed up by one professor as follows: "I suggest that, 
independent of our common discussion, we [the engineers] develop a practical 
proposal for a CAP solution. In the next step, this should be critically analysed 
by the social scientists from all possible angles. This is their strength anyway." 
The work of the CAP was based around the concept of competence-oriented 
workshop control, production islands, and qualification. The group was 
largely in accord with these ideas. Indeed, the CAP group was to spend a 
significant amount of time engaged in productive discussion concerning 
human-centred CAP philosophy. 
In the course of these initial discussions, the rough structure of the 
international division of labour in the ESPRIT project between the CAP, CAD 
and CAM components was modified and a general direction of development 
was devised. The initial view of the interrelationship between the three 
components as a simple hierarchy (see Fig. 2.4) was altered into one 
symbolizing the transfer of managerial and operative planning competence 
to the shop-floor level (see Fig. 2.5). 
Turning Fig. 2.5 through 90 degrees is to express that the hierarchical, 
centralized factory model is to be replaced by one in which production and 
administration (logistics), organized in islands, cooperate with each other 
according to the releases of superordinate production planning (see Fig. 2.6). 
In designing such decentralized computer-aided production planning 
systems, the CAP group was faced with the question of how much planning 
should be delegated to the shop-floor. Mertens (1985, p. 102) distinguishes 
between three levels of planning: 
1. Production programme planning - long-term planning which defines 
company targets. 
2. Manufacturing programme planning - medium-term planning which 
defines strategies for achieving the targets set by the production 
programme. 

30 
Crossing the Border 
COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN 
COMPUTER-AIDED PLANNING 
COMPUTER-AIDED MANUFACTURE 
Fig. 2.4. Initial computer-integrated manufacturing hierarchy. 
I 
C_A0----l 
CAP 
CAM 
Fig. 2.5. First modification by the computer-aided planning group. 
CAP 
CAD 
CAM 
Fig. 2.6. Second modification by the computer-aided planning group. 

The Interdisciplinary Design of Computer-Integrated Manufacturing Systems 
31 
3. Workshop control- short-term planning of how targets will be achieved 
on the shop-floor. 
It was envisaged that both workshop control and elements of manufacturing 
programme planning would be based at the shop-floor level in the ESPRIT 
system through the adoption of the "production island" approach to 
production systems design. This concept of the production island was 
developed by Bradner (1985) to describe the organization of small-batch 
production according to the principles of group technology in which families 
of products or parts are manufactured in their entirety by semi-autonomous 
work groups of highly skilled people. A more detailed outline of this concept 
may be found in section 2.4.2. 
The CAP group considered that this concept opened up the path to the 
future of production work and technology which is most conducive to turning 
CAP, CAD and CAM into human-centred tools. In addition, there were 
technical and economic arguments which supported the island concept: 
1. Orders being processed within a production island often do not require 
such detailed process planning as in traditional manufacturing environ-
ments. It is sufficient to specify the due completion date for the component 
and the drawings, and not the sequence of all operations. 
2. The order lead-time is essentially shorter, and last-minute changes of 
delivery dates as well as urgent jobs can be handled with fewer problems. 
3. As a result of the higher qualifications of the island workers, some design 
changes can be handled more easily, since the worker can often work from 
a rough draft. 
These arguments (especially point 3) indicate that the abilities of staff must 
be taken into account as an independent variable in shaping the CAP concept. 
Therefore, the CAP group were in accord over the theoretical underpinning 
of their work. However, the group confronted problems with the issue of 
user participation which had been raised by the work of the CAD group in 
the early part of the project. With the exception of that psychological position 
in work science which is fixated on the analysis of work processes, the majority 
of the CAP group members were quite open to the idea of participation as 
an important dimension in the shaping process. Nevertheless, there were 
objective and subjective barriers to its realization. 
First, setting up a user group for the development of CAP tools would have 
required the recruitment of technical employees mainly from operations 
planning because, in factories, this is where the planning and controlling of 
the production process typically take place. Hence the involvement of 
planning personnel would have clashed head on with the CAP group's 
objective of reintegrating important functions of operations planning on the 
shop-floor. It was seen that all the technical employees who have sufficient 
experience with planning and control are to be found in operations planning 
and were therefore not eligible to become members of a user group. 
The CAP group work aimed to develop a different model of work 
organization. This, however, had to be achieved without involving those 
immediately concerned because they all lacked the necessary technical 
knowledge and experience. 

32 
Crossing the Border 
A second barrier to user participation was the CAP group's lack of experience 
with user participation, although group members did not see the lack of a 
user subgroup as a major problem. The contradiction between the comparative 
openness to (if not interest in) user participation on the one hand, and the 
lack of a corresponding group initiative on the other, cannot be attributed to 
the objective barrier outlined above. The factory model, based on the principles 
of island production, as well as the concomitant conditions for computer-
aided planning, were, from the outset, unanimously endorsed by the entire 
CAP group and understood as being in the objective interest of prospective 
users. According to this logic, the integration of peoples' subjective interests 
is less important. All the CAP group members concurred on this point. 
The design work of the CAP group during the first half of the project was 
additionally troubled by the nature of the relationship between the academic 
and industrial partners. In the day-to-day work of the group, their 
collaboration was hampered by a number of factors. First, the industrial 
company engineers were not accustomed to elaborating concepts such as 
human-centredness. Also the CAP product had no specific customer in mind. 
This called into question the validity of engaging in a project where the 
customary criteria and procedures of project acceptance were lacking. As a 
result, the industrial partner did not fully participate in the CAP group 
discussions until something resembling a product was developed. 
This lack of cooperation during the first half of the project resulted in 
something of a project dualism within the CAP group. Whilst the academic 
partners were elaborating and concretizing the concept of human-centredness, 
the industrial partner began developing an existing shop-floor monitoring 
and control (SMC) system according to the principles of conventional 
industrial design. As a result, two different workstations were developed 
within the CAP group. The industrial partner opted for a more conventional 
design solution whilst the academic partners opted for DISCUSS, a production 
island-oriented shop-floor control system. 
This dualism did not involve a conscious decision against collaboration. 
Under time pressure, the academic designers (like their industrial counterparts 
in Krupp Atlas) resorted to existing solutions. The involvement of social 
scientists in the actual design process served to increase the designers' 
dilemma of wanting to create something new whilst having to start from 
something which was already available. The internalized principle that the 
"system has to be finished" thus heightens the barrier which stands between 
social scientists and engineers collaborating in the actual design process. Yet 
despite the fact that both the academic and the industrial engineers felt bound 
by the same objectives and developed SMC designs based on pre-existing 
designs, two different workstations were eventually realized. One of the 
reasons for this is the fact that industrial designers have to gear their efforts 
to marketable products and that their scope for acting is circumscribed by 
design routine. Academic designers, by contrast, have comparatively more 
scope for selecting suitable designs. 
One final aspect of the CAP work which deserves mention relates to the 
constraints on interdisciplinary design imposed by the hierarchical nature of 
German universities. A number of problems were created by the prominent 
position of the professors vis-a.-vis the research associates and by the 
dependence of non-professional academics as laid down in the University Act 

The Interdisciplinary Design of Computer-Integrated Manufacturing Systems 
33 
and in researchers' work contracts. 
The rule that research associates must work subject to instruction, if 
consistently applied, tends to reduce initiative and independence among 
subordinate group members. If, by contrast, this rule is informally ignored 
(i.e. research associates are allowed to carry out research with some degree 
of independence) this may result in role conflicts that may equally impede 
the research and design process. In the latter case, there opens up a wide gap 
between the formal responsibility and the actual competence of the professors. 
They may have to assume formal responsibility for research work with which 
they are insufficiently familiar and have contributed little towards. Both trends 
had some impact on the output of the CAP group during the first half of the 
project. 
2.3 Evaluation of the First-Year Experiences in the 
Three National Groups 
2.3.1 National Differences 
As described above, the three national approaches had quite different points 
of departure owing to differences of historical context and background. For 
example, the German CAP group were heavily influenced by the debate on 
new production concepts which began in Germany around 1980. In this 
debate, some fields of production engineering as well as researchers in 
engineering science and industrial management have increasingly turned 
away from rationalization strategies that are exclusively geared towards 
scientific management (Taylor 1911). 
Structural changes in production posed a new challenge to production 
planning systems as improved strategies are needed to enhance a company's 
market share, service level and flexibility. Industrial management were turning 
their attention increasingly towards controlling the flow of work as a means 
towards productivity and profitability. The new production concept debate 
in Germany and elsewhere (Brodner 1986) questioned the validity of 
centralized production planning and instead focused on qualification and the 
decentralization of production responsibility to the shop-floor. 
The CAM group, on the other hand, were heavily influenced by the UMIST 
Project (1982-85) under the direction of Professor Rosenbrock (Rosenbrock 
1989). The original aim of the UMIST project was to develop a complete flexible 
manufacturing system (FMS). Unfortunately, because of lack of supportive 
funding, the hardware for this proposed system was not developed. 
Accordingly, the project focused on the design and development of a CAM 
turning cell rather than a full FMS. 
By the end of the UMIST project, sophisticated software had been written 
and coded to enable skilled turners to write and edit complex part programs 
for a lathe. Many features of this software, including a shop-floor decision 
support system, were incorporated into the CNC lathe controllers developed 
in the ESPRIT project. 
Thus, the CAP group primarily focused on the work organization level of 

34 
Crossing the Border 
analysis, whereas the CAM group focused on the human-machine interaction 
level. The Danish group shared a similar human-machine level perspective 
with their British colleagues, although the Scandanavian research tradition of 
user involvement and participation in design was more in evidence in 
Denmark than in the UK. 
The Danish social scientists were theoretically inspired by Habermas' 
concept of "communicative action" and Polanyi's concept of "tacit 
knowledge" . In addition, the work of Cooley and Rosenbrock was to influence 
the group's way of thinking. Coupled with their research on the impact of 
technological change on industrial designers and draughtsmen, this outlook 
stressed the importance of relecting on practical skills and the more or less 
conscious relation between the mental and physical processes in evidence 
during design work. 
The stress was therefore upon ensuring that tacit knowing is still needed 
and is more highly prioritized as CAD technology develops and on improving 
the physical and social context of the designer to enable a reliance on his or 
her own qualified, subjective judgement. The core of the CAD group's research 
was therefore the designer's possibilities to preserve or widen his or her 
subjectively based initiative during the designing process. 
It is worth noting that, although practical experiences and subjectively 
bounded skills played a central role in the general frame of reference of all 
three groups, this was actually practised at the methodological level only by 
the CAD group. Neither the CAP or CAM group involved end-users directly 
in the exploratory, developmental process at the beginning of the ESPRIT 
project. On the other hand, the German work organzation perspective was 
important for the further development of the project, as we shall see later in 
this chapter. 
2.3.2 Critical Evaluation of Interdisciplinary Collaboration During 
the First Year of the Project 
It was commonly accepted during the ongoing interdisciplinary dialogue that 
any successful techological development, and particularly one claiming to be 
human centred, requires general orientations regarding humaneness and 
social compatibility. However, neither social scientists nor engineers know 
how these general orientations can be made to bear fruit in the development 
process. The problem of mediating between basic ideas and general 
orientations on the one hand, and tangible shaping criteria and dimensions 
on the other, renders any interdisciplinary dialogue difficult because the 
engineers will always insist on the tangible level, while the social scientists 
will always resort to the level of criteria which may be difficult to 
operationalize. One important task to be fulfilled by interdisciplinary research 
and development therefore consists of a mediation between these levels (and 
world views) and of making participants aware of this mediation, thereby 
turning it into a continuous process. 
Given this, and with the benefit of hindsight, the separation of engineers, 
social scientists and users into distinct groups within the national project 
groups was a mistake. For example, within the CAD group it is now realized 
that it was a mistake not to involve the technical groups in the user group 

The Interdisciplinary Design of Computer-Integrated Manufacturing Systems 
35 
discussions from the beginning of the project. The initial reason for their 
exclusion was to avoid the premature closure of design perspective and options 
open to the users. It was feared that the engineers' special interest in creating 
an "easy to use" CAD system would exert a strong influence on the users. 
But the unanticipated side effect of this disaggregation between the user/social 
science group and the technical group was an increasing" gap" in perspectives. 
This gap became evident towards the end of the first year of the project 
when the technical group presented their idea for a combined CAD system 
and drawing board. This idea met with little enthusiasm from the user groups 
(see section 2.2.2). On the other hand, the technical group realized that they 
had committed themselves to the idea of the electronic drawing board virtually 
from the onset of the project without any consultation with users. 
The CAM group experienced a similar gap in perspectives, although this 
was never reflected by the participants. When conflicts arose within the CAM 
group (e.g. the analogue versus digital data input discussed in section 2.2.1), 
it was commonly viewed as a conflict between individual aesthetics and 
predispositions rather than a more deep-rooted conflict between design 
philosophies. It is unlikely that shaping criteria, no matter how specific and 
detailed, would have resolved this conflict (Corbett 1987). 
Within the CAP group collaboration was essentially moulded by three 
research traditions: engineering-scientific pragmatism, psychological objectiv-
ism, and pedagogical reductionism. The "gap" between these traditions 
stemmed from the comparative lack of theory and specific methodologies to 
guide prospective design problem-solving in engineering pragmatism, and 
the inability of the social scientists to contribute to the design work without 
first having a finished product to analyse. 
Thus, the educational scientists were primarily concerned with the shaping 
of training and education processes. This orientation facilitates collaboration 
with other disciplines, yet the pronounced didactic approach to the explication 
and solution of problems produces an implicitly determinist understanding 
of human-centred CIM in which technology and work are taken as given. 
Instead, qualification requirements and educational contents are derived on 
the basis of technological products. Because of this reactive approach to CIM 
system design, the pedagogical scientists made little impact on the CAP design 
process. 
Similarly, the psychologists within the group tended to share a mechanistic 
view of work closely related to the position held by their engineering 
colleagues. Work psychology is based on fairly comprehensive theories and 
rules (e.g. Hacker 1986), which makes interdisciplinary collaboration all the 
more difficult if other disciplines cannot be subsumed into such theories. As 
with the pedagogical sciences, this bias towards the analysis of work and the 
assessment of technological givens acted as a barrier to inter-disciplinary 
collaboration and to prospective technology shaping. 
Prospective interdisciplinary design shaping therefore should place much 
more emphasis and effort towards joint workshops from the beginning of the 
design process in an attempt to bridge the "gap" between the different visions 
and perspectives of the project partner disciplines. In the same vein, much 
more time needs to be given at the start of the collaboration process to explicate 
and clarify these differences. It is from this initial process that appropriate 
shaping methods must develop. 

36 
Crossing the Border 
2.4 The "Shaping Paper" - Intentions, Reactions and 
Influence 
2.4.1 Intentions: The International Social Science Group (ISSG) 
The ISSG was officially established in August 1986 and comprised one social 
scientist from each of the three national groups. The objective of this group 
was to formulate a common frame of reference and suitable methods regarding 
human-centred perspectives on technological development. Although sharing 
a similar social science perspective, the three members (the authors of this 
book) came from different cultural traditions which, particularly at the onset 
of the project, created a number of hard and intense discussions before a 
common understanding was reached between them. 
Six months later (February 1987), the ISSG presented the Shaping Paper to 
all partners in the project. The ISSG viewed the paper as a point of departure 
for a dialogue with engineers in the project. Thus, it was hoped that the 
Shaping Paper might create a common understanding of the human-
centredness concept and give some shared vision and guidelines for how to 
put these basic ideas into practice. Failing that, it was thought that the paper 
would at least provoke engineers to react in a detailed and constructive way 
thereby contributing to the development of a more elaborated concept. 
The shaping paper is included, in its original form, in the following section 
of this chapter. 

The Interdisciplinary Design of Computer-Integrated Manufacturing Systems 
2.4.2 The Social Shaping of Technology and Work 
A Conceptual Framework for Research and Development Projects 
in the ClM area - The "Shaping Paper" 
A INTRODUCTION 
In this paper the concept of human-centred technology is outlined and 
a conceptual framework for the evaluation, design and development of 
human-centred CIM systems is offered. The paper is in three parts. 
The first section outlines the philosophical base from which the concept 
of human-centredness is derived. This base, which we have termed 
"holism", has its historical roots in the belief that the fragmentation and 
simplification of industrial worklife owes much to the predominantly 
"mechanistic" perspective shared by technological and organizational 
designers throughout the industrialised world. 
A critique of the mechanistic perspective is given in sections B.2 and 
B.3. This is followed by an outline of an alternative holistic perspective 
in section B.4. This section attempts to redefine the philosophical basis 
for understanding and changing the nature of technology and work and, 
as such, introduces a number of concepts with which some readers may 
be unfamiliar. However, concepts such as "praxis", "life-world" and 
"dialectic" are fundamental to a philosophy of human-centredness and 
have been utilized in order to avoid the use of words in common usage 
within the scientific and engineering disciplines which are deeply 
embedded in the mechanistic world view. The use of such holistic 
concepts, whilst running the risk of creating problems of understanding, 
ensures that the two mutually exclusive concepts (or paradigms) of 
mechanism and holism do not become confused. It would be unfortunate 
if "human-centredness" comes to mean all things to all men as has 
happened with the concept of "user friendly"! 
The need for such a philosophical underpinning stems from the very 
nature of the human-centredness concept and allows the fundamental 
difference between this concept and that of "human factors", for 
example, to be seen. It will become clear on reading this paper that 
traditional human factors engineering in fact has more in common with 
the mechanistic world view than with human-centredness. This is 
because human factors engineering aims to improve the design of the 
human-machine interface in order to enhance performance without any 
consideration of the design of human work or machines in a wider 
context. Human-centredness, on the other hand, aims to enhance the 
quality of worklife and product through the fundamental redesign of 
work in its totality. 
The second part of the paper focuses on three important dimensions 
of human-centred work. These are the nature of the relationship between 
(a) work and technology, (b) work and social communication, and (c) 
work and learning. These dimensions reflect the psychological 
importance of designing work which allows workers to use tools which 
extend their skills and abilities, which encourages a high degree of social 
37 

38 
Crossing the Border 
interaction, and which allows the development of personality and self-
determination. 
The third section outlines the methods which may be used in order 
to apply a philosophy of human-centredness to the practice of human-
centred CIM system design and development. The dimensions of work 
outlined in section 0.3.2 and the criteria for human-machine interface 
design in section 0.3.4 are offered as design tools to aid the shaping 
and evaluation of decision-making throughout the design process. They 
are premised on the idea that workers should be able to shape their own 
working practices thereby placing them in a superordinate, rather than 
subordinate, position vis-a.-vis the technological system. The scenario in 
section 0.2 illustrates how the system would look if these human-centred 
dimensions and criteria are incorporated into the design. By placing the 
dimensions/criteria in their overall context in this way, their usability 
may be considerably enhanced. 
Finally, it should be stressed that this paper is not intended to be a 
designer's manual or guide. Rather, it offers a conceptual framework to 
enable social scientists and engineers to work together during the design 
process. Design is a complex process in which actors sharing different 
assumptions and interests must collaborate. When such a team is 
multidisciplinary, the process is even more complex and requires a large 
degree of mutual perspective-taking and understanding. It is hoped that 
this paper contributes to this endeavour. 
B THE CONCEPT OF TECHNOLOGICAL SHAPING 
B.1 Introduction 
The concept "human-centred technology" refers to two aspects of 
subjectivity. First, technology shaping is a fundamental expression of 
human life activity. Anthropologically speaking, this ability of 
technology shaping has crystallized into the evolutionary process of 
nature that has allowed mankind to "opt out of" the process of evolution 
and "to enter" a social-historical process. Second, participation in the 
shaping of technology includes the capacity for understanding and the 
active participation in the shaping of one's own social conditions. 
In the field of science the dimension of development and shaping is 
most firmly anchored in the engineering sciences and in educational 
theory. A related field of science includes the performance-guiding 
sciences, such as medicine and therapeutically oriented psychology. The 
purely cognitive-oriented sciences are located at the other end of the 
scientific spectrum. Hence, although shaping and cognition orientation 
are two essentially different poles of scientific study, they are, 
nevertheless, reciprocally constitutive for one another. 
Dimensions of evaluation and analysis of work processes are also, 
therefore, always dimensions of the shaping of work (and technology). 
It must be taken into account here that designs of the future, such as 
those that have to be made for the planning, development and 

The Interdisciplinary Design of Computer-Integrated Manufacturing Systems 
implementation of a human-centred computer-integrated manufacturing 
(HC-CIM) system are, in principle, full of uncertainty with respect to 
their effects on the experiencing process of employees, learning 
opportunities and stress. 
Through the inclusion of qualitative methods of empirical sociological 
research oriented to the interpretative paradigm (see Leithauser 1986) 
and to the concept of work activity research, the risk of humanely and 
socially "intolerable" designs of the future can be significantly reduced. 
In the following, a conceptual framework will be presented for the 
evaluation and shaping of computer-aided technology and work. 
B.2 The Role of Technological Rationality 
Technological rationality refers to the inherent logic contained in 
technical things and concepts in which the function and/or value of a 
technical entity or development is abstracted in terms of its usefulness. 
Technological functionality means that an electrical motor, for example, 
is constructed in such a manner that the standards of a given requirement 
profile (such as rotation speed, efficiency, performance, revolution-
torque curve) are optimally realized. 
"Optimal" means that the same technical quality can be found in the 
frame of a whole spectrum of possibilities, and that additional optimization 
criteria are required for a single solution. Technical-scientific rationality 
also covers the sphere of technical possibilities and the purpose-rationale 
of its shaping. The functioning of technology and its inner logic are, 
therefore, the central criteria of technological rationality. 
A technological rationality assumes that a derivative connection more 
or less exists between technological-scientific theory, the processes based 
thereon, and the technical product. There are correct and incorrect steps 
associated with this logic. For all intents and purposes, however, there 
are "optimal" solutions with optimization criteria. However, concrete 
examples demonstrate that there is considerable shaping flexibility 
within the "logic". Rosenbrock points out that engineering activity has 
far more to do with the artistic solving of problems than generally 
believed. Similarly, analyses by Hellige on the significance of the 
technological-scientific problem-solving perspectives of technicians for 
the development of technology imply that the sphere of technical 
possibilities as the basis of technical rationality demonstrates 
considerable technical-cultural diversity. Thus the Scandinavian power/ 
heat coupling approach to energy technology is fundamentally different 
from the condensation power plants of the USA or West Germany 
(Hellige 1984). 
As each technology has a social context, it must lend itself more or 
less to social and social science scrutiny, substantiation and evaluation. 
Scientific theory in this respect always has a mirror function enabling a 
reflection of technological activity, technological process and products. 
The dominant characteristic of technology is therefore the imprint 
made on it by conditions which, although external to it, decisively affect 
its concrete existence; conditions which are technically expressed, 
without their features being recognizable by means of an analysis of the 
39 

40 
Crossing the Border 
technology. Every involvement with technology must therefore be 
carried out on the basis of the interest and value-oriented characteristics 
underlying it, even if these are difficult to discern in individual cases. 
A value-free technology is a contradiction in itself, and therefore a 
normative understanding of technology is required. The necessity to 
understand the development of technology as a dimension of the shaping 
of social future, and to found a tradition of technology controVtechnology 
shaping, where technology is no longer regarded as an instrument for 
exercising dictatorial control over nature, and for the blind substitution 
of human abilities and activities, results from the recognition that the 
project does not exclude the risk of the destruction of nature and the 
environment. 
In the dialectical relationship between nature and technology, nature 
is what occurs by itself. Technology has been set into motion by human 
beings, and refers to the world of the "artificial", that which is opposite 
to the "natural". 
The aspect of subordination is an interchanging factor in the dialectical 
relationship between nature and technology. On the one hand, in the 
absence of mankind (which maintains and installs technology) technology 
withers away. Technology, on the other hand, includes the aspect of 
"dominance over nature", and therefore the possibility of the destruction 
of nature. Notwithstanding this, nature and technology are interchange-
ably constitutive for one another. Each technology is also based on the 
potentials of nature. Then again, nature is always also socially constituted 
nature, at least where it is in the range of human activities. 
If technology in its historical and anthropological origins can still be 
traced to a process related to the needs and requirements from which 
tools and work processes developed, then it must be true also that the 
division of labour accompanying industrial production reflects social 
purposes that are abstractly represented in technology. Needs are always 
transmitted via interests in the process of technology shaping and the 
utilization of technology. However, these necessitate the political and 
economic structures of a society to be taken into consideration if their 
quality is to be discerned in the process of technology shaping and its 
implementation. Thus, it is only from concrete interest structures that 
a system of purposes develops, from which technology develops in its 
diverse components and interests. 
The concept of technology shaping stresses the shapability of 
technology and stands in contrast to the concept of technological 
determinism, according to which technology is seen as the ultimate cause 
of all social movements. 
Technological rationality is not identical with determinism, but the 
ideas of an "inner logic" and "one best way" to develop technology, 
which seem to be tremendously powerful, often place a strong 
deterministic way of reasoning by people, who are inclined to 
technological rationality either theoretically or in practice. * 
* Technological determinism: ... the first part of technological determinism is that 
technical change is in some sense autonomous, "outside" of society, literally or 
metaphorically. The second part is that technical change causes social change. Technological 
determinism ... has also been employed as an historical theory, explaining why past 
forms of society came into being and passed away (Mackenzie and Wajcman 1985, p.4ff.). 

The Interdisciplinary Design of Computer-Integrated Manufacturing Systems 
B.3 Technological Rationality and .the Mechanistic World Picture 
The historical roots of technological rationality are deeply founded in 
the mechanistic world picture, which has been dominating Western 
culture so strongly in the last four hundred years. The mechanistic world 
picture of Cartesian-Newtonian science led to the methods of research 
and treatment, which are so dominating of the technological formulation 
as the descriptive medium, and mathematical deduction as the guiding 
principle, in the search for new phenomena to be verified by 
experimentation. It was the modes of thought inherent in this conception 
which penetrated into philosophical thought about the human being 
and his place in the universe, and into numerous special sciences which, 
initially, seemed to lack all contact with the study of nature. 
According to the mechanistic science ideal, all subjective elements of 
the work process should be eliminated or objectified. Hence the declared 
aim of modem science is to establish a strictly detached, objective 
knowledge. Any theory falling short of this ideal is accepted only as a 
temporary imperfection, which will be eliminated later. This way of 
thinking is sometimes expressed in the concept of "rest-work", which 
means work that cannot yet be carried out by machines for either 
technical or economic reasons, and which therefore still requires the 
more or less active involvement of human beings. 
The mechanistic approach perceives human beings as information 
processors that calculate according to rules on data, which take the form 
of atomic facts. Though developing still more complex and heuristic-
based models of how human beings solve problems, the mechanistic 
oriented researchers are nonetheless convinced that by suitable 
questioning they can induce the expert to "recollect" the complete set 
of unconscious heuristics. If there is a limit to what can be understood 
by rules, the mechanistic approach would never recognise it. However, 
such an approach overlooks the fact that judgement and perception may 
involve global processes which cannot be understood in terms of a 
sequence or even a parallel set of discrete operations. 
Now that the full implications of the attempt to treat man as an object 
or device have become more and more apparent, the mechanistic science 
ideal has become the target of a more serious critique from different 
disciplines, even from some computer scientists. The pioneers of the 
criticism were Heidegger and Wittgenstein. Since then, many others -
notably Maurice Merleau-Ponty, Michael Polanyi and Hubert L. Dreyfus 
- have, each in their own way, applied and refined similar insights. 
The mechanistic science ideal seems to have striking parallels in the 
more practically oriented management circles and system development 
in relation to information technology. Weltz and Lullies (1983) have 
summarized some characteristics of the mechanistic image of the human 
being, based on numerous interviews with managers and system experts. 
They distinguish between two different images, both related to the 
mechanistic approach. The most rigid of these considers the human 
being as a disturbing factor to be reduced through extension and 
perfection of the technical system (the vision of the fully automated 
factory). The more flexible but still mechanistic image considers human 
41 

42 
Crossing the Border 
work as a mountain river, whose energy is to be channelled through 
organizational rules and opportunities of control. These two views of 
the human being imply strategies of rationalization, which: exclude all 
"negative" possibilities; prescribe the "correct" behaviour as precisely 
as possible; restrict the human initiative as much as possible; and develop 
still more methods of possible control. Weltz and Lullies further argue 
that this process of rationalization, which has dominated the historical 
development of work in industrial society, has produced a tendency to 
passify and alienate at least some employees. 
Historically, this alienation relates to the threefold process of 
subdivision of work, mechanization and automation, each of which fed 
upon and reinforced the others. Before jobs can be taken over by a 
machine, they must first have been fragmented. This is almost always 
achieved in developmental stages; at each stage the jobs given to men 
and women are whatever remains once the jobs of the machine have 
been determined. Therefore, subdivison of work was a precondition for 
mechanization and automation, which incorporated still more human 
movements and judgements. Part of the result of this development has 
been the shaping of a large number of trivial repetitive tasks, and the 
creation of a workforce who are rendered more passive as technology 
becomes more active. In the mechanistic view, this passivity of 
employees reinforces the view of human beings as solely motivated by 
material rewards (e.g. wages). Such an interpretation may stem more 
from a psycholOgical reaction to trivial work than from any innate trait. 
The emergence of a counter-tendency to this rigid perception is 
becoming more and more clear, for both functional and human reasons. 
The functional critique, which is observable in some management circles, 
focuses mainly on the lack of flexibility and responsibility with respect 
to sudden changes or "unforeseen" situations. Thus the rigid perception 
of human beings may result in counter-productive effects, which force 
management either to increase the degree of external control or to change 
the mechanistic perception of the employees. The human critique is 
based on a perception of the human-work relationship quite different 
from the pessimistic, mechanistic image mentioned above; this different 
vision is presented in the next section. 
B.4 Work and Personality from a Holistic Perspective 
B.4.1 The Search for a New Paradigm 
The critique presented in the previous section of the mechanistic 
approach is rather fundamental. It is not just a specific explanation, but 
the whole conceptual framework that has failed. 
Ever more scientists from different disciplines - including physics, 
biology, psychology, sociology - seem to be searching for a holistic 
paradigm which transcends current disciplines and conceptional 
boundaries. As Fritjof Capra points out:" ... We live today in a globally 
interconnected world in which biological, psychological, social and 

The Interdisciplinary Design of Computer-Integrated Manufacturing Systems 
environmental phenomena are all interdependent. To describe this world 
appropriately we need an ecological perspective which the Cartesian 
world picture does not offer" (Capra 1982, p.XVllI). 
So far most of the scientists from the above-mentioned disciplines still 
operate independently and have not yet recognized how their intentions 
interrelate. Nevertheless, an important shift of paradigm seems to have 
developed in many scientific disciplines for both materialistic and 
epistemological reasons. 
B.4.2 The Concept of "Life-World" and "System" 
The concept of life-world (Lebenswelt) is defined by Habermas as the 
"praxis relation" of the human community. It is the horizon of meaning 
with the content of more or less tacit knowledge, which helps social 
actors interpret the different situations of action. The life-world functions 
both as an implicit horizon or context (and thereby partly at the 
unconscious level) and as resource of convictions, etc., which the human 
actors use to establish consensual or conflicting interpretations of specific 
situations. The communicating actors are placed in a context of specific 
situation (e.g. work situation) and in a context of life-world. The situation 
determines some flexible restrictions and the life-world functions more 
indirectly as both a horizon and resource for the interpretation of actions. 
Following Habermas, the structural components of the life-world may 
be analysed from three partly interdependent aspects (Habermas, 1970): 
1. Culture (mutual understanding, traditional and new knowledge, 
meaning). 
2. Society (coordination of actions, norms of legitimacy, social solidarity 
and integration). 
3. Personality (socialization of the individual person with different sorts 
of competences (cognitive, moral, expressive, etc.». 
The reproduction of the life-world has both a material and symbolic 
dimension. The relation between the life-world and situation-based 
communication may be characterized as reciprocal action and thereby 
contains the possibility to change part of the life-world. The system is 
a formalized or institutionalized part of the life-world based on money 
and power. 
The two essential characteristics of the evolution process of society 
are: (a) the increasing rationalization of the life-world and (b) the 
increasing complexity of the system differentiation. Rationalization of 
the life-world results in an increasing differentiation between culture, 
society and personality. In the modern society this tendency has 
produced an institutionalization of expert cultures, which develops the 
three structural components of the life-world from each specific demand 
of validity. 
The increasing system complexity is a historical, developmental 
process taking place at many different levels of society (including the 
internal structure of the firm). It is in some way reduced by the 
43 

44 
Crossing the Border 
establishment of new subsystems, which then force the problem of 
integration. But integration can be either functionally or socially oriented. 
Social integration can be seen as part of the symbolic reproduction of 
the life-world with the purpose of maintaining or increasing the system 
perspective. 
According to Habermas, the system colonizes additional areas of the 
life-world. In a capitalist society the consequence is often disintegration 
of the traditional modes of life without establishing new meaningful 
ones. However, the development is not exclusively negative; it may 
provoke a tendency to search for new, alternative ways of living. 
B.4.3 The Concept of "Praxis" 
As mentioned, the concept of praxis is closely interrelated with the 
concept of life-world. It is going back to the ancient Greek philosophers 
thinking on the difference of theory and praxis. Praxis in this sense 
means something different from practical or technical work. On the 
contrary, one has to look at human activities from the point of viewing 
them as being imbedded in situations, where the moral question of "what 
is to be done" is at stake. That is, the question of "how it is to be done", 
should be answered within the frame of the complexity of human life 
as a whole. There exist very different fields of praxis, such as policy, 
science, industrial production and individual life. From a holistic point 
of view, the purpose cannot be a simple reintegration of these different 
fields of praxis. But inside the different fields of praxis it is necessary to 
reflect the conditions, validity and consequences of the special praxis. 
When doing this, the special praxis is always confronted with the overall 
interrelatedness of culture, society and personality. In science, as well 
as in other fields of praxis, i~ means that without such reflections it 
cannot be a humane praxis. 
Both individuals and social organizations contain the potential for self-
renewal and self-transcendence. Self-renewal refers to the ability of 
organizations and organisms continuously to renew and recycle their 
components, while maintaining the integrity of their overall structure. 
Self-transcendence refers to the ability to reach out creatively beyond 
physical and mental boundaries in the processes of learning and 
development. 
If the potential for self-renewal and self-transcendence are prioritized 
in the shaping of the prospective work organization, the mechanistic 
picture of workers as mechanical performers of orders must be 
abandoned. Instead, workers are to be considered as purposeful actors, 
capable, when possible, of performing meaningful acts based on their 
own subjective knowledge and judgement. 
Moreover, the objectivist paradigm, which considers data as a mapping 
of reality in a context-free manner, has to be abandoned. Communication 
through language or non-verbal gesticulation is an act of commitment 
and interpretation based on a more or less common social and historical 
background. 

The InterdiscipIinary Design of Computer-Integrated Manufacturing Systems 
Hence, the concept of praxis developed above relies on two sorts of 
interdependences: 
1. The mutal interdependence and connection between body and mind, 
including the conscious and unconscious levels. 
2. The dynamic relationship between work conditions and the 
psychosomatic processes of the workers involved. 
B.4.4 The Relation Between Mind and Body 
The mechanistic way of thinking - following the tradition of Plato and 
Descartes - has viewed the body N as getting in the way of intelligence 
and reason, rather than being in any way indispensable for it" (Dreyfus 
1979; p.235). 
In the holistic approach the body-mind relationship is considered 
crucial to an understanding of how skilled workers and designers 
develop and use their tradition-based abilities in practice. One essential 
point is that an embodied skill, unlike a fixed response or set of responses, 
can be brought to bear in an indefinite number of ways. Focusing, getting 
the right perspective, and picking out certain details, all involve 
coordinated relationships between mind and body. 
Dreyfus concludes that the body contributes three functions not 
present, and not yet conceived, in digital computer programs: (a) the 
inner horizon, i.e. the partially indeterminate, predelineated anticipation 
of partially indeterminate data; (b) the global character of this anticipation 
which determines the meaning of the details it assimilates and is 
determined by them; (c) the transferability of this anticipation from one 
sense modality and one organ of action to another. 
All these are included in the general human ability to acquire bodily 
skills. Thanks to this fundamental ability, an embodied agent can dwell 
in the world in such a way as to avoid the infinite task of formalizing 
everything (Dreyfus, 1979, p.255). 
It seems essential to find ways of restoring or improving the body-
mind relationship, even when a elM system - or part of it - is developed 
and/or implemented. From a holistic perspective it may be fruitful to 
consider the mind as a complementary dynamic process between the 
conscious and unconscious levels, viewed as a continuous mutual stream 
of energy. The unconscious level is not only a dump for repressed 
instincts, but may also be seen as a creative and intelligent principle 
relating the person to the natural, social and biographical background. 
Polanyi distinguishes between two kinds of mutually exclusive 
awareness (Polanyi 1967): focal awareness, and form awareness. This 
means that a person may be aware of certain things, either by focusing 
on them directly, or by looking at them as functional parts of a superior 
target. Focal awareness always is fully conscious, but form awareness 
may exist at any of the conscious and unconscious levels. Polanyi's 
ultimate focal aim is that all knowledge is either tacit or rooted in tacit 
knowledge. Besides, he argues, every concept's relation to reality is 
grounded in personal commitments, which we are unable to specify 
45 

46 
Crossing the Border 
completely. The reason is that we are dwelling in these basic 
commitments. Focusing our attention upon them means destroying their 
subsidiary function. Therefore, we cannot spell out this process of tacit 
integration in explicit steps. 
Winograd and Flores (1986) also stress the importance of participation 
and involvement rather than formal operations: "Knowledge and 
understanding (in both the cognitive and linguistic senses) do not result 
from formal operations on mental representations of an objectively 
existing world. Rather they arise from the individual's committed 
participation in mutually oriented patterns of behaviour that are 
embedded in a socially shared background of concerns, actions and 
beliefs." 
In their book Mind over Machine Hubert Dreyfus and his brother Stuart 
Dreyfus try to describe how analysis and intuition work together in the 
human mind at different stages of the skill-acquisition process (Dreyfus 
and Dreyfus 1986). Their essential point is to show that analytic thinking 
and intuition are not two mentally exclusive ways of understanding or 
making judgements. Rather, they seem to be complementary factors 
working together, though intuition is of increasing importance when 
the skill performer becomes more and more experienced. With enough 
experience, the human being seems to be able to recognize whole scenes 
without decomposing them into specific features. 
On the other hand, one might have to take into account that, 
nevertheless, there are important distinctions between analytical and 
intuitive ways of understanding and reasoning. When it comes to the 
point of integrating life-world into every-day working inside the factory, 
especially, it should be necessary to realize that people are interested 
not only in their present work, but in other fields of life-world as well, 
and at the same time. In a "human" concept of work, there should be 
opportunities of leaving space opened for both ways of approaching the 
"world", fulfilling actual tasks as well as having a chat with one's friend 
about something completely different. 
Both the design function, and skilled machining, are examples of 
occupations characterized by tacit skills. However, the choice is not 
between tacit or calculative skills, but rather how to find the balance 
between analytic thinking and intuition. Both are necessary from the 
holistic point of view of the human-work relationship. 
B.4.S The Relationship Between Working Conditions and the Personality 
In the holistic approach, personality and work are dialectically related 
to one another. This relationship has two aspects: 
1. Personality-forming work aspects 
2. Work-related personality aspects 
The basic model of the relationship between work and personality, 
insofar as it concerns the work sphere, is structured according to degrees 
of restriction, and constellations, whilst the personality aspect is 

The Interdisciplinary Design of Computer-Integrated Manufacturing Systems 
structured according to its flexibility or rigidity. Here, flexibility signifies 
conscious activity, whereas rigidity means conduct. 
The reorientation towards a positive theory of the shaping of 
technology and work, as it has been attempted by various social science 
studies over the last few years, is as difficult a process as the increasing 
attempts within engineering and natural sciences to come to terms with 
the social implications of technology in the technology-shaping process. 
The reorientation towards a positive theory of technology (and work 
shaping is not only a matter of crossing the borders between traditional 
separated scientific disciplines) also necessitates the integration of the 
theoretical and practical knowledge and experiences too. The possible 
users of the prospective technology are to be involved in the shaping 
process, not only at the stage of implementation and adaptation, but 
also in the initial development process. This reorientation includes a 
number of different fields in society, in which technology shaping is 
influenced. In the following section the scope of these fields is tentatively 
presented. 
B.5 Fields of Technology Shaping 
Concepts of technology shaping are usually limited to specific social sites 
of technology shaping and thereby neglect the interrelationships 
between the social sites. Figure 2.7 represents an attempt to view 
technology shaping in a more holistic way. On the vertical axis of the 
figure, the social sites of technology shaping are disaggregated into 
different categories (ranging from the individual through to international 
socio-economic and political structures). The different spheres or sectors 
of technology (e.g. electronic, mechanical, chemical process and nuclear 
technologies) and their application are represented on the horizontal 
axis. The figure therefore allows an assessment of the importance of 
individual approaches to the shaping of technology (relative to other 
specific social sites) to be made across a range of technological 
applications. 
This contextual approach to technology shaping raises the question 
of what significance the ability of shaping activities located within 
industrial vocational education and training has for the more macro sites 
of technology shaping (Braten 1984). 
Individuals are differentially affected at the different sites of technology 
shaping; for instance, at the State level as a voter, at the university social 
site, as an expert, as a specialist, student, etc. Each concrete individual 
is alwaysboth actively and passively involved and affected, as, for 
example, with wage dependence, as a citizen and as a private person 
and consumer, and he or she is frequently faced with conflicting interests 
within his or her own self. The total personality must always be 
considered. 
The evaluation of a technology can lead to vastly different 
interpretations according to the perspective chosen. Thus, from the 
perspective of a member of a factory or enterprise, the evaluation of a 
technology can be a very different interpretation than from the viewpoint 
47 

48 
Social sites of 
technology shaping 
Crossing the Border 
~~~~~~:!~nal 
I 
1 I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
-------
_~I-,I-LI ~-II-----~I ____ L1----1 
Basic structure 
of society 
I 
I 
1 I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
-t--t I-~"'T-----l- --- -1- ----I 
The State 
: 
I 
I i I 
: 
I 
: 
Poiiti~lp':;ss-;:;rBi - T i - rT~----i ---- ~ - - - -, 
interest groups 
-L .1_1_ ~ ~ _____ 1 _____ ~-- __ ~ 
Science and 
1 1 I 
1 
I 
1 
I 
1 
~~~ -~-- - ~ 1_:_ L 
-1. -
-
-
- ~ -
-
- - -1- -
- --i 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
1 I 
1 
-------
-~'-~T~----~-----~---~ 
Organizations 
I 
I 
I 
1 
I 
I 
I 
I 
---------r'-r+-L----T----~----l 
Individuals 
I 
1 I I : 
I 
1 
I 
ITechnologylTechnology ITechnologyl Spheres of 
land 
land nature land work 
I technology and 
Sectors of 
llife-world 
I 
1 
I their application 
technology 
I 
I 
I 
1 
Fig. 2.7. Fields of technology shaping. 
of a member of a social movement. For example, the education/training 
concept "technology shaping" requires the integration of the perspective 
of the affected, as well as a differentiation according to sectors of 
technology. Every educational/training concept, but in particular all 
occupational education/training, would be inadequate if it were to reduce 
the personality to the" dimension" of skilled worker. This differentiation 
is necessary from the perspective of shapability and shaping of 
technology, as the weighting of the shaping fields and their relationship 
to each other is very different according to the different areas of 
technology. 
The development of the concept of technology shaping within the 
"sphere of technology and its application" necessitates the arrangement 
of the areas of technology at one end of a horizontal scale, emphasizing 
the basic innovation, the fundamental technological-scientific core of 
this technology. With regard to micro-electronics, the basic innovation 
is the integrated programmable electronics system, as represented inter 
alia by microprocessors. Those micro-electronic- or microcomputer-
centred products and processes directly applicable/implementable can 
be classified at the other end of the scale. 
Thus a scale develops according to which every technology/technique 
which can be categorized in the sphere of micro-electronics can be 
classified between the poles of "fundamental basic innovation" and 
"concrete application of the technology". 
This differentiation is meaningful for the shaping question, as the 
purpose-means relationship continually moves along this scale. Should 
the indirectly employable technology, such as very specific user software, 

The Interdisciplinary Design of Computer-Integrated Manufacturing Systems 
still be able to be easily extrapolated from the previously defined purpose, 
which is quite unequivocally defined in the form of an operationalized 
manual of duties concerning the product to be developed, then the 
purpose-means relationship at the other end of the scale - "micro-
electronics as basis innovation" - can be reversed. 
Micro-electronics seeks its own purposes. Only in this sense can we 
speak of an open-purpose structure in relation to communication/data 
technology. The opinion that the crystallization of open-purpose 
structures to the development of technology is a phenomenon of the 
most current technological developments cannot be substantiated. Every 
sector of technology can in principle always be ordered along a scale 
that allows differentiation on the basis of that technology and its concrete 
use. 
Then, however, an implicit displacement of the purpose-means 
relationship along the continuum between technical basis innovation 
and its multifarious applications also holds true. In this sense, the 
building blocks of micro-electronics are nothing more than the new (and 
old) basic building materials, as is the case with plywood in the 
woodworking/timber industry, or bricks in the building industry. The 
difference between the one and the other area of technology does not 
lie in this fundamental phenomenon, but rather in the shaping potential 
inherent in a technology, and the opportunities for direct and indirect 
involvement in the technology shaping process. 
The significance of the reversal of the purpose-means relationship to 
a means-purpose relationship is exemplified by transistor technology. 
Transistor technology was developed by Bell Laboratories in the frame 
of the management goal of creating a solid-matter triode to replace the 
vacuum valve in order to be more competitive in the amplifier technology 
market. Transistor technology was to become the basis for innovations 
in microcomputer technology. Yet this was neither formulated as a goal, 
nor was the imagination of those involved at the time sufficiently flexible 
to anticipate even the slightest hint of such future development 
possibilities. Hence, this problem of the open-purpose structure of basic 
technical innovation must be considered in the debates about humane 
and socially compatible shaping of technology. 
In fundamental projects for the further development of engineering 
and natural science research, the capacity for technological and socially 
creative imagination on the part of the researchers must be taken into 
consideration in any reappraisal of possible historical ramifications and 
for responsible participation in technology shaping for the future. This 
creativity is essential in order to anticipate, and reflect upon, future 
development phases. Added scope can be provided by the formulation 
and design of well-founded scenarios which articulate possible future 
developments and uses of research knowledge, products and their 
possible effects and consequences. 
Yet, whilst the general recognition that technology is an expression 
of social purposes (as well as the interests underlying such purposes) is 
necessary if we are to develop a concept of technology shaping based 
on a specific technology, this is not sufficient. Even if we were to succeed 
in realizing a use-value oriented concept of technology development for 
49 

50 
Crossing the Border 
the purpose of creative and gainful employment, one key problem 
remains. History repeatedly shows us that the design and development 
of technology can have social and ecological effects and consequences 
which are both unintended and unforeseen by its designers, developers 
and users. A solution to this problem in the sense of technology shaping, 
which applies especially to the technology developed according to the 
analysis-synthesis concept (non-holistic, non-ecological), includes the 
abandoning of socially non-controllable technology. 
The extent of the side-effects of technical products and processes as 
a rule exceeds the dimensions of the intended consequences of purpose-
rational technological developments. In this respect, tecJ:mology is in 
principle always also incalculable. It bears surprises and unforeseeable 
potential and gives rise to previously incalculable consequences. 
A concept of technology shaping, and an education/training goal allied 
to the shaping of technology, must therefore take account of both aspects 
of technology shaping: 
1. A use-value-orientated shaping of technology in unison with qualified 
economics. 
2. A shaping of technology that is aware of the limits of purpose-rational 
technology development and the incalculability of the consequences 
of technology and/or its innovative potential. 
C DIMENSIONS OF HUMAN-CENTRED WORK 
C.l Introduction 
The development of a human-centred eIM system presupposes that this 
eIM system is necessarily regarded as a technology facilitating the 
establishment of preconditions and (work) conditions, whose "humane 
character" must first be proven in the concrete work process. Hence the 
He-elM technology that is to be developed has a hypothetical character. 
The justification, substantiation and evolution of a concept of "humane 
work" should differentiate according to three work-oriented relation-
ships: (a) work and technology; (b) work and communication; (c) work 
and learning. 
C.2 The Relationship of Work and Technology 
In Western culture there exists an analytically explicable connection 
between work and technology, inasmuch as the knowledge implemented 
in the forces of production, embodied in machines, organizations and 
competencies, is meant to improve the productivity of labour by 
improving the control over nature and over cooperating human beings. 
As mentioned earlier, a dramatic transformation in the relationship of 
work and technology has occurred during the course of the Industrial 
Revolution. This is characterized by the relationship of work to 

The Interdisciplinary Design of Computer-Integrated Manufacturing Systems 
technology (as a measure in the work process) which was/is increasingly 
organized from the perspective of machines and "rest-work". This 
ongoing process of substitution and objectification of work presupposes 
a process of increasing regimentation and division of more complex work 
procedures that need to be carried out. 
The work organization serves as a mediation instrument for the 
acceleration of the segmentation and objectification process. This 
development accompanied the mounting process of subordination of 
the human being to the machine. Thinking in terms of machines became 
the norm for the shaping of the work-technology relationship. In the 
resultant competitive situation of man versus machine, the machine 
usually proved to be superior in the work process. If one defines and 
organizes human abilities as mechanical, insofar as humans are required 
to carry out robot-like tasks, then the "proof" that a mechanical robot 
is superior to the "human robot" is usually close at hand. Such a logic 
is now increasingly being applied to office automation (Bailey 1982). 
We can formulate this in general terms. If one always defines and 
organizes work in the work-technology relationship from a machine 
perspective, then one makes the machine and its "abilities" (functions 
and possibilities) the norm for human abilities. The argument that 
industrial technological development has increasingly freed us from 
routine work and stress burdens is only partially true, as: 
1. It is often overlooked that burdensome work frequently derives from 
the same logic as the technology that was and is implemented for the 
segmentation and objectification of that work. 
2. A very restricted mechanistic comprehension of stress burdens 
underlies this form of thinking. 
Where work is experienced as hardship, and generally regarded as 
burdensome, all forms of objectification of work appear as a reduction 
of stress, and a "freeing" from work would ultimately correspond to a 
burden-free situation. "Social work" is, however, not only objectively 
necessary for survival, but in the shape of human work is subjectively 
an intrinsic prerequisite for human existence. If one does not regard 
work, from the outset, as wage labour, then it becomes apparent that 
cause enough exists for understanding work as a primary form of human 
life expression. Moreover, this awareness ought to lead to the shaping 
of work accordingly, and not allow it to atrophy to a mere reflection of 
technological development that excludes the human being from 
(collective) productivity. 
The human bioogical development potential, as it is biologically and 
historically given, must become a point of departure for the shaping of 
work and technology. The potentialities of self-renewal and self-
transcendence - both at the individual and organizational level - are 
given high priority from the human-centred perspective. This includes 
the capacity for understanding and the instance of active participation 
in the shaping of one's own social conditions. 
51 

52 
Crossing the Border 
Thus, the development of "human-centred" computer-assisted work 
and technology, particularly in the frame of research and development 
projects oriented towards an integrative technology-shaping concept, 
should include the following: 
1. Analysis of the formative conditions and conditions of change for 
computer-assisted and computer-integrated production technology, 
including possible ramification opportunities. 
2. The historical reconstruction (re-evaluation) of alternative develop-
ment directions in the domain of computer-assisted work and 
technology . 
3. The analysis and assessment (evaluation of the relationship of 
computer-assisted technology) and the social interests of those 
involved and concerned (internal) groups and individuals, as well as 
the subjective experience of the employed. 
4. An analysis and evaluation of CIM under special consideration of the 
diverging interests, as they are given via the diverse social sites of 
technology shaping and the individuals acting at those sites. 
5. The development of tables of duties for the shaping of HC-CIM 
components, in which the social implications and intentions are 
apparent, and the shaping-scientific possibilities in which shaping 
criteria for industrial work and life-world are formulated. 
6. A model realization and testing of the HC-CIM system, since only 
by means of the real work process can its quality more or less be 
proven to be human-centred or not. In other words, only via a longer-
term development process of HC-CIM work can the intended 
development possibilities be brought to fruition. 
C.3 Work and Communication 
Communication is a fundamental human relation (Holzkamp 1973). In 
the speech act theory developed by Habermas the act of language and 
communication is emphasized rather than its descriptive or representational 
role. Communication through language or non-verbal gesticulation is an 
act of commitment and interpretation based on a more or less common 
social and historical background. The act of communication is directed 
towards the creation of mutual orientation (Maturana). As pointed out by 
Winograd and Flores, this orientation is not grounded in a correspondence 
between language and the world, but exists as a consensual domain - as 
interlinked patterns of activity (Winograd and Flores 1986). 
Communication, as defined here, influences the work processes more 
deeply than is reflected in the perception of the mechanistic approach, 
which emphasizes the role of transmitting information and symbols. 
Through the communicative act the actors not only give or obey orders 
in the work process, they also confront or share interpretations of 
experiences regarding the social and functional aspects of the common 
work-life. 

The Interdisciplinary Design of Computer-Integrated Manufacturing Systems 
As pointed out by Leithauser, there exists a "hidden situation" in 
every firm under and beside the formal organization of the firm, which 
is largely unrecognised by the management or the external system 
experts. The centre of the "hidden situation" may shift or take different 
shapes dependent on how extensive and advanced the technology, but 
we may anticipate that even the most integrated and complex system is 
still dependent on the interactions taking place in hidden situations. 
The communicative acts in the hidden situation often supply or rectify 
the direction of the work process, when the officially prescribed task or 
methods are inadequate. Moreover, it is important to restore the hidden 
situation regarding subjective self-respect and human dignity. Therefore 
it is not surprising that even workers at terminals with restricted social 
contacts have developed an informal culture through the communication 
network. 
Instead of trying to eliminate the possibilities of informal interaction 
- which seems to be the dominating tendency in conventional technology 
shaping - a holistic technology shaping may deliberate how to widen 
possibilities of informal interaction, both in the single work-group and 
between different departments. 
As pointed out by Winograd and Flores, the importance of face-to-
face communication has traditionally been preferred by successful 
managers (Winograd and Flores 1986, p.15l): 
. . . their activities are not well represented by the stereotype of a reflecting solitary mind 
studying complex alternatives. Instead, managers appear to be absorbed in many short 
interactions, most of them lasting between two and twenty minutes. They manifest a great 
preference for oral communication - by telephone or face to face. 
But this may be the preference of other parts in the firm too. Designers 
and skilled workers may prefer just as much oral communication as 
managers. 
In the context of computer systems, the predominant emphasis is on 
formalized information and preplanned communication. The signific-
ance of non-formalized information and communication is often 
neglected, perhaps due to the difficulties of making it visible. Many 
systems designed by computer professionals are intended to facilitate 
the activity of an individual working alone, and thereby leave out the 
essential dimension of collective work. The introduction of integrated 
systems with time-sharing terminals has often radically cut off natural 
face-to-face communication channels. From both a functional and human 
perspective such tendencies could be counteracted. A holistic technology 
shaping may deliberate how to widen informal and face-to-face 
communication as possibilities both in the single work-group and 
between different departments. 
Communication mediated by computer applications may constitute a 
supplement to face-to-face communication, but not a substitute for it. 
Thus, formalized and preplanned communication may readily be 
interpreted as a part of overall communication. If there are any problems 
in technical communication, it may be shifted to personal face-to-face 
communication. Furthermore, if the objectives of coordination between 
53 

54 
Crossing the Border 
two or more collaborating persons are known, the choice of 
communication medium may be based on their own decision. 
As pointed out by the Norwegian sociologist Braten (1984), 
decentralized computer networks may increase symbolic centralization. 
If a "model-strong" actor and a "model-weak" actor are coupled in an 
open information exchange system, the former may be expected to 
gradually increase his control of the other actor: 
Thus a successful transition in the name of democratization to a more open communication 
structure may freeze - or even increase - the influence gap ... In order to restore balance, 
and thereby dialogue in such systems of interaction, it is required that the participants 
are able to step outside the system's boundary, as it were, and assume an observer's 
position. (Braten 1984, p.190) 
Communicative action should be rationalized neither under the 
technical aspects of the means selected nor under the strategic aspect of 
the selection of means. The principle in the holistic approach should be 
the moral-practical aspect of the responsibility of the acting subject and 
the justifiability of the action norm (Habermas 1970). 
To do this is not only organizational but also an educational matter: 
There exists a domain for education in communicative competence ... that is the capacity 
to express one's intentions and take responsibilities in the network of commitments that 
utterances and their interpretations bring to the world . . . People's conscious knowledge 
of their participation in the network of commitment can be reinforced and developed, 
improving their capacity to act in the domain of language. (Winograd and Flores 1986, p. 
162) 
Thus we touch on the third dimension of human-centred work: the 
learning aspect, which is discussed in the following section. 
C.4 Work and Learning 
Work, from an anthropological perspective, is always an acquisition or 
learning process. During the work process, the expenditure and 
acquisition of abilities always takes place as two dimensions of the same 
process. Hence the volume of learning opportunities within the work 
process is a measure for humane work and technology. In the frequently 
horizontally and vertically divided work process, the chances for learning 
(particularly in the range of simple performing activities) are restricted 
to a large degree. 
In the search for new production concepts in the area of computer-
assisted work and technology, this insight, as well as the recognition 
that a phasing out of the acquisition aspect of work is counter-productive, 
is beginning to find acceptance. The reintegration of previously 
fragmented work and the extension of performance flexibility as 
instances of rehumanization of work (combined with a strengthening of 
the quality of acquisition (learning opportunities), motivation, and 
identification with the work) are becoming sought-after productive forces 
in computer-integrated production. 
The production island is thus increasingly gaining in significance as 
an efficient production concept. "Production islands", with their 

The Interdisciplinary Design of Computer-Integrated Manufacturing Systems 
homogeneous qualification structure, can, from a manufacturing as well 
as a time perspective, react better to the varying requirement of the 
market than centralized and hierarchical forms of organization. 
Following extensive investigations of small and medium-sized enterpri-
ses, Moll (1983) comes to the conclusion that "small craftsman 
workshops" (Kleinmeistereien), with "flat" hierarchies and elastic 
cooperative relations, should be essential elements of future production. 
What is needed are highly and broadly qualified skilled workers willing 
and able to learn, with market company loyalty and professional 
qualifications. An undifferentiated extrapolation of the uninterrupted 
Taylorization of work until the late 1970s is unacceptable. 
CA.1 The Relationship Between Cultivation (Bildung) and Qualification 
Qualification refers to a spectrum of requirements of skills and abilities 
demanded of an employee or group of employees, comprised more or 
less of the specific content of work and work forms. Qualifications are 
therefore also always profiles of activity requirements relatively external 
to the personality of the working individual. The attempt to shape the 
activity requirements, as they crystallize according to the concept of 
"rest-work", into a personality theory in which categories of activities 
are placed in antithesis to a typology of psychological dispositions (from 
which a hierarchically organized automatic control system model is then 
postulated as a personality model) is therefore unsuited to explain the 
relationship between work and personality. 
Seve referred to the misplaced attempts at "importing" models from 
mathematical logic, cybernetics and linguistics into the psychology of. 
personality, as "linguistomania" and "cybernetomania". An example of 
a psychological theory that can be classified in the category is the 
"performance-regulation theory" as formulated by Hacker (see Simon 
1978). 
The concept of qualification refers to the qualification holder. This 
holder does not become subject to the cognition and shaping processes. 
Qualification bearers appear as a residual risk from the perspective of 
the primary qualification requirements, as interference potential and a 
source of unpredictability. Therefore they are variables that could be 
disposed of. The substitution of human representatives by mechanical 
representatives is a distinguishing mark of mechanization and 
automation. A work process can be described by qualifications. 
Subjective elements of personality, however, cannot. Qualification is an 
economic category. Education, on the other hand, refers to personality 
in the relationship of work and personality. From the cultivation 
(Bildung) perspective, the question is raised about the cultivation value 
of work content. The unfolding of the personality forces on the basis of 
an intellect capable of self-determination is the starting point of the 
education concept as well as of practical cultivation efforts. 
A greater contrast of cultivation and qualification leads to unacceptable 
reductions in the description of the fluctuating relationship between 
work and personality. We therefore base our approach on a dialectical 
55 

56 
Crossing the Border 
relationship between cultivation and qualification. Cultivation and 
qualification are, as depicted above, substantially different from one 
another, and in this sense on opposite sides of the fence, i.e. they 
represent the poles of a dialectical relationship. 
Cultivation is therefore a constituent aspect of qualification since it 
always takes place in an insoluble alternating relationship between 
society and personality. At the same time, qualification always contains 
cultivation aspects; qualification is implicit cultivation. The suppression 
of this alternating relationship in the practice of cultivation and work 
planning leads to violation of the personality on the one hand, as well 
as (where applicable) to inhuman shaping of work, and production 
processes on the other hand. Qualification conditions and opportunities 
should thus be seen as prerequisites for educational opportunities, as 
well as vice versa. In a project with the claim to being human-centred, 
the primary perspective in regard to the work process dimension is the 
cultivation perspective. Qualification requirements need to be develo-
ped, from the perspective of cultivation interests and opportunities. For 
the alternating relationship between working/learning in a computer-
assisted production process, this means that besides the procuring of 
instrumental qualifications (trade, craft, intellectuat emotional) the 
opportunity to comprehend the work process must be available, both 
in this technical-economic connection (shop-floor and external), and 
from an ecological and humane, as well as social-historical perspective, 
and to reflect upon these. 
As work processes cannot and should not be counteracted or 
neutralized in cultivation processes - they are rather different processes 
- it is necessary to develop models according to which the sketched 
cultivation values can be realized. The place of work, as an implicit centre 
of cultivation, is of great significance in this respect. Cultivation and 
qualification, however, cannot be limited to the work process. The 
cultivation goal of participation in the shaping of work and technology, 
as a central idea for the project human-centred CIM, presupposes a 
professional education concept far broader than the perspective of the 
work process. Yet such breadth is essential if we are adequately to unfold 
and shape the interrelationship between humane computer-assisted 
skilled work and qualification. 
More humane computer-assisted manufacturing which enables greater 
performance flexibility (autonomy), more opportunities for learning 
(qualification), and the realization of less stress, can, when coupled with 
the dismantling of "indirect" skills in separate planning and steering 
spheres, lead to an increase in productivity (Moll 1979). 
The dynamic productivity model, proposed by Rosenbrock and 
developed further by Seliger, demonstrates that productivity gains, if 
they are directly transformed into short-term rationalization gains, can 
lead to unfavourable economic consequences in the long term. Given 
this, and considering the discrepancy between education/training and 
qualification, this model may be useful for the implementation of an 
HC-CIM system (Rosenbrock 1981; Seliger 1983). 
Besides the utilization of opportunities for learning in the work 
process, the anticipated growth in productivity is translated into further 

The Interdisciplinary Design of Computer-Integrated Manufacturing Systems 
industrial qualification measures. This further education/training is, 
above all, directed towards the transmission of creative shaping, as well 
as social and reflective abilities.' As the discrepancy between education/ 
training and qualification also includes the discrepant relationship 
between individual and collective interest in education/training of the 
employees on the one hand, and the interest of the management in the 
utilization of qualifications on the other, it would be of fundamental 
value to shape the concept of further education/training in such a way 
that the right of education and interest in education of the employees, 
and the qualification interest of the firm, are sufficiently taken into 
consideration. 
D METHODS FOR EVALUATING AND SHAPING COMPUTER-
AIDED TECHNOLOGY AND WORK 
D.l Introduction 
The mechanistic approach to the design and development of computer-
aided technology and work typically follows a sequential process in 
which the technical aspects of a work system are designed first, and 
psychological and organizational aspects are not considered until the 
system is implemented. The technical system is thereby shaped by the 
mechanistic science ideal, and produces demotivated and passive 
behaviour amongst the users of the system (as discussed in section B.2). 
A holistic approach to the design of computer-aided technology and 
work must involve the consideration of human-centred technical and 
social criteria from the beginning of the design process. Amongst 
engineering designers, the design of technology and work is viewed 
almost solely as a technical concern and it is therefore important that 
some method whereby human-centred considerations can reshape this 
process is made available to designers, if this trend is to be redirected. 
It is possible to distinguish five distinct, although essentially 
complementary, methods of parallel design in the social science 
literature. These methods are briefly discussed below and the advantages 
and disadvantages of each are summarized in Fig. 2.8. A more detailed 
discussion is included in Ravden et al. (1987). 
Sociotechnical systems design developed out of the work of Fred 
Emery and Eric Trist at the Tavistock Institute in Great Britain. The 
method associated with the sociotechnical approach to work design is 
the nine-step variance analysis technique. This method is extremely 
complex (and time-consuming to undertake) as it includes the analysis 
of user and supply systems and the analysis of market environment and 
*Brater in his differentiations concerning the limits of a vocational education/training 
concept oriented towards a purpose-rational approach, comes to the conclusion "that the 
particular requirements and expectations demanded of skilled workers thus exist above 
all especially therein, of being able to master complex, not standardised and relatively diverse 
tasks flexibly, as in small series production or tool-making" (p.65). 
57 

58 
Crossing the Border 
organizational development plans. This macro-level of analysis is 
reflected in the almost exclusive application of sociotechnical design 
methods in the design or redesign of complete departments or factory-
wide production systems. 
With a few notable exceptions (e.g. Volvo Kalmar), most of the work 
in this field has concentrated primarily on the redesign of existing social 
systems, with little or no redesign of the work technology itself. Indeed, 
it has been argued that the methods of sociotechnical design are largely 
mechanistic in practice since the design of operator tasks are based on 
the control of instability arising from the technical system. Hence, 
sociotechnical design tends to be technically led. 
The parallel design method of user participation has gained increasing 
prominence in recent years. The rationale behind this method is that if 
system users are involved in design, then the resultant system will be 
better, either because it will suit the particular needs and skills of those 
Design method 
Advantages 
Disadvantages 
SOCIOTECHNICAL 
Comprehensive. 
Very complex - requires 
SYSTEMS DESIGN 
Can be used to design 
sociotechnical systems 
complete factory 
specialists. Tends to treat 
technology as a "given" in 
design. Aids design choices 
only at a general level 
USER 
Caters for specific user 
Unfamiliarity of technical 
PARTICIPATION 
needs. Uses a full range of details and design options to 
personnel expertise 
users may make 
participation difficult or 
ineffective. User 
involvement tends to lag 
behind technical design. 
User group may not be 
identifiable or available. 
Tends to produce 
"conservative" systems 
DESIGN CRITERIA 
Can be very specific. Allows Less suitable at general 
AND GUIDELINES 
design choices to be 
level. Limited knowledge 
evaluated at an early stage base. May be difficult to use 
SCENARIOS 
Relatively easy to construct. Unsuitable as aid to specific 
Inexpensive 
design decisions. Leaves 
design process technically 
driven 
DESIGN BY DOING 
Exposes design options to 
Very time consuming. 
users, allowing more 
Essentially experimental 
informed user contribution. and therefore difficult to 
Unconstrained by 
manage and may produce 
conventional engineering 
unrealizable system 
design custom and practice. specification 
Fig. 2.8. Comparative advantages and disadvantages of parallel design methods. 

The Interdisciplinary Design of Computer-Integrated Manufacturing Systems 
people working with it, or because these people have the job-specific 
knowledge about the production process which should be included in 
the technical design itself. 
The actual form which user participation takes in a particular design 
project may vary, although the most successful projects have involved 
users during the entire design and development process. There are a 
number of problems associated with this method and these are 
summarized in Fig. 2.8. 
A third method of parallel design involves the representation of social 
science expertise in the form of design guidelines or criteria for use by 
design engineers. The aim of this approach is the inclusion of these 
"social" criteria in the system, alongside engineering and economic 
criteria, in order to optimize the human and social aspects of the system. 
The major problem associated with this method is that of communicating 
the knowledge base behind the criteria in a form that is usable by 
designers (Corbett 1987). 
The use of scenarios - a fourth parallel design method - is a recent 
development and it is difficult to evaluate its effectiveness in shaping 
design. A scenario is basically a picture or vision to illustrate what a 
system would look like if certain social considerations were included in 
the design. By itself, a scenario is only a starting point for parallel design, 
and may leave the design process largely unaltered, and therefore 
technically driven. 
The most radical method of parallel design is "designing by doing". 
This method derives from the work, in Scandinavia, within the UTOPIA 
project. It is a participative methodology involving users from the very 
onset of design. Users are a:ble to articulate their needs in a concrete 
way, by using prototypes and mock-up simulations, and then draw up 
a specification for use by design engineers. This experimental approach 
to design is still under development and, although a number of problems 
associated with user participation may be overcome by this method, 
communication between users and designers remains problematic. The 
technically unconstrained nature of the user involvement is difficult to 
manage and may lead to unrealizable system specifications unless steps 
are taken to involve design engineers more closely in the early stages. 
In this final section, a strategy of social shaping is outlined which 
attempts to combine three of these parallel design methods in order to 
minimize the disadvantages associated with the individual methods. 
These methods are: the use of scenarios, design guidelines or criteria, 
and user participation. 
The focus of this strategy is the use of the six work dimensions (criteria) 
discussed in section D.3.2. These are: 
1. Time structure 
2. Space for movement 
3. Social relations 
4. Control flexibility 
5. Qualification 
6. Stress control 
59 

60 
Crossing the Border 
One important way by which these dimensions may be used during 
the design process is through the drawing up of a scenario, or picture, 
of the ideal typical work environment. Such a scenario enables designers 
to see the kind of work environment into which they must project their 
end product, and allows design choices to be evaluated according to 
how well they contribute to such a factory work-life. 
D.2 A Scenario 
D.2.1 Range of Products 
The factory of the future will focus on small to medium batch production 
and contain flexible production islands incorporating both highly 
automated and manual-intensive machines. Flexibility here is taken to 
mean the ability to adapt to changes in product design, batch size, and 
machining processes in order to meet changing market demands and 
customer requirements. To meet these demands, the human-centred 
technology must be integrated with, and complemented by, an equally 
flexible organization of work. We are therefore talking about human-
centred sociotechnical eIM systems. 
The factory of the future produces a wide range of products with a 
certain common core. These products will include "fixed" products 
presented to customers in catalogues, customer-specified products and 
products adapted to customer requirements. In all cases the factory will 
design and manufacture the complete product without the use of a 
subcontractor. Relationships with customers are direct to allow the 
evaluation and improvement of the use-value of the products. In this 
way the factory can develop its product range in new directions as 
expertise in design and manufacture (and customer requirements) 
develop. 
D.2.2 The Factory 
The factory is made of three sectors: coordination, design and 
manufacture, and these are organized by product and not by function 
to maximize flexibility. In other words, instead of dividing labour, work 
is organized by dividing products and product order. This is achieved 
by extending the concept of group technology into a general organization 
concept rather than a single technique. 
The factory's product range is divided into part families, i.e. groups 
of products with similar characteristics, and the production islands are 
responsible for a particular subgroup of these part families. The 
production islands have the task of producing components and complete 
products as far as possible from raw materials. All necessary human, 
technical and material resources are therefore concentrated within the 
production island. 

The Interdisciplinary Design of Computer-Integrated Manufacturing Systems 
Design and manufacture are organized around these part families so 
that each product group in manufacturing has a corresponding group 
in the design section of the factory. The design process is split up 
according to product families, or their parts, so that the designers perform 
the whole design process comprising tasks such as determining 
functional structures and dimensions, geometric modelling and 
designing new products. Thus, two skill-centred production subgroups 
will be formed, equipped with local computer assistance and connected 
by electronic data exchange, namely production and design islands. 
The two autonomous subsystems are interlinked by the basic 
components of CIM architecture. These are: 
1. A common database with which all functional programs may interact 
2. A data highway to link subsystems 
3. Data-exchange interfaces, to integrate subsystems, customer orders 
and material supply 
Unlike the centralized system architectures commonly associated with 
Taylorist work structuring, these components reflect a CIM environment 
. that is integrated in terms of information rather than control. In other 
words, instead of formalizing and incorporating almost all production 
knowledge and work planning into the computer system, the computer 
system serves as an integrated information system. Although the 
computer controls routine operations, the planning of work activities is 
left to the island personnel, who will use their knowledge and skill to 
optimize island performance with the computer system providing them 
with accurate information and simulations to support decision-making. 
The structuring of this information, as it is presented to local workstations 
and machines, can be changed by island personnel to suit their preferred 
methods of working and decision-making. 
The interlinking of island activities is coordinated by the coordination 
department, which is responsible for maintaining the flow of information 
between islands, and for distributing tasks to the relevant design and 
production islands (as well as initiating new product groups). 
The presence of a coordination department does not mean that 
planning and execution are distinct functions. Orders being produced 
in a production island do not require detailed process planning 
information from the coordination department. It is sufficient only to 
specify the completion date for the part or product and not the sequence 
of operations. This is left to the members of the relevant production 
island to decide. Furthermore, there is extensive formal and informal 
collaboration between all three sectors of the factory by means of 
electronic data exchange, as well as face-to-face communication. 
For example, new product groups will be formed whenever a new 
product or product family is to be developed. This group, which 
comprises members from all three sectors of the factory, plans the design 
and manufacture of the new product. Once the first batch has been 
successfully produced this group is dissolved. In this way, the product 
will be adapted to suit the manufacturing capabilities of the production 
island from the earliest stages of the design process. 
61 

62 
Crossing the Border 
On a more day-to-day basis, the interactions between coordination, 
design and manufacturing enable all personnel to see their work from 
the perspective of its wider implications for the factory overall, and also 
to be involved in a wide range of decision-making activities. For example, 
once product delivery data have been agreed by coordination, design 
and production personnel, any unforeseen problems arising from within 
the production island which threaten punctual completion are dealt with 
by the production island personnel. If the boundary manager for the 
island detects that rescheduling within the island will not solve the 
problem he or she may then attempt a form of load sharing with other 
islands before alerting the coordination department that delivery 
schedules require reprocessing. 
D.2.3 The Production Island 
The production island has four main tasks: 
1. Production planning (in collaboration with the design group) 
2. Production (machining and assembly, plus equipment maintenance) 
3. Product and methods development 
4. Qualification and training development 
The production island work-group comprises a number of "electro-
mechanical craftspeople" who will possess skills in machining, assembly, 
machine setting, NC program generation and editing, inventory 
management, quality control, machine maintenance and work 
scheduling and planning. Although all group members will possess these 
skills, some members will have developed a more specialized interest 
in certain tasks and functions (e.g. hardware maintenance). Unlike the 
rigid division of labour associated with the more Taylorist organizational 
structures, the island has an "organic" division of labour in which 
individual tasks and skills overlap to allow group problem solving and 
flexibility in personnel-machine assignment. 
Although the group is free to organize and supervise its own 
behaviour, the internal division of labour follows two guiding principles: 
1. The division is always horizontal rather than vertical (e.g. planning 
and task execution are never divided among group members, each 
group member being responsible for the setting, programming and 
machining functions for any given machine). 
2. It shall always be possible for every member to experience and develop 
the relation between quality of product and quality of production 
(e.g. all personnel participate in the four categories of tasks outlined 
above). 
One person in the group has the responsibility for managing the 
boundaries of the island. The worker is elected by the group (or the 
position is filled by job rotation) and negotiates with the coordination 
department on which jobs to initiate and when they are to be delivered. 
She or he is also responsible for making sure that the island always has 

The Interdisciplinary Design of Computer-Integrated Manufacturing Systems 
sufficient resources to undertake the work in progress. This leaves the 
other group members free to concentrate on production (although they 
will be involved in briefing the boundary manager). The boundary 
manager does not distribute tasks for others in the group. 
When new orders come in, the group as a whole will decide who will 
do which part of the work and will ensure that every member is aware 
of their tasks for at least one week in advance to facilitate the planning 
of additional activities, such as product and methods development and 
qualification and training development. Typically there will be up to five 
hours "free time" available each week to allow island personnel to engage 
in these development activities. These will include brainstorming 
workshops (to aid product and methods development) and further 
education workshops (to aid the development of personnel skills and 
qualifications) . 
In this process of development activities, care should be taken to 
ensure that representatives are fully involved. For, as methods like 
"organization development" are at first sight primarily a workers' 
participation strategy created by the managment, one should not forget 
about the different interests of work configuration on the part of the 
workers (as well as on the part of the management) still being alive. 
Also, it is to be considered that the free time concept is in some sense 
the counterpart of the dynamic productivity concept mentioned earlier. 
Obviously, it is very important that the higher productivity of the island, 
as expected by many authors, may by no means lead to increasing worker 
redundancies. Instead, the concept of participation in organizational 
development will enable the employees to use their "spare time" for 
planning not only new methods of higher productivity, but more humane 
work conditions as well. 
D.2.4 The Workplace 
The worker in the production island group is characterized by his or her 
craft skills. The worker will typically have responsibility for one machine 
in addition to access to a common pool of auxiliary equipment and 
machines. He or she is responsible for designing and manufacturing 
fixtures and other tools and aids when necessary. In this way, workers 
will be able to develop their own working methods whilst, at the same 
time, taking part in the overall development of new products or parts 
in cooperation with the corresponding design group. 
The computer-aided machines which are used within the production 
island are all operator programmed, although geometric data for parts 
are typically transmitted directly to the machine database. In no cases 
are part programs written by the design group. 
The human-machine interface has been designed so as to allow the 
worker to understand the workings of the machine and to develop his 
or her experience and skill of the machining process. The dialogue 
between them is not structured by design, but is flexible enough to 
enable the workers to define their own methods of working. The 
information system has a network architecture which allows the worker 
63 

64 
Crossing the Border 
to access all relevant databases and also to receive fast reliable feedback 
on matters concerning quality, amount of work in progress, throughput 
times, scheduling alterations and so forth. In addition to the regular 
meetings and conversations with workers, both within and outside of 
his group, this information system gives the worker a "panoramic" view 
of the entire production system. All machines have access to this 
information system, although some workers may have designed their 
own personalized information display macros. To avoid confusion, these 
may only be accessed by the user's password. 
0.3 The Scenario Related to the Dimensions and Criteria of 
Experiencing, Shaping and Evaluating Work 
D.3.1 The Normative Perspective of the Shaping Process 
Every shaping process requires the anticipation of the use-value of 
products and processes. Moreover, the shaping of the future always 
creates new conditions and opportunities for the development of 
individuals in the interrelation between the development of society and 
of subjectivity. Therefore, it is necessary to establish normative 
technological and work concepts. 
The production concept described in section D.2 is to be understood 
with this in mind. The global orientation of values in the process of 
designing HC-CIM is such that the subjective potential for automomous 
action develops as comprehensively as possible and the ability to 
(co)shape one's own working and living conditions can be achieved as 
extensively as possible through computer-assisted work. 
D.3.2 Dimensions of Work 
In the following we propose six dimensions for the structuring of work 
processes, according to which work can be empirically analysed 
regarding its relevance to experience and socialization, as well as shaped 
from the same point of view. A comparison of relevant works from 
various scientific disciplines shows that there is common agreement 
concerning the care aspects of work. 
Brater designates division of labour, attachment to place of work, the 
cooperation structure and degree of formalization of the respective 
working conditions and the extent of insight or participation in strategic 
decisions as shaping variables (Brater 1984). 
Marie Jahoda arrives at five experience perspectives in an evaluation 
of sociological studies of problems in working life (Jahoda 1983). She 
designates them "objective experience categories", "as they determine 
those aspects of work that are experienced by the employed as well as 
by the unemployed in any manner or form and that have to be 
experienced whether they want to believe it or not" (see Leithauser 1986). 

The Interdisciplinary Design of Computer-Integrated Manufacturing Systems 
These five perspectives are: 
1. Imposing of a fixed time structure 
2. Expansion of the social horizon 
3. Participation in collective goals and efforts 
4. Assignment of status and identity 
5. Compulsion of regular activity 
In their interactive model concerning the relationship between work 
forms of the personality and personality-related working conditions, 
Hoff, Lappe and Lempert distinguish between six "work-related aspects" 
relevant to socialization which they differentiate according to degrees of 
restriction (Hoff et al. 1982). 
All these approaches can be combined into a model, in which six 
dimensions of industrial life of the work process are distinguished as 
dimensions of experiencing as well as of shaping and evaluation of 
computer-assisted work and technology. A formalization of the degree 
of restriction (such that a differentiation is made between all six 
dimensions according to standardized, comparable restriction levels) 
enables one to apply this model to all sorts of work situations. In our 
case, a qualitative description of six different levels of increasingly 
restrictive forms of work and production is to serve as a measuring stick 
for restriction levels. The dimensions of the six work aspects that need 
to be analysed/shaped are: 
1. Time structure 
2. Space for movement 
3. Social relations 
4. Responsibility and control flexibility 
5. Qualification 
6. Stress control 
Time structure includes both time pressure from outside and the degree 
to which it is possible for the individual and/or group to plan the use 
of time themselves. 
Space for movement includes the degree of explicit formalization of 
moving from one position to another as a part of the job function. It 
further includes the implicit possibilities to move if the person feels the 
need or wish to do so. 
Social relations refer to the degree of explicit formalization regarding 
whom to contact and when, as well as the informal possibilities to 
communicate across or behind the formal structures. 
Responsibility and control flexibility concerns the scope and degree of 
responsibility placed on the person or group themselves. It includes, as 
well, the possibilities and actual practice of controlling how this 
responsibility is managed by the group or individual. 
Qualification concerns the functional abilities more or less related to 
the single job and/or the process of work as a whole. It also includes 
the more comprehensive aspects of self-renewal and self-transcendence 
as essential humane abilities. 
65 

66 
Crossing the Border 
Stress control includes the degree to which the individual and/or group 
is able to control the physical and/or psychological pressure that is felt 
either explicitly or implicitly, in the work organization or man-machine 
relationship. 
Each of the six dimensions must be developed from the perspective 
of the other dimensions. The relationship between motion and time 
structure is the first aspect that enables a more precise determination of 
the quality of the restrictiveness of an existing time structure. In the 
same way, the social relations, the checking of the work and the 
perception of responsibiliity are also subject to a time structure. Time 
structures are also reflected in the stresses and in the learning and 
overtaxing of abilities. In general, therefore, the question of the time 
structure is always linked to one of the other dimensions. Analysis and 
shaping of time structures are thus tied to all other aspects of work (see 
Fig. 2.9). 
Similar preconditions apply to the space of movement. The quality of 
the possibilities for movement can first be tapped when reference is 
made to the relationships between: 
1. Space for movement and social relations 
2. Space for movement and responsibility/control flexibility 
3. Space for movement and stress control 
4. Space for movement and qualification 
An abstractly defined spatiotemporal space of movement would 
remain relatively meaningless without reference to cooperation, 
responsibility and work content, as well as to the resulting qualification 
possibilities. (Please refer to section B.3 for an understanding of the 
relationship between work and qualification.) In this dimension one 
must not forget the abilities regarding reflection, oral communication 
and cooperation which can be classified according to six restriction levels. 
Note that the dimension of qualification is better suited than any other 
dimension as a main indicator for the degree of performance flexibility 
or restrictivity of a production concept. 
The workload results in the same way from the interaction of the other 
work aspects as well as from the relationship of the subjective provisions 
(qualification requirements, time structure, possibilities for movement, 
etc.). 
Stress and strain can only be adequately studied and taken into 
consideration in the shaping process if methods of interpretative 
sociological research are taken into account beyond the mechanistic 
concept of ergonomic stress and beyond the traditional concept of 
empirical, analytical, sociological research. 
Each of the work dimensions, classified according to degree of 
restriction, thus demonstrates a relatively high degree of abstraction 
regarding the quality of concrete work situations. This is what makes 
up the analytical quality of the model. In actual research the critical and 
analytical as well as the shaping-related dimensions of science are 
becoming more and more frequently understood as interrelated. Thus 

The Interdisciplinary Design of Computer-Integrated Manufacturing Systems 
Time structure (Z) 
/"~:-~-----
Responsibility 
/ I \ 
---...~~ 
Space for movement 
and control 
~\~~--/-I-; 
~l---'r\ ----"::!, 
(R) 
flexibility (K) 
\ '" 
/ 
\ 
/1 
\ ~/ 
>;\ / 
\ 1'.--
// 
j 
X '. 
/ 
/\ 
~\ 
Stress control (B) 
Social relations (S) 
Fig. 2.9. Dimensions of work. 
the science of work and industry, for example, consists of the analysis 
and shaping of work processes and of the interrelation between work 
and technology. 
Regarding the six dimensions of the working-life/work process, one 
must differentiate: 
1. Between the objective and the subjective perspective. The 
qualification level, for example, can be subjectively described from 
the point of view of the psychological dispositions, capabilities and 
development potential of the personality and, on the other hand, 
from the point of view of the activities constituting the work process 
(objective aspect). This relationship between work and personality 
can be applied in the same manner to each of the other dimensions 
of the working-life/work process. 
2. Between the conditional and the shaping (decision) aspect. Each of 
the six dimensions fundamentally represents a field of conditions as 
well as a field of possible decisions. In a concrete case, the .time 
structure, for example, can be given and thus becomes a condition 
for the work and socialization process; in another case with different 
given conditions, the time structure can represent a shaping 
dimension. As a result 2x64 (26) formulations of a question can 
formally be distinguished. 
3. Between an analytical formulation of the question, such as (1), and 
a shaping-related formulation of the task, such as (2). The distinction 
67 

68 
Crossing the Border 
between objective work/shaping dimensions and subjective discovering/ 
experiencing dimensions is based on a subtly differentiated use of the 
grid of the work evaluation shown in Fig. 2.10 and 2.1l. 
An objectively mean degree of restriction (level 3 in Fig. 2.10) can now 
be subjectively perceived as "humane". On the basis of the qualification 
level dimension, this would mean that the qualification demands 
according to level 3 correspond to the subjective abilities and all excessive 
qualification requirements (level 0, I, 2) would be experienced just as 
restrictively as work demands that are constantly below one's 
qualification level (levels 4, 5). 
According to this view, the only seemingly paradoxical situation arises 
when objectively minimum restrictiveness or maximum performance 
flexibility are subjectively perceived as restrictive. The conclusion to be 
drawn from this must therefore be to assume a dynamic relationship 
between work and personality. That is, with respect to the analysis and 
shaping of a human-centred eIM system, always to start from the 
development conditions and possibilities in the relationship between 
work and personality. 
A work situation which is subjectively perceived as only slightly 
restrictive and objectively displays a mean degree of restriction (see Fig. 
2.11) is humane if it makes adequate performance flexibility possible for 
employees with very different previous experience and qualifications 
and if it allows further personal development of employees through 
expansion of performance flexibility or removal of restrictions. 
MA I 
c o .. o 
I. .. o • 
II: 
X 
MIN 
5 
4 
3 
2 
1 
0 
2 
R 
s 
Q 
B 
25 
20 
Fig. 2.10. Dimensions for analysis and shaping of industrial work-life. 
K 
K5 
KO 

The Interdisciplinary Design of Computer-Integrated Manufacturing Systems 
A wide variety of forms of work and work organization can certainly 
be found that, if one regards the relationship between work and 
personality statically, permit "humane" work. However, if one considers 
the personality to be developing during the work process, then it is of 
particular importance to create a work organization which enables 
workers having different qualifications and socialization to take up work, 
but which, above all, enables the creation of a minimum of objectively 
and subjectively experienced restrictiveness in the six dimensions of 
work. The island production concept appears with respect to both aspects 
(the aspect of heterogeneous initial conditions (e.g. qualifications) as 
well as the aspect of possibilities for development not only of the working 
conditions but also of the subjective potential) to be a form of work and 
work organization deserving special emphasis (Brodner 1985). 
Z 
R 
S 
Q 
B 
K 
5 
Z5 
K5 
~ 
4 
;g 
:c 
'~ 
3 
Q. 
E 
'" 
E 
Q. 
2 
0 
~ 
'" 
." 
~ 
:c 
' ;( 
'" 
u: 
0 
Fig. 2.11. The relation between objective and subjective perspectives on work. 
Since the island production concept also proves to be particularly 
attractive for a broad area of production from the point of view of business 
management, an interesting conceptual framework is available here for 
human-centred eIM development. 
0.3.3 Example of How to Use the Dimensions of Work in the Shaping and 
Evaluation Process 
On the basis of the present level of socialization research, as well as of 
industrial psychology and sociology research, one can assume that work 
situations are subjectively experienced as having the least amount of 
stress and strain and that the learning opportunities, work motivation 
and interest in the work are increased if: 
69 

70 
Crossing the Border 
1. Work situations are characterized to a certain extent by (solvable) 
problems 
2. Reflection, discussion and experimentation opportunities are 
provided 
3. Understanding and support from fellow men is available 
4. Personal responsibility according to one's capabilities is provided 
5. These conditions vary from situation to situation and from area of 
life to area of life (cf. Hoff et al. 1982) 
The scenario drawn up earlier enables us to illustrate how to use the 
six dimensions of work presented in the former section. However, the 
scenario is, by definition, an ideal type. If the dimensions are to be used 
in practice both for shaping and evaluation purposes, they must be more 
differentiated regarding restrictivity versus flexibility. An example of 
how this differentiation may be developed is shown in Fig. 2.12. This 
matrix is an example of the classification of work on differentiated levels 
of restrictions in the humane work environment. For other areas of work 
(e.g. design and assembly), it is necessary to change the descriptions of 
the levels of work restrictions or performance flexibility. It is also 
necessary to work out a specific perspective for a human work 
environment - a scenario - regarding the six dimensions of work (level 
0). After doing this, it is possible to develop the whole matrix. 
The scenario presented earlier in this section allows a maximum of 
performance flexibility regarding spending of time, space of movement, 
formal and informal communication, self-control planning and carrying 
out of complex tasks and involvement in decision-making processes 
concerning stress (level 0 in the matrix). 
Alternative scenarios may be drawn up if one prefers one of the other 
levels or a combination of several levels illustrated in the matrix above. 
The most restrictive scenario results from levelS. This is characterized 
by strictly bound and preplanned time rhythm and schedule, strictly 
bound place, isolation of formally restricted communication, centralized 
control, sensory-motor abilities and externally steered stress. 

:;i 
/I) 
Grade 01 restriction/performance I Dimensions 01 discovering/experiencing, and 
S' 
flexibility 
shaping 01 the work situation 
Ii 
nma structura (Z) 
Space 01 
Social relations (S) 
Responsibility and 
Qualillcation level (Q) 
Strasa control (8) 
e: 
movement (R) 
control ftaxibility (K) 
'" 
i 
Centralizad hierarchical 
Time-rhythm bound 
Strictly bound to one place, No minimum work related 
Total control via higher 
Senso-motoric abilities 
Stress complelely steered 
.g. 
5 
manufacturing concapt CAD 
programme, time schedule wHhout possibility of place social connections, 
factory d=ment; 
extemally ~echnologicslly 
I 
centred, precision planning 
change, or change In 
maximum control 
technolog cally transmitted 
transmitted) 
c 
objectification 01 factory work 
movements 
~echnically facilitsted) 
~ 
Operator-oriented manufacturing 
Not time-rhythm bound, 
Largely bound to one spot, Formal hlerarchicsl work-
Broad control, 
Routine fulfilment of ~b 
Stress largely externally 
t:I 
:s '0 with a large degree 01 AV in CAD 
but dellnHe handling times with markedly reduced 
related minimum 
technologlcslly and 
requirements accord ng to 
steered ~hnologically 
/I) 
4 
~ ~ and work ~ration, separate 
for dellnite processes 
freedom of movement, e.g. 
~eration, no Informal 
socially (peraonnel) 
a given work programme! 
transmitted), little variation 
Ill. 
skilled work machine operators, 
machine oriented 
cts possible during 
transmitted 
rhythm; narrow v8r1ation 
in the work speed 
~ 
~ 8 qualification control, secondary 
work; extensive control 
span 
0 
E g skilled workers) 
(technically transmitted) 
..... 
. 
~ i Classical skilled worker-oriented 
Variable time organization 
Largely bound to one spot Cooperation via work-
Broad control due to 
Controlled, understood 
Stress /::pelY externally 
i 
-
manufacturing with advanced 
wHhin the AV blueprints 
(machine aYrouP) and 
based communication 
Plannin~ structures, and 
and sell-optimlzed work 
control 
~echnologlcally 
3 
AV and the seperation between 
(e.g. optimizing of CNC 
occasion shift in space, 
technology, minimal 
person control 
(e.g. skilled machine work) and soc~ transmitted), 
machines and secondary 
programme and varying of dependent on cooperation Informal cooperation 
variation 
the work speed 
skilled worken 
technology input data) 
possible; social and 
gosslble wHhin defined 
it 
technological control 
orders 
7-
Classical skilled worker-based 
Variable time organization 
Workshore:riented 
Technologicslly and 
UmHed control (reduced to Sell-programmed, planned Work speed externally and 
~ 
manufacturing with limited 
(e.q. in relation to the 
posslblllt es for movement 
socially transmitted 
more complex work 
manufacturing on diverse 
sell-controlled by work 
~ 
workshop oriented work 
vanation of lots to be 
(subject to cooperation and 
COO~eration on the 
sHuations) 
manufacturing 
breaks and a combination 
2 
planning and centralized 
handled 
work diversity, e.g. by 
wo 
hop level necessary 
Installations; experimental 
of work activities ~rimary 
it 
material-tool economy, also 
means of secondary skilled informal social cooperation 
abilHles (above all, in 
and secondary ski led 
0.. 
AV orientation In programming 
work) 
~ossible to a IImHed extent 
secondary skilled work) 
work) 
f 
01 tool machines 
social + technological 
'0 
controO 
8} Integration 01 primary and 
Open time organization on Good possibllHies for 
Social and technologically 
Largely (cooperative) 
Planning In the frame of 
Parliclpatlon In decisions 
Iii 8. secondaJY skilled workers. 
workshop level in the 
movement (necessary 
induced coorc::;ration and 
collective social control 
part goals wHhln a broader about stresslburden 
~ 
Broad decentralization 01 
framework of definite time 
because of broad 
communlcat on wHh 
91ven goal; carrying out of 
largely possible; 
[ 
o e manufacturing, with perdy 
sectors (e.%.14 d~) for 
responsibility on the shop-
relevant informal 
lverse duties/tasks in the 
decentralizad work 
i 'i autonomous manufacturing 
ths lots to 
han led, 
floor IeveO 
components; social control 
workshop 
planning 
a. CD 
Islands, lerge~ autonomous 
including maintenance, 
oq 
E ~ workplen, an geometrically 
servicing, repair 
~ 
~;" based construction (CAD) 
'" 
1 ~ Completely ~Iized 
Open time organization of 
Good possibilities for 
Social and lechnologically ~~~ 
Planning of complex work 
Maximum involvement In 
it 
E ~ workshop-orIant production, 
the workshop, and 
movement on the shop-
induced ~on 
and 
an self 
In a 
relationships; ~Ing out 
the decision-making 
~ 
0 
~ 
with autonomous production 
participation In production 
floor-level and beyond 
communlcatlOll (horizontal 
collective 
of complex tasks n 
process concerning stress, 
Islanda (partly) integrated 
planning, autonomous 
structure), wHh well-
manufacturing an 
possible via decentralized 
construction and work planning 
workplace oriented work 
developed informal 
production) 
work shaping 
planning 
components; great degree 
of self-control 
Fig. 2.12. Differentiation of the dimensions of discovering/experiencing and shaping of the work situation according to degrees of restriction! 
performance flexibility, for computer-assisted production work. 
;::i 

72 
Crossing the Border 
D.3.4 Criteria for Human-Machine Interface Design 
One of the problems associated with conventional advanced manufactur-
ing systems is that their operation often requires skills that are unrelated 
to existing skills, with the resultant problems of poor transfer of education 
and under-utilization of skills. 
A human-centred CIM system must aim to utilize existing skills and 
allow them to develop into new skills. However, skills analysis is an 
analysis of performance rather than behaviour, a measure of the man-
machine system rather than of the human himself in isolation from 
equipment. Turning skills, for example, have changed over time. The 
development of the tool rest, the numerical control of servos, and the 
digital computer have directly influenced the skills involved in lathe 
operation. Motor skills have largely disappeared with the replacement 
of hand-wheels by numerical controllers. The problem that must be faced 
is how one decides which skills to foster and which to degrade. 
Galjaard has shown how variety, choice uncertainty and selectivity of 
information have been gradually reduced in the work experience of the 
machine tool operator, yet it is precisely these three elements that form 
the basis of schema development and skill learning (Galjaard 1982). 
The aim of a human-centred design is therefore to fit the codes and 
strategies of the computer processes to the needs and skills of the 
operator. Our discussion of these needs and skills has been at a very 
general level thus far, which, at first glance, may appear counter-
productive. However, it should be possible to derive general principles 
of design which can inform specific design choices made in the 
development of a system. As Eason has pointed out, the degrees of 
freedom within a design progressively close as the development work 
progresses (Eason 1982). But this does not necessarily mean that the 
strategic degrees of freedom available to the operator also close. 
An important aim for human-centred design is to ensure that the 
interface does not constrain the number of useful operating strategies 
available. Operators should have the freedom to shift strategies without 
losing software support. The phrase "useful strategies" refers to those 
tasks where choice uncertainty (i.e. disturbance) is acknowledged to 
exist and where the tacit knowledge and skills of the operator are used 
to avert or correct error. 
The criteria for human-centred human-machine interface design are 
divided into three groups, each stressing one of the three following 
strategies (Corbett 1985): 
1. Flexible allocation of functions between human and machine 
2. The possibility of a panoramic view of the overall process 
3. An open software allowing the worker to follow his own preferred 
methods of working 
1. Flexible allocation of functions between human and machine may 
be achieved by the criteria of complementarity, operator "control" and 
interactivity. 
Complementarity. Human and machine should help each other to achieve 
an effect of which each is separately incapable. This principle lies at the 

The Interdisciplinary Design of Computer-Integrated Manufacturing Systems 
basis of human-centred design and stresses that the designer should not 
produce routine and repetitive jobs for the operator. Such jobs are better 
suited to the power of computers. 
Operator control. This principle primarily stipulates that the operator 
should have the freedom to choose how those tasks which can be 
performed by a machine operator, or automatically and/or away from 
the machine, are divided between the operator and the computer. This 
allows for a variety of users, a high degree of flexibility, and the 
opportunity for the user to learn machining skills at a pace consonant 
with his or her abilities. The flexible allocation approach postulated by 
Bailey mirrors this principle of operator control (Bailey 1982). 
Interactivity. Input and output data should be negotiable and software 
should therefore allow interaction between the operator (the active data 
input) and the computer. The level of interaction will depend on whether 
the task is routine and software-activated (where an interactive screen 
editor will suffice) or open to disturbance and thus operator-activated 
(where data manipulation may need to be changed to fit actual, rather 
than normative, demands). 
2. The possibility of a panoramic view of the overall process may be 
achieved by the criteria of minimum shock, transparency, compatibility 
and accountability. 
Minimum Shock. Common-sense and psychology experimentation alike 
suggest that error will be reduced if the operator knows what is going 
to happen next. The principle of minimum shock focuses on system 
error, when it stipulates that the system should not do anything that 
the operator finds unexpected in the light of his or her knowledge of 
the present state of the system. 
Transparency. The principle of transparency stipulates that the operator 
must be able to "see" the internal processes of the computer software 
in order to facilitate the development of a "schema" (i.e. learning). One 
can never fully "control" a process without understanding it. 
Compatibility. The orientation of modern cognitive learning theory 
emphasizes that people learn structures rather than isolated pairings 
(Foss 1968; Carroll and Thomas 1982) and research into command 
language design emphasizes the need to design system interfaces as 
coherent structures. Furthermore, evidence powerfully suggests that 
people develop new schemata by using metaphors to schemata they 
have already learned (Schneiderman and Mayer 1979; Carroll and 
Thomas 1982). For the lathe interface it is therefore important that the 
operator inputs and receives information compatible with his or her 
training. 
Accountability. The operator is entitled to know what the program is 
doing. To achieve this degree of transparency the software architecture 
must be self-describing. The integral HELP facility described by Fenchel 
and Estin is an example of such a system (Fenchel and Estin 1982). 
3. An open software allowing the worker to follow his own preferred 
methods of working may be achieved by the criteria of operating 
flexibility, disturbance control, fallibility and error reversibility. 
Operating Flexibility. The principle of operating flexibility stipulates that 
73 

74 
Crossing the Border 
the system should offer operators the freedom to trade-off requirements 
and resource limits by shifting operating strategies without losing 
software support i.e. the interface should not constrain the number of 
useful strategies available. 
Disturbance Control. Tasks that contain choice uncertainty should be 
under operator control with software support. Software cannot predict 
all possible disturbance whereas an operator can cope with the 
unforeseen. 
Fallibility. One of the most valuable elements in the human contribution 
to a system is the tacit one. This knowledge should not be designed out 
of the system. Data concerning operations that contain choice uncertainty 
may be incorrect and therefore the operator should never be put in a 
position where he helplessly watches the computer carry out an incorrect 
operation that he had foreseen. 
Error Reversibility. In almost all learning environments there will be an 
element of trial and error, in the exploration of alternatives. Machining 
errors can be very costly and all but the most highly skilled machinists 
are, justifiably, not prepared to risk full exploration. Error risk can be 
minimized in two ways: 
1. Strictly define the boundaries of exploration, i.e. restrict the choice 
of alternatives. An example would be locking out an NC tape editor 
from the machine and keeping the key away from the operator. 
2. Supply information feedforward to inform the operator of the likely 
consequences of his or her actions. In the context of the other criteria, 
this option is recommended. 
D.3.5 Summary 
The efficiency of a human-centred system is based on the complementar-
ity of human and machine. Because of unforeseen disturbances that may 
enter the system, the operator must be able to control all tasks that 
contain choice uncertainty via an interactive interface. However, an 
operator cannot control a system unless he or she comprehends its 
functioning. A system should support the operator's model of its 
functioning (schema) so that the knowledge that is needed during 
infrequent task activity is obtained during general activity. 
All routine software-activated functions (e.g. data storage, manipula-
tion and presentation) should therefore be transparent, compatible with 
existing shop-floor skills and knowledge, self-describing, and predict-
able. In addition, when the operator intervenes in order to eliminate 
disturbance he should not lose software support. 

The Interdisciplinary Design of Computer-Integrated Manufacturing Systems 
D.4 How to Shape and Evaluate Computer-Aided Technology and Work 
D.4.1 Typical Shortcomings of Conventional Methods of System Development 
The conventional methods of system development presuppose the 
possibility to develop a description of any work process as a normalized 
system of functions and data transfers. Furthermore, organizations are 
perceived to be perfect cooperative systems. When these are formalized 
it is possible to design a new work process and a new organization based 
on the technological rationality of "optimal" solutions. The technical 
aspects of the system are given full consideration, shaped by the 
mechanistic science ideal. 
From a holistic perspective the conventional approach is characterized 
by too little respect for traditional skills in the domain of both design 
and manufacture. There is a tendency to consider system knowledge as 
a superior substitute for, instead of supplement to, traditional skills. 
This fundamentally narrow outlook causes failure of communication and 
understanding between system developers and traditional skilled users, 
which can lead to serious errors. 
Furthermore, users of the system have too little influence upon and 
knowledge of system technology. The reason is partly to be found in 
the lack of respect mentioned above, and partly the lack of interest and 
involvement by the users themselves until quite late in the process of 
implementation. Especially in relation to the HC-eIM approach these 
shortcomings are to be taken quite seriously, both in a functional and 
human perspective. 
D.4.2 The Search after Methods in Accordance with the New Paradigm 
The critique presented above is rather fundamental. It is not just a specific 
method or technique, but a whole conceptual framework that is 
questioned. Therefore, it is insufficient only to develop more 
sophisticated methods, parameters or criteria independent of the 
fundamental theoretical framework. The development of a new 
paradigm includes the value orientation, the theoretical concepts and 
the dimensions and criteria for shaping and evaluating system 
development. The methods used in the concrete shaping and evaluating 
processes must be selected in accordance with this holistic paradigm. 
One of these methods is the scenario. The scenario is by definition 
prospective and open for discussion. This method may stimulate both 
the social and technical scientist to be concrete. Furthermore, the single 
abstracted aspects are related to a wholeness, i.e. the model of the future 
factory. It therefore enables a designer to see the kind of work 
environment into which he must project his end-product. Drawn up as 
an ideal type, it stresses the opportunities in opposition to the 
deterministic "one best way" of thinking. Moreover, it may help the 
75 

76 
Crossing the Border 
social and technical scientists to communicate in a more constructive 
and creative way because both are forced to make prospective pictures 
of how their concepts and products may be used and mutually related 
in the future. 
The scenario method is not sufficient. It needs the supplement of 
analytical and shaping means such as dimensions and criteria of human-
centred technology. The six dimensions of work presented in section 
D.3 are to be considered as guidelines regarding the shaping process of 
the human-centred eIM system at the organizational level. The criteria 
for human-machine interface design, presented in section D.3.4, are to 
be considered as guidelines regarding the shaping process of the human-
centred eIM system at the human-machine level. 
The guidelines are not fixed in a deterministic way of thinking, but 
open for discussion. They must nevertheless be reflected both in the 
shaping and in the evaluating processes of the human-centred system 
development. By reflection we mean partly a serious consideration of 
how system development may follow these guidelines and partly an 
argumentation -
in accordance with the general human-centred 
perspective - if some of the guidelines are not followed. 
A human-centred eIM approach includes methods to involve users 
of the field in the process of system development. As pointed out by 
Rosenbrock, such methods meet a number of obvious difficulties 
(Rosenbrock 1983). Workers involved in the R&D process could be placed 
at a disadvantage through lack of knowledge of these specifications. 
Also there is the risk that many aspects of the real situation will not be 
represented in laboratory conditions (e.g. pay systems and realistic 
pressure of work). 
Furthermore, a "Hawthorne effect" may be expected. Moreover, 
different workers will have different abilities and may need to use the 
system in different ways. Different management situations may require 
different ways of using the system, and so on. The above-mentioned 
difficulties are serious constraints for user involvement in system 
development. It may be important to reflect very carefully how the 
interests and practical knowledge of the users in the field are to be 
communicated to the specialists in order to influence system 
development. 
Firstly, it may be important to plan user involvement as a long-term 
process, such as continuous involvement over several years, and not 
limit it to one or two discussion meetings or test procedures every month 
or two. Second, it may be necessary to use some time, particularly at 
the early stages of design, to discuss the human-centred idea with the 
users in the field and have their response to the idea. In this phase of 
the process the specialists and users have to be quite open regarding 
different social-psychological barriers which may obstruct the communi-
cation. The specialists may learn to understand some of the valuable 
aspects of the design and craft tradition without romanticizing it. 
The users in the field may be open to look at new possibilities of 
carrying out or organizing the jobs stimulated by methods such as future 
creating workshops. It is also important to be quite open regarding 
potential conflicts of interests. Although the human-centred perspective 

The Interdisciplinary Design of Computer-Integrated Manufacturing Systems 
may serve the interests of the user in principle, the concrete suggestions 
from the specialists may turn out to be a compromise between 
conventional and human-centred intentions, and thus may run the risk 
of generating other, unexpected, consequences which may be in 
opposition to the interests of the users in the field. 
Third, it is important to make a flexible plan for the process-oriented 
approach. The users may have more or less relevant knowledge, ideas, 
or motivation to participate than expected from the beginning. New 
problems may appear. If so, it is important to be able to adapt the 
cooperation between specialists and users during the process as soon 
as new, more or less unforeseen, problems emerge. 
Although user involvement will face difficulties, the consequence is 
not to avoid user involvement but to find ways to overcome these 
difficulties. The realization of the human-centred perspective may 
depend on how well and to what extent the above-mentioned constraints 
are overcome. 
E REFERENCES 
Bailey RW (1982) Human performance engineering: a guide for system designers. Prentice-
HaIl, New Jersey 
Braten S (1984) Dialogeus Vilhar: Datasamfundet. Universitetsferlaget, Oslo 
Brater M (1984) Forderung der Social und Kommunikations - Fahigkeit im Bereich als 
Grundlage der Sozialvertraglichkeit neuer Technik. In: Hochshultage Berufliche Bildung, 
Fachtagung 19. University of Bremen 
Brater M (1986) Kunstlerische Ubungen in der Berufsbildung. In: Projektgruppe 
Handlungslernen, Reihe Berufliche Bildung 4. Wetzlar 
Bradner P (1985) Fabrik 2000 - Alternative Entwicklungspfade in die Zukunft der Fabrik. 
Sigma Rainer Bohn Verlag, Berlin 
Capra F (1982) The turning point. Wildwood House, New York 
Carroll JM (1980) Learning, using and designing command paradigms. IBM Research 
Report RC 8141 
Carroll JM and Thomas JC (1982) Metaphor and the cognitive representation of computing 
systems. IEEE Trans Syst Manage Cybern 12:133-148 
Corbett JM (1985) Prospective design of a human-centred CNC lathe. Behav Information 
TechnoI4:201-214 
Corbett JM (1987) Human work design criteria and the design process: the devil in the 
detail. In: Bradner P (ed) Skill based automated manufacturing. Pergamon Press, Oxford 
Dreyfus HL (1979) What computers can't do. Harper and Row, New York. 
Dreyfus HL, Dreyfus S (1986) Mind over machines. Basil Blackwell, Oxford 
Eason KD (1982) The process of introducing new technology. Behav Information Technol 
1:197-213 
Fenchel RS, Estin G (1982) Self-describing systems using integral help. IEEE Trans Syst 
Manage Cybern 12:162-167 
Foss DJ (1968) Learning and discovery in the acquisition of structured material. J Exp 
Psychol77:341-344 
Galjaard JH (1982) Science, technology and ethical space. Scitech Research Group Paper, 
Interuniversity Institute of Management, University of Delft 
Habermas J (1970) A theory of communicative distortion. Inquiry 13:360-375 
Halfmann J (1986) Die Entstehung der Microelectronik. Zur Produktion des Technischen 
Fortschritts. Campus, Frankfurt 
Hellige HD (1984) Die gesellschaftlichen und historischen Grundlagen der Technikgestal-
tung als Gegenstand der Ingenieursausbildung. In: Troitsch U, Konig W (eds) Lemen 
aus der Technikgeschichte. VOl, Dusseldorf 
Hoff E, Lappe L, Lempert W (1982) Sozialisationstheorie Uberlegungen zur Analyse von 
Arbeit, Betrieb und Beruf. Soziale Welt 33:29-46 
77 

78 
Crossing the Border 
Holzkamp K (1973) Sinnliche Erkenntnis. Historischer Ursprung und Gesellschaftliche 
Funktion der Wahrnehmung. OPV, Frankfurt 
Jahoda M (1983) Wieviel Arbeit Braucht der Mensch? OGB Verlag, Weinheim 
Leithauser Th (1986) Subjektivitiit im ProduktionsprozeB. In: Vollmerg B, Senghaase-
Knobloch E, Leithauser Th (eds) Betriebliche Lebenswelt. Campus, Opladen 
Mackenzie D, Wajcman J (1985) The social shaping of techology. Open University Press, 
Milton Keynes 
Moll HH (1979) Zeitgerechte Arbeitsgestaltung. VOl Zeitung 121:1-38 
Moll HH (1983) Mehr Produktivitat durch weniger Arbeitsteilung. VOl Nachrichten 43:11-
29 
Polanyi M (1967) The tacit dimension. Anchor Books, New York 
Ravden SJ, Oegg CW and Corbett JM (1987) Report on human factors for OM systems 
and methods to enhance their usability. ESPRIT Project 534, Technical Report ESPfT871 
065/001. Memo 970, Social and Applied Psychology Unit, University of Sheffield 
Rosenbrock HH (1981) Human resources and technology. In: Proceedings of the Sixth 
World Congress of the International Economic Association of Human Resources, 
Employment and Development, Mexico 
Rosenbrock HH (1983) The social and engineering design of a flexible manufacturing 
system. In: Warman EA (ed) CAPE '83 Part 1. North-Holland, Amsterdam 
Schneiderman B, Mayer R (1979) Syntactidsemantic interactions in programmer behaviour: 
a model and experimental results. Int J Comput Information Sci 8:219-238 
Seliger G (1983) Wirtschaftliche Planung automatisierter Fertigungssysteme. Springer-
Verlag, Berlin 
Simon D (1978) Lemen im ArbeitsprozeB. Der Beitrag von Hacker's Arbeitspsychologie 
und Piaget's Entwicklungstheorie. Campus, Frankfurt 
Weltz F, Lullies V (1983) Menschenbilder der Betriebs organisation. Technik und 
Gesellschaft. Jahrbuch, Frankfurt 
Winograd T, Flores F (1986) Understanding computers and cognition: a new foundation 
for design. Ablex, Norwood 

The Interdisciplinary Design of Computer-Integrated Manufacturing Systems 
79 
2.4.3 Reactions of the Engineers to the Shaping Paper 
How did the engineers react to the paper? During the spring of 1987, the ISSG 
held a series of meetings with representatives from each of the national 
technical groups. 
Almost all engineers found the more general theoretical parts of the 
"Shaping Paper" difficult to comprehend. The following reaction (from a 
Danish engineer) was typical: 
The "Shaping Paper" presents a lot of new words which I do not know the meaning of, and 
when I read it several times I had trouble translating it in a way which could help the development 
of equipment of some kind. I have to translate it into something like a functional specification. 
This is my way of working when I start up. The gap is too big at the moment. 
Some engineers were very critical of the philosophical content of the paper. 
They feel that concepts such as "life-world" and "praxis" were unnecessary 
in a discussion of human-centredness. In their view, a justification of human-
centred principles and ideas in terms of economic benefits is needed, as "this 
is the only language that manufacturing organizations (and potential buyers 
of human-centred technology) understand". 
One engineer explained his "feeling" about the paper in the following way: 
It is my feeling that the paper is very much politically related and not so much to the human-
centredness of the functions that have to take place in design and manufacturing. 
To this the social scientists replied: 
Is it possible to translate such a paper into criteria and not use political orientations? Is it possible 
to describe human-centredness without a political orientation? That is the question. 
There were therefore two kinds of disagreement or confusion between the 
two disciplines. First, the engineers tend to believe that it should be possible 
to have a neutral description of human-centredness, distinct from any political 
orientation, whilst the social scientists considered human-centredness as 
either implicitly or explicitly politically oriented. Second, in line with their 
British colleagues, the engineers wanted an operationalized functional 
specification as a product of the "Shaping Paper", whilst the social scientists 
suggested the importance of the choice between different kinds of specification 
as a matter for discussion between all the parties concerned (i.e. engineers, 
users and social scientists) based on the orientation and scenario of prospective 
work organization presented in the paper. 
Nevertheless, responses to the "Shaping Paper" varied significantly 
between individual engineers. For example, one of the engineers attempted 
to apply the six dimensions of work outlined in the paper to the design of 
the CAM cell operators' tasks. He found this a difficult task and reported that: 
The initial object - to evaluate a list of operator tasks using the social science criteria - was the 
wrong approach to take. Tasks should not be created and then their "human-centredness" 
evaluated. Rather, the "human-centred" criteria should be used to generate tasks. Furthermore, 
the definition of the criteria (and their associated levels) is not rigorous/unambiguous enough to 
apply in any definitive manner. 
In complete contrast, and at the same time as his colleague, another engineer 
attempted to analyse the design of operator tasks in the CAM cell from a 
different perspective; namely "with the objective of modelling the operators' 
workload to establish the number of operators needed to run the cell in a 
human centred way". 

80 
Crossing the Border 
To achieve this, a computer-based model of the use of the operators' time 
and the effects of work-handling on the lathe was constructed. This model 
was based on 32 assumptions built into an interpreted Pascal program. These 
assumptions included: the time taken to load and unload machines, work-
handler programming time, unmanned working time, proportion of up-time, 
time taken for CAM-CAD-CAP liaison, manual finishing times, time needed 
for training per day, etc. 
Results showed that it is slightly better (approx. 2%) to produce an average 
batch with work-handling than with manual loading. In addition, results 
indicate that the operator would be occupied for 75% of the shift when loading 
manually, but for only 50% of the shift when a work-handler is used. 
In conclusion, the engineer writes: 
No allowance is made for "non-productive" time such as resting, talking, union 
meetings and similar activities. A clear conclusion is that with work-handling and 
negligible non-productive time, the operator would be able to run both machines (each 
machine takes 218 minutes of his 448 minutes shift time). Allowing for non-productive 
time and "interference time" during which both machines need his attention, the cell 
could be run producing only slightly less with one operator than with two. 
The report ends with a number of recommendations for using the computer 
model and program as a design aid. These include a suggestion that "a 
simulation of a typical task order on a shift could be produced to show what 
the operator could be doing from minute to minute". Any discussion of the 
compatibility (or rather incompatibility) between this approach and the work 
dimensions otulined in the "Shaping Paper" is conspicuous by its absence. 
It is clear from these two examples that these two engineers had 
fundamentally different reactions to the "Shaping Paper". For the first 
engineer there is a realization that a multidisciplinary design method involves 
a radical shift away from the conventional engineering design approach 
epitomized by his colleague'S computer model. 
2.4.4 The Influence of the Shaping Paper on the Project 
Looking back it seems that the scenario or vision of a human-centred factory 
of the future had the deepest influence on the project. The scenario enabled 
the engineers to "see" the context of their work. 
The CAP group, in particular, overwhelmingly endorsed the passage 
outlining the scenario. This was because: (1) the group had contributed to the 
development of vital parts of the scenario, and to the island production concept 
in particular; (2) the engineers had realized at an early stage that a human-
centred CIM concept presupposed an adequate factory model; and (3) there 
is a higher degree of affinity between CAP and a factory model than is the 
case with CAM and CAD developments. 
But in generaC nearly all engineers seemed to accept the ideas outlined in 
the scenario. Yet they felt that the problem was how to "translate" it into 
technical, operational terms. 
In the subsequent overall system specification, produced in June 1987, the 
specifications of the CAM, CAD and CAP components correspond directly 
with the factory scenario outlined in the "Shaping Paper". This report became 

The Interdisciplinary Design of Computer-Integrated Manufacturing Systems 
81 
the point of departure for the second international group established during 
the project: the International Data Management Group (IDMG). 
The role of the IDMG and the experiences of interdisciplinary collaboration 
in the second half of the project are discussed in the following chapter. 

Chapter 3 
Interdisciplinary Collaboration in the Second 
Half of ESPRIT Project 1217 (1199) 
3.1 Experiences of Interdisciplinary Collaboration at 
the National Level 
3.1.1 The British CAM Group 
As outlined in section 2.2.1, the relationship between the CAM engineers and 
social scientists was far from ideal in the early phases of the project. However, 
following the circulation of the "Shaping Paper" and the ensuing discussions, 
this relationship improved markedly. This was due, in part, to the growing 
mutual respect that developed between the two disciplines. 
For their part, the engineers became aware that technical decision-making 
was inevitably a slower process when social aspects of design are incorporated 
into this process. For the social scientists, there was an increased awareness 
of the need to present these social aspects in a tangible, usable form if their 
engineering colleagues were to successfully incorporate such qualitative 
dimensions into the CAM design process. 
As a result of this mutual perspective-taking and self-reflection, a design 
method was developed based on the three main themes of the human-
machine interface criteria outlined in the "Shaping Paper". These themes, it 
will be recalled, were: (1) design for flexible allocation of functions between 
human and machine; (2) design to enable the user to gain a panoramic view 
of the work process; and (3) the design of open software to allow the user to 
follow his or her own methods of working. 
Based on the overall system specification (Project report R9), the engineers 
developed a "framework" for the CNCcontrollers onto which a "user surface" 
would be added following collaboration with the prospective users from the 
user company. A framework differs from a prototype in the sense that the 
former is the technical (primarily hardware) operating core of the CNC 
controller which requires the input of machine code in order to function. The 
user surface refers to the human-machine interface hardware and software. 
This can take many different forms. The advantage of this design methodology 

84 
Crossing the Border 
stemmed from the fact that, unlike conventional technical design practices, 
the framework could be built without closing off many design options in the 
early stages of design. The design of the CNC lathe software would only be 
complete after it had been used on the shop floor for a period of time and 
this completed design may take on a form significantly different from that 
initially envisaged by the design engineers. 
The revised CAM group workplan accordingly scheduled for a minimum 
of two prototype user surfaces to be designed. The actual number of iterations 
would depend on the evaluation of prospective users. Provision was also 
made for the design of a further prototype after the user company had gained 
experience with the CAM cell over a period of months and made 
recommendations for changes to the user surface. 
Along with their Danish and German colleagues, the UK engineers had 
uniformily endorsed the scenario or vision of a human-centred CIM system 
outlined in the "Shaping Paper" as it enabled them to see the context of their 
work and to visualize how the cell would operate in practice. However, the 
scenario also appeared to perpetuate the misperception that the CAM cell 
software was somehow distinct from organizational considerations. In this 
sense, the scenario was seen as of more relevance to the coordination of work 
between the CAM, CAD and CAP national groups than to the coordination 
of work within the CAM group. 
Thus, during the first half of the project, the UK engineers focused their 
attention primarily on ergonomic aspects of the work. It was only when plans 
for the participation of prospective users were well under way that the 
engineers were directly confronted with organizational aspects of CAM. This 
arose because the user company (Rolls Royce, Leavesden) began to raise issues 
such as training, the role of production and associated line management, and 
the CAM-CAP interface, once they became involved in prototype evaluation. 
In truth, the CAM group work had become so focused on human-machine 
interface design issues that these important organizational aspects had been 
left to somehow look after themselves (despite repeated warnings from social 
scientists). However, once the organizational issues were raised, the CAM 
group widened its perspective and the implementation process came to be 
regarded as of equal importance as the technical design process itself. As a 
result, the relationship between the engineers and the user company took on 
more importance than the relationship between engineers and social scientists. 
The role of the latter, during the last year of the project, became one of 
consultancy and monitoring as a more direct relationship between designer 
and user developed. 
3.1.2 The Danish CAD Group 
Influenced by the discussions on the "Shaping Paper" and the user groups, 
the CAD group decided, in September 1987, to focus on the possibilities of 
keeping informal communication between the designer and pattern maker 
intact, whilst at the same time simplifying the means of exchanging ideas and 
duplicated effort regarding the transfer of the chosen solution to the CAD 
system. Furthermore, the sketch pad would simplify learning by doing. 

Interdisciplinary Collaboration in the Second Half of ESPRIT Project 1217 (1199) 
85 
INPUT TO NEW DESIGN 
SKETCH AND OLD DRAWING 
I 
~ 
~ 
~EXCHANGEJ 
DESIGN WORK 
KNOWLEDGE 
WORK PREPARATION 
DESIGN GEOMETRY OF A 
CHECK AND MODI FY GEOMETRY 
NEW PART ON CAD ENTRY 
OF A NEW PART ON CAD ENTRY 
r- l 
EXCHANGE J ...... 
."'-
/ 
GEOMETRY 
~ / 
2-D GEOMETRY 
2-D GEOMETRY 
DATA BASE 
DATA BASE 
~ 
...... 
-
IGES TRANSLATOR 
IGES TRANSLATOR 
t 
t 
CAD SYSTEM 
CAM SYSTEM 
t 
* 
PART DRAWINGS 
PART PROGRAMS 
Fig. 3.1. CAD system data flow and structure. 
As illustrated in Fig. 3.1, the suggested CAD entry medium makes it possible 
to use sketches, old drawings and IGES files as inputs from which the design 
of a new component can be made. The geometry would be calculated and 
edited either by the designer or the work preparer and exchanged between 
them. Because the CAD entry system is the same for both, they can easily 
communicate and change the design in a common language. The CAD entry 
is portable, thus facilitating informal interpersonal communication. 
The electronic sketch-pad-based CAD system also improves learning 

86 
Crossing the Border 
possibilities in at least two ways. First, because it is easy to use, it offers 
designers who are not familiar with CAD to gradually learn the technical 
capabilities of the computer. Second, computer-literate designers who are 
unfamiliar with the design work culture may be introduced to that culture by 
using the sketch pad together with an experienced designer. 
The basic description of the Danish CAD system views the designer as 
drawing sketches to express early design ideas. These sketches are stored in 
the computer's "idea bank", which can then be distributed to other members 
of the design island for further elaboration. After deciding the shape of the 
part, the designer draws its geometry on the CAD system. By this time the 
drawing can be transferred to the CAM area for further examination and 
modification. In this process the designer and production planner may work 
together on tolerances, etc., to guide manufacturing personnel. The drawing 
is then transferred to a CAD system for additional information to complete 
the documentation. 
As with the CAM group workplan, the CAD system development process 
made provision for a series of design reiterations and prototype 
experimentation. This process has a number of objectives, namely; 
1. To evaluate how the prototype supports personal communication between 
users and planning/manufacturing personnel 
2. To refine the CAD entry equipment 
3. To observe the possible changes in the work process and the reactions of 
users 
4. To evaluate the work process from a human-centred perspective regarding 
productivity, learning and work quality. 
The experimental prototyping took place in the Development Department 
in a Danish industrial company between May and December 1988. During 
this period five company employees (designers and pattern makers) 
participated in the experiment - including the designer who had originally 
suggested the sketch pad concept. 
Before the experiment began, the user groups and the CAD research group 
discussed how to structure the process. It was agreed that the designers should 
try to use the sketch pad in carrying out their normal daily work tasks and 
report back to the group after a couple of weeks. Where necessary, the group 
would initiate any changes to the system based on the feedback. 
This cyclical try-€valuate-change process worked well on a number of 
levels. A number of suggested improvements arose from the process and, 
although resource limitations made it impossible to 
realiz~ all these 
suggestions, a number of important modifications were made. The "spin-off" 
effects of the process were equally important. During the evaluation of the 
sketch pad, a creative and very stimulating atmosphere developed in the 
group (two designers, one engineer, and two social scientists). A number of 
ideas on how to improve work organization and educational opportunities 
were discussed during the six-month prototyping period. These were not 
foreseen or anticipated, but were extremely informative as they led to a 
continuation of discussion into the spring of 1989. 
These discussions elaborated some visions of the "ideal" design office which 
had arisen during prototyping of the sketch pad, and inspired both engineers 

Interdisciplinary Collaboration in the Second Half of ESPRIT Project 1217 (1199) 
87 
and social scientists within the CAD group. As a result a series of meetings 
were held which contributed to an understanding of theoretical knowledge, 
"knowledge through experience" and practical knowledge. 
Thus, the CAD group experienced a gradual development of a positive 
shaping atmosphere during the third year of the ESPRIT project. Beginning 
with an atmosphere of distrust, prejudice and rather uncoordinated activity 
amongst the engineers and social scientists (provoking a crisis in the spring 
of 1988), the "Shaping Paper" and the influence of the user groups had a 
profound effect and helped establish a more or less continuous dialogue and 
interdisciplinary collaboration. This contributed to a more holistic paradigm 
for the development of human-centred technology. 
3.1.3 The German CAP Group 
The actual development of the shop-floor monitoring and control (SMC) 
workstation was carried out without truly interdisciplinary collaboration 
between engineers and social scientists. This was not so much due to explicit 
objections to interdisciplinary research and development, as to patterns and 
habits characteristic of research and development which are confined to 
individual disciplines. These were not sufficiently reflected upon with regard 
to their limiting effects on collaboration. This lack of reflection reinforced two 
related elements of traditional development practice which are directed against 
"integrated development concepts". 
First, from the engineering viewpoint, only the more or less "finished" 
product or component represents a "real" contribution to collaboration worthy 
of discussion. The product facilitates communication, it is self-explanatory in 
the sense that it is obvious what one is talking about. Talking about 
"unfinished products" - which may be translated as meaning something 
beyond the objectivity of technology - was typically experienced by the CAP 
engineers as limiting their own professional strength: "Let's first realize a 
finished version before representing it for discussion and criticism". 
Secondly, the fact that the SMC prototype which was developed by the 
academic partners during the second half of the project showed noticeable 
traits of "human-centredness" was chiefly attributable t~ the comparatively 
intense discussions, both formal and informal, which took place at the 
international level (e.g. the International Data Management Group, the 
International Social Science Group, project meetings and international 
workshops). This continuous dialogue about human-centred CIM, which was 
quite divorced from the actual development and design work of the CAP 
group, eventually reinforced a view of the problem and the problem-solving 
horizon which carried over into the university-based designers' activities. 
Indeed, the lack of interdisciplinary collaboration within the CAP group was 
partly compensated by the influence of the discussions and presentations at 
the international level. 
It should also be noted that the hierarchical nature of the research and 
development process, which hampered interdisciplinary collaboration during 
the first half of the project, was not fully resolved during the second half 
(section 2.1.3). Paradoxically, the absence of professors from project events 
may also lead to innovative phases in the research and development process. 

88 
Crossing the Border 
This absence was accompanied by an intensification of social relations within 
the CAP group, which ultimately led to a certain innovatory base for 
interdisciplinary cooperation. It was not least to this effect that project 
participants attributed the creative developments and refinements of the SMC 
workstation concept which were achieved during the second half of the 
project. 
3.2 Experiences of Collaboration at the International 
Level 
Whilst the collaboration between social scientists and engineers showed 
marked improvements during the second half of the project, it is instructive 
to examine the experiences of collaboration between the national groups. 
In section 2.4.1 the differences between the approaches of the three national 
groups were discussed and reference was made to the importance of practical 
shop-floor knowledge for the work of the CAD and CAM partners. The 
emphasis of the CAP group, on the other hand, was more firmly rooted at 
the organizational level of analysis. 
For example, the main emphasis of the CAM work was the establishment 
of a fully operational CAM turning cell comprising two CNC lathes, automatic 
parts-handling and tool-changing equipment and a cell controller workstation. 
This cell was viewed as a basic building block for the creation of production 
islands. 
Compared to the CAP work, this emphasis on technical design and 
configuration is rather narrow as it fails to explicitly incorporate a consideration 
of wider issues such as organizational design and systems architecture. 
These two approaches are clearly complementary but the precise nature of 
the relationship beween organizational and technological design was rarely 
touched on until the CAP argued the case for a human-centred CIM 
demonstration site at Bremen which would contain a variety of conventional 
NC and CNC machine tools at a board meeting. This proposal provoked 
intense criticism from members of the CAM group who felt that the utilization 
of technique-oriented as opposed to human-centred machines in such a 
demonstration would undermine the very nature of the project's human-
centred CIM philosophy. 
The CAM group regarded the production island concept (and its elaboration 
by the CAP group) as a crucial organizational context within which to place 
human-centred technology (of which the CAD group's electronic sketch pad 
was heralded as an examplar). 
This difference in approach was to have more than a purely academic 
significance. Consider the shaping criteria and scenario outlined in section 
2.4.2. These effectively ask engineering designers to leave design options 
open and to promote a maximum degree of flexibility in the use of the 
technology they are designing. When it comes to designing a machine tool 
interface, users can become involved in answering the question "which design 
options should be left open and for how long?" However, when it comes to 
designing a complex CIM system, user participation becomes more 

Interdisciplinary Collaboration in the Second Half of ESPRIT Project 1217 (1199) 
89 
problematic owing to the technical complexities and organizational 
considerations which must be woven into the design specification and process. 
Yet the placement of human-centred technology within a centralized, rigid 
systems architecture may result in a loss of the former's intrinsic flexibility 
and tool character. 
The "Shaping Paper" offers only general guidance on the issue of systems 
architecture design and it was whilst in the process of writing this book that 
the authors came to realize that this was a fundamental oversight which 
contributed, at least in part, to the CAM-CAP group conflict discussed above. 
Subsequent discussions with engineering colleagues revealed that the lack 
of a specific human-centred CIM architecture (or even a detailed technical 
scenario) was perceived as a problem which jeopardized the development of 
a truly integrated human-centred system specification - a key project objective. 
It is perhaps of historical significance that in the original (rejected) project 
proposal (section 2.1) explicit financial and strategic provision had been made 
for the participation of Intervisie (a Dutch consultancy firm) in tackling what 
the proposal termed the "organizational interface" issues. Unfortunately, 
Intervisie withdrew from the project following the rejection of the first 
proposal by the ESPRIT directorate in late 1984. 
With the benefit of hindsight, the differences between the CAD and the 
CAM groups on the one hand, and the CAP group on the other, may have 
been resolved far earlier in the project if the common ground between the 
two perspectives had been explored. This common ground - where technical 
and organizational facets of human-centred CIM come together - is systems 
architecture, and it was through the work of the International Data 
Management Group and the use of "shaping workshops" (Chapter 4) that 
this ground was established. 
3.2.1 The International Data Management Group 
The IDMG was established in July 1987 as a subgroup of the national technical 
groups. Its objective was to elaborate "a reference model for human-centred 
CIM data management" and thereby to achieve consistency between the 
software and hardware developments within each of the three national 
groups. 
From the outset, the IDMG comprised only engineers who were inspired 
by some reference models developed by the US Air Force in the mid 1970s: 
integrated computer-aided manufacturing (ICAM) and structural analysis and 
design technique systems (SADT). The basic outline of the IDMG reference 
model is shown as Fig. 3.2. This approach was not generally approved of by 
the project board and others as it wasargued that the implicit factory 
architecture of the approach was in contradiction with the "Shaping Paper" 
scenario. 
After discussions within the IDMG, the engineers specifically asked for 
social scientists to join the group. This occurred in October 1987 when two 
social scientists joined the group (one of whom was later to become 
chairperson of the group). However, this did not resolve the underlying 
problems and, in January 1988, the IDMG was formally requested to 
incorporate key elements of the overall systems specification into their work. 

90 
Crossing the Border 
LEVEL 6 
Company 
LEVEL 5 
Customer 
Factory 
Planning 
LEVEL 4 
Island 
Island 
LEVEL 3 
Production 
Cell 
Cell 
LEVEL 2 
Process level 
Workstation 
LEVEL 1 
Machining level 
Equipment 
Fig. 3.2. International Data Management Group reference model for ClM data management. 
Thus the IDMG had the difficult task of developing a data management while 
at the same time referring to the concept of human-centred eIM. 
In the autumn of 1988, the IDMG produced a report entitled" A reference 
model for human-centred eIM data management". In the report it was stated 
that "some of the SADT and IDEF (IeAM definition) tools are used, but with 
an aim truly unlike that of the IeAM project". (It should be noted that the 
basic assumption of the IeAM project was that every act of manufacture and 
managerial control can be represented by data.) 
This report documents how the IDMG managed to transform general 

Interdisciplinary Collaboration in the Second Hall of ESPRIT Project 1217 (1199) 
91 
qualitative criteria and orientations into a data management model. In the 
introduction to the report, the group critically analyse the objectives and 
methods of the ICAM project and clearly state that, despite their rejection of 
the ICAM approach, they have adopted some of the methods and tools 
associated with it as a basic starting point. This difference in objectives is 
made clear in the introduction to the IDMG report: 
Computer technology itself does not determine any specific shape of manufacturing. Yet, for the 
development and use of computer-aided human-centred integrated manufacturing systems, a 
constant rethinking of system development, philosophy and methods is essential, as is 
experimentation with different forms of work organization and planning. 
Thus, instead of the ICAM philosophy, the IDMG refer to ESPRIT project 
documents: 
The human-centred CIM project is based on the theory of experimentation with group technology 
and autonomous island production. However, CIM transcends the boundaries of the production 
island and emphasizes the integration of design, planning and production. This makes 
experimentation with organization and system development much more difficult because a 
century of systematic division of labour within the factory has left us with little knowledge of, 
and experience with, the integration of the technical office and the shop-floor. 
The IDMG concludes that: 
The steady evolving possibility of technical integration of computer systems in the different 
factory sections compels the necessity of a new understanding of all aspects of manufacturing. 
Without this understanding, technical integration will be either useless and therefore totally 
uneconomic or its consequences unpredictable. 
Information technology is thus considered as the vehicle for the extensive 
reintegration of planning and production. But the success of this reintegration 
will also depend on "development of another kind of collective skill effecting 
design work, planning work and shopfloor production work. Understanding 
collective work and collective skills is essential for the development of human-
centred CIM systems". 
In common with the "Shaping Paper", the IDMG stress a process-oriented 
development towards integration. Thus it is presupposed that the cooperation 
between different sectors of CIM work will gradually undergo a number of 
changes and that integration of different skills may become possible; "perhaps 
ending up with the integrated education in which subjects are not design or 
manufacturing, theoretical or manual". 
A similar understanding is expressed in the view that a CIM project must 
facilitate the learning-by-doing of the beginner and let the skilled user" define 
the principles according to which the code be made and then make it, only 
asking for additional information when needed". 
The IDMG are aware of the far-reaching implications of this and argue that 
the biggest obstacles to be surmounted are the traditional division between 
white- and blue-collar work and conventional managment wisdom which 
equates efficiency and performance with job simplification. 
All the work, decision and learning processes which are intended to find 
a place in the island production groups are described in more detail than in 
the general factory scenario outlined in the Shaping Paper. Moreover, this 
description is structured so as to facilitate the integration of human activities 
with data structure and information flow. 

92 
Crossing the Border 
However, this codification of production processes into the open structure 
of the data management model enables a different kind of implementation, 
namely increased control over the production process as well as a restriction 
of opportunities for learning. This approach, which runs counter to the tenets 
of human-centredness, is seen as one possible projection of the concept of 
data management into "work-life". 
It is precisely in order to counteract this possible misinterpretation that the 
IDMG drew up a detailed scenario outlining all their specific assumptions: 
"To foresee the consequences of new technology and work organization, a 
detailed scenario has to be written and discussed at each special 
implementation. Especially when new software is developed, the scenario 
should be very detailed as it, together with the flow diagrams, can tell how 
to make the data model, the systems orders and interface." 
Thus the detailed scenario is perceived to be both an orientation for the 
technical development of the data management model and a means to evaluate 
the implementation process. If so, it may be seen as a new way of developing 
and implementing CIM systems. 
Certainly, there are indications that the authors of the IDMG report conceive 
of the detailed scenario as a necessary element of a reference model rather 
than as one possible projection of the data management concept into work-
life. If this is so, the model proposed represents a fundamentally new form 
of describing and developing CIM systems. The data management concept 
alone is no guarantee that the factory scenario outlined in the report will be 
realized. The scenario itself forms the core of the factory model. This core 
provides important hints about a company's decision-making and manage-
ment structures, the content and forms of in-house enskilling and training 
and the drawing up of industrial relations codes of practice. What it does not 
offer, however, is any guidance on how the design and implementation 
process may be carried out in practice. In this sense the IDMG report has 
more relevance to the development of a "green field" industrial site than to 
a company who already have some basic CIM building blocks and entrenched 
organizational practices. This issue is discussed in more depth in Chapter 4. 
Overall, the degree of human-centredness of the IDMG approach depends 
on the extent to which it successfully encourages a participative process 
involving the end users' imagination of prospective paradigms of work, tools, 
communication and opportunities for learning. Perhaps more fundamentally, 
it is important that technically mediated integration per se does not have a 
distinct ontological status, but may be questioned if alternative, more human-
centred, solutions are available (Chapter 4). 
To conclude, the Reference Model for Human-Centred CIM Data 
Management report can be perceived as a systematic response to the concepts 
and scenario presented in the "Shaping Paper". In this way, the dialogue 
between the social science and the technical groups was realized in the ESPRIT 
project at the international level. 

Interdisciplinary Collaboration in the Second Half of ESPRIT Project 1217 (1199) 
93 
3.3 Lessons Learned 
3.3.1 Constraints on Interdisciplinary Collaboration 
It is clear from the preceding sections that the engineers and social scientists 
within the project experienced varying degrees of difficulties in working 
together. This is not surprising given the difficulties experienced by 
ergonomists (who typically focus on comparatively narrow aspects of work-
life such as health, safety and performance) who work with engineers (see 
Corbett 1990). 
Almost without exception in the early stages of the project, the engineers 
in Project 1217 (1199) viewed social science andlor user input to the project 
as something which could be "slotted" into conventional engineering design 
practice. In other words, their expectations centred around the development 
and use of social science andlor human factors techniques such as design 
criteria. This explains why the third section of the Shaping Paper (which 
details the shaping dimensions and human-machine interface design criteria) 
was accepted far more readily than the earlier, more philosophical, sections. 
To understand why this should be the case it is worthwhile to return to a 
consideration of the philosophical, ideological and cultural roots of 
engineering design discussed in the Shaping Paper, in the light of the ESPRIT 
project experiences. 
At least three main areas of (philosophical) incompatibility between 
engineering and social science approaches to design may be identified from 
the preceding sections of this chapter. These focus on differences in logic, 
epistemology and assumptions about human nature. 
Logic 
Perrow argues that an analysis of the decisions of designers, partly determined 
by their supporters but also instilled in them in their professional training, 
reveals that they work from a design logic rather than an operating logic 
(Perrow 1983). 
The design logic employed by engineers and the operating logic employed 
by users and social scientists are to some degree contradictory. 
A good design is compact, but good operating logic stresses easy access to controls and to system-
state information ... A good design favours information on subsystem dynamics, because it is 
easier and cheaper than total system dynamics and does not require integration with subsystems 
someone else has worked on, but good operating logic emphasizes information on the dynamics 
of the total system. (Perrow 1983, p.528). 
The CAM group engineers' use of the criterion of "consistency" is an example 
of this design logic. Consistency is a functional characteristic of a human-
computer interface which produces a "clean design" in terms of design logic, 
but which standardizes the activity of the user and bears no relationship to 
user knowledge, experience or skill. Certainly the idea of open software in 
which users are free to define their own macros and work sequences (discussed 
in Chapter 2) is not readily seen as clean design by engineering designers at 
the present time although there are signs that this is changing within the 
computer science community (Ehn 1988). 

94 
Crossing the Border 
At a different level of analysis, the experience of the CAP group illustrates 
that industrial and academic design engineers may work from different logical 
standpoints. It will be recalled that the "project dualism" which resulted in 
the development of two SMC workstations arose primarily through the 
industrial partners' emphasis on the logic of the marketplace. 
Epistemology 
A further incompatibility between social science and engineering approaches 
to design stems from the type of data and knowledge each discipline employs. 
Social science deals with considerable amounts of qualitative data, whereas 
engineering design data is more quantitative. 
This difference was most apparent during interdisciplinary discussions on 
the "Shaping Paper." It is part of engineers' self-image to be concerned with 
maximally precise facts and, in the case of shaping, to be dealing with criteria 
that can be and have been operationalized in a quantitative form. Whilst the 
engineers were generally appreciative of the factory scenario outlined in the 
paper as a backdrop reflection, they effectively ignored the shaping 
dimensions in their design work. At first sight this would appear to be 
contradictory as the scenario is of a more qualitative nature than the shaping 
dimensions. However, it became clear that the scenario was primarily viewed 
as a description of the overall design objective. As such it impinged very little 
on their design practice at a detailed level. The dimensions, on the other 
hand, were offered as aids to design decision-making. Their qualitative nature, 
however, rendered them unusable from the perspective of conventional 
design methodology. It is significant that the (quantitively derived) computer-
based model of CAM cell operation developed by one of the CAM engineers 
was far more readily accepted by his colleagues as a design aid than the 
shaping dimensions. 
The engineers' reactions to the "Shaping Paper" reveal the more general 
difference of orientation between the social and engineering sciences. The 
epistemological tradition of engineering science distinguishes between 
problem areas suitable for objective, quantitative analysis and areas which 
contain values, attitudes and feelings. The abstract mathematical form of 
thinking reinforces the propensity to objectify, quantify and abstract from the 
social science paradigm of values and social interests. 
As described by Rosenbrock: 
On the technical and economic aspects the engineer can let his imagination range freely among 
the options, and a good combination of these options will often present itself to him ... By 
contrast if he tries to include the social aspects of the options open to him, he has no general 
principles which he can use for guidance. He is explicitly warned against reliance upon values 
which might be thought to serve no place in general principles. (Rosenbrock 1983). 
This was exactly how the social scientists experienced the engineers' ambiguity 
towards the "Shaping Paper". It was clear that the engineers did not know 
how to cope with the paper. Some of them tried to quantify the different 
dimensions and human-machine design criteria individually but gave up 
because they found that "you have to take the whole unit". When unable to 
isolate and quantify the dimensions, they were also unable to establish a 

Interdisciplinary Collaboration in the Second Half of ESPRIT Project 1217 (1199) 
95 
measurement yardstick with which to evaluate design solutions. 
At a more macro level, the engineers were not convinced that social science 
concepts and objectives could be realized as economically viable strategies. 
In some way the economic paradigm of competition (e.g. "automate or 
liquidate") seems to have similar characteristics of universality to the natural 
sciences. If this is accepted, the engineers' natural science ideal of objectivity 
is intact and it is therefore possible for the engineers to legitimate their 
"scientific" orientation: to develop and implement technology in accordance 
with the "universal economic laws" of industrialized society. 
Assumptions about Human Nature 
A third area of potential conflict between engineering and social science design 
stems from different implicit or explicit assumptions about the behaviour and 
needs of human operators. 
In conventional engineering design philosophy, human behaviour and 
needs are not explicitly considered. The drive to achieve system robustness 
and performance predictability and controllability results in operating tasks 
which themselves are predictable, standardized and regulated by prescribed 
rules and procedures. For many designers the human is the major source of 
unpredictability and error in systems operation -
hence the logic of 
automation. 
Even though the engineers in the project generally did not express this 
view, in many instances the incompatibility between the social science view 
of human nature and work-life and that implicitly held by the engineers 
became visible. 
For example, from the onset of the project, it was clear that the engineers 
and the social scientists shared a very different understanding of the nature 
and role of communication. For the engineers communication tended to mean 
the transfer of technical data and information between workstations (data 
management), whereas for the social scientists communication referred more 
to interpersonal, primarily verbal intercourse between social actors based at 
these workstations and elsewhere. These two models of communication reflect 
images of the human as a mechanistic information processor and as a 
formulator of plans and strategies within a shared world of symbols and 
language, respectively. 
However, it was agreed that both forms of communication were of great 
importance for efficient system functioning, although the engineers felt that 
too strong a reliance on informal communication networks within a system 
would make that system prone to unreliability, unpredictability and conflicting 
sets of instruction. For the social scientists, on the other hand, an over-reliance 
on electronic data exchange as the medium of communication within a system 
would make the overall system uncreative, unresponsive or insensitive to 
non-informative information, and reduce the richness and quality of work-
life for users. 
In discussions about the importance of enhancing, rather than diminishing, 
the role of face-to-face communication in the CAM cell, for example, it became 
clear that many of the CAM group engineers felt that there was little benefit, 
in terms of performance, to be gained from such a strategy. This view led 

96 
Crossing the Border 
them to accord a low priority to such issues. Indeed, this low priority to the 
role of interpersonal, compared to human-computer and computer-computer 
communication was also reflected in the documents produced by the 
International Data Management Group. 
Discussions about communication within the CAD group revealed a similar 
antipathy between the engineers and social scientists, and it was only after 
the development of the electronic sketch pad concept that the two disciplines 
developed a common ground. Significantly, it was the impetus created by 
this tangible design solution which facilitated this working consensus rather 
than the philosophical justifications presented in the "Shaping Paper". 
3.3.2 Experiences of Improved Collaboration During the Project 
All three national groups experienced a crisis in their collaborative endeavours 
during the first year of the project, partly due to the constraints discussed in 
the previous section. With the exception of the German CAP group (where 
a project dualism developed and the academic and industrial partners 
effectively ceased collaboration), the crisis was the point of departure for 
profound changes in the development strategy of the technical groups. 
Furthermore, the collaboration considerably improved during the second half 
of the project. This does not mean that the constraints disappeared. But the 
common understanding, sympathy and will to collaborate was exercised when 
agreements were reached regarding the functional perspective of the 
technically led approach. 
Hence, when the sketch pad idea was agreed upon within the Danish group 
and agreements were made with a Danish company to test and develop the 
concept, the aforementioned constraints suddenly became inspiring topics for 
discussion. Both parties knew that they had different experiences and ways 
of expressing themselves, but in the continuous dialogue with the company's 
designers these differences were not incompatible but complemented each 
other. 
It would appear from the experience of the Danish and British groups that 
successful collaboration depends on at least three criteria being fulfilled. First, 
all group members should have a commitment to the human-centred 
approach. This is fundamental and, in the case of ESPRIT Project 1217 (1199), 
despite a few disagreements during the early months of the project, this 
criterion was fulfilled. 
A second important criterion for successful collaboration is that engineers 
and social scientists share a common vision of what the resultant ClM system 
should look like. The scenario outlined in the "Shaping Paper" consolidated 
this shared vision and was to prove crucial at both the national and 
international level. 
The third criterion is that project participants should share knowledge and 
understanding with regard to the practical steps that need to be taken to 
achieve collaboration. This criterion relates to methodology and failure to fulfil 
this criterion during the early stages of the project proved to be the biggest 
constraint to successful collaboration. In the case of both the British and Danish 
groups it took an "exemplar" to overcome this constraint. Thus the "open 
CNC framework" concept in Britain and the electronic sketch pad concept in 

Interdisciplinary Collaboration in the Second Half of ESPRIT Project 1217 (1199) 
97 
Denmark proved to be crucial turning points in the collaborative process. It 
is interesting, and perhaps fundamental, that in both cases user participation 
was the key methodological breakthrough. Users tended to be relatively free 
of the philosophical and methodological biases which hampered the 
engineering and social science project participants. 
At the international level, the response and elaboration of the ideas 
presented in the International Social Science Group's "Shaping Paper" and 
the International Data Management Group's "Reference Model" report 
demonstrate that constraints on collaboration can be overcome and serve to 
stimulate the dialogue between engineers and social scientists. 
Looking back at the process over the project's three-year life-span, it is 
pOSSible to see a number of prejudices and unreflected decisions and activities 
which resulted in unnecessary tensions and wasting of resources. These have 
been discussed in some detail in this chapter. However, as a pioneering 
interdisciplinary approach with a human-centred orientation, the process 
created a number of negative and positive experiences, some of which inspired 
the authors to analyse how prospective interdisciplinary design may reflect 
and utilize different kinds of attitudes, knowledge and experiences in an open 
and transcendent dialogue process. The following chapter examines this in 
more detail. 

Chapter 4 
Crossing the Border 
In this final chapter, we attempt to describe the concept of "crossing the 
border" in such a way as to render it transferable to other shaping projects. 
This requires, on the one hand, abstracting from the specific experiences 
gained in the project on 'human-centred eIM systems", while, on the other, 
concretizing the paradigm of computer-aided participation (Rauner 1988a). 
Our concept is not simply an idealist notion that we use in order to oppose 
traditional factory development and the interests guiding it. Rather, this 
concept refers to a realistic option in a historical branching-out situation whose 
feasibility is supported by a number of indications. 
After forty years of comparatively steady and obvious growth of our 
production system, we are apparently on the brink of a new development 
stage, which, in Lutz's words, resembles a giant experimental terrain (Lutz 
1988). None of the factors involved in factory development, neither production 
technology nor computer-aided production work, nor the level of available 
qualifications indicates the direction in which the "new" factory will develop. 
Any attempt to extrapolate possible future production systems from one of 
these factors has been futile. 
The terms deregulation, flexibilization, availability, as well as open system 
architecture, mark the evaporation of continuity and clear-cut development 
paths. Instead, these terms refer to changes that have to be coped with. 
The concept of "manufacturing consent" (Burawoy 1979) encourages us to 
present, and to invite the public to discuss, our understanding of "crossing 
the border". We use this phrase to denote the self-critical extrapolation, from 
our experiences in the He-elM project, of a new development tradition of 
computer-aided participation. 
4.1 Crossing the Border - a Tentative Definition 
4.1.1 Fields of Action 
In our project, the founding of a new development tradition occurred rather 
laboriously through interdisciplinary cooperation and participation. The 

100 
Crossing the Border 
process was aided, however, by the fundamental experiences and reflections 
published by Ehn (1988) as well as Winograd and Flores (1986). 
Crossing the border does not simply denote a particular way of participatory 
systems development and software engineering. Computer-integrated 
manufacturing challenges everybody involved to shape the integration of 
"new" and "old" technologies and to try and achieve a well-poised balance 
in the complex interrelation of the development of technology, work, work 
organization and training of staff. This well-poised balance corresponds to a 
social modernization strategy in which it is the interests of the people 
concerned that count and that determine development objectives rather than 
vice versa. Applied to factory development, such a strategy relies on readiness 
to innovate on the part of the people concerned. Inspired by intellectual 
curiosity and keen on experimenting, they actively grapple with what is 
technologically possible. 
Below, we sketch the dimensions implied in the concept of crossing the 
border. 
Leaving aside the shaping object - here, computer-integrated manufacturing 
in the sense of a complex computer-aided work system - there are two 
dimensions which delineate the area in which conventional limits of thinking 
and acting have to be transcended as a precondition for shaping in a human 
fashion the computer technology and computer-aided integration that are 
increasingly coming into use in the factory. 
~ 
attitudes 
abilities 
actions 
competence 
(interest, motivation 
(knowledge, experience, 
(shaping-oriented 
agents 
needs, orientations) 
skilQ 
communication, 
co-operation, intervention) 
social and govern-
mentinstitutions and 
f their representatives 
~ external people con-
cerned 
users 
l (wage-earners) 
I E!IT1pk:1fers 
(management) 
engineers and engi-
neeringscientists 
III 
r-_d~ 
tors, scholars con-
cemedwith humans 
sociologists, social 
scientists 
Fig. 4.1. The qualifications enabling agents to transgress limits in the course of shaping. 

Crossing the Border 
101 
The areas thus defined represent, first of all, the questions raised by the 
elaboration of the concept of crossing the border: which attitudes and abilities 
do social scientists, engineers or users require in order to be able to collaborate 
- on the shaping of humane computer-aided work systems - with the other 
agents by contributing their specific, work-related interests, needs and abilities 
to an integrated and participatory development process? Any answer to this 
question presupposes a clear definition of the understanding the people 
involved need to have for each other in order to gear the accumulation of 
experience and the adjustment of interests towards the given development 
objectives. 
4.1.2 Agents Involved in the Shaping Process 
The agents involved in participatory and integrated technology development 
represent seven groups of people from three social sectors: state and society, 
companies, and academia (see Fig. 4.1): We shall leave aside the agents from 
government and social institutions, despite the fact that their attitudes, abilities 
and activities are equally relevant to crossing the border in participatory and 
integrated development. Here belong the ESPRIT programme and its 
representatives, for instance. One would have to analyse how the intentions 
of the programme as well as budgeting and project processing rules bear upon 
agents' willingness to award funding to a given R&D project. Here also belong 
trade unions and employers' associations, whose agents have a great impact 
on any participatory and integrated (in the sense of transgressing limits) 
shaping of work and technology. t 
In the HC-CIM project, the people involved in shaping came mainly from 
companies and academia. The experiences gained in this project confirm the 
validity of our approach. This consists of involving in the shaping of computer-
aided work systems scholars concerned with humans, social and engineering 
scientists as well as (potential) users. The object of the shaping process - a 
human-centred CIM system - cannot be reduced to an instrument of merely 
technical dimension; it is also of considerable social relevance. This is why 
the project started on the assumption that the involvement of social scientists 
and of scholars concerned with humans would be an advantage. The 
usefulness of interdisciplinary development groups of projects appeared to 
us to be theoretically founded on our understanding of "work and 
technology", as explained in Chapter 2. Empirically, the value of such groups 
had become evident in other projects. Kling and Scacchi (1982), for instance, 
talk about a "web of computing" with regard to the development of computer-
aided work systems. This phrase denotes that: 
the specific network of people, resources, services and organizational structures which mediates 
computer use, is an inherent component of the system itself. Computer-based technologies cannot 
be assessed apart from the cultures and organizations that use them; they are best considered 
therefore as deeply embedded in a network of organizational and social relations, 
'See also the areas of technology shaping. 
twe mention here only in passing the fact that the task force came round to accepting a project 
with an emphasis on "socially compatible technology shaping". This transgression of programme 
limits goes to show the potential flexibility of state agents, rather underdeveloped though it 
commonly is. The rigid demarcations of departments and programmes usually stand in the way 
of innovation. 

102 
Crossing the Border 
in a framework of activities and institutional arrangements. In this final configuration, computer-
based technology is a form of social organization. (Gordon and Kimball 1985, pp 79-80) 
This view concords with our understanding of technology and confirms the 
abstract recognition that technology shaping is the /I concern" of various 
academic disciplines. The question as yet largely unanswered, however, is 
how the competence of the highly segregated academic disciplines, or of their 
representatives, has to be enlarged in order to be of use to a shaping of work 
and technology that is both participatory and integrated. Phrased more 
dynamically, the question is what learning processes need to be involved in 
shaping. 
What can and must "crossing the border" mean to the agents involved? 
This question will be exemplified below with regard to engineering and social 
scientists as well as users. 
Two of the boundaries that engineers have to transgress in order to use 
their shaping competence more extensively than has hitherto been the case 
will be considered more closely: 
1. Engineers' "technico-scientific problem-solving horizon" (Hellige 1984), 
blindly accepted by the individual, as well as its evolution as one of the 
dimensions inherent in industrial-cultural development. 
2. The reduction of technological science - which always implies a specific 
concept of technology - to the logic inherent in what is technical. 
The example of engineers' technico-scientific problem-solving horizon 
shows clearly how engineers and engineering scientists have to transcent the 
limits of traditional problem solving. The term introduced by Hellige points 
in the right direction: 
I use this term to denote the consensus that exists in the individual disciplines and schools within 
the engineering community. This consensus changes over time and is checked by economic, 
social and political factors, professional traditions, effects of base technologyies and the "scientific 
styles" of problem-solving behaviour. The "technico-scientific problem-solving horizon" thus 
represents a historically and socially determined limitation of the sum total of the knowledge 
and experience available to anyone branch of technology. Consequently, only a limited number 
of the total amount of feasible technical solutions, objects, and methods are seen as possible and 
hence elaborated. Depending on the given problem-solving horizon, 
certain development paths are excluded right from the start of a given assignment and problem 
definition; 
economizing on material and energy costs takes precedence over work-saving technological 
progress in the development process; 
certain building and system sizes are seen as standard norms and monumentalization 
predominates over minimalization or vice versa; 
centralized, hierarchical, hierarchically distributed or rather more decentralized and autonomous 
solutions are given preference in energy, information and work systems; 
the individual stages of the technological building process, the scope of alternative solutions 
considered and the predominant criteria of assessment, according to which optimization and 
selection occur, vary; 
through the actual design of the technical structures of hard- and software, it finally determines, 
to a considerable extent, the possible scope of use and the chances for shaping the given human! 
machine relations differently. (Hellige 1984, p.lO). 

Crossing the Border 
103 
In this context, crossing the border involves becoming aware of one's own 
and of the culturally predominant technico-scientific problem-solving horizon, 
as well as the concomitant restriction of shaping perspectives. The re-
evaluation proposed by Hellige affords the opportunity to understand and 
assess the technological alternatives selected - as opposed to those ignored 
- as expressions of objectified interests, purposes and problem-solving 
horizons, and that beyond the study of the historical evolution of any technical 
artefact. 
This approach already points to the transgression of the second restriction, 
i.e. the understanding of any technology as a means-end relation. As a 
functional relation, technology always also bears a use-value. The shaping of 
technology is concerned with concrete technical artefacts and thus with the 
realization of use-values. This requires agents to become aware that technology 
is tied to specific interests and purposes and that it is moulded by a given 
culture. Moreover, the shaping process has to be geared towards usefulness 
and functionally as the fundamental requirements of any technology. 
In traditional software engineering, it is at the design stage that social criteria 
are translated into technical ones (see Fig. 4.2). Designing presupposes 
descriptions of the qualities required of a given system - its use-value qualities 
- and of the criteria for testing them. Designing is essentially an act of 
transforming the use-value qualities desired into a technical description of the 
system to be realized. In the case of software engineering, this transformation 
involves defining the systems structure, interfaces, data and control flows, 
and the division of components. 
This transformation of social and technical criteria and descriptions is 
necessarily accompanied by a high degree of abstraction and formalization, 
I analysing and defining the assignment I 
designing 
implementing 
documenting 
testing 
integrating and installing 
Fig. 4.2. Development stages in software engineering. 

104 
Crossing the Border 
moulded, more or less consciously, by designers' interpretations, values, and 
social orientations. Depending on the development technique employed, 
similar transformation problems may already occur at the definition stage. 
This may be so particularly when a largely operationalized specification is 
itself part of the assignment. 
Transcending traditional assignments and disciplines is much more difficult 
for social scientists and scholars concerned with humans. t Social scientists in 
particular, analytically oriented as they traditionally are, lack the drive to 
shape. This is not merely the result of a pragmatic division of labour among 
academic disciplines. Rather - as the example of the critical theory bears out 
(Adorno and Horkheimer 1969) - it is more or less constitutive of social science. 
Interdiscplinary and participatory technology shaping thus poses a 
fundamental challenge to social science. The idea of a shaping-oriented - and 
hence constructive - social science is, however, increasingly gaining ground 
(Rauner 1988a). Social science complements engineering science by tackling 
the technical implications and effects of social shaping criteria and 
requirements, for instance with regard to computer-aided work systems. Any 
abstract sociological concept of technology fails to recognize the latter as the 
object of the shaping of work and work systems. True, such a concept sees 
technology generally in its historical dimension as mediating between humans 
and nature, or, sociologically, as, for instance, objectifying labour. Yet the 
concept fails to consider technology's technico-instrumental qualities and 
quantities. 
Crossing the border requires at least those scholars concerned with humans 
and those social scientists who see themselves as shaping-oriented to acquire 
sufficient technical knowledge to be able to engage in constructive shaping-
oriented communication with technologists and engineers. 
True, crossing the border in the course of an integrated and participatory 
development process is a serious academic problem, as these few observations 
bear out and as we have shown in Chapter 3 in particular. Yet crossing the 
border is far more important to any effective cooperation among users, and 
between the latter and academics. In order further to clarify the concept, we 
need to distinguish between "employers" and "users". Only then can we 
define at what point the practitioners at company level need to transcend 
their conventional scope of acting. 
Employers, according to Koslowski (1988), are the representatives of the 
heads of organization or organizational unit (such as company owners, 
management, middle management). Employers are therefore those who 
"actually commission" a given development. Their supreme object is to 
enhance their company's productivity. Initially, they are not primarily 
• In the HC-OM project, development resulted in a comparatively abstract and open description 
of the HCCIM system to be developed. Therefore the project lends itself particularly to an analysis 
of transformation processes. The Data Management Group attempted explicity to organise 
transformation as a shaping process. They did so by turning the underlying values and objectives 
into a detailed work scenario, thus making them available to everybody involved. 
t Academic disciplines concerned with humans, such as medicine and educational studies, are 
far more explicitly oriented towards constructive solutions. Both disciplines are action-oriented 
and derive their ultimate legitimation from their ability to cure people, or to impart to them 
knowledge, skills and attitudes. 

Crossing the Border 
105 
concerned with humanizing working life nor with the social shaping of 
technology. At best, they tentatively adopt these shaping orientations under 
the combined pressure of statutory requirements, union agreements and 
company staffs right of co-determination. Transcending this restricted 
shaping interest involves, among other things, taking note of users' shaping 
interests and making full use of shaping possibilities and development 
strategies in cooperation with science and research. Such transcending of 
traditional employers' interests is promoted by the recognition that, even if 
the primacy of enhancing productivity is maintained, there is more scope for 
the human-centred and socially compatible shaping of technology than has 
hitherto been supposed. Quite a number of authors deem the humanization 
of working life and human-centred technology to be central to more effective 
production. 
Users, by contrast, are those wage-earners who in their capacity as skilled 
workers, specialists, or designers (in the case of CAD) have, more or less 
directly, to operate, service, and if necessary repair computer-aided work 
systems. Users' shaping and interest is traditionally related to factors 
immediately relevant to their work, such as working conditions, forms of 
work, job content, stress, wages, etc. Taken together, their attitudes and 
abilities are geared towards fending off and" defending". Crossing the border 
involves, here, too, learning to articulate one's work-related needs in the form 
of interests, translating them into criteria relevant to shaping, and 
communicating about them with other agents, and that beyond traditional 
attitudes, abilities and activities. This is, moreover, an important precondition 
for understanding and assessing the other agents' - including employers' -
interests with regard to shaping. 
Attitudes, abilities and activities (see Fig. 4.1) are helpful categories for 
describing and classifying those concepts and strategies that are suggested 
for the participation of the people affected by technological innovation. 
Opperman (1983) distinguishes between the degree and the intensity of the 
conflict attendant upon articulating one's interests. By reducing the many 
facets of "shaping competence" - which must be seen as a potential that 
needs bringing out - to the representation of interests, his classification scheme 
remains confined to the limits prescribed by the classical forms of 
"participation" and co-determination. 
4.1.3 Shaping Competence 
Elaborating upon the concept of crossing the border requires clarifying the 
term shaping competence. Traditionally, the competences attributed to the 
agents involved in the development and implementation of tchnology have 
been seen as very narrow and specific. While knowledge specifically relating 
to technology and its development has been ascribed to designers, assignment-
related knowledge (definition of objectives and purposes) has been attributed 
to employers. Users have usually been afforded opportunities for having their 
interests represented according to their company's industrial relations code 
and the right of co-determination. 

106 
Crossing the Border 
Attitudes 
All agents are equally experts of their daily lives. This means that, in the 
development of computer-aided work systems, the agents involved have to 
become aware of their respective expert status according to their place in the 
social hierarchy. Only then will they be able to understand and assess the 
other agents' expert status. Learning to understand and assess the limitations 
of one's own experience, knowledge, abilities and interests is an important 
precondition for understanding and accepting the other agents' attitudes, 
abilities and actions. This is not tantamount to giving precedence to others' 
interests over one's own, but to rendering the latter amenable to free and 
uninhibited discussion. Lack of a considerable degree of intellectual curiosity 
in other disciplines' approaches, methods and results precludes any 
productive communication among scholars from different disciplines. 
The fact that designers (engineers) have a professional interest in shaping 
is evidenced by their profession. This professional interest in shaping has a 
marked instrumental quality. Extending it into taking the social shaping 
perspective into account is an important step beyond the limits of engineers' 
traditional design interests. This extension implies engineers' readiness to 
take note, and to evaluate the technical implications of the desires, 
experiences, judgements as well as the ability of those who are affected by a 
given development process. The individual interests and abilities of the people 
concerned form the ultimate starting point in any shaping of technology. Such 
an attitude is alien to, among others, those scholars who, at best, consider 
the people concerned from the point of view of acceptance or who tum them, 
in the shape of objectivistic personality models, into objects of their research. 
In an integrative and participatory development process, social scientists need 
to divest themselves of an attitude that turns other agents into the objects of 
their discipline. This requirement poses a considerable challenge to social 
scientists, who, in accordance with their professional self-image, are regularly 
tempted to assume the part of moderators and "meta-scientists" in such 
situations and to define the latter in their favour. 
Within the concept of crossing the border, communication is not a 
sociological method but an open interaction among subjects only, who jointly 
define their situation and the rules governing their communication. As part 
of their communication, agents may also agree to take turns in playing the 
parts of subjects or objects in the joint development process. Users as well 
as social scientists and scholars concerned with humans can be assumed to 
possess only a very limited interest in, and motivation for, shaping-oriented 
cooperation. The high degree of plasticity of IT and its use for objectifying, 
controlling and organizing mental and social processes has led to a marked 
change of interests. The project of co-determination is increasingly seen as a 
reactive, one-dimensional "shaping concept", highly contested between those 
in power and those opposing them. This project needs extending into a 
participatory shaping concept. This is not tantamount to a linear extension of 
co-determination, but to the moulding of the "productivity and social relations 
pact" (Hildebrandt 1987). 
The concept of integrative and participatory shaping of work and technology 
incorporates both workers' co-determination and the quality circles engendered 
by management. Both thereby assume a new quality guided by interests. 

Crossing the Border 
107 
IT has led to dramatic changes in the object of technology shaping. The 
possibilities for mechanizing mental and social processes, the development 
of totally novel information tools, and the new potential for multiplying 
political and economic control have induced many social scientists to venture 
the transgression of the conventional boundaries of their discipline and to 
turn to the issue of shaping. 
Abilities 
Changes of attitude imply different and new abilities that are indispensable 
to the crossing of borders towards technology shaping. Here, we can only 
briefly exemplify in which direction agents have to enlarge their abilities 
beyond traditional professional and job-related boundaries in order to meet 
the demands of a holistic shaping concept. 
Agents' groups themselves display limitations and restrictions. In the 
context of company- and concern-specific as well as national traditions, there 
evolve specific differences not only in attitudes, social and cultural 
orientations, but also, and markedly, in abilities. Differences in the production 
concepts found in the trades as compared to industry, between different 
branches, between companies within the same branch, and between industrial 
nations clearly express the differences of qualification to be found among 
staff. Existing qualifications are usually conceived of as linear requirements 
that are more or less determined by the development and implementation of 
technology. It has only been recently that close comparative studies on an 
international scale have shown that the scope of qualifications in the trades 
and professions is not grouped around a structurally determined core (with 
the qualification structure being, on principle, technologically determined). 
Instead, there exist marked structural differences. The pronounced orientation 
towards computer science in the training of US engineers employed on 
computer-aided work systems differs markedly from the orientation towards 
machine-tool building that predominates in the FRG. Even more pronounced 
are the differences in skilled workers' qualifications. Their proportion in the 
workforce, their training, and their abilities differ markedly in comparable 
companies in West Germany, the USA and the UK. 
Crossing the border therefore means, first of all, to reject the determinist 
concept of qualification requirements and to become aware of the relative 
nature of existing abilities. The shared knowledge that work and technology 
are shapable, the ability to think in alternatives, and the fathoming of shaping 
scope are equally important to all the agents involved in a holistic shaping 
process. 
"Crossing the border requires all agents to have a profound knowledge of 
labour and production processes, including possible solutions in the area of 
work organization and their technical implications. On this basis alone job-
related solutions can be realized which assign technology the function of 
means" (Ehn 1988). 
If, by contrast, professional designers' technical knowledge and know-how 
dominate the shaping process, solutions will tend to be technocentric. The 
other agents will be prevented from using their specific abilities in designing 
technology. This is because such dominance will reduce to constructional 

108 
Crossing the Border 
scientific methods the mediation between the different jargons and forms of 
expression employed by the agents involved. Apart from the mutual 
enlargement of knowledge as an important precondition of a holistic shaping 
process, social abilities, too, are central to the success of cooperation and 
communication. In order better to assess and accept the other agents' abilities 
and interests, one has to conceive of and assess one's own abilities, interests 
and orientations as conditioned by society and the course of one's life. As a 
result, one realizes their limited usefulness to the shaping assignment at hand. 
This insight is a key ability which needs promoting. Moreover, one has to be 
able to put oneself in the other agents' place in order to think about a problem 
from their point of view. Also, and relatedly, one has to be able to listen, and 
not to judge prematurely. These are further important preconditions for the 
participatory and integrative shaping of computer-aided work systems. 
Finally, one has to be able to relate one's own abilities, and their limitations, 
to the extent and quality of the shaping assignment at hand: insight into the 
limitation of one's problem-solving competence is constitutive of participatory 
technology shaping. 
Acting 
The term technology shaping, unlike II designing" or II constructing", is 
intended to denote a more than merely purpose-related development process 
which begins with a clearly defined assignment to be accomplished according 
to equally clearly defined rules. The fact that engineers have been assumed 
to be guided in designing by a high degree of purpose-relatedness has largely 
helped to stabilize the use of technocentric methods, which have been common 
up until now. Purpose-relatedness excludes those dimensions of acting that 
aim at agents' creativity, at the real world's virtuality and adaptation to a 
given situation, and at the tacit skills, which are particularly important to the 
shaping of technology. 
Crossing the border requires all the people involved to adopt an 
experimental basic attitude and to be able to behave experimentally. 
The participatory and experimental search for alternative technical solutions 
extends far beyond the restricted, rigid, scientific experimenting that has been 
central to empirical cognition since Galileo and Bacon. The dominant concept 
of experimenting has been moulded by the sciences' conception of nature. 
Scientists are concerned with snatching from nature its "secrets" at all costs, 
as Bacon put it, in order ultimately to govern it. Shaping, by contrast, employs 
an experimental approach whose objectives are largely open and where the 
people concerned enter into the given situation. Shaping by experimenting 
is characterized by a communicative structure, curiosity about trying things 
out, and a creativity that is adapted to a given situation. The exploratory 
prototyping to be found in software engineering shares many of the features 
common to shaping by experimenting. 
Any participatory shaping process requires agents to make use of new aids 
in order to overcome the barriers to action that have been put up by jargons 
and by the difference between academic and everyday registers. lllustrating 
and visualizing shaping alternatives are particularly relevant to the pulling 
down of any barriers impeding understanding. Experimental and exploratory 

Crossing the Border 
109 
simulating and prototyping are adequate means of enhancing agents' 
communication about the interests, objectives and means relevant to shaping. 
4.2 Participatory Systems Development 
4.2.1 Hierarchic-Sequential Design Tradition 
Both in construction science and at the initial stages of software engineering, 
there evolved methods of technology development which are guided by 
purpose-related and planful action. A rigid distinction is made between the 
translation of development objectives, intentions and purposes into a 
specification (requirement profile) and the design process proper. In the course 
of the latter, the requirements laid down in the profile are gradually turned 
into a systems solution. The definition of ends is conceived of as a normative 
process occurring prior to design. Consequently, the latter appears to be value-
free. VDI (Association of German Engineers) guideline 2222, for instance, 
distinguishes a sequence of four stages in the accomplishment of a given 
design assignment: 
1. Planning: functional analysis, definition of overall and part functions 
2. Conceiving: approximation of conditions of use, solution of material and 
dimension tasks 
3. Designing: designing true to scale 
4. Detailing: detail drawings, appliance design, check-list, operations 
planning and scheduling (see Fig. 4.3). 
Initially, software engineering evolved in the tradition of classical 
construction science. Hence it conceived of software development, by analogy 
with construction, as the hierarchic-sequential transformation of a 
specification into a product. This transformation is broken down into the 
following part abilities, which are arranged in a linear order in terms of a 
stage model (see Fig. 4.2): 
1. Definition of assignment. This stage involves analysing problems and 
assignments unless there is a given specification. Requirement analysis leads 
to requirement definition in the shape of an operationalized specification of 
tasks. Quality standards are defined according to which attainment of goals 
is checked.' 
2. Designing. In the design process, the specification of requirements, in 
terms of a description of the desired properties, is transformed into a 
description which includes the definition of the systems structure, of the data 
and control flows, and of the distribution of components. This transformation 
is the key event in the design process because, here, the purposes defined 
"Balzert points to the limits inherent in this first development stage: "It is impossible to define 
in advance the total behaviour of a complex system in detail. Particularly with regard to systems 
with intensive human machine communication, it is nearly impossible to predict what people 
will be doing with the system once they have obtained it" (Balzert 1986, p.lIO). 

110 
Crossing the Border 
developing assignment 
i-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------f---------------: 
i 
I 
. 
! 
1. planning: 
I 
t 
assignrnentanalysis 
I adaptationexperiments 
! 
deIInttion of overall 
and part functions 
2. conceiving: 
approximation of 
conditions of use: 
solution of material 
and dimensions tasks 
3. designing: 
design true to scale 
4. elaborating: 
detail drawings 
appIiancedesign 
check·llsts 
operations planning 
scheduOng etc. 
I prototype experiments 
I pilotproductexperiments I 
~~ 
-g-l!: 
15 ~ 
.~~ II ii 
, 
ii 
(------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ -----------------' 
Fig. 4.3. a Hierarchical stages of technology development (according to VDI Guidelines 
2222). 
are irreversibly translated into technical structure. In classical design, personal 
orientations, values, interpretations and objectives, all of which have a 
considerable impact on this transformation, remain largely implicit. 
3. Implementation. In software engineering, implementation involves 
translating the design into an operational software system. 
4. Documentation. Adequate use of the "product" hinges on documentation. 
This should include: 
Specification of requirements 
Description of program (description of design) 
Administrative records 
User manual 
5. Testing. Testing is traditionally understood as a comparison of nominal 
and actual functions in order to prove a program to be free of errors. Testing 
in a broader sense means evaluation and includes personal assessment of the 
result by the people involved (see Fig. 4.4). 
Finally, the five main stages of software development are followed by: 
Integration and installation 
Maintenance, service, administration 
These more or less linear-sequential methods are often coupled with a 

Crossing the Border 
overall problem 
part problems 
individual problems 
individual solutions 
(system components) 
part solutions 
(part systems) 
overall solution 
(system) 
Fig. 4.3. b Method of analysis and synthesis for structuring problems and systems. 
111 
hierarchical top-down structure in decision making and in the labour process 
(see Fig. 4.5). 
This widespread structure of design is characterized by a hierarchical 
division of labour and control, which has proved less productive in those 
development projects that are intially not amenable to definition in terms of 
their use-value. 
These classical methods of technology development, which are applied to 
the hierarchic-sequential concretization of a given specification (see Fig. 4.2), 
dominate software development, too. The division of development into clearly 
defined stages has been intended to render the process transparent and 
improve project control. In stage models, this is achieved by clearly defined 
intermediate results that are evaluated and checked at intervals by project 
management. As a result of these checks, the subsequent development stage 
is tackled, or else the intermediate product is revised and amended. 

112 
documents 
Q!!!lIlI!l 
-designers 
-users 
-employers 
-externals 
I testing of I 
I 
Crossing the Border 
program codes 
static: checking the program text 
j 
~ 
I 
I 
dynamic: running the program 
I 
tbecomputer or aided by computer 
-compiler 
-testing aids 
-generating text data 
-evaluating text etc. 
Fig. 4.4. Testing of software documentation and codes (according to Koslowski 1988). 
Koslowski points out the reasons why stage models have become so 
widespread: 
1. By being divided into stages, each resulting in intermediate products, the 
development is structured and easy to grasp. 
2. This considerably facilitates planning, organizing and checking dates and 
staff development. 
3. Systems development is rendered "linear" with checks and, if necessary, 
revisions of intermediate results making feedback superfluous. 
4. Division into stages and corresponding part activities helps emphasize 
analysis and design (see Fig. 4.3). The "product" aimed at thus gains 
priority over the development process. 
Koslowski's assessment is valid only with regard to the general appreciation 
of the formal rationality of these methods and the firm ground they have 
taken in teaching engineering science. His assessment does not apply, 
however, to the reality of developing and designing. Here, those methods 
geared towards purpose-related action are rather secondary. It was not until 
computer-aided planning and control of development was introduced, to 
which stage models particularly lend themselves, that the latter gained more 
recognition in practice. 

Crossing the Border 
113 
perfomlersIpeopIe in charge 
projecI/procass stage 
r"'"'"""" I 
i 
I 
I 
deIilIIkln 
I 
(given objective) 
: 
! 
........... 
r----c-
), ~~~~n II 
opera!ionaIization of 
-
, 
objectlv8s and methods 
---:..... 
,----
I 
conceiving 
I 
I 
~ 
'---
I 
piOQlal.I*1Q 
, 
I 
I [J 
: 
'---
evaluation 
! 
~ion 
i 
: 
: 
TheO\lellapolthe IndMdual stages has been imroduced as a first step towards an efficiem development 
structure. The 0\IeIIap leadstotemporary cooper~ion among those responsible for Individual stages. 
Fig. 4.5. Hierarchical division of labour and control in stage-oriented development concepts. 
4.2.2 The Limitations of Traditional Design 
As early as 1981, Floyd pointed out that stage models were successful only 
in special cases that met the following criteria: 
1. The requirements of an organization and of the people involved are clear 
and can be met permanently by a tailor-made IT system. 
2. It is possible to state these requirements completely and precisely at the 
beginning of systems development. 
3. Recording these requirements by means of written, semiformal documents 
poses no problems. 
4. The different levels of description and concreteness have been transformed 
correctly, i.e. without losing or distorting any information (Floyd 1984, 
p.135). 
These assumptions obviously apply but to a limited class of assignments 
of little complexity. 
The reasons why stage models frequently fail, are increasingly rarely applied 
or are not very helpful in finding adequate solutions have been summarized 
by Koslowski (1988) thus: 
1. Complex organizational structures, particularly when based on possibly 
heterogeneous interests, cannot be described correctly, completely and 
unambiguously. 

114 
Crossing the Border 
2. It is impossible to describe organizations over an extended period of time 
and to derive static requirements therefrom, because organizations 
constantly change and develop further. 
3. The transformation of aspects of reality into properties of technical systems 
and corresponding models and the imitation of social reality by means of 
IT systems pose fundamental difficulties. 
4. The different linguistic "realms" within which designers and users move 
result in serious misinterpretations, loss of information and distortions. 
5. The instruments of description and data collection available are primarily 
geared towards engineers' requirements and thus do not lend themselves 
to adequately describing complicated organizational and social relations. 
6. There are limits to users' ability to recognize the effects of systems on 
themselves in advance and on the basis of abstract plans. 
4.2.3 Technology Shaping 
These criticisms largely correspond to our own experience and underpin our 
concept of the interdisciplinary participatory shaping of technology and work. 
The alternative to a hierarchic-sequential development process consists of 
regarding the stages as functions of development and in fulfilling them in a 
parallel fashion, while keeping them closely linked to each other. 
Consequently, they continuously presuppose and bear on each other. Such 
rolling development (see Fig. 4.6) takes into account four important aspects: 
1. Objectives may be changed as a result of integrated development. Such 
changes are simultaneously learning processes for all the people involved. 
2. Employers and users participate in their capacity as experts of their work 
situation. 
3. The development product is seen as one version of the system. 
This implies giving priority to technology as a process over technology as 
a product: technology as an adaptive element of organization development. 
Adaptability thus turns into a central technical systems property or an 
important shaping criterion. 
definition 
development objective 
designing 
developing 
evaluation 
implementation 
Fig. 4.6. Rolling system development. 
specification 
requirement profile 
integration 
installation 
testing 
trying out 

Crossing the Border 
115 
4. Development is no longer a linear process. Rather it is seen as a sequence 
of objectives which result from the interplay of producing, testing and 
revising/adapting. Thinking in terms of versions is particularly adapted to 
(a) the plasticity of IT and (b) the permanency of organization development. 
Rolling systems development within the human-centred elM project for 
developing individual parts follows the pattern of a "generative conduct 
system" (Aregger and Frey 1975). 
The concept of "rolling technology shaping" corresponds to techniques of 
process-oriented and evolutionary systems development that are gaining 
increasing importance in software engineering. Both concepts (a) feed back 
and branch out between the various activities involved in systems 
development and (b) work with preliminary systems or systems components 
that can be realized easily and quickly and be modified. Ideally, there exist 
operational preliminary systems variants at each moment of software 
development and implementation. Process-oriented methods of systems 
development which involve employers and users in the development process 
through fast preliminary realization of systems and systems components are 
classified as proto typing: 
Exploratory prototyping 
Experimental prototyping 
Evolutionary prototyping 
are seen as alternatives to traditional design techniques. They are adequate 
to the systemic and IT character of "new" technology, are more efficient and 
may make a considerable contribution to rendering technology shaping more 
democratic (Koslowski 1988, p.168). 
Exploratory prototyping aims to support communication between designers 
and users. Alternative solutions, which afford direct experience of important 
aspects of the system to be realized, enable (potential) users more adequately 
to assess the changes in their work consequent upon the introduction of 
computer-aided work systems. The problem solutions enable users to develop 
tangible ideas. Exploratory prototyping is of strategic importance at the 
transition from requirement analysis to design. Very early on, the immediate 
experience of operating the prototype version enables customers and users 
to render their objectives more precisely and, if necessary, to revise them in 
a way that is always close to real conditions. 
Experimental prototyping presupposes a comparatively stable objective or 
requirement description and helps adequately to realize the existing 
specification. Here, too, prototyping encourages participatory development: 
the" experiment" considerably facilitates designers' and users' grappling with, 
and assessment of, potential solutions. 
Evolutionary prototyping is the furthest reaching kind of prototyping. It 
assumes that technology development can only adequately be conceived of 
as integral to the development of constantly changing organizations. It 
requires IT systems that can permanently be developed further. "This implies 
the total rejection of stage concepts, because the boundary between systems 
development on the one hand and service and maintenance on the other has 
vanished" (Koslowski 1988, p.l71). 

116 
Crossing the Border 
Possibilities and Limits Inherent in Proto typing 
It is for good reasons that prototyping has gained such relevance in software 
engineering. This trend has been furthered by the high degree of plasticity 
of software technology, the enlarged scope, afforded by new-generation 
computers, for the development of prototyping tools and by user participation 
in shaping "user surfaces", i.e. human-machine interfaces (and that not least 
for reasons of economic rationality). In classical machine building, by contrast, 
protyping of the kind described above is ruled out by the physical and objective 
starting conditions which are taken as given. 
On a larger canvas, there is, however, a marked tendency for using 
computer technology in variable conjunctions with other media for 
representing potential realizations. The architect group Wickfors in Uppsala 
(Sweden), for example, has developed computer-aided techniques for 
representing building designs from various perspectives: 
Integrating the particular building into a whole range 
The wider surroundings 
The angle of the main entrance 
Bird's-eye view 
Various interior views 
This type of representation does not render obsolete the realistic models 
that have always been used in urban planning and architecture. Furthermore, 
this technique allows dynamic representations, for example from the point 
of view of a pedestrian or a car going by. The participation of citizens in urban 
planning or, generally, communication between architects and their clients, 
or the people concerned, thus assumes a new quality. 
Like prototyping, dynamic representations of more complex processes, such 
as factory logistics, have become similarly important. The intensity of 
participatory technology shaping hinges upon the quality achieved by the 
representation of the objects under development (in the widest sense) for the 
people concerned. These representations include social ones, such as decision, 
planning and role plays. 
With regard to CIM, these forms of participatory technology shaping are 
embedded in a wider concept of socially compatible and realistic technology 
shaping. The following section documents design instances. 
4.3 The Shaping Process 
Below, we shall design a scenario of the participatory and interdisciplinary 
differential shaping of computer-aided work systems. This scenario will be 
based on both our general reflections upon the social shaping of work and 
technology and our actual project experience. This shaping concept has to be 
seen as one dimension of organization development. Differential shaping 
means that, in the process, there have to be different shapes to choose from. 
Choice may occur in: 
The transformation of technological basic innovations into applied technology 
(e.g. computer-aided work systems) 

Crossing the Border 
117 
The organization of work (Ulich 1978) 
The participation and cooperation between academics, users, and the people 
affected. 
Particularly those immediately affected need the opportunity to choose 
forms of participation that accord with their specific capability to express 
themselves and their abilities and interests. In several important ways, this 
concept differs from the attempts at designing anthropocentric technology 
hitherto tried out and presented. Three approaches to realizing the concept 
of human-centred technology shaping can be distinguished: 
1. In the engineering tradition, the search is for objectively valid shaping 
criteria or reference models. These are to serve as objective criteria of design. 
Once found, they are expected to help distinguish between humane and 
inhumane technology without recourse to the arduous processes of the 
participation of those affected and the interdisciplinary dialogue. Due to the 
narrow limits within which the concept of human-centredness can be 
objectively operationalized, this approach is hardly relevant to the 
development of computer-aided work systems (Rauner et al. 1988a). 
2. Alternatively, one can go on optimizing procedures that have proved to 
be useful in the interdisciplinary and participatory shaping of technology until 
defined procedures are finally arrived at. With regard to software engineering, 
a large number of such procedures have been suggested. This approach offers 
very limited possibilities for bringing individual abilities, interests and 
experience to bear on the shaping process as required by a given situation 
and beyond defined procedures. These limits are, however, far less confined 
than is the case with criteria catalogues and reference models. The search for 
an approach to the shaping of anthropocentric technology that does not turn 
those involved (including those immediately affected) into subjects of the 
shaping process leads into a dilemma. All the people involved can theoretically 
be the subjects of the shaping process, provided that there is a maximum 
scope for acting, that the situation is objectively completely open and does 
not imply any assumptions. Those involved may, however, experience such 
an open situation as highly restrictive, with the lack of any orientations to 
which action can be geared potentially leading to inability to act. Keeping the 
balance between the two shaping principles that contradict, yet presuppose, 
each other - a maximum of planned and purposeful proceeding on the one 
hand, and large scope for acting and open acting situations on the other - is 
a challenge that has to be met anew again and again. 
3. The third approach, which offers a practical way out of this (theoretically 
inescapable) dilemma, consists of rule-governed cooperation of academics and 
practitioners. While, in the first case, shaping occurs at the level of products, 
and, in the second, at the level of defined processes (procedures), the third 
approach is based on rules of dialogue and cooperation between those 
involved in the shaping process. If the object of shaping is humane work in 
computer-aided and -integrated manufacture, then this approach alone can 
lay the scientific base for the shaping concept (see "Shaping Paper" and 
Chapter 1). 

118 
Crossing the Border 
This final chapter is therefore intended: 
1. To present and give reasons for the rules of a participatory and 
interdisciplinary approach to shaping. 
2. To exemplify by means of scenarios how these rules may be translated into 
actual processes of integrated technology shaping. 
The concept proper of the anthropocentric shaping of technology is thus 
confined to these rules. The examples given of the possible application of 
these rules are intended to stimulate thought and to demonstrate how they 
can be transformed into interdisciplinary and participatory shaping processes. 
The examples chosen are not mere figments of our imagination, but are doubly 
related to the practice of our project. They represent typical cases that have 
been turned into scenarios and transcend the practice tried out in the project 
by: 
1. Being summarized into linked-up shaping processes. 
2. Indicating possible branchings off, which are typical of a differential 
shaping concept. 
3. Taking account of negative project experience in that, in the cases 
presented, this is given a positive turn. 
Rule-Governed Shaping of Computer-Aided Work Systems 
1. Any shaping process is based on an assignment that is clearly formulated 
in a manner comprehensible to all (employers, academics and users) and on 
which agreement has been reached. 
This rule does not define the level of abstractness at which the common 
assignment is formulated. It is, however, important for the assignment to be 
so clearly phrased as to be understood by all and to serve as both an orientation 
in the problem-solving process and a criterion for the evaluation of 
(intermediate) results. According to this concept, however, the assignment 
is not rigid in the sense of a specification, but allows a rolling shifting of 
objectives. With any participatory and interdisciplinary shaping process also 
representing a special kind of learning process for all involved, one has 
repeatedly to make sure whether or not the assignment and the concomitant 
working practice anticipated have to be modified, revised and/or specified on 
the basis of enhanced insights. 
In the project on human-centred CIM systems, for instance, the assignment 
was formulated at a high level of abstraction due to the pronounced (desired) 
heterogeneity of project participants. This and the general lack of experience 
with interdisciplinary and participatory research and development projects 
formed the major difficulties in gradually transforming the basic idea of 
human-centredness into technical artefacts. The concept of gradual or rolling 
assignment development and shifting of objectives is thus a response to the 
methodological deficits shown by the project on human-centred CIM systems. 
Rule one implies the demand for formulating the 'assignment as concretely 
as possible. If no agreement about the assignment can be reached at an 
advanced level of concreteness, due to lack of knowledge or difference of 

Crossing the Border 
119 
interests, if, however, general interest in fulfilling the assignment in general 
persists, then it is usually advisable to talk about the assignment at a more 
abstract level. This, however, must not happen at the expense of clarity and 
comprehensibility . 
The transition between levels of assignment description is, in the case of 
concretization, linked to a process of discussing further-reaching aspects of 
the objective conditions to be concretized and assumptions to be made. This, 
however, already forms an essential element in the shaping process itself. 
Formulating the assignment thus involves choosing and assessing the 
adequate level of concreteness as well as defining the distance between the 
concrete project result and the chosen level of assignment description. 
2. At regular intervals, particularly at the end of defined work stages, the 
project group reflects upon the method employed and the quality of the 
intermediate result achieved, deciding form and content of the subsequent 
project stage. 
The second rule is characterized by the fact that there exists no part authority 
in the project, such as might be represented by individuals (project leaders) 
or by members of certain disciplines who take responsibility for the method 
employed by virtue of their profession. The project group as a whole 
determines the content and form of subsequent processes. In doing so, it uses 
the existing rough schedule and the suggestions to be made, if need be, by 
the steering group (see rule 4). The alternation between action and reflection 
in action or, in other words, between communication and meta-
communication is an important rule in any shaping process which all project 
participants together are the subject of. This rule precludes the search for 
linear methods of design. Ongoing reflection throughout the project in 
conjunction with branching and open shaping processes are central to the 
overall concept of rule-governed development. Stages of reflection and meta-
communication have to be integrated into the overall process so as to operate 
to the project's full support. Otherwise, shaping projects stand in danger of 
evaporating into meta-communication and of failing eventually. Practising 
and applying rule two should be subject to time-limits agreed upon in advance 
by the project group. 
3. The groups involved have the opportunity and are encouraged to 
contribute to the shaping process those forms of expression that correspond 
to their experience, their abilities, interests and wishes. 
The concept of working jointly on assignments beyond the boundaries of 
disciplines and fields of practice requires understanding and communication 
as well as media for transmitting knowledge, designs and experience. Here, 
again, tensions exist. Fulfilling a technical assignment commonly presupposes 
technico-scientific instruments. This is usually part of engineers' and 
engineering scientists' professional competence. If this recognition were to 
give rise to the rule that the shaping of technology has to occur in the jargon 
and the medium of the technology and technical science at issue, this would 
erect insurmountable barriers to the people involved and affected who, for 
good reasons, are equally seen as experts of the working practice to be shaped. 
Each of the expert jargons and methods is Simultaneously a barrier to, and a 
necessity of, communication and participatory/interdisciplinary shaping. This 

120 
Crossing the Border 
applies equally to academics, and the jargons specific to their disciplines, and 
to skilled workers and managers. Thus the shaping process has to allow for 
stages at which group-specific media and the means of expression common 
to the people involved are used as well as for stages at which group-specific 
ideas are translated so as to become amenable to being discussed and 
incorporated into the overall result. Scenarios have proved to be a particularly 
effective form of expression at the integrated stages of the shaping process. 
With every project on the shaping of computer-aided work systems requiring 
changes in, for instance, one sector of the factory, the description of the events 
anticipated at company level, such as the processing of an order, is an excellent 
form of communication. Designing such scenario "pictures" about the change 
desired has proved successful in our project. This allows all the people 
involved (a) from their perspective of experts to participate in designing future 
work and company events as a whole, and (b) to use the jointly designed 
scenario as the complex base for translating the above into the perspectives 
of the various groups affected. 
4. Representatives of the people involved in the project with their specific 
abilities, experience and interests make up a coordinating group which has 
two main functions: 
(a) Integrating and systematizing the contribution to the project made by the 
groups involved 
(b) Organizing "double loop learning" or meta-communication (Habermas 
1981) in order to liven up the process of self-evaluation. 
If the size of the project group exceeds a certain number and if the project is 
also internationally composed, as with ESPRIT, then the setting up of such 
a coordinating group is necessary for practical reasons alone. Here, the aspect 
of representation is not a step towards establishing a hierarchical project 
organization, but the result of the principle that both moderation of the project 
dialogue and cooperation have to occur collectively. Our (the Social Science 
Group's) own practice of drawing up and discussing the II conceptual framework 
for research and development projects in the area of elM" (see Chapter 2) has 
shown clearly that, by assuming the role of moderators in the discussion of this 
concept, we as social scientists were unable to overcome the barriers to 
dialogue erected by the framework that was itself drawn up in the terminology 
of our discipline. Social scientists ought not to act as the moderators in the 
interdisciplinary and participatory project practice as a matter of course. Their 
seeming professional suitability for this task often turns out to be a barrier to 
communication. Assigning the parts of moderators to social scientists usually 
impairs the problem-solving process. Moreover, the social situation is 
informally defined by the jargon of social science. Thus in these cases, 
contributions by social scientists often dominate the project situation without 
in the least advancing the process of technology realization. The rule we 
advocate conforms to a position in activity research which maintains that the 
opposition of objects and subjects in the research process has to be abolished. 
Setting up a coordinating group for the moderation of shaping projects is an 
important step towards realizing this basic rule of research methodology. The 
coordinating group plays an important part in initiating the formulation and 
progression of the assignment and the explication of problem-solving horizons 
of the groups involved (as a reflection upon intellectual barriers). 

Crossing the Border 
121 
Referring to our own project practice, we shall translate the concept of the 
rule-governed participatory and interdisciplinary shaping of technology, as 
established above, into two alternative shaping processes. These processes, 
though following two different basic patterns, are not presented and discussed 
with a view to establishing which of them is superior. Any decision on either 
of these approaches is completely up to the people actually involved in the 
shaping process. Of course, both methods may also be combined with each 
other. 
This basic model of participatory and interdisciplinary differential 
technology shaping (PIDTS) is characterized by an alternation between the 
states of specialization by discipline- and interest-specific groups and 
generalization by groups of mixed composition. This is an iterative method, 
because the two stages may be passed through several times in succession 
depending on the distance between the assignment and the concrete project 
result (see Fig 4.7). Rule three in particular suggests the mutual translation 
of specific interests and of experiences formulated from the specific point of 
view of those affected into generalizable and integrated aspects of shaping. 
The four-stage method (see Fig. 4.8), on the other hand, follows a different 
logic while also being based on the four rules of PIDTS. In content, this four-
stage method is based upon the six dimensions of technology shaping (see 
"Shaping Paper") as established in Chapter 2. Methodologically, it begins in 
two stages from a concrete work practice that has been found to be in need 
of change. This is then specifically represented by the groups of participants 
and assessed with regard to the six shaping dimensions. Subsequently, these 
different representations are integrated into one picture of the practice in need 
of change. The stages of the representation, analysis and assessment of 
existing practices are followed by two further stages. These involve 
transforming the results of the analysis into the scenario desired and its 
subsequent concretization and translation into the perspective of each of the 
participant groups involved and affected. All of these four stages together 
can be seen as one sequence in the designing of a factory scenario, for instance, 
and thus as one stage in the overall process of PIDTS. 
specialization 
generalization 
Fig. 4.7. Iterative two-stage design method. 

122 
group-specific representation 
and practice 
integrated evaluation 
integrated scenario 
transformation into 
group-specific scenarios 
Fig. 4.8. Four-stage method for designing a scenario. 
Crossing the Border 
4.4 Prospective Example of the Shaping Process as a 
Rolling Development 
The principle of rolling development may be practised in a variety of ways. 
Based on both positive and negative experiences within ESPRIT project 1217 
(1199), this section offers a description of one of many possible methods of 
rolling development. It should be stressed that the following example is not 
the model for the shaping of CIM technology from a human-centred 
perspective. Rather, it is a prospective case for illustrating how the principles 
of rolling development may be carried out in an interdisciplinary context. 
The following example presupposes a rather complex task; i.e. it is more 
than just a prototype of a tool or software system for a stand-alone human-
machine system. In the following case the question which is addressed 
concerns how the organization, technique and educational aspects of a factory 
(or the production centre of a manufacturing company) may be viewed as an 
integrated entity. 
Neither organization, technique nor education has an ontological status. 
That is, they all open from the onset of design. For example, we consider 
CIM as one of the possibilities and not the definite objective of design. In this 
sense, the following example of rolling development is more wide ranging 
and open than the objectives of the ESPRIT project. The essential point is to 
establish a shaping process which, from the outset, includes a dialectical 
interaction between practically experienced people and engineers, towards 
the shaping of human-centred manufacturing. 

Crossing the Border 
123 
4.4.1 Preparation of the Shaping Process 
We suppose that at least three project design groups should be established: 
a group of end-users (U), a group of social scientists (S) and a group of 
engineers (E). 
Based on the experiences of the Danish group within the ESPRIT project, 
the group of end-users may be chosen from within the same company, 
although not necessarily from the same department. Also, it should be people 
from the same level in the company hierarchy to avoid introducing intra--
company politics into the group's design work. 
The social science group may include people from different social science 
disciplines (e.g. psychology, sociology and ergonomics) but members should 
be encouraged to dispel any disciplinary parochialism or narrow-mindedness. 
The engineering group may include people from different engineering 
disciplines in order to cover the different problem areas within the project. 
It may also be an advantage to include engineers who have some experience 
in CIM system implementation and education in a practical setting. 
Finally, there should be sufficient time to discuss the meaning and possible 
contradictions surrounding the concept of human-centredness both within, 
and between, the groups, in an effort to encourage the formation of a mutually 
agreed definition of, and philosophical basis for, human-centredness. 
Each of the groups should choose one of its members as their representative 
on a coordination group (CG). This group of three has a number of important 
functions to perform during the design process (see rule four, section 4.3). 
Before the groups begin working, the CG defines the tasks and the problem-
solving horizon of the project in order to secure comparative standards across 
the groups. These standards must be agreed by the three groups. 
In order to secure both rolling development and to prevent a total lack of 
coordination and focus, the process should be governed by the rules outlined 
in section 4.3 
4.4.2 Future-Creating Workshops 
During the initial stages of the project, it may be fruitful to carry out a number 
of rather open and loosely structured discussions. "Future-creating 
workshops" incorporate both a critique of existing conditions of work and 
technology and creative ideas concerning new conditions and suggestions for 
the realization of human-centred work and technology. 
In the ESPRIT project, the Danish CAD group gained experience in using 
this method. The social scientists held three future-creating workshops with 
three separate user groups. Although a number of interesting ideas were 
produced in these workshops, we recommend the following procedure for 
further workshops. 
Each of the three groups (U, S and E) separately describe their initial versions 
of an organization scenario or equipment prototype in their preferred language 
(e.g. written word, physical models, drawings, role playing). The process is 
illustrated in Fig. 4.9. There are several reasons for separating the groups 
according to common language and experience at this stage of a project. First, 
although the Danish user groups produced a number of interesting ideas 

124 
E 
Fig. 4.9. A future-creating workshop. 
E = Engineering group 
U = User group 
S = Social science group 
Crossing the Border 
V1= First version (scenario, prototype, etc.) 
during the ESPRIT project, their work was directed and influenced by 
questions and stimulation from the social scientists. The problem setting was 
devised by the social scientists and the engineers were not involved at all at 
this stage. A much wider set of design options and ideas may have been 
produced if the three groups had been working in parallel at the same task 
using their own preferred methods of discourse and enquiry (rule three in 
section 4.3). 
4.4.3 Shaping Workshops 
Depending on decisions made after the future-creating workshops (see rule 
two in section 4.3), the process may continue in different directions. In this 
case we suppose the next step to be a "shaping workshop" of mixed groups; 
that is, groups each consisting of at least one social scientist, one engineer 
and one end-user. Compared with the future-creating workshop, the shaping 
workshop is firmly structured from the beginning as the following procedural 
example indicates: 
Step 1. The aims and rules of the workshop are presented by a person 
outside the group who has been chosen to guide the workshop. 
Step 2. A user representative presents his or her results from the previous 
future-creating workshop (VUl in Fig. 4.9) to the shaping workshop 
participants. 
Step 3. Discussion of the technical and social implications of VUl. 
Step 4. The social science representative presents the results from the social 
science future-creating workshop (VSl in Fig 4.9) to the group. 
Step 5. Discussion of the technical and practical implications of VSl. 

Crossing the Border 
Future·Creating 
Workshop 
E-"V 1 
E 
Fig. 4.10. A shaping workshop. 
125 
Shaping Workshop 
Step 6. The engineering representative presents the results of the engineers' 
future-creating workshop (VEl in Fig 4.9). 
Step 7. Discussions of the social and practical implications of VEl. 
Step 8. Comparison and discussion of the similarities and potential 
contradictions, or differences, between VUl, VSl and VEl. 
Step 9. Integration (as far as possible) into a common version (VCl). 
The process thus far is illustrated diagrammatically in Fig. 4.10. 
Hence we see that the mixed design groups (Ev U1 and 51; E2, U2 and 52; 
E3, U 3 and 53 in Fig. 4.10) are multidisciplinary in order to enable the translation 
and transformation of the design options derived from the separate future-
creating workshops into a common design option or specification which 
includes technical, social and practical considerations. In this case, the 
products are three more or less different versions (V C', V C2 and V C3) produced 
by three parallel multidisciplinary working groups. 
At the time of writing an earlier draft of this book, the authors had no 
experience in running such a workshop. It was therefore decided that, in 
order to reflect theory in practice, a shaping workshop should be organized 
around the concept of systems architecture. This absence of an agreed 
definition and articulation of this concept, it will be recalled, had created a 
number of problems during the middle period of the project. Hence, the 
workshop was to serve a dual purpose. On the one hand, we wished to try 
out a specific kind of interdisciplinary communication, and on the other hand 
we wished to make further steps towards developing a reference model for 
a human-centred CIM architecture. 
The shaping workshops, held in Berlin during the last year of the project, 
comprised three social scientists and four engineers from the E5PRIT project, 
plus two external engineering scientists. The latter were invited in order for 
new ideas to be injected into the project. Moreover, the presence of two 
outside experts was expected to help remove the experimental nature of the 
workshop from the project routine. This seemed important for transferring 
and generalizing the workshop findings and conclusions from the relatively 
narrow context of the project. 

126 
Crossing the Border 
The shaping workshop was organized around dialogues similar to those 
detailed above. In the course of the first dialogue, the technical implications 
and preconditions presented by the factory scenario in the "Shaping Paper" 
(section 2.4.2) were analysed. In a subsequent dialogue, the engineers 
presented technical descriptions of a human-centred CIM architecture. These 
were analysed by the social scientists with regard to their social implications, 
presuppositions and effects. Three intermediary stages between the factory 
scenario and systems architecture were also considered (namely work 
organization, qualification and CIM building blocks) to aid the development 
of a five-dimensional reference model as well as the gradual transformation 
of social into technical descriptions and vice versa. 
The Berlin workshop was not fully successful in achieving its dual aims, 
primarily owing to the difficulties faced by the engineers in describing a 
technical specification of human-centred CIM architecture. This specification 
was to be developed more fully by the Data Management Group within the 
project who, in the course of a much longer working process, achieved a level 
of interdisciplinary dialogue comparable to the communication occurring 
within the limited time frame of the shaping workshop. More specifically, 
the data management reference model was complemented by a correspond-
ingly detailed work and factory scenario. The latter served to mediate between 
the general factory scenario of the "Shaping Paper" and the representation 
of a detailed technical specification for a human-centred CIM architecture. 
The concept of interdisciplinary shaping was thus doubly justified and the 
consideration of both the Berlin workshop and the workings of the Data 
Management Group allowed us to suggest how shaping workshops may be 
developed and organized with far more confidence than would otherwise 
have been the case. 
4.4.4 Coordination of the Results of the Shaping Workshops 
Returning to our ideal-type rolling development process, the coordination 
group (CG) should receive the three "products" of the shaping workshops 
(Le. V Cl, V C2 and V C3). This is followed by discussions and decisions are then 
taken regarding how to continue the process. In this case, we suppose that 
the CG produces a design option based on the juxtaposition and integration 
of these three products. 
In the ESPRIT project, a group consisting of three social scientists produced 
a synthesis of concepts and principles and a factory scenario (see the "Shaping 
Paper" in section 2.4.2). Although proving to be an important step in the 
development of the project, this paper was limited in its effect on the overall 
design process (as pointed out in Chapters 2 and 3). 
In order to learn from the project, we suggest that not one but three versions 
are created. Furthermore, the multidisciplinary coordination group (and not 
social scientists) should take part in the formulation of a first common design 
version or specification which synthesizes, or juxtaposes, the possible 
contradictions between the three earlier versions formulated within the 
shaping workshops (this process is illustrated diagrammatically in Fig. 4.11). 
Moreover, the CG may organize an evaluation procedure in an effort to 
improve methodology and overcome conflicts and misunderstandings. 

Crossing the Border 
127 
4.4.5 The Second Shaping Workshop 
In this case, we suggest a rearrangement of the groups back to their original 
format (i.e. an engineering group, social science group and end-user group). 
The reason for this change relates to the specific task of the second shaping 
workshop; namely, the comparisons of the coordination groups' deliberations 
and common version with the original versions produced by the groups in 
the future creating workshops (VEl, VUl and VSI) in order to criticize and 
produce new ideas. These are delivered back to the coordination group who 
develop a new synthesis or juxtaposition (S2 and Jz). This process is illustrated 
in Fig. 4.12. 
4.4.6 Seminar with Outside Experts 
The refined design specification from the coordination group may be further 
discussed by the three design groups. Alternatively, a few, carefully selected, 
specialists may be invited to comment on this specification. In the Danish 
ESPRIT project group, positive experiences of such a procedure were gained 
by inviting researchers from Norway and Sweden to comment on and discuss 
the initial concept of human-centredness. The advantage of outside 
consultation stems from its distance and detachment from the design process. 
In this case, we propose that outside experts are invited to a short series 
of seminars of this kind to enable the integration of a new specification by 
the coordination group. 
V1 
C ' 
Coordination 
Group (CG) 
Fig. 4.11. Coordinating the results of the shaping workshops. 
Fig. 4.12. A second shaping workshop. 
Synthesis 1 
Juxtaposition 1 

128 
Crossing the Border 
Subsequently, the procedure is reflected and reappraised according to rule 
two (see section 4.3). In this case we propose that a third shaping workshop 
is held with mixed groups of engineers, social scientists and end-users. The 
objective of this workshop is to prepare an exhibition or workshop for the 
public. This public airing of the design specification (presented in the form 
of models, film, prototypes, etc.) is suggested for a number of reasons. First, 
it might stimulate the project participants. Ideas communicated thus far in 
the design process are at a relatively abstract level. Through preparation for 
an exhibition, these ideas necessarily become more concrete. The ESPRIT 
Danish group prepared a slide show of their CAD work to great effect in this 
way. 
In the present case, it is intended that the exhibition is viewed as a part of 
the rolling development process rather than as an end product as in the case 
of the Danish CAD slide show. A second reason for incorporating a public 
exhibition into the rolling development process stems from the desire to 
encourage a more open and democratic procedure of technology development. 
People from outside get a chance to "get inside" the project and even to 
contribute to it. Third, the project group may get stimulating feedback from 
such an exhibition if it is shaped in such a way as to facilitate meaningful 
participation. 
Following this exhibition, the coordination group may take the initiative 
for another internal, self-refletive seminar. Depending on these discussions, 
the rolling development may again take different routes. In this case, we 
suppose that some of the ideas are implemented within a company as 
experimental prototypes. Simultaneously, it may be decided to carry out 
educational experiments in order to achieve a balance between prospective 
techniques, organization and educational initiatives. 
4.4.7 Conclusion 
The above example does not pretend to be the model for shaping work and 
technology. It is an example based on our experiences (both positive and 
negative) within the ESPRIT project and is therefore rooted in self-reflected 
practice. However, it should be stressed that, at every step, numerous different 
directions can be chosen. This example is offered in the hope that it may 
stimulate designers to break with the dogmatism of a linear, hierarchical 
process and allow space for a more dynamic and "spiral" design process which 
has a balance between the participation of users, social scientists, engineers 
and other interested parties. 
4.5 Summary and Conclusions 
Our initial questions (see pp. 24-25) concerning the mediation between the 
industrial-culturally moulded abilities and attitudes of staff on the one hand 
and the development of efficient computer-aided work systems on the other 
is not merely - as we have stated - a matter of reflecting and respecting, but 
also of transcending. The existing forms of work and industrial culture are 
largely characterized by Tayloristic structures. Set roles and an internalized 

Crossing the Border 
129 
working practice counteract innovations in all departments and at all levels 
of the factory, even though such innovation may be in staH's objective interest. 
The transformation of both management and staff's existing converging 
interests in reducing Tayloristic structures of work and technology into their 
personal interests and corresponding willingness to innovate is a key problem 
faced by those R&D projects that are concerned, directly or indirectly, with 
organization development. R&D projects with a focus on technology, such 
as have been sponsored by ESPRIT, run the risk of intensifying old work and 
factory structures by means of new production technology. Here, collusion 
may occur between conservative management's interest in maximum 
supervision and deterministic production control and corresponding staH 
interest in preserving the status quo. 
The experiences and results gained in our project from holistic approaches 
to shaping point the way towards mediating as well as transcending the 
traditional orientations and abilities of the people involved. The basic idea of 
human-centred CIM, precisely because it is not amenable to operationaliza-
tion, has challenged everybody involved time and again to problematize our 
technology developments in the areas of CAD, CAM and CAP and their 
correspondence to the basic idea. Evaluation means, here, continuous 
communication among all the people involved in their search for a better 
understanding of human-centredness as truth in the Habermasean sense 
(Habermas 1981). 
This basic idea also illuminates the relation of project planning to routine. 
The disadvantages of stage models in software engineering also show in the 
procedures of our and comparable R&D projects. It is from project events 
occurring in specific situations, from new and unplanned initiatives growing 
out of learning situations, as well as from the increasing tendency of all 
participants to see themselves as learners that really innovative insights, 
experiences and products have evolved. These had not been anticipated and 
would have been impossible to anticipate. 
In the search for new forms of humane, yet efficient, work and technology 
for the "new" factory, there is a great need for intelligent basic ideas and for 
committed experimenting behaviour. Conversely, there is less need for 
computer-aided planning instruments, which reduce agents to objects of their 
own planning and thus nip innovation in the bud. 
A comparison of the national part projects has repeatedly shown the 
immense importance to the people concerned being the subjects of the 
development process in their capacity as experts of their daily work and life. 
The technical results of the part projects CAM (UK) and CAP (FRG) do not 
transcend the level of solutions already achieved and remain confined to the 
progressive conventions of the current work-related debate about CIM 
(Bradner 1986). The part project CAD, by contrast, created a novelty due to 
its pronounced user involvement and interdisciplinary project practice. The 
CAD group's special ability to innovate has not only resulted in the idea of 
an "intelligent drawing board". * Moreover, it shows in their ability to 
problematize this idea again in the course of the project and as a result of 
* This idea evolved in a Danish preliminary project, which was also characterized by a high level 
of user involvement. 

130 
Crossing the Border 
intensive communication with designers and technical draftsmen/women. The 
group thus eventually arrived at the idea of the sketch board. 
What then are essential conditions for achieving a truly prospective quality 
of R&D projects? Our experiences in this project can be summarized thus: 
1. The "new" working practice in computer-aided integrated manufacturing 
(CAIM) must not be conceived from the point of view of the properties and 
possibilities inherent in computer-based/integrated production technology. 
Instead, a change of perspective is required. The use of work and factory 
scenarios is more promising of success. They are the means of both 
representing anticipated factory conditions and of communication among the 
people £rom the different fields involved about their specific experiences, 
ideas, jargons, imagination and interests. Work and factory scenarios, though 
containing, are not restricted by the one-dimensional formalism of technical 
realization. They are able to mobilize experience and to stimulate that creativity 
and imagination that enable people to transcend existing factories towards a 
higher level of human-centredness. This approach involves a degree of 
breaking free from the multiple ways in which one is tied to social and technical 
conventions. At the same time, the work (factory) scenarios are instrumental 
in defining technical deSigns, as has been shown by the Data Management 
Group's model (see p. 102). 
2. The second dimension of a prospective development practice consists of 
enabling the people concerned/users to participate in the shaping of work 
and technology (Rauner 1988b). This ability, diametrically opposed to 
Taylorism and to technological determinism as it is, has traditionally been 
omitted from vocational (further) education. Those training concepts and 
instruction technologies that are geared towards adapting people to the 
(existing) structures of work and technology represent tremendous barriers 
to innovation. The idea of "enabling people to participate in the shaping of 
work and technology" as a guideline for the vocational training of skilled 
workers is not least a consequence derived from the reality of increasingly 
open technologies. Open architectures are to be found at all levels of computer-
aided work systems - ranging from, the architecture of micro-electronic 
components to factory architecture. These architectures need complementing 
by the transformation of open systems into tangible computer-aided work 
systems and structures that take into account the specific conditions within 
a given factory. The transformation of open technologies into architectures 
for use in companies does not require adapted qualification, but a high level 
of shaping ability. 
3. The third dimension of a prospective development practice, finally, is 
shaping-oriented research. This does not conceive of the development of work 
and factories as being determined by technology and is, moreoever, aware of 
the limits, scope and restrictions inherent in individuals' views and in their 
ability to solve problems. Such research requires a high level of reflection, 
which is markedly underdeveloped in the many disciplines of academia with 
its pronounced division of labour. Only the productive tension between 
theoretical and practical competence turns science and research into factors 
to be reckoned with in any holistic shaping process. Sponsors' widespread 
and increasing pressure, even on experimental projects, to prove, prior to 
competition (as is the case in ESPRIT), the potential profitability of the 

Crossing the Border 
131 
innovations to be developed is shortsighted and ultimately counter-
productive. It goes without saying that the superiority of innovations that are 
part of a social modernization strategy is not amenable to evaluation by the 
rather limited economic methods. This, incidentally, is one of the greatest 
weaknesses of shaping-oriented research. As yet, nobody has succeeded in 
integrating into shaping-oriented research economics with its categories that 
necessarily abstract from the content of work and technology. This can only 
be accomplished by relinquishing classical economics' understanding of itself 
as a science. 
4. Let us imagine for a moment that our project results were to be transferred 
to factory routine. Then we would have to deal with the part played by 
management, their commitment and ability to innovate. On the basis of his 
intimate knowledge of the company he works for, one of the engineers 
involved in our project stated that "another big trouble is to get traditional 
management to accept that individuals require a high degree of freedom in 
order to be flexible". Our experience of involving management in innovating 
companies towards a higher degree of human-centred elM confirms that, as 
a rule, marketing-oriented management, due to their intellectual affinity to 
applied economics, is more likely to impede any long-term innovations than 
their engineering- and production-oriented counterparts. 

References 
Adorno TW, Horkheimer M (1969) Dialektik der AufkHirung. Fischer, 
Frankfurt 
Aregger K, Frey K (1975) Ein Modell zur Integration von Theorie und Praxis 
in Curriculumprojekten: Das generative Leitsystem. Institut fur die 
Padagogik der Naturwissenschaften, Kiel 
Babbage C (1832) On the economy of machinery and manufactures. Charles 
Knight, London 
Balzert H (1986) Programmierung. Reihe Informatik 50:37-51 
Bjerknes G, Ehn P, Kyng M (eds) (1987) Computers and democracy: a 
Scandinavian challenge. Avebury Books, Aldershot 
Bjorn-Andersen N (ed) (1980) Artikelsamling til Socioteknisk System-
boustruktion. IFA Publications, Copenhagen 
Braten S (1983) Dialogeus Vilhar: Datasamfundet. Universitetsferlaget, Oslo 
Brodner P (1985) Fabrik 2000: Alternative Entwicklungspfade in die Zukunft 
der Fabrik. Sigma-Verlag, Berlin 
Brodner P (1986) Skill based manufacturing versus unmanned factory: which 
is superior? Int J Ind Ergnomics 1:145-153 
Burawoy M (1979) Manufacturing consent: changes in the labour process 
under monopoly capitalism. University of Chicago Press, Chicago 
Cooley MJE (19897) Architect or bee? The human price of technology. Hogarth 
Press, London 
Corbett JM (1987) Human work design criteria and the design process: the 
devil in the detail. In: Brodner P (ed) Skill based automated manufacturing. 
Pergamon Press, Oxford 
Corbett JM (1990) Human centred advanced manufacturing systems: from 
rhetoric to reality. Int J Ind Ergonomics 5:83-90 
Dreyfus HL, Dreyfus S (1986) Mind over machines. Basil Blackwell, Oxford 
Ehn P (1988) Work oriented design of computer artifacts. Arbetslivscentrum, 
Stockholm 
Fayol H (1949) General and industrial management. Pitman, London 
Floyd C (1984) A systematic look at prototyping. In: Budde R (ed) Approaches 
to prototyping. Springer-Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg New York 
Gordon R, Kimball LM (1985) High technology, employment and the 
challenges to education. Silicon Valley Research Group Working Paper No. 
1. University of Santa Cruz, California 

134 
Crossing the Border 
Gulick L, Urwick L (eds) (1937) Papers in the science of administration. 
Institute of Public Administration, Columbia University, New York 
Habermas J (1981) Theorie des kommunikativen Handelns. Suhrkamp, 
Frankfurt/Main 
Hacker W (1986) Arbeitspsychologie. Huber, Bern 
Hellige HD (1984) Die gesellschaftlichen und historischen Grundlagen der 
Technikgestaltung als Gegenstand der Ingenieurausbildung. In: Troitsch 
U, Konig W (eds) Lemen aus der Technikgeschichte. VDI, Dusseldorf 
Herzberg F (1966) Work and the nature of man. Staples Press, New York 
Hildebrandt E (1987) Unternehmensplanung und Kontrollbeziehungen im 
Maschinenbau und Kontrolle: Eine Einfiihrung in die Labour Process 
Debate. Edition Sigma, Berlin 
Kling R, Scacchi W (1982) The web of computing: computer technology as 
social organisation. Adv Computing 21:1-93 
Koslowski K (1988) Unterstiitzung von partizipativer Systementwicklung 
durch Methoden des Software Engineering. Westdeutscher Verlag, 
Opladen 
Kuhn T (1970) The structure of scientific revolutions (2nd edn). Chicago 
University Press, Chicago 
Lutz B (1988) Zum Verhaltnis von Analyse und Gestaltung in der sozial-
wissenschaftlichen Technikforschung. In: Rauner F (ed) Gestalten: Eine 
neue gesellschaftliche Praxis. Verlag Neue Gesellschaft, Bonn 
Majchrzak A (1988) The human side of factory automation. Jossey-Bass, San 
Francisco 
Mayo E (1933) The human problems of an industrial civilisation. Macmillan, 
New York 
McGregor 0 (1960) The human side of enterprise. McGraw-Hill, New York 
Mertens K (1985) Steuerung rechnergefiihrter Fertigungssysteme. Hanser, 
Munchen 
Moll HH (1983) Mehr Produktivitat durch weniger Arbeitsteilung. VOl 
Nachrichten 43:11-29 
Mooney JC, Reiley AP (1931) Onward industry. Harper and Row, New York 
Morgan G (1986) Images of organisation. Sage Publications, London 
Noble OF (1977) America by design. Alfred Knopf, New York 
Noble OF (1984) Forces of production: a social history of industrial automation. 
Alfred Knopf, New York 
Numinen MI (1988) People or computers: three ways of looking at information 
systems. Studentlitteratur, Lund 
Oppermann R (1983) Forschungsstand und Perspektiven partizipativer 
Systementwicklung. Oldenbourg, Munchen 
Perrow C (1983) The organisational context of human factors engineering. 
Administrative Sci Q 28:521-541 
Polanyi M (1957) Personal knowledge. Routledge and Kegan Paul, London 
Polanyi M (1967) The tacit dimension. Anchor Books, New York 
Rauner F (ed) (1988a) Gestaltung: Eine neue gesellschaftliche Praxis. Verlag 
Neue Gesellschaft, Bonn 
Rauner F (1988b) Die Befahigung zur (Mit) Gestaltung von Arbeit und Technik 
als Leitidee beruflicher Bildung. In: Heidegger G, Gerds P, Weisenbach K 
(eds) Gestaltung von Arbeit und Technik: Ein Ziel beruflicher Bildung. 
Campus Press, Frankfurt 

Referencs 
135 
Rauner F, Rasmussen LB, Corbett JM (1988) The social shaping of technology 
and work: human centred computer integrated manufacturing systems. AI 
Soc 2:47-61 
Rosenbrock HH (1977) The future of control. Automatica 13:389-392 
Rosenbrock HH (1980) Human resources and technology. In: Proceedings of 
the sixth world congress of the international economic association on 
human resources, employment and development, Mexico 
Rosenbrock HH (1983) The social and engineering design of a flexible 
manufacturing system. In: Warman EA (ed) CAPE '83 Part 1. North-
Holland, Amsterdam 
Rosenbrock HH (ed) (1980) Designing human centred technology. Springer-
Verlag, London 
Sandberg T (1982) Work organisation and autonomous groups, Liber Forlag, 
Uppsala 
Schon DA (1983) The reflective practitioner. Basic Books, New York 
Smith A (1776) The wealth of nations. Stratton and Cadell, London 
Suchman LA (1987) Plans and situated actions: the problem of human-
machine communication. Cambridge University Press, New York 
Taylor FW (1911) Principles of scientific management. Harper and Row, New 
York 
Thorsrud E (1972) Worker participation in management in Norway. Institute 
for Labour Studies Publications, Geneva 
Trist EL, Bamforth KW (1948) Some social and psychological consequences 
of the Longwall method of coal getting. Hum Relations 4:3-38 
Ulich E (1978) Uber das Prinzip der differentiellen Arbeitsgestaltung. 
Industrielle Organ 47:566-568 
UTOPIA (1981) Report Number 1. Swedish Centre for Working Life, 
Stockholm 
Weizenbaum J (1976) Computer power and human reason. Freeman, San 
Francisco 
Wingert B, Duus W, Raeder M, Riehm V (1984) CAD im Maschinenbau. 
Springer-Verlag, Berlin 
Winograd T, Flores F (1986) Understanding computers and cognition: a new 
foundation for design. Ablex, Norwood 
Yeomans RW, Choudry A, Ten Hagen PJW (1985) Design rules for a computer 
integrated manufacturing system. North-Holland, Amsterdam 

