
Crossing the Border of the Traditional Science Curriculum

Bold Visions in Educational Research 
Volume 56 
 
 
Series Editors: 
 
Kenneth Tobin, The Graduate Center, City University of New York, USA 
Carolyne Ali-Khan, College of Education & Human Services,  University of North Florida, USA 
 
Co-founding Editor: 
 
Joe Kincheloe (with Kenneth Tobin) 
 
Editorial Board: 
 
Barry Down, School of Education, Murdoch University, Australia 
Daniel L. Dinsmore, University of North Florida, USA  
Gene Fellner, College of Staten Island, City University of New York, USA 
L. Earle Reybold, College of Education and Human Development,  
George Mason University, USA 
Stephen Ritchie, School of Education, Murdoch University, Australia 
 
 
Scope: 
Bold Visions in Educational Research is international in scope and includes books from two 
areas: teaching and learning to teach and research methods in education. Each area contains 
multi-authored handbooks of approximately 200,000 words and monographs (authored and edited 
collections) of approximately 130,000 words. All books are scholarly, written to engage specified 
readers and catalyze changes in policies and practices. Defining characteristics of books in the 
series are their explicit uses of theory and associated methodologies to address important 
problems. We invite books from across a theoretical and methodological spectrum from scholars 
employing quantitative, statistical, experimental, ethnographic, semiotic, hermeneutic, historical, 
ethnomethodological, phenomenological, case studies, action, cultural studies, content analysis, 
rhetorical, deconstructive, critical, literary, aesthetic and other research methods. 
 
Books on teaching and learning to teach focus on any of the curriculum areas (e.g., literacy, 
science, mathematics, social science), in and out of school settings, and points along the age 
continuum (pre K to adult). The purpose of books on research methods in education is not to 
present generalized and abstract procedures but to show how research is undertaken, highlighting 
the particulars that pertain to a study. Each book brings to the foreground those details that must 
be considered at every step on the way to doing a good study. The goal is not to show how 
generalizable methods are but to present rich descriptions to show how research is enacted. The 
books focus on methodology, within a context of substantive results so that methods, theory, and 
the processes leading to empirical analyses and outcomes are juxtaposed. In this way method is 
not reified, but is explored within well-described contexts and the emergent research outcomes. 
Three illustrative examples of books are those that allow proponents of particular perspectives to 
interact and debate, comprehensive handbooks where leading scholars explore particular genres of 
inquiry in detail, and introductory texts to particular educational research methods/issues of 
interest to novice researchers. 

Crossing the Border of the Traditional
Science Curriculum
Innovative Teaching and Learning in Basic Science Education
Edited by
Maurício Pietrocola
School of Education, University of São Paulo, Brazil
and
Ivã Gurgel
Institute of Physics, University of São Paulo, Brazil
SENSE PUBLISHERS
ROTTERDAM / BOSTON / TAIPEI

A C.I.P. record for this book is available from the Library of Congress.
ISBN 978-94-6351-039-4 (paperback)
ISBN 978-94-6351-040-0 (hardback)
ISBN 978-94-6351-041-7 (e-book)
Published by: Sense Publishers,
P.O. Box 21858,
3001 AW Rotterdam,
The Netherlands
https://www.sensepublishers.com/
All chapters in this book have undergone peer review.
Printed on acid-free paper
All rights reserved © 2017 Sense Publishers
No part of this work may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted
in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, microﬁlming,
recording or otherwise, without written permission from the Publisher, with the
exception of any material supplied speciﬁcally for the purpose of being entered and
executed on a computer system, for exclusive use by the purchaser of the work.

 
 
 
To my father, who never gave up until the very end. (MP) 
To my wife, who encourages me to continue in  
every challenge I face. (IG) 


vii 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
Acknowledgements 
vii 
 
Introduction 
xi 
 
1. 
Curricular Innovation and Didactic-Pedagogical Risk Management: 
 
Teaching Modern and Contemporary Physics in High Schools 
1 
 
Maurício Pietrocola 
 
2. 
Elementary Particle Physics for High Schools  
23 
 
Maxwell Siqueira 
 
3. 
Particle Accelerators and Didactic Obstacles: A Teaching and Learning 
 
Experience in São Paulo and Cataluña 
45 
 
Márlon Pessanha and Maurício Pietrocola 
 
4. 
A Teaching-Learning Sequence on the Concept of Mass and Required 
 
Skills for Teaching Relativity 
61 
 
Fabiana B. Kneubil and Maurício Pietrocola 
 
5. 
Science Stand: Crossing Borders between Sciences, Arts, and  
 
Humanities in a Decentralized Science Dissemination Program 
73 
 
Luís Paulo de Carvalho Piassi, Rui Manoel de Bastos Vieira, and 
 
Emerson Izidoro dos Santos 
 
6. 
Computer Simulations and Students’ Difficulties in Reading Visual 
Representations in Science Education 
95 
 
Víctor López and Roser Pintó 
 
7. 
Praxeology and the Use of Educational Robotics in the Teaching of 
 
Physics 
115 
 
Milton Schivani and Maurício Pietrocola 
 
8. 
Teaching Solar Physics in a Partnership between Formal and  
 
Non-Formal Education 
127 
 
Cibelle Celestino Silva and Pedro Donizete Colombo Jr. 
 
9. 
Curricular Innovation in Modern and Contemporary Physics in 
 
Ongoing Training Courses: Professional Profile, Motivation Change, 
 
and Teacher Difficulties  
143
 
Ivani T. Lawall and Maurício Pietrocola 
 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 
viii 
10. A Game Designed to Tackle Controversies about the Nature of Science: 
 
Debates Regarding Science Funding Based on Studies of the 
 
History of Cosmology in the First Half of the 20th Century 
163 
 
Alexandre Bagdonas, André Noronha, Vitor Machado, 
 
Felipe Velásquez, and Ivã Gurgel 
 
11. A Proposal for Overcoming Obstacles to Teaching Natural Science: 
 
Evaluating a History of High School Cosmology Courses  
181 
 
Thaís Cyrino de Mello Forato and Alexandre Bagdonas 
 
12. The Role of Narrative Thinking in Learning Scientific Concepts 
207 
 
Ivã Gurgel, Maurício Pietrocola, and Danilo Cardoso 
 
13. Interwoven Thoughts: Rethinking the Current Picture of Physics  
 
Knowledge 
227 
 
Maristela do Nascimento Rocha and Ivã Gurgel 

ix 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
Crossing the Border of the Traditional Science Curriculum is a collection of 
chapters, the authors of which have been participants in projects supported by the 
Curricular Innovation Research Center (NUPIC, in Portuguese) at the School of 
Education of the University of São Paulo between 2003 and 2012. We want to 
thank the Foundation for Research Support of the State of São Paulo (FAPESP), 
the National Council of Research (CNPq), and Coordination for the Improvement 
of Higher Education Personnel (CAPES) for their support of NUPIC and its 
projects. 


 
xi 
INTRODUCTION 
The introduction of curricular contents normally absent from science classrooms is 
not a simple result of the will or desire for curricular updating, but emerges as a 
complex issue to be addressed in the context of applied educational research. This 
book came about from research projects developed between 2003 and 2012 at the 
University of São Paulo by NUPIC1 and financed by the public research and 
development agencies FAPESP2 and CNPq.3 The focal point of these projects was 
investigating the introduction of knowledge from modern and contemporary 
physics (MCP) as a process of innovation meant to transcend the educational 
processes already established by didactic practice and tradition. In this context, we 
developed many research studies, with the main goal of studying the limits and 
possibilities for introducing these contents to high schools. At first, two physics 
subjects were privileged in this process: (I) the dual nature of light and (II) the 
physics of elementary particles. This research was followed by other themes, 
including the history of science, relativity theory, radiation, cosmology, and 
astrophysics.  
 
Parallel to this framework, we developed other lines of work aimed at 
understanding possible impositions in the processes which generated the theoretical 
results of the research, taking into account the construction of didactic 
activities/sequences of teaching and learning; the epistemological characteristics of 
knowledge, such as creative imagination; the structure of scientific knowledge; the 
nature of science; scientific explanations; and scientific narratives. 
 
These studies generated various results, some practical, such as didactic 
materials for teachers (available on the group’s website as Sequences of Teaching 
and Learning) and in-service courses for high school science teachers, and other, 
more-theoretical ones, in the form of articles and conference presentations. In 
addition, these studies allowed the group to participate actively in the construction 
of Physics Curriculum Standards by the State of São Paulo (São Paulo, 2008).4 In 
terms of theoretical results, some working hypotheses emerged from that stage of 
research. We believe that the problems faced in updating the physics curriculum 
can be understood in terms of two distinct yet complementary kinds of 
impediments, which we define as didactic-epistemological obstacles and didactic-
pedagogical obstacles.  
 
(I) Bachelard’s (1938) original idea of epistemological obstacles relates to the 
notion that the development of scientific knowledge stems from thought surpassing 
itself. The obstacles proposed by Bachelard were limited by a few types which 
were especially appropriate in addressing the formation of the scientific spirit 
(esprit scientifique), defined by him as that which is present at the birth (17th 
century) and the maturing (19th century) of modern science. In our theoretical 
perspective, didactic-epistemological obstacles are ways of understanding the 
ruptures present in the production of scientific knowledge vis-à-vis the educational 

INTRODUCTION 
xii 
system. In other words, our goal is to encompass and expose the many types of 
epistemological inadequacies present in the process of didactic transposition, as 
related to the structuring and development of scientific knowledge itself. 
 
Proposing the existence of didactic-epistemological obstacles notably tied to the 
didactic transposition of modern physics, as differentiated from those tied to 
classical physics, results in the following hypothesis:  
Classical physics is a knowledge developed on the basis of a phenomenology 
present in everyday life, whereas modern physics results from the exhaustion 
of classic ideas. 
The same could be said of other scientific areas, such as chemistry, biology, 
astronomy, and even geology. 
 
So far, we have proposed the existence of four types of didactic-epistemological 
obstacles related to modern physics, namely: phenomenology, language/ 
formalization, conceptual structure, and ontological base. To be succinct, each of 
these obstacles is based on the difficulties observed in the construction of 
knowledge for teaching intended for high school education. We briefly describe 
each of these obstacles below. 
 
Phenomenology – Most phenomena making up the contents of classical physics are 
accessible in everyday life and/or in didactic laboratories in the form of simple 
experimental activities. The phenomena considered in modern and contemporary 
theories belong to a world beyond the limits of daily life: the very small, the very 
fast, the very old, etc. Such phenomena are neither accessible to everyday life nor 
prone to being presented in simple experiments in didactic laboratories. To wit, 
while a drip that creates a circular ripple in a lake or a bowl with water can be used 
to start a discussion on the concept of wave mechanics, which readily-available 
tools might be used to discuss the dual nature of light? 
 
Language/formalization – Most of the contents of classical physics can be 
transposed to the school environment via a simplified mathematical formalism, 
comprised of basic algebra and geometry. Conversely, modern and contemporary 
theories are structured by the use of complex mathematics, such as the functions of 
probability, tensors, etc. There are no high school-centric didactic transpositions 
which lighten the mathematical knowledge requirements for such contents. This 
type of problem has been addressed in the literature in two ways: either by 
demanding the necessary technical expertise, or through choosing more conceptual 
and qualitative physics, often using metaphorical and analogous methods.  
 
Conceptual structure – Scientific concepts can be understood as an abstract 
extension of concepts present in common knowledge. Determining factors such as 
force, temperature, heat, and energy are examples of equivalent concepts in the 
context of the world’s intuitive knowledge. Such concepts were/are the focus of 
research on misconceptions and cognitive development. The concepts present in 
modern and contemporary physics breach common ideas and, more than that, are 

INTRODUCTION 
xiii 
counterintuitive, running opposite to the basis of human knowledge. Probabilistic 
determinism, orbital position, concepts of spin and reduced mass, as well as 
relative time and space, are terms liable to be associated with intuitive concepts. 
However, they should be understood as “old language graveyards”.5 
 
Ontological base – Classic entities are built from objects present in the perceivable 
world: particles, waves, space, time, energy, etc. The entities present in modern 
and contemporary theories are constructed opposite to common sense: particles 
with no mass, quantum energy, virtual particles, and curved space are entities 
which contain special characteristics, properties, and behavior highly distinct from 
the objects that make up everyday life. 
 
(II) The concept of didactic obstacles was proposed by Brousseau in 1986 to 
indicate the existence of teaching practices, habits, and didactic foci which hinder 
the process of teaching and learning. Similarly, we will use the notion of didactic-
pedagogical obstacles to define the conditions of the didactic system which 
hinder/prevent the introduction of contents from modern and contemporary 
physics. These conditions were forged over the 200-year history of physics 
teaching and if, on the one hand, they contribute to the establishment of classical 
physics in classrooms, they are on the other hand obstacles to the introduction of 
certain knowledge. 
 
The notion that didactic-pedagogical obstacles exist stems from the hypothesis 
that: 
Classical physics teaching is the fruit of a process of didactic transposition 
validated by a historical process. 
Over the centuries, trial and error have selected contents, defined activities, 
perfected evaluation methods, and created a school curriculum adjusted to the 
educational system, making it highly stable.  
 
The didactic-pedagogical obstacles to the introduction of modern and 
contemporary theories in high school are the conceptual hierarchy of prerequisites; 
the didactic intuition of teachers; content selection; proposed activity types; and 
evaluation.  
 
Each of these obstacles is derived from the difficulties observed in the 
construction of knowledge taught related to modern and contemporary physics for 
high school education. These obstacles are briefly described below: 
 
The conceptual hierarchy of prerequisites – indicates that the simplest concepts 
should precede the more complex ones. This belief is tied to the idea that the 
history of physics serves as evidence of a growing conceptual sequence – and thus 
hinders the consideration of 20th-century theories as a basis for didactic 
transposition. In this perspective, newer knowledge is conceptually dependent on 
older knowledge and the former cannot be taught without the latter. 
 

INTRODUCTION 
xiv 
The didactic intuition of teachers – holds that there is an intuitive method of 
teaching physics, which is manifested in the practice and the speaking of teachers 
and students. This practice suggests that physics teaching inherently contains, for 
example, closed problems and exercises. It also indicates didactic tools which are 
not configured/included as physics teaching, such as certain texts and conceptual 
questions.  
 
Content selection – The contents of traditional physics programs are historically 
validated and ready to be taught. Innovation by seeking new content involves 
taking risks, which is often seen as devoid of merit. 
 
Proposed activity types – As with curricular contents, there are exemplary 
activities which are assumed to “work” in physics teaching and learning inside 
class rooms. For example, solving problems – an approach widely studied and 
researched in the field – is considered an exemplary method of developing 
activities in physics classes. This premise becomes clear when attempts are made 
to change school routines by incorporating different activities, such as project-
based learning, etc. 
 
Evaluation – Finally, evaluation is one of the most sensitive aspects of classroom 
management. In classical physics, there is a consensus around what and how to 
evaluate. Changes in school knowledge often render traditional methods 
unfeasible, creating resistance. 
 
The transposition of modern science contents to high school classrooms should be 
seen as one of the most complex tasks facing educators. On the one hand, there are 
the inherent epistemological demands in the field of scientific knowledge, demands 
which are very distant from the standards of understanding forged in everyday life. 
On the other, the demands of the school environment are equally challenging: 
ideology, intertwined with didactic and traditional necessities, constructs its own 
set of pedagogical complications. The result is a complex problem with no obvious 
solution: How might both domains be satisfactorily addressed? Is it possible to 
maintain conceptual rigor while simultaneously meeting the demands of the 
teaching and learning system?  
 
Such questions must be answered through applied research, in the form of 
proposals for and analyses of classroom activities. It is important at this point to 
highlight those research contexts capable of revealing the didactic knowledge 
required to face such a challenge. We must also note that this process is not just a 
matter of addressing proposals for the insertion of new material within the known 
standards of teaching. The insertion of new scientific content in high schools 
should be seen as an activity of innovation, given that it involves rupturing a 
tradition of education that precedes teachers, students, curriculum shapers, etc. 
That being said, it will be important to recall the thematic of curricular innovation 
in educational lore. 

INTRODUCTION 
xv 
 
Aside from the works originating in the above research projects, several 
additional chapters were included in this volume because they share the same 
desire of crossing the borders of traditional science education. These explore 
themes related to the use of educational robotics, computer simulation, and the 
coming together of art and science. 
 
Almost all research took place in Brazilian educational environments. The only 
exception is the chapter by Víctor López and Roser Pintó about computer 
simulation in Cataluña. 
 
We hope this book offers fresh ideas about the limits and possibilities for 
change in science classes and contributes to methods of education that meet the 
demands of the modern citizen. 
NOTES 
1  This research group is self-entitled NUPIC – Núcleo de Pesquisa em Inovação Curricular (Curricular 
Innovation Research Center) – and it groups researchers from the Faculdade de Educação (School of 
Education), the Instituto de Física de São Carlos (Sao Carlos Physics Institute) of the USP 
(University of São Paulo), the Physics Department of UDESC, and the Physics Department of the 
Universidade 
Estadual 
de 
Ilhéus 
(State 
University 
of 
Ilheus), 
along 
with 
various 
graduate/postgraduate students and associated researchers. Further information can be found at 
http://nupic.iv.org.br/portal. 
2  FAPESP – in English, the Research Support Foundation of the State of São Paulo. 
3  CNPq – in English, the National Research Council. 
4  Physics Curricular Standard of the State of São Paulo. 
5  Referring to the growth of languages, Russell (2001) states the following: “The common language is 
a graveyard for the remains of the philosophical speculation from the past”. 


 
M. Pietrocola & I. Gurgel (Eds.), Crossing the Border of the Traditional Science Curriculum, 1–21. 
© 2017 Sense Publishers. All rights reserved. 
MAURÍCIO PIETROCOLA 
1. CURRICULAR INNOVATION AND  
DIDACTIC-PEDAGOGICAL RISK MANAGEMENT 
Teaching Modern and Contemporary Physics in High Schools 
INTRODUCTION 
The text that follows is focused on the uncertainty related to the selection and 
creation of scientific knowledge for the classroom. Although a wide range of 
aspects of science can be found in school contents, traditional teaching over the 
past decades has favored those contents needed for problem solving (Echeverría & 
Pozo, 1998; Peduzzi, 1998). Since the 1950s, several studies have evaluated the 
relevance and possibility of curricular innovations which diversify the school 
content beyond problem solving (Barojas, 1998). To that end, it has been 
commonplace to encounter works proposing alternatives to this method of 
conceiving 
of 
potentially-teachable 
science 
contents, 
particularly 
when 
distinguishing between knowing what science is, knowing about science, and 
knowing about the uses of science (Hodson, 1992). Works focused on teaching the 
nature of science (NOS) exemplify attempts to broaden the scope of relevant 
options for school content in high schools (Gauch, 2009; Niaz, 2009; Park & Lee, 
2009; Abd-El-Khalick et al., 2008; Schwartz & Lederman, 2008). 
 
Within this context of questioning what types of scientific knowledge should be 
taught, the contents that stand out are those aimed at analyzing the role and 
importance of such knowledge to the basic formation of a social conscience in the 
individual (Fourez, 1994). Since science exerts an increasing influence on 
everyday life, the comprehension of its contents is fundamental to understanding 
the modern world and to active and full participation in today’s society. We live in 
an increasingly technological society, a world brought about by the 
industrialization that was driven onward in the 20th century by scientific theories 
which took stands against the mechanistic thought long considered the paradigm of 
how to know the world. Theories such as special and general relativity, quantum 
chemistry, and molecular genetics gave rise to new fields of knowledge, leading to 
unexpected paths in scientific research and creating new technologies that up to 
that point had existed only in science fiction movies. The technological devices 
born from this scientific development changed behaviors, dictated rules, and, also, 
created doubts and expectations concerning the role of science in modern society. 
 
Today, we are able to access many products and processes created by 
contemporary technology, with digital TVs with 3D imagery entertaining us at 
home, medical equipment that makes remote surgery possible, and so on. However, 

PIETROCOLA 
2 
very few of us manage to overcome immediate feelings of awe at the spectacle 
offered by science. In general, it is neither possible for the average citizen to 
comprehend the products of new scientific advancements, nor to decipher even a 
fraction of the information received from the media. Even in the 21st century, 
many respond to the new reality as our prehistorical ancestors did to fire. Thus, we 
face the paradox of living in a society which has science and technology as its 
prime engines yet where nonetheless a large portion of the population remains 
scientifically and technologically illiterate.  
 
More than twenty years ago, Gerard Fourez explored the political, social-
economic, and cultural factors permeating education, taking into account the 
possible impact and transformation that might result from teaching science in a 
way that promoted the Scientific and Technological Literacy (STL) of the student 
(Fourez, 1994). He stressed that STL could be a compass for science teaching in 
the context of the “crisis in science teaching for citizenship”. This crisis would 
have been already-discernable in a variety of initiatives demonstrating the 
inadequacy of science teaching in the face of the challenges of modern society. 
Examples of such manifestations include the catchy slogan, “A Nation at Risk”, 
proposed by the National Science Teacher Association (NSTA) in 1980 and 
UNESCO’s Project 2000+, founded in 1993. More recently, the Next Generation 
Science Standards (NGSS) echoed this train of thought by stating: 
The world has changed dramatically in the 15 years since state science 
education standards’ guiding documents were developed. Since then, many 
advances have occurred in the fields of science and science education, as well 
as in the innovation-driven economy. The United States has a leaky K-12 
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) talent pipeline, 
with too few students entering STEM majors and careers at every level – 
from those with relevant postsecondary certificates to Ph.Ds. We need new 
science standards that stimulate and build interest in STEM. (NGSS, 2013, 
pp. xiv–xv) 
Such a feeling of crisis is not limited to the last 40 years. The 1960s became known 
in science education lore as the “project era” for agglutinating many science 
education proposals in response to the demands of the time. This led to the 
development of many international projects such as the Physical Science Study 
Committee (PSSC), the Biological Sciences Curriculum Study (BSCS), the 
PILOTO by UNESCO, the Harvard University Physics Project, and the Nuffield 
Science Teaching Project, among others. All of them followed the perception that 
the science curriculum, more than any other field of knowledge, was burdened by 
social and political pressure to change in order to adapt to modern challenges and 
needs. Aside from the demands originating from society itself, there were often 
internal demands from science itself as a field of knowledge. On the one hand, it is 
acknowledged that scientific knowledge is in constant evolution and 
transformation; this suggests a periodic need to rethink the content being taught. 
On the other hand, there is the awareness that teaching science is no small task, one 
which always bears the inherent risk of inefficiency in the process. Teachers and 

CURRICULAR INNOVATION AND DIDACTIC-PEDAGOGICAL RISK MANAGEMENT 
3 
educators in general are perpetually conscious of the success of their teaching, 
either in terms of the motivation and interest of their students or in the relevance 
and utility of their curricular contents.  
 
In the last decade, and with Europe at the forefront, a number of projects such as 
STTIS,1 Material Science,2 NINA,3 and the CAT European Project4 have revived 
this demand for renovation with proposals for curricular innovation/update.  
 
In Brazil, a similar discussion of science education goals appears in the 
PCNEM5 (National Curriculum Parameters for High School), which uses the 
change of environment created by modern science and technology as justification 
for a change in the curriculum and presents goals to be achieved to promote 
education for citizenship. 
 
The new technologies of communication and information permeate daily life 
regardless of physical space, and create conditions of life and coexistence in need 
of study within the school environment. Television, radio, and information 
technology, among others, have allowed people to approach the images and sounds 
of once-unimaginable worlds (Brasil, 1999, p. 132). 
 
In this context of modifications produced by science and technology, physics 
has a prominent role. In the last century, the number of innovations and theoretical 
breaches in the field reached a very large number compared to other periods of its 
history. Physics is considered “the representative of science” par excellence 
(Emter, 1994) and the physics theories developed from the 20th century onward are 
the most successful description of physical nature elaborated to this day, while also 
having served as philosophical bases for important introspection on our methods of 
learning. The spectrum of physical knowledge, both in the micro and macro senses, 
was broadened in response to breaches between classic concepts and definitions 
and new ones. Theories such as general and special relativity and quantum 
mechanics served as the groundwork for the output of knowledge in a new 
scientific panorama. 
 
Regarding this, the PCN+ (Complementary Educational Orientations to the 
National Curriculum Parameters for High School) demonstrates the ratification of 
what was shown above:  
The presence of physics knowledge in high school gained a new meaning 
from the directives presented in the PCNEM. It is about constructing a vision 
of physics focused on the formation of a modern, active and cooperative 
citizen, with the tools to understand, intervene and participate in reality. 
(Brasil, 2002, p. 1) 
The Science Curriculum Standards by the State of São Paulo highlight the role of 
science in modern society: 
[C]urrent society, faced with matters such as the quest for productive 
modernization, concern for the natural environment, the search for new 
energy sources, and the choice of standards of telecommunication, needs to 
make use of the sciences as providers of languages, tools and criteria. 
Therefore, the basic education that ends in high school must promote 

PIETROCOLA 
4 
scientific and technological knowledge to be learned and mastered by citizens 
as a resource of their own, rather than “of others” whether they’re scientists 
or engineers, and used as a source of expression, a tool of judgment, decision 
making or problem solving in real scenarios. (São Paulo, 2008, p. 37) 
The contents of modern and contemporary theories of physics are already part of 
our daily life and common sense, as there are indications of the existence among 
contemporary youth of alternate conceptions regarding certain topics of modern 
physics (Paulo, 1997; Pietrocola & Zylberstajn 1999). The production of these 
alternate conceptions must result from the interaction between the student and the 
world as modified by science and technology, especially as related to information 
put out by the press. In other words, it is already possible to acknowledge today the 
existence of an everyday world modified by modern science, a change similar to 
the 19th-century transformation caused by the advent of heat-powered machinery 
or that which occurred in the 20th century with the incorporation of electricity into 
ways of life and production in cities. It is to be expected that science education 
should enable individuals to incorporate the new products of science into their bag 
of knowledge, in a way that allows them to understand the existing stalemates, 
challenges, and achievements in society. 
 
Faced with this scenario of specific demands and necessities in terms of 
knowledge, schools have been unable to properly deal with modern and 
contemporary physics theories. High school physics in particular has focused on 
knowledge related to theories from the 17th, 18th, and 19th centuries. The indexes 
of didactic books or school programs for physics courses display a structure that 
approximates their historical development stages: they invariably start with the 
study of cinematography (end of the 17th century), continuing with dynamics, 
hydrostatics, and thermology (18th century), reaching as far as thermodynamics 
and electromagnetism (19th century) in the final stages. This curricular 
organization reflects a linear and hierarchical conceptual structure, since it 
considers the “old” as preliminary. It implicitly holds that the student must undergo 
the historical trajectory of knowledge building as a field of scientific research. In 
this conception, it is only possible to teach contents such as electromagnetic field 
(from grade 12 of high school) to someone who was able to learn Newtonian 
physics (from grade 10).  
 
This way of conceiving the curriculum has prevented science education from 
advancing beyond the borders of the so-called classical theories (those produced up 
to and through the 19th century). The image of science constructed by high school 
students does not match the activities occurring in laboratories and research 
centers. Even 35 years later, I recall an enthusiastic 15-year old high school physics 
student who asked me about university research into “Kinematics”. It took me a 
few seconds to ponder the purpose of his question until I realized that, for him, the 
physics taught in class – based on problem solving for the movement and 
launching of objects – was an example of how physics were conducted in research 
laboratories. I do not recall what my response was, but I surely lacked the courage 
to disillusion him by saying that probably nothing fundamentally new had been 

CURRICULAR INNOVATION AND DIDACTIC-PEDAGOGICAL RISK MANAGEMENT 
5 
produced in this field of physics since the 17th-century works of Galileo and 
Torricelli!6  
 
By limiting itself to classical knowledge, school physics hinders holistic 
scientific formation, because – even with the continued relevance of classical 
physics to certain technological areas and the prerogative of building a founding 
knowledge of western culture – the absence of modern and contemporary theories 
in class distorts the image of physics conveyed. The need to ensure people’s 
understanding of the scientific-technological artifacts of everyday life, whether 
they are material or cultural, real or virtual, makes it imperative to proceed with a 
curricular update that ensures access to the contents present in modern physics 
theories developed throughout the 20th century.  
 
The challenge to be faced thus far lies in understanding why schools have so 
much difficulty in inserting new contents –some of which have been in the past for 
over a century – into their didactic-pedagogical practices. We must find ways to 
move some ideas forward and suggest strategies capable of overcoming this 
unjustified discrepancy in such a scientifically-reliant society. 
RESEARCH IN THE CONTEXT OF INNOVATION 
In recent years, the subject of innovation has been a recurring theme in the 
international literature on science education research. Perhaps because of the large 
amount of update/renovation projects for school curricula in the last few years, this 
focus has been adopted by many researchers in the field, making it a point of study. 
These works are normally related to projects aimed at introducing and evaluating 
the impact of curricular innovation (Pinto, 2002, 2005; Ogborn, 2002; Piers, 2008; 
Mansour et al., 2010). Such projects are normally organized around proposals 
aimed at innovation, whether they are based on content, methodology, or the 
organization of teaching-learning activities. Many are dedicated to studying the 
role of teachers and their beliefs (Couso & Pinto, 2009; Henze et al., 2007; van 
Driel et al., 2005; Viennot et al., 2005) during processes of innovation. The 
International Journal of Science Education dedicated a special issue (Volume 24, 
No. 3) to research related to the STTIS project.7 Roser Pintó, the guest editor, 
writes the following regarding the importance of the collection of research related 
to the project: 
The STTIS project aims at understanding the process of the adaptation of 
science teachers to their circumstances when specific innovations have to be 
implemented, in particular, the practice of some informatic tools in science 
classes, or some new images or graphs, or some new teaching strategies of 
specific contents. (Pinto, 2002, p. 228)  
The 2008 edition of the GIREP8 annual meeting, entitled “Physics Curriculum 
Design, Development and Validation” gave special attention to research related to 
curriculum innovation projects. The conference accepted works in eight lines of 
research, one being “Curriculum Innovations in School and University Physics”. 
With sixteen coordinated sessions, this was one of the research lines with the 

PIETROCOLA 
6 
highest number of works. Two of the eight plenary sessions were also dedicated to 
this theme. Something similar happened in two other conventions in the field, 
ESERA9 and Ensenanza de las Ciências,10 both in 2009. Each included 
coordinated sessions with works based on science innovation projects, mainly 
European ones. 
 
A reasonable outcome in the face of this landslide of innovation research would 
be the institutional response to this science teaching crisis announced by Gerard 
Fourez (as described above). In other words, governments, aware of the frailty of 
their science education methods, should develop a financing policy for projects 
aimed at investigating innovation in science education.  
 
However, this is nothing new in the field of education. Research on the subject 
appears in educational lore in the late 1960s, based on the themes of “institutional 
innovation” and “educational innovation”, and often related to the use of the new 
technologies of the time (TV, slides, etc.) and the teaching of foreign languages. 
An example of a pioneering work in this field is Robert Bush and N.L Gage’s 
(1968) “Center for Research and Development in Teaching”, which describes 
research conducted at the Stanford Center for Research and Development in 
Teaching. Taken over by the behaviorist references of the time, the aforementioned 
research is founded on three variables of study: behavioral, or directly observable 
variables; personal variables, which can be inferred by tests; and, finally, 
institutional variables affecting the social, technological, and administrative 
elements of education. Among the latter, we have an emphasis on “studies of 
institutional scope involving the organizational context of education, the 
professional socialization of teachers and the attitude of teachers in favor of 
innovation” (1968, p. 1). Another work of this time comes from Thomas Stephens 
(1974), and is entitled “Innovative Teaching Practices: Their Relation to System 
Norms and Rewards”.  
 
New technologies are one of the points of interest in innovation studies to this 
day, with a large number of works evaluating their educational potential. Griffin 
(1988) studies the results of the use of computers in schools from the point of view 
of teachers. Wehrli (2009) studies the attitude of teachers toward the insertion of 
new technologies in class. Zhang (2009) attempts to study the learning culture as a 
complex system involving properties on macro and microscopic levels, the former 
being associated to beliefs and the very nature of behavior, and concludes that it is 
not enough to simply provide systems with “microscopic” properties (computers, 
software, etc.), since they cannot compensate for the other levels. 
 
One author who stands out in the research about the processes of curricular 
innovation is Michael Fullan. In a classic book on the subject, he states that 
unsuccessful innovation attempts are based on models with no place for teachers’ 
beliefs and practices (Fullan, 1982). For an innovation plan to be widely accepted, 
it is necessary to adjust it to the restrictions/limitations of teachers. In another study 
(Fullan, 2006), he states that, in innovation, the fundamental objective is to change 
the school culture; involved parties must organize innovation in the school culture 
context in order to make things clear not only in professional circles, but for 
student circles as well. 

CURRICULAR INNOVATION AND DIDACTIC-PEDAGOGICAL RISK MANAGEMENT 
7 
 
What draws attention in the bibliographic revision of this theme is the authors’ 
strong insistence on the role performed by teachers in every process of innovation. 
In general, teachers are the most sensitive element of any process of curriculum 
innovation. One of biggest the risks involved is the lack of acceptance and/or 
understanding of such innovation on the part of teachers (Fullan & Hargreaves, 
1992). The chances of success increase when the desire to change comes from 
within the education system, and is not perceived by the teachers as an imposition 
(Terhart, 1999). Innovation is faced with hurdles in the perceptions teachers have 
of their own ability/competence to innovate and in their willingness to assume 
innovation’s inherent risks (Lang et al., 1999). 
 
In the field of science education, there is a series of classic works about 
innovation (MacDonald & Rudduck, 1971; Brown & McIntyre, 1978; McIntyre & 
Brown, 1979). In the latter, entitled “Science Teachers’ Implementation of Two 
Intended Innovations”, McIntyre and Brown examine the first year of 
implementation of two innovations in science classes making use of education 
methodologies based on a mix of group activities and discovery methods. The 
conclusion is that teachers interpret proposals of innovation in a way that 
minimizes changes to their conventional teaching methods. Generally speaking, the 
important conclusion of these works from the 1970s is the certainty that including 
teachers in projects of innovation is essential. This is because innovating curricula 
and methodologies involves dealing with a variety of problems and assuming risks 
(Davis, 2003). Failure remains as a possible, albeit-undesirable consequence, as 
witnessed in the history of some of the most important science education projects 
such as PSSC and BSCS. Although teachers around the world consider these to 
contain excellent examples and good teaching materials, they were met with 
limited acceptance and short use in their original proposed contexts.  
 
The early 2000s saw a number of articles aimed at addressing innovations in 
curricular content. This is because, according to their authors, the innovation of 
content is particularly important to science curriculum (Méheut & Psillos, 2004). 
Some propose dealing with curriculum innovations in this field via short- and mid-
term studies, contrary to more traditional research, which requires long-term 
studies (Kariotoglou & Tselfes, 2000).  
 
These studies were based on the methodological approach defined as Design-
Based Research, or DBR (Design-Based Research Collective, 2003),11 which is 
explained as a research methodology capable of associating theoretical research 
with practical and educational applications. The authors state the following: 
… design-based research methods can compose a coherent methodology that 
bridges theoretical research and educational practice. Viewing both the 
design of an intervention and its specific enactments as objects of research 
can produce robust explanations of innovative practice and provide principles 
that can be localized for others to apply to new settings. Design-based 
research, by grounding itself in the needs, constraints, and interactions of 
local practice, can provide a lens for understanding how theoretical claims 

PIETROCOLA 
8 
about teaching and learning can be transformed into effective learning in 
educational settings. (p. 8) 
The theoretical-methodological basis of the proposal rests on research based on 
intervention-analysis of results, often cited as “formative evaluation”. However, it 
mainly seeks to overcome some of its limitations. This is because, in the traditional 
research of this line, the intervention of instructional programs, teaching materials, 
or pedagogical orientations of any kind, are measured by their contrast to pre-
established standards (Worthen, Sanders, & Fitzpatrick, 1996). During such a 
“formative evaluation”, cycles of intervention are based on development, 
implementation, and study, allowing the educational “planner” to obtain relevant 
information such as how intervention, successful or not, occurred, with the goal of 
maximizing the proposal being tested. The final result is an idealized proposal 
followed by a summary of the evaluation that ends up defining a context made of 
factors independent from the intervention that created them. The DBR works under 
the same perspective, using a mix of methods which allow the evaluation of results 
from an intervention. But, unlike “formative evaluation”, the DBR conceives of the 
success of an innovative proposal as a product of planned intervention and in the 
context of the intervention itself, with the aim of going beyond the mere idea of 
perfecting a particular “product”. In this sense, the intention of DBR in education 
is: 
to inquire more broadly into the nature of learning in a complex system and 
to refine generative or predictive theories of learning. (2003, p. 7) 
The expectation of this group is to be able to develop successful innovation models 
beyond mere isolated artifacts or programs. 
 
In the field of science education, a number of studies adopted this theoretical-
methodological line in order to plan, apply, and evaluate sequences of teaching and 
learning of specific topics. An important characteristic of this line of study is to 
simultaneously address research and the development of teaching activities 
(Méheut & Psillos, 2004). In the studies by Lijnse (1994, 1995), we found a first 
mention of the paradigm of science education studies of this line. This generated 
the term Teaching and Learning Sequences (TLS). These studies may be 
understood as: 
… ‘developmental research’ involving the interlacing of design, development 
and application of a teaching sequence on a specific topic, usually lasting a 
few weeks, in a cycling evolutionary process enlightened by rich research 
data. (Méheut & Psillos, 2004, p. 516)  
A special issue of the International Journal of Science Education (2004, Vol. 26, 
No. 5) compiles studies of this line. Among the articles included, Buty, Tiberghien 
and Le Marechal broach optics and conductivity, while Kabapínar, Leach and Scott 
(2004) address the subject of solubility. In another publication, Tiberghien et al. 
(2009) test a few epistemological presuppositions related to the process of TLS-
based science modeling on the content of mechanics to 10th-grade high school 

CURRICULAR INNOVATION AND DIDACTIC-PEDAGOGICAL RISK MANAGEMENT 
9 
students. Besson and coworkers used the TLS perspective to conduct a study 
involving the concept of “physical attrition” (Besson et al., 2009). 
 
Piet Lijnse and Kees Klaassen put forth an important discussion regarding the 
value of TLS-based research in a study from 2004. In this article, they introduce 
the idea of didactic structures as a product of applied studies involving TLS. The 
authors criticize the lack of studies dedicated to developing didactic knowledge of 
specific topics in favor of general educational theories or theories about cognitive 
learning. They state that studies involving sequences of teaching and learning wind 
up restricted to local scenarios and published in magazines targeted at teachers 
(2004, p. 537). They lament the surge of this type of research on international 
levels, since it could instead contribute to a real didactic progression. The authors 
harshly state that if we try to apply these general educational theories in an actual 
classroom  
one immediately faces the problem that, on application, such theories only 
result at best in heuristic rules. Such rules simply cannot guarantee that the 
teaching process that is supposed to be governed by them will have the 
necessary didactical quality. (italics added, 2004, p. 538)  
The term “didactic quality” can be troublesome in the reading of the text, but the 
authors define this notion as follows: 
… although a best way of teaching a topic may indeed be an illusion, we do 
think that some ways are better than others; and therefore that it is 
worthwhile to search for evidence of how and why that is the case and for 
means that enable us to express and discuss the didactical quality of such 
teaching sequences and situations. (2004, p. 538) 
They conclude, 
In this paper it is argued that the concept of ‘didactical structure’ might 
provide a further step to foster such deeper discussions about the didactical 
advantages and disadvantages of particular ways of teaching a topic. (2004, 
p. 538) 
Finally, in the perspective of the authors, these very didactical structures would be 
the ones incorporating didactic quality in some form! 
 
It seems fairly natural for us to state that the problems regarding the 
implementation of contents from modern and contemporary science theories in 
high school must be addressed from the perspective of content innovation. Aside 
from that, it seems the DBR’s option, particularly through the TLS approach, 
would be an efficient method of providing safe guidelines to overcoming the risks 
inherent to the process of curricular innovation. 
 
The TLS concerning modern and contemporary physics would consist of 
proposals for education resulting from the negotiation between demands of various 
types. The chart below, extracted from Méheut and Psillos (2004, p. 517), 
represents the existing points of interest in a general process of TLS elaboration. 
The authors use the term “didactic rhombus” and indicate two types of equally 

PIETRO
10 
import
epistem
 
Thi
dilemm
epistem
dimen
factors
been c
metho
which 
focus 
studies
them a
Howev
has no
didacti
evalua
guaran
OCOLA 
tant complem
mological dim
Figure 1. Th
s perspective 
mas inherent 
mological dem
sion – vertic
s (pedagogica
considered in 
dological tool
would ultima
of study. The 
s that could b
an effective wa
ver, the teachi
ot been evalu
ic transpositio
ation of sequ
ntee of learnin
mentary ana
mension. 
he didactical rh
appeals beca
in the proces
mands in mod
al axis in th
al dimension –
n the studies. 
l is well-suite
ately constitut
didactic struc
be seen by te
ay of contribu
MANAG
ing of contents
uated over tim
on, we could s
uences of tea
ng by high scho
alyses: the p
ombus (from M
ause of the po
ss of innovat
dern and cont
e above char
– horizontal a
Therefore, it
ed to managin
te the material
ctures develop
eachers as con
uting to the upd
EMENT OF RI
s from modern
me, as classica
say there has 
aching and le
ool students. I
pedagogical
Méheut & Psillos
ossibility of d
tion discussed
temporary ph
rt) and the cl
axis in the sam
t seems to us
ng the didactic
lization of sch
ped would inc
ntaining “dida
date of the phy
ISK TAKEN 
n and contemp
al contents ha
been no thera
earning intend
In other words
dimension 
s, 2004, p. 517) 
dealing with r
d above. The 
hysics (epistem
lassroom con
me chart) wo
s that this the
c sequences p
hool knowledg
corporate the r
actic quality”
ysics curriculu
porary science
ave been. In 
apeutic proces
ded to provi
s, teaching mo
and the 
 
risks and 
inherent 
mological 
nditioning 
ould have 
eoretical-
produced, 
ge as the 
results of 
, making 
um. 
e theories 
terms of 
ss for the 
de some 
odern and 

CURRICULAR INNOVATION AND DIDACTIC-PEDAGOGICAL RISK MANAGEMENT 
11 
contemporary physics is a risk-taking activity, one involving the teaching of 
content that is vastly different from traditional physics lessons. More than twenty 
years ago, John Gilbert (1992) made similar comments concerning the risk taken 
by English teachers when engaging in an education project involving remote 
sensing by satellites. His main conclusion was that the more successful teachers 
were the ones with a high tolerance for uncertainty. In other words, resilience is an 
essential condition. But what makes a teacher resilient? 
 
Some possible answers emerged from a study involving high school physics 
teachers in Brazil who implemented contemporary and modern physics courses. 
We studied how these teachers managed a situation of didactic innovation 
involving such contents. More specifically, the question we attempted to answer 
was: what is the perception of these teachers concerning the process of didactic 
innovation they participated in? 
 
The study involved a research group of five teachers who worked on the 
implementation of TLS about the physics of elementary particles and the concept 
of wave-particle duality in the years 2007 and 2008. The production of this TLS 
had been initiated by another group of teachers and researchers circa 2003–2006. 
Therefore, the group was the second generation of teachers, and was facing 
preexisting teaching-learning activities. This group’s profile is particularly relevant 
because it allows us to understand the conditions conducive to overcoming risks 
and understanding the mechanisms put in practice to increase tolerance of 
uncertainty. We wanted to understand how the available didactic material (in the 
form of didactic sequences) was appropriated and adapted by teachers, in order to 
put such materials to good use; and to understand the obstacles presented when 
teachers perceive new materials as foreign to their environment and their 
traditional practices. 
 
We chose a qualitative approach aligned with the aforementioned international 
productions in accordance to the theme of curricular innovation in science. Faced 
with the similarity between our research goals, we used, in broad strokes, the 
methodological outline adopted by the project STTIS (Pinto, 2004). 
 
Our data acquisition involved semi-structured interviews with the participating 
teachers. The interview protocol was based on five aspects: 1) reasons for 
participating in the project of innovation; 2) conception of modern physics 
education; 3) changes in professional practices; 4) obstacles and difficulties; 5) 
recommendations to colleagues in their profession. 
 
The teachers’ responses provided relevant information about their professional 
practices. A teacher stated that one “must be willing to do something different” 
(T4), later stressing that he “used to focus more on content and now I focus on 
other things” (T4). Another teacher stated that it is necessary to “have a different 
view [about] the possibility of developing a curriculum from another subject” (T5). 
We verified that the teachers had a predisposition to break away from traditional 
practices and attempt new strategies. However, we also noticed that this required 
them to expand on their formation. One of them recommended “continued study 
and discussion groups” (T1). Another stressed that “the teachers … must be aware 
they don’t need to follow the curriculum rigorously” (T2). He further added that he 

PIETROCOLA 
12 
felt prepared to “skip stages with no real loss” to arrive at modern physics. By the 
same token, another teacher stated that he started to “see the possibility of 
developing a curriculum from another subject differently” (T5). The latter 
statements express quite well the need for an initial and continued formation that 
grants the teacher a greater autonomy in his or her didactic choices. This also 
allows teachers to identify their own needs, as highlighted by one of those 
interviewed: “something I had to learn, had doubts, had to ask” (T5).  
 
We categorized the teachers’ responses as reflecting four types of perception 
about the process of implementing the modern physics contents they had 
participated in. 
I. The perception that there is a tradition in physics education 
The elements of the teachers’ responses that resulted in this category were 
associated with a meta-reflection on their practice that allowed them to i) perceive 
themselves as part of a didactic tradition; ii) to realize that the didactic borders of 
the classroom are not so strict; iii) to acquire the disposition to break away from 
traditional practices and allow new strategies; iv) to understand that there are many 
options for contents – beyond the traditional contents – to be taught; v) to gain the 
perception that in order to teach modern and contemporary physics, one must be 
ready for new education scenarios. 
II. The perception that something must change within the classroom 
This category groups elements associated with the perception of: i) changes in how 
a class is conducted; ii) both students labeled as “strong” and “weak” changing 
their posture toward their interest in physics, relativizing the evaluations of good 
and bad students; iii) which subjects of interest to the students could be addressed;  
iv) what education could have done in terms of student skills and competences. 
III. The perception that teachers must accept the risk of failure 
The elements that defined this category were linked to the perception of: i) their 
own ability to manage the risk; ii) to be prepared to teach in a different way; iii) to 
assume the risks of change; iv) acquired self-confidence. 
IV. The willingness to participate and find support in an innovative group 
This includes elements associated with a teacher’s need to: i) identify his/her own 
shortcomings; ii) be prepared to face problems; iii) be in a process of professional 
development; iv) have access to “experts” to deal with the complexities of a 
classroom. 

CURRICULAR INNOVATION AND DIDACTIC-PEDAGOGICAL RISK MANAGEMENT 
13 
CONCLUSION 
The inherent risks and difficulties in a curricular innovation may be understood in 
terms of relevance and adaptation of knowledge to the education system. In this 
perspective, the construction of school subjects could be understood as the result of 
a process of didactic transposition, which transforms, implements, and judges in 
order to finally stabilize school knowledge according to the formative objectives 
and conditioning factors of the classroom. The traditional education of a particular 
school subject is the result of stabilized school knowledge, making it resistant to 
change. Risks and difficulties would be the expected consequences of innovation, 
with the latter experienced as a disturbance in the established order of an 
apparently stable scenario.  
 
By analyzing the way that science courses are organized, it is not difficult to 
notice a prevalent logic of “school survivability”. Physics courses, like 
mathematics, chemistry, and biology, are the result of didactic transpositions 
initiated in a distant past that acquired certain stability as the result of classroom 
therapeutics. The proposition of change is therefore faced with tacit questions such 
as “Why innovate?”, “What to innovate?”, and “How to innovate?”, originated in 
the context of several years/decades of experience accumulated in the use of 
traditional activities. The context of this sedimentation of experiences has occurred 
in an education system, where the stage – the classrooms and didactic laboratories 
(teachers, students and their parents, among others), and the scripts – mainly 
education programs and didactic books, were mutually adjusted, with the education 
system as the background. 
 
A sequence of teaching and learning deemed as traditional should be sanctioned 
as such by educational experience. In other words, it would be a didactic structure 
validated by time, rather than research, because it would have survived the ups and 
downs of the educational system, successfully managing the risks and overcoming 
the didactic-pedagogical hurdles of that system. These structures contain hints that 
allow teachers to separate the essential from the incidental. In a certain manner, the 
education sequence composed of exemplary problems that pervades mechanics 
courses, with its problems of blocks, inclined planes and pulleys, is comprised of 
school knowledge devoid of didactic risks and dilemmas. A few experienced 
teachers could likely evaluate the reasons why such education sequences are 
widely used in classrooms around the world, and perhaps provide good insights 
into their merits and didactic quality, even if it comes from a very personal 
standpoint. 
 
A conclusion that seems to deserve emphasis in this study is that it is not enough 
for teachers to acknowledge and approve a proposal as innovative in itself, rather, 
they themselves must also translate and systematize it in terms of their own 
theoretical and practical experience in order to constitute a repertoire that gives 
them some confidence as a coauthor. The teachers in our study were capable of 
recognizing their own transformative role in the process of innovation. This could 
aid them in future innovations. 

PIETROCOLA 
14 
 
Another result of our research was the observation that teachers became aware 
of how, in a process of curriculum innovation, the relationships between teacher, 
student, and school knowledge become more evident. In other words, not only 
were school contents changed, but, in addition, the reciprocal responsibilities and 
expectations of teachers and students were transformed in the face of new 
knowledge. Guy Brousseau (1986) calls this set of mutual expectations a Didactic 
Contract. In the process of curricular content innovation, the teacher not only 
teaches a new subject, but also negotiates a new didactic contract. Therefore, the 
teacher must be willing to take certain risks. In this case, being able to manage 
such risks demands greater autonomy. In short, the underlying problem to be faced 
is how to foster greater autonomy among teachers, thereby enabling them to face 
the inevitable risks and dilemmas in any proposal for innovation.  
 
Generally speaking, the fundamental problem related to the issues raised in this 
text can be summarized with the following question: 
How may we validate curricular innovations and introduce new scientific 
contents and education strategies which break away from those established 
by time and tradition? 
Although it might seem simple, the above question is inserted in a fairly complex 
research scenario, since the intention is to create innovation in a much shorter time 
period compared to the one that stabilized school knowledge over time in 
traditional education. In other words, studies aimed at innovating programs and 
curricula, even partially, are launched with the delicate task of assuring that it is 
possible to teach and learn the new content proposed. In this context, the greater 
issue resides in the fact that we cannot wait decades for this innovation to be 
validated. 
 
We believe this problem must be considered from the perspective of managing 
the risks and dilemmas of innovations, as previously discussed. Since the teachers 
are the most sensitive element in the process of innovation and see the risk of 
failure as a constant threat, it would be ideal to develop knowledge that granted 
security to the teacher in order to help her or him face and manage the risks 
inherent in every innovation. Studying forms of risk management could be a good 
way of defining such a line of work. Supported by DBR, and with the collaboration 
of teachers in contexts of innovation, it is possible to produce didactic knowledge 
that ensures the educational changes necessary for facing the challenges of modern 
society.  
NOTES 
1  Science Teacher Training for Information Society, http://crecim.uab.es/websttis/index.html 
2  Project, materials, science, co-participation of five European universities. 
3  Project NINA, led by the University of Amsterdam, http://www.nieuwenatuurkunde.nl/  
4  http://cat.upatras.gr/  
5  Parâmetros Curriculares Nacionais para o Ensino Médio (National Curriculum Parameters for High 
School). 
 
 

CURRICULAR INNOVATION AND DIDACTIC-PEDAGOGICAL RISK MANAGEMENT 
15 
 
6 
Certainly, many applications of cinematography continue to be made, especially in the studies of 
projectiles fired by cannons and, more recently, in the perspective of rocket launching. These fields 
should not be considered as new theoretical products, but rather as developments of more precise 
models to deal with real life situations.  
7  Science Teacher Training in an Information Society, http://crecim.uab.es/websttis/index.html  
8  http://www.ucy.ac.cy/girep2008/ 
9  Book 1 of the event’s proceedings defines the following themes of their work: “Instructional 
methods, perspectives and innovations, laboratory-based practices, use of ICT in science education, 
and other methods like use of drama in science teaching …”. A search with Innovation as a key 
word resulted in 11 studies found. Similarly, Book 2 mentions the same topic, with about 25 works 
found.  
10  http://ensciencias.uab.es/congreso2009/cast/6_programa.html 
11  This group includes researchers from many institutes around the world. Details can be found at 
http://www.designbasedresearch.org/ 
REFERENCES 
Abd-El-Khalick, F., Bell, R. L., & Lederman, N. G. (1998). The nature of science and instructional 
practice: making the unnatural natural. Science Education, 82(4), 417–436. 
Abd-El-Khalick, F., Waters, M., & Le, A.-P. (2008). Representations of the nature of science in high 
school chemistry textbooks over the past four decades. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 
45(7), 835–855. 
Akerson, V. L., & Abd-El-Khalick, F. (2003). Teaching elements of nature of science: A yearlong case 
study of a fourth-grade teacher. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 40(10), 1025–1049. 
Akerson, V. L., Abd-El-Khalick, F., & Lederman, N. G. (2000). Influence of a reflective explicit 
activity-based approach on elementary teachers’ conceptions of nature of science. Journal of 
Research in Science Teaching, 37(4), 295–317. 
Alonso Sánchez, M., Gil, D., & Martinez Torregrosa, J. (1992a). Exames de física en la enseñanza por 
transmisión e en la enseñanza por investigation. Enseñanza de las ciencias, 10(2), 127–138. 
Alonso Sánchez, M., Gil, D., & Martínez Torregrosa, J. (1992b). Concepciones espontaneas de los 
profesores de ciencias sobre la evaluacion: obstaculos a superar y propuestas de replanteamiento. 
Enseñanza de las Ciencias, 5(2), 18–37. 
Alves-Filho, J. P. (2000). Atividades experimentais: Do método á prática construtivista. Doctoral 
Dissertation, UFSC, Florianópolis. 
Arriassecq, I., & Greca, I. (2007). Approaches to the teaching of special relativity theory in high school 
and university textbooks of Argentina. Science & Education. 
Arruda, S. M., & Villani, A. (1994). Mudança conceitual no ensino de ciencias. Caderno Catarinense 
de Ensino de Física, Florianópolis, 11(2), 88–99. 
Arsac, G., Chevallard, Y., & Martinad, J.-L. (1994). La transposition didactique à l´épreuve. Paris: La 
Pensée Sauvage Editions. 
Astolfi, J. (1997). Mots-clés de la didatique des sciences. Paris: De Boeck. 
Astolfi, J. P., & Develay, M. (1995). A didática das ciências (4th ed.). Campinas, SP: Papirus.  
Astolfi, J. P., Pterfalvi, B., & Vérin, A. (1991). Compétences méthodologiques en sciences 
experimentales. Paris: INRP. 
Azevedo, M. C. P. S., Andrade R., & Pietrocola, M. (2006). O ensino de física: Busca de parâmetros 
para análise de situações em sala de aula. In X EPEF – Encontro de Pesquisa e Ensino de Física (pp. 
1–10). Londrina, Brazil. 
Bachelard, G. (1996). A formação do espírito científico. Rio de Janeiro: Contraponto.  
Baily, C., & Finkelstein, N. D. (2010). Teaching and understanding of quantum interpretations in 
modern physics courses. Physical Review Special Topics – Physics Education Research, 6(1). 
Barojas, J. (1998). Cooperative networks in physics education. New York: American. 
 
 

PIETROCOLA 
16 
 
Batista, W. (2009). Física das radiações: uma proposta para o Ensino Médio. Master’s Thesis, 
Programa Inter-Unidades USP. 
Besson, U., Borghi, L., & Mascheretti, A. D. A. A. (2009). Three-dimensional approach and open 
source structure for the design and experimentation of TLS. International Journal of Science 
Education, 1–26.  
Borges, O. N., Borges, A. T., Gomes, A. E., & Terrazzan, E. A. (1997). Reformulação do currículo de 
física do ensino médio em Minas Gerais: Versão preliminar do currículo proposto. Atas do XII 
SNEF, January, 213–226. 
Brasil. (1999). Parâmetros Curriculares Nacionais para o Ensino Médio. Ministério da 
Educação/Secretaria da Educação Média e Tecnológica, Brasília. 
Brasil. (2002). PCN+ Ensino Médio: Orientações Educacionais Complementares aos Parâmetros 
Curriculares Nacionais para o Ensino Médio. Ciências da natureza, Matemática e suas tecnologias. 
Ministério da Educação/Secretariada Educação Média e Tecnológica, Brasília. 
Brockington, G. (2005). A realidade escondida: A dualidade onda-partícula para estudantes do Ensino 
Médio. Master’s Thesis, IFUSP/FEUSP, São Paulo. 
Brockington, G., & Pietrocola, M. (2005). O ensino de física moderna necessita ser real? In Anais do 
XVI SNEF – Simpósio Nacional de Ensino de Física, Rio de Janeiro.  
Brockington, G., & Pietrocola, M. (2006). Serão as regras da transposição didática aplicáveis aos 
conceitos de física moderna? Investigações em Ensino de Ciências (Online), 10(3), 1–17. 
Brockington, G., Siqueira, M., & Pietrocola, M. (2007). Marcadores-estruturantes: A proposta de um 
“guia” para a elaboração de cursos de FMC para o E.M. In V Encontro Nacional Pesquisa em 
Educação em Ciências, ABRAPEC, Florianópolis. 
Brousseau, G. (1986). Fondements et méthodes de la didactique des mathématiques. Recherches en 
Didactique des Mathématiques, 7(2). 
Bush, R., & Gage, N. L. (1968). Center for research and development in teaching. Journal of Research 
and Development in Education, 1(4), 85–105. 
Caillot, M. (1996). La théorie de la transposition didactique est-elle transposable? In C. Raisky & M. 
Caillot (Eds.), Au-delà des didactiques, le didactique: Débats autour de concepts fédérateurs. 
Brussels: De Boeck & Larcier S. A. 
Carvalho, A. M. P., Garrido, E., & Castro, R. S. (1995). El papel de las actividades en la instrucción del 
conocimiento en classe. Investigación en la Escuela, 25, 61–70. 
Cavalcante, M. A. (1999). O ensino de uma NOVA FÍSICA e o exercício da cidadania. Revista 
Brasileira de Ensino de Física, 21(4), 550–551. 
Chevallard, Y. (1991). La transposicion didactica: Del saber sabio al saber enseñado (1st ed.). 
Argentina: La Pensée Sauvage. 
Cohen, L., & Manion, L. (1980). Research methods in education. London: Croom Helm. 
Costa, I., & Santos, M. (1999). A física moderna e contemporânea na sala de aula da escola média. In 
Anais do XIII Simpósio Nacional de Ensino de Física, Brasília. 
Couso, D., & Pinto, R. (2009). Analisis del contenido del discurso. Enseñanza de las Ciencias, 27(1), 
5–18. 
Cuppari, A., Rinaudo, G., Robutti, O., & Violino, P. (1997). Gradual introduction of some aspects of 
quantum mechanics in a high school curriculum. Physics Education, 32(5), 302–308. 
Custodio, J. F. (2007). Explicando explicações na educação científica: Domínio Cognitivo, Status 
afetivo e Sentimento de Entendimento. Thesis (Doctorate in Science and Technology Education), 
Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina. 
Custódio, J. F., Pietrocola, M., & Cruz, F. F. S. (2005). Conflitos cognitivos-afetivos: A condição de 
insatisfação com as concepções prévias dos alunos e a exploração de novas idéias. In XVI Simpósio 
Nacional de Ensino de Física. Rio de Janeiro: Sociedade Brasileira de Física.  
Darsie, M. M. P. (1998). A reflexão distanciada na construção dos conhecimentos profissionais do 
professor em curso de formação inicial. Doctoral Dissertation, São Paulo: FEUSP. 
 
 

CURRICULAR INNOVATION AND DIDACTIC-PEDAGOGICAL RISK MANAGEMENT 
17 
 
Davis, K. (2002). Change is hard: What science teachers are telling us about reform and teacher learning 
of innovative practices. Science Education, 87(1), 3–30. 
de Amborisis, A. (2008). Introducing new approaches in the curriculum: What do teachers need to make 
it possible? In GIREP, Conference, Phyprus. 
Delizoicov, D., & Angotti, J. A. (2001). Metodologia do ensino de ciências. Editora Cortez. 
Design-Based Research Collective, The. (2003). Design-based research: An emerging paradigm for 
educational inquiry. Educational Researcher, 32(5), 1–5. 
Echeverría, P., & Pozo, J. I. (1998). Teorías e ideas previas sobre la cognición. In M. D. Valiña & M. J. 
Blanco (Eds.), I jornadas de psicología del pensamiento (pp. 339–350). Servicio de Publicaciones 
de la Universidad de Santiago de Compostela. 
Emter, E. (1994). Literatur und Quantentheorie. Die Rezeption der modernen Physik in Schriften zur 
Literatur und Philosophie deutschsprachiger Autoren (1925–1970). Berlin: Walter de Gruyter & Co.  
Fischler, H., & Lichtfeldt, M. (1991). Learning quantum mechanics. Research in physics learning, 
theoretical issues and empirical studies. In Proceedings of the International Workshop, Bremen. 
Fischler, H., & Lichtfeldt, M. (1992). Modern physics and students’ conceptions. Journal of Science 
Education, 14(2), 181–190. 
Forato, T. C. M., & Pietrocola, M. (2005). O arrastamento parcial do éter de Fresnel como explicação 
científica. In R. Nardi & O. Borges (Eds.), Atas do V Encontro Nacional Pesquisa em Educação em 
Ciências, ABRAPEC, Bauru. CD-ROM. 
Fourez, G. (1994). Alfabetización científica y tecnológica. Buenos Aires: Ediciones Colihue. (Coleccion 
Nuevos Caminos). 
Fourez, G. (2003). Crise no ensino de Ciências? (Crisis in science teaching?). Investigações em Ensino 
de Ciências. 
Freire Jr., O., Carvalho Neto, R. A. de, Rocha, J. F. M., Vasconcelos, M. J. L., Socorro, M., & Anjos, E. 
L. (1995). Introducing quantum physics in high school. In Proceedings of Third International 
History, Philosophy and Science Teaching Conference (Vol. 1, pp. 412–419), Minneapolis.  
Fullan, M. (1982). The meaning of educational change. London: Cassel.  
Fullan, M. (2006). Leading professional learning. School Administrator, 63(10), 10. 
Gauch, H. (2009). Responses and clarifications regarding science and worldviews. Science & 
Education, 18(6), 905–927. 
Gil, D. P., & Solbes, J. (1993). The introduction of modern physics: Overcoming a deformed vision of 
science. International Journal of Science Education, 15(3), 255–260. 
Gil, D. P., Senent, F., & Solbes, J. (1987). La introducción a la física moderna: Un ejemplo 
paradigmático de cambio conceptual. Enseñanza de las Ciencias, Extra Volume, 189–195. 
Gilbert, J. (1992). Risk-taking and teachers’ professional development: The case of Satellite Remote 
Sensing in science education. Research in Science Education, 22, 157–162. 
Greca, I., & Freire Jr., O. (2004). Does an emphasis on the concept of quantum states enhance students 
understanding of quantum mechanics? Science & Education, 9(2). 
Greca, I., & Moreira, M. (2001). Uma revisão da literatura sobre estudos relativos ao ensino da 
mecânica quântica introdutória. Investigações em Ensino de Ciência, 6(1). 
Griffin, J. (1988). CAL innovation as viewed by purchasers of computer software in high schools. 
Journal of Computer Assisted Learning. 
 Gurgel, I. (2004). Modelos e explicações: A construção da realidade e suas bases emocionais. São 
Paulo: Instituto de Física. 
Gurgel, I., & Pietrocola, M. (2004). A imaginação científica: Aspectos da construção do conhecimento 
na perspectiva da criação subjetiva. In Atas do IX Encontro Nacional de Pesquisa em Ensino de 
Física, Jaboticatubas. 
Gurgel, I., & Pietrocola, M. (2005). O papel dos modelos no entendimento dos alunos. In Atas do V 
Encontro Nacional de Pesquisa em Educação em Ciências, Bauru. 
 
 

PIETROCOLA 
18 
 
Henze, I., van Driel, J. H., & Verloop, N. (2007). Science teachers’ knowledge about teaching models 
and modelling in the context of a new syllabus on public understanding of science. Research in 
Science Education, 37(2), 99–122. http://doi.org/10.1007/s11165-006-9017-6 
Hodson, D. (1992). Assessment of practical work: Some considerations in philosophy of science. 
Science and Education, 1(2), 115–144. 
Hubber, P. (2003). An instructional model for a radical conceptual change towards quantum mechanics 
concepts. Science Education, 87(2), 257–280. 
Hubber, P. (2006). Year 12 students’ mental models of the nature of light. Research in Science 
Education, 36(4), 419–439. 
Johansson, K., & Nilsson, C. (1999). Stockholm Science Laboratory for schools: A complement to the 
traditional education system. Physics Education, 34(6), 345–350. 
Lawal, I., Siqueira, M., Pietrocola, M., & Ricardo, E. (2009). Desenvolvimento profissional durante a 
implementação de inovações curriculares por professores do ensino secundário. In VIII Congreso 
Enseñanza de las Ciencias (pp. 2569–2572). Barcelona: Institut de Ciències del’Educació de la 
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona. 
Lawrence, I. (1996). Quantum physics in school. Physics Education, 31(5), 278–286. 
Levrini, O., & diSessa, A. A. (2008). How students learn from multiple contexts and definitions: Proper 
time as a coordination class. Phys. Rev. ST Phys. Educ. Res., 4(1), 1–18. 
Lijnse, P., & Klaassen, K. (2004). Didactical structures as an outcome of research on teaching-learning 
sequences? International Journal of Science Education, 26(5), 537–554. 
Lising, L., & Elby, A. (2005). The impact of epistemology on learning: A case study from introductory 
physics. American Journal of Physics, 73(4), 372–382. 
Mansour, N. (2010). Impact of the Knowledge and Beliefs of Egyptian Science Teachers in Integrating 
a STS Based Curriculum: A Sociocultural Perspective. Journal of Science Teacher Education, 21(5), 
513–534. 
Marandino, M. (2004). Transposição ou recontextualização? Sobre a produção de saberes na educação 
em museus de ciência. Revista Brasileira de Educação, 26. 
Marandino, M., & Mortensen, M. (2010). Museographic transposition: Accomplishments and 
applications. In III International Conference on the Anthropological Theory of the Didactic, Saint 
Hilari Sacalm (Vol. 1, p. 323–332). Barcelona: Ingenio Mathematica. 
Martins, A. F. P. (2007). História e filosofia da ciência no ensino: Há muitas pedras nesse caminho …. 
Caderno Brasileiro de Ensino de Física, 24, 112–131. 
Matthews, M. (1997). Introductory comments on philosophy and constructivism in science education. 
Science & Education, 6(1), 5–14. 
McIntyre, D., & Brown, S. (1979). Science teachers’ implementation of two intended innovations. 
Scottish Educational Review, 11(1), 42–57. 
McKagan, S., Perkins, K., & Wieman, C. (2008). Why We Should Teach the Bohr Model and How to 
Teach it Effectively. Physical Review Special Topics – Physics Education Research, 4(1). 
Michelini, M. (2000). The contribution of institutions to the improvement of the teaching of physics. 
Support of scientific culture by means of structures and curricula integrating research in teaching. 
Oral communication presented at the XVIII Conferência Internacional do “Groupe Internationale de 
Rechérche sur l´Enseignement de la Physique (GIREP)”, Barcelona. 
Müller, R., & Wiesner, H. (2002). Teaching quantum mechanics on an introductory level. American 
Journal of Physics, 70(3), 200–209. 
Niaz, M. (2009). Progressive transitions in chemistry teachers’ understanding of nature of science based 
on historical controversies. Science & Education, 18(1), 43–65. 
Ofugi, C. D. (2001). A inserção da teoria da relatividade no ensino médio. Dissertation (Master’s in 
Education), Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina. 
Ogborn, J. (2002). Ownership and transformation: teachers using curriculum innovations. Physics 
Education, 37(2), 142–146. 
Ogborn, J. (2005). Introducing relativity: Less may be more. Physics Education, 40(3), 213–222. 
 
 

CURRICULAR INNOVATION AND DIDACTIC-PEDAGOGICAL RISK MANAGEMENT 
19 
 
Orange, C. (1990). Didactique de l’informatique et pratiques sociales de référence. Revue de l’EPI, 60. 
Retrieved from: http://www.epi.asso.fr/revue/60/b60p151.htm (accessed 06/07/2005). 
Ostermann, F., & Cavalcanti, C. J. H. (1999). Física moderna e contemporânea no ensino médio: 
elaboração de material didático, em forma de pôster, sobre partículas elementares e interações 
fundamentais. Caderno Catarinense de Ensino de Física, 16(3), 267–286. 
Ostermann, F., & Moreira, M. A. (1998). Tópicos de física contemporânea na escola média brasileira: 
Um estudo com a técnica Delphi. In VI Encontro de Pesquisa em Ensino de Física, UFSC, 
Florianópolis. 
Ostermann, F., & Moreira, M. A. (2000). Uma revisão bibliográfica sobre a área de pesquisa física 
moderna e contemporânea no ensino médio. Investigações em Ensino de Ciências, 5(1). 
Ostermann, F., & Pureur, P. (2005). Supercondutividade (1st ed.). São Paulo: Livraria da Física. 
Pagliarini, C. R. (2007). A história e filosofia da ciência em livros didáticos de física. Master’s Thesis, 
Instituto de Física, Universidade de São Paulo  
Park, D-Y., & Lee, Y-J. (2009). Different conceptions of the nature of science among preservice 
elementary teachers of two countries. Journal of Elementary Science Education, 21(2), 1–14. 
Paulo, I. (1997). Elementos para uma proposta de inserção de tópicos de física moderna. Dissertation 
(Master’s in Nursing), IE, Universidade Federal de Mato Grosso. 
Peduzzi, L. O. Q. (1998). As concepções espontâneas, a resolução de problemas e a história e filosofia 
da ciência em um curso de mecânica. Doctoral Dissertation, UFSC/CED, Florianópolis. 
Pereira, O. S. (1997). Visão de estudantes sobre a inserção de Física Moderna e contemporânea no 2° 
grau. In XII Simpósio Nacional de Ensino de Física, Atas (pp. 551–559). Belo Horizonte. 
Perrenoud, P. (2002). A prática reflexiva no ofício de professor: Profissionalização e razão pedagógica. 
(Transl. C. Schilling). Porto Alegre: Artmed Editora. 
Pessoa Jr., O. (Ed.). (2000). Fundamentos da física 1 – Simpósio David Bohm. São Paulo: Editora 
Livraria da Física. 
Piassi, L. P., & Pietrocola, M. (2005). Ficção científica no ensino de física: Utilizando um romance para 
desenvolver conceitos. In XVI Simpósio Nacional de Ensino de Física, Atas (electronic, pp. 1–8). 
Rio de Janeiro. 
Piers, M. (2008). New physics curricula in the Netherlands. In GIREP, Conference. Phyprus. 
Pietrocola, M. (2003). A história e a epistemologia no ensino das ciências: Dos processos aos modelos 
de realidade na educação científica. In A ciência em perspectiva. MAST: SBHC. 
Pietrocola, M. (2004). Curiosidade e imaginação. In A. M. P. Carvalho (Ed.), Ensino de ciências: 
Unindo a pesquisa e a prática. São Paulo: Thomson. 
Pietrocola, M. (2005). Modern physics in Brazilian high schools. In International Conference on 
Physics Education. Nova Delhi: ICPE.  
Pietrocola, M. (2006). Understanding the world through physical knowledge. In Proceedings 
International Conference on Physics Education (ICPE 2007, 2006), Tokyo.  
Pietrocola, M. (2008). Mathematics as structural language of physical thought. In M. Vicentini & E. 
Sassi (Eds.), Connecting research in physics education with teacher education (Vol. 2, I.C.P.E. 
Book). 
Pietrocola, M., & Romero, T. R. (2005). Modelos e explicações: A construção da realidade e suas bases 
emocionais. In V ENPEC, Bauru. 
Pietrocola, M., & Zylbersztajn, A. (1999). The use of the Principle of Relativity in the interpretation of 
phenomena by undergraduate physics students. International Journal of Science Education, 21(3), 
261–276.  
Pietrocola, M., Ricardo, E., & Forato, T. (n.d.). History, didactics and transformation of scientific 
content: Epistemological surveillance and commitments established by science education. In C. N. 
El-Hani, E. F. Mortimer, & M. R. Otero (Eds.), Science education research in South and Latin 
America (Vol. 1, pp. 1–21). New York.  
Pinto, R. (2002). Introduction to the Science Teacher Training in an Information Society (STTIS) 
project. International Journal of Science Education, 24(3), 227–234. 
 
 

PIETROCOLA 
20 
 
Pinto, R. (2005). Introducing curriculum innovations in science: Identifying teachers' transformations 
and the design of related teacher education. Science Education, 89(1), 1–12. 
Pinto, A. C., & Zanetic, J. (1999). É possível levar a Física Quântica para o ensino médio? Caderno 
Catarinense de Ensino de Física, 16(1), 7–34. 
Ricardo, E., Pinsson Slongo, I., & Pietrocola, M. (2003). A perturbação do contrato didático e o 
gerenciamento dos paradoxos. Investigações em Ensino de Ciências, Porto Alegre. 
Santos, W., Luiz, A., & de Carvalho, C. (2009). A proposal to introduce a topic of contemporary 
physics into high-school teaching. Physics Education, 44(5), 511–516.  
São Paulo. (2008). Proposta curricular do Estado de São Paulo. Ciências da natureza, Matemática e 
suas tecnologias. Secretaria de Educação, São Paulo. 
Schwartz, R., & Lederman, N. (2008). What scientists say: Scientists’ views of nature of science and 
relation to science context. International Journal of Science Education, 30(6), 727–771. 
Siqueira, M. R. (2007). Do visível ao indivisível: uma proposta de ensino de Física de Partículas para a 
Educação Básica. Master’s Thesis, IFUSP/FEUSP, São Paulo. 
Siqueira, M., & Pietrocola, M. (2005). Revisando materiais em ensino médio sobre o tema física de 
partículas elementares. In V ENPEC – Encontro Nacional de Pesquisa em Ensino em Ciências, 
Bauru. 
Siqueira, M., & Pietrocola, M. (2006). A transposição didática aplicada a teoria contemporânea: A física 
de partículas elementares no ensino médio. In X Encontro de Pesquisa em Ensino de Física, 
Londrina, Brazil.  
Silva, C. C., & Pietrocola, M. (2003). O papel estruturante da matemática na teoria eletromagnética: Um 
estudo histórico e suas implicações didáticas. In III Encontro de Pesquisa em Ensino de Ciências, 
ABRAPEC, Bauru.  
Stannard, R. (1990). Modern physics for the young. Physics Education, 25(3), 133. 
Teixeira, E. S., Greca, I. M., & Freire, O. (2009). The history and philosophy of science in physics 
teaching: a research synthesis of didactic interventions. Science and Education, 1–26. 
Terrazzan, E. (1992). A inserção da física moderna e contemporânea no ensino de física na escola de 2º 
grau. Caderno Catarinense de Ensino de Física, 9(3), 209–214. 
Terrazzan, E. (1994). Perspectivas para a inserção da física moderna na escola média. Doctoral 
Dissertation in Education, Faculdade de Educação, Universidade de São Paulo.  
Terrisse, A. (2001). La référence em question. In A. Terrise, Didactique des disciplines: Les références 
au savoir. Brussels: De Boeck & Larcier S. A. 
Tiberghien, A., Jossem, E. L., & Barojas, J. (1998). Connecting research in physics education with 
teacher education. In I.C.P.E. Book. 
Tiberghien, A., Vince, J., & Gaidioz, P. (2009). Design-based research: Case of a teaching sequence on 
mechanics. International Journal of Science Education, 31(17), 2275–2314.  
Toulmin, S. (1972). Human understanding. Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
Valadares, E., & Moreira, A. M. (1998). Ensinando física moderna no segundo grau: efeito fotoelétrico., 
laser e emissão de corpo negro. Caderno Catarinense de Ensino de Física, 15(2), 121–135. 
van Driel, J., Bulte, A., & Verloop, N. (2005). The conceptions of chemistry teachers about teaching 
and learning in the context of a curriculum innovation. International Journal of Science Education, 
27(3), 303–322. 
Viennot, L., Chauvet, F. O., Colin, P., & Rebmann, G. R. (2005). Designing strategies and tools for 
teacher training: The role of critical details, examples in optics. Science Education, 89(1), 13–27.  
Villani, A., & Arruda, S. (1998). Special theory of relativity, conceptual change and history of science. 
Science & Education, 7(1), 85–100. 
Wehrli, B. (2009). Technology as a fence and a bridge. Horace, 25(1), 1–4. 
Wilson, B. (1992). Particle physics at A-level – A teacher’s viewpoint. Physics Education, 27(2), 64–
65. 
Zanetic, J. (1989). Física também é cultura. Doctoral Dissertation, FEUSP, São Paulo. 
 
 

CURRICULAR INNOVATION AND DIDACTIC-PEDAGOGICAL RISK MANAGEMENT 
21 
 
Zhang, J. (2009). Technology-supported learning innovation in cultural contexts. Educational 
Technology Research and Development, 58(2), 229–243. 
Zylbersztajn, A. (1998). Resolução de problemas, uma perspectiva Kuhniana. In Atas eletrõnicas do VI 
Encontro de Pesquisa em Ensino de Física, Florianópolis. 
 
Maurício Pietrocola 
Department of Teaching Methodology and Comparative Education 
School of Education of the University of São Paulo 
São Paulo-SP, Brazil 
 
 

 
M. Pietrocola & I. Gurgel (Eds.), Crossing the Border of the Traditional Science Curriculum, 23–43. 
© 2017 Sense Publishers. All rights reserved. 
MAXWELL SIQUEIRA 
 2. ELEMENTARY PARTICLE PHYSICS FOR  
HIGH SCHOOLS 
INTRODUCTION 
Over the last decades, society has undergone many political, cultural, scientific, 
and economic changes, thereby becoming more dynamic and globalized. The 
consequences of these changes may be seen in the fast and efficient ways in which 
facts, products, information, and news arrive at almost each and every part of the 
planet. These processes have also made it easier for a majority of the population to 
have access to technological devices.  
 
Nowadays, one cannot deny that people’s daily lives have been modified by 
technological advances, as a result of the scientific developments which have been 
taking place over the last decades. Smart phones and tablets, touch-screen displays, 
video game systems which need no controllers, and an array of other devices which 
were previously only seen in science fiction movies have become commonplace. 
However, when one looks at schools as a formal place for education, a place 
where one expects that humankind’s accumulated knowledge will be passed on to 
new generations, one notices that few changes have taken place, especially 
regarding science curricula. In fact, science at school – and particularly physics – 
tends to be based on theories which were created before the end of the 19th 
century, and to ignore the last century or so of scientific development, a period 
which has contributed greatly to today’s technologies. As a consequence, there is 
an increasing need to adapt and update school science curricula, particularly in the 
interest of information access (Terrazzan, 2007).  
The teaching-learning process in the sciences holds multiple layers, from the 
tendencies and capacities of teachers and students, to the habits and traditions of 
the institutions in which science is taught, from the constantly-evolving field of 
science to the multiple forms of knowledge it contains. Thus, one needs to reflect 
on the multiple factors involved in changing school science curricula, especially 
physics, in order to effectively update them. A curriculum which promotes more 
efficient learning from students, one which includes discussions about new 
contents and technologies, is suitable for our time and societal demands. Such a 
curriculum would provide a scientific and technological education as a useful part 
of the culture of all citizens. Denying that change is creating a gap in students’ 
education, which results in a pedagogical practice that is disconnected and 
decontextualized from their realities. 
Adding modern and contemporary physics (MCP) is one possible path toward a 
more effective scientific education for youngsters, as well as for incorporating 

SIQUEIRA 
24 
subjects that interest them, especially those comprising new technologies. 
Arguments for the addition of MCP in high schools have built up in the literature 
regarding science teaching; these aim toward innovations and updates to the 
physics curriculum. There is a consensus – both at the international level (Gil et al., 
1987; Stannard, 1990; Kalmus, 1992; Swinbak, 1992), and at the national level 
(Terrazzan, 1992, 1994; Moreira & Valadares, 1998; Pinto & Zanetic, 1999; 
Ostermann & Moreira, 2000, 2001; Brockington, 2005; Siqueira, 2006, 2012) – 
that it is necessary and possible to take these new contents to classrooms.  
 
A representative topic in MCP which effectively includes those aspects 
necessary to the full education of 21st-century students, one which incorporates 
contemporary contents and proposals and integrates the interests and conditional 
aspects of the learning system, may be found in the teaching of Elementary Particle 
Physics to high school students.  
 
In the following sections, we will discuss the contributions which may be made 
by adding Elementary Particle Physics to high school classes, with reference to 
activities which are already part of the physics curricula in some Brazilian schools. 
Finally, we will discuss the main obstacles and challenges which must be 
overcome in order to do so. 
THE CONTRIBUTIONS OF ELEMENTARY PARTICLE PHYSICS 
TO HIGH SCHOOL EDUCATION 
It is not hard to see that the physics which is taught nowadays does not suit its 
time. There is a discrepancy between the teaching of that science and today’s 
society. We teach physics knowledge from centuries ago, but we live in a modern 
world, surrounded by advanced technologies. Scientific developments have led to 
an ongoing revolution in the objects which surround us. Why not discuss the 
scientific concepts which contribute to that change? Elementary Particle Physics 
(EPP) is a topic that may be utilized to make that discussion possible.  
 
Discussing EPP enables access to a world which is largely unexplored in most 
schools, the microscopic world. It enables the acquisition of higher knowledge 
about the structure of matter, and hence, of the world around us. Besides that, it is 
easy to see that this kind of content inspires great fascination in youngsters. What 
scientist has never been asked what quarks are? How do particle accelerators 
work? Questions such as these have always intrigued – and will always intrigue –
students who, more often than not, receive information from the media (scientific 
magazines and books, newspapers, documentaries, the Internet, and other forms of 
media communication). 
This area of physics is greatly important to modern scientific inquiry as it 
addresses problems which arise from the boundaries of science. The desire to know 
the origin of the universe and how it has evolved has led scientists to question 
matter and energy and their methods of transformation. Investments have been 
made since the beginning of the 20th century in the search to overcome the limits 
of knowledge, and, in particular, in the efforts to detect and understand elementary 
particles. The vast amounts of funds employed serve as an indication of the appeal 

ELEMENTARY PARTICLE PHYSICS FOR HIGH SCHOOLS 
25 
the research in this area has to society in general. In that regard, one needs only to 
recall the biggest enterprise in mankind’s history – the Large Hadron Collider 
(LHC), located at CERN.1 The LHC is a singular enterprise case, as most people 
do not immediately understand why so much money was invested to build a 
machine that produces no tangible assets, such as energy, industrial products, etc. 
We believe that teaching more-contemporary physics in schools may lead students 
to understand why so many investments, financial and personal, are made to 
develop laboratory equipment such as the LHC. 
Besides that, it is important to discuss the experiments which are conducted at 
the LHC, so that some of the information broadcast by the communication media 
can be demystified, such as the rumors of the possibility of the Earth being 
destroyed by a black hole created in the LHC. In many headlines, the collider was 
called a doomsday machine.2 
Another important aspect of EPP in schools relates to the fact that the entities 
which are present in elementary particles have counterintuitive characteristics, such 
as reduced mass, quantum energy, virtual particles, etc. – singular aspects that 
define distinct behaviors of objects in the everyday world. For example, one can 
examine the existing mass differences of the quarks which compose protons when 
they are turned on (938 MeV/c2) and when they are “separated” (approximately 12 
MeV/c2). Discussion of such cases contributes to a break with the dogma of 
everyday notions, and motivates engagement with counterintuitive ideas, even 
those which outwit us. Learning about such content in the classroom can bring 
students access to new worlds and ways of thinking. Conversely, discovering that 
those contents cannot be found in classrooms often frustrates students. Students are 
richly served when being stimulated to further understand complex and 
confounding EPP entities, or other concepts which cannot be found in their daily 
lives. 
When they access this new microscopic world, students gain a better 
understanding of the structure of matter, as well as that of new technologies, and so 
may further comprehend some phenomena which are linked to the structures of 
matter and technologies. In this way, EPP gives students a new way to read the 
world around them; that is, a fresh way to look at nature. Furthermore, it distances 
them from the classical atomic models which are presented in classes, replacing 
them with one that is more suitable to their time, the Standard Model, which suits 
contemporary science. 
Before further exploring the extensive educational potential of Elementary 
Particle Physics, it is relevant to question the contents of current curricula. Despite 
our now being in the 21st century, little has been changed since the 1950s in the 
atomic model as shown and taught in schools. It is very common to find models in 
textbooks that only describe three particles (protons, electrons, and neutrons, which 
constitute a fraction of the full set of elementary particles). The structure of matter, 
as described by the atomic model, is part of chemistry, physics, and even biology 
curricula in schools. However, such content is addressed from a historical 
perspective, and therefore ends up failing to reveal how rich the most current 

SIQUEIRA 
26 
research is. Because of this approach, students end up finishing high school 
believing there are only three elementary particles (electrons, protons, and 
neutrons) and only knowing two types of forces (gravitational and 
electromagnetic), all as classically-described. EPP would allow teachers to present 
a more updated description of the atom, thus contributing to a learning that is more 
coherent with contemporary science; showing how developed science is, where it 
is going, and how it works; and pointing out the technological advances in those 
processes.  
As a contemporary science, EPP may contribute to a more adequate, 
comprehensive view of scientific work by showing students how dynamic science 
is, how it is developed, what contributions various scientists made in order to 
advance a concept, and how experimenting has become both crucial and harder to 
accomplish. In the latter case, investments from several countries and scientists are 
needed to build equipment and laboratories (as in the LHC), develop theories and 
models, and validate them through the analysis of data from large experiments. 
Success involves all parties working together towards scientific development. In 
fact, particle physics is a very dynamic and collaborative science, always searching 
for new models to describe the innermost nature of matter. 
Models are important elements in the daily lives of physicists. Whether it is by 
modeling situations or aspects of matter, models are part of the all physics 
knowledge. As Brockington (2005) points out, “models play an indispensable role 
in building scientific knowledge, and are the essence of the scientific process, 
through which one can conceptually apprehend reality” (p. 161). However, in spite 
of playing an important role in scientific theories, the process through which 
science builds and validates its models is hardly discussed in classrooms, let alone 
in textbooks. How can we wish to teach science if we do not try to discuss 
scientific models, one of the main scientific tools used to understand nature? The 
study of EPP facilitates the discussion of models, especially the Standard Model, to 
describe matter. It is also useful in clarifying the process through which science 
validates its theories, as well as that by which current science works in its attempts 
to describe nature. 
From a more philosophical approach, EPP proposes questions which have not 
always permeated the development of human thought. That is so because, “the 
track of the history of ideas on the constitution of matter is an important part of 
mankind’s cultural history, and a part of human thought history itself” (Salmeron, 
2005, p. 43). In learning about this subject, students will naturally confront 
questions such as, “What is the universe made of?” “What is its origin?” “How has 
it come to be what it is today?” “What will be its end?” “Is the universe contracting 
or expanding?” “Will people be able to get to Mars someday?” “Is there life 
outside the Earth?” Such questions have made and still make human beings think 
about how the universe works, and impel us to try to unveil its origins and 
evolution. They serve as motivation for studying elementary particles and even 
generate a greater interest in science (particularly physics) on the parts of young 
people. Besides that, studying the elementary particles that are related to 

ELEMENTARY PARTICLE PHYSICS FOR HIGH SCHOOLS 
27 
cosmology may contribute to the eradication of certain absurd beliefs and 
superstitions which are very common among youngsters (Alvarenga, 2000).  
There are also some intrinsic values which elementary particles may contribute 
to a high school education. One may, for example, deal with meanings that are 
attributed to some words, like “seeing”, in physics terms. In particle physics, the 
studied objects are not directly “seen”, as they would be in the case of a person or a 
book, but rather in an indirect way, through the scattering of particles. Thus, 
questions, such as “Do scientists really see a particle?” and “How can they see it?”, 
may lead to epistemological discussions which are very rich for science teaching as 
well as useful in contributing to an accurate view of scientific work. The same 
value can be given to the word “elementary”, which brings to the surface profound 
questions such as: “Does elementary mean stable?” “Is the elementary as 
immutable as the Greeks thought?” 
From this perspective, it is important to also discuss the shifts in meaning of the 
words “color” and “taste”, by showing that these concepts are not defined by their 
common meanings, but rather by that which is figuratively attributed to them. 
Thus, one may show that the meaning of these words is not that which is linked to 
our daily lives, and that the meaning of words is linked to the context in which they 
are inserted. This revelation leads to questions about aspects of language as related 
to the human being (Moreira, 1989).  
All arguments mentioned so far enumerate the contributions this area may bring 
to science teaching, as well as to the attempt to bring a less distorted view of 
science to students. Classroom science will benefit greatly from fundamental 
concept discussions and the inclusion of discoveries such as the positron (the 
antiparticle of the electron), which was first theoretically proposed, and then, years 
later, detected. Such an approach breaks with the traditional scientific method so 
widespread in physics teaching; yet just such a break is necessary for progress in 
science and society. The discovery of that particle, the positron, for example, 
consequently led to the need for a new and better way to understand the concept of 
the vacuum, so that it could be adequately interpreted as per the new theory; that is, 
a paradigm shift took place, in the Kuhnian sense (Kuhn, 2003). 
Aside from the inherent scientific aspects (along with the above-mentioned 
philosophical attributes), another possible area of inquiry that may arise in teaching 
EPP regards its historical and cultural aspects that may link the functioning of 
scientific activity and the dynamics of science to broader political and socio-
cultural issues. Here, we may mention parts of the History of Physics in Brazil as 
examples, such as the contributions from Brazilian physicist César Lattes in the 
discovery and detection of one of the particles in the atomic nucleus, the pi meson. 
Such an approach enables students to construct a less distorted and more adequate 
perspective on scientific activity and the work of scientists, both in the universal 
advancement of science concepts and in a given country’s scientific and 
technological development. 
Despite all the arguments mentioned above, including the great fascination 
particle physics may inspire in students, there are still few proposals which take 

SIQUEIRA 
28 
EPP into account for actual use in classrooms. This indicates the need to invest in 
possibilities which may, in fact, take that knowledge to high school levels. With 
such investment, proposals which may be taken to the classroom and which may 
supply data to outline more solid paths can be explored, not only in regards to 
including particle physics in the curricula, but also modern and contemporary 
physics. Either subject will lead students to acquire new knowledge over the course 
of attempts to get them interested in science; even if they do not follow science 
careers or become science teachers, they will have the chance to enjoy that 
knowledge area that has contributed so much to human development. 
To that end, a proposal for teaching elementary particles3 was initially prepared 
in 2004, and has been applied, and restructured in the years since. Nowadays, part 
of that proposal is used in São Paulo’s state physics curriculum. 
We will next mention some activities, tested in real classroom environments, 
which deal with the subject of elementary particles. 
TRANSFORMING KNOWLEDGE TO THE CLASSROOM: THE DIDACTIC 
TRANSPOSITION THEORY 
Knowledge that reaches the classroom goes through a transformation process, 
always taking into consideration the learning of this knowledge by the students. 
However, this adaptation of knowledge to the classroom is not merely a 
simplification of knowledge, because several factors that influence learning are 
taken into consideration, as, for example, the sequencing of learning that, in most 
cases, is anachronistic (although it can nonetheless contribute to a better 
understanding of knowledge). 
The Theory of Didactic Transposition allows us to look at these transformations, 
because it assumes the existence of a process in which “a content of knowledge” – 
having been designated as knowledge for teaching – suffers, from there, a set of 
adaptive transformations that takes place in actually being taught. In this model, 
the work that transforms an object of knowledge into a teaching object is known as 
didactic transposition (Chevallard, 1991). 
In the analysis of these transformations, the didactic transposition framework 
proposes the existence of three levels of knowledge. The first (Chevallard’s [1991] 
terms are retained throughout), scholarly knowledge, where the process begins, is 
related to the original knowledge that is taken as a reference in the definition of a 
given school subject. Such knowledge is that built in the core of the scientific 
community. This knowledge also undergoes transformations within that 
community until it becomes public, when it is published in the specific scientific 
journals of that community. Published, the knowledge is clean, debugged, and in 
impersonal language, in a form which does not reveal its constructed 
characteristics. 
Knowledge to be taught is the second level of knowledge, emergent from its first 
transposition (the process of transforming scholarly knowledge into knowledge to 
be taught). It materializes in the production of textbooks, teaching manuals for 
university education, school programs that target college students and teachers, and 

ELEMENTARY PARTICLE PHYSICS FOR HIGH SCHOOLS 
29 
so on. Here, the knowledge is restructured in simpler language; by adjusting itself 
to teaching, by being “dismantled”, it is reorganized again in a logical and timeless 
way. In this process, Chevallard (1991, p. 45) points out that knowledge to be 
taught sometimes contains genuine didactic creations, which are built from 
teaching needs. 
In this process, as it is transformed into knowledge to be taught, scholarly 
knowledge undergoes a decontextualization, occurring via the loss of its original 
context, through a process that Chevallard calls depersonalization. Knowledge 
goes through a sort of “disassembly” in order to be rebuilt, allowing a new 
structuration and organization. Thus, this knowledge is a dogmatic configuration, 
ordained, cumulative, and in a way, linearized. With that, it loses the context of its 
origin and has a new context. 
Another function of knowledge to be taught is to remove any connection with 
the epistemological environment in which it was created (scholarly knowledge) 
through a process called desyncretization, resulting in its being reconstituted in a 
new epistemological context. 
The 
processes 
of 
depersonalization, 
of 
desyncretization 
and 
of 
decontextualization, to which knowledge is subjected, strip it of its 
epistemological-historical context and language itself. In order to be taught, 
knowledge gains a new look, an ahistorical organization, a new 
epistemological niche, and dogmatic validity. (Alves Filho, 2000, p. 227) 
Unlike the scholarly knowledge that after being legitimized by the scientific 
community becomes part of the larger culture, knowledge to be taught and its 
objects may not survive until the end of the didactic transposition process. It may 
become obsolete in the school context, or trivialized in its socio-cultural milieu, 
under pressure from groups in the noosphere, and be discarded. However, these 
actions share a single goal: improving teaching and learning. 
The last level, knowledge taught, is the second transposition of knowledge, and 
concerns the adaptation of knowledge to didactic timing. It is at this stage that the 
transformation of knowledge is aimed at the sequencing of lessons. In this 
transformation of knowledge to the classroom, the figure of the teacher appears, 
with the intention to adapt the knowledge brought in textbooks (knowledge to be 
taught) to one that effectively reaches students. The teacher is the main character of 
this transposition, playing a central role at that level of knowledge. However, the 
teacher is not the only person involved: students and the school administration 
(principals, counselors, pedagogues, among others) are also the representatives and 
shapers of this plateau in the noosphere. This process of the transformation of 
knowledge to be taught into knowledge taught is called “Internal Didactic 
Transposition” because it occurs in the core of the school environment. 
In this process, the teacher ends up suffering interference from other members 
of the noosphere during interactions in the school environment. This makes certain 
that other interests, in addition to those of teachers, are taken into consideration in 
the process. Because of this, a new epistemological environment is created, one 
that is much more unstable when compared to scholarly knowledge and knowledge 

SIQUEIRA 
30 
to be taught. Knowledge taught is also more multiple: “Each new transposition 
creates a new epistemological framework (…). Within each new framework, all 
that is possible is done to reduce learning difficulties, dissolve them” (Joshua & 
Dupin, 1993, p. 201). 
Each one of these levels has its own autonomous community, with its own 
representatives or groups. Linking these levels is the noosphere, which constitutes 
a sphere of action where the protagonists act in the transformation of knowledge. 
This sphere ends up involving people and/or institutions that influence the 
educational system; in other words, all of the individuals and social, economic, and 
political institutions that shape the transformations suffered by knowledge are 
considered part of the noosphere. It is inside the noosphere that the inevitable 
conflicts occur in the transformations of knowledge, where the various actors from 
different social spheres negotiate their interests and viewpoints, where the demands 
of society are discussed. In this environment, there are negotiations, exchanges of 
ideas, and conflicts, all in the quest to find solutions to the problems brought about 
by society. In short, “the Noosphere is the region where the thinking process of the 
didactic operation occurs” (Chevallard, 1991, p. 28). 
However, to reach the teacher, knowledge first has to survive at the level of 
knowledge to be taught. For this, Chevallard (1991) highlights some evidence of 
relevant characteristics which knowledge must retain in order to survive as 
knowledge to be taught. These characteristics are: 
Knowledge has to be consensual. Knowledge that is destined for the classroom 
cannot have doubts about its status of “truth”, even if that truth is momentary. 
Transposed knowledge must seek updates. In this case, updates are present in two 
modes: Moral Actuality is linked to the curriculum, and to the assumption that the 
knowledge that will be transposed has importance as recognized both by society 
and by parents, rather than being an obsolete form of knowledge that, for example, 
parents themselves could teach; Biological Actuality is connected directly to a 
subject’s own area of expertise. Transposed knowledge must be in accordance with 
current science, leaving obsolete concepts to be taught only in a historical 
perspective. 
Knowledge must be operational. Knowledge intended for the classroom must be 
able to generate a sequence which includes activities, exercises, tasks, or some 
other sort of endeavor that has as its goal the conceptualization of knowledge. This 
is an important feature, because it is connected directly to evaluation. Knowledges 
that do not present any kind of activity conducive to learning assessment are bound 
to not remain long in school environments. 
Knowledge must allow the existence of a creativity didactic. This characteristic 
implies the creation of learning objects that are exclusively intended for use in 
school activities, that is, objects that do not have similarities in scholarly 
knowledge, and that become in themselves creations that have a guaranteed 
existence only in the classroom. For example, this is the case in activities involving 
the association of resistors and thermometric scales. 
Knowledge needs to be therapeutic. It has to adapt to the didactic system, that 
is, only knowledge that works as such stays in the school system, within the 

ELEMENTARY PARTICLE PHYSICS FOR HIGH SCHOOLS 
31 
highlighted characteristics – and that which does not work is out. This 
characteristic can only be checked after a few years of implementation in the 
classroom. 
In addition to these indications, Astolfi (1997), in analyzing the process of 
didactic transposition, stipulated some rules to describe the transformation process 
of scholarly knowledge into knowledge to be taught. These rules are directly linked 
to the relevant characteristics stipulated by Chevallard, as cited above. They are: 
modernizing school knowledge; updating school knowledge; articulating new 
knowledge with the former; transforming knowledge into exercises and problems; 
and making concepts more comprehensible.  
In the following, we will discuss some activities based on the topic of 
elementary particles that have been tested in real classroom environments. These 
activities are didactic creations which are used as facilitators of learning for this 
subject, and take into account important aspects of the transformation of 
knowledge. 
PROPOSAL OF ACTIVITIES 
Activities play a fundamental role in any teaching-learning sequence, and this 
holds true in the case of elementary particles. The activities herein aim to provide 
problems to be solved by students, problems that serve as motivation for 
discussions on concepts in which the development of sequences is centered on 
student-teacher debates, in order to get students to shift their passive attitudes 
towards class contents. 
Preparation of activities is, undoubtedly, one of the main problems to be faced 
when preparing any didactic sequence on MCP topics. However, by exploring 
possible metaphors and analogies, Brazilian researchers and teachers have been 
developing some activities for discussion on elementary particle concepts, which 
are described below: 
Proposed by Siqueira (2006), the activity called Analyzing radiographies 
(Analisando as radiografias) (Figure 1) served to introduce the sequence of 
particles. It aims to lead students to understand the production process of X-rays, 
radiographies, and differences in the shades which are found in them, as a 
consequence of the absorption by different materials of distinct densities. To that 
end, we try to have students understand the nature of X-rays – how they were 
discovered, their consequences in the scientific community – and, further, to get 
them to search for additional information on the nature and structure of matter, in 
order to better understand X-rays. 
In this activity, students are invited to analyze radiographies in order to pinpoint 
some peculiarities, such as differences in shades, sharpness, edge contrasts, body 
parts, prosthetics, cracked bones, and others. Afterwards, questions are raised by 
the teacher, in order to guide the discussion, such as: “Which radiography called 
your attention the most?” “Why?” “Why are there clearer and darker regions?” 
“Why are some radiographies sharper than others?” “How are radiographies 
produced?” 

SIQUEI
32 
Suc
radiog
conseq
and ab
discus
skin: t
X”).4 
To 
with p
translu
of pho
approx
can be
disting
(shade
 
IRA 
ch questions s
graphies which
quences and a
bsorption proc
sion formal, t
the discovery 
finish the disc
photographic 
ucent, or transp
otographic pa
ximately five 
e observed (F
guish the shap
es) in the mark
F
Figure 1. St
serve as a mo
h allows for in
applications, a
cesses by diff
teachers and 
of X-rays” (“
cussion, the ac
paper (Raio
parent objects
aper (Figure 2
minutes, the o
Figure 3). The
pes of the obje
ks left by the s
Figure 2. Photog
tudents observin
otivation to s
nquiry around
as well as the
ferent materia
students may
“Vendo atrav
ctivity is comp
o X com pa
s of any shape 
2). After rem
objects are tak
en, two questi
ects?” “Are th
shapes on the p
graphic paper w
ng radiographs
tart a discuss
d how X-rays 
eir nature, the
ls, etc. In ord
y refer to the 
vés da pele: a
plemented wit
apel fotográfi
are placed on
maining next 
ken off, and t
ions are asked
here difference
photographic p
with opaque obj
sion about X-
were discover
e “creation”, d
der to make th
text, “Seeing
a descoberta d
th an analogy 
fico). Several 
n a light-sensit
to a light so
the marks left 
d: “How well 
es regarding s
paper?”  
jects 
-rays and 
red, their 
detection, 
he whole 
g through 
dos raios 
– X-rays 
opaque, 
tive sheet 
ource for 
by them 
can you 
sharpness 

Thi
radiog
source
radiog
the firs
aspect
motiva
close 
proble
and co
Thi
in unv
contrib
radioa
in phy
for hig
physic
A 
(Espal
conduc
initiall
seen b
atomic
particl
physic
activity
might 
time, i
hits an
receivi
In t
Styrof
 Fi
s second part 
graphies, with 
e; and the ph
graphy itself. T
st part of our 
s of X-ray and
ates discussion
to the daily 
em which is pr
onclusions. 
s discussion o
veiling the stru
buted to disc
ctivity were th
ysics, such as n
gh schools, the
cal objects pre
second activ
lhamento Ruth
cted by Ernes
ly aimed at lea
by the naked e
c nuclei. The
les), which is 
cs, can be mat
y to show tha
imagine. In f
in rendering o
n object, this s
ing visible ligh
this activity, se
foam glued un
EL
igure 3. Photog
of the activity
the light sourc
hotographic pa
Thus, we seek 
activity, aimin
d radiography 
n, as radiogra
lives of stud
roposed in the 
on the discove
ucture of matte
covering the 
he ones that o
nuclear, atomi
e subject is be
sent in their d
vity, found i
herford),5 wh
st Rutherford 
ading students
eye, due to it
e idea is tha
 commonly u
terialized for 
at the concept 
fact, the pheno
objects visible
scattering is in
ht. 
everal wooden
nder them. Ea
LEMENTARY PA
graphic paper af
y aims to draw
ce that sensitiz
aper, which i
to visualize an
ng to lead stud
production. T
aphies and X-
dents. This fa
activity, as st
ery of X-rays 
er – the atom.
structure of 
opened the doo
ic, and, particu
elieved to lead
aily lives. 
in Siqueira 
hich is an ana
to propose th
s to discuss ho
s microscopic
at Rutherford
used in nuclea
the classroom
of scattering 
omenon of sc
e: The process
n turn detecte
n boards are u
ach board corr
ARTICLE PHYS
fter exposure to
w an analogy 
zes the paper a
is light-sensit
nd materialize
dents to better
This is believe
-rays are obje
amiliarity lend
tudents wish to
and radioactiv
. Although oth
the atom, st
ors to the deve
ularly, particle
d students to b
(2006), is R
alogy to the e
he atomic nu
ow to “see” an
c size, as in th
d’s method (
ar, atomic, an
m. It is import
is closer to ou
cattering is act
s consists of li
d by the eyes
used, with geo
responds to a 
SICS FOR HIGH 
o light 
with the prod
analogous to t
tive, analogou
e the discussio
r comprehend 
d to be a form
ects that are r
ds significanc
o discuss their
vity emerges a
her investigati
tudies of X-r
elopment of n
e physics. As 
better understa
Rutherford S
experiment wh
ucleus. This a
n object that c
he cases of at
scattering wi
nd elementary
tant and usefu
ur daily lives 
tually in use a
ight scattering
, which are ca
ometric shapes
shape, which
SCHOOLS 
33 
duction of 
the X-ray 
us to the 
on held in 
the main 
mat which 
relatively 
ce to the 
r answers 
as crucial 
ions have 
rays and 
new areas 
a content 
and those 
Scattering 
hich was 
activity is 
cannot be 
toms and 
ith alpha 
y particle 
ul in this 
than one 
all of the 
g when it 
apable of 
s made of 
h remains 

SIQUEI
34 
under 
probed
beneat
into ac
the pat
possib
which 
Fig
Figur
In o
the pat
in orde
than o
compa
Thi
enhanc
IRA 
the table so i
d by releasing
th the boards 
ccount (the an
th of marbles 
ble to start to 
become “shar
gure 4. Student r
re 5. Student an
order to outlin
ths of the mar
er to determin
one board, so 
ared among th
s activity is f
ce the activity
it cannot be s
g marbles, in
(Figure 4). In
ngle of inciden
at incidence a
outline the sh
rper” after a ce
rolling marbles
nalyzing trajecto
ne the shape, a
rbles are reco
ne the effectiv
the “true” sha
e various grou
followed by a
y: “How can y
seen. From th
n order to de
n order to do t
nce is equal to
and at reflecti
hapes which 
ertain number
s in order to ma
 
ories and trying
a piece of pap
orded. Next, th
ve shape of th
ape of the obj
ups. 
a script, which
you determine
hat point on, t
etermine the 
that, the reflec
o the angle of 
ion (Figure 5)
are underneat
r of incidences
rk their paths a
g to trace the res
per is placed o
he collected in
he object. The
bject hidden u
h proposes qu
e the size and
the boards beg
shapes that a
ction principle
f reflection), b
). With those d
th the boards,
s. 
and then analyze
sulting geometr
on the wooden
nformation is 
e idea is to ha
under the boar
uestions to des
d shape of the 
gin to be 
are glued 
e is taken 
by tracing 
data, it is 
, outlines 
e them 
ric shape 
n lid, and 
analyzed 
ave more 
rd can be 
signed to 
object?” 

ELEMENTARY PARTICLE PHYSICS FOR HIGH SCHOOLS 
35 
“How could you know whether the figures have details in their shapes, which are 
small if compared to the marble sizes?” “How can you confirm your conclusions 
without looking at the objects?” 
With such questions, a discussion is started on activity goals, in an effort to get 
students to understand how atomic investigations are carried out, how the 
development of particle accelerators allowed further investigation of the atom, and 
the particles themselves. This activity is focused on answering the last question, 
wherein we have an opportunity to discuss the idea of models, and to give 
examples of the atomic models used in high school chemistry and physics 
textbooks. 
Through the discussion of atomic models, it is possible to discuss the use of 
models in science and the role models play in theories. When one is not sure about 
the real shape of the object under investigation, models are resorted to in order to 
have an approximate view of the studied object or phenomenon. This activity 
serves as a metaphor for what happens in scientific research, and it reveals a 
fundamental facet of the teaching-learning process through which young students 
begin, in the classroom and in their own discussions, to understand scientific work. 
The activity also allows discussing model validation processes, thus creating a 
classroom environment which is analogous to a genuine scientific debate. 
Classroom consensus is reached through debates which are based on ideas, 
arguments, and collected information. In this way, these discussions end up 
reflecting actual scientific work, as well as how science evolves by changing its 
models and theories, in the attempt to get closer and closer to reality. 
Another activity proposed by Siqueira (2006) is called “Categorizing particles” 
(“Categorizando partículas”). The central idea of this activity is for students to 
start understanding that there are characteristics or properties which allow the 
grouping of particles into families, thereby creating order. 
In the activity, students get an array of little balls (several colors, sizes, and 
materials), and they are asked to separate them into groups, as per a property (or 
the properties) by which they see fit to group them. After the activity is finished, 
the criteria which are used by physicists to separate elementary particles into 
quarks, leptons, and bosons are discussed. 
An activity proposed by Silva and Siqueira (2013b) aims to discuss the working 
principle of particle accelerators, especially circular ones. In this activity, the 
following materials are used: a 180-mm diameter circular iron board (paint can 
lid), 11 10-mm diameter steel balls, and 5 10-mm diameter round neodymium 
magnets. The magnets are secured to the platform in an equidistant way, and two 
balls are placed in front of each magnet (Figure 6). A single ball receives an initial 
push, which will initiate the circular motion. 
Through the assembly of the materials and the experiment itself, it is possible to 
discuss several concepts which are present in particle accelerators, drawing an 
analogy with the LHC (Large Hadron Collider). In our experiment, the balls 
simulate the particles which are accelerated without the action of an external force 
in the system, through the magnetic force of magnets. When observing the motion 
continuity of particles at increasing speeds, it is possible to draw an analogy with 

SIQUEI
36 
particl
revolu
circula
experi
of acce
the di
limitat
of the 
Silv
suppor
evolut
from 
Physic
examp
 
 
IRA 
les from real 
utions per sec
ar ones, magn
ment proposed
elerating the b
ifference in p
tions in our an
magnetic field
va and Siqueir
rt discussion 
ion of atomic
the texts pre
cs, and they c
ple of a crossw
accelerators, 
cond. Nonethe
netic inductio
d, magnetic in
balls, whereas
potential. It is
nalogy, such a
d in both cases
Figure 6. P
ra (2013a) als
of the prim
c models. The 
epared by Siq
can also be fo
word that was c
Figur
such as the L
eless, in thos
on is mainly 
nduction, besid
s, in real accel
s important t
as the balls rep
s. 
 
Particle acceler
so propose an
mordial elemen
 questions and
queira (2006)
ound in a tex
created by the
re 7. Particle cr
LHC, where p
se real accele
intended to g
des guiding th
lerators, what 
to point out 
presenting par
rator assembly
n activity whi
nts that cons
d tips in this 
) for teaching
xtbook (Pietro
e authors follow
rossword 
particles reach
erators, espec
guide particle
hem, also play
accelerates pa
that there are
rticles and the
ch uses cross
stitute matter 
activity are d
g Elementary
ocola et al., 20
ws: 
h 11,000 
cially the 
s. In the 
s the role 
articles is 
e certain 
e function 
swords to 
and the 
developed 
y Particle 
011). An 

ELEMENTARY PARTICLE PHYSICS FOR HIGH SCHOOLS 
37 
In addition to the previously described activities, a series of other activities 
called Learning Situations6 (in development since 2008 and also involving 
elementary particles) makes up the regular curriculum of the public schools in the 
State of São Paulo in Brazil. The first of these deals with the development of 
science and the importance of Brazil’s participation in finding the solution to a 
question about the stability of the atomic nucleus, a discussion that occurred during 
the decade between 1930 and 1940. The activity was based on research developed 
by Santos Neto (2007). 
The activity is developed in two steps. The first aims at showing to students that 
Brazilians have played important roles in the development of science, contributing 
significantly to advances in scientific theories. Thus, students are invited to read 
part of the text (Figure 8) and suggest a title for the report. After that, the titles 
given by each student and their meanings are discussed. The second part delves 
into the importance of Lattes’ discovery for Elementary Particle Physics, 
discussing the role of the pi meson in the theory of atomic nucleus stability and the 
consolidation of its description. The discussion held in this activity aims to 
recognize Brazil’s participation in the international field of science and to grasp 
aspects relevant to the process of creation of science in a historical perspective. 
Figure 8. Clipping of a story about César Lattes’ discovery from a newspaper of the time 

SIQUEI
38 
Bra
Englan
occurr
in the 
studen
Noite. 
Ano
chamb
investi
origina
limitat
particl
 
 
Figure 
electro
through
IRA 
azil’s involvem
nd), in detecti
red in 1947. In
laboratory. T
nts using the r
other proposed
bers. From t
igate, by com
ated from reac
tions, is anal
les that leave t
9. Track left by
n (e-) and a pos
h a bubble cham
ment, through
ing the pi mes
n the following
The importanc
eportage of th
d activity deal
the known tr
mparison, the
ctions or deca
logous to the
their traces in 
   
y a proton (p+), 
sitron (e+) going
mber 
h César Lattes
son by using e
g year, Lattes 
ce of this disc
hat time, as co
ls with the pro
rajectories of
e trajectories
ays (Figure 10
e procedure t
bubble chamb
         
 
an  
Fig
g   
un
 
s (in collabor
experimental 
was able to d
covery to scie
onveyed by th
ocess of detect
f some parti
of unknown 
0). This proces
that scientists
bers or clouds.
gure 10. Track f
known particles
ration with a 
studies of cos
detect the same
ence is discus
he newspaper F
ting particles i
icles (Figure 
particles, w
ss, while respe
s perform to 
. 
for identificatio
s 
group in 
smic rays 
e particle 
ssed with 
Folha da 
in bubble 
9), we 
which are 
ecting its 
identify 
 
on of 

ELEMENTARY PARTICLE PHYSICS FOR HIGH SCHOOLS 
39 
In this way, students observe the reaction or decay and initiate the comparison, 
by means of reference particles, seeking to determine which particles participate in 
the process. After this investigation, discussion about bubble chambers initiates a 
consideration of the reasons why some trajectories are presented in the form of 
curves and some as spirals, while others appear straight. 
One can see that the development of this activity facilitates the discussion of 
some relevant aspects that characterize particles, such as their load, mass, and 
stability. In addition, it allows teachers to demonstrate aspects of the process of 
detecting subatomic particles which, although not directly viewed, can be 
identified through their passage in the bubble chamber or clouds. This is important 
to understanding the construction of ideas in science, especially when dealing with 
the physics of elementary particles. 
OBSTACLES AND CHALLENGES 
Adding EPP in Brazilian schools involves overcoming obstacles and challenges, 
mainly because of its non-intuitive and abstract aspects. The obstacles and 
challenges found in the literature include shortages of good quality textbooks, 
deficits in teacher backgrounds, the mathematical formality used in EPP contents, 
and the lack of learning activities for students. 
The lack of materials for teachers is a challenge which has been pointed out by 
physics teaching professionals for some time. Although there are several source 
materials available for EPP,7 most of them cannot be immediately used in the 
classroom, as they need to be transformed in order to be used for that context. In 
addition, although the textbooks which were approved by 2015’s Programa 
Nacional do Livro Didático (or PNLD, Brazil’s National Textbook Program) deal 
with particle physics, they still, with rare exceptions, do so in the classical way. A 
quick analysis of most textbooks may reveal that EPP is still taught in the 
traditional way, by summarizing all knowledge of particles in tables which seem to 
condense all the richness of that topic. In fact, what such textbooks do is sell 
something old for something new. 
Another relevant aspect is the background of physics teachers, since adding 
particle physics into the curricula without the involvement of properly qualified 
professionals is unthinkable (Siqueira & Pietrocola, 2012). In Brazil, physics 
courses led by licensed teachers hardly ever cover EPP; when they do, they are 
usually taught by professors/researchers in areas unrelated to education, and rely 
on older textbooks, such as Eisberg and Resnick (1994). Besides that, the latter 
theoretical disciplines are not related to pedagogical disciplines, never mind 
incorporating supervised internships. This renders EPP even less accessible for 
high schools, as, even though there are disciplines related to such topics, they do 
not provide enough subsidies for future teachers to cover it in classrooms; that is, 
this topic lacks the operational aspect for high school education (Siqueira, 2012). 
In other words, it is not enough for teachers to “know”, they also need the know-
how (Carvalho & Gil-Perez, 2001). 

SIQUEIRA 
40 
Another already-identified problem regards the mastery of mathematical 
formalism which is needed to deal with the topic. Many times, teachers, due to 
their background, see the physics taught in high schools as a simplified version of 
academic physics, mainly in regards to mathematical formalism; that is, the 
difference between levels of physics at high schools and universities is framed by 
teachers as just a matter of degrees of difficulty, with mathematics being the 
clearest indicator (Siqueira, 2012). However, dealing with fundamental EPP 
aspects and concepts through a conceptual and phenomenological approach is 
believed to be possible, allowing for conceptual discussions and guiding learning 
along qualitative aspects of the topic. That strategy seems to have great potential, 
as qualitative and phenomenological discussions enable the main concepts and 
aspects related to science to be discussed, without the need for broad mathematical 
knowledge on the part of students. 
Nevertheless, the most critical point which is presented in any proposal to 
include MCP, which is no different for particle physics, is the matter of teaching 
activities. The phenomena on which the theories comprising EPP are based belong 
to a world not easily accessible in day-to-day life. Typical didactic experiments 
cannot be used to demonstrate such subject matter; rather, most EPP experiments 
are highly complex and very expensive, not being suitable for the reality of our 
schools. However, with a certain amount of didactic creativity, low-cost activities 
can be adapted which may function to improve students’ learning through a better 
understanding of course contents. This will enable more dynamic classes, 
stimulating discussions among students, and thereby helping students to become 
less passive and to actively take part in building their own knowledge. 
FINAL CONSIDERATIONS 
The experience of developing and monitoring teachers in implementing activities 
and proposals for teaching elementary particle physics revealed that certain 
challenges and obstacles are inherent in any proposal for teaching that makes 
innovations to material already enshrined by tradition. Nonetheless, these can be 
overcome through the joint development of teaching materials and teacher 
education, especially when teachers participate directly in developing the materials 
for the teaching-learning sequence. These latter are the foundations for success that 
can be highlighted for the innovative activities presented here. 
In fact, the relative success of activities developed in the classroom depends 
primarily upon the direct involvement of high school teachers in the development, 
implementation, evaluation, and restructuring of those activities. This participation 
leads teachers to identify with the material and thus creates greater personal 
engagement. 
The teacher is a key element in education transformation processes, since any 
innovation process is only possible if it involves the teacher directly, because 
changes in education depend on what they do in their classes. (Flores & 
Flores, 1998, p. 97) 

ELEMENTARY PARTICLE PHYSICS FOR HIGH SCHOOLS 
41 
At this point, after several years of research and implementation of our proposal  
on EPP and its inclusion in the São Paulo state curriculum, we may conclude  
that it is possible to teach such contents in Brazil’s high school context. In the  
same way that there are no clear limits for human intelligence, which is always 
engaged in its efforts to understand the world, the same conviction should exist vis-
à-vis the possibilities for taking that understanding to all students, thus contributing 
to an improvement in the scientific culture of those individuals and of society writ 
large. 
Even so, there remains a very clear and specific path on how to insert this and 
other topics of modern and contemporary physics in the classroom. We have 
wagered successfully upon the methodological referential of Teaching-Learning 
Sequences (Méheut & Psillos, 2004), which has significantly contributed to the 
success of our proposals. 
NOTES 
1  A French abbreviation for the European Organization for Nuclear Research, located on the border 
between France and Switzerland (Geneva). 
2  http://veja.abril.com.br/090408/p_086.shtml 
3  The complete proposal material can be found on NuPIC’s website: http://www.nupic.fe.usp.br/ 
4  That text is part of the didactic sequence proposal on elementary particles, and it can be found in 
Siqueira (2006), or on NuPIC’s website: http://www.nupic.fe.usp.br/ 
5  Further details on the preparation of the activity may be obtained in Siqueira and Pietrocola, 2010. 
6  These Learning Situations are available in Cadernos de Orientação do professor de Física – 3 ano – 
caderno 4. São Paulo: Secretaria de Educação do Estado de São Paulo, 2008, Vol. 1. 46 pp. 
7  In a study by Siqueira and Pietrocola (2005), a survey was conducted on elementary particles 
subjects which are accessible to teachers and that may be used by them to start including that topic 
in classes.  
REFERENCES 
Alavarenga, B. (2000). A relevância do ensino da Física Atômica e das Partículas Elementares no 
currículo do 2o grau. In F. Caruso & A. Santoro (Eds.), Do átomo grego à Física das interações 
fundamentais (2nd ed., pp. 179–196). Rio de Janeiro: AIAFEX.  
Alves Filho J. P. (2000). Atividades experimentais: Do método à prática construtivista. Doctoral 
Dissertation, Florianópolis: UFSC. 
Astolfi, J. P., & Develay, M. (2006). A didática das ciências (10th ed.). Campinas: Papirus. 
Astolfi, J. P. et al. (1997). Mots-clés de la didactique des sciences. Pratiques pédagogies. Brussels: De 
Boeck & Larcier S. A. 
Brockington, G. (2005). A realidade escondida: A dualidade onda-partícula para alunos do ensino 
médio. Master’s Thesis, USP, São Paulo. 
Carvalho, A. M. P., & Gil-Perez, D. (2001). Formação de professores de ciências (6th ed.). São Paulo: 
Cortez. 
Chevallard, Y. (1991). La transposicion didactica: Del saber sabio al saber enseñado (1st ed.). 
Argentina: La Pensée Sauvage. 
Eisberg, R., & Resnick, R. (1994). Física quântica – Átomos, moléculas, sólidos, núcleos e partículas 
(9th ed.). Rio de Janeiro: Ed. Campus. 
Flores, M. A., & Flores, M. (1992). O professor – Agente de inovação curricular. In A. Nóvoa (Ed.), Os 
professores e sua formação. Lisboa: Dom Quixote. 
 
 

SIQUEIRA 
42 
 
Gil-Perez, D., Senent, F., & Solbes, J. (1987). La introducción a la física moderna: Um ejemplo 
paradigmatico de cambio conceptual. Enseñanza de las ciências, Barcelona. n. extra, 209–210. 
Joshua, S., & Dupin, J. J. (1993). La introduction à la didactique des sciences et des mathématiques. 
Paris: Presses Universitaires de France. 
Kalmus, P. I. (1992). Particle physics at A-level – The universities’ viewpoint. Physics Education, 
27(2), 62–64. 
Kuhn, T. S. (2003). A estrutura das revoluções científicas (8th ed.). São Paulo: Perspectiva. 
Méheut, M., & Psillos, D. (2004). Teaching–learning sequences: Aims and tools for science education 
research. International Journal of Science Education, 26(5), 515–535. 
Moreira, M. A. (1989). Um mapa conceitual sobre partículas elementares. Revista Brasileira de Física, 
11(1), 114–129. 
Moreira, A. M., & Valadares, E. C. (1998). Ensinando física moderna no segundo grau: Efeito 
fotoelétrico, laser e emissão de corpo negro. Caderno Catarinense de Ensino de Física, 15(2), 121–
135. 
Ostermann, F., & Moreira, M. A. (2000). Física contemporánea em la escuela secundaria: uma 
experiencia en el aula involucrando formación de profesores. Enseñanza de las Ciencias, 18(3), 
391–404. 
Ostermann, F., & Moreira, M. A. (2001). Atualização do currículo de Física na escola de nível médio: 
Um estudo desta problemática na perspectiva de uma experiência em sala de aula e da formação 
inicial de professores. Caderno Catarinense de Ensino de Física, 18(2), 135–151. 
Pietrocola, M. et al. (2011). Coleção física em contexto: Eletricidade e magnetismo, ondas 
eletromagnéticas, radiação e matéria (Vol. 3). Editora FTD. 
Pinto, A. C., & Zanetic, J. (1999). É possível levar a física quântica para o ensino médio? Caderno 
Catarinense de Ensino de Física, 16(1), 7–34. 
Salmeron, R. A. (2005). Física nuclear, raios cósmicos e as origens da Física de Partículas. In F. Caruso, 
V. Oguri, & A. Santoro (Eds.), Partículas elementares: 100 anos de descobertas. Manaus: Editora 
da Universidade Federal do Amazonas. 
Santos Neto, E. R. (2007). Física no Brasil para o Ensino Médio: Uma abordagem para a compreensão 
da ciência e da atividade científica. São Paulo, USP. 
Silva, H. L. N., & Siqueira, M. (2013a). O uso da palavra cruzada para o ensino de física moderna e 
contemporânea. Campina Grande: Encontro de Físicos do Norte e Nordeste. 
Silva, Y. A. R., & Siqueira, M. (2013b). Canhão de Gauss: Possibilidade para discutir aceleradores de 
partículas na Educação Básica. Campina Grande: Encontro de Físicos do Norte e Nordeste. 
Siqueira, M. (2006). Do visível ao indivisível: uma proposta de ensino de física de partículas 
elementares para a educação básica. Master’s Thesis, IFUSP/FEUSP, São Paulo. 
Siqueira, M. (2012). Professores de física em contexto de inovação curricular: Saberes docentes e 
superação de obstáculos didáticos no ensino de Física Moderna e Contemporânea. Doctoral 
Dissertation, Faculdade de Educação, Universidade de São Paulo. 
Siqueira, M., & Pietrocola, M. (2010). O espalhamento Rutherford na sala de aula do ensino médio. A 
Física na Escola, 11(2), 9–11. 
Siqueira, M., & Pietrocola, M. (2011). Como a física de partículas elementares pode contribuir para o 
Ensino Básico? In F. Caruso, V. Oguri, & A. Santoro (Eds.), O que são quarks, glúons, bósons de 
Higgs, buracos negros e outras coisas estranhas? (pp. 263–284). São Paulo: Editora Livraria da 
Física. 
Siqueira, M., & Pietrocola, M. (2012). Teacher education in the context of modern and contemporary 
physics: An experience with public system teachers. Presented at World Conference on Physics 
Education, Istanbul, Turkey, 1–6 July, 2012. 
Stannard, R. (1990). Modern physics for the young. Physics Education, 25(3), 133–143. 
Swinbank, E. (1992). Particle physics: A new course for schools and colleges. Physics Education, 27(2), 
87–91. 
 
 

ELEMENTARY PARTICLE PHYSICS FOR HIGH SCHOOLS 
43 
 
Terrazzan, E. A. (1992). A inserção da física moderna e contemporânea no ensino de física na escola de 
2º grau. Caderno Catarinense de Ensino de Física, 9(3), 209–214. 
Terrazzan, E. A. (1994). Perspectivas para a inserção de física moderna na escola média. São Paulo: 
Curso de pós-graduação em educação – USP. 
Terrazzan, E. A. (2007). Inovação escolar e pesquisa sobre a formação de professores. In R. Nardi (Ed.), 
A pesquisa em ensino de Ciências no Brasil: Alguns recortes (pp. 145–192), São Paulo. 
 
Maxwell Siqueira 
Exact and Technological Sciences Department  
University State of Santa Cruz –UESC  
Brazil 
 

 
M. Pietrocola & I. Gurgel (Eds.), Crossing the Border of the Traditional Science Curriculum, 45–59. 
© 2017 Sense Publishers. All rights reserved. 
MÁRLON PESSANHA AND MAURÍCIO PIETROCOLA 
 3. PARTICLE ACCELERATORS AND  
DIDACTIC OBSTACLES 
A Teaching and Learning Experience in São Paulo and Cataluña 
INTRODUCTION 
After a few decades in which educators and researchers in the field of physics 
education discussed the inclusion of topics from modern and contemporary physics 
(MCP) in high school, a consensus has emerged regarding the need for that 
insertion (Ostermann & Moreira, 2004). 
 
The list of the main reasons to justify such insertion includes the necessity of 
student contact, in schools, with science as it is currently practiced. Contemporary 
scientific production – as disclosed on the Internet, in TV news, newspapers, 
magazines, and other places – is not necessarily handled with the necessary 
scientific precision. Therefore, students hear and read about quantum physics, 
relativity, black holes, and particle accelerators, among other topics, in different 
spaces, but not at school. 
 
Above all, particle accelerators stand out in modern science as being crucial in 
the areas of elementary particle physics (EPP) and nuclear physics, without which 
such areas would not have developed as much as they have (Das & Ferbel, 2003, 
pp. 183–184). A school curriculum adequate for the contemplation of topics related 
to science as it is practiced nowadays would inevitably include such topics as EPP 
and nuclear physics, as well as the equipment involved in those areas. 
 
In fact, in the last few years, the official high school curricula of states, 
provinces, and autonomous communities of different countries have been 
undergoing innovations that, among other changes, include topics of MCP. For 
example, in Brazil, the official curriculum of São Paulo State was updated in the 
late 2000s, when new topics were incorporated in the discipline of high school 
physics related to: 
Quantum Physics and the Structure of Matter, such as the properties and 
organization of matter; the atom and the emission and absorption of radiation; 
the atomic nucleus and radioactivity; elementary particles, and electronics. 
(São Paulo, 2008, pp. 49–60) 
 
In another example, in Spain, the official curriculum of the Autonomous 
Community of Cataluña, also published in the late 2000s, foresees, more 
specifically, that EPP must be addressed in the post-obligatory discipline of high 

PESSANHA & PIETROCOLA 
46 
school physics,1 and recognizes the need for the investigative instruments of this 
field, such as accelerators and detectors (Catalunya, 2008, pp. 59263–59277). 
 
With the structure of matter and elementary particles being included in the 
curriculum, a challenge that emerges has to do with planning suitable situations in 
which to teach such subjects: the study of the structure of matter and its equipment 
involve both phenomena and entities not included in the direct perception of the 
daily world; moreover, they become reality and are accessible only through 
techniques developed in a highly rational manner. In other words, the challenge in 
teaching this topic is to provide conditions that allow teachers and students to 
overcome the difficulties in actual perception of the phenomena and entities that 
are targets of the study.  
 
In this chapter, we discuss the experience of a course about the structure of 
matter and particle accelerators implemented with students from São Paulo State  
(Brazil) and students from the Autonomous Community of Cataluña (Spain).  
In the following, we present a reflection on the nature of the scientific knowledge 
involved in dealing with this topic and describe how such understanding  
guided the planning of the course. Next, we will present a reflection on the  
didactic actions of the teachers, in which we verify how inadequate or scarcely-
adequate didactic choices influenced the learning process of the students, either 
reinforcing or actually producing mistaken conceptions regarding the nature of the 
subatomic world. 
A NEW SCIENCE OF PHENOMENOTECHNICAL KNOWLEDGE 
Before we present the course on particle accelerators and report on some didactic 
obstacles involved in its implementation, we believe it is important to emphasize 
something that was especially relevant in its planning: our perspective on the 
nature of MCP knowledge. This view allowed us a clearer understanding of the 
relationships between the scientific knowledge involved in the study of the 
structure of matter and the techniques used in particle accelerators, thereby 
allowing us to better define our activities. 
 
As a basis for our reflections, we used some ideas of the French science 
philosopher Gaston Bachelard, who was a contemporary of the emergence of the 
new physics that started in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. When Bachelard 
(1975) analyzed the science that was practiced at his time, he stated that modern 
physics was no longer engaged in the reproduction of a given reality, but that in 
fact new realities were being invented with the use of new equipment. He claimed 
that knowledge was being built based not on direct observation or on the 
instrumentation of the natural phenomena, but on the creation of phenomena that 
took place inside the equipment. This meant that, on the one hand, knowledge was 
still being built based on a methodological accuracy characteristic of previous 
centuries, but, on the other hand, the phenomena being studied were those created 
within the science equipment itself, rather than phenomena perceived in the daily 
world. 

PARTICLE ACCELERATORS AND DIDACTIC OBSTACLES 
47 
 
Subatomic particles or the corpuscular behavior of light are not directly and 
naturally accessible to the senses, but they can be built as a technically accessible 
reality. The equipment used in modern science, mainly in the atomic and 
subatomic worlds, allows us to indirectly reach a phenomenon both rationally 
predicted and technically built. 
 
The result is a doubly-built scientific reality, both by technique and by theory, 
by experimentation and by rationalization. Thus, in the study of the subatomic 
world one no longer deals with a “natural reality” provided to the senses, that is, 
with a phenomenon-like reality. On the contrary, one deals with the product of 
techniques, that is, with a phenomenotechnical reality (Bachelard, 1975; 
Rheinberger, 2005). 
 
Particle accelerators are a flagrant example of phenomenotechnique, but many 
other types of equipment and experiments deal with a reality that cannot be noticed 
directly by the senses, but that is both accessible and built through technique. A 
historically-relevant example is Geiger and Marsden’s experiment of scattering 
alpha particles, which led Rutherford to propose a new atomic model in the early 
20th century. In this historical experiment, scattering took place through the 
following technique: alpha particles, invisible to the naked eye, were scattered 
when they interacted with an obstacle (gold foil), and the scattering became evident 
when they interacted with zinc sulfide screens. 
 
In short, when we define the knowledge of the subatomic world as being 
phenomenotechnical, we take two important issues for granted, namely: (1) that 
this knowledge is built upon a reality that is also built, a reality which is 
inaccessible in the daily world and that, therefore, breaks with the immediate; (2) 
that in order to understand the concepts deriving from modern and contemporary 
theories, it is relevant to understand the techniques themselves as applied 
knowledge. 
 
Thus, since the knowledge built upon the subatomic world and elementary 
particles involves a phenomenotechnical reality, in the course as planned (and 
described in the next section), we deal with the topic of the structure of matter by 
debating technique, by investigating the historical experiments that helped develop 
this area, and, finally, by discussing particle accelerators. 
THE COURSE ON PARTICLE ACCELERATORS 
A significant amount of the scientific knowledge about the atomic and subatomic 
worlds emerged from experimental methods based on the technique of inference by 
trajectories, in which, among other things, one verifies the consequences of the 
interaction between macroscopic particles or objects with known properties with 
something that one wishes to know. Throughout the 20th century, this technique 
allowed the discovery of several properties both of the atom and of subatomic 
particles. 
 
When this course was designed, we developed activities that investigated this 
technique. In some cases, computer simulations were used to represent the 
experiments and interactions in which the technique was explored. The activities of 

PESSANHA & PIETROCOLA 
48 
the course were conceived and organized in an interconnected manner, and they 
were designed in such a way as to allow a gradual building of understanding about 
particle accelerators. 
 
In general, as emerging from discussion of both concepts and technique, the 
goal of the course was for the students to understand what particle accelerators do 
and how they work. Therefore, the relationship among particle accelerators, the 
technique used, and the physical knowledge that these generate made up a 
conceptual model (Greca & Moreira, 2000) that the students were expected to 
gradually build. 
 
The course was thus designed while taking the idea of phenomenotechnique into 
consideration, and incorporating the gradual building of technical and scientific 
knowledge. Such elements guided our didactic design and, therefore, played a role 
in what some authors (Méheut & Psillos, 2004) define as design principles. 
 
In Table 1, the basic structure of the course is presented in detail, indicating 
each main stage (identified by Roman numerals) and its respective activities 
(identified by Arabic numerals). 
 
Taking as a starting point some ideas that we considered to be part of the 
previous conceptions2 of the students, the activities were designed in such a way as 
to allow a layered building of the conceptual elements necessary for discussions 
about what particle accelerators do and how they work. 
 
Each of the activities, interconnected among themselves mainly by reference to 
technique, allowed us to bring to the surface a set of conceptual elements that 
would be useful in understanding particle accelerators. At the same time, these 
activities served the need to discuss or to deepen other contents foreseen in the 
curricula both of São Paulo and Cataluña. One example arose in the study of 
atomic models (Stage III of the course), foreseen in both curricula, which allowed 
us to deal with the scattering technique present in the accelerators and involved 
conceptual elements, such as the electric interaction among subatomic particles. 
 
By the end of the course, the students were expected to have developed a sense 
of the structure of the atom and its particles (subatomic, including the sub-nuclear 
ones), to recognize electric and nuclear interactions (strong force and weak force), 
and to understand how particle accelerators work, as well as their role in revealing 
and validating new knowledge about the structure of matter. Such elements were 
part of the target conceptual model that the students were expected to build during 
the course. 
 
Figure 1 presents a scheme that indicates the main ideas that comprise the 
expected/target conceptual model, and the partial models that were expected to be 
learned during the course. As can be seen, several conceptual elements were 
inserted during the course; these were connected with the building of the target 
conceptual model that describes how particle accelerators work and their use in the 
study of the structure of matter. The numbering from 1 to 9 in this figure is the 
same that identifies the activities described in Table 1. 
 
 
 

PARTICLE ACCELERATORS AND DIDACTIC OBSTACLES 
49 
Table 1. Basic structure of the course “From Thomson to Particle Accelerators” 
Stages 
Activities
I. Presentation 
and Motivation 
(25 minutes) 
 
After a brief introduction to the course, a motivation activity 
begins that seeks to make the students think about the importance 
of studying the insides of matter (1). The activity reports on 
research involving X-Rays obtained in a particle accelerator and 
used to investigate better drugs to treat coronary diseases. The 
use of X-Rays to determine the inside structure of macroscopic 
objects or parts of the human body is also discussed (2). 
II. Analogical 
Experiment (45 
minutes) 
Based on an analogical experiment3 (3), a demonstration of the 
technique often used to study the structure of matter and particle 
accelerators, which allows to us obtain information about an 
unknown or hidden object based on its interaction with an object 
whose properties are known, is attempted. In the analogical 
experiment, having access only to marbles, the students must 
conceive of an experimental method to find out the shape, size, 
and details of a geometric object hidden under a wooden surface. 
III. Structure of 
the Atom (100 
minutes) 
Based on the technique introduced in the previous activity, 
Thomson’s atomic model (4) is discussed, as well as its 
transformation since the historical experiment conducted by 
Geiger-Marsden (5), and the adequacy of an atomic model with a 
positive nucleus, as is the case in Rutherford’s atomic model (6). 
This stage uses computer resources that allow simulation of both 
the historical experiment and the electric interactions between 
charged particles and the atomic nucleus.4 
IV. The 
Technique (25 
minutes) 
In this activity, based on proposed questions and using a 
computer simulation5, students attempt to compare the technique 
used both in their analogical experiment and in Geiger-Marsden’s 
historical experiment (7). The emphasis in the discussion of the 
technique and its use is on studying the insides of matter, which 
serves as a bridge for later discussion about particle accelerators. 
V. Particle 
Accelerators 
(25 minutes) 
This last stage includes a debate about what particle accelerators 
are and how they work (8). In addition, there is a brief treatment 
of the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) and an example is given of a 
particle accelerator located near the region where the course takes 
place: in Cataluña, the ALBA Synchrotron was mentioned, and, 
in São Paulo, the PELLETRON of the University of São Paulo 
(9). 

PESSAN
50 
Fig
There 
with st
São Pa
 
The
unders
phenom
many 
experi
 
In b
and th
objects
subato
dynam
 
Suc
what i
intrins
obstac
kind o
decade
 
The
define
define
obstac
the cla
scarce
NHA & PIETRO
gure 1. Scheme 
 
were six imp
tudents from 
aulo State (Bra
e implementa
standing the 
mena and ent
cases, they 
ence. 
both contexts,
heoretical con
s. Thus, the m
omic particles 
mics of objects
ch attachment 
s new was an 
sic to the act
cle. The scienc
of obstacle, in
es of the 20th 
e French educa
d the epistemo
s other kinds 
cles. Such obst
ass planning –
ly adequate. 
COLA 
representing bo
THE IMPLE
SOME L
plementations 
Cataluña (Spa
azil). 
ations reveale
concepts, som
tities studied w
were counte
 we noticed th
ntents accord
movement, traj
tended to be
 that were acc
to what is ea
obstacle to bu
t of knowing
ce philosopher
n his analysis
century.  
ator Guy Brou
ological obsta
of obstacles 
tacles have to 
– or even durin
oth the partial a
EMENTATION
LEARNING OB
of the course
ain) and two i
ed that stud
me of which 
were not direc
erintuitive, w
hat students o
ding to pheno
jectories, colli
e explained by
cessible to the 
asily perceptib
uilding knowle
g itself, is of
r Bachelard (2
s of the histo
usseau (2002)
acle as a kind 
that act in di
 do with the d
ng the lesson 
and final concep
 OF THE COU
BSTACLES 
e, with four i
implementatio
ents had dif
were related
ctly amenable
which broke 
often interpret
omena that i
isions, and pe
y students in 
human senses
ble and its use
edge. This kin
ften defined a
2002) was the 
orical path of
, in his theory
of learning ob
dactic situatio
didactic choice
itself – that ar
ptual models (ta
URSE AND  
implementatio
ons with stude
fferent difficu
d to the fact 
e to the sense
with student
ted virtual exp
involved mac
enetration capa
the same wa
s. 
e in trying to 
nd of obstacle,
as an epistem
first to empha
f science in t
y of didactic si
bstacle. Brous
ons, including
es made by te
re either inade
 
arget) 
ons being 
ents from 
ulties in 
that the 
es and, in 
ts’ daily 
periments 
croscopic 
acities of 
ay as the 
interpret 
 which is 
mological 
asize this 
the early 
ituations, 
seau also 
g didactic 
eachers in 
equate or 

 
Dur
partici
didacti
activit
acted a
about t
Situati
One o
follow
Marsd
studen
particl
 
Wh
traject
that th
model 
 
How
from C
differe
with th
studen
examp
 
As 
alpha p
and, t
studen
later ac
ring the desig
ipation of high
ic approaches
ies. In our an
as didactic ob
the subatomic
ion 1 – Scarce
of the stages 
wed by a virtu
den’s historica
nts had to pred
les) were cast 
hen the studen
ories of the ch
he students wo
during the vir
wever, when t
Cataluña, man
ent from the o
hese going thr
nts indicated a
ple is shown in
Figure
can be seen, t
particles touch
thereby, unde
nts would not b
ctivity with th
PA
gn and the im
h school teach
s and pedago
nalyses, we no
bstacles, which
c world. Next, 
ely Adequate Im
of the course
ual experimen
al experiment
dict what was 
against an ato
nts made the p
harged particl
ould be able to
rtual experime
the course wa
ny of them in
one expected. I
rough the atom
a collision bet
n Figure 2. 
e 2. Example of
the drawing of
h a would-be 
rgoing a maj
be able to reco
he simulation o
ARTICLE ACCEL
mplementation
hers, who wer
ogical resourc
oticed that som
h reinforced o
we will descr
Images and Te
e involved a 
nt using a co
t (activity 5 
expected when
m, according 
prediction, the
les. With this 
o recognize th
ent and expres
as implemente
ndicated in the
Instead of plo
m, which was e
tween the part
f a drawing mad
f the trajectori
surface of Th
jor deviation.
ognize the ina
of Geiger and 
LERATORS AND
n of the cour
re in charge of
ces that woul
me of those d
or even led to
ribe three of th
exts  
prediction (ac
omputer simu
of Figure 1)
n positively ch
to Thomson’s
ey were asked
part of the ac
he inadequacy
ss the need to e
d for the seco
eir predictions
otting the traje
expected for T
ticles and the
de by one of the
ies indicates a
homson’s atom
. With this f
adequacy of Th
Marsden’s his
D DIDACTIC OB
rse, we relied
f defining man
ld be used in
didactic choice
o mistaken con
hose situations
ctivity 4 of F
ulation of Ge
). In the acti
harged particl
s model. 
d to plot, on p
ctivity, it was 
y of Thomson’
elaborate a ne
ond time, with
s a trajectory 
ectories of the 
Thomson’s ato
e atom’s “surf
 
e students 
a collision in w
m, not going th
flawed predic
homson’s mod
storical experi
BSTACLES 
51 
d on the 
ny of the 
n course 
es in fact 
nceptions 
s: 
Figure 1) 
eiger and 
ivity, the 
les (alpha 
paper, the 
expected 
’s atomic 
w one. 
h students 
that was 
particles 
om, these 
face”. An 
which the 
hrough it 
ction, the 
del in the 
iment. 

PESSAN
52 
 
Dur
why th
stated 
they re
materi
The
corp
 
Thi
actuall
a mist
means
was no
alpha p
since i
Thoms
 
In t
of Tho
and th
their e
on whi
the im
Figur
 
The
represe
collisio
later im
change
Thoms
surface
 
 
NHA & PIETRO
ring the dialog
hey described
that the atom
esorted to the
ial itself: 
e atoms of the
puscles, imme
s statement di
ly be defined a
taken percepti
s of collision. 
ot necessary in
particles and t
it facilitated th
son’s atom. 
the same impl
omson’s atom
he atom. When
explanations re
ich they shoul
mage of Thoms
re 3. Representa
erefore, not on
entations of 
on. Both the t
mplementation
ed to no lon
son’s atom we
e, as can be se
COLA 
gues that took
d the trajector
m was solid an
e idea of mas
e elements con
ersed in a sphe
id not present 
as presented. H
ion of a solid
Since the des
n order to unde
the atom, the
he existence o
lementation, s
m when they ju
n the students
elied on two i
ld draw the tra
son’s atom sho
ation of Thomso
nly was part o
Thomson’s a
text and the i
ns of the cour
nger mention
ere replaced b
een in Figure 4
k place in the 
ries of the pa
nd impenetrab
s exposed in 
nsist of a certa
ere with positiv
incorrect info
However, its r
dity to the ato
scription of th
erstand the int
reference to m
f naïve percep
ome students 
ustified the co
 were asked a
images availa
ajectories (the 
own in Figure 
on’s atom used 
of the text use
atom which 
image for Tho
rse. The text t
mass. In tu
by representati
4. 
 
classroom, th
articles in tha
ble and, in ord
the statement
ain number of
ve charge and
rmation, and T
reference to m
om that woul
he atom as som
teraction that t
mass was deem
ptions in stude
also referred 
ollisions betwe
about that pre
able in the ma
grey circle pr
3. 
 
in the 1st imple
ed scarcely ad
were used su
omson’s atom
that described
urn, the imag
ions that did n
he students we
at way. Some 
der defend thi
t used in the 
f negatively ch
d mass.6 
Thomson’s ato
mass led the stu
d cause devia
mething that h
took place bet
med scarcely a
ents’ understan
to a presumed
een the alpha 
sumed atomic
aterial itself: th
resent in Figur
ementation of th
dequate, but th
uggested the 
m were change
d Thomson’s a
ges used to 
not give a fals
ere asked 
of them 
is notion, 
available 
harged 
om could 
udents to 
ations by 
has mass 
tween the 
adequate, 
ndings of 
d surface 
particles 
c surface, 
he image 
re 2), and 
e course 
he visual 
idea of 
ed for the 
atom was 
represent 
se idea of 

Situati
In the
teache
cloud, 
 
In m
elemen
interpr
charac
mistak
implem
 
Teache
Studen
Teache
Studen
Teache
Studen
Teache
Studen
Teache
Figure 4
ion 2 – Inadeq
e three last im
ers often used 
and the alpha
many instance
nts of the 
retation to th
cteristics of a 
ken understand
mentation of th
er 3:  Yes. Im
nt 8:  What do
er 3:  Yes. Lik
nt 8:  Does th
er 3:  Deform
nt 8:  When a
then th
tornado
er 3:  No. It c
nt 8:  Yes, I th
er 3:  No. Im
fluid, in
as if it
Thomso
points t
PA
4. Representatio
imple
quacy in the La
mplementation
a metaphor in
a particles coul
es when this 
comparison 
e students. T
cloud that wo
ding thereof. 
he course, tran
magine the atom
o you mean a 
ke a fluid, whi
he atom deform
m? How? 
an object move
e atom defor
os, small tornad
rosses … Are 
hink so. 
magine that the
n the sense tha
t was in a f
on’s atom is 
to the descript
ARTICLE ACCEL
on of Thomson’
ementation of th
ack of Metaph
ns of the cou
n their explan
ld cross it easi
metaphor wa
should be t
Therefore, stud
ould not appl
One example
nscribed next:
m as a cloud. I
cloud? Like a
ich can be cro
m? 
es through the
rms. The obje
dos. 
 you talking ab
e atom, Thom
at it can cross 
fluid. For ex
a … see the 
tion of Thoms
LERATORS AND
’s atom used sin
he course 
hor Deconstru
urse in Catal
nations: Thom
ily. 
as used, it wa
taken into a
dents could p
ly to Thomson
e of this took
It is similar to 
a fluid? 
ossed. 
e air, in a fluid
ect in the air
bout vortices?
mson’s atom, 
it. The atom i
xample, balls 
definition. W
son’s atom ava
D DIDACTIC OB
 
nce the 2nd  
ction  
luña, the part
mson’s atom w
as not specifie
account, leav
potentially lis
n’s atom, lead
k place during
a cloud. 
d … If it is lik
r makes … m
? 
is like a clou
is not a fluid, i
thrown into 
Where is it? H
ailable in the a
BSTACLES 
53 
ticipating 
was like a 
ed which 
ving that 
st several 
ding to a 
g the 2nd 
ke a fluid, 
makes … 
ud, like a 
it crosses 
the air. 
Here. [He 
activity’s 

PESSANHA & PIETROCOLA 
54 
guide.] It says that it is a positive sphere with negative charges, ok? 
The atom is a sphere that can be penetrated by the alpha particle, but it 
does not deform. It only crosses, like in a fluid, but it is not a fluid. 
Student 8:  Ok. Ok. 
Teacher 3:  Did you understand? 
Student 8:  Yes. It crosses, but the atom does not deform. It is not a fluid. 
Teacher 3:  Perfect! 
 
In the dialogue, considering that Thomson’s atom was like a cloud, the student 
asked the teacher if the atom was like a fluid. Then, the student asked if the atom 
would deform with the particles crossing it, and if such crossing would cause 
vortices inside the atom. 
 
In this situation, we can notice that even if the metaphor was used to render an 
adequate understanding of the interaction between the alpha particles and 
Thomson’s atom easier, the lack of immediate deconstruction of the metaphor 
generated several inadequate conclusions about the atom’s structure. 
 
In the situation transcribed, after he noticed the mistaken interpretation, the 
teacher devoted himself to explaining in detail which aspects of a cloud should be 
applied to understanding Thomson’s atom. In other words, the teacher 
deconstructed the metaphor, which allowed the student to notice that the cloud was 
similar to Thomson’s atom only regarding penetrability, while other aspects, such 
as a deformation or the existence of vortices, did not apply to the atom. 
 
Based on this situation, we can conclude that the option to use metaphors may 
be an obstacle to learning if the compared elements are not made explicit, that is, if 
the metaphor is not deconstructed.  
Situation 3 – Emphasis on Mass Concentration in the Nuclear Atom 
This last situation took place in the 1st implementation of the course with students 
from São Paulo State. In this case, the approach chosen for the teacher to deal with 
atomic structure proved to be inadequate, and in fact served to reinforce students’ 
mistaken conceptions. 
 
In the lesson, after the activities that dealt with the replacement of Thomson’s 
atom with a more-current model, the teacher chose to approach the idea of the 
nucleus of the atom according to mass concentration: 
 
Teacher 4:  Thus, the question is: there is a fact...What is the fact? That alpha 
particle came back with a large angle. It should not have come back, 
but it did. It is a fact, I cannot deny that. How can I explain that fact? 
How could it come back? So, I gave the example of the truck and the 
bike: if it finds a bike inside, does it strike the bike and go back? 
Students:  No. 
Teacher 4:  It will go over it. So what does it have to find there? 
Student 2:  Another truck. 
 

PARTICLE ACCELERATORS AND DIDACTIC OBSTACLES 
55 
[Incomprehensible passage] 
 
Teacher 4:  So, another truck? If the alpha particle is massive, if it has a large mass 
as compared to the other entities that we have seen there, what has it 
found inside there? What mass did it find inside there? What would be 
the mass of that? How should it be? 
Student 3:  The same as its mass. 
Teacher 4:  Also a large mass, right? Exactly. It should have a large mass. Correct? 
Yes? 
Students:  Yes. 
Teacher 4:  Because only if it found something with a large mass would it return. 
Another thing: However, what is the problem? 
Student 5:  What is that large mass? 
Teacher 4:  We have even thought about what that large mass is already. Now, 
something else that remains is that the majority went by. The majority 
went by. And a few came back, and those that came back encountered 
something with a large mass. What can I conclude from that? The 
majority went by, the majority went by, but a few came back, and they 
encountered something with a large mass. Only a few came back. 
What can I conclude? I already know that there is something with a 
large mass here. What else can I conclude if the majority went by and 
a few came back? I know that the mass is large, of that thing that is 
inside. What else do I know? The structure. Think about the structure. 
Is the size of that thing inside big? 
Student 4:  Yes. 
Teacher 4:  It may be something small. A small thing that is inside. Because most 
particles go by. However, when the alpha particle encounters that 
small thing, which is small but massive, it comes back. That led to 
Rutherford’s idea that mass was almost entirely concentrated in the 
nucleus and that the nucleus was something small. 
 
As can be seen, the teacher chose to explain the nucleus of the atom by 
emphasizing mass concentration using a truck-bike analogy which later proved 
inadequate. 
 
Another teacher who was watching the explanation, noticing that charge 
concentration – the most relevant aspect of the nuclear atom – was not being 
approached, intervened: 
 
Teacher 5:  And there is another issue that arises, that not only… you have to think 
not only about the issue of mass, but also about that of charge. 
Teacher 4:  Charge. It does not have to do only with the effect of mass, but also 
with that of charge. With the positive charge being entirely 
concentrated there. And then the alpha particle is positively charged, it 
encounters something with a positive charge, which is also massive, it 

PESSANHA & PIETROCOLA 
56 
goes and [he makes gestures representing a trajectory of the particle 
getting closer and then being deviated by repulsion]. 
Student 8:  Doesn’t the charge of the electron have an effect? 
Teacher 4:  Hardly any. The deviation is due to the positive charges… hardly any 
is due to the negative charges. Why is the deviation due to the negative 
charges so limited? 
Student 5:  Because they do not repel each other. 
Teacher 4:  No, as far as the alpha particle is concerned, is its trajectory scarcely 
influenced due to the negative charges? We have seen that before… 
What is the mass of the electron as compared to the mass of the 
proton? In other words, what is the mass of the electron as compared 
to the mass of the atom? We have already discussed that, it is very 
small, isn’t it? Rutherford already knew that the mass of the electron as 
compared to the mass of the alpha particle is very small. Almost 3,000 
times smaller. No, 2,000 times smaller. Almost 2,000 times smaller 
than the mass of the alpha particle. 
Teacher 5:  And that is exactly what [Teacher 4] was talking about with the truck 
and the bike. 
Teacher 4:  So there are two things involved there, the sign of the charges and the 
mass. Therefore, although the electron is negatively charged, it will 
attract the alpha particle, but the alpha particle has an enormous mass. 
When it comes close to the electron it feels its power, its electric 
power, but it undergoes a small deviation. That is what I have said, it 
is about moving the truck with the bike. Of course, it will not deviate 
from its trajectory. Ok? These two things are acting there, both the 
sign of the charges and the mass. 
 
Teacher 5’s intervention seems to have been positive, since, right after it, Teacher 
4, who was teaching the class, inserted the issue of charge concentration in his 
discourse. However, in order to answer the question posed by Student 8 (whether 
the charge of the electron did not act upon the alpha particles), the teacher returned 
to the prior explanation emphasizing mass. 
 
After that discussion, the students gathered in groups in order to attempt the 
proposal of a new model of the atom, which, according to course planning, was 
expected to be similar to Rutherford’s nuclear atom. Next, the models that each 
group proposed were presented to the entire class. All the groups presented models 
with one nucleus, but only one indicated the concentration of positive electric 
charge in the nucleus, whereas the others indicated exclusively the concentration of 
mass in the nucleus. 
 
Figure 5 shows a drawing of an atom and its nucleus made by one of the 
students of the groups that proposed an atomic structure indicating only mass 
concentration (“massive nucleus”). In turn, Figure 6 shows the drawing made by 
one of the students in the group that proposed an atomic structure emphasizing 
charge concentration (“Nucleus charge +”: nuclei with positive charge). 

F
Figu
 
As 
obstac
comm
mecha
Consid
and tec
the co
particl
approa
constru
relativ
Later, 
Figure 5. Studen
ure 6. Student dr
can be seen, 
cle. Such an em
on in the tea
anical collision
dering that, in
chnique in the
ourse simultan
le accelerators
ached, the co
uction of the 
vely simple co
teachers ini
PA
nt drawing with
m
rawing with ato
electr
Teacher 4’s 
mphasis could
aching and le
n. 
n qualitative te
e knowledge d
neously favor
s. Besides, due
ourse was con
target concep
onversation ab
itiated a disc
ARTICLE ACCEL
h atomic structu
mass in the nucl
omic structure in
ric charge in the
emphasis on
d even reinforc
earning of th
FINAL IDEA
erms, there is n
deriving from 
ed discussion
e to the count
nceived in su
ptual model (p
bout why one
cussion of te
LERATORS AND
ure indicating th
leus 
ndicating the co
e nucleus 
mass concen
ce an epistemo
he structure o
AS 
no clear separ
m modern and 
n of the struc
terintuitive na
uch a way a
particle accele
e should study
echnique bas
D DIDACTIC OB
 
he concentration
 
oncentration of p
ntration was a
ological obstac
of matter: the
ration between
contemporary
ture of matte
ature of the kn
as to allow a
rators), startin
y the inside o
sed on an an
BSTACLES 
57 
n of  
positive 
a didactic 
cle that is 
e idea of 
n concept 
y physics, 
er and of 
nowledge 
a gradual 
ng with a 
of matter. 
nalogical 

PESSANHA & PIETROCOLA 
58 
experiment, followed by an examination, from a historical point of view, of the 
replacement of Thomson’s atom. Finally, particle accelerators were discussed. 
 
Our historical approach, besides serving topics required in the curricula both of 
Cataluña and of São Paulo State (the study of atomic models), in effect subsidized 
later discussions about what particle accelerators do and how they work as 
equipment that allows the study of the structure of matter and subatomic 
phenomena, based on a technique of indirectly obtaining “hidden” information. 
 
In the various implementations of the course, we identified several obstacles to 
learning about the subatomic world of physics. Some of those obstacles, those of 
an epistemological nature, consisted in the use of the perceptions of daily 
experience in order to try to understand the subatomic world. Other obstacles, of a 
didactic nature, involved didactic choices made by teachers that proved to be 
scarcely adequate. 
 
As has been seen, both the texts and images chosen, as well as the use of 
metaphors that were not deconstructed, and the misleading emphasis given in one 
explanation of the atomic nucleus, were didactic obstacles that actually reinforced 
the mistaken perceptions of the students. 
 
As was mentioned, the course was designed to allow a gradual understanding of 
key concepts involved in the study of the structure of matter, as well as the study of 
the technique that was used. Overcoming mistaken perceptions and comprehension 
of technique are of central importance to understanding particle accelerators. 
 
In general, it can be stated that both in the elaboration of the material and in the 
choice of teaching approach, teachers themselves must pay attention to the 
difficulties of the topic of modern and contemporary physics. In the case of the 
particle accelerator theme, as has already been emphasized, the physical world 
explored is inaccessible to the human senses and, moreover, is a counterintuitive 
one, which disrupts our deeply-held notions about and perceptions of the accessible 
world. For example, in the subatomic world, interaction does not occur by contact, 
but, instead, involves distance interactions (electric power and nuclear powers), 
particles penetrate matter, and wave-particle duality must be taken into account. 
These last are among the many aspects of the subatomic physics that require the 
close attention of the teacher. 
NOTES 
1  Spain’s post-obligatory high school, called bachillerato, offers two years of courses and normally 
serves students between 16 and 17 years of age. It is a pre-university program, directed by area of 
interest and devoted to preparing for future studies at the university level. 
2  We use the term previous conceptions to refer to the set of notions built in daily experience and to 
the set of conceptual elements that students were already expected to know because they had been 
studied before in the classroom. 
3  A text in Portuguese describing how the experiment was designed is available from 
http://www.sbfisica.org.br/fne/Vol11/Num2/a04.pdf (accessed November 17, 2014). 
4  The Rutherford Scattering and Up Close Rutherford Scattering simulations were used, both of 
which were created by a Canadian Research Center: The King’s Centre for Visualization in Science. 
 
 

PARTICLE ACCELERATORS AND DIDACTIC OBSTACLES 
59 
 
The simulations used, as well as others involving modern physics, may be accessed from 
http://www.kcvs.ca/site/projects/physics.html (accessed November 17, 2014). 
5  The simulation Scattering and Structure, which was also created by The King’s Centre for 
Visualization in Science, was used. 
6  The original text in Catalan: “Els àtoms dels elements consisteixen en un cert nombre de corpuscles 
carregats negativament, immersos en una esfera amb càrrega positiva i massa”. 
REFERENCES 
Bachelard, G. (1975). Le rationalisme appliqué. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France (PUF). 
Bachelard, G. (2002). The formation of the scientific mind: A contribution to a psychoanalysis of 
objective knowledge. Manchester: Clinamen Press. 
Brousseau, G. (2002). Theory of didactical situations in mathematics: Didactique des mathématiques, 
1970-1990. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
Catalunya, Departamento de Educación. (2008). Decree 142/2008, of July 15th that established the 
ordination of the bachillerato teachings. Diario Oficial de la Generalitat de Catalunya: No. 5183 – 
7/29/2008, Jul 2008. Available from http://www.gencat.cat/eadop/imagenes/5183/08190087.pdf 
(accessed December 9, 2014). 
Das, A., & Ferbel, T. (2003). Introduction to nuclear and particle physics. Singapore: World Scientific 
Publishing. 
Greca, I. M., & Moreira, M. A. (2000). Mental models, conceptual models, and modeling. International 
Journal of Science Education, 22(1), 1–11. 
Méheut, M., & Psillos, D. (2004). Teaching-learning sequences: Aims and tools for science education 
research. International Journal of Science Education, 26(5), 635–652. 
Ostermann, F., & Moreira, M. A. (2004). Updating the physics curriculum in high schools: A teaching 
unit about superconductivity. Revista Electrónica de Enseñanza de las Ciencias, 3(2), 190–201. 
Rheinberger, H. (2005). Gaston Bachelard and the notion of “phenomenotechnique”. Perspectives on 
Science, 13(3), 313–328. 
São Paulo. (2008). Proposta curricular do Estado de São Paulo – Física – Ensino médio. Available from 
http://www.rededosaber.sp.gov.br/portais/Portals/18/arquivos/Prop_FIS_COMP_red_md_20_03.pdf
(accessed December, 9 2014). 
 
Márlon Pessanha 
Departamento de Metodologia de Ensino 
Universidade Federal de São Carlos 
Brazil 
 
Maurício Pietrocola 
Department of Teaching Methodology and Comparative Education 
School of Education of the University of São Paulo 
São Paulo-SP, Brazil 
 

 
M. Pietrocola & I. Gurgel (Eds.), Crossing the Border of the Traditional Science Curriculum, 61–72. 
© 2017 Sense Publishers. All rights reserved. 
FABIANA B. KNEUBIL AND MAURÍCIO PIETROCOLA 
4. A TEACHING-LEARNING SEQUENCE ON THE 
CONCEPT OF MASS AND REQUIRED SKILLS FOR 
TEACHING RELATIVITY 
INTRODUCTION 
Researches on physics teaching have been going on for several decades and 
curricular innovation is an important and recurrent theme in such research 
worldwide. In Brazil, several researchers have considered the insertion of modern 
physics materials in high school courses, mostly as methodologies and strategies. 
Since the 1980s, studies have emphasized the need for curricular changes in order 
to incorporate modifications in worldviews that scientific theories, such as those 
regarding special and general relativities and quantum mechanics, have promoted 
(Terrazzan, 1994; Ostermann & Moreira, 2001; Moreira & Valadares, 1998; Gil et 
al., 1987; Ostermann & Cavalcanti, 1999). The need for these changes is shown in 
the fact that technological developments derived from 20th-century scientific 
knowledge have been incorporated into society and, thus, commensurate 
transformations in teaching are required. 
 
Nowadays, many researchers take interventionist approaches, proposing 
teaching strategies involving modern topics, presenting discussions of the results of 
certain methodologies, developing didactic sequences regarding different contents, 
and analyzing the role of teacher training in curricular innovation (Brockington, 
2005; Nicolau Jr., 2014; Lawall et al., 2010; Pietrocola et al., 2009; Siqueira, 
2006). A research group at the University of São Paulo, called Research Nucleus in 
Curricular Innovation, delivers modern physics courses to Brazilian high school 
teachers, using their own didactic materials. Its educational research has focused 
not only on modern physics content, but also on how to promote the insertion of 
these innovative topics into the classroom.  
 
The group deals both with didactical-methodological issues and with teacher 
training. To increase the effectiveness of innovation, the guiding principles of 
didactical reform must also be present in teachers’ practices. Teachers are the most 
sensitive actors in the educational process and their training represents a great 
challenge. Implementing change is not an easy task.  
 
As part of the crisis of science education, teachers are required to address the 
importance of the study of science without being specifically trained to deal with 
related difficulties (Fourez, 2003). According to Chevallard (1991), teachers work 
within a didactic transposition process and are subject both to external pressures 
and to the influences of the teaching system. Teachers are normally pushed into 
doing the work of the didactization process for school contents, in order to adapt 

KNEUBIL & PIETROCOLA 
62 
them to new objectives imposed by higher instances. Teachers do have their own 
conceptions and experiences, and this may be the reason why they tend to react to 
innovations (Pinto, 2005). Issues like these give rise to problems, risks, and the 
possibility of failure (Davis, 2003). 
 
This chapter1 describes a case study concerning the performance of a teacher 
during a Teaching-Learning Sequence (TLS). This specific educational sequence 
addressed the concept of mass in three different contexts, namely classical 
mechanics, electromagnetism, and relativity, and emphasized epistemological and 
conceptual changes in mass from Newton to Einstein. The teacher was invited to 
both participate in the design of our TLS and to implement the developed course 
into the classroom.  
 
During his classes, we could observe the difficulties he encountered, which 
generally arose in dealing with innovative subjects and epistemological content. 
This led us to suggest a set of relevant skills which could be required for 
implementing modern physics topics in the classroom. 
MOTIVATION FOR THE CONCEPT OF MASS THEME 
This chapter was motivated by the careless widespread use of the famous 
expression E=mc2, which represents mass-energy equivalence. It is, definitively, 
the most popular formula in physics and can be found everywhere, both inside and 
outside of schools, in the media, even on T-shirts, etc. In educational institutions, 
both in high school and basic university courses, the formula E=mc2 is usually not 
discussed in any depth.  
 
Mass, normally associated with matter, is one of most fundamental concepts in 
basic education. Since the beginning of physics teaching, mass has been presented 
as a founding entity. In Newtonian mechanics, mass and matter are treated as 
identical and associated with the properties of inertia and attraction. After about 
two centuries of classical mechanics, energy was incorporated and related to mass 
in expressions of kinetic and potential energies. In the early 20th century, special 
and general relativities transformed the classical relationship between mass and 
energy. The best-known resulting change is embodied in the expression2 E=mc2.  
 
One of the consequences of relativity is that inertia and attraction become 
properties of energy and are no longer framed as properties of matter. Another 
change is mathematical: mass does not depend on frame of reference and is a 
relativistic invariant. The ontological nature of mass is quite relevant to current 
physics, since it is a facet of the Higgs boson.  
 
Despite their importance, these epistemological changes in the concepts of mass 
and energy seem to never quite reach most educational spheres, such as high 
school textbooks, undergraduate courses, and their various syllabi. There is a huge 
gap between the worldview introduced by relativity and typical physics education 
and, unfortunately, teachers have not had adequate access to this re-signification of 
mass and energy. More than a century after this shift, discussions on the 
implications of relativity are not yet part of most school knowledge – and this is 

TEACHING-LEARNING SEQUENCE ON THE CONCEPT OF MASS  
63 
especially true for the expression E=mc2, which is often used only as a simple 
numerical conversion of mass into energy. 
 
In our research, we developed a didactic sequence regarding the concept of 
mass, approaching the changes in the meaning of mass over three centuries, from 
Newton to Einstein. Part of our work consisted in proposing a didactic 
transposition of these topics,3 ranging from scholarly knowledge up to knowledge 
taught, as defined by Chevallard (1991) in his Didactic Transposition Theory. 
DESIGN-BASED RESEARCH AND TEACHING-LEARNING SEQUENCES 
Design-Based Research (DBR) is a methodology that emerged in the 1990s, based 
on interventionist methods, and with the goal of joining the theoretical aspects of 
educational research and practice. This methodology was introduced in the 
educational context by Brown (1992) and Collins (1992) and, afterwards, 
employed by other educators as well (Richey et al., 2004; DBR-Collective, 2003). 
DBR emerged as a form of research that implements educational innovation in real 
classroom environments and that deals with the entire teaching process, starting 
from the idea of innovation and following through to its actual implementation. 
The results that arise from a given implementation process must be incorporated 
into the methodology itself, aiming at its improvement.  
 
It is important to emphasize the interventionist features of DBR, since these are 
what promote links between the theoretical and the practical dimensions. Van den 
Akker (1999) emphasizes that the relation between theory and practice is very 
complex and that, sometimes, the direct application of theory is not enough to 
solve practical issues. Therefore, he argues that 
a more ‘constructivist’ development approach is preferable: researchers and 
practitioners cooperatively construct workable interventions and articulate 
principles that underpin the effects of those interventions. Another reason for 
cooperation is that without the involvement of practitioners it is impossible to 
gain clear insight into potential implementation problems and to generate 
measures to reduce those problems. (Van den Akker, 1999, p. 9) 
 
In the teaching context, DBR methodology has been used to design, implement 
and evaluate Teaching-Learning Sequences (TLSs) on specific science subjects. 
Many educational researchers argue that general education and learning theories do 
not account for solving problems related to practice. According to them, theories 
unrelated to specific science subjects do not ensure didactical quality in teaching 
(Lijnse & Klaassen, 2004). These authors contend that ‘flight away from content’ 
causes a gap in the didactical dimension, and thus a lack in certain elements 
necessary for the promotion of didactical progress. They also emphasize that  
the missing level is that of describing and understanding what is, or should 
be, going on in science classrooms in terms of the content-specific 
interactions of teaching-learning processes, and of trying to interpret them in 
terms of didactical theory. (Lijnse & Klaassen, 2004, p. 538) 

KNEUB
64 
 
The
cognit
the na
Psillos
researc
adapte
TLSs 
particu
perspe
 
At t
produc
didacti
Lijnse 
teache
level. 
 
 
In 
implem
theory
classro
applied
metho
researc
design
knowl
transfe
provid
experi
difficu
to be in
 
In g
researc
BIL & PIETROCO
e notion of TL
ive learning o
ame TLS refe
s, 2004). Teac
ch and a pro
ed to the reas
takes into a
ularities of 
ectives, pedago
the end of the 
ced should co
ical dimensio
(2010), there
er (level 2, in F
Fig
short, DBR h
mentation ma
y. Traditional 
oom. Hence, t
d in real conte
dological-dida
chers to devel
ning them for 
edge are gen
erred to other
de new didact
enced teacher
ulties regardin
ncorporated in
general, durin
cher and the d
OLA 
LS has been w
of both student
ers to an inve
ching-Learning
oduct, and in
oning of stud
account spec
specific con
ogical approac
implementati
ontribute to a
on associated 
e is a level of 
Figure 1) and 
gure 1. Level of 
has been sho
ay produce kn
education the
there is a need
exts. Scientifi
actical knowle
lop didactical
all science sub
neral, the resu
r contexts an
tical knowled
rs. They can e
g certain topic
nto the practic
ng the design
design team o
widely used in 
ts and teacher
estigation gui
g Sequences a
nclude design
dents and to t
cific issues, 
ntents, episte
ches, and the f
ion process, it 
an increase in
with a speci
didactics that
design-based 
f didactics (from
own to be pr
nowledge that
ories tend not
d to develop k
ic school know
edge. Tiberghi
l sequences ab
bjects is not f
ults generated
nd applied by
dge and impr
enlarge teache
cs. It would ta
ce of teachers w
n of a TLS a
often specify r
investigative 
rs. However, i
ided by speci
are both an act
ned learning 
the classroom
such as stud
emological a
features of did
is expected th
n the amount 
ific science c
t is often skip
research aims
m Lijnse, 2010, p
romising, bec
t contributes 
t to support te
knowledge to
wledge must b
ien (2000) enc
bout more cha
feasible. As th
d by such im
y other teache
rove practice,
ers’ awarenes
ake a long tim
working on th
about specific 
research quest
research rega
in the present 
ific topics (M
tivity of interv
activities em
m. The develop
dent concepti
assumptions, 
dactic contexts
hat the data an
of knowledg
content. Acco
pped over or le
s at filling this
p. 145) 
cause results 
to a given d
eacher’s actio
o be taught tha
be associated 
courages educ
allenging topi
he features of 
mplementation
ers. These res
 even in the
ss about situat
me for similar 
heir own.  
science cont
tions, which g
arding the 
research, 
Méheut & 
ventionist 
mpirically 
pment of 
ions, the 
learning 
s.  
nd results 
ge in the 
ording to 
eft to the 
s missing 
 
from its 
didactical 
ons in the 
at can be 
with this 
ators and 
ics, since 
scientific 
n can be 
sults can 
e case of 
tions and 
advances 
tents, the 
guide the 

TEACHING-LEARNING SEQUENCE ON THE CONCEPT OF MASS  
65 
investigation and evaluation. The results of our TLS on mass/energy research are 
related to this kind of question.  
OUR TEACHING-LEARNING SEQUENCE ON THE CONCEPT OF MASS  
Our TLS is called ‘E=mc2 and the Weight of Energy’. It was developed in the 
University of São Paulo between 2012 and 2014, and was designed for experienced 
high school teachers. As far as methodology was concerned, we adopted the usual 
TLS framework, as described in the previous section, and supplemented it with 
ideas from didactic transposition theory, including the three spheres of knowledge 
(scholarly knowledge, knowledge to be taught, and knowledge taught), didactic 
intention, and epistemological vigilance (Chevallard, 1991). These concepts are 
important for our work, since our research concerned the teacher’s performance 
and, according to Chevallard, the teacher must convey his or her didactic intention 
to the classroom.  
 
Our investigation regarded the transferability of didactic sequences related to the 
concept of mass. We concentrated on the following two issues: 
1. Is the design process alone enough to prepare a teacher to deal with innovative 
contents?  
2. What are the skills a teacher must have for teaching modern physics topics?  
With these two questions, we wanted to understand the importance of the teacher’s 
expertise in a curricular innovation setting and to take into account his training and 
previous knowledge. We analyzed the same teacher in both classical and modern 
physics teaching contexts. In addition, we hypothesized that the skills required to 
teach in each setting would be different. 
 
We began by reviewing the concept of mass in three different frameworks, 
namely classical mechanics, electromagnetism, and relativity. This highlighted the 
fact that the properties of inertia and attraction, which were attributes of matter in 
Newtonian mechanics, shift to energy in relativity theory. Motivated by the 
perception that discussions of the formula E=mc2 are practically absent in 
textbooks used in both high school and introductory university courses, our study 
was recorded in a written document of more than 150 pages. Later, this text was 
used to develop the DBR didactic sequence. 
 
The design team involved three collaborators: the co-authors of this chapter, a 
professional physicist, and the implementing teacher, under the supervision of one 
of us (F.B.K.). The design stage lasted about four months, with 12 meetings. After 
this process, the design team defined the Design Principles and Objectives of the 
Course, described below. 
Design Principles 
In DBR/TLS methodology, design principles have a high level of importance. In 
our case, they are related to the structure of scientific knowledge and have, 

KNEUBIL & PIETROCOLA 
66 
therefore, an epistemological nature. We started from two principles: (a) scientific 
concepts evolve and their meanings change over time – as when relativity re-
signified the concept of mass; (b) maps and networks are indispensable in 
understanding concepts – scientific knowledge is organized in conceptual 
structures and the meaning of each concept is defined by other nearby concepts 
(Kneubil & Robilotta, 2015).  
Objectives of the Course 
The objectives of this course on the concept of mass are quite broad and more 
concrete than the principles stated above. They were present throughout the whole 
process, guiding the construction of the didactic sequence. 
 
 Main Objective: to highlight the changes of the concept of mass from 
Newtonian Mechanics to Relativity.  
 Secondary Objectives: the secondary objectives regard the methodological 
dimension and consist of the following: (a) to show that the formula E=mc2 is 
not superficial and conveys very rich ontological information – conceptual 
objective; (b) to show that conceptual structures allow a better understanding of 
the concept of mass – epistemological objective; (c) to show that the fragments 
of E=mc2 available in textbooks, curricula, and syllabi do not allow a clear 
understanding of the subject – curricular objective. 
The Course Plan 
The didactic sequence on the concept of mass was designed with eight lessons, 
divided into three on classical mechanics, two on electromagnetism, and three on 
relativity. Each lesson was planned to last two hours and a short description of each 
is presented below. 
 
Lesson 0 – The Classical Universe 
The General Contents of the Universe – Space and Time – Mass and Gravitational 
Field – Newton’s Law of Gravity – Newton’s Laws of Dynamics – The Universe 
as a stage, with material actors  
 
Lesson 1 – Energy and Work in Classical Physics 
Energy and Momentum related to Space and Time – The Role of Force – 
Gravitational Potential Energy – Mass and Inertia 
 
Lesson 2 – Bound Systems and the Hydrogen Atom  
Confined Systems – The Potential Well – Coulombic Potential – The Energies of 
the Atom – Binding Energy – Epistemological Discussion – Exothermic Reactions  
 
 
 

TEACHING-LEARNING SEQUENCE ON THE CONCEPT OF MASS  
67 
Lesson 3 – Energy and Momentum in Electromagnetism 
Charges and Fields – The Energy of Fields – Stored Energy in Capacitors – Point-
like Charge Energy – Electromagnetic Waves – Momentum of Waves – The Re-
Signification of Momentum 
 
Lesson 4 – Radiation and Action-Reaction 
Electric Field Lines – Deceleration of Electric Charge – The Origin of Radiation – 
The Breaking of Newton’s Third Law – Momentum Conservation – Re-
Signification: Wave carries Momentum  
 
Lesson 5 – Relativity: Relative and Absolute Entities 
Relativity in Spatial Rotations – Special Relativity Theory – Lorentz 
Transformations – Scalar Products – Relativistic Interval – Proper Time  
 
Lesson 6 – Relativity: Mass and Energy 
The Classical Coil-Magnet Problem – Four-Momentum – Energy as the Fourth 
Component of the Four-Vector – Energy and Inertia – Invariant Mass – The Re-
Signification of Mass 
 
Lesson 7 – E=mc2 in Action 
Exothermic Reactions – The Energy of the Photon – Relativity and Lavoisier –The 
Weight of Hydrogen – The Weight of Deuteron – The Weight of the Proton – Re-
Signification: Energy has Weight! 
General Features of the Course 
This course can be considered as a kind of didactical narrative, one which conveys 
a message. All the topics mentioned above were carefully ordered to preserve 
global meaning. The course was designed taking into account the main objective, 
which is the re-signification of mass, at all stages of the process. Some elements of 
the course were chosen to highlight the construction of important underlying 
concepts, such as mass, inertia, gravity, momentum, and energy, in classical 
mechanics, electromagnetism, and relativity. In order to accomplish our objectives, 
these topics, which make up a didactic structure, were classified as means-like or 
ends-like.4 This idea is represented in Figure 2. 
The means-like elements are contents outside the main axis of the course. They 
may be related to other concepts and are intended to make up possible content 
gaps, as well as to strengthen basic contents. Therefore, the role of means-like 
elements is mostly local.  
 
The other topics, namely ends-like elements, have to do with approaches 
considered key to understanding the global picture. They make up the main axis of 
the didactic narrative and deal with both dimensions of scientific knowledge, 
namely extension and depth (Kneubil & Robilotta, 2014). The goal of the ends-like 
topics is to insert physical concepts into broader contexts. Some lessons aim at 
 

KNEUB
68 
render
epistem
our co
structu
 
In 
disting
approa
Accord
didacti
genera
realize
those c
 
Our
and th
elabor
new di
by ana
transpo
knowl
the tea
 
Thr
directl
 Recog
Knowi
is esse
the cla
BIL & PIETROCO
ring ontologic
mology. When
ognition. The 
uring knowled
every lesson
guishes the tw
ach to each typ
ding to Lijns
ic sequences 
al. The implem
e some aspects
concerning rel
r research esse
he achieveme
ation of the co
idactic transpo
alysing the tea
osing this kno
edge in this in
acher’s didacti
roughout the p
ly associated w
gnition of the F
ing how to ch
ential and effe
assroom teach
OLA 
Figure 
cal features o
n this happens
framework of
dge and giving
n means-like
wo is their rela
pe. 
DI
e (2000), one
is to extract
mentation of 
s related to the
lativity.  
entially involv
ent of the im
ourse proposa
osition, i.e., ne
acher’s classes
owledge into th
nvestigation h
ic skills. 
process of desi
with the specif
Functionality 
hoose element
fective in opti
hing process. 
2. Elements of 
of concepts e
s, a greater int
f ends-like ele
g new meaning
and ends-li
ation to didact
IDACTIC RESU
e of the goal
t results and 
our Teaching
e practice of t
ved two axes, 
mplementing
al on the conce
ew school kno
s, we could ob
he classroom. 
had to deal wi
ign and imple
fic content of t
of Prerequisit
ts that are ade
mizing, enhan
In the cours
the course 
xplicit and a
tegration occu
ements is glob
gs to concepts.
ike topics w
ic intention, a
ULTS 
ls of developi
knowledge f
g-Learning Se
eaching mode
namely the p
teacher. The 
ept of mass, w
owledge. Rega
bserve the diff
Therefore, the
ith both the c
mentation, we
this course. Th
tes 
quate for teac
ncing, motiva
se we develop
allowing a ble
urs in a deeper
bal and it acts
. 
were presente
as well as the 
ing and imple
for didactic t
equence allow
ern contents, e
physical cours
first one led
which correspo
arding the sec
ficulties encou
e creation of d
ontents develo
e recognized f
hey are describ
ching innovati
ating, and stre
ped, for exam
 
end with 
r layer of 
s towards 
ed; what 
teacher’s 
ementing 
theory in 
wed us to 
especially 
e content 
d to the 
onds to a 
ond axis, 
untered in 
didactical 
oped and 
five skills 
bed next. 
ve topics 
eamlining 
mple, we 

TEACHING-LEARNING SEQUENCE ON THE CONCEPT OF MASS  
69 
inserted a calculation of a diagonal cube module in three-dimensional space in one 
lesson. This was done because we knew that two classes later we would discuss 
four dimensions in relativity. Choosing prerequisites in a fair and necessary way 
and recognizing their functionality are not simple tasks. This competence is very 
important in ordering the contents necessary for the structure of didactic sequences, 
especially when implementing innovative research, as with this TLS. Our 
education does not typically include or develop this kind of skill, as our school 
experiences as students are usually entirely based on traditional contents lists 
arranged into curricular frames. Therefore, this competence is not a natural result 
of our training and it must be taught or guided in order to be implemented in the 
teaching of physics, especially in short courses that involve thematic sequences. 
Knowing How to Re-Signify Physical Concepts 
In modern physics, concepts change their meanings and, therefore, knowing how to 
re-signify them is necessary in order to move from one theory to another. The re-
signification of concepts in physics is associated with the restructuring of theories, 
since the meaning of one concept depends on the context in which it belongs. We 
were able to verify the importance of knowing how to re-signify concepts during 
the implementation of this TLS. The exercise of this skill requires a broader view 
of physics and knowledge of other contexts beyond the particular one that the 
teacher is addressing in a given activity.  
Knowing How to Interpret Equations 
Most of the time, physics ideas are represented through mathematical expressions. 
Extracting these ideas from equations and interpreting them both require complex 
skills, which the teacher must have. In order to gain these skills, extensive 
experience in teaching such content is necessary. In the case of relativity, even 
apparently simple equations are impregnated with the notion of changing 
frameworks and, for this reason, they are much more difficult to interpret than 
those of classical mechanics. 
Familiarity with Abstract Concepts 
Abstraction is a fundamental feature of scientific knowledge and thus physics 
teachers must be able to work with abstract concepts. In classical physics, such 
concepts as time, force, field, velocity, and energy are already very abstract. 
However, in relativity, they are incorporated into higher structures, which render 
them even more abstract. For example, the concept of space is thought about as a 
four-dimensional entity, incorporating four-vectors with four components. To 
understand the meaning of the four-vector modulus in relativity requires complex 
abstraction, since it mixes space with time. Our Teaching-Learning Sequence 
incorporated many of these abstract concepts such as proper time, relativistic 
interval, and relativistic mass. It allowed us to discover that the effective teaching 

KNEUBIL & PIETROCOLA 
70 
of such concepts is related more to the capacity to abstract than is the case for 
classical physics concepts. 
Knowing How to Transform Questions 
This skill is related to the perception of the specific problems and issues dealt with 
in classical versus modern physics. It is very important in modern physics contents, 
and is in fact a required skill when students ask questions. An inexperienced 
teacher has a greater chance of making mistakes if he or she is taken aback by a 
question as it is asked by the student. This may happen because the problems that 
each theory solves are different. The way we think about concepts and how we deal 
with physical situations are unique to relativity. This conception of relativity leads 
to a specialized way of discussing questions that is found only in the study of 
relativity. If a student raises a problem based on classical thought, the teacher must 
have the insight to recognize that basis, and to reformulate the student’s question 
by bringing it back to the context of relativity. This action is entirely positive, 
because it teaches students that to think in the field of relativity also involves 
placing problems and questions within the framework of the theory. This skill 
requires experience in – and ongoing practice of – teaching modern physics 
themes. 
 
These five skills are directly related to the teaching of modern physics. The 
inadvertent practice of teaching classical physics must not develop in the teacher’s 
enactment of these competences. Each skill is connected with the capacity to act in 
consonance with modern physics content and is essentially required by the nature 
of the content itself. The ability that the teacher has to address each aspect of 
content influences his or her lesson in a definitive manner, giving to it a more or 
less didactic quality, depending on his or her skill levels in these five areas. 
NOTES 
1  The results and discussions present here are part of a doctoral dissertation (Kneubil, 2014), which 
describes the epistemological route of mass-energy equivalence and analyzes the teacher’s 
performance in the implementation of a Teaching-Learning Sequence on the concept of mass. 
2  Although the formula E=mc2 suggests the equality between mass and energy, in the theory of 
relativity, mass is a scalar entity and energy is the fourth component of a four-vector. It would 
therefore be more appropriate to write it as E=  mc2 (Okun, 1989; Hecht, 2011, 2006; Kneubil, 
2014). 
3  The complete instruction material can be found in Kneubil (2014). 
4  I use the words ‘means’ and ‘ends’ here as in the saying: ‘The ends do not justify the means’. 
REFERENCES 
Brockington, J. G. (2005). A realidade escondida: A dualidade onda-partícula para alunos do ensino 
médio. Master’s Thesis, USP, São Paulo.  
 
 

TEACHING-LEARNING SEQUENCE ON THE CONCEPT OF MASS  
71 
 
Brown, A. (1992). Design experiments: Theoretical and methodological challenges in creating complex 
interventions in classroom settings. The Journal of the Learning Science, 2(2), 141–178. 
Chevallard, Y. (1991). La transposicion didactica: Del saber sabio al saber enseñado. Argentina: La 
Pensee Sauvage. 
Collins, A. (1992). Toward a design science of education. In E. Scanlon & T. O’Shea (Eds.), New 
directions in educational technology (pp. 15-22). Berlin: Springer-Verlag. 
Davis, K. (2003). Change is hard: What science teachers are telling us about reform and teacher learning 
of innovative practices. Science Education, 87(1), 3–20. 
DBR-Collective. (2003). Design-based research: An emerging paradigm for educational inquiry. 
Educational Researcher, 32(1), 5–8. 
Fourez, G. (2003). Crise no ensino de ciências? Investigações em Ensino de Ciências, 8(2), 109–123. 
Gil, D. P., Senent, F., & Solbes, J. (1987). La introduccion a la física moderna: Un ejemplo 
paradigmatico de cambio conceptual. Enseñanza de Las Ciências, n. extr., 209–210. 
Hecht, E. (2006). There is no really good definition of mass. The Physics Teacher, 44, 40–45. 
Hecht, E. (2011). On defining mass. The Physics Teacher, 49, 40–43. 
Kneubil, F. B. (2014). O percurso epistemológico dos saberes e a equivalência massa-energia. Doctoral 
Dissertation, School of Education of USP, São Paulo. 
Kneubil, F. B., & Robilotta, M. R. (2015). Physics teaching: Mathematics as an epistemological tool. 
Science & Education, 24(5-6), 645-660.  
Lawall, I., Pietrocola, M., Ricardo, E., Shinomiya, G., & Siqueira, M. (2010). Dificuldades de 
professores em física em situação de inovações curriculares e em curso de formação. In XII EPEF, 
Águas de Lindóia. 
Lijnse, P. (2010). Methodological aspects of design research in physics education. In K. Kortland & K. 
Klaassen (Eds.), Designing theory-based teaching-learning sequences for science education (pp. 
144–155). Utrecht: CDBeta Press. 
Lijnse, P., & Klaassen, K. (2004). Didactical structures as an outcome of research on teaching-learning 
sequences? International Journal of Science Education, 26(5), 537–554. 
Moreira, M. A., & Valadares, E. C. (1998). Ensinando física moderna no segundo grau: Efeito 
fotoelétrico, laser e emissão de corpo negro. Caderno Catarinense de Ensino de Física, 15(2), 121–
135. 
Nicolau, J. (2013). Estrutura didática baseada em fluxo – Sequência de ensino aprendizagem de 
relatividade restrita: Paradoxo dos gêmeos. Master’s Thesis, IF/FEUSP, São Paulo. 
Okun, L. B. (1989). The concept of mass. Physics Today, 42(6), 31–36. 
Ostermann, F., & Cavalcanti, C. J. H. (1999). Física moderna e contemporânea no ensino médio: 
Elaboração de material didático, em forma de pôster, sobre partículas elementares e interações 
fundamentais. Caderno Catarinense de Ensino de Física, 16(3), 267–286. 
Ostermann, F., & Moreira, M. A. (2001). Atualização do currículo de física na escola de nível médio: 
Um estudo desta problemática na perspectiva de uma experiência em sala de aula e da formação 
inicial de professores. Caderno Catarinense de Ensino de Física, 18(2), 135–151. 
Pietrocola, M., Ricardo, E, Siqueira, M., & Lawal, I. (2009). Teachers’ perception of curricula content 
innovation. In Proceedings ESERA-2009, Istanbul (pp. 1–4). 
Pintó, O. R. (2005). Introducing curriculum innovations in science: Identifying teachers’ 
transformations and the design of related teacher education. International Journal of Science 
Education, 89, 38–55. 
Richey, R. C., Klein, J. D., & Nelson, W. A. (2004). Development research: Studies of instructional 
design and development. In D. H. Jonassen (Ed.), Handbook of research on educational 
communications and technology. New Jersey: LEA. 
Siqueira, M. R. (2006). Do visível ao indivisível: Uma proposta de física de partículas elementares 
para o ensino médio. Master’s Thesis, IFUSP/FEUSP, São Paulo. 
Terrazzan, E. A. (1994). Perspectivas para a inserção de física moderna na escola média. Doctoral 
Dissertation, USP, São Paulo. 
 
 

KNEUBIL & PIETROCOLA 
72 
 
Tiberghien, A. (2000). Designing teaching situations in the high school. In R. Millar, J. Leach, & J. 
Osborne (Eds.), Improving science education – The contribution of research (pp. 27–47). 
Buckingham: Open University Press. 
Van den Akker, J. (1999). Principles and methods of development research. In J. van den Akker et al. 
(Eds.), The design methodology and developmental research in education and training (pp. 1–14). 
Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
 
Fabiana B. Kneubil 
Department of Physics 
Federal University of Santa Catarina (UFSC) 
Florianópolis-SC, Brazil 
 
Maurício Pietrocola 
Department of Teaching Methodology and Comparative Education 
School of Education of the University of São Paulo 
São Paulo-SP, Brazil 
 

 
M. Pietrocola & I. Gurgel (Eds.), Crossing the Border of the Traditional Science Curriculum, 73–93. 
© 2017 Sense Publishers. All rights reserved. 
LUÍS PAULO DE CARVALHO PIASSI,  
RUI MANOEL DE BASTOS VIEIRA, AND  
EMERSON IZIDORO DOS SANTOS 
5. SCIENCE STAND 
Crossing Borders between Sciences, Arts, and Humanities in a 
Decentralized Science Dissemination Program
BACKGROUND AND PRINCIPLES 
 
Our current research interests derive from our previous experiences as graduate 
students in the second half of the 1990s, in two physics education projects that 
existed at that time at the Institute of Physics of the University of São Paulo. The 
“Experimentoteca-Ludoteca” (perhaps most fittingly paraphrased as “Playful 
Library”) Project, coordinated by Professor Norberto Ferreira (1993), developed 
low-cost, playful experimental resources for science teaching, by using simple and 
familiar materials to reproduce classical didactic experiments and toys for learning 
about mechanics, electricity, optics, and so on. 
 
The “GREF – Grupo de Reelaboração do Ensino de Física” (or “Physics 
Teaching Re-Elaboration Group”), managed by Luis Carlos de Menezes and 
Yassuko Hosoume (1993), proposed materials and methods for an approach to 
teaching physics that was based on everyday life. Discussion of such subjects as 
mechanics, thermodynamics, and electromagnetism was based on things students 
use, see, or are interested in in their daily lives, such as electronic gadgets, 
vehicles, home appliances, etc. 
 
In addition to providing the experience necessary for the production of didactic 
material, such activities were the basis of our participation in ongoing training 
programs for teachers; we were also able to work directly with several such 
programs. Concerns about elementary schools have become systematic since we 
joined the “ABC na Educação Científica – Mão na Massa” (ABCs of Science 
Education – Hands-on Science) program in 2005. This is an inquiry-based science 
education (IBSE) program, intended mainly for elementary schools, and it derives 
from the French program “La Main à La Pâte”,1 and from the contacts that 
Professor Norberto Ferreira had with the Nobel-Prize physicist Georges Charpak. 
The implementation of this program in Brazil occurred in three initial outposts in 
institutions of non-formal science education, namely “Fundação Oswaldo Cruz” 
(Oswaldo Cruz Foundation, known as Fiocruz), in Rio de Janeiro, “Centro de 
Divulgação Científica e Cultural” (Center for Scientific and Cultural 
Dissemination, or CDCC), in São Carlos, and “Estação Ciência” (Science Station), 
in São Paulo, the last two being affiliated with the University of São Paulo. The 

PIASSI ET AL.  
74 
Brazilian Academy of Sciences program supports the program, which is still active 
in settings all over Brazil. We were part of the “Estação Ciência” (Science Station) 
ABC program throughout almost our entire doctoral courses. Since 2008, we have 
been gradually admitted as professors in the University of São Paulo (USP) and in 
the Federal University of São Paulo (UNIFESP), where we are undertaking our 
current research. 
 
One important aspect with which we have been concerned since the outset of 
our studies, is the role of knowledge sources other than textbooks and the 
traditional didactic resources usually employed in science teaching. Experiments 
can be more than a lively way to explain concepts, they can be a source of real 
pleasure as well, just like the toys, games, and other cultural products liked and 
enjoyed so much by children. One of the bases for such considerations was the 
work of the French pedagogue Georges Snyders. In the 1980s, he wrote a book 
entitled “Le Joie à l´École” (Snyders, 1986), in which he explored the 
contradictions that exist between the cultural forms that the school system proposes 
and those with which children are so intensely engaged outside of the classroom, 
such as music, sports, concerts, fashion, and flirting, among others. He wondered if 
it would be possible to engage students in an “elaborated culture”, which schools 
could provide, as much as they engage with their “primary culture”, which derives 
from their spontaneous experiences. In other words, how could schools provide 
young people with a similar and even deeper joy in knowledge? 
 
There are many possibilities for the development and testing of these ideas. 
Since around 2004, based on personal classroom experience with the use of science 
fiction to teach science topics, we have developed several classroom activities 
utilizing science fiction films, novels, and short stories. We have started to use 
these materials not only for discussion of the products of science – concepts, laws 
and phenomena – but also the mechanisms of scientific knowledge production and 
the relationship between science activity and social context. 
 
For a Ph.D. thesis (Piassi, 2007) based on these practical experiences, we 
investigated and studied science fiction itself and we conducted research about 
classroom experiences involving science fiction. These studies provided a basis for 
the development of instruments for theoretical analysis in dealing with science 
fiction from the point of view of the science teacher. Classroom approaches to 
science fiction are often based the somewhat naïve approach of identifying science 
concepts and discussing the distortions of “real” science presented in stories. By 
instead considering science fiction as a fictional construct built over a social 
discourse about science, we were able to deal with such “errors” and “distortions” 
from another point of view. Instead of distortions, we can consider certain 
ideological positions about science that we can identify in works of science fiction. 
Most of the time, such positions can be described in terms of polarities, in which 
each of the poles represents beliefs or disbeliefs related to the roles that science 
plays in our lives. 
 
Thus, we obtained a theoretical framework to address not only the application of 
science fiction itself, but also a broader field of cultural products to be (potentially) 
inserted in the science education context, from playful experiments to toys, films, 

SCIENCE STAND 
75 
books, songs, and so on. We were looking for ways to incorporate as many of these 
tools as possible, considering the pleasure that such things provide to young people 
in their spare time. However, as Snyders (1986) points out, even though such 
spontaneous joys are real, they are also at the same time ephemeral and superficial. 
They pose the sorts of questions and interests that a more systematic and critical 
approach to reasoning could address in a more satisfactory way. 
 
Since 2008, when one of us (Piassi) was admitted as a professor in the School of 
Arts, Sciences, and Humanities of the University of São Paulo (EACH-USP), it has 
become possible to investigate these ideas in more comprehensive projects. The 
EACH-USP is a non-departmental unit, a 10-year-old project of the University of 
São Paulo designed not only to create an advanced campus in a poor region of the 
metropolis that lacks public resources, but utilizing a training proposal adequate for 
facing the new challenges that certainly arise in such a context. It has ten very 
distinct undergraduate courses.2 However, these courses of study do share several 
disciplines, including the natural sciences, arts & literature, conflict resolution, 
society & the environment, multiculturalism & rights, among others, in an attempt 
to facilitate general training as well as interaction between the different areas. This 
environment was favorable to the innovative and interdisciplinary proposals we 
hoped to institute. 
 
Two initiatives emerged. The first one involved an ongoing training program for 
in-service public school teachers, using the IBSE approach and the innovative 
elements we were developing, from playful low-cost experiments to movies, games 
and other resources. We started with a 30-hour course called “Physics in the K-8 
School: Interdisciplinary Activities in a Sociocultural Perspective”, as a proposal 
for the ongoing education of science teachers based on Vygotsky’s socio-historical 
theory (Vygotsky, 1978, 2012). This study enabled us to establish a method for the 
analysis of certain criteria in order to evaluate the choices between different 
approaches to teaching. Our studies point to the need to examine classroom activity 
according to multiple aspects that involve not only the conceptual realm and the 
individual actions of the teacher and the student, but also – and mainly – those 
activities related to social interactions in the classroom environment (Santos, 
2010). On this basis, we planned a second course, a 360-hour course called 
“Specialization in Astronomy Teaching”, in which we proposed to evaluate the 
model of teachers training teachers in a continuous manner designed to engage 
participants in the development and the undertaking of didactic activities through 
social interactions, again driven by Vygotsky’s socio-historical theory. In order to 
monitor the teachers’ didactic production, we developed two instruments: 
“improvement indicators” and “interaction profiles”. The former enabled us to 
analyze and control the development process activities through formative 
assessment. Its aim was both to identify and to offer opportunities for correction 
and improvement by means of descriptive opinion. The latter, in turn, enabled us to 
analyze interactions among teachers within their working groups. We observed that 
the creation and development processes of these activities were directly related to 
the different ways in which these interactions occurred within the groups (Vieira, 

PIASSI 
76 
2013).
Portug
The di
particu
interes
this is 
most c
Paulo.
the exp
is “Mo
a truck
Park” 
public 
hands-
 
Our
project
consist
sell m
contac
who ha
Educar
develo
made 
shown
 
Figure
ET AL.  
. The second 
guese, which w
iffusion of sc
ularly after o
sted, above all
that there are
children to vis
 There, howe
perience of m
obile Science”
k as science ce
(Muramatsu 
spaces, and 
-on science ex
r “Science Sta
t called “Ecot
ts of mobile l
magazines an
cted one of ou
ad the idea of 
re donated a
oping this idea
it possible to
n in Figure 1. 
e 1. The first “Sc
Guarulhos cam
initiative was
we will now de
TH
cience happen
our previous 
l, in ways to d
e so few muse
sit such facilit
ever, are sever
museums and s
” itself, a prog
enter.3 Other in
& Robilotta, 
“Truck with 
xhibitions to pu
and” fits in th
teca”, from the
ibraries for ch
nd newspaper
ur friends, the 
f adapting the E
a stand to E
a. Next, we as
o develop (in
cience Stand”, i
mpus of the Fede
s the “Science
escribe in a de
HE SCIENCE ST
ns to be a par
experiences 
decentralize s
eums and scie
ies, even in la
ral “mobile sc
science center
gram of the Os
nteresting proj
2011), which
Science”, wh
ublic schools (
his category o
e non-governm
hildren built o
rs. The proje
high school p
Ecoteca mode
EACH-USP, i
sked various a
n 2010-2011) 
in an exhibition
eral University 
e Stand”, or “
etailed manner
TAND 
rticularly inter
at the “Scien
cience centers
ence centers in
arge metropoli
cience” initiat
rs to a wider a
swaldo Cruz F
jects include “
h offers scienc
hich uses a c
(Souza & Siqu
of projects. It 
mental organiz
on structures s
ect coordinat
physics teache
el to mobile sc
in order to s
agencies for fin
both materia
n to public kinde
of São Paulo –
“Banca da Ciê
r. 
resting subjec
nce Station”. 
s. The main re
n Brazil. It is
itan areas, suc
tives intended
audience. Amo
Foundation, wh
“Art and Scien
ce exhibitions
cargo vehicle 
ueira, 2011). 
derived from
zation Educare
imilar to thos
tor, Jonar B
er, Ricardo Ma
cience centers.
support resea
nancial suppo
als and exhibi
ergarten teache
UNIFESP (201
ência” in 
ct for us, 
We are 
eason for 
 hard for 
ch as São 
d to bring 
ong them 
hich uses 
nce in the 
s in open 
to carry 
m another 
e4, which 
e used to 
Brasileiro, 
agalhães, 
 In 2009, 
arch into 
ort, which 
itions, as 
 
ers, on the 
14)  

SCIENCE STAND 
77 
 
At that time, our focus was on the development of materials that we could 
display in our “Science Stand”. These materials would be considered as basic 
components of an exhibition which should follow certain operating principles, or 
guidelines. One aspect we would like to emphasize is the expectation relationship. 
What kind of experience are visitors expecting when they come to an exhibition? 
According to Michelle Henning (2006), neither museums nor exhibitions are 
regularly seen as media, nor are they studied from cultural perspectives. Hence, it 
is rare to think about the implicit messages that certain choices express in the 
production of materials. 
 
As a simple example, consider Henning’s reflection regarding the glass case 
often used in museums to display artifacts: “the glass case fetishizes objects by 
conferring an instant aura of preciousness. It places them in a space and time 
distinct from that which visitors occupy – protecting them from deterioration, 
pollutants, and changes in temperature” (Henning, 2006, p. 8). Henning gives this 
glass case example during her discussion of the well-known Marxist concept of 
commodity fetishism. Commodity fetishism is a phenomenon where people 
attribute essential value to the thing itself, instead of to the human labor necessary 
to its creation. In other words, the focus is on things, rather than on people: 
Commodity fetishism suggests an anthropomorphic relationship with material 
things, which we treat as valuable and meaningful in themselves, and capable 
of endowing us with certain desirable qualities. These relationships do not 
cease at the museum’s door. Museums are not immune to the changed 
relationships between people and things brought about in capitalism. 
(Henning, 2006, p. 8) 
 
We do not want the visitor to see the “Science Stand” as a place of consumption, 
despite the “point of sale” metaphor implicit in its constitution. When we think of a 
stand or a stall, the acts of selling and buying come automatically to our minds. We 
go to a newsstand, or a stand at a fair, or a juice stall in order to buy something or, 
at least, to get informed about things (or services) which may be acquired or 
consumed. Instead, what we offer is a knowledge experience, with humorous 
elements as well as entertainment or leisure features that elicit a non-passive 
attitude from visitors. Visitors to the “Science Stand” are moved to decode 
situations, wonder about phenomena, and ask for answers to their questions. 
 
This format breaks with expectations in that, at first glance, the visitor sees the 
“Science Stand” as a place where something is being sold, but instead what he or 
she gets is a learning situation, one which requires direct engagement, handling 
things, social interactions, and so on. Thus, it is not a consumption relationship 
after all. The very constitution of the things they will find at this stand is the 
antithesis of the mass-market industrialized products one can find in stores. In fact, 
what they will encounter is simple, handcrafted things that suggest the possibility 
of replication at home. This is the implicit message we want to convey. In our 
“Science Stand”, you are not going to buy something tricky to show your friends, 
as you might in a magic stall. You are not even going to briefly and passively 
watch a performance done by someone else. If you want to reproduce the “Science 

PIASSI ET AL.  
78 
Stand” experience yourself, you will be able to do so because the necessary 
ingredients are simple, manageable, and accessible. 
 
In order to achieve these points, we defined a set of guidelines for the project’s 
main features. Table 1 has to do with the general aspects of the exhibition, as a 
whole. Other tables refer to the production of exhibition artifacts, the constitution 
of the structure of the stands, and to the mobile features. Therefore, for the general 
(and somewhat ambitious) principles of the exhibitions, we propose the statements 
listed in Table 1. 
Table 1. Guidelines for conceiving exhibitions 
I 
Engagement 
Activities should not be established in a consumption 
relationship, with the audience in the role of mere receivers. 
They should encourage visitors’ direct involvement by 
offering them situations that involve compelling challenges 
and problems. 
II 
Captivation 
Exhibitions must be visible and able to attract, inspire 
curiosity, and provide experiences of wonder for the public. 
Their elements should clearly dialogue with both the cultural 
interests and the daily experience of visitors. 
III 
Repercussion 
Activities must provide extended cultural repercussions that 
extend in time, even after they end, thus encouraging new 
relationships with scientific knowledge. 
IV 
Empowerment 
The visitor should experience cultural enhancement from 
exhibit activities, which must not only provide immediate 
enjoyment or curiosity, but should promote reflection, 
knowledge, and suggestions for new ways to act in the 
world.  
 
 
 
During that period, while our extended astronomy course for teachers was 
taking place, several of the artifacts proposed involved space topics, such as moon 
phases, seasons, and solar system models, among others. Other materials were 
inherited straight from the “Experimentoteca-Ludoteca” project, mainly 
equilibrium toys and simple electrostatic experiments. Others were inspired by 
other sources and involved such themes as fluid mechanics, optics, and waves, 
emphasizing physics topics. We also acquired some ready-made materials, some of 
which included professional science exhibition equipment. However, our priority 
was the sort of handcrafted games and toys commonly sold in artisan fairs all over 
Brazil, which our audience considers both simpler and more familiar. 
 
As we conceived, selected, and adapted the material, we conceived of some 
points to follow, derived from principles already established in previous projects. 
These defined a set of guidelines for material production, according to Table 2. We 
think about these guidelines as a proposition according to which science is 
something close to people and we contend that anyone can produce knowledge. 
Science is not an activity restricted to geniuses and it does not always require 
expensive and sophisticated equipment. 

Fi
handc
I 
P
II 
S
III 
F
IV 
A
V 
R
 
 
Sinc
São Pa
us (Sa
Univer
improv
Stand”
exhibit
develo
exhibit
 
How
realize
work t
structu
wheels
handle
regular
In add
incorp
igure 2. Two ar
crafted toy that 
Table 2.
Playfulness 
Simplicity 
Familiarity 
Affordability 
Reproducibility
ce 2012, we h
aulo (USP) an
antos) became 
rsity of São P
ve both our a
”. We set s
tion devices, 
opments was t
tions to locatio
wever, when 
ed that its spe
to be adequat
ure, which it 
s, a more rob
es designed to
r vehicle winc
dition, this ne
porates a system
rtifacts of “Scien
turns over by it
Davy Lamp a
 Guidelines for
The artifact
to the visitor
The artifact 
way. 
It must be ea
Both spare p
y 
Almost anyo
have been rec
nd from federa
a science pro
Paulo (UNIFE
action model
standards in 
formats, mo
to plan strateg
ons where it w
we tried to m
ecific structur
te to itineranc
designed, wh
bust steel fra
o attach it to 
ches, a much 
ew mobile st
m to capture r
 
nce Stand”. Lef
tself, as a center
assembled with s
r exhibition artif
must arouse cu
r. 
must be simple
asy to recognize
parts and materi
one should be a
ceiving additio
al agencies. A
ofessor in und
SP) in Guarul
and the ove
visual comm
onitors´ unifor
gies and mater
was impossible
move the sta
re required a 
cy. In 2013, E
hich was more
ame, dimensio
a truck body
cheaper servic
tand is design
rainwater. 
ft: The “Upside
r of gravity effe
simple hardwar
facts in a “Scien
uriosity and off
e, and the public
e both its mater
ials must be low
able to replicate 
onal funding f
Almost around 
dergraduate pe
lhos. These tw
erall design m
munication, m
rms, and so 
ials making it
e to carry the s
and from one 
lot of specia
Educare supp
e adapted for
ons similar to
y. Therefore, w
ce, available e
ned to remain
SCIENC
e Down Ladybug
ect. Right: A Hu
re 
nce Stand” 
fer a pleasant ex
c must perceive
rials and spare p
w-cost and easy 
the artifact. 
from the Univ
the same tim
edagogy at the
wo events help
model of the 
materials, dim
on. One of t
t possible to ta
stand itself. 
point to ano
alized (and ex
plied us with 
r transportatio
o an automob
we could hau
everywhere (F
n outdoors, a
CE STAND 
79 
 
g”, a 
umphrey-
xperience 
e it in that 
parts. 
to find. 
versity of 
me, one of 
e Federal 
ped us to 
“Science 
mensions, 
the main 
ake small 
other, we 
xpensive) 
a second 
on. It has 
bile, and 
ul it with 
Figure 3). 
and even 

PIASSI 
80 
 
in
 
We
circum
the dev
must w
allow t
Theref
highly
local w
catchm
plannin
inside 
 
Eve
exhibit
more 
conseq
“point 
offerin
ET AL.  
Figure 3. The n
n the Youngsters
 used both s
mstances of ea
vice itself, as 
work as provi
their operation
fore, versatilit
y variable. In a
water and ele
ment system th
ng to adapt a
the stand, but
en with this 
tions in every 
effective or s
quently adopte
of sale” for 
ng science inst
new stand, desi
s Exhibition of t
at São Carl
stands in sev
ach, it was pos
shown in Tab
isional but ef
n and, later, th
ty is crucial, 
addition, inso
ectricity suppl
hat is working
a solar energy
t this is a futur
better-design
 desired or req
suitable to hav
ed two strateg
science, but 
tead of fruits. 
igned for transp
the Brazilian So
los Federal Uni
veral events, 
ssible to assig
ble 3. In gener
ffective mini-s
heir being mov
because the s
far as it is po
lies. For the 
g fine in our 
y system in o
re project. 
ned stand, it 
quested locatio
ve equipment
gies. The firs
on a smaller
The first atte
portation by reg
ociety of Scienc
iversity (2015)
and, by analy
gn some guide
ral, our conclu
science center
ved, as straigh
specific condi
ssible, stands
former, Educ
current facilit
rder to store 
was not th
on. In some si
t that was eve
st maintained
r scale, somet
empt of this ap
gular car winche
e Progress mee
yzing the res
elines for the d
usion is that th
rs, with resou
htforwardly as 
itions of loca
should not de
care designed
ties. This NGO
electricity in 
hat simple to
ituations, it em
en more porta
the idea of a
thing like a f
pproach can b
 
es,  
eting,  
sults and 
design of 
he stands 
urces that 
possible. 
ations are 
epend on 
d a water 
O is also 
batteries 
o present 
merged as 
able. We 
a kind of 
fruit stall 
be seen in 

SCIENCE STAND 
81 
Figure 4. The key requirement for this device was that it fit in a regular passenger 
vehicle, preferably in the trunk of a car. 
 
Table 3. Guidelines for designing mobile stands 
I 
Mobility 
The design of the stand must ensure low-cost, quick, and easy 
transportation, and it must not require any specialized or 
professional equipment. Educare’s solution was to install wheels 
on a regular, automobile-sized chassis, so that the stand could be 
hauled in the same way as cars, using regular winches. We are 
now investigating the best kinds of wheels for the irregular terrains 
(such as grass) often found in locations where we hope to utilize 
the stand. 
II 
Autonomy 
One of the stands has a system designed to capture and store 
rainwater, which has worked fine for activities requiring water. As 
far as electricity is concerned, we are planning to install battery 
storage systems with capture by solar panels. Although we can 
sometimes rely on electric power points, we have noted that it is 
essential to have the capacity to rely on this possibility, not only 
for lighting, but also for the implementation of activities and 
experiments. 
III 
Security 
The structure must be able to withstand bad weather, ensure 
security, and present resistance to invasive actions. The stand 
currently employed has been used and maintained in public spaces 
and, so far, there have been no problems in these regards. Some 
minor theft-preventative adjustments are being made regarding 
fixed installations that remain outside the structure. We are also 
formulating a locking system to prevent the whole structure from 
being removed from its site without authorization. 
IV 
Versatility 
The framework should allow various types of activities to be 
presented with only minor adjustments. It should enable several 
different activities – such as interactive exhibitions, puppet theater 
performances, workshops, and audiovisual displays, among others 
– to occur simultaneously or in quick succession. All of the stand´s 
spaces (inside, sides, roof) have mechanisms for modular 
installation devices. Based on pilot experiences, we identified 
some equipment that will allow for this versatility, using widely-
available materials such as the panels and fixtures often used to 
display products in stores. 
 
 
We observed that our first model was both too heavy and too clumsy for our 
purposes, so we are building a smaller, lighter one. In any case, our intention is for 
such a device to be able to transform any space where it is located into a space of 
scientific exhibition. 
 
The second “Science Stand”-associated strategy we adopted for science 
exhibitions was to create a visual identity that resembled a “point of sale for 
science”, just as the stands do. With that in mind, we chose standards for exhibition 
materials that were in tune with the reproducibility and simplicity of the ideas 

PIASSI 
82 
themse
compo
friendl
explan
ET AL.  
elves. We pro
osed of perfor
ly material, w
natory posters,
Figure 4. The 
Figure 5
ojected displa
ated eucalyptu
which can ac
, as can be see
“Mini Science S
that 
5. Exhibition for
ays in the form
us wood shav
ccommodate b
en in Figures 1
 
Stand” – The fi
could be hauled
r parents at a sc
m of 3-D pos
ings. This is a
both exhibitio
1, 4, and 5. 
rst model of an 
d by car 
chool in Guarul
sters, by usin
a cheap, versa
on artifacts an
exhibition devi
lhos (2014)  
ng boards 
atile, eco-
nd small 
 
ice  
 

SCIENCE STAND 
83 
 
After exhibiting to different audiences in several spaces and situations, we were 
able to develop some guidelines for displaying resources in order to ensure that 
project goals are fulfilled. These guidelines are described in Table 4. 
Table 4. Guidelines for designing exhibition devices 
I 
Standardization 
We established exhibition systems with their own identity and 
characteristics, which can be easily reproduced and which give 
prominence to the activity performed. With that in mind, we used 
widely available materials. 
II 
Mobility 
Presentations in schools, events, and other situations require light 
materials and devices that can be easily transported, both by air 
and ground, without the use of specialized packaging or labor. 
III 
Versatility 
The devices should be adaptable to different spaces and situations, 
be easily assembled in classrooms, halls, stands, lobbies, etc., and 
allow for various types of interactions, based on direct 
accessibility for and engagement with the visiting public. 
IV 
Modularity 
Materials must be adaptable to several formats and sizes, and 
suitable for being combined in various ways for various kinds of 
exhibitions, including classroom use by teachers. 
 
 
The focus of the project is not to reach the widest possible audience, nor is it to 
disseminate the “Science Stand” on a large scale. Although such aspects are 
desirable, our main interest is to produce knowledge that schools, non-formal 
educational spaces, municipalities, universities, and other institutions can duplicate 
at the local level. 
 
The intervention methodology that we proposed follows Inquiry-Based Science 
Education (IBSE) methodology, understood as starting with the proposal of a 
problem to an audience, challenging them to wonder about a phenomenon or 
situation, and proposing some ways of investigating it in order to reach a 
satisfactory answer. The actual way in which IBSE can occur in our project 
depends on the situation, which presupposes different kinds of social interaction 
among participants, as mediated by exhibition resources. We defined some 
modalities of adopted actions, as shown in Table 5. Based on these modalities, we 
distinguished five basic levels of interaction, as described in Table 6. Finally, Table 
7 illustrates the approximate prevalence of interaction levels to each modality of 
action. 
Table 5. Modalities of action 
Action 
Public 
Locations 
Exhibition 
General and School 
Miscellaneous (events, etc.) 
Presentation 
School (Students and Teachers) 
Universities 
Intervention 
School (Students and Teachers) 
Schools 
Training 
Teachers and Students 
Schools, Universities 

PIASSI ET AL.  
84 
Table 6. Levels of visitor interaction in exhibition activities 
I 
Handling 
An experiment, panel, or any other exhibition element leads 
the individual visitor to manipulation, reading, or another 
form of direct action. 
II 
Monitoring 
The visitor poses requests or questions about the exhibition, or 
an element that, by its own characteristics, requires monitored 
action. In this case, the interaction is triadic (visitor-monitor-
element) and often involves small groups of participants. 
III 
Demonstration 
A lecturer centralizes the attentions of an entire group around 
a given exhibition element, giving explanations, proposing 
activities, and asking questions. 
IV 
Activity 
A whole group is asked to perform certain activities 
(individually or in groups), often with the use of consumable 
materials and eventually resulting in physical products that 
can be taken home by visitors. 
V 
Workshop 
In this case, the activity is prescheduled. Participants are 
informed of the schedule in advance and are sometimes asked 
to bring certain materials. Workshops take longer and 
sometimes involve a systematic follow-up aimed at achieving 
minimum goals for all participants and/or an assessment of the 
process from the point of view of participants. 
 
 
Table 7. Prevalent interaction levels for modalities of action 
Handling 
Monitoring 
Demonstration 
Activity 
Workshop 
Exhibitions 
●●● 
●● 
● 
 
 
Presentations 
● 
●● 
●●● 
●● 
 
Interventions 
 
● 
●●● 
●●● 
●●● 
Trainings 
 
● 
●● 
●● 
●●● 
 
 
Among the schools that visit or are visited by the “Science Stand”, we currently 
work with several fixed pilot schools in which one or more teachers directly 
integrate with the project team, attending regular meetings and developing, under 
our guidance, specific interventions. This structure not only allows the necessary 
evaluation of actions within the school space itself, but also enables the individual 
subprojects to find room for systematic research. We understand such actions as 
non-formal interventions in the school space (and other educational spaces), which 
is, by definition, a formal education environment. We are especially concerned 
about this interaction between non-formal and formal education as mediated by 
university-school relationships since it promotes several research possibilities. In 
the following, we detail some such instances. 
 

SCIENCE STAND 
85 
LADYBUGS IN WONDERLAND: NON-FORMAL INTERVENTIONS 
Based on our former experiences with science fiction and its possible uses for 
teaching science, we started doing research in this field as soon as we began to 
supervise graduate students (some undergraduate research was even brought in for 
the project). Our focus became a little broader than science fiction itself, extending 
to other similar cultural expressions, including several kinds of media and 
materials, all of which may be grouped under the more general term of “fantasy”. 
In short, we started a research line on fantasy studies applied to science education. 
 
Fantasy narratives permeate education beginning in early childhood, from fairy 
tales to modern cartoons and feature films. They depict the natural and social world 
by means of fantastic representations of phenomena, beings, and situations, 
involving things as disparate as dragons, talking animals, magic, extraterrestrial 
beings, robots, enchanted forests, animated toys, and so on. Children build an 
important part of their worldview through those representations as found in books, 
puppets, games, toys, comics, films, and other media, including those related to 
nature and society. With the development of the graduate program on cultural 
studies at EACH-USP, we started to undertake systematic research in this area, 
seeking to investigate the relationships between the socio-political dimensions of 
science, the civilizing process, and child- and youth-oriented media as represented 
in the cultural industry products of audiovisual fiction, printed materials, and 
musical expression. 
 
Given the parallel development of the “Science Stand”, we have made ongoing 
efforts to build connections between these two streams of research concerns. On 
the one side, we have our exhibition activities, which include playful experiments, 
handmade toys, and so on, and, on the other, extensive media materials, which – 
despite being interesting for science teaching – were not simple to configure in 
terms of the classical itinerant science center proposal. 
 
In 2010, we obtained federal resources for our project “Reading Science”, 
allowing us to undertake research into the use of fictional works in the classroom. 
Initially, this work included such approaches as “Teaching the Theory of Relativity 
with Novels”, “Using Fantastic Tales to Teach Physics” or “The Use of Comics to 
Teach Science”, among others, which derived from master´s degree projects. We 
contend that the teaching of science should incorporate socio-cultural and political 
themes related to the sciences, including approaches to the arts and social sciences; 
the above proposals were directly related to that perspective. All of these works, 
however, concentrated mainly on analyzing certain materials and formulating 
possible didactic activities, with only occasional practical and systematic 
classroom applications.  
 
For the results to be more effective, we decided to perform regular work to 
ensure organized data gathering, which led to two projects. The first one is called 
JOANINHA (Joy, Observe, Analyze, and Narrate: Inquiries on Nature, 
Humanities, and Arts), and intended for early childhood (between the ages of 2 and 
6). It focuses on how children use literature, puppetry, toys, games, and play. 
Currently, it involves three kindergarten schools. The other project is ALICE (Arts 

PIASSI ET AL.  
86 
and Playfulness in Inquiries into Science Culture in Educational Environments), 
and is directed toward pre-adolescent (tween) audiences It is intended for students 
10-14 years-old, and is based on extra-curricular activities involving music, 
cinema, robotics, role playing, TV series, debates, and so on. We are presenting 
ALICE in two public schools. The acronym5 JOANINHA spells out the Portuguese 
word for “ladybug”, a common figure in a variety of media and products targeted 
to early childhood. The second acronym refers to the well-known character from 
Lewis Carroll´s juvenile fantasy stories. 
 
Our first systematic implementation took place in 2011, and utilized two 
undergraduate investigations which focused on illustrated children’s books and 
were directed towards younger children. These interventions occurred in public 
elementary schools, where we explored possibilities for, and educational 
applications of, children’s books, puppet theater, cartoons, and toys, among other 
resources. For example, we explored children’s books like “While Mummy Hen 
Was Away” (Young-So & Byeong-Ho, 2013) and “Rosie’s Walk” (Hutchins, 
1971), which tell stories about hens leaving their chicken coops (or “homes”) and 
the chaotic results of their actions (a wolf threatening the hen’s eggs in the first one 
or a fox chasing the hen in the second one). By using books like these to address 
critical inquiries and to promote playful and didactic activities about such themes, 
we believe we can fulfill important goals in teaching science concepts, discussing 
social issues, and developing both language and artistic skills. 
 
None of these books was written as a resource for teaching science, but, in 
reading them closely, and also as presented in puppet shows, a range of concepts 
could be explored, including the food chain, predator-prey relationships, and others 
that were less obvious, deriving from such questions as “Why does the hen live on 
the farm while the fox lives in the forest?”, “Why doesn’t the wolf stay in the 
forest? Isn’t there food him there? Why?” Or even “Is it true that when a hen 
leaves her home bad things always happen? Why?” Such simple questions may 
address environmental issues, animal rights, and gender relationships, among 
others.  
 
Related activities involved text production, research, and the use of art and 
media for expressions of scientific content: panels, folders, paintings, 
performances, installations, videos, toys, music, fictional texts, among others. 
Secondary students produced and exhibited their work, not only in schools, but 
also in non-school settings, such as fairs, exhibitions, and other events. The team 
included graduate and undergraduate students from various courses. 
 
The activities proposed in this scenario were intended to encourage primary and 
secondary students in critical observation of, and wonder about, the natural world, 
as well as to inspire students to think about social relationships and practices. For 
this to happen, we developed recreational activities for children that attempt to 
provide real opportunities for sociocultural interaction, while enabling contact with 
subjects related to science in connection with the humanities and arts. It was 
presented not as curricular content, but as an amusement intervention in the school 
context. The project as a whole included six fronts, performed by different teams, 
according to Figure 7. 

Figur
honor
 
The
zoolog
Watso
Brazili
writer 
childre
 
Bec
teache
may ot
The “S
interac
split th
 
1. Que
diss
and
re 7. The six “S
ing a woman w
e names of the
gist and prim
on, the actress 
ian Aerospace
of children’
en’s comedian
cause of the 
er can undertak
ther school pr
CON
Science Stand
ctions between
hese into three
estions abou
semination. Th
d their effectiv
Science Stand” i
whose work relat
H. Parad
e teams are re
matologist who
and UN Wom
e Engineer at N
’s literature; 
n; and Rita Lee
interdisciplin
ke these activ
rofessionals wh
NCLUSIONS A
d”, “JOANINH
n the three, c
e main categor
ut the produ
hese questions
eness, in a bro
intervention tea
tes to the respec
diso, from the L
eferences to p
o was murde
men Goodwil
NASA; Lucia 
Maria Anton
e, the Brazilia
nary character
vities, regardle
hose expertise
AND RESEARC
HA”, and “AL
contribute to r
ries: 
uction and 
s involve reas
oad sense. 
ams. Each one is
ctive team prop
UCIA team) 
prominent wom
ered for defen
ll Ambassador
Machado de 
nieta de las 
an rock star. 
r that we pr
ess of their di
e or interests c
CH DEVELOPM
LICE” project
research on s
strategies of
oning about m
SCIENC
is called by an a
osal. (Illustratio
men: Dian Fo
nding gorillas
r; Jacqueline L
Almeida, the 
Nieves, the
ropose, any i
scipline or tra
can be integrat
MENTS  
ts, as well as 
several fronts.
f science ed
materials and m
CE STAND 
87 
 
acronym 
on: Alina 
ossey, the 
s; Emma 
Lyra, the 
Brazilian 
Mexican 
interested 
aining, as 
ted. 
the close 
 We can 
ducation/ 
messages 

PIASSI ET AL.  
88 
2. Questions about the agents involved (school students and/or visitors, teachers, 
undergraduate monitors, graduate students). Here the focus is on educative 
interactions and on professional training. 
3. Questions about the role of institutions and possible results for public policies in 
several instances, including extracurricular projects, science dissemination 
programs, university-school relationships, ongoing teacher training, and so on. 
 
Therefore, our focus is not only on the children themselves. Beyond being based 
on work that is oriented toward children, the “Science Stand” program constitutes a 
professional training process and a laboratory in which to test possible educational 
policies on a micro scale. We consider the project as a study intended to contribute 
to public policies, not only in government instances, but also in the actions and 
roles of universities in society. The professional training process has two fronts:  
(a) in-service (and local) training, directed towards teachers’ work in schools, and 
(b) initial training, since university students do most of the actual work as part of 
their professional training as teachers (or for other careers). 
 
We cannot investigate or even discuss all of these possibilities in detail. Our 
objective here was simply to indicate that these developments are possible topics to 
address in future investigations. Therefore, we will focus a little bit more on the 
aspects we ourselves have been carefully dealing with for the last few years. 
 
As far as the connections between “Science Stand” and JOANINHA/ALICE and 
where their possible mutual contributions are concerned, the main open question is 
how to integrate artistic and socio-political themes with the natural sciences in 
dissemination actions. Under that broader inquiry, this work provided some 
questions to address: 
 
 How to offer, to the public, formats that assure relevant hands-on interactions 
with exhibitions based on suitable artistic and media materials? 
 How to ensure the critical perspective and effectiveness of the intended 
message? 
 How can we articulate new media products with classical exhibition artifacts 
without merely presenting a juxtaposition? 
 How can we configure monitored actions to address the social issues of science 
through artistic and literary resources? 
 What actions and products enable teachers to enjoy, incorporate, and adapt 
proposals in their teaching activities? 
 
One of the goals of our various forms of research is to enable us to develop 
theoretical evaluation criteria for the didactic formulation process in this type of 
proposal. Since we often deal with people whose purposes are in principle not 
didactic, we understand that there are several aspects to be studied that are hardly 
addressed in the research on non-formal education and teaching, which is often 
focused on disseminating experiences, proposals, and possibilities. The three steps 
– analysis, formulation, and intervention – represented in the following scheme can 
properly summarize the roadmap we adopt to this approach: 
 

 
 
One
used t
natura
space, 
“Barba
David 
mind. 
be use
what w
doing 
cuts, w
 
The
strong
determ
instrum
movie 
can be
cinema
one or
when 
relatio
those w
are av
depend
contex
which 
 
As 
the ve
topics 
previo
Based 
Figure 
e may conside
to approach a
lly to discuss
and correlat
arella”, TV sh
Bowie´s “Sp
In this proces
eful to our pu
we want to tea
so. This proc
which both lim
e analysis proc
ly concur with
mination, and 
ments for a gi
or a song) in 
e addressed b
a criticism, or
r more frame
we restrict o
onship between
who receive t
vailable, and th
ds on the per
xt, which we c
allows us to u
far as the seco
ery concrete re
we want to 
ous analysis, b
on “2001: A 
8. Roadmap to 
scienc
er, for example
a theme, such 
sions about as
ted social issu
hows like “Sta
pace Oddity”
ss, we are esta
urposes. The t
ach or commun
cess eventually
mit and define t
cess might be 
h the idea that
so recommen
iven product. S
at least three 
by more spec
r via semiotics
eworks can hi
ourselves to ju
n the creator 
these message
he decision as
rspective of th
consider as the
understand a s
ond step, form
elationship th
explore. The
but now we m
Space Odyss
approaching m
ce dissemination
e, that certain
as the Space
stronautics, ro
ues. Movies 
ar Trek” or “I
or Elton John
ablishing a co
three-step pro
nicate and the 
y undergoes s
the corpus. 
performed ac
t media and ar
nd an awaren
Specifically, w
dimensions: te
ialized theore
s or content an
ighlight more
ust one. Disc
of the “speech
es. Many theo
s to which is 
he researcher. 
e full picture 
pecific work.
mulation, is con
at the chosen
ese parameter
must be more s
ey”, and on th
media and arts p
n actions 
songs, movies
e Race in the 
ocket technolo
like “2001: A
I Dream of Je
n´s “Rocket M
rpus of mater
ocess provides
products we c
several review
ccording to sev
rt products ha
ness of the a
we consider e
ext, discourse
etical tradition
nalysis. In gen
 interesting a
course, in tur
h”, the intenti
oretical works
more appropr
The third dim
of the social a
ncerned, we sh
n cultural prod
rs have a clo
specific in ter
he general “Sp
SCIENC
products in  
s or TV series 
1960´s, leadi
ogy, the moon
A Space Ody
eannie”, and so
Man” come r
rial that we co
s an iteration 
consider satisf
ws, with addit
veral paths, th
ave their own l
appropriate th
ach product (s
, and context. 
ns, such as li
neral, a combi
aspects than a
rn, is establish
ions implicit i
 on discourse
riate for a giv
mension is th
and historical 
hould take into
duct develops 
ose dialogue 
rms of teachin
pace Race” th
CE STAND 
89 
 
 could be 
ing quite 
n, life in 
yssey” or 
ongs like 
readily to 
onsider to 
between 
factory to 
tions and 
hough we 
logic and 
heoretical 
such as a 
The first 
iterary or 
ination of 
are noted 
hed as a 
in it, and 
e analysis 
ven work 
hat of the 
situation 
o account 
with the 
with the 
ng topics. 
heme, we 

PIASSI ET AL.  
90 
can explore conceptual topics, such as “explaining orbit”, or “the relativity of 
movements”, or “inertial and non-inertial reference frames”, or even “space 
artifacts and vehicles and their uses”. However, it is equally possible and desirable 
to consider topics about the nature of science, or the process of scientific 
knowledge production, which one may quite easily address based on the parts 
within the film plot in which the characters discuss a discovery under the moon’s 
surface. Does such a conversation have connections with the “Space Race” theme? 
Sure – after all, what is it space exploration for? We are free to ask such questions 
and to come to different conclusions. Space exploration, in principle, should give 
us clues about space, planets, and the laws of nature, as well as other related 
phenomena. Such question, however, could also lead us to other inquiries, such as 
“What were the actual goals of the space race?” As we know, that “race” was much 
more about politics than science. This refers to a third important source of teaching 
topics: the relationships between science and other social instances. In short, we 
think that there are at least three levels from which we can extract topics: 
 
 The core of science and technology products (concepts, phenomena, 
conventions, artifacts, descriptions); 
 The layer of the production of science processes, such as their history, their 
methods, their validation criteria, their instruments, and so on; 
 Finally, an outer layer represented by the relationships that science establishes 
with other branches of human culture, such as politics, economy, religion, arts, 
etc. 
 
It is important to point out that media and art products in particular have many 
possibilities regarding those two outer layers. As we know, the content of a given 
film or song (or something else in the cultural or media fields) is not necessarily or 
generally intended to teach science contents. However, it is very common for 
media and art products to depict views about science, scientific work, scientists, 
and their role in society. Such analyses, however, hardly end the processes of the 
second step. We have not yet planned what we should do with the public. If we 
choose a very well-analyzed song from a film, and extract some interesting topics 
from it, we must then think about what to do in order for people to best learn what 
we hope to teach. Will we exhibit the full movie and discuss it? Will we use a 
trailer or an excerpt, or posters, or reviews, or many things together? How will the 
audience interact with these things? Answering these questions is also a crucial 
part of the formulation step. 
 
Finally, we should apply all these formulated didactics in a real situation. When 
we adopt the IBSE perspective, the strategy is to start from a question and then to 
develop the process from that initial inquiry. The goal of obtaining answers to 
people’s resulting queries derives from the motivation provided by the proposed 
situation. We can describe this process in three moments: 
 

SCIENCE STAND 
91 
 
The statement of a problem or a “mission” which participants must 
solve/fulfill, either individually or in groups depending on the activity’s 
nature.  
 
Participants are encouraged to find ways to solve their problems on their 
own, limited by certain previously-established rules. 
 
The disclosure of results (whose specific format varies, according to the 
activity, in order to allow the use of different languages), followed by 
systematization. 
 
When we gather data to evaluate results and to produce conclusions for our 
research, we are interested, first, in checking if the introduction of media product 
activities, when compiled from the established parameters, encourages the interest 
of the participants in the debate, since such participation is the basis for this stage 
of the investigation. We perform observations using image and sound recordings in 
order to collect empirical results for the activities. These same recordings allow us 
to record the public’s behavior, as well as to verify whether the activities are 
effective in providing an environment of interest vis-à-vis the themes addressed in 
the activities. In our view, such records are a key requirement, allowing for later 
analysis of the quality of debate contents. They provide verification of attitudinal 
manifestations via observation of verbal and non-verbal language expressed by 
participants during activities, generally by means of photos, video recording, and 
note taking. From these, we can build protocol manifestation lists, such as 
exemplified in Table 8. 
Table 8. Examples of participant’s attitudinal manifestations, as recorded in verifiable 
events for data gathering 
 Demonstrates explicit and spontaneous interest in materials  
 Makes positive (or negative) comments about the materials  
 Discusses, in a spontaneous manner, the themes proposed  
 Proposes issues not necessarily provided in the activity  
 Establishes relations with other examples or situations 
 Expresses conceptual questions 
 Presents positions of social order, politics, ethics, or morals 
 Mentions or suggests other materials on the proposed topic 
 Requests more materials, in addition to those presented 
 
 
We also believe that key research results should derive from the material work 
itself, so that the project foresees, at all stages, the systematization and 
dissemination of this material in such a way as to permit its reproduction and 
adaptation in other contexts. As regards participant teachers, discussing 
suggestions and proposals regarding activities and possible classroom results also 
integrates the dissemination effort to wider audiences. 
 
 
 

PIASSI ET AL.  
92 
NOTES 
1  http://www.fondation-lamap.org/ 
2  Degrees in Natural Sciences, Environmental Management, Information Systems, Leisure and 
Tourism, Management of Public Policy, Physical Education and Health, Textile and Fashion, 
Gerontology, Marketing, and Obstetrics. 
3  http://www.museudavida.fiocruz.br/cgi/cgilua.exe/sys/start.htm?UserActiveTemplate=english&sid= 
269 
4  http://portalecoteca.blogspot.com.br/ 
5  These acronyms were adapted for translation. In Portuguese, JOANINHA is “Jogar, Observar, 
Aprender, Narrar: Investigações sobre Natureza, Humanidades e Artes” while ALICE stands for 
“Arte e Lúdico na Investigação da Ciência nos Espaços Educativos”.  
 
REFERENCES 
 
Ferreira, N. C. (1993). Experimentoteca ludoteca. In A universidade e o aprendizado escolar de ciências 
projeto USP/BID 1990–1993 (pp. 97–105). Universidade de São Paulo. Coordenadoria Executiva de 
Cooperação Universitária e de Atividades Especiais. São Paulo: CECAE-USP. 
Hosoume, Y., & Menezes, L. C. (1993). Formação em serviço de professores de física do 2º grau. In A 
universidade e o aprendizado escolar de ciências projeto USP/BID 1990–1993 (pp. 169–171). 
Universidade de São Paulo. Coordenadoria Executiva de Cooperação Universitária e de Atividades 
Especiais. São Paulo: CECAE-USP. 
Henning, M. (2006). Museums, media, and cultural theory. New York: Open University Press. 
Hutchins, P. (1971). Rosie’s walk. New York: Alladin Paperback.  
Hutchins, P. (2015). Rosie’s walk. New York: Simon & Schuster. 
Muramatsu, M., & Robilotta, C. C. (2011). Art and science in the park: Disseminating science in public 
space. In 11th International Conference on Hands-on Science (pp 47–48). Conference Booklet, 
Science Education with and for Society, Aveiro, Portugal.  
Piassi, L. P. C. (2007). Contatos: A ficção científica no ensino de ciências em um contexto sócio 
cultural. Doctoral Dissertation, Faculdade de Educação, Universidade de São Paulo. 
Santos, E. I. (2010). Física no ensino fundamental: Formação continuada de professores de ciências em 
uma perspectiva sócio-histórica. Doctoral Dissertation, Faculty of Sciences, UNESP, Bauru. 
Snyders, G. (1986). La joie à l’école. Paris: PUF. 
Souza, J. S., & Siqueira, M. (2011). Caminhão com ciência: Contribuições para o ensino não formal no 
sul da Bahia. In VIII Encontro Nacional de Pesquisa em Educação em Ciência, Campinas, Brazil. 
Vieira, R. M. B. (2013). A produção de atividades didáticas por professores de ciências em formação 
continuada: Uma perspectiva sócio-histórica. Doctoral Dissertation, Faculty of Education, Institute 
of Physics, Institute of Chemistry, Institute of Biosciences, University of São Paulo, São Paulo. 
Vygotsky, L. D. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Vygotsky, L. D. (2012). Thought and language (Revised and expanded edition). Cambridge, MA: The 
MIT Press. 
Young-So, Y., & Byeong-Ho, H. (2013). While Mummy Hen was away. Welwyn Garden City, UK: 
Ginger Books. 
 
Luís Paulo de Carvalho Piassi 
School of Arts, Science and Humanities 
University of São Paulo (EACH) 
São Paulo-SP, Brazil 

SCIENCE STAND 
93 
Rui Manoel de Bastos Vieira 
School of Arts, Science and Humanities 
University of São Paulo (EACH) 
São Paulo-SP, Brazil 
 
Emerson Izidoro dos Santos 
School of Arts, Science and Humanities 
University of São Paulo (EACH) 
São Paulo-SP, Brazil 
 
 

 
M. Pietrocola & I. Gurgel (Eds.), Crossing the Border of the Traditional Science Curriculum, 95–114. 
© 2017 Sense Publishers. All rights reserved. 
VÍCTOR LÓPEZ AND ROSER PINTÓ 
6. COMPUTER SIMULATIONS AND STUDENTS’ 
DIFFICULTIES IN READING VISUAL 
REPRESENTATIONS IN SCIENCE EDUCATION 
INTRODUCTION AND RATIONALE 
Computer Simulations in Science Education  
Computer simulations can provide learning opportunities in science education, 
allowing students to deal with virtual phenomena and to manipulate or modify 
parameters that would otherwise be impossible to observe. After the progressive 
introduction of computer simulations in school contexts over the last decades, there 
has been widespread scientific discussion about their impact in science teaching 
and learning. In this discussion, many questions have been raised related to 
educational impact, motivation effect, the role of feedback, the specificities of each 
scientific concept, modes of representation, and the relationship between real and 
virtual experiences (Chang, Chen, Lin, & Sung, 2008). In order to summarize this 
discussion, Smetana and Bell (2011) have carried out a critical review of 61 
empirical studies published in journal articles, wherein scientific simulations are 
analysed as tools devoted to the promotion of content knowledge, science process 
skills, and conceptual change, among other aims. They found that the effectiveness 
of simulations is optimal in those cases where they are used as supplements (that is, 
not entirely replacing other instructional modes), when they include high-quality 
support structures, and when they promote student reflection and cognitive 
dissonance. In parallel, the review produced by Honey and Hilton (2011) indicates 
that most studies of simulations in the field of science education have focused on 
the conceptual understanding of students, providing promising evidence that 
simulations can advance this science learning goal. However, they also indicate 
that there is only moderate evidence of the impact of simulations on students’ 
motivation. Finally, a third review made by Rutten, van Joolingen, and van der 
Veen (2012), analysing 510 Journal articles on the effects of simulations in science 
education, provides evidence that simulations can enhance traditional instruction, 
but also demonstrates that aspects such as teacher support and specific learning 
scenarios play an important role that has not been usually taken into account. 
 
One of the most relevant and world-renowned online simulation repositories is 
the PhET platform (http://phet.colorado.edu/), which has delivered more than 100 
million simulations to students in the last ten years, and received dozens of 
educational and scientific awards. PhET simulations aim to provide students with 
representations that allow them to develop deeper and richer understandings than 

LÓPEZ 
96 
they o
with t
commu
advant
2006),
the im
side of
molecu
with th
the pa
surface
expone
Figure
Figure
 
Ano
“Farad
& PINTÓ 
otherwise migh
the simulatio
unicate the re
tage of the co
, with represen
mage, by one b
f the image, b
ular-kinetic m
his simulation
articles increas
es remain sta
ential cooling)
e 1. “Friction” s
Availab
e 2. “Faraday’s
from
other PhET 
day’s Law” (s
ht do with tex
on called “Fr
elationship bet
ombination of 
ntations of int
book on top o
by two groups
model), accomp
n – by draggin
ses and, simul
atic, the part
) does the tem
simulation, repr
ble from http://p
s Law” simulati
m http://phet.colo
simulation in
see Figure 2), 
xt or static im
riction” (see 
tween friction
f two complem
teraction at a m
f another) and
s of particles 
panied by a th
ng one of the b
ltaneously, the
ticle vibration
mperature.  
 
resenting the re
/phet.colorado.e
ion, representin
orado.edu/en/si
ntended for m
and represent
mages. This is,
Figure 1), w
n and heating.
mentary repres
macroscopic le
d at the molec
vibrating and 
hermometer. W
book surfaces
e temperature
n rate decrea
elationship betw
edu/en/simulatio
ng electromagne
imulation/farad
middle schoo
ts one of the 
 for example,
which is inte
 This simulati
sentations (Ai
evel (at the le
cular level (at 
colliding, fol
When students
– the vibratio
e rises. Later o
ases as (follo
  
ween friction and
on/friction 
 
etic induction. A
days-law 
ol students is
many availab
 the case 
ended to 
ion takes 
insworth, 
ft side of 
the right 
llowing a 
s interact 
on rate of 
on, if the 
owing an 
d heating. 
Available 
s named 
ble online 

COMPUTER SIMULATIONS IN SCIENCE EDUCATION 
97 
simulations addressing this physical phenomenon (Dega, Kriek, & Mogese, 2013). 
This simulation shows the electromagnetic induction produced in the interaction 
between a coil and a magnet that can be dragged around the screen by students. As 
its name makes clear, the simulation intends to communicate that the electric 
current – which is simultaneously represented by the illumination of the bulb and 
the movement of the needle of the voltmeter – is directly related to the variation of 
magnetic flux crossing the coil. Further, this simulation also allows students to 
observe a depiction of magnetic field lines. This simulation can be considered a 
highly interactive and dynamic representation that includes the three main types of 
change simultaneously, in their component graphic entities as defined by Lowe 
(1999): transitions, translations, and transformations.  
Visualization of Simulations and Student Interpretations of Depicted Content  
As PhET project members stated (Wieman, Adams, & Perkins, 2008), the desire of 
the authors of the simulations – as with, in principle, any other educational 
simulation – is to bring scientific concepts to students in the most comprehensible 
fashion possible. For this reason, the two previously-presented simulations include 
a full complement of visual resources and features, such as interactivity (draggable 
objects), dynamism, multiple representations, richness of colour, and/or 
representations of invisible and abstract entities (whether particles of matter or 
magnetic lines).  
 
Nevertheless, despite the desire of the authors for easily-comprehensible 
simulation designs, we assume that there is a gap between what students visualize 
and how students might interpret visualized information. This gap results from a 
wide variety of perceptive and cognitive mechanisms that may lead to 
misunderstanding. When visualizing a simulation, students not only need to 
identify all the visual elements and their most important features, but also to 
decode the visual grammar of the depicted representations, and to relate that visual 
grammar to meaning, and then, accordingly, to construct the conveyed message 
(Kress & van Leeuwen, 1996). In this sense, previous studies have refuted the 
assumption that when students read a visual representation they correctly 
understand its meaning. Studies in the field of Science Education by Ametller and 
Pintó (2002), Colin, Chauvet, and Viennot (2002), and Stylianidou and Ogborn 
(2002) demonstrated that most visual representations can inadvertently convey 
wrong ideas to students, especially when there is a lack of student knowledge of 
the visual language. Furthermore, the benefits of the visual communications 
offered by simulations, as well as their risks and challenges in the field of science 
education, are still an open question (Norris, 2012; Phillips, Norris, & Macnab, 
2010; Treagust & Gilbert, 2009; Treagust & Tsui, 2013). 
 
Outside the scope of science education literature, visualization as a cognitive 
mechanism has received much attention in the fields of graphics comprehension 
and instructional design. Among the several elements affecting visualization, it is 
well known that the prevalence and the attention given by the reader to each visual 
element play an important role (Larkin & Simon, 1987; Winn, 1994), as are the 

LÓPEZ & PINTÓ 
98 
representational connections that each reader is able to make in his/her memory 
(Schnotz, 2004). The dynamic, multimedia, interactive nature of simulations can 
both enhance and hinder student interpretations of depicted content, even when 
learners have sufficient cognitive resources to perceive and process all of its 
essential information (Mayer & Moreno, 2003; Sweller, Van Merriënboer, & Paas, 
1998). The 26 primary studies reviewed by Höffler and Leutner (2007) showed an 
instructional advantage of animation over static images, especially when 
animations 
are 
representative 
rather 
than 
decorative. 
Nevertheless, 
misinterpretations can still be accentuated due to the constraints imposed by the 
limited sensitivity of the learner to dynamic information (Meyer, Rasch, & 
Schnotz, 2010), and also because of the tendency by the student to extract the most 
perceptually-salient animated information, instead of the most relevant information 
(Lowe, 2003). Something similar occurs when students have to pay attention to 
different sources of information that act as multiple representations (Ainsworth, 
2006), where the prior knowledge of the student affects the split of their visual 
attention, whether on conceptually relevant features or on superficial features 
(Cook, Wiebe, & Carter, 2008). These and other questions have led to deep 
discussions about empirically-validated design factors and principles for effective 
educational simulations, as well as the translation of these factors and principles in 
science education instructional design, some of which can be found in Cook (2006) 
or Plass, Homer, and Hayward (2009). 
Students’ Explanations of the Scientific Content of Simulations 
Given the gap between visualization and interpretation by students, if a group of 
middle school students with a low prior knowledge of the domain visualizes one of 
the two previously presented simulations – “Friction” and “Faradays’ Law” – we 
wonder if students’ full understanding of the depicted scientific concepts should be 
taken for granted at all. In fact, when speaking of “understanding”, we refer to 
conceptual understanding as widely discussed in the field, which other authors 
have called conceptualization (see, for instance, the definition of this term 
proposed by Linder, 1993). However, this debate remains beyond the scope of this 
study and, indeed, we assume that the only way to identify students’ 
understandings is by means of their oral / written explanations, that is, by 
observing how students respond when asked about any specific simulation content 
(i.e., “What do you think this simulation is trying to tell you?”). For this reason, 
our focus will be on student explanations, which, according to the previously-
mentioned studies, may differ somewhat from the scientific explanations that the 
simulations intend to communicate.  
 
In order to address the analysis of these student explanations, it is also necessary 
to take into account students’ previous knowledge about the domain and, more 
specifically, its associated alternative ideas (Gunstone, 1989; Pozo & Gómez, 
1998), many of which bear erroneous science implications and which have 
received considerable attention during previous decades. Considering the 
“Friction” simulation, most of its depicted scientific concepts have several 

COMPUTER SIMULATIONS IN SCIENCE EDUCATION 
99 
associated alternative ideas that have been widely reported in the literature. This is 
the case with the particle-based representation of matter that appears in this 
simulation, which we can easily associate with different alternative ideas about 
particles and matter, such as the connection of macroscopic properties to 
microscopic particles (Harrison & Treagust, 2002; Lijnse, Licht, de Vos, & 
Waarlo, 1990), or the idea that solids are not made up of atoms, especially those 
without visible granularity (Johnson, 1998; Nakhleh, Samarapungavan, & Saglam, 
2005; Nakhleh, Samarapungavan, Saglam, & Duru, 2006), or the notion that atoms 
and molecules are embedded in matter (Griffiths & Preston, 1992; Johnson, 1998; 
Renstrom, Andersson, & Marton, 1990). Similarly, concerning the relationship 
between particle behavior and temperature displayed in the simulation, different 
related alternative ideas have also been identified, such us the view that the 
particles in a solid are not moving (Lee, Eichinger, Anderson, Berkheimer, & 
Blaskeslee, 1993; Novak & Musonda, 1991), or the idea that the average speed of 
the atoms or molecules in a substance remains the same with a change in 
temperature (AAAS, 2013). The “Friction” simulation also includes other scientific 
topics, such as the cooling processes of matter, which in turn may entail alternative 
student conceptions. For instance, students may assume that when a body is cooled 
its temperature tends to reach a “natural” temperature (Wiser, 1995).  
 
A range of associated alternative ideas can also be highlighted as regards the 
scientific concepts depicted in the “Faradays’ Law” simulation. On the one hand, 
we should consider the variety of alternative ideas about electric current and 
electrical circuits (Cosgrove, Osborne, and Carr, 1985), such as the attenuation 
model or the unipolar model (Driver et al., 1994; McDermott & Shaffer, 1992; 
Shipstone, 1988), as well as the idea that electric current moves sequentially across 
the different elements of a circuit (Closset, 1983; Holton & Verma, 2011; Psillos, 
Koumaras, & Valassiades, 1987). On the other hand, we should also consider those 
alternative ideas which regard electromagnetic induction and interactions between 
magnets and coils, such as the difficulties inherent in conceiving the coil-magnet 
interaction as a distance interaction (Guisasola, Almudi, & Zuza, 2013; Thong & 
Gunstone, 2008), and in distinguishing between magnetic field, magnetic flux, and 
variations in magnetic flux (Albe, Venturini, & Lascours, 2001; Maloney, 
O’Kuma, Hieggelke, & Van Heuvelen, 2001), not to mention the lack of physical 
meaning given to electromagnetic induction (Mauk & Hingley, 2005; Thong & 
Gunstone, 2008). Finally, concerning the magnetic lines depicted in this 
simulation, different alternative ideas on the parts of students have also been 
identified, such as the idea that magnetic lines correspond to “real” entities (Thong 
& Gunstone, 2008).  
 
Finally, beyond students’ specific alternative ideas related to the scientific 
content of the two previous simulations as presented, student explanations can also 
be influenced by more general psychological mechanisms. In fact, the ways in 
which these alternative ideas are linked to forms of normal or spontaneous 
reasoning in everyday life and everyday experience – and assumed by students 
prior to receiving any teaching on the subject – have been widely studied. These 
mechanisms have received considerable attention through various approaches,  

LÓPEZ & PINTÓ 
100 
such as the “spontaneous reasoning” framework (Viennot, 1979), the 
“phenomenological primitives” framework (diSessa, 1983), and the “psychology of 
common sense” framework (Pozo, Sanz, Gómez, & Limón, 1991). They have also 
been identified in the psychology subfield of graphics perception, when describing 
mechanisms for reducing the cognitive load in visualizations (Paas et al., 2004; 
Schnotz, 2005; Sweller et al., 1998).  
RESEARCH OBJECTIVES AND METHODOLOGICAL APPROACH  
In this context, the objectives of our research are: 
 
 To identify the explanations that 14-16-year-old students give when they are 
asked about the scientific meaning of the two simulations, “Friction” and 
“Faradays’ Law”.  
 To compare these explanations with the expected/intended scientific 
explanations of the simulations.  
 To identify which reasoning mechanisms might be involved in these student 
explanations.  
 
 
In order to achieve these objectives, we followed several steps. The two 
simulations previously presented (Figures 1 and 2) were selected according to a 
variety of educational criteria, including the adequacy of the scientific content of 
the simulations for the school curriculum for this age group, the level of interaction 
provided by the simulation, and the absence of any mathematical formality that 
would hinder student understanding. Then, a set of statements was defined, 
corresponding to the scientific explanations that resulted from a content analysis of 
the two simulations, as well as the pedagogical aim of each simulation as outlined 
in the PhET website. The ensemble of defined statements is presented in Tables 1 
and 2, wherein each table links the scientific concepts that constitute the conceptual 
system of each simulation. 
 
Later on, we selected a group of 20 students (14–16 years old) from four 
different schools in the Barcelona area. All of the students had some prior 
knowledge about the scientific topics in question, but none of them were experts on 
either subject. We then carried out two sets of interviews, one for the “Friction” 
simulation and another for the “Faraday’s Law” simulation, with a group of 10 
students per simulation. We used the ten first letters of the alphabet (from A to J) to 
select the ten students interviewed about “Friction”: student A, student B, … 
student J. Similarly, we used the following ten letters (from K to T) to name the 
students interviewed about “Faraday’s Law”: student K, student L, … student T. 
All interviews were individual and semi-structured, and included questions about 
the scientific meaning of the simulations. Each interview took about 20 minutes, 
and was video-recorded and transcribed. 
 
At this point, we selected the fragments of interviews where any student 
explanation could be identified. Later, we coded and classified all of these 
fragments by comparing the similarities and differences between student 

COMPUTER SIMULATIONS IN SCIENCE EDUCATION 
101 
explanations and the scientific explanations that the simulations were intended to 
communicate, with a particular focus on those explanations that differed from the 
scientific explanations (Table 3). Finally, we discussed the reasoning mechanisms 
that might be involved in those student explanations that differed from the 
scientific explanations, according to the different frameworks presented above. 
Table 1. Summary of the scientific explanations that the “Friction”  
simulation is intended to communicate  
Code 
Statement 
Fric1 
Friction between two surfaces produces a temperature increase of the rubbed 
surfaces. 
Fric2 
The macroscopic friction between surfaces corresponds to the microscopic 
collisions between particles. 
Fric3 
Collisions between particles increase the vibration rate of the particles. 
Fric4 
The temperature increase (decrease) of the rubbed surfaces can be microscopically 
explained by the increase (decrease) in the vibration of particles. 
Fric5 
When surfaces stop rubbing, the previously-increased temperature decreases 
because of the difference with the temperature of the environment.  
Fric6 
The cooling rate of the rubbed surface follows an exponential rate, decreasing very 
rapidly at the beginning and then progressively slowing down. 
Fric7 
As well as increasing temperature, friction also causes some particles to break 
away, producing erosion on the rubbed surfaces.  
Table 2. Summary of the scientific explanations that the “Faradays’ Law” simulation is 
intended to communicate 
Code 
Statement 
Fara1 
The movement of the needle of the voltmeter indicates the voltage between the 
ends of the coil.  
Fara2 
The intensity of the bulb’s light is directly proportional to the absolute value 
displayed by the voltmeter, and both the illumination and the needle’s movement 
are simultaneous.  
Fara3 
Magnetic lines represent the direction and the intensity of the magnetic field.  
Fara4 
When the magnet moves close to the coil, electric current is induced. The 
intensity of the current depends on the number of magnetic lines crossing the coil.  
Fara5 
The induced electric current depends on the position and the velocity of the 
magnet.  
Fara6 
The induced electric current depends on the number of turns in the coil. 
 
 
Overall, this methodological procedure is qualitative, since we are performing a 
diagnostic study intended to reveal which student explanations differ from 
scientific explanations, and also investigating which reasoning mechanisms might 
be involved. By contrast, the study is not focused on the quantitative prevalence of 
these student explanations and reasoning mechanisms.  

LÓPEZ & PINTÓ 
102 
ANALYSIS OF DATA AND RESULTS  
Analysis of Students’ Explanations Regarding the “Friction” Simulation 
As stated above, the ten students (A to J) who were asked about the “Friction” 
simulation had to answer a set of questions about the scientific content of the 
simulation, that is, about the behavior of the particles, the relationship between 
friction and heating, and also about the behavior of the thermometer. The wide 
variety of explanations given by students was classified according to which of the 
scientific concepts were involved in each explanation, using the classification 
presented in Table 1.  
 
The first of these statements, Fric1, “Friction between two surfaces produces a 
temperature increase of the rubbed surfaces”, can be considered the main scientific 
explanation behind the depicted information of the simulation. Nevertheless, 
despite the relevance of this explanation, two alternative explanations were given 
by students. First, some students explained that the increase in temperature was 
produced by simple contact between surfaces <Fric1-SE1>, and not necessarily by 
the friction (movement) between these surfaces. This explanation could be 
identified in expressions such as “When I join the two books, they get heated” 
[Student A], and also “The books are heated because of their contact” [Student B]. 
Another student explanation differing from the scientific explanation Fric1 was 
supported by a simplified and naive heat-transfer model, and held that the increase 
in temperature is produced by “temperature transfer” <Fric1-SE2>. This 
explanation can be found in statements by students such as “Each book has its own 
temperature. When you join them, they take on more temperature” [Student D].  
 
A second piece of relevant information depicted in the simulation is Fric2, “The 
macroscopic friction between surfaces corresponds to the microscopic collisions 
between particles”, an idea that links macroscopic phenomena with particle-based 
interpretation. However, some students did not link these two pieces of information 
because they were only focusing their attention on the right side of the picture. This 
led them to explain the behavior of the system as related to two isolated groups of 
particles, without any integration with the rest of the picture <Fric2-SE1>. This is 
the case, for instance, in explanations like “I can see an isolated group of atoms 
(…) Oh, the books! I hadn’t noticed the books” [Student B].  
 
A deep understanding of the “Friction” simulation implies a conceptual 
understanding of the role of particle collisions, since these collisions are the actual 
cause of the increase in the vibration rate of particles, and, so, the temperature 
increase. For this reason, we defined Fric3 as “Collisions between particles 
increase the vibration rate of the particles”. Nonetheless, the idea of particle 
collisions did not appear in some student explanations, and was in fact substituted 
by other physical explanations. We found, for instance, references to a chemical 
reaction <Fric3-SE1> such as, “It looks like a chemical reaction” [Student A]. 
Other explanations were based on the idea of a change of state <Fric3-SE2>, which 
includes explanations with terms such as “evaporation” or “melting”. This is the 
case of “It turns from solid to liquid” [Student J]. Finally, a third explanation that 
differs from the idea of particle collisions is based on the idea of the mixture of 

COMPUTER SIMULATIONS IN SCIENCE EDUCATION 
103 
substances <Fric3-SE3>, which was identified in expressions like “Green particles 
got mixed with yellow particles” [Student C].  
 
To supplement the previous statement, we defined Fric4 with the micro-macro 
relationship of temperature: “The temperature increase (decrease) of the rubbed 
surfaces can be microscopically explained by the increase (decrease) in the 
vibration of particles”, which represents the basis of the kinetic particle theory. 
This idea did not appear in some students’ explanations, which suggests that they 
did not understand the relationship between particles and temperature <Fric4-
SE1>: “I don’t know the relationship between particles and the thermometer” 
[Student E]. Other alternative explanations can be found in the inverse causality of 
the relationship between macro and micro levels <Fric4-SE2>, such as “The 
temperature rises and, for this reason, particles begin to vibrate faster” [Student 
C]. That is, instead of explaining the temperature as the macroscopic consequence 
of the increase of vibration rate, Student C explained the increase of vibration rate 
as the consequence of temperature increase. 
 
After the book has been moved/rubbed (dragged), if it is then left in place 
(dropped), a decrease in the vibration rate of the particles can be observed in the 
simulation. This decrease in vibration rate is accompanied in the simulation by a 
decrease in temperature, which is intended to show that any heated material is later 
cooled if the environmental temperature is lower than its temperature. For this 
reason, we defined Fric5 as “When surfaces stop rubbing, the previously-increased 
temperature decreases because of the difference with the temperature of the 
environment”. In fact, most of the students were able to explain the cooling in 
terms of the stopping of friction, as indicated in Fric5. However, two students 
identified the separation between the two surfaces as the cause of the cooling 
<Fric5-SE1>. This is, for instance, the explanation found in “[The temperature 
decreases] because the bodies are not together any more, and for this reason they 
get colder” [Student D]. 
 
In parallel, according to Newton’s law of cooling, the rate of increase or 
decrease in the temperature of any material depends on the temperature difference 
between this material and the environment. For this reason, Fric6 was defined as 
“The cooling rate of the rubbed surface follows an exponential rate, decreasing 
very rapidly at the beginning and then progressively slowing down”. Contrary to 
this idea, some of the students explained cooling in terms of a constant rate of 
temperature decrease <Fric6-SE1>. An example of this type of answer is “The 
decrease in the temperature is the same all the time” [Student E].  
 
A final idea presented in the “Friction” simulation concerns the erosion of 
surfaces. When students interact with the simulation by rubbing the book (that is, 
dragging or shaking it), it can be observed that some particles break away from 
their position and come out of the representation. That is why Fric7 was defined as 
“As well as increasing temperature, friction also causes some particles to break 
away, producing erosion on the rubbed surfaces”. Not all students interpreted this 
representation as an erosion phenomenon, and different alternative explanations 
arose. Some students explained the breaking away of some particles as if it were 
the evaporation of the material <Fric7-SE1>: “at a certain point, some particles 

LÓPEZ & PINTÓ 
104 
are evaporated and they come off” [Student H]. Other students explained this 
breaking away as the particles being part of the air comprised between the two 
surfaces <Fric7-SE2>: “These [particles] are air’s atoms in the middle [of the two 
books]” [Student F].  
Analysis of Students’ Explanations Regarding the “Faraday’s Law” Simulation 
The second group of students were asked about the scientific content of the 
“Faraday’s Law” simulation: the idea of the electric circuit, electromagnetic 
induction, the behavior of the bulb, and the behavior of the voltmeter, including its 
relationship with the magnet, etc. In the following, we analyse the variety of 
explanations given by these ten students (K to T) on the basis of the six statements 
presented in Table 2.  
 
As stated above, the “Faraday’s Law” simulation intends to explain that the 
movement of a magnet around a coil produces an induced voltage – and therefore, 
an induced electric current – in a circuit. Thus, the representation of this induced 
voltage should be correctly interpreted by students. In the case of this simulation, 
voltage is represented by the needle of the voltmeter as well as by the illumination 
of the bulb. For this reason, we defined Fara1 as “The movement of the needle of 
the voltmeter indicates the voltage between the ends of the coil”. According to 
their answers, not all the students achieved a correct understanding of this 
representation. On the one hand, some students explained the behavior of the 
needle and its back-and-forth motion as a switch that opens and closes the circuit 
<Fara1-SE1>. This explanation can be observed in statements such as “This [the 
needle] is a switch that keeps changing all the time” [Student L]. On the other 
hand, other students explained the role of the voltmeter as a sensor that makes 
measurements directly on the magnet, and not on the coil <Fara1-SE2>: “it [the 
voltmeter] measures the force of the magnet, and this is positive or negative 
because of the poles” [Student N].  
 
In parallel to the movement of the voltmeter needle, the other source of 
information that allows students to understand the induced voltage is the 
illumination of the bulb. The simulation intends to communicate that both 
phenomena (needle movement and bulb illumination) are simultaneous and directly 
related; that is, the more illumination, the more the needle moves to the left or to 
the right. For this reason, we defined Fara2 as “The intensity of the bulb’s light is 
directly proportional to the absolute value displayed by the voltmeter, and both the 
illumination and the needle’s movement are simultaneous”. This scientific 
explanation differs from some of the students’ explanations. Some students 
described the different phenomena of the simulation in successive order, one after 
another <Fara2-SE1>, according to the common misconception identified in the 
literature by which understanding electric current runs sequentially through the 
circuit elements (Driver et al., 1994; Shipstone, 1984, 1988). This explanation 
could be identified in expressions such as “When the magnet moves, [the electric 
current] first goes to voltmeter, and then it moves to the bulb” [Student L]. A 
second alternative explanation given by students consisted in relating the 

COMPUTER SIMULATIONS IN SCIENCE EDUCATION 
105 
illumination of the bulb only with the positive voltage, but not with the negative 
voltage <Fara2-SE2>. This explanation appeared, for instance, in the expression 
“When it [the voltmeter’s needle] is in the positive side, [the bulb] is illuminated 
but when it [the needle] is in the negative, no” [Student K]. This explanation is in 
line with the alternative explanation identified by Holton and Verma (2011).  
 
Another key concept behind the “Faraday’s Law” simulation is the idea of 
magnetic field, which appears as represented by magnetic lines. For this reason, we 
defined Fara3 as “Magnetic lines represent the direction and the intensity of the 
magnetic field”. Nevertheless, some students gave alternative explanations. First, 
some students explained that the represented lines were the movement of electrons 
<Fara3-SE1>, as suggested by the statements “This represents the direction taken 
by electrons” [Student P] and “The lines through which electrons travel” [Student 
S]. Other students’ explanations suggested that magnetic lines were physical 
entities that could collide against real objects <Fara3-SE2>, as suggested by 
statements such as “lines collide with the coil” [Student K]. In fact, this specific 
conception has also been identified in previous studies (Thong & Gunstone, 2008). 
Finally, we identified a third student’s explanation according to which magnetic 
lines correspond to the perimeter of the field <Fara3-SE1>, indicating a notion of 
the magnetic field as finite and delimited by an elliptical line, that is, a perimeter. 
We identified this explanation when we observed one student [Student R] 
mentioning the idea of “inside the field and outside the field” as referring to the 
area inside and outside of the ellipse formed by one of the magnetic lines.  
 
While the three previously defined statements Fara1, Fara2 and Fara3 focus on 
the separated ideas of electricity and magnetism, the next three statements address 
the idea of electromagnetic induction. First, Fara4 states that “When the magnet 
moves close to the coil, electric current is induced. The intensity of the current 
depends on the number of magnetic lines crossing the coil”. The highly complex 
idea of electromagnetic induction was not used by some of the students; instead, 
alternative explanations were given, supported by the idea of a physical interaction 
between the magnet and the coil. This result agrees with results given by 
Guisasola, Almudi and Zuza (2013), which show that interaction at a distance 
between a coil and a magnet is not easily conceived by students. This alternative 
idea appeared in student interviews through two different explanations. In two 
interviews, students explained that the circuits were opened because there was a 
hole in the middle (the coil), and that the magnet was then connected inside the 
coil, closing the electric circuit and allowing electric current to flow <Fara4-SE1>. 
This explanation can be observed in “Now, [when the magnet is exactly inside the 
coil] the circuit is closed, you know? At this moment, electrons are able to freely 
move through the circuit” [Student O]. Another alternative explanation given by 
students was based on the physical contact (and even friction) between the coil and 
the magnet <Fara4-SE2>. This is the case in quotes such as, “When the magnet 
touches the coil, the bulb lights because it [the magnet] transfers positive or 
negative energy to the bulb” [Student S], and also “When the magnet contacts the 
magnet, there are micro-crashes with electrons. It generates electricity” [Student 
P]. This last student also stated later that the more friction, the more electric current 

LÓPEZ & PINTÓ 
106 
was produced, demonstrating an alternative idea also identified by Driver et al. 
(1994). 
 
Since Faraday’s law of induction states that the induced electromotive force in 
any closed circuit (in our case, a coil) is equal to the negative of the time rate of 
change of the magnetic flux through the circuit; Fara5 indicates that this time rate 
of change in magnetic flux depends on the position and the velocity of the magnet. 
Since magnetic flux is a complex concept for 14–16-year-old students, the 
statement was simplified as “The induced electric current depends on the position 
and the velocity of the magnet”. Despite this, some students’ alternative 
explanations did not describe the electric current in terms of the velocity of the 
magnet. They related the intensity of the electrical current only with the position of 
the magnet, but not with its velocity <Fara5-SE1>. Some students described the 
behavior of the system in terms of the position of the magnet, using expressions 
like “If the magnet is closer the electricity is bigger” [Student N]. However, in 
these explanations they did not explain that if the magnet remained still, no electric 
current was induced. Another explanation given by students assumed that electric 
induction occurred when the magnet moved, but that the induced electric current 
had a constant value that did not depend on the velocity of the magnet <Fara5-
SE2>. This is the case of Student L, who was moving the magnet with different 
velocities when he said “I always perceive the same light intensity”.  
 
Finally, according to Faraday’s law of induction, the last statement, Fara6, has 
been defined as “The induced electric current depends on the number of turns in 
the coil”. This idea is represented in the simulation through the existence of two 
different coils with a different number of turns (two and four, respectively). Two 
different alternative student explanations for this idea were identified through the 
interviews. First, we identified an explanation that stated that the induced current 
depended on the length of the coil, but held that this length was not related to the 
number of coils, but rather with the time that the magnet remained inside the coil 
when it was crossing it <Fara6-SE1>. This explanation was observed when Student 
L hypothesized that “Since this coil is longer, there is more electricity passing 
because the magnet remains longer inside the coil. And if it [the coil] is shorter, 
there is less light”. Other students were also not able to adequately relate the 
number of turns of each coil with the induced current, as they stated that this 
number did not affect the induced current <Fara6-SE2>. To wit, “it doesn’t matter 
which coil crosses the magnet. The bulb lights in the same way” [Student Q], a 
statement that was later amended (“Well, with the second coil the intensity is 
greater, but I hadn’t realized it before”).  
Summary of Students’ Alternative Explanations 
The ensemble of alternative explanations given by students is summarized in Table 
3. For simplicity, the table does not include student quotes verbatim, but instead 
gives a brief description of the idea underlying student explanations, as well as 
identifying which student gave each explanation.  

COMPUTER SIMULATIONS IN SCIENCE EDUCATION 
107 
Table 3. Summary list of students’ alternative explanations  
Code 
Code’ 
Brief description of the student explanation  
Student 
Fric1 
Fric1-SE1 
the increase in temperature is produced by simple 
surface contact  
A,B 
Fric1-SE2 
the increase in temperature is produced by “heat 
transfer” 
D 
Fric2 
Fric2-SE1 
the image only represents two isolated groups of 
particles  
A,B,G 
Fric3 
Fric3-SE1 
the image represents a chemical reaction 
A,C 
Fric3-SE2 
the image represents the melting of a solid 
D,J 
Fric3-SE3 
the image represents a mixture of substances 
C,D 
Fric4 
Fric4-SE2 
there is no relationship between particle behavior 
and temperature 
E,I 
Fric4-SE2 
the increase in particle vibration is caused by the 
increase in temperature 
C,E,F  
Fric5 
Fric5-SE1 
the cooling is caused by the separation of the 
surfaces in contact  
A,B,D 
Fric6 
Fric6-SE1 
the cooling of the surface occurs at a constant rate 
A,B,D,E,I,J 
Fric7 
Fric7-SE1 
the particles coming off correspond to an 
evaporation process  
D,H 
Fric7-SE2 
the particles coming off correspond to air particles 
F 
 
 
 
 
Fara1 
Fara1-SE1 
the voltmeter is a switch that opens and closes the 
circuit  
L 
 
Fara1-SE2 
the voltmeter measures “magnetic force” directly 
N 
Fara2 
Fara2-SE1 
situations happen in succession, one after another 
L,M 
Fara2-SE2 
the bulb only lights with positive voltage, not with 
negative  
K,M 
Fara3 
Fara3-SE1 
the lines represented the movement of electrons 
R,S 
Fara3-SE2 
magnetic lines are physical entities that collide 
against real objects 
K 
Fara4 
Fara4-SE2 
when the magnet “connects” inside the coil, the 
circuit gets closed  
O 
Fara4-SE1 
Electromagnetic Force is produced by physical 
contact/friction between the coil and magnet 
K,M,P 
Fara5 
Fara5-SE1 
EMF depends on the position of the magnet, but not 
on its velocity 
K,M,N,P,T 
Fara5-SE2 
EMF is constant, therefore it does not depend on the 
velocity of the magnet 
L 
Fara6 
Fara6-SE1 
EMF depends on the length of the coil but not on 
the number of turns  
L 
Fara6-SE2 
EMF is the same regardless of the number of turns 
of the coil  
Q 
 
 
 
According to Table 3, a wide variety of alternative explanations can be 
identified when students are asked about the science concepts in these simulations. 
It is important to highlight that the variety of explanations involves both the range 
of specific concepts for which each explanation concerns, as well as the set of 

LÓPEZ & PINTÓ 
108 
alternative explanations that each student gives about each concept. For example, 
in the “Friction” simulation, we have not only identified alternative explanations 
concerning a variety of concepts (friction, temperature, work and heat, the micro-
macro relationship, the molecular-kinetic model, etc.), but also a variety of 
explanations concerning a specific concept, as happens for Fric3. In fact, with only 
a small number of students (ten students per simulation), there were 12 alternative 
explanations for the “Friction” simulation – out of which ten were used by two or 
more individual students – and, in the “Faraday’s Law” simulation, 12 alternative 
explanations were identified – out of which five were stated by two or more 
students. As regards the recurrence of the different students’ answers, it is 
important to remark that alternative explanations concerning all the defined 
statements have been identified. They include not only those complex or abstract 
concepts which might seem more difficult for students (as in, for instance, a deep 
understanding of the relationship between the vibration of particles and the idea of 
temperature), but also the ideas at the core of the information depicted in the 
simulations, as occurs with Fric1 (“Friction between two surfaces produces a 
temperature increase of the rubbed surfaces”), which, a priori, might seem 
relatively simple and easy for students.  
Discussion of Students’ Underlying Reasoning Mechanisms  
Considering the expected scientific explanations that should result from the content 
analysis of the two simulations (that is, the statements defined in Tables 1 and 2), 
and comparing them with students’ alternative explanations given during their 
interviews, a set of commonalities can be identified. These commonalities cannot, 
however, be considered as the sole causes of students’ alternative explanations 
(Meltzer, 2007); we thus refer to the reasoning mechanisms by which alternative 
ideas arise which may be implicit in such explanations. They have been grouped 
according to the literature (diSessa, 1983; Leinhardt, Zalavsky, & Stein, 1990; 
Pozo et al., 1991; Pozo, 1987, 1993; Viennot, 1979, 1996).  
 
A first commonality identified in students’ explanations concerning both 
simulations is the description of the behavior of the simulation in terms of the state 
of their elements, and not on the processes depicted. This is the case of Fric1-SE1, 
“the increase in temperature is produced by simple surface contact”, and Fric5-
SE1, “the cooling is caused by the separation of the surfaces in contact”. This 
reasoning can also be observed in the answers about the relationship between the 
coil and the magnet in the “Faradays’ Law” simulation: Fara4-SE1, “when the 
magnet “connects” inside the coil, the circuit gets closed”; Fara4-SE2, “EMF is 
produced by physical contact/friction between the coil and magnet”; and Fara5-
SE1 “EMF depends on the position of the magnet, but not on its velocity”. All of 
these explanations are based on the position of the objects (whether the book or the 
magnet) but not on the movement of these objects. Students are able to describe the 
behavior depending on whether the books (or the magnet and the coil) are “in 
contact / not in contact”, but not on whether they are “moving / not moving”. 
Actually, this finding agrees with the results of Gustafson and Mahaffy (2012), 

COMPUTER SIMULATIONS IN SCIENCE EDUCATION 
109 
which state that students tend to explain the behavior of particles in terms of their 
position and not of their movement. This reasoning mechanism can be considered a 
simplification of the total information depicted in the simulation, since students are 
focused on the position of the visual objects, which is an easier perception, and not 
on their movement.  
 
Something similar occurs with Fara5-SE2, where “EMF is constant, thus it does 
not depend on the velocity of the magnet”, and with Fara6-SE2, “EMF is the same 
regardless of the number of turns of the coil”. In these two explanations, students 
distinguish whether the bulb lights or not, but they do not discern the different 
values of more or less illumination, that is, the different degrees of intensity. This 
leads to a discretization of the displayed variables, similar to the mechanism 
reported by Driver et al. (1994), where students did not see motion as belonging to 
a number of different categories, such as at rest, constant velocity, speeding up, 
slowing down, changing direction, etc. Instead, they saw motion as simply moving 
or not moving. Furthermore, this result also agrees with students’ natural tendency 
to interpret continuous data as discrete data (Leinhardt et al., 1990). On further 
analysis of Fric6-SE1 “the cooling of the surface occurs at a constant rate”, a 
similar simplification mechanism can also be identified. In the previous cases, 
students had understood a movement-dependent behavior as a position-dependent 
behaviour; similarly, in this case students explained a non-linear behavior as a 
linear behavior, that is, a linearization mechanism. This also agrees with historical 
results regarding the tendency toward interpreting non-linear graphics as linear 
graphics (García, 2005; Markovitz, Eylon, & Bruckheimer, 1986).  
 
In parallel to these simplification mechanisms, students also tend to fill their 
explanations with stored memory information, that is, with more-accessible long 
term memory knowledge. This implies the necessity of changing the information 
offered by simulation images to information that is closer to “reader” minds, 
according to the accessibility rule defined by Pozo et al. (1991). On analyzing 
some of the students’ answers, a common denominator can be identified: students 
usually introduce scientific concepts which are not related to the simulation, but to 
something learned shortly before they were interviewed. For the “Friction” 
simulation, two references to changes of state can be identified: Fric3-SE2, “the 
picture represents the melting of a solid” and Fric7-SE1, “the particles being 
removed correspond to an evaporation process”; in both cases, students had 
previously studied the molecular-kinetic model for explaining changes of state in 
their classes. For the “Faradays’ Law” simulation, both Fara1-SE1, “the voltmeter 
is a switch that opens and closes the circuit”, and Fara4-SE1, “when the magnet 
“connects” inside the coil, the circuit gets closed”, refer to the idea of an opened / 
closed electric circuit; this idea had been studied by students some weeks before 
the interview. Students’ tendency to deal with their misunderstanding of 
simulations by including concepts retrieved from accessible memory had also been 
reported by Genover, Pozo, and Vilar (1998), who identified how students 
substitute the information from a text with other general knowledge they possess. 
This reference to previous, accessible knowledge can also be identified in those 
explanations where students used other scientific models to explain phenomena: In 

LÓPEZ & PINTÓ 
110 
Fric1-SE2, “the increase in temperature is produced by “heat transfer”, is arrived at 
by substituting a model of work with a model of heat. In Fara5-SE2, “EMF is 
produced by physical contact/friction between the coil and magnet”, a mechanical 
model is used in place of an electromagnetic model, as Driver et al. (1994) had 
identified. Even the students’ explanation found in Fara3-SE1, “the lines 
represented the movement of electrons”, arose because they have studied electricity 
(but not magnetism) in their science classes.  
 
A last kind of commonalities in students’ answers can be identified in those 
cases where students reorganized the information depicted by the simulations, 
modifying relationships between elements in terms of causalities and interactions. 
This is the case, for example, in the associations that some students made about the 
spatial contiguity between the magnet and the voltmeter (Fara1-SE2), as well as 
between the bulb and the magnetic line (Fara3-SE2). This association of ideas has 
been described by Pozo (1987) as a conceptual relationship being imputed to a 
visual relationship. This organization of information in students’ explanations can 
also be seen when students explain different phenomena that are simultaneous as 
occurring in a successive order. This is the case in Fara2-SE1, which clearly 
corresponds with the spontaneous sequential reasoning identified in the literature 
(Closset, 1983; Viennot, 1996); and in the inversion that can be identified in Fric4-
SE2, where, first, temperature rises and then particles increase their vibration rate. 
Finally, in the reorganization of information that students make in their 
explanations, they occasionally directly eliminate a part of the depicted 
information. This is the case in Fric2-SE1, where three students tried to explain the 
system as if there were no books in the left side of the picture, and also Fara2-SE2, 
where one student tried to explain the behavior of the bulb as if there were no 
illumination when the voltmeter indicated negative values.  
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS  
The identification of this array of alternative student explanations suggests that 
representing scientific concepts through simulations that have been specially 
designed for middle school students does not automatically lead to the correct 
understanding of these concepts on the part of those students. Thus, these findings 
lead us to refute the implicit conception that sometimes underlies teacher’s and 
designer’s assumptions, that visualizing the images displayed in educational 
resources implies a full understanding of the meaning of the intended scientific 
concepts. For this reason, we contend that professionals in the field of science 
education should not take it for granted that students will benefit from any 
educational simulation without analysing what students do and do not understand 
when they observe these simulations. This idea is in line with previous studies 
pointing out that the effectiveness of simulations varies with the particular students 
and contexts studied, and that simulations may have a negative impact on 
conceptual change for students with low prior conceptual knowledge (Dega et al., 
2013). Furthermore, these results are also in agreement with those authors who 
state that in order to achieve effective comprehension of depicted scientific 

COMPUTER SIMULATIONS IN SCIENCE EDUCATION 
111 
content, students need to overcome various difficulties (Ametller & Pintó, 2002; 
Colin, Chauvet, & Viennot, 2002; Stylianidou & Ogborn, 2002).  
 
In addition, the wide variety of identified alternative explanations that can arise 
leads us to conclude that these explanations do not point in a single direction, but 
in fact depend on many different factors. In this sense, it is important to distinguish 
between content-dependent analysis of students’ answers and content-independent 
analysis. From the point of view of the concepts underlying simulations, the 
identified alternative student explanations are closely related to other students’ 
alternative conceptions from these or other educational levels. It is important to 
mention that students’ alternative explanations do not only involve complex 
concepts, but also simple ideas that might seem obvious to teachers and designers. 
In addition, other commonalities in students’ reasoning have also been identified, 
such as the substitution of the information depicted in the simulation by 
previous/accessible knowledge, or by simplified explanations wherein information 
has been eliminated or re-organized. Since very similar reasoning mechanisms 
were identified concerning student explanations vis-à-vis these two different 
simulations, we foresee that such reasoning could also appear in explanations 
concerning simulations of other specific scientific concepts. 
 
On the basis of the above, we assume that the critical reading of images could 
play a central role in schools when students are using and visualizing scientific 
simulations. In order to receive the actual benefits which might be offered by 
simulations, teachers and instructional materials should scaffold students’ reading 
processes and clarify students’ explanations of the depicted content, thereby 
leading to more accurate understanding.  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
The authors are grateful for the support of the Spanish MINECO project under No. 
EDU2011-28431. 
REFERENCES 
AAAS. (2013). Project 2061. Retrieved from http://assessment.aaas.org/ 
Ainsworth, S. (2006). DeFT: A conceptual framework for considering learning with multiple 
representations. Learning and Instruction, 16(3), 183–198. 
Albe, V., Venturini, P., & Lascours, J. (2001). Electromagnetic concepts in mathematical 
representations of physics. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 10(2), 726–736. 
Ametller, J., & Pintó, R. (2002). Students’ reading of innovative images of energy at high school level. 
International Journal of Science Education, 24(3), 285–312. 
Chang, K.-E., Chen, Y.-L., Lin, H.-Y., & Sung, Y.-T. (2008). Effects of learning support in simulation-
based physics learning. Computers & Education, 51(4), 1486–1498. 
Closset, J. L. (1983). Sequential reasoning in electricity. In Workshop on Research in Physics Education 
(pp. 313–319). Paris: Editions du CNRS. 
Colin, P., Chauvet, F., & Viennot, L. (2002). Reading images in optics: Students’ difficulties and 
teachers’ views. International Journal of Science Education, 24(3), 313–332.  
Cook, M. (2006). Visual representations in science education: The influence of prior knowledge and 
cognitive load theory on instructional design principles. Science Education, 90(6), 1073–1091. 

LÓPEZ & PINTÓ 
112 
Cook, M., Wiebe, E. N., & Carter, G. (2008). The influence of prior knowledge on viewing and 
interpreting graphics with macroscopic and molecular representations. Science Education, 92(5), 
848–867. 
Cosgrove, M., Osborne, R., & Carr, M. (1985). Using practical and technological problems to promote 
conceptual change workshop. In W. Duit, Jung, & C. Rhoneck (Eds.), Aspects of understanding 
electricity (paper number 250). Kiel: Institut fur die Pedagogik der Naturwissenschaften. 
Dega, B. G., Kriek, J., & Mogese, T. F. (2013). Students’ conceptual change in electricity and 
magnetism using simulations: A comparison of cognitive perturbation and cognitive conflict. 
Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 50(6), 677–698. doi:10.1002/tea.21096 
diSessa, A. (1983). Phenomenology and the evolution of intuition. In A. L. Stevens (Ed.), Mental 
models (pp. 15–33). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Driver, R., Squires, A., Rushworth, P., & Wood-Robinson, V. (1994). Making sense of secondary 
science: Research into children’s ideas. London: Routledge. 
García, J. J. (2005). La comprensión de las representaciones gráficas cartesianas presentes en los 
libros de texto de Ciencias Experimentales, sus características y el uso que se hace de ellas en el 
aula. Departamento de Didáctica de las Ciencias Experimentales. Universidad de Granada, Granada. 
Genover, J., Pozo, A., & Vilar, J. (1998). Eines de comprensió de textos. La lectura intensiva a 
secundària. Barcelona: Graó. 
Griffiths, A. K., & Preston, K. R. (1992). Grade-12 students’ misconceptions relating to fundamental 
characteristics of atoms and molecules. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 29(6), 611–628. 
Guisasola, J., Almudi, J. M., & Zuza, K. (2013). University students’ understanding of electromagnetic 
induction. International Journal of Science Education, 35(16), 2692–2717.  
Gunstone, R. (1989). A comment on “the problem of terminology in the study of student conceptions in 
science”. Science Education, 73(6), 643–646. 
Gustafson, B. J., & Mahaffy, P. G. (2012). Using computer visualizations to introduce grade five 
students to the particle nature of matter. In S. P. Norris (Ed.), Reading for evidence and interpreting 
visualizations in mathematics and science education (pp. 181–202). Rotterdam, The Netherlands: 
Sense Publishers. 
Harrison, A., & Treagust, D. (2002). The particulate nature of matter: Challenges in understanding the 
submicroscopic world. In J. Gilbert (Ed.), Chemical education: Towards research-based practice 
(pp. 189–212). Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
Höffler, T. N., & Leutner, D. (2007). Instructional animation versus static pictures: A meta-analysis. 
Learning and Instruction, 17, 722–738. 
Holton, D. L., & Verma, A. (2011). Designing animated simulations and web-based assessments to 
improve electrical engineerging education. In Gaming and simulations: Concepts, methodolgies, 
tools and applications (pp. 979–997). New York: Information Science Reference. 
Honey, M. A., & Hilton, M. (2011). Learning science through computer games and simulations. 
National Academy of Sciences. Washington, DC. 
Johnson, P. (1998). Progression in children’s understanding of a “basic” particle theory: A longitudinal 
study. International Journal of Science Education, 20(4), 393–412. 
Kress, G., & van Leeuwen, T. (1996). Reading images. The grammar of visual design. New York: 
Routledge. 
Larkin, J. H., & Simon, H. A. (1987). Why a diagram is (sometimes) worth ten thousand words? 
Cognitive Science, 11(1), 65–99. 
Lee, O., Eichinger, D. C., Anderson, C. W., Berkheimer, G. D., & Blaskeslee, T. D. (1993). Changing 
middle school students’ conceptions of matter and molecules. Journal of Research in Science 
Teaching, 30(3), 249–270. 
Leinhardt, G., Zalavsky, O., & Stein, M. K. (1990). Functions, graphs, and graphing. Task A learning, 
and teaching. Review of Educational Research, 60(1), 1–64. 
Linder, C. J. (1993). University physics students’ conceptualizations of factors affecting the speed of 
sound propagation. International Journal of Science Education, 15(6), 655–662. 

COMPUTER SIMULATIONS IN SCIENCE EDUCATION 
113 
Lijnse, P. L., Licht, P., de Vos, W., & Waarlo, A. J. (1990). Relating macroscopic to microscopic 
particles. A central problem in secondary science education. Utrech: CDB Press. 
Lowe, R. K. (1999). Extracting information from an animation during complex visual learning. 
European Journal of Psychology of Education, 14, 225–244. 
Lowe, R. K. (2003). Animation and learning: selective processing of information in dynamic graphics. 
Learning and Instruction, 13(2), 157–176. 
Maloney, D. P., O’Kuma, Hieggelke, C. J., & Van Heuvelen, A. (2001). Surveying students’ conceptual 
knowledge of electricity and magnetism. American Journal of Physics, 69(51), 12–23. 
Markovitz, Z., Eylon, B., & Bruckheimer, M. (1986). Functions today and yesterday. For the Learning 
of Mathematics, 6(2), 18–28. 
Mauk, H. V., & Hingley, D. (2005). Student understanding of induced current: Using tutorials in 
introductory physics to teach electricity and magnetism. American Journal of Physics, 73, 1164. 
Mayer, R., & Moreno, R. (2003). Nine ways to reduce cognitive load in multimedia learning. 
Educational Physcologist, 38(1), 43–52. 
McDermott, L. C., & Shaffer, P. S. (1992). Research as a guide for curriculum development: An 
example from introductory electricity, Part I: Investigation of student understanding. American 
Journal of Physics, 60, 994–1003. 
Meltzer, D. E. (2007). Multiple representations in physics education: Recent developments and 
questions for future work. Presented at a workshop at the University of Jyväskylä. 
Meyer, K., Rasch, T., & Schnotz, W. (2010). Effects of animation’s speed of presentation on perceptual 
processing and learning. Learning and Instruction, 20(2), 136–145. 
Nakhleh, M. B., Samarapungavan, A., & Saglam, Y. (2005). Middle school students’ beliefs about 
matter. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 42(5), 581–612. 
Nakhleh, M. B., Samarapungavan, A., Saglam, Y., & Duru, E. (2006). A cross-cultural study: Middle 
school students’ beliefs about matter. In Proceedings of the NARST Annual Meeting. San Francisco, 
CA. 
Norris, S. P. (2012). Reading for evidence and interpreting visualizations in mathematics and science 
education. Rotterdam, The Netherlands: Sense Publishers. 
Novak, J. D., & Musonda, D. (1991). A twelve-year longitudinal study of science concept learning. 
American Educational Research Journal, 28, 117–153. 
Paas, F., Renkel, A., & Sweller, J. (2004). Cognitive load theory: Instructional implications of the 
interaction between information structures and cognitive architecture. Instructional Science, 21, 1–8. 
Phillips, L. M., Norris, S. P., & Macnab, J. S. (2010). Visualization in mathematics, reading and science 
education (p. 107). Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Springer. 
Plass, J. L., Homer, B. D., & Hayward, E. O. (2009). Design factors for educationally effective 
animations and simulations. Journal of Computing in Higher Education, 21(1), 31–61.  
Pozo, J. I. (1987). Aprendizaje de la ciencia y pensamiento causal. Madrid: Visor. 
Pozo, J. I. (1993). Psicología y didáctica de las ciencias de la naturaleza ¿concepciones alternativas? 
Infancia y Aprendizaje, 16, 187–204. 
Pozo, J. I., & Gómez, M. A. (1998). Aprender y enseñar ciencia. Del conocimiento cotidiano al 
conocimiento científico (p. 332). Madrid: Ediciones Morata. 
Pozo, J. I., Sanz, A., Gómez, M. A., & Limón, M. (1991). Las ideas de los alumnos sobre la ciencia: 
Una interpretacion desde la psicologia cognitiva. Enseñanza de Las Ciencias: Revista de 
Investigación y Experiencias Didácticas, 9(l), 83–94. 
Psillos, D., Koumaras, P., & Valassiades, O. (1987). Students’ representations of electric current before, 
during and after instruction on DC circuits. V. Journal of Research in Science and Technological 
Education, 5(2), 185–189. 
Renstrom, L., Andersson, B., & Marton, F. (1990). Students’ conceptions of matter. Journal of 
Educational Psychology1, 82(3), 555–569. 
Rutten, N., van Joolingen, W. R., & van der Veen, J. T. (2012). The learning effects of computer 
simulations in science education. Computers & Education, 58, 136–153.  

LÓPEZ & PINTÓ 
114 
Schnotz, W. (2005). An integrated model of text and picture comprehension. In R. Mayer (Ed.), The 
Cambridge handbook of multimedia learning (pp. 49–69). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University 
Press. 
Shipstone, D. (1984). A study of children’s understanding of electricity in simple DC circuits. European 
Journal of Science Education, 6(2), 185–198. 
Shipstone, D. (1988). Pupils’ understanding of simple electrical circuits. Physics Education, 23, 92–96. 
Smetana, L. K., & Bell, R. L. (2011). Computer simulations to support science instruction and learning: 
A critical review of the literature. International Journal of Science Education, 34(9), 1337–1370. 
Stylianidou, F., & Ogborn, J. (2002). Analysis of science textbook pictures about energy and pupils’ 
readings of them. International Journal of Science Education, 24(3), 257–283.  
Sweller, J., Van Merriënboer, J., & Paas, F. (1998). Cognitive architecture and instructional design. 
Educational Psychology Review, 10(3), 251–296. 
Thong, W. M., & Gunstone, R. (2008). Some student conceptions of electromagnetic induction. 
Research in Science Education, 38(1), 31–44. 
Treagust, D., & Tsui, C.-Y. (2013). Multiple representations in biological education (p. 390). 
Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Springer. 
Viennot, L. (1979). Spontaneous reasoning in elementary dynamics. European Journal of Science 
Education1, 1(2), 205–225. 
Viennot, L. (1996). Raisoner en physique. La part de sens commun. Brussels: De Boeck Université 
Practiques Pedagogiques. 
Wieman, C. E., Adams, W. K., & Perkins, K. K. (2008). PhET: Simulations that enhance learning. 
Science, 322(5902), 682–683. 
Winn, W. D. (1994). Contributions of perceptual and cognitive processes to the comprehension of 
graphics. In W. Schnotz & Kulhavy (Eds.), Comprehension of graphics. Advances in psychology 
(Vol. 108, pp. 3–28). Amsterdam: Elsevier Science. 
Wiser, M. (1995). Use of history of science to understand and remedy students’ misconceptions about 
heat and temperature. In D. Perkins (Ed.), Software goes to … Teaching for understanding with new 
technologies (pp. 23–38). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
 
Víctor López  
Centre for Research in Science and Mathematics Education (CRECIM)  
Autonomous University of Barcelona (UAB) 
Spain  
 
Roser Pintó  
Centre for Research in Science and Mathematics Education (CRECIM)  
Autonomous University of Barcelona (UAB) 
Spain  

 
M. Pietrocola & I. Gurgel (Eds.), Crossing the Border of the Traditional Science Curriculum, 115–125. 
© 2017 Sense Publishers. All rights reserved. 
MILTON SCHIVANI AND MAURÍCIO PIETROCOLA 
7. PRAXEOLOGY AND THE USE OF EDUCATIONAL 
ROBOTICS IN THE TEACHING OF PHYSICS 
INTRODUCTION 
Nowadays, especially in large urban areas, life without the presence of a wide 
variety of “technological artefacts”, such as traffic control, communication and 
information systems, smartphones, and food packaging, among others, is almost 
unthinkable. In addition, one cannot forget that most students in contemporary 
society (from the elementary to the university level) are already used to the 
dynamic and succinct modes of audio-visual communication and information 
common to TV, cinema, and, in particular, computers.  
 
In addition to significantly influencing ways of life and means of production in 
society in general, the different forms and multiple expressions of the technologies 
that surround us have the potential to generate new teaching and learning 
situations. As Papert (2008, p. 14) points out, correctly, digital technologies and 
their multiple expressions offer unprecedented opportunities to promote quality in 
learning environments, “understood as being the entire set of conditions that 
contribute to shape learning at work, in school and leisure”. In addition to the 
personal computer, digital technologies might be related to differentiated materials, 
such as those found in educational robotics (ER), which incorporates several 
options of plastic, metal or wooden parts, with different sizes and connections 
among them, with similar options for software, processing modules and sensors.  
 
Since it is intrinsically playful and since it involves, either directly or indirectly, 
skills related to doing science, the field of robotics has become a strong contender 
as an educational instrument in recent years. Various research indicates that – 
through certain resources such as sensors, drives, programmable bricks, and 
graphic interfaces – it is possible to use ER to develop skills for solving logic and 
mathematical problems, to foster creative processes, to enrich critical reasoning, 
and to promote scientific literacy (Schivani, 2014; Benitti, 2012; Church et al., 
2010; Mitnik et al., 2009; Lowe et al., 2008). 
 
However, taking for granted the new and emergent resources that new 
technologies offer, as is the case with ER, does not necessarily imply that a given 
class will be better. As the Brazilian Ministry of Education acknowledges (Brasil, 
2000), one of the main problems with the use of technologies in an educational 
capacity has to do with the forms of their use, rather than with the ends of their 
creation. The mere presence in the classroom of digital resources related to 
differentiated materials does not mean that the teaching and learning process will 
be automatically improved. An explicit didactic-pedagogical evaluation of the 

SCHIVANI & PIETROCOLA 
116 
adequacy of the materials is necessary, especially when the goal is to teach 
scientific concepts. 
 
Therefore, there emerges both the need for and the challenge to schools to 
function as critical spaces regarding the use and appropriation of such resources. 
One must be careful that the initiatives bringing computer or robotics kits to 
schools avoid these tools being restricted to use in “computer labs”, without any 
direct integration with disciplinary knowledge.  
 
The introduction of these technologies in teaching, specifically in the teaching 
of natural science, leads to a change in the roles of all who intervene in the 
teaching process. This shift occurs mainly in the role of the teacher, who takes on a 
more mediating role in an environment built to challenge and encourage the 
student to explore, reflect, and discover, and, in that of the student, moving him or 
her towards improved critical sense, increased capacities for analysis and synthesis, 
and a greater level of autonomy (Martinho & Pombo, 2009).  
 
Two aspects must be taken into account here regarding technology in the school 
environment. The first has to do with the critical training of students, which entails 
making them aware of possibilities for responsible consumption of the objects that 
come from the new technologies present in society in general. The other has to do 
with the use of some of those objects (including digital technologies) as didactic-
pedagogical resources, in order to foster the teaching and learning process. 
Therefore, we ask how digital resources can be used during learning to encourage 
the student to go beyond ready-made answers and to actually be the author and 
producer of his or her own knowledge. How can new technologies be used to help 
us both to teach and to learn scientific concepts? 
 
When one explores the actual use of robotics as an educational instrument used 
to teach physics, it is necessary to create activities that will on some level relate the 
physics knowledge to be taught to the elements intrinsic to such technology. In 
other words, there must be a relation between the physics theory and concepts 
addressed (the “why”) and the practice (“what is done”). However, how can one 
determine if such a connection is actually being made? How can one analyze the 
connections between the intrinsic features of robotics and the scientific content 
present in an innovation proposal? How can one ensure that there exists a 
resonance between those two different knowledge sets in order to optimize their 
use in the process of teaching and learning science, here, in the teaching of 
physics? 
 
In order to answer at least some of these questions, we rely on the idea of 
Praxeology, the structural aspect of the Anthropological Theory of Didactics 
(ATD), as proposed by the French mathematician Yves Chevallard (1999). This 
theoretical instrument is used in order to understand human actions and activities in 
general, both shaping and organizing knowledge in terms of type of task, 
technique, technology, and theory. Since it proposes to deal with absolutely any 
sphere of human activity, ATD finds in physics, as a field of knowledge, a fertile 
domain in which to search for tasks and theoretical knowledge bodies that support 
its execution, even though the number of works in this area is still limited (Bosch 
et al, 2011). 

PRAXEOLOGY AND THE USE OF EDUCATIONAL ROBOTICS 
117 
THE IDEA OF PRAXEOLOGY 
The origin of the term Praxeology is the union of two Greek words, praxis, which 
has to do with the practice of a certain task, and logos, which indicates the study of 
something. In the context of ATD, a Praxeology is expressed by the set [T, τ, θ, Θ], 
where T represents the type of task, which can ramify into countless tasks [t], τ 
represents the technique, θ the technology, and Θ has to do with the theory 
(Chevallard, 1999). Such structure allows to investigate the practice of a certain 
task correlating it with a logos, that is, with a conceptual-theoretical component. 
Mortensen (2010), for example, uses the structural aspect of ATD to investigate the 
experience and understanding of visitors to an immersion exhibition in a science 
museum; he seeks to verify both divergences and convergences between the 
praxeology expected in the exhibition and the praxeology observed in its visitors. 
In turn, Nogueira (2008) analyzes the introduction of algebra in elementary school 
textbooks using praxeological organizations as theoretical and methodological 
references. Along the same line of textbook investigation, Zanardi (2013) analyses, 
from the point of view of tasks, techniques, technologies, and theories, how 
contents related to the Clapeyron equation are addressed in both high school 
physics and chemistry books. 
 
The idea of praxeology also allows us to shape and organize knowledge 
according to what Chevallard (1999) called Praxeological Organization (PO), 
which is made up of two different though correlated blocks: the practical-technical 
block [T, τ], which corresponds to knowing how to do things, and the 
technological-theoretical block [θ, Θ], which has to do with knowledge, that is, 
with the logical discourse that allows to us understand and better justify the 
practical-technical block. Since it may encompass any type of activity in which one 
can establish tasks to be executed and the knowledge that is in the base of their 
execution, a Praxeological Organization may be of different types: didactic, 
physical, mathematical, chemical, artisanal, industrial, rural, or domestic, among 
others. A didactic Praxeological Organization (didactic PO) is understood, a priori, 
as the set of the types of tasks, techniques, technologies, etc., that is mobilized for 
the specific study of a certain “work”, in a proper “institution”. 
The Practical-Technical Block (Praxis) 
From the start, the execution of a task, or type of task takes for granted the 
adoption of a certain technique. Therefore, people understand this pair as a 
practical-technical block [T, τ]. According to Chevallard, everything that a person 
is requested to do, anything mediated by verbs, may be called a task. In this sense, 
the word task evokes an action, a way to do something. It is a ramification of a 
broader network that the author calls type of task [T].  
 
Activities developed within the scope of educational robotics – though they are 
in one sense dealing with a single phenomenon or physical concept – may request a 
broad set of “things to do”, from the assembly of the “robots” to their 
programming, the calculation of the physical sizes at stake, the adequate use of 

SCHIVANI & PIETROCOLA 
118 
sensors and processing modules, and so on. Therefore, we might have a type of 
task, T, “calculation of the vehicle’s velocity”, which includes a task “t”, or 
calculation of the vehicle’s velocity in Linear Motion (LM), using data collected by 
such and such sensor …, all that within the genre of “calculation”. 
 
In turn, the technique [τ] has to do directly with how to carry out a certain task 
that belongs to T. In that sense, it can be said that the technique is a sort of 
“knowing how to do” which only makes sense when it is tied to a task to which it 
is related. In order to establish a robot vehicle’s velocity, for example, one can use 
different techniques, from using accelerometers attached to the vehicle itself to 
external mechanisms, such as the use of ultrasound and motion detection sensors. 
Each technique used to carry out this type of task (calculation of velocity) requires 
specific programming which must be suited to the system of hardware and 
software used, and which in turn suggests other tasks and techniques. 
The Technological-Theoretical Block (Logos) 
According to ATD, the discourse that interprets and justifies technique is 
understood as a technology [θ] (the term technology has a specific sense in this 
theory, very different from that commonly used). In ATD, technology seeks to 
explain and to clarify technique, to justify its use/efficiency, to ensure its success, 
and to favor, as far as possible, the emergence of new techniques. 
 
The concept, in physics, of torque (τ) provides an example of this understanding 
of technology. The concept of torque allows us to better understand and justify the 
adoption of certain techniques, as when someone uses a pipe to increase the 
extension of a tire iron handle in order to make it easier to remove screws. Such a 
technique increases the lever arm (r, distance between the rotation axle and the 
point of application of force), which is directly proportional to the torque. 
Therefore, the torque resulting from the constant force (F) applied at a certain point 
of the pipe to turn the screw will be smaller according to the distance between that 
point and the rotation axle (depending on the angle between those two sizes), 
determined by the vectorial expression 
 
τ=r×F 
(1) 
 
According to Chevallard (1999), in an Institution [I], regardless of the types of 
tasks and related tasks, a type of task always brings with it at least a trace of 
technology [θ]. Technological elements are often integrated into the technique. 
 
Theory [Θ] encompasses a second level of activity validation, in other words, it 
both explains and justifies the technology that includes the adoption of a technique, 
with solidity and persistence, to carry out a certain task. The theory resumes, in 
relation to technology, the role that the latter plays in relation to the technique. 
Therefore, technology and theory make up the technological-theoretical block [θ, 
Θ], which is strictly tied to “knowledge”.  
 
In general, one could also think about other justification levels, in a progression 
that tends toward the infinite, that is, theories to explain theories which, in turn, 

PRAXEOLOGY AND THE USE OF EDUCATIONAL ROBOTICS 
119 
support other theories, and so on. However, according to Chevallard (1999, p.13), 
“the description presented here in three levels (technique/technology/theory) is 
often enough to cope with the activity that one wants to analyze”. In addition, the 
justification of a certain technology is treated, in many institutions, through mere 
transmission to another institution, either real or supposed, considered as being the 
owner of the logical discourse that permeates that justification. That is identified in 
the classical examples of declarations and situations such as: “We show in 
mathematics …”, “The Physics teacher announced …”, “It has been seen in 
geometry that …” (Chevallard, 1999). 
 
As far as the ER activities in the teaching of physics are concerned, the presence 
of the technological-theoretical block, that is, of a discourse that enables 
explanation of technique, expounding on why is it effective or why it works, 
becomes very important to us. Since we are not interested only in the execution of 
the task itself, but rather are concerned that students be able to explain and discuss 
the process they are carrying out in terms of theory and physics concepts, the idea 
of Praxeological Organization is useful for clarifying and interconnecting these 
factors, connecting praxis with logos (Schivani, 2014). 
 
One of the greatest didactic difficulties in carrying out innovative proposals 
using robotics has to do with the need to integrate the various knowledge sets 
necessary to their execution. One can only envision applications of robotics in the 
educational scenario within a certain set of rules or methods. In other words, a 
student may understand, on a mechanical level, the algorithms involved in the 
development of a certain assembly, and thus be ready to carry out the entire 
activity without taking into consideration the physical aspects (both conceptual and 
theoretical) involved in that task. A given student may also reinforce the limited 
use of techniques to fulfill certain tasks. In these cases, concerns arise about 
scientific knowledge in relation to what the student is doing. This becomes even 
more clear when one observes the solving of problems by trial and error, a 
common approach within the scope of educational robotics (Barak & Zadok, 
2009). Depending on the problem that must be solved, students may focus their 
attention mostly on technique, on the practical part of the activity, without much 
concern for the conceptual understanding of the matter at hand. Only after a few 
unsuccessful attempts and mistakes do they realize that their initial intuition is not 
an adequate tool with which to solve the proposed tasks (Rouxinol et al., 2011). 
EDUCATIONAL ROBOTICS FROM A PRAXEOLOGICAL PERSPECTIVE 
Educational robotics offers several options for sensors, drives, and spare parts with 
their own fittings, in addition to providing forms of software that use intuitive and 
easy-to-use graphic interfaces. This format allows for the development of multiple 
physical structures and, as a consequence, for the execution of countless tasks and 
the application of many different techniques. Thus, it is possible to create countless 
structures/systems (automatized heaters, barcode readers, communication systems, 
vehicles, androids, “intelligent” homes, braking systems, seismographs, machinery, 
etc.), which potentialize the imitation of a variety of “real” situations that might 

SCHIVANI & PIETROCOLA 
120 
occur in a student’s daily life or in society in general. These become “realities” or 
social practices that one may take as reference and problematize. 
 
However, the use of this kind of instruments to teach science in general, and 
physics specifically, must overcome the techniques adopted to carry out specific 
tasks. In order to reduce the risks of wasting the potential of ER as a teaching 
instrument, it is necessary to create activities that will, on a basic level, relate the 
knowledge to be taught to the elements intrinsic to that technology; that is, one 
must pay attention to knowing how to do the task, the praxis, without forgetting the 
logical discourse that permeates and helps us understand that know-how, the logos.  
 
From a praxeological perspective, we contend that if the occurrence of the 
technological-theoretical block is not identified (at least part of it, such as 
technology, for example) in the didactic activity, the modelling of knowledge will 
be jeopardized, since the disciplinary knowledge necessary to understand and/or to 
better solve the proposed task cannot be mobilized. Modelling involves 
idealizations, approximations, and the selection of significant variables, aiming at 
representing the problem in a simplified manner, either through pictorial, graphic 
and/or experimental representations, or through mathematical expressions, 
allowing us to determine, for example, physical relations and necessary 
restrictions, even though they are not directly observed (Karan, 2012; Greca & 
Santos, 2005). 
 
In general, ER may lead to learning in a range of disciplines and to the 
development of certain competences such as, for example, reading, the articulation 
and interpretation of symbols and codes in different languages, and using 
representations (sentences, equations, schemes, diagrams, tables, charts, and 
geometric representations) to solve problems. It also allows the student to 
recognize the relations between different dimensions, or those of cause and effect, 
so that s/he can make predictions and decisions, either alone or in a collaborative 
manner (Church et al., 2010; Mitnik et al., 2009). 
 
The assembly of a fork-lift (Figure 1) built with robotics kits and used for 
didactic purposes, may serve as a basis to show how the praxeological elements θ 
and Θ are present and how they correlate to tasks and techniques. 
 
The main type of task [T] that may be carried out via that assembly has to do 
with the transportation (both horizontal and vertical) of loads, such as that of small 
objects (marbles, for example) of known mass. One of the techniques [τ] associated 
with the fulfillment and investigation of this type of task is to position the load, 
contained inside containers (made of paper and of different sizes), at a certain 
distance from the fork-lift’s front wheels. 
 
Depending on the distance between the center of gravity of the load and the 
central axle that goes through the front wheels of the fork-lift, there may be 
accidents, such as the load being dropped, or the fork-lift itself falling over. 
However, the understanding, both in theoretical and conceptual terms, of that 
connection (which is also a technique), and of the risk of accidents is only 
satisfactory to a minimum extent when one also understands the technology [θ], 
that is, when one comprehends the physical concept of torque by means of the 
lever principle.  

 
The
fulcrum
proces
connec
in the 
undert
lever a
keepin
didacti
tasks a
theoret
 
The
thinks 
mecha
acceler
well a
transfe
Theref
initiati
theory
(didact
 
If w
industr
by init
depend
Figure
e central axle 
m (support p
ssing module 
ction, we can 
law of conse
takes the work
arm in charge 
ng the fork-lift
ic PO, with th
and technique
tical block. 
e great potent
about the co
anisms enable
ration, time, 
as the most 
erence, harmo
fore, one can 
ive to reveal 
y, the structure
tic PO).  
we start from a
rial, commerc
tially treating 
ding on the di
PRAX
e 1. Fork-lift bu
that complet
point of a lev
make up th
also identify t
ervation of en
k of applying
of the power,
t in stable bala
he potential to
s that are just
tial of educati
ontextualized
e us to exp
force, torque,
diverse pheno
onic motion, 
observe that
and clarify, 
e and dynamic
a specific hum
cial, and/or do
it as a Praxeo
idactic intentio
XEOLOGY AND 
ilt with kits from
tes the front w
ver). In turn, 
he counterwe
the Θ (theory 
nergy, since,
g a weight for
, the other extr
ance. Therefor
o work both d
tified and und
ional robotics
teaching of 
plore extensiv
, position, ma
omena (sound
capacitance, 
t the idea of 
in terms of t
cs between a g
man activity, as
omestic) realit
ological Orga
on, one can ex
THE USE OF ED
 
m Lego Mindsto
wheels of the
the engines,
eight. Even t
associated to 
while the for
rce on one of 
remity underta
re, this projec
didactically an
derstood by a 
s also comes 
physics (Rica
ve physical 
agnetic field, 
d, ultrasound
circular and 
praxeology i
tasks, techniq
given reality a
s included with
ty, we may in
anization (refe
xtract from th
DUCATIONAL R
orms NXT 
fork-lift mak
, the battery, 
though it is 
technology θ)
rk-lift’s count
the extremiti
akes work on 
ct embodies a 
nd pedagogic
specific techn
to the fore w
ardo, 2010), 
dimensions (
temperature, 
, light intens
straight motio
s a strong all
ques, technolo
and its didactic
hin a certain (
nvestigate tha
rence PO). Th
hat initial refer
ROBOTICS 
121 
ke up the 
and the 
a subtle 
) element 
terweight 
es of the 
the load, 
complete 
ally with 
nological-
when one 
since its 
(velocity, 
etc.), as 
sity, heat 
on, etc.). 
ly in the 
ogies and 
c activity 
(research, 
t activity 
hereafter, 
rence PO 

SCHIVANI & PIETROCOLA 
122 
investigation which tasks, techniques, technologies, or theories one wants to deal 
with or which are more useful for inclusion in didactic activity. This latter strategy 
is developed by means of what we call Praxeological Verisimilitude (PV) 
(Schivani & Pietrocola, 2013; Schivani, 2014). 
PRAXEOLOGICAL VERISIMILITUDE AND EDUCATIONAL ROBOTICS IN 
TEACHING PHYSICS  
Praxeological Verisimilitude (PV) seeks, basically, either to investigate or to 
develop didactic activities by taking into account certain tasks, techniques, 
technologies, and/or theories that are (either partially or entirely) similar between 
the didactic and the reference POs. Therefore, Praxeological Verisimilitude refers 
to (all or some of) the praxeological elements that are, to some extent, similar 
between two different praxeological organizations. 
 
Within the scope of using educational robotics to teach physics, we can use a 
drawbridge, such as those found in various contemporary cities, as an example of 
the application of that concept (PV). 
 
In the didactic PO, for example, one can use a robotics kit to build a reduced-
scale drawbridge that can be operated manually by a winch. In this case, one of the 
techniques that one can use in the didactic PO – one also commonly used in the 
reference PO when carrying out the task of “raising the bridge” – has to do with the 
use of a reduction box, which uses gears to reduce rotation speed and to increase 
the available torque in order to help in the raising of the bridge (the main task). 
 
In our specific assembly, the reduction box built in the bridge of the didactic PO 
is not the same (in terms of structure, location, and activation) as that used in the 
current drawbridges of the reference PO, since it is activated by hand by means of 
a winch. It may be built with metal shafts or in pieces made up of perforated plastic 
and is of a smaller size, as properly designed to fulfill the needs of the didactic PO. 
Therefore, although the physical structures present both in the didactic and in the 
reference PO refer to a drawbridge, the bridge developed in the didactic PO is not 
able to carry out the exact same task as that of the reference PO. This results in 
what we call a Correspondence Praxeological Verisimilitude (Correspondence PV) 
as far as the technique [τ] is concerned, since the mechanisms and procedures used 
in both POs (such as the reduction box) are similar but not identical. 
 
On the other hand, the physical principle of how the reduction box in a 
drawbridge works, whether that of a given drawbridge in a given city or that of the 
didactic activity, is exactly the same for both cases, regardless of the magnitude of 
the type of task carried out. We refer to this connection regarding technology and 
theory as Praxeological Verisimilitude by Intersection (PV by Intersection), since 
one can understand how the mechanism works, both in the reference and in the 
didactic PO, by means of the same technological-theoretical block [θ, Θ]. For 
example, in this instance, one may apprehend the workings of either drawbridge by 
means of the relations of gear transmission and of vectorial decomposition (or 
force and torque). 

PRAXEOLOGY AND THE USE OF EDUCATIONAL ROBOTICS 
123 
 
Another example which may be used to illustrate the notion of Praxeological 
Verisimilitude has to do with electronic speed monitors. This type of speed monitor 
operates via the agitation of the electromagnetic field, as generated by coils 
installed in the street under the asphalt. Two coils (of the magnetic lace type) are 
placed on the street at a predetermined distance from one another. Such coils are 
installed around 20 meters before the tower (that shows the speed) and ordered in 
the same way as the traffic flow. When the recorded speed is greater than the speed 
limit, a photographic camera is activated. One of the techniques used to determine 
the vehicle’s speed involves simple kinematic calculations. 
 
By means of educational robotics, one can “replicate” such a system and explore 
that reference practice in the classroom, by building both the electronic speed 
monitor system and the vehicles (in small scale) using different kits and materials. 
However, it is necessary to be sure about which tasks, techniques, technologies, 
and/or theories of the reference PO one wishes to explore, and whether those 
praxeological elements will appear in the didactic PO through an intersection PV, a 
correspondence PV, or both. 
 
Upon first analysis, the type of task (determining the speed of vehicles that go 
by a stretch of road) and the main technique associated with that type of task 
(placing detectors on the road so that the time elapsed between two peaks of the 
signs detected are processed by the tower to calculate the speed) are an intersection 
PV. Thus, the didactic PO may have exactly the same type of task and the same 
technique contained in the reference PO, which increases the amount of 
praxeological elements that may be discussed in the disciplinary knowledge 
modelling process. Thus, it is possible to address physical concepts such as average 
speed, instant speed, average acceleration, and instant acceleration, in addition to 
the techniques used for recording and measuring the time elapsed between the 
signs activated when vehicles pass. 
 
By using robotics components, one can develop different fabrications that are 
permeated by the multiple techniques necessary for carrying out the main type of 
task (here, determining a vehicle’s speed). One can use many types of sensors, 
from ultrasound and infrared to light sensors, as well as those of different materials 
and assemblies; students are compelled to investigate the best option, both in terms 
of efficiency in measurement and complexity of assembly. Students’ creativity is 
explicitly valued in this process, and the use of their logical reasoning to solve 
problems gains major importance vis-à-vis both physical and mathematical 
concepts. This involves a correspondence PV, since students will obviously not use 
the exact same equipment, structures, and materials present in the reference PO. 
 
Finally, taking into account the wide variety of materials offered by educational 
robotics, it is possible to change certain techniques to approach the particular 
reality one wants to explore. Therefore, if there is interest in exploring similar 
techniques in the didactic PO, similar, that is, to those that use variations of the 
magnetic field to record the passage of a body between one point and the other (as 
occurs with the electronic speed monitor), one could use a Hall effect sensor, 
which works as a transductor that varies its exit tension in response to an external 
magnetic field. This iteration might further increase students’ freedom and 

SCHIVANI & PIETROCOLA 
124 
involvement, allowing them the creativity to explore a variety of proposed 
problems from different angles, and to engage with the world them with new 
perspectives and increased possibilities for both action and understanding. 
FINAL THOUGHTS 
The resources offered by new technologies are increasingly present within the 
educational scenario. Therefore, it is both necessary and pertinent to debate 
possible analytical strategies and explore the development of didactic activities that 
effectively use those resources. 
 
Educational robotics, when used for teaching physics, allows a broad approach 
that may include several objects of a given PO. However, we warn that this alone is 
not enough. With the goal of encouraging students to think about and to 
interconnect both theory and practice, the resources that educational robotics offer 
may be used during the teaching and learning process by taking the two blocks – 
the practical-technical and the technological-theoretical – into consideration. These 
blocks must be strongly and successfully interconnected in the didactic activity. In 
order to avoid empty and “alienated” activities one must pay attention to know-
how, or praxis, without forgetting the logical discourse that permeates and helps in 
the understanding of that know-how, the logos. 
 
In that aspect, we note that ATD, mainly as far as its structural component 
(praxeology) 
is 
concerned, 
presents 
itself 
as 
an 
effective 
theoretical  
tool for understanding both the limits and the possibilities of robotics in situations  
that involve tasks that require specific physics knowledge. We find ATD especially 
useful in highlighting the praxeological elements that are actually developed in the 
didactic PO, with echoes in the natural phenomena and/or human activity that one 
wants to contextualize.  
 
If the technological-theoretical block, or at least part of it (a technology, for 
example), is not identified within the didactic PO, the modelling of knowledge so 
important to the teaching of physics is seriously damaged. If the didactic PO does 
not include even a fraction of the technological-theoretical block in order to better 
understand the techniques used in the fulfillment of certain tasks, the mobilization 
of disciplinary knowledge runs the risk of being incomplete or even non-existent. 
REFERENCES 
Barak, M., & Zadok, Y. (2009). Robotics projects and learning concepts in science, technology and 
problem solving. International Journal of Technology and Design Education, 19(3), 289–307. 
Benitti, F. B. V. (2012). Exploring the educational potential of robotics in schools: A systematic review. 
Computers & Education, 58, 978–988. 
Bosch, M., et al. (2011). CRM documents – Un panorama de la ATD [An overview of ATD] (1st ed., pp. 
203–216). Barcelona: CRM Centre de Recerca Matemática. 
Brasil. (2000). PCN ensino médio. Parâmetros curriculares nacionais para o ensino médio – Parte II – 
Linguagens, códigos e suas tecnologias. Ministério da Educação (MEC), Secretaria de Educação 
Média e Tecnológica (SEMTEC). Brasília: MEC/Semtec. 
Chevallard, Y. (1999). L’analyse des pratiques enseignantes en théorie anthropologique du didactique. 
Recherches en Didactique des Mathématiques (Revue), Pensée Sauvage, 19(2), 221–265. 

PRAXEOLOGY AND THE USE OF EDUCATIONAL ROBOTICS 
125 
Church, W., Ford, T., Perova, N., & Rogers, C. (2010). Physics with robotics: Using Lego® 
Mindstorms® in high school education. Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence, 
Spring Symposium Series, Stanford University. 
Greca, I. M., & Santos, F. M. T. (2005). Difficulties in generalizing modelling strategies in science: The 
case of physics and chemistry. Investigações em Ensino de Ciências, 10(1), 31–46. 
Karam, R. A. S. (2012). Using mathematics as a reasoning instrument in physics instruction: A 
theoretical tool for the analysis of didactic approaches. Doctoral Dissertation, Faculdade de 
Educação, 
University 
of 
São 
Paulo, 
São 
Paulo. 
Retrieved 
2016-08-13, 
from 
http://www.teses.usp.br/teses/ disponiveis/48/48134/tde-29052012-134910/ 
Lowe, M., Moore, H., Langrall, E., & Gehrman, C. (2008). Robots in the introductory physics 
laboratory. American Journal of Physics, 76(10), 895–902. 
Martinho, T., & Pombo, L. (2009). Potencialidades das TIC no ensino das Ciências Naturais: Um 
estudo de caso. Revista Electrónica de Enseñanza de las Ciencias, 8(2), 527–538.  
Mitnik, R., Recabarren, M., Nussbaum, M., & Soto, A. (2009). Collaborative robotic instruction: A 
graph teaching experience. Computers & Education, 53(2), 330–342. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/ 
j.compedu.2009.02.010 
Mortensen, M. F. (2011). Analysis of the educational potential of a science museum learning 
environment: Visitors’ experience with and understanding of an immersion exhibit. International 
Journal of Science Education, 33(4), 517–545. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09500691003754589 
Nogueira, R. C. S. (2008). A álgebra nos livros didáticos do ensino fundamental: Uma análise 
praxeológica. Master’s Thesis, Universidade Federal de Mato Grosso do Sul. Centro de Ciências 
Humanas e Sociais. 
Papert, S. (2008). The children’s machine: Rethinking school in the age of the computer. Porto Alegre: 
Artmed. 
Ricardo, E. C. (2010). Problematização e contextualização no ensino de Física. In A. M. Pessoa de 
Carvalho (Ed.), Ensino de física. Coleção ideias em ação (pp. 29-47). São Paulo: Cengage Learning.  
Rouxinol, E. et al. (2011). Novas tecnologias para o ensino de física: Um estudo preliminar das 
características e potencialidades de atividades usando kits de robótica. Presented at XIX Simpósio 
Nacional de Ensino de Física (XIX SNEF). Manaus/AM, Brazil. 
Schivani, M. (2014). Contextualization in the teaching of physics in the light of the anthropological 
theory of didactics: The case of educational robotics. Doctoral Dissertation, Faculdade de Educação, 
University of São Paulo, São Paulo. Retrieved 2016-08-13, from http://www.teses.usp.br/teses/ 
disponiveis/48/48134/tde-01122014-104322/ 
Schivani, M., & Pietrocola, M. (2013). The contextualization of the teaching of physics through 
instruments of educational robotics: Analysis of activities by verisimilar praxeology. Presented at 
IVth International Congress on the Anthropological Theory of Didactics (ATD), Toulouse (France). 
Zanardi, D. C. (2013). The praxeological analysis of experimental activities aiding the drawing of 
problem-situations in physics teaching. Master’s Thesis, Ensino de Ciências (Física, Química e 
Biologia), University of São Paulo, São Paulo. Retrieved 2016-08-13, from http://www.teses.usp.br/ 
teses/disponiveis/81/81131/tde-28042014-204753/ 
 
Milton Schivani 
Department of Theorical and Experimental Physics (DFTE) 
Federal University of Rio Grande do Norte (UFRN) 
Natal-RN, Brazil 
Maurício Pietrocola 
Department of Teaching Methodology and Comparative Education 
School of Education of the University of São Paulo 
São Paulo-SP, Brazil 
 

 
M. Pietrocola & I. Gurgel (Eds.), Crossing the Border of the Traditional Science Curriculum, 127–141. 
© 2017 Sense Publishers. All rights reserved. 
CIBELLE CELESTINO SILVA AND  
PEDRO DONIZETE COLOMBO JR. 
8. TEACHING SOLAR PHYSICS IN A  
PARTNERSHIP BETWEEN FORMAL AND  
NON-FORMAL EDUCATION 
INTRODUCTION 
This chapter presents an innovative approach to teaching modern physics in high 
schools based on a partnership between physics teachers and a science center team 
in the teaching of solar physics contents. The science center concerned is the 
Dietrich Schiel Observatory of the University of São Paulo. This center’s Solar 
Room, a space equipped for and devoted to the dissemination of solar physics 
topics, was also utilized. 
 
The use of science centers for learning is a rising phenomenon, which may well 
be intimately related to the increasing impacts of science and technology on 
society. In different parts of the world, cultural institutions that are rich in terms of 
science (such as science centers) have collaborated with schools by supplying 
students, teachers, and families with opportunities to expand both their experiences 
and their understanding of science (Bhatia, 2009; Bevan et al., 2010; Salmi, 2012).  
 
By addressing solar physics and discussing the partnership between a science 
center and high schools, this chapter seeks to contribute to the possibilities for 
developing methods of teaching physics that are closer to students’ experience and 
to provide a discussion about “learning to teach in innovative ways”. As far as 
“learning to teach” is concerned, we seek to offer teachers new methodological 
approaches and new reflections on the practice of teaching, including ways of 
rethinking that practice, the evaluation of activities, and the process of retro-
feeding activities discussed with the students. At the same time, this “innovative 
way” reflects a partnership between formal and non-formal education, strategy, and 
new contents (solar and modern physics).  
 
In the current study, learning to teach in an innovative way comes into effect in 
Teaching-Learning Sequences (TLS) developed in partnership with teachers and 
mediated by what we call reflective cycles, which we developed in our partnership 
between formal (school) and non-formal (science center) education. The 
development of TLSs relied on a broader approach known as Design-Based 
Research [DBR] (2003). According to Juuti and Lavonen (2006), DBR features 
three characteristics: “a) a design process is essentially iterative; b) the objective of 
a design-based research is to develop an artefact to help teachers and pupils to act 
(teach and study) more intelligibly (in a way that leads to learning); c) design-

SILVA & COLOMBO JR. 
128 
based research renders novel knowledge about science teaching and learning” 
(Juuti & Lavonen, 2006, p. 59).  
 
Our study involved an elaboration of TLS (Lijnse, 1994, 1995; Méheut, 2004; 
Méheut & Psillos, 2004; Komorek & Duit, 2004; Lijnse & Klaassen, 2004; Viiri & 
Savinainen, 2008) that encompassed activities both in the classroom and in the 
Dietrich Schiel Observatory of the University of São Paulo. One can understand 
TLSs as a set of lessons about a specific theme (which is not necessarily related to 
the school curriculum) that lasts for a few weeks. The sequences evolve 
progressively, with two main characteristics being inclusion within a gradual 
teaching process and the intertwining of the teaching of science with the student’s 
perspective. TLSs may be used as a tool both for research and for curricular 
innovations, since they enable the production of contents that are different from 
those found in the textbooks, in the sense that they seek to include both scientific 
knowledge and knowledge to be taught.  
 
We used a methodology that we called “reflective cycles” to guide our research. 
Reflective cycles may be interpreted as ongoing partnership actions between 
teachers and researchers, starting with teacher preparation, continuing through the 
elaboration of activities, and culminating in TLS implementation with students.  
 
The goal of this text is to present and discuss this collaborative methodology, as 
used in the construction and implementation of the sequences. In this discussion, 
the close proximity between formal and non-formal education modes emerges as 
key for the teaching-learning process, as do the roles of the teachers in the 
approach, as mediated by the reflective cycles, and those innovative aspects 
brought by TLS to modern physics for students. 
SOLAR PHYSICS AND THE DIETRICH SCHIEL OBSERVATORY 
What is the Sun? What is it made of? How does it produce its energy? Why is it 
important to study the Sun? These are common questions posed by people visiting 
astronomical observatories and planetariums. Despite its interest, relevance, and 
didactic potential, solar physics is seldom taught in high schools or even in teacher 
training courses. We chose this theme because it enables an interdisciplinary 
approach to modern physics topics, such as spectroscopy, atomic models, and 
astrophysics. 
 
In order to realize the educational potential of solar physics, the Dietrich Schiel 
Observatory built a Solar Room1 which is open to the public, universities, and 
schools. The Solar Room is equipped and devoted to the study of the Sun and to 
the dissemination of science. Approximately 10m2 in area, the space is paneled 
with pictures of several solar structures and star spectra, and contains a 
spectroscope built to study the solar spectrum, a 200/2000 Newtonian telescope 
with a 42mm ocular which projects the sun on a screen, and a computer used to 
observe solar activities in real time, by means of access to specialized websites. 
There is a heliostat on the outside roof of the Solar Room which has electronic 
controls for the position of the Sun’s image throughout its daily movement, and is 
connected to a telescope that projects an image of the Sun in a 1.2 m x 1.2 m white 

screen
faculae
 
Figure
tube of
imag
 
In t
surface
very n
conten
might 
concep
Sun, t
radiati
the in
Living
constru
work w
n inside the ro
e (Hönel, 2004
a) 
d)
e 1. Heliostat O
f the telescope l
ge on a screen i
observe solar
http:/
the Solar Roo
e, such as sun
nature of the S
nts such as el
take place inc
pts regarding 
the flares – g
ion as charged
nterplanetary 
gston, 2005). I
uction of TLS
with modern p
oom (Figure 1
4).  
 
) 
Operation Stages
located inside th
inside the Solar
r spectrum abso
//www.cdcc.usp
om, the observ
nspots and facu
Sun as a dyn
lectromagnetis
clude those abo
stellar evoluti
gigantic explo
d particles, gas
medium, as 
In this research
Ss by means of
physics in scho
), enabling th
b) 
s: a) the fixed m
he Solar Room;
r Room, and e) i
orption. (Source
p.br/cda/interno
vation of phen
ulae, allows te
amic star, and
sm and therm
out the origin 
ion), the transp
osions in the 
s, electrons, vi
well as ge
h, such action
f reflective cy
ools in Brazil 
TEA
he observation
mirror, b) the m
d) illustrates th
illustrates the us
e: Dietrich Schi
o/heliostato/inde
nomena that t
eachers to star
d to work wit
modynamics. O
of chemical e
portation of en
surface of th
isible, ultravio
eomagnetic s
s were incorpo
cles and they 
and elsewhere
ACHING SOLAR
n of sunspots a
c) 
e) 
obile mirror, an
he projection of 
se of a spectros
iel Observatory
ex.html) 
take place on 
rt discussions a
th students on
Other discuss
elements (via e
nergy produce
he Sun – wh
olet and X-Ray
storms (Bhatn
orated in the c
provide a new
e. 
R PHYSICS 
129 
and solar 
 
 
nd, c) the 
f the Sun’s 
scope to 
y, 
the solar 
about the 
n science 
ions that 
exploring 
ed by the 
hich eject 
y light in 
nager & 
collective 
w path for 

SILVA & COLOMBO JR. 
130 
REFLECTIVE CYCLES AS A COLLABORATIVE METHODOLOGY FOR THE 
DEVELOPMENT OF TEACHING-LEARNING SEQUENCES 
TLSs and Their Phases 
The reflective cycle is a research and development method we created for our 
formal/non-formal partnership. This methodology includes three interconnected 
phases: Phase A: constitution of the work group; Phase B: teacher training, with 
collaboration between researcher and teacher; and, Phase C: application, ongoing 
evaluation, and re-elaboration of TLSs, in a system of reflective subcycles that 
includes both the formal and non-formal education environments and their agents, 
that is, researchers and teachers. 
 
The idea of reflective cycles was inspired by the participative action research of 
Eilks et al. (2004), which considers curricular innovations as best explored and 
developed in circles of retrospective understanding and future action. Eilks et al. 
(2004) focus their ideas on research into the History and Philosophy of Science 
(HPS), as reflected in their “Model of HIPST” (Model of History and Philosophy 
in Science Teaching). In this model, the teaching of ideas, concepts, and strategies 
is planned, evaluated, and reworked in cycles. The researchers state that strong 
teacher participation is typical. A key focus is the sharing of ideas and perspectives 
according to the different skills and knowledge of those involved. The teachers are 
in charge of structuring the developmental processes and of defining the central 
issues to be addressed in regular meetings (Höttecke et al., 2012, pp. 1251–1252). 
Inspired by the HPS work of Eilks et al. (2004), Henke et al. (2009) and Höttecke 
et al. (2012), we developed the idea of reflective cycles that focus on partnership 
between formal and non-formal education and on the process of curricular 
innovation.  
 
Taking our main goals into account, reflective cycles may be interpreted, along 
with their phases of development, according to Figure 2.  
 
Understood as a methodological tool, reflective cycles are used to research ways 
in which we may learn to teach innovatively, based on the joint elaboration of 
teachers and researchers (observatory staff) of the Teaching-Learning Sequence. 
The following tables (Tables 1 to 4) comprise our systematization of the reflective 
cycles as experienced in the context of our project, giving special attention to 
learning to teach in an innovative way and to the materialization of that type of 
learning in our TLS. 
 
Up to this point, the reflective cycles encompass possibilities for thinking about 
ways of learning to teach, based on the work of teaching preparation and on the 
study of topics of solar physics with the teachers. However, the materialization of 
ideas that embody innovative teaching and learning was sought in the second part 
of phase B, in the search to encourage the initial construction of the TLS. During 
this period, the partnership between teacher and researcher became more intensive. 
The teacher’s experience took on the leading role in the reflective cycles, given 
that the teacher is the agent most able to point to the specific aspects of her or his 
school, its sociocultural environment, didactic time, adequacy as regards previous 
knowledge, and possibilities for work with particular groups of students. 

TEACHING SOLAR PHYSICS 
131 
Figure 2. Representation of reflection cycles. Phase A: 1. Constitution of the working 
group; Phase B: 2. Contents update, 3. Sharing of ideas and perspectives, identification 
of problems and possible solutions, 4. Gathering of already-available materials, 5. Initial 
development of the TLS; Phase C: 6. Application of the material developed, 7. Ongoing 
evaluation and re-elaboration of the TLS, 8. Availability of the material and the TLS,  
9. Sharing of ideas and perspectives, identification of problems and possible solutions – 
feedback (Colombo Jr. et al., 2013; Colombo Jr., 2014) 
Table 1. Phase A 
Constitution of the Working Group 
 
 
Theoretical aspect
 
 
Initial moment when the rules for the constitution of the working 
group that will monitor the research in its different stages are 
defined. The selection of participants should take into account, 
among other things, the goals of the research, the dynamics of the 
work, the academic training of the participants, and their level of 
availability for the preparation and execution of research proposals. 
 
 
 
Contextualization 
in Research 
We invited teachers who taught in Brazilian public high schools 
and who wanted to voluntarily participate in this research to make 
up our working group. The selection requirements were: being a 
tenured teacher, being trained either in physics or chemistry, being 
able to volunteer, and being available to participate in training 
meetings on Saturdays at the Dietrich Schiel Observatory. Seven 
teachers were selected, with four of them attending the full course 
and two being placed in charge of applying the elaborated TLS. 
 
 

SILVA & COLOMBO JR. 
132 
Table 2. Phase B 
Contents Update 
 
 
 
 
Theoretical aspect
 
 
Although it is within one of the phases of the reflective cycles, this 
stage involves the overall development of the research, both in the 
classroom and in the science center to be visited. The goal of this 
stage is to provide research participants with moments of both 
theoretical and practical learning around the themes that will be 
discussed with the students. Understood as part of ongoing training, 
actions and activities should be proposed that the teachers may use 
in convenient moments during the research, such as in the 
elaboration of the TLSs and while working with students. 
 
 
 
Contextualization 
in the Research 
The teachers’ preparation consisted of eight meetings, for a total 
attendance of approximately 40 hours of activities. Most of the 
meetings took place on Saturdays at the Dietrich Schiel 
Observatory. One week before the meetings, teachers received a 
synthesis, in the form of a descriptive text, of the topics that would 
be discussed. This measure enabled teachers to have some notion, 
albeit potentially on a superficial level, of the topics that would be 
addressed. 
 
Sharing of Ideas and Perspectives, Identification of Problems and Possible Solutions. 
 
 
Theoretical aspect
 
 
The sharing of ideas and discussions about specific content, as well 
as its related didactic and pedagogical issues, is intrinsically related 
to the previous item. The act of sharing ideas and identifying 
problems invites the teacher to (re)think his or her teaching practice 
and to bring into the social discussion both the difficulties and the 
perspectives that s/he has regarding the project to be developed. 
This approach acquires new meanings when the teacher evaluates 
and reconstructs her or his lesson aiming at the application of the 
TLS. 
 
 
 
 
Contextualization 
in the Research 
In our research, the teachers were invited to keep a written record of 
their perspectives regarding the project and, later, to indicate the 
possible problems they believed could appear in the development of 
such work. In meetings with peers and researchers, the teachers 
were encouraged to read their records and to share their conflicts 
and issues, along with any possible guidance toward solutions. Such 
actions greatly enriched the project, since the sociocultural contexts 
in which teachers were immersed were brought to the fore, and 
each revealed aspects of their didactical and pedagogical 
experience. 
 
Gathering of Already Available Materials 
 
 
Theoretical aspect
 
 
Understood as a selective stage of the reflective cycle, this is when 
both teachers and researchers re-visit the texts and notes created 
during teaching preparation, and when they search other sources for 
both materials and activities that may be a part of the TLS to be 
developed in the following stage. 
 

TEACHING SOLAR PHYSICS 
133 
 
 
 
 
Contextualization 
in the Research 
The teachers were encouraged to look for references to the Sun in 
the physics and chemistry textbooks used in their schools, whether 
in the scope of solar physics or in that of chemistry, for example, in 
nuclear fusion, radiation, etc. Materials were also sought through 
the Internet, enabling the use of solar physics as a means to 
approach certain topics of modern physics with the students, such 
as: the use of Applets, simulators, experiments, demonstrations, 
videos, films, and texts, among others. This research encouraged 
the execution of works in the following stage, the initial building of 
the TLS. 
 
 
The building of TLS relies on the Design-Based Research (DBR) 
methodological approach (Juuti & Lavonen, 2006). This approach is an important 
methodology for understanding how, when, and why educational innovations work 
in practice (DBR, 2003):  
[…] design-based research methods can compose a coherent methodology 
that bridges theoretical research and teaching practice. Viewing both the 
design of an intervention and its specific enactments as objects of research 
can produce robust explanations of innovative practice and provide principles 
that can be localized for others to apply to new settings. Design-based 
research, by grounding itself in the needs, constraints, and interactions of 
local practice, can provide a lens for understanding how theoretical claims 
about teaching and learning can be transformed into effective learning in 
educational settings. (DBR, 2003, p. 8) 
 
DBR focuses on a perspective in which the use of different methods enables 
researchers to analyze the results of an intervention in the educational context. 
Therefore, an innovative proposal becomes a product of the planned intervention 
and of the intervention context itself (Pietrocola, 2010). This research is grounded 
in the DBR-TLS perspective and its implications go well beyond the elaboration of 
a specific, complete, private product. On the contrary, it seeks innovation in real 
learning environments and with the participation of teachers as the protagonists of 
the process. 
The TLS and its Design 
The proposal of enacting a teacher-researcher partnership (between formal and 
non-formal modes of education) using the reflective cycles supports the ongoing 
work of debating and of (re)thinking teaching practice. To that end, one of our first 
steps was the preparation of teachers for partnership work. Table 5 shows a 
synthesis of the efforts that were carried out during the first teaching preparation 
meetings. We agree with Pietrocola (2010) that opting for DBR, in combination 
with the TLS approach, is an efficient means of constructing safe pathways for 
overcoming the risks inherent to the processes of curricular innovation (in terms of 
 

SILVA & COLOMBO JR. 
134 
Table 3. Phase B (continued) 
Initial Development of the Teaching-Learning Sequences (TLSs) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Theoretical aspect
 
 
This is a rich moment in the partnership between formal (school) 
and non-formal (science center) education. It is the moment when 
the teacher, as representative of the school environment, makes 
explicit both his or her desires and his or her choices of themes 
deemed important to the TLSs. On the other hand, the researcher 
dialogues, proposes, and discusses his or her interests as well, 
seeking to adapt the TLSs to her or his desires for the partnership 
and research issues. It is important to emphasize that the 
development of a TLS begins, either directly or indirectly, at the 
moment when the working group is constituted. It can be 
understood as starting with the selection of contents, gathering of 
materials, and early socialization between teachers and researchers. 
A TLS is ultimately built through research data during its 
implementation with students, which justifies referring to this phase 
of the reflective cycle as “initial development”. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contextualization 
in the Research 
Two TLSs were developed, taking into account the requests of 
applicant teachers in the schools. The elaboration of the TLS and of 
didactic materials (activities) for students took place based on the 
negotiation between teachers and researchers, and can be 
summarized as follows: (1) First, the researchers presented a 
summary of the subjects approached during the teaching 
preparation mini-courses. The goal was to recall what had been 
worked on during the months of teaching preparation. This moment 
also reflects the initial steps of the reflective cycles, in which the 
working team that has been established shares problems, solutions, 
and expectations for the elaboration and application of the TLS. 
The team discussed such aspects as didactic time, possibilities for 
developing activities in the schools, and student profiles. (2) Next, 
the teachers presented those aspects of the textbooks used in their 
schools that focus on modern physics issues. In presenting these 
materials, the teachers had the autonomy to adjust the TLSs 
according to the textbooks they were used to working with, 
although they were offered a new approach to working with their 
chosen subjects. (3) After that, a debate was held about how to 
work on the issues that the teachers chose (and others that are not 
discussed in the books) in order to enable the use of solar physics as 
a means for approaching modern physics topics. Thus, both teacher 
autonomy and in-place curricular proposals were respected, 
rendering the partnership more valuable. (4) After the choice of 
topics for the TLS, exercises, demonstrations, and experiments that 
could support the themes that would be worked on with the students 
were selected. As with the previous stage, the summary texts given 
to the teachers for the five teaching preparation meetings were also 
taken into consideration. Because of this, the TLS contained not 
only exercises, but diversified textual constructions, guidelines for 
experiments, and Applets as well. 

TEACHING SOLAR PHYSICS 
135 
Table 4. Phase C 
Application of the Developed Material – Ongoing Evaluation and Re-Elaboration 
 
 
 
Theoretical aspect
 
 
In the application phase of a TLS, crucial attention must be paid at 
all times to the dynamics of its ongoing construction, that is, the 
TLS must be constructed (reorganized) at the moment of its 
application, by being constantly fed by research data. Thus, it is 
expected that a TLS may be applied in at least two classrooms, with 
a gap between the beginnings of the applications that allows its 
reorganization. This approach attends to the origin of TLSs, in 
which they derive from evolutionary cycles illuminated by research 
data (Lijnse, 1995) and to research along the DBR line (Eilks et al., 
2004; Henke et al., 2009; Höttecke et al., 2012). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contextualization 
in the Research 
Seeking to fulfill the theoretical aspect of the application of the 
TLS, its inception in different classrooms took place, on purpose, 
with a delay of two weeks between the classrooms of the same 
school, and in different times between the schools that participated 
in the research. The goal of this decision was to allow space for 
discussion, evaluation, and reflection as the TLS were developed 
with students, and to allow the teachers to re-elaborate them for the 
second application. Discussions about the application of the TLS 
were nonstop during their application, with weekly meetings being 
held with the teachers, in their schools. Beginning the TLS in 
different moments both in the schools and in the classrooms, was a 
methodological strategy that allowed the teachers to review and 
adapt the TLS during the application process. We understand that 
this fact represents a significant gain for the procedural bias of 
teaching and learning activities, since it allows for the reviewing of 
decisions, changes in approaches, and inclusion of topics that were 
not evaluated in the initial application, besides making an ongoing 
dialogue between teachers and researchers possible. It also 
represents an important aspect of learning to teach in innovative 
ways, since the Teaching-Learning Sequence and its repercussions 
for the students involved become part of an ongoing interactive 
learning experience. 
 
Availability of the Material and of the TLSs – Sharing of Ideas – Feedback 
 
 
Theoretical aspect
 
 
The last stage of the reflective cycles has to do with disclosure and 
with making all of the material produced available to serve teachers 
and students. The disclosure of the results of the research is a way 
to contribute to the success of other schools and teachers via access 
to the work, thereby giving back to society the balance of its 
investment. 
 
Contextualization 
in the Research 
The disclosure of the present research focuses on the publication of 
scientific articles, and on participation in national and international 
conferences and meetings in the field of the teaching of physics. 
 
 

SILVA & COLOMBO JR. 
136 
Table 5. The teaching preparation course 
Meeting 
Goals  
 
Duration 
 
 
 
 
I 
‒ To deepen knowledge of the theoretical aspects of non-
formal education, focusing on education in science centers 
and museums, and its relation to formal school learning sets. 
‒ To discuss concepts related to curricular innovation and 
Teaching-Learning Sequences with the teachers involved in 
the research. 
‒ To present and discuss the notion of the Didactic 
Transposition of scientific contents with the teachers 
involved in the research.  
 
 
4 to 5 
hours 
 
II  
 
and  
 
III 
‒ To substantiate and discuss (in a theoretical and 
practical/experimental manner) the modern physics topics 
(spectroscopy) related to the research.  
‒ To carry out experimental and low-cost activities using solar 
physics as a means to work on modern physics in high 
schools. 
 
10 to 11 
hours 
IV  
 
and 
  
V 
‒ To explore topics related to solar physics in both theoretical 
and practical manners.  
‒ To carry out practical activities involving observation of the 
Sun at the Dietrich Schiel Observatory of the University of 
São Paulo, Brazil. 
 
10 to 11 
hours 
 
 
 
V 
‒ To build, together with participating teachers, Teaching-
Learning Sequences which contain both theoretical and 
practical activities, and which incorporate work done in the 
classroom (formal education) and in the Observatory (non-
formal education). 
‒ To define, in accordance with participating teachers, a 
schedule for the application of the proposed Teaching-
Learning Sequences. 
 
 
13 to 14 
hours 
 
Total (approximately) 
40 hours 
 
method or content – or both). Therefore, the TLS that we propose emerges amid 
negotiations between multiple demands of different natures: teacher, researcher, 
formal and non-formal contexts, school community.  
 
As far as the joint elaboration of the TLSs was concerned, our process went 
beyond the simple systematization of themes, contents, and dates. On the contrary, 
Phases B and C of the reflective cycles took into account teaching experience, 
school context (both structural and pedagogical), standing curricular proposals, 
already-developed teacher contents, and the roles of the reflective cycles in their 
construction. Two TLSs were elaborated, which were different in terms of 
structure, themes, and approaches and – taking into consideration the sociocultural 
context of each school – also included roadmaps to activities and texts meant to 
enable students to benefit from the TLSs both in their classrooms and in the 
Observatory. In order to illustrate the work developed from the reflective cycles, 
we present, in Table 6 (Colombo Jr., 2014), a TLS which resulted from various 

TEACHING SOLAR PHYSICS 
137 
versions that were discussed by the team, and was elaborated for work with 
students both in the classroom and at the Dietrich Schiel Observatory.  
Table 6. Teaching-learning sequence 
MOMENT I The Sun 
Learning Situation 01  
Theme 
 
Didactic Resources and Readings 
 
Lessons 
 
The Sun and 
Solar Activity 
 
 
PowerPoint Presentation (Lecture) 
 
YouTube videos about the Sun 
 
Didactic Texts about solar physics 
 
Experimental Activity / Exercises 
 
 
 
 
03 
 
General 
Goals 
 
 
To present the Sun and its structures 
 
To understand nuclear fusion and the Sun as a 
power source 
 
To calculate solar diameter 
Learning Situation 02  
Theme 
 
Didactic Resources and Readings 
 
Lessons 
 
The Sun as a 
Black Body 
  
 
PowerPoint Presentation 
 
Didactic texts about black body radiation 
 
Experimental activity: “Estimating the 
luminosity and the temperature of the solar 
photosphere” (Caniato, 1990). 
 
 
 
 
 
04 
 
General 
Goals 
 
 
To debate the emergence of Quantum Mechanics 
and the quantization of energy  
 
To seek to understand the concept of black body 
radiation 
 
To calculate the power irradiated by the sun and the 
temperature of the solar photosphere 
 
Total: 07 
 
MOMENT II SPECTROSCOPY 
Learning Situation 03  
Theme 
 
Didactic Resources and Readings 
 
Lessons 
 
Electromagnetism 
 
 
PowerPoint presentation 
 
Texts on the electromagnetic spectrum 
and the Bohr atom 
 
Fixation exercises 
 
 
 
 
02 
 
General 
Goals 
 
 
To understand the electromagnetic spectrum  
 
To work on the Bohr atom and electronic 
transitions  
 
To understand Kirchhoff’s Laws for spectroscopy 
Learning Situation 04 
Theme 
 
Didactic Resources and Readings 
 
Lessons 
 
Applications 
of 
Spectroscopy 
 
 
PowerPoint presentation 
 
Theater staging by the students: “How do lamps 
work?” 
 
Activity “Building an amateur spectroscope” 
(Azevedo, 2008; SEE/SP, 2009; NUPIC, 2011). 
 
 
 
 
 

SILVA & COLOMBO JR. 
138 
 
 
General 
Goals 
 
 
To build and to discuss an amateur spectroscope 
 
To debate the spectra of different lamps used in 
daily life 
 
To prepare the students to visit Dietrich Schiel 
Observatory 
 
03 
Learning Situation 05 
Theme 
 
Didactic Resources and Readings 
 
Lessons 
 
Spectroscopy in 
the non-formal 
education 
environment 
 
Introductory text: “A Guided Visit to the 
Dietrich Schiel Observatory”  
 
Visit to the Observatory 
 
Experimental activity: “The Solar Room 
and the Solar Spectrum” 
 
 
 
Didactic 
Visit  
(> 02) 
 
General 
Goals 
 
To visit the Observatory (spectroscopy in a non-
formal environment) 
 
To compare different kinds of lamp spectra and 
the solar spectrum 
 
Total: > 7 
 
 
MOMENT III – 
Systematization 
Learning Situation 06 
Theme 
 
Didactic Resources and Readings 
Lessons 
Feedback on 
previously-studied 
issues  
 
Use of Applets – computer room 
 
Final evaluation activity 
 
 
04 
 
General 
Goals 
 
 
To use resources from multiple media as a way to 
systematize what has been worked on during the 
lessons 
 
To propose a final evaluation – one of the 
evaluation stages of the course 
 
Total: 04 
FINAL COMMENTS  
Curricular innovations can barely impact the practice of school science teaching 
without the adoption of measures for overcoming the obstacles preventing 
innovation from being widely implemented (Höttecke et al., 2012). In this project, 
the adaptation of contents to school schedules and the time necessary for carrying 
out activities, as well as the challenges of working with new physics themes, such 
as modern physics, were some of the obstacles faced in the process of elaboration 
of the TLS with participating teachers. Our formal/non-formal partnership and our 
situating the teacher as the protagonist-agent of innovation were key for the 
execution of the proposal with the students. The partnership with the teachers 
became crucial to a greater level integrity in our design and actions. 
[…] it is important to understand intended user teachers’ competence, beliefs, 
intentions, and attitudes toward the topic concerned in the design; or, in other 
words, to share teachers’ worlds. (Juuti & Lavonen 2006, p. 61) 

TEACHING SOLAR PHYSICS 
139
Our work with solar physics in a school-science center partnership opened new 
horizons for discussions about learning to teach in innovative ways, at times 
instrumentalizing the teacher and, in general, supplying new methodological 
approaches for the practice of teaching. The execution of TLSs based on ideas 
from DBR brings research closer to teaching and reveals new fields of possibilities 
for teachers working with both modern and solar physics.  
 
Our reflective cycles, in turn, involved more than the simple collaborative 
methodology used in the construction and implementation of the sequences. They 
emerged from the outset as a necessary “tool” for realizing our formal/non-formal 
partnership. Based on ongoing teaching preparation and reflection about the 
practice and adaptation of the TLSs to the school niche, the reflection cycles not 
only addressed “learning to teach”, but also “innovative ways” to do so, as seen in 
the tables presented throughout the chapter. 
 
We hope this text enables readers to consider the possibilities for formal/non-
formal educational partnerships and the importance of collaborative work 
substantiated in innovative ways, such as the reflective cycles utilized in this 
project. In future publications, we will seek to broaden this debate by presenting 
analyses of the implementations of the TLS with the students in the classroom and 
in non-formal educational spaces. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
We are grateful to the participating teachers, who spared no effort toward the 
success of this research, and to the formal and non-formal educational institutions 
that opened their doors for its development. We also are grateful to the São Paulo 
Research Foundation for financial support.  
NOTE 
1  Inspired by the solar space of the “Planetarium Foundation of Rio de Janeiro” (Aroca, 2009). 
REFERENCES 
Aroca, S. C. (2009). Ensino de física solar em um espaço não formal de educação. Doctoral 
Dissertation, Physics Institute of São Carlos, University of São Paulo, Brazil. 
Azevedo, M. C. P. S. (2008). Situações de ensino – aprendizagem. Análise de uma sequência didática 
de física a partir da Teoria das Situações de Brousseau. Master’s Thesis, Institute of Physics and 
School of Education, University of São Paulo, Brazil. 
Bevan, B., Dillon, J., Hein, G. E., Macdonald, M., Michalchik, V., Miller, D., Root, D., Rudder, L., 
Xanthoudaki, M., & Yoon, S. (2010). Making science matter: Collaborations between informal 
science education organizations and schools. A CAISE Inquiry Group Report. Washington, D.C.: 
Center for Advancement of Informal Science Education (CAISE). Retrieved August 17, 2016, from 
http://www.informalscience.org/sites/default/files/MakingScienceMatter.pdf  
Bhatnager, A., & Livingston, W. (2005). Fundamentals of solar astronomy. Singapore: World Scientific 
Publishing. 
Bhatia, A. (2009). Museum and school partnership for learning on field trips. Master’s Thesis, 
Colorado State University, Fort Collins, Colorado, USA. 

SILVA & COLOMBO JR. 
140 
 
Caniato, R. (1990). O céu. São Paulo: Editora Ática. 
Colombo Jr., P. D. (2014). Inovações curriculares em ensino de física moderna: investigando uma 
parceria entre professores e centro de ciências. Doctoral Dissertation, Institute of Physics and 
School of Education, University of São Paulo, Brazil. 
Colombo Jr., P. D., Cristina, A. P., & Silva, C. C. (2013). Sequências de ensino aprendizagem e os 
Ciclos de Reflexão na preparação docente para a parceria escola-centro de ciências. Enseñanza de 
las Ciencias, Numero extra, 780–785.  
Design-Based Research – DBR (Collective). (2003). An emerging paradigm for educational inquiry. 
Educational Researcher, 32(1), 5–8. 
Eilks, I., Parchmann, I., Grasel, C., & Ralle, B. (2004). Changing teachers’ attitudes and professional 
skills by involving teachers into projects of curriculum innovation in Germany. In B. Ralle & I. 
Eilks (Eds.). Quality in practice oriented research in science education (pp. 29–40). Aachen: 
Shaker. 
Henke, A., Höttecke, D., & Riess, F. (2009). Case studies for teaching and learning with History and 
Philosophy of Science – Exemplary results of the HIPST project in Germany. Presented at Tenth 
International History, Philosophy, and Science Teaching Conference, University of Notre Dame, 
United States. Retrieved August 17, 2016, from http://www3.nd.edu/~ihpst09/papers/Henke_MS.pdf  
Hönel, J. (2004). Setor de astronomia. Dietrich Schiel Observatory, University of São Paulo. Retrieved 
August 17, 2016, from http://www.cdcc.usp.br/cda/historico/index.html  
Höttecke, D., Henke, A, & Riess, F. (2012). Implementing History and Philosophy in Science teaching: 
Strategies, methods, results and experiences from the European HIPST Project. Science & 
Education, 21(9), 1233–1261. 
Komorek, M., & Duit, R. (2004). The teaching experiment as a powerful method to develop and 
evaluate teaching and learning sequences in the domain of non-linear systems. International Journal 
of Science Education, 26(5), 619–633. 
Juuti, K., & Lavonen, J. (2006). Design-based research in science education: One step towards 
methodology. NorDiNa, 2(2), 54–68. 
Lijnse, P. L. (1994). La recherche-développement: Une voie vers une “structure didactique” de la 
physique empiriquement fondée. Didaskalia, 3, 93–108. 
Lijnse, P. L. (1995). “Developmental research” as a way to an empirically based “didactical structure” 
of science. Science Education, 79(2), 189–199. 
Lijnse, P. & Klaassen, K. (2004). Didactical structures as an outcome of research on teaching–learning 
sequences? International Journal of Science Education, 26(5), 537–554. 
Méheut, M. (2004). Designing and validating two teaching–learning sequences about particle models. 
International Journal of Science Education, 26(5), 605–618. 
Méheut, M., & Psillos, D. (2004). Teaching–learning sequences: Aims and tools for science education 
research. International Journal of Science Education, 26(5), 515–535.  
Nupic (Núcleo de Pesquisa em Inovação curricular). (2011). A transposição das teorias modernas e 
contemporâneas para a sala de aula: Dualidade onda-partícula. Research Center Innovation in 
curriculum. University of São Paulo, Brazil. Retrieved March 10, 2012, from www.nupic.fe.usp.br  
Pietrocola, M. P. O. (2010). Inovação curricular e gerenciamento de riscos didático-pedagógicos: O 
ensino de conteúdos de física moderna e contemporânea na escola média. University of São Paulo. 
Retrieved July 15, 2014, from http://www.nupic.fe.usp.br 
Salmi, H. (2012). Evidence of bridging the gap between formal education and informal learning through 
teacher education. Reflecting Education, 8(2), 44–61. 
Secretária do Estado da Educação, SEE/SP. (2009). Proposta curricular do estado de São Paulo. 
Caderno do Professor: Física, São Paulo, 3(3), 25–29.  
Viiri, J., & Savinainen, A. (2008). Teaching-learning sequences: A comparison of learning          
demand analysis and educational reconstruction. Latin-American Journal of Physics Education, 
2(2), 80–86. 
 
 
 

TEACHING SOLAR PHYSICS 
141 
 
Cibelle Celestino Silva  
Institute of Physics – São Carlos 
University of São Paulo 
São Paulo-SP, Brazil 
 
Pedro Donizete Colombo Jr. 
Department of Education in Science, Mathematics and Technology 
Federal University of Triângulo Mineiro 
Minas Gerais-MG, Brazil 

 
M. Pietrocola & I. Gurgel (Eds.), Crossing the Border of the Traditional Science Curriculum, 143–162. 
© 2017 Sense Publishers. All rights reserved. 
IVANI T. LAWALL AND MAURÍCIO PIETROCOLA  
9. CURRICULAR INNOVATION IN MODERN AND 
CONTEMPORARY PHYSICS IN ONGOING  
TRAINING COURSES 
Professional Profile, Motivation Change, and Teacher Difficulties 
INTRODUCTION 
Social changes naturally generate the need for updates in schools. The introduction 
of new values and behaviors inevitably leads to a rethinking of the roles of schools 
in society’s new and developing contexts. In particular, teachers may be asked to 
review their practices, with the goal of changing routine teaching methods and 
contents. When the Law of Directives and Bases of National Educational (LDB) 
was put into effect in 1996, we found ourselves in just such a situation, with new 
directions indicated for both secondary and professional education. This document 
clearly expressed the challenges that education was facing as a result of society’s 
transformation by the means of production entailed by new technologies, as well as 
by the value of information in a world dominated by real-time communication. 
 
Brazil’s National Curriculum Parameters, published from 1998 on, were a 
consequence of that pressure for change, and had an impact on the manner of 
organization of the entire country’s teaching systems, even though the amount of 
actual implementation in the classroom has been modest (Ricardo, 2005). In recent 
years, mainly in Europe and in the United States, projects such as Introduction to 
Science Teacher Training in an Information Society (STTIS), and Science 2000,1 
have sought to deal with a society being transformed by science and technology. 
According to Pietrocola (2010), when analyzing how science courses are taught, it 
is not difficult to notice that a logic of school survival prevails. Science teachers 
replicate processes legitimized in the past. In that sense, school disciplines are 
supposedly the result of didactic transposition, in which there is transformation, 
implementation, judgement, and, finally, stabilization of school knowledge vis-à-
vis the formative goals and determining factors of the classroom. Both in science 
and mathematics teaching, the knowledge that is taught, as generally associated 
with teacher activities, results from didactic transpositions that have already 
acquired some stability. The proposal of changes faces a tacit consensus regarding 
questions like “Why teach?”, “What to teach?”, and “How to teach?”, which result 
from several years/decades of accumulated experience both in the use and in the 
adaptation of teaching activities. The preferred environment for such 
sedimentations of experiences has been classrooms and didactic laboratories. Its 
players have included, among others, teachers, students, and parents. Its main 

LAWALL & PIETROCOLA 
144 
screenplays have been textbooks, and its background the educational system to 
which they refer. Traditional teaching in a certain school discipline is framed as the 
result of stabilized school knowledge and, therefore, as resistant to any changes or 
innovation.  
 
Since they are the main players in the didactic transposition process, the act of 
dealing with teachers in innovation situations is especially important. Pintó et al. 
(2005) claim that it is not enough for the teachers involved in a curricular 
innovation process to admit that a proposal is innovative in itself, but they 
themselves must both translate it and decode it according to their theoretical and 
practical background. The teachers must be able to recognize and acknowledge 
their own transformative role in the innovation process.  
 
Shulman (1986) emphasizes that a very important aspect of the analysis of 
teaching – one which investigations on didactics have long ignored – is the 
extensive knowledge that teachers have of teaching contents and of how these 
contents reach the students. The author elucidates the various categories of teacher 
knowledge bases, which may be summarized as follows: knowledge of specific 
content (related to the specific content of the subject or subjects that the teacher 
teaches), general pedagogical knowledge (including knowledge about theories and 
principles related to teaching and learning processes), and pedagogical knowledge 
of the content (Pedagogical Content Knowledge). The latter is a new kind of 
knowledge that the teacher constantly builds when s/he teaches a subject, which 
allows him or her to expose ideas in the ways most effective for student learning. 
In this process, s/he seeks to utilize the most important and useful analogies, 
descriptions, examples, explanations, and demonstrations, seeking to render the 
subject comprehensible. The analysis of such knowledge is important, since the 
teacher does not acquire it in his or her training. This knowledge is a personal 
elaboration by the teacher, acquired during years of practice, through confrontation 
with the process of transforming content learned during training in teaching 
content. It is at this point that personal values, motivations, and obstacles are 
present in the teacher’s practice, shaping those transformations in ways relevant to 
any analysis of teaching, as well as teaching practice writ large. Chevallard (1991) 
calls this process “Internal Didactic Transposition”: the transformation of content 
in the classroom, a process manifested largely by the teacher, who is not devoid of 
personal values and ideas. 
 
In this context, Nilsson (2008) emphasizes that familiarity with the subject being 
taught may make it easier for the teacher to relate daily phenomena to teaching 
material and to approach the subject from a variety of angles. However, it is not 
enough to know the subject (matter) itself. Such knowledge must always be related 
to other domains, such as that of pedagogical knowledge. These concepts proved 
useful for survey projects that sought to assess the impact of innovations in the 
science curricula (Pintó et al., 2003; Pintó, 2005; Couso, 2008, 2009). In more 
general terms, survey results inform us about the difficulties and challenges present 
in situations that involve curricular innovations, regardless of whether they are 
restricted to a change in content or the result of new didactic and methodological 
guidelines.  

CURRICULAR INNOVATION IN ONGOING TRAINING COURSES 
145 
 
In Brazil, many literary works on the teaching of science (Ostermann & 
Moreira, 2000; Brockington, 2005; Siqueira, 2006; Lawall et al., 2010) indicate the 
need for both innovation in and updating of the physics curriculum. Those surveys 
also point to factors that complicate the insertion of modern and contemporary 
physics in the high school classroom, such as the lack of appropriate materials on 
such contents, the mathematical formalism present in the theories, and 
inadequately-trained teachers. Among those aspects, teacher training stands out, 
since recent surveys point to the overriding role of the teacher in the context of 
curricular reformulations or innovations. In a curricular innovation process – which 
often begins in universities – the teacher, using his or her knowledge of a particular 
school context, transforms, modifies, and adapts the innovation in the best possible 
way for it to be within the reach of the students in a given school reality. 
 
According to Davis (2003), innovative curricula and methodologies require 
dealing with several problems and taking on risks, including the possibility of 
failure(s). Fullan and Hargreaves (1992) claim that one of the risks in this process 
has to do with to the lack of support and/or the lack of understanding of the 
proposed innovation on the part of teachers, which can be a delicate matter in any 
curricular innovation process. When the impetus for change comes from within the 
teaching system, the chances of success increase. In that case, teachers do not sense 
change as an imposition (Terhart, 1999). Otherwise, teachers’ perception regarding 
their capacity/ability to innovate and to take on the resulting risks mitigates against 
the implementation of innovations (Lang et al., 1999). 
 
In that perspective, some authors (Huberman, 2000; Fuller & Bown, 1975, 
Kagan, 1992) analyze the professional development of teachers in stages or phases, 
defined as changes that take place as time goes by in aspects that define their 
behavior, knowledge, self-images, beliefs, or perceptions. In this context, the 
teacher plays a major role in the process of changing school knowledge, from its 
origin until it reaches students.  
 
The main focus of this chapter is to analyze teachers’ professional development 
based on Huberman’s studies, and to try to answer a few questions about teacher 
training through teachers’ participation in a project of curricular innovation in 
modern and contemporary physics.2 First, we present our analyses of a group of 12 
physics teachers, henceforth called instructors, who participated in the production 
and implementation of Teaching and Learning Sequences, and of a second group, 
henceforth called course attending teachers, who attended an ongoing training 
course taught by the first group. In addition to questions about professional 
development, teachers in both groups answered questions about their motivation 
for participating in these innovation groups, as well as about changes in their 
practice and difficulties in applying these contents in the classroom.  
Professional Development  
The idea of professional development as related to teacher training emerges in 
several theoretical approaches. According to Tardif (2007), the development of 
professional learning is tied both to its sources and places of acquisition, and to its 

LAWALL & PIETROCOLA 
146 
moments and phases of development. These different factors may be considered 
when one analyzes a group of teachers participating in a project for the innovation 
of physics contents in Brazilian high schools. Therefore, learning does not refer 
only to the learning work itself, but also to the whole process of a teacher’s work, 
which only makes sense when it is related to the actual work situation (Tardif, 
2000). It is in the latter context that learning is developed, built, and mobilized. 
 
In general, professional development may be understood as the process by 
which teachers increase both their knowledge and their competence. It takes for 
granted that throughout their careers teachers must maintain a permanent 
investigative attitude, seeking solutions for their problems through questioning and 
learning. The main purpose and central goal of these actions are the improvement 
of teachers’ educational practices and, consequently, the improvement of their 
students’ learning. Therefore, professional development is a process, rather than an 
event or series of events. For some people, this process might seem linear, but for 
others there are levels, regressions, blind alleys, moments of impulse, and 
discontinuity (Huberman, 2000). 
 
To accept the existence of such dynamics in the professional life of teachers 
requires us to accept, as well, that different paths may be taken. In one scenario, a 
given teacher’s success may lead him or her to a constant “search” for 
improvement and professional development. Another teacher might abandon the 
occupation – or remain in a situation of “inertia” in the face of education’s many 
demands and commitments (Arruda, 2001). 
 
Seeking to understand the professional trajectories of teachers, Huberman 
(2000) has been verifying the possibility of characterizing “periods” and “phases” 
in teachers’ careers. The establishment of phases or even periods in the career of 
teaching professionals is known to be a risky endeavor (Tardif 2007, Huberman 
2000). The professionalization of teachers is permeated by discernable aspects, 
such as knowledge acquired, and the following of certain rules and laws. These 
more tangible dimensions of teaching activities could be used as controls and are, 
therefore, suitable for objectivization in terms of features that could lead to the 
identification of phases. However, other aspects related to teacher performance are 
hard to characterize, such as the criteria used to make real-time decisions in the 
classroom, to assess, to solve conflicts, to choose methodological strategies, etc. 
These features are as important as the former for occupational success, and we 
believe that they, even more than the former, often ensure successful learning for 
students. 
 
Aware of the problems that every researcher committed to approaching the 
occupation of teaching as a research topic faces, Huberman (2000) insists on the 
many difficulties present there. He warns about the risks of the researcher being 
drawn to simplified or deterministic interpretations. With such concerns in mind, 
the author presents several procedures that may help in facing such difficulties:  
[I]t is very difficult to study the professional life cycle planning to extract 
profile types from it, as well as sequences, phases or determinants of either a 
happy or an unhappy outcome. It is particularly risky to integrate, in the same 
group, individuals who seem to share common traits, but whose background 

CURRICULAR INNOVATION IN ONGOING TRAINING COURSES 
147 
or social environments are different. There would certainly be intersection 
zones among these individuals, but also difference zones without the 
boundary between both zones being clear. That reminds us of the biblical 
proverb according to which there are men who look entirely like other men, 
men who are similar only in some ways and men who do not look at all like 
anyone else. Where do those intersections, those intersection zones meet? 
How is it possible to identify them in reliable terms? (Huberman, 2000, p. 54) 
Keeping such parameters in mind, Huberman (2000) nonetheless proposes five 
phases that mark the evolution process of the teaching occupation: (1) Career Entry 
(from 1 to 3 years in the occupation); (2) Stabilization (from 4 to 6 years);  
(3) Experimentation or Diversification (from 7 to 25 years); (4) Search for a Stable 
Employment Situation (from 25 to 35 years); and (5) Disengagement (from 35 to 
40 years of occupation). The author claims that a teacher’s career goes through 
sequences that determine those phases throughout his professional life. However, 
he emphasizes that not every teacher goes through the phases in the same way, nor 
do all professionals necessarily go through all phases, and also that the same 
professional might go through some of these phases more than once. This becomes 
clear when he states: 
(…) such sequences relate to many, sometimes even to most elements of a 
studied population, but never to that entire population. (…) There are people 
who “stabilize” early, others stabilize later, others who never stabilize and 
there are still others who stabilize and later destabilize. (Huberman, 2000, p. 
37) 
Next, we highlight the main features of each phase proposed by Huberman: 
 
PHASE 1: Career Entry (from 1 to 3 years in the occupation) – Early in his or her 
career, the teacher gets to know, for the first time, the pedagogical reality analyzed 
during academic training. Through this clash with reality, the teacher undergoes an 
experience of survival and discovery, in an adaptation phase in which s/he, 
sometimes enthusiasticly, constantly evaluates his or her teaching practice.  
 
PHASE 2: Stabilization (from 4 to 6 years in the occupation) – In the stabilization 
phase, the teacher creates his or her professional identity; this a decisive 
developmental stage. The characteristics of stabilization are the security, freedom, 
and autonomy acquired by the teacher. Phase 2 includes the affirmation of the 
“teaching self” among more experienced fellow teachers, and a strong commitment 
to the development of the occupation.  
 
PHASE 3: Diversification and Experimentation (from 7 to 25 years in the 
occupation) – Having consolidated their pedagogical “competence”, teachers 
participate in a variety of personal experiences, diversifying their didactic material, 
their means of evaluation, their approaches to working with students, and their 
ongoing classroom programs, as they search for more authority, responsibility, and 

LAWALL & PIETROCOLA 
148 
prestige. In this phase, teachers are presumably in their most encouraged, most 
dynamic, most engaged modes, whether in the classroom or on pedagogical teams 
or in reform initiatives; this can lead to teacher ambition vis-à-vis administrative 
positions, resulting in some teachers moving away from the classroom “routine” as 
a consequence of the search for new challenges. 
 
PHASE 4: Serenity and Relational Distance (from 25 to 35 years in the occupation) 
– This phase can also be understood as a search for a stable professional situation. 
Either teachers reach serenity and move away from students in relational terms, 
working in a repetitive way, without many pedagogical changes, or they take on 
conservatism and complaint, resisting innovations and becoming, on the 
professional level, both nostalgic and frustrated. 
 
PHASE 5: Disengagement (from 35 to 40 years in the occupation) – By the end of 
her or his career, the teacher disengages from school matters, devoting much of her 
or his time to personal projects. 
 
Therefore, the development of a career is a process, rather than a succession of 
isolated events. The phases are not rules. They may take place or not and, even if 
they do, the sequence will not be the same for all, since each individual operates in 
a different professional environment and has different personal and professional 
backgrounds (Huberman, 2000). The classroom matters of a given classroom and 
the unique problems faced by each teacher are part of their personal development 
process and establish what each teacher becomes. 
 
Hewson (2007) believes that the teacher is the main key to improving any 
curricular proposal. When one analyzes professional development, one must take 
into account both the personal and the social aspects, bearing in mind how such 
development takes place within the classroom. 
Methodology 
The establishment of research and extension groups that involve high school 
teachers is of major importance in reducing the distance between universities and 
those schools (mainly public schools) which lack the ability to offer a quality 
education and teachers that are prepared for the challenges they will face.  
 
In our research project, a group made up of six teachers from the public schools 
of São Paulo State was established to work in a curricular innovation project 
studying the insertion of modern and contemporary physics (MCP) contents, 
beginning in 2003. Once the first proposal3 was structured, teacher reports served 
as orientations for future changes. Those reports were crucial for our proposals, 
since it was possible to adapt the latter based on the teachers’ practices in order to 
reach a final version of each. The byproducts of that work included a variety of 
teaching materials, presentations in both national and international conferences, 
scientific articles, and master’s theses in programs of the University of São Paulo. 

CURRICULAR INNOVATION IN ONGOING TRAINING COURSES 
149 
 
The group was renewed in early 2007, when six new teachers became members. 
All 12 teachers (six from the original formation and six new ones) have teaching 
degrees in physics. The new teachers validated the activities to be used in high 
schools and carried out the developed sequences in their classrooms.  
 
A new project, the goal of which was to supplement the teaching and learning 
sequences by means of activities with the “instructors” began in 2008. With a focus 
on MCP contents, we set the goal of supplementing both the teaching and learning 
of physics in high school contexts, with a view toward contributing to the updating 
and improvement of physics teaching and learning. This project was materialized 
through the development of new teaching methodologies (teaching by 
investigation, teaching by models, teaching about the nature of science), new 
teaching materials (activity and experience guides, texts, animations, simulations, 
and digital resources), and resources offered by new information technologies 
(distance virtual tutorships, distance teaching platforms for teacher follow-up, and 
dynamic gateways for making didactic materials available). 
 
In this new project, the team in charge of each of the courses was made up of 
two public school teachers, the “instructors”, and university members (professors, 
undergraduates, and graduate students). The group of instructors was made up of 
the São Paulo State public school teachers who had participated in the research 
group and been awarded scholarships from the Foundation for Research Support of 
São Paulo State (FAPESP). The project consisted of three ongoing training courses 
offered in three editions. The first one took place in the first semester of 2010, the 
second one took place in the second semester of the same year, ending in early 
2011, and the third one took place in the second semester of 2011. The courses 
addressed such themes as relativity, spectral lines, and elementary particles, and 
were offered to public school teachers, henceforth called “course participant 
teachers”. They were trained by means of both in-person and distance activities, 
collaborating both in the suitability and in the extension of the teaching materials 
already produced. 
 
Each course has two modules: the first consists of five in-person meetings, in 
which contents are presented and activities are discussed; in the second, teachers 
apply a teaching sequence in their high school classrooms. The need to deal with 
the development of teaching materials and activities adapted to high school and the 
teaching-learning process were decisive factors in choosing a qualitative study 
method since “(…) the starting point of qualitative research is complexity” 
(Gonçalves, 1997, p. 107). Erickson (1998) ratifies such a choice when he states, 
The main goals of qualitative research are to detail the conduct of daily 
events and to identify the meaning that these events have for those who 
participate in them and for those who witness them. (…) Qualitative research 
on education is especially suitable when you want to obtain detailed 
information on implementation and to identify nuances of the subjective 
understanding that motivates various participants. (p. 1155) 
Cohen and Manion (1980) established several data triangulation strategies that help 
to confirm findings in qualitative research. Their process of Methodological 

LAWALL & PIETROCOLA 
150 
Triangulation is represented by a diversity of research instruments and records 
when data is produced. Thus, it is about the use of different study methods in the 
same research object. 
 
Therefore, we used a triangulation in our data collection (recordings, interviews, 
and questionnaires). We believe that this may have enabled us to obtain more 
accurate data and conclusions. Interviews were held with the teachers in order to 
try to map their impressions and ideas regarding obstacles, difficulties, 
motivations, and other influences that they encountered during their training and 
their application of the didactic sequences. In addition, we used a questionnaire for 
the construction of teacher profiles and to supply information for conclusions to 
our hypotheses. Interviews were done by neutral parties who did not belong to the 
group, and who had participated neither in the development of the material nor in 
the application of its activities.  
 
There were no strict requirements in the order of the interview questions, and it 
was understood that the information obtained might in fact lead to new questions, 
since, when one intends to completely comprehend a given social phenomenon 
both reorientations and adaptations may take place as information is collected and 
analyzed (Richardson, 1985).  
Discussion of the Results 
When we analyzed the interviews, we sought to highlight episodes that could 
characterize both the instructor teachers4 and the teachers who participated in the 
later courses in the phases proposed by Huberman (2000). We also investigated 
those that indicated (a) the motivation to attend innovation groups; (b) a better 
understanding of innovation, highlighting professional development and the 
changes in practice that occur when working with curricular innovation. 
i) 
Instructor Teachers: 
In 2009, interviews were held with the teachers who had participated in the early 
phase of the project, including the elaboration and application of the proposal 
between 2003 and 2005. Although these teachers made up two different groups of 
six, all 12 worked with curricular innovation. At the moment of the implementation 
of the proposals, the teachers were all public-school physics teachers from São 
Paulo State. Therefore, we decided to characterize them as a single group. In order 
to differentiate each one of the teachers, we numbered them from 1 to 12. This data 
collection took place in the second semester of 2008 and in the first semester of 
2009. The interviews were both filmed and recorded, and lasted between 20 and 80 
minutes.  
 
The answers obtained in the written questionnaires revealed that ten teachers 
were in the Experimentation or Diversification phase, while Teacher 4 was in the 
Stabilization phase, and Teacher 11 was in the Serenity and Distancing phase, 
according to their respective service times and the phases established by Huberman 
(2000). However, not all teachers fit into the phases that Huberman proposed, as 

CURRICULAR INNOVATION IN ONGOING TRAINING COURSES 
151 
the author himself predicted. Teacher 1’s report on his practice is incompatible 
with the Phase 3, or Experimentation, status indicated by his service time. When 
asked about his participation in the group and what led to that participation, he 
claimed that he sought security, as indicated in his statement:  
Teacher 1: (…) if they ask something else, you are ashamed to say you do not 
know. It is hard, you cannot say you do not know. If you say you do not 
know, your class is over, your year is over, everything is over.5  
One can observe this teacher’s insecurity, even as he tries to keep his students 
under control and to demonstrate confidence. According to Huberman, such an 
attitude characterizes the transition between the phase of Career Entry and that of 
Stabilization. Therefore, it is remarkable in someone who has been a teacher for 15 
years.  
 
Later, Teacher 1 admitted once again that he is insecure. When he was asked 
about his motivation for participating in the curricular innovation group, he made a 
before-after assessment. His response clearly revealed his troubles in class 
development: 
Teacher 1: Before (…) I did not talk, my opinions, you know, I was really 
scared, I was more insecure, so I did another class like that,…from the book 
to the blackboard and from the blackboard to the book…, that exercise,…, it 
was nothing more than that, …it was really very limited.  
In this passage, the teacher is clearly more concerned about himself than about 
didactic goals. This characteristic often belongs to the Career Entry phase.  
 
In the case of Teacher 4, the opposite took place. According to his service time, 
he should have been in the Stabilization phase. However, his report showed a 
secure teacher, able to make methodological adaptations and diversifications, 
which revealed characteristics of the Experimentation phase. This was noted when 
he was asked about his motivation for inserting modern physics into the program: 
Teacher 4: (…) Earlier, my notion of modern physics and teaching, I 
imagined how to teach any other concept of physics, such as those traditional 
forms, I had to try not to go so deep into the traditional, it was hard for me to 
imagine modern physics other than through the traditional bias. I thought 
more about an adaptation, and here [with the research group] I realized that 
there is a completely different possibility, I got more aware of the notion of 
didactic transposition, I think I changed my point of view regarding how to 
teach both modern and traditional physics. 
Later in the interview, Teacher 4 showed he was secure enough to attempt to 
diversify his didactic material, and possessed the dynamism and motivation 
necessary for trying out innovative contents, all characteristics of the 
Experimentation phase. In turn, Teacher 1 showed the opposite: insecurity, “fear”, 
doubts that are often typical of the Career Entry phase. However, he fluctuated 
from these to perspectives more typical of a teacher in the Stabilization phase. 

LAWALL & PIETROCOLA 
152 
A. Motivation for Participation in Innovation Groups  
Early on, there was an attempt to verify the reasons behind participation in groups 
working on innovation projects. Some of the statements are revealing.  
Teacher 4: (…)Well, I was always very interested in modern physics, since 
my undergraduate days, indeed before then…to be honest physics at school 
never attracted me very much, I liked it, I had good grades, but when I read A 
Brief History of Time, by Stephen Hawking, (…), I recall that at that time 
those things about modern physics that called my attention, what makes the 
eye glow is modern physics (…). 
Teacher 5: (…) As teachers, we always want to recycle. Every opportunity 
you have to recycle, to learn something else, to innovate within teaching is 
always welcome, I think it is a real opportunity, I saw an opportunity to grow 
(…). 
In the transcriptions above, Teachers 4 and 5 make it very clear that their 
participation in innovation groups took place due to a moderate dissatisfaction 
stemming from their desire to introduce new methodologies, and from their 
disengaging from the classroom routine as a consequence of their search for new 
challenges. Routines imposed year after year in the school context are seen by 
some teachers as counter to good teaching. Other statements seem to reinforce that 
affirmation, as will be verified later.  
Asked about the subject of MCP, Teacher 7’s expectations had to do, initially, with 
the subject taught, with didactics, and with class preparation:  
Teacher 7: (…) it was basically for the function of going to school, not 
initially, later I started to like modern physics, in the beginning it had more to 
do with that idea of elaborating the activity, going to school, and coming 
back (…). 
Teacher 7 seems to demonstrate that he wants to consolidate his pedagogical 
competence, as acquired over time and with work experience. Increasing mastery 
may lead to possibilities opening for the development of teachers’ own learning 
experiences; this may be tied to greater security and to feelings of proficiency on 
the part of teachers, enabling them to insert modern physics contents into their high 
school classrooms.  
B. Changes in Practice and in Professional Development When Working with 
Curricular Innovation 
As far as the second theme of the interview, change in practice, was concerned, 
most of the interviewees believed that their participation in curricular innovation 
groups contributed to changes in their practice. Some statements indicated this 
perspective: 
Teacher 2: (…) the change that I had was to favor physics, even though I 
have a traditional way of teaching in the more qualitative, rather than in the 
quantitative sense (…). Therefore, I go into my classes trying to offer the 

CURRICULAR INNOVATION IN ONGOING TRAINING COURSES 
153 
student a more qualitative physics as far as possible, one that is more human 
and closer to reality. In addition, I have had positive results. This makes the 
students interact more, I notice that they interact (…).  
Teacher 3: A long time ago, we used to stay, to a certain extent, in that 
stagnation… with no prospects at all… Of course, I always try to renew my 
knowledge. Once in a while, when there was a course, I attended it, but 
nothing that clicked, that motivated me. (…) We had to come up with a 
reading strategy so that it did not become boring. I discovered that gradually. 
In one class it worked, while in another it did not. 
Teacher 2 indicated changes in the way he addresses content, while Teacher 3 
sought to try new strategies. Security allows for greater flexibility, which leads 
teachers to vary material and even didactic sequences, typical characteristics of the 
Diversification and Experimentation phase. During this phase, the teacher feels 
ready to face either complex or unexpected situations with the ability to maintain 
control. According to Huberman, the teacher is more secure, more at ease, 
throughout that phase, having found her or his own teaching style. This leads to 
greater self-confidence and to mastery of the many aspects of the work of teaching, 
which is reflected in teachers’ professional balance. In that sense, to stabilize 
means to enjoy a higher level of personal and occupational freedom. Still, 
regarding changes in attitudes and teaching practices, other statements reinforce 
earlier comments:  
Teacher 4: (….) I think so, when I think about an activity I try to look at it in 
another way, not simply as I used to look, earlier I guess that I thought more 
about the content, now I try to look at other things, but it actually caused an 
effect on me. 
Teacher 5: Oh, I noticed a radical change (…), even more so because I also 
had a personal change. I had to study many things I did not know (….) I 
believe that I started to look in a different way at the possibilities for 
developing content, for developing a curriculum based on other matters, (…) 
because when you want to develop the skills and competences of the 
students, you want them to become that citizen who will read, interpret, 
argue, and be critical. If you choose a content in which he is not interested, it 
is more difficult, and they find modern physics content interesting, even due 
to the attractions of the media, and to the things used in daily life. 
Teachers 4 and 5 try to diversify both their methods and their practices and to 
figure out the most appropriate ways to apply them in teaching, which clearly 
shows that they are in the Diversification and Experimentation phase, in which 
teachers are motivated and energized toward innovation and disinclined to engage 
in routine classroom practices.  
 
These interviews revealed that when teachers participated in our research groups 
they experienced changes in their practices, became more secure and self-
confident, and also changed their ways of thinking about teaching MCP, even 

LAWALL & PIETROCOLA 
154 
though the precise contribution, as provided in their elaboration of the didactic 
material produced, is not clear. In any case, they felt prepared to enact such 
innovation. By participating in the group, they overcame obstacles to appropriating 
the proposal as they wished, as the following statements suggest: 
Teacher 5: (…) I think I started to look in a different way at the possibilities 
for developing a content, for developing a curriculum from other matters 
(…). 
Teacher 10: (…) an investigative material is a real material for the classroom, 
that can meet the needs of the teachers who are in the classroom as well as 
those of the students. The use of the laboratory is a correction of the 
language, a change in the language, from daily life to more scientific 
language, among other aspects not present in the pedagogical material. 
Therefore, Teachers 5 and 10 are able to undergo the personal experiences 
characteristic of the Diversification and Experimentation phase. Teachers often 
tend to accede to group values. They share their professional experiences with 
other members and exchange knowledge with them on various matters. Teachers 2 
and 6 diversified their class management, since they went after new challenges 
when they participated in the innovation groups: 
Teacher 2: (…) so, as far as the approach was concerned, I do not know, you 
gradually developed it with the students, they gradually noticed it. You don’t 
explain what it is. He will reach the conclusion by himself (…).  
Teacher 6: (…) because it is not only an expository class, an exclusively 
expository class, they have to work a lot, attend the classes, fulfill several 
activities, and they think this is strange (…) you elaborate, you can 
participate in the development of knowledge, they have a very innocent idea 
(…). 
These responses show teachers who are invested in their own development, 
seeking to diversify their methods and practices and to find the most appropriate 
ways to apply their learning in their teaching, as identified in the Diversification 
and Experimentation phase. According to Huberman, one phase may prepare a 
teacher for the next and may limit the range of possibilities that may develop, but 
sequencing cannot always be definitively determined. The search for new 
challenges is a response to the fear of falling into a routine, and engagement with 
collective activities corresponds to a need to maintain enthusiasm for the 
occupation. 
 
As far as whether participation offered contributions to professional 
development, almost all the interviewees answered in the affirmative. However, 
engagement level varied. While some indicated a critical analysis of their practices, 
others carried out modest changes, as some statements point out: 
Teacher 2: (…) so, as far as the approach was concerned, you gradually 
developed it with the students, they gradually noticed it. You don’t explain 

CURRICULAR INNOVATION IN ONGOING TRAINING COURSES 
155 
what it is. He will reach the conclusion by himself. And then he often left 
with… he entered without knowing what was going on… what would take 
place, but he left with questions.  
Teacher 5: (…) I think I started to look in a different way at the possibilities 
for developing a content, for developing a curriculum from other matters 
(…). 
Here we notice that Teacher 2 has an open-minded stance in relation to his class. 
He is not afraid to “experience” new approaches, because he seems to be secure 
about any diversifications he may initiate in the classroom. One may note in 
Teacher 5’s statement that he is not afraid to change the curriculum. In other 
words, both teachers are willing to incorporate new contents, materials, and 
approaches. This corresponds to their professional development phase, according 
to Huberman’s categories, that of Diversification and Experimentation. 
 
Most teachers’ statements revealed an engagement with collective activities, 
which corresponds to a need to maintain enthusiasm for their occupation. Here, it 
seems clear that teacher participation in the curricular innovation group led to 
personal and professional development, indicating that they were in the 
Stabilization and/or Diversification phase. This is related to what Couso and Pintó 
(2009) conceive as the ability to learn in their environment, which entails the 
possibility for participating in social interactions that produce professional 
knowledge and for internalizing this knowledge as a result of participation in 
cooperative work. However, there were cases in which there was a departure from 
the phases that Huberman pointed out. We can verify that in the following 
statement: 
Teacher 1: So, because I got tired, because I did not want to stay only that 
way, I did not want to be that static teacher, only standing there, only 
alternating between the book and the blackboard. A teacher must talk, he 
must know what is going on with the student, he must also find out about the 
students, encouraging them, training them, teaching a good class. In that case, 
all students participate and you do not even feel the class go by (…). 
Teacher 1 makes explicit that his concern has shifted to didactic goals, since he 
feels more at ease in facing complex or unexpected situations, generating a bet, in 
the middle or long run, on security and a greater flexibility in class management. 
Those traces of professional development place him in the Stabilization phase, 
even though he has been teaching for 15 years. 
ii) Teachers Who Participated in Courses 
Our courses took place at the School of Education of the University of São Paulo 
(FEUSP) and were attended by 226 teachers, each of whom answered our 
questionnaire. The themes of the courses were: relativity, spectral lines, and 
elementary particles. The courses were offered three times.  

LAWALL & PIETROCOLA 
156 
 
The answers of 194 teachers, from three different classes, were analyzed. The 
first class had 80 teachers, the second one had 79 teachers and the third one had 34 
teachers. As far as professional profile was concerned, the first issue analyzed had 
to do with professional training, taking into account the information obtained in the 
questionnaire from the beginning of the course regarding professional training, 
attendance in courses on curricular innovation, and total years of teaching. 
Responses showed that 62% of the teachers were physics graduates, 22% were 
mathematics graduates, 3% were chemistry graduates and 6% were graduates from 
other disciplines, primarily engineering. This makes sense, since the main 
requirement for a teacher to attend this course was for him or her to be a classroom 
teacher of physics in public schools. Regarding professional qualifications, it was 
verified that 36.5% had taken post-graduate courses; in other words, many of the 
teachers had chosen to continue their education, as evincing ongoing efforts to 
learn more and to develop their careers. 
 
Regarding attendance in ongoing training courses, it was observed that 76% of 
the teachers had already attended at least one course in the past five years, 
demonstrating their interest in remaining updated as far as teaching is concerned. 
According to TARDIF, “Therefore, professionals must train and renew themselves 
through different means, after their initial university studies” (2007, p. 249).  
 
We used Huberman’s theory with the goal of sketching the professional 
development profiles of the teachers, dividing them into phases according to their 
teaching time. These phases are not rules, and may or may not take place as 
outlined. According to our analysis of the answers of the 194 teachers who took the 
course, most of them, indeed 61%, were in the Diversification and Experimentation 
phase (7 to 25 years of teaching), which is characterized by the teacher’s desire to 
innovate in the classroom, since s/he feels secure and stable. Teachers in that phase 
are supposedly “the most motivated, the most dynamic, the most engaged in 
pedagogical teams” (Huberman, 2000). Analysis of the questionnaire also indicates 
that 11% of the teachers were in the Career Entry phase; 21% were in the 
Stabilization phase, in other words, they were still getting used to the school life; 
and 4% were already in the Serenity and Disengagement phase, that is, getting 
ready for retirement after having been in the classroom for more than 25 years. 
This latter reveals that the Huberman’s phases are not rigid rules, since those 
teachers still attend innovation courses, showing interest in innovating and learning 
new teaching methods.  
 
One can observe a strong commitment to professional development on the part 
of these teachers, since they remain motivated for and enthusiastic about the 
occupation. As can be observed, 21% of the teachers were in the Stabilization 
phase and 61% in the Experimentation and Diversification phase. Huberman 
(2000) claims that in these phases the teachers are at their most concerned with and 
committed to the development of the occupation. They are also the ones who 
attend the most training and updating courses (such as this training course and 
curricular innovation group), leading to personal and professional development.  
 
The eight teachers who attended more than one edition of the training course 
were interviewed. The teachers in this group have been teaching between two and 

CURRICULAR INNOVATION IN ONGOING TRAINING COURSES 
157 
16 years. Three of them were licensed in physics, three in mathematics, one in 
science, and one was an electric engineering graduate. In order to characterize each 
of the teachers, a reference acronym was established: C1, C2, C3…C8. 
 
The major themes that guided the interviews were the same as those presented 
to the instructors: 
A. Motivation for Participation in Innovation Groups  
Initially, the teachers were asked about their motivation for attending the training 
courses. Four of the teachers answered that it was due to the lack of MCP contents 
in their undergraduate training and four teachers mentioned the need for updating, 
as can be seen in the following statements from teachers C1 and C4. 
C1: First of all, regarding my physics training, I got my teaching degree in 
three years, so modern physics only included relativity. I did not take courses 
on particles and spectral lines, so that was my main interest. 
C4: It was actually a student (…) and he asked me in 2008: teacher, have you 
heard about the God particle? (..) So I thought: my God, there is still 
something I do not know!!! (…) I had not studied MCP in my undergraduate 
courses and I was facing a situation in which the student asked me something 
I did not know the answer to.  
The statements by Teachers C1 and C4 reveal possible difficulties derived from a 
lack of knowledge of MCP content, which may be due to initial training in another 
field, or even to insufficient training. It is not surprising that this motivates 
teachers, since, as Nilsson (2008) highlights, gaps in teacher knowledge may lead 
to feelings of frustration and discomfort, even more so when a student asks a 
question to which the teacher not know the answer.  
 
Teachers also expressed the need to update and to learn “new practices”. 
According to Tardif (2007), to learn is to acquire knowledge, and from there to 
build knowledges that are tools for work development. Teachers gradually learn 
how to teach by facing, on a daily basis, situations that enable them to build such 
tools. 
B. Changes in Practice and in Professional Development When Working with 
Curricular Innovation 
The teachers’ answers revealed that they changed their practices after they attended 
the training courses. They reported that, in addition to presenting MCP contents to 
their students, they now use the methodologies learned in the courses to teach other 
physics contents. According to teachers C2 and C3, classical physics is no longer 
framed as undisputed truth, since they now call students’ attention to the history of 
science and to physics as a human development. 
 
This is of great importance for student education, since it presents a more 
correct view of science and of the nature of scientific work, overcoming the linear 
view of scientific development currently present in most textbooks and physics 
classes (Ostermann & Moreira, 2000). 

LAWALL & PIETROCOLA 
158 
C2: Before that was how it happened, that was simply it, as if there was an 
end (…) today that is not the case. I teach classical physics not as the end, but 
as part of a process. 
C3: What I have been noticing a lot is that I have been giving a little more 
attention to the philosophy of science (…) how does the person arrive at that 
concept, that thing about not being an undisputed truth. 
Such changes in teachers’ practices are a reflection of the professional 
development provided by the courses. This process improves both the knowledge 
and the competences of the teachers, providing them with a permanent inquisitive 
stance, and encouraging them to always seek solutions for their problems by means 
of questioning. In this way, teaching practices evolve and improve; moreover, and 
above all, student learning does the same as a consequence of this progress on the 
parts of teachers.  
 
When professional development is debated one must take into account what it 
means to be a professional and to what extent professionals have the autonomy to 
carry out their work. It is a long-term process, in which different kinds of 
opportunities and experiences interact, and both learning and teaching are 
produced. It is the evolution of the professional self over the course of a given 
career.  
iii) Difficulties of Instructors and Course Participants  
When instructors were asked what they would characterize as the difficulties of 
teaching the course to the attending teachers, two categories were identified: one 
had to do with knowledge of the contents presented and the other with teaching 
methods and strategies. Teacher 6’s statement reveals that the initial concern was 
with knowledge of MCP content: 
Teacher 6: Once this stage of the course was over, I considered that my 
greatest difficulty was my training in modern physics. (…) As I prepared my 
classes, I was almost exclusively concerned about the contents, leaving aside 
how to deal with them in the classroom.  
Even though he participated in the group preparing the material, his concerns 
remained when presenting it to those who attended the course. However, one can 
later detect issues with his pedagogical training that need to be addressed for his 
classes to improve.  
Teacher 6: I am certain now that a new approach is necessary for me to carry 
out my work, taking into account such issues as problematization, appropriate 
didactic sequences, didactic transposition, etc. (…) exchanging experiences 
with my fellow teachers was also very important for my ongoing training as 
an education professional. 
Here we can verify that teachers’ concerns had to do not only with contents, but 
also with the methods and strategies they could use to work with MCP content in 

CURRICULAR INNOVATION IN ONGOING TRAINING COURSES 
159 
high school. One can identify two different levels of knowledge, represented here 
by a combination of knowing the subject and knowing how to teach that subject. In 
didactic terms, this is close to the notion of Knowledge of Pedagogical Contents 
which, according to Shulman (1996, p. 9), includes “the most useful ways to 
represent ideas, the most important analogies, illustrations, examples, explanations 
and demonstrations, in short, the way to represent and to formulate the subject to 
make it more understandable”.  
 
The main complaints of the teachers who participated in the courses regarding 
introducing MCP contents in the classroom had to with the lack of structure in their 
schools, a shortage of materials for differentiated activities, and difficulties finding 
the time to study, prepare, and present the activities.  
C1: (…) It is actually about structure. In the suburbs, we do not have a 
laboratory, nor do we have it downtown (…) and I have to take what I need 
to use in terms of audiovisual resources (…) I have to schedule it ahead of 
time, sometimes I have to prepare everything and we have a very limited time 
to do all that alone. 
C7: (…) The greatest difficulty is of a material nature. It is hard for us to 
implement due to the lack of materials, we have to buy them (…) An issue 
that seemed more troublesome to me was that they are not used to that kind 
of activity. Therefore, they say everything at once, they want to participate, 
they participated actively (…) they can’t behave themselves. 
The difficulties mentioned by the instructor teachers6 and those who participated in 
the courses7 are very similar, regardless of the activity concerned. However, the 
latter attempted to adapt the material according to the reality of their schools and 
classrooms.  
 
As far as the participation of the teachers in the project was concerned, both the 
responses of the instructors and of those who attended courses contributed in a 
significant manner to changes in teaching practice. Changes in teaching practices 
resulted from the debates, studies, and explanations that the courses provided, 
which strengthened the knowledge that the teachers had about certain subjects, 
both in the contents of the discipline of physics and in the pedagogical 
methodologies and strategies presented. This process in turn provided the 
necessary security and support for teachers to innovate in the classroom.  
 
The participation of the teachers in the training courses was a significant factor 
in their support for the proposal, since, while they did at the outset accept this 
challenge, they later became in an important sense the owners of the didactic 
material, with different levels of initiatives intended to facilitate adjustments, 
adaptations, and reorientations based on their work contexts. 
CONCLUSION 
For our initial work, the phases Huberman proposed served as decent descriptions 
of the professional life cycles of teachers, since they delineate the phases, 
transitions, and crises which teaching professionals must face throughout the 

LAWALL & PIETROCOLA 
160 
development of their professional careers, phenomena which affect many, even 
most, teachers. This model is an overview, which groups tendencies that are not so 
ordered in the real world. We cannot in fact say that all professionals undergo the 
same phases, in the same order, regardless of living or working conditions, 
historical period, immediate social interactions, and individual desires and needs. 
 
Teacher statements revealed that the lack of MCP contents in their 
undergraduate educations and their searches for new practices were the main 
incentives for them to attend the training courses. Even teachers who had teaching 
degrees in physics reported that what they learned in the university, during their 
undergraduate courses, was not enough to address different MCP topics in high 
school classes. Since the lack of knowledge of those contents leads to insecurity, 
discomfort, and frustration on the part of teachers (Nilsson, 2008), they end up not 
including such challenging themes in their classrooms. However, despite the 
importance of and the need for ongoing training courses, we believe that contents 
and didactic instruments that provide teachers with support for curricular 
innovation should be offered in their initial training.  
 
It should also be emphasized that teacher support is of the ultimate importance 
during the elaboration and implementation of innovative proposals, since it is 
teachers themselves who try to adapt, utilize, and redirect innovative ways of 
teaching and learning according to their unique school reality. In other words, the 
teacher interacts and negotiates with innovation, either rejecting or changing 
certain aspects of the proposal, in the way that s/he considers the most appropriate 
for the needs of her or his classes and students (Pinto, Couso, & Gutierrez, 2005) in 
order to actually produce school knowledge. Certain aspects of the subject matter 
make it more difficult for teachers to introduce MCP in high schools. Even though 
they are generally able to grasp the contents and activities that the training courses 
offer, teachers mentioned the lack of school structure and the shortage of time 
available for preparing and teaching the classes as factors that render the real-life 
execution of the proposal more difficult.  
 
Finally, we must emphasize the key role played by teachers in the curricular 
innovation movement. According to Tardfi (2007), university researchers must 
stop viewing teachers merely as research objects. Instead, they must consider them 
as subjects with their own knowledge sets, as collaborators and as co-researchers, 
in such a way that they value their fellow teachers and, at the same time, support 
their ongoing training.  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The authors are grateful to their teachers, Élio C. Ricardo, Maxwell Siqueira, and 
George Shinomiya, for discussions regarding work with instructors, as well as to 
their fellow workers at NUPIC. 
NOTES 
1  American Project. 
 
 

CURRICULAR INNOVATION IN ONGOING TRAINING COURSES 
161 
 
2  This project was developed at USP, by Professor Mauricio Pietrocola, between 2003 and 2013. 
3  The first proposal taken into the classroom was about the concepts of quantum mechanics. The full 
course and its analysis can be found in Brockington (2005). 
4  Data on the instructors was presented at the III Encuentro Internacional sobre Investigación en 
Enseñanza en Ciencias, at Burgos-ES, and in the XII EPEF – Meeting of Research in the Teaching 
of Physics, at Águas de Lindóia, SP, 2010. 
5  The transcriptions were made verbatim. Some bad language habits were removed, without changing 
the content. 
6  Studies done by Siqueira with the group of instructor teachers confirm these results. 
7  Studies done by Shinomiya with the group of teachers who participated in the courses confirm these 
results. 
REFERENCES 
Arruda, S. M. (2001). Entre a inércia e a busca: reflexões sobre a formação em serviço de professores 
de física do ensino médio. Doctoral Dissertation, School of Education, University of São Paulo. 
Cohen, L., & Manion, L. (1980). Research methods in education. London: Croom Helm. 
Couso, D. (2008). Authentic collaboration: Implication and results of a promising paradigm for science 
education reform and research. Presented at Atas do GIREP 2008 – International Conference, 
August 18–22, Nicosia, Cyprus, University of Cyprus.  
Couso, D., & Pintó, R (2009). Análisis del contenido del discurso cooperative de los profesores de 
ciencias em contextos de innovación didática. Ensñansa de las Ciências, 27(1), 5–18.  
Davis, K. (2003). Change is hard: What science teachers are telling us about reform and teacher learning 
of innovative practices. Science Education, 87(1), 3–20.  
Erickson, F. (1998). Qualitative research methods for science education. In B. J. Fraser & K. G. Tobin 
(Eds.), International handbook of science education, Part one. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic 
Publishers. 
Fullan, M., & Hargreaves, A. (1992). Teacher development and educational change. London: Falmer. 
Fuller, F. F., & Bown, O. H. (1975). Becoming a teacher. In K. Ryan (Ed.), Teacher education – 
yearbook N. S. S. E. (pp. 25--52). Chicago: University of Chicago Press,  
Gonçalves, M. E. R. (1997). As atividades de conhecimento físico na formação do professor das séries 
iniciais. Doctoral Dissertation, School of Education, University of São Paulo. 
Hewson, P. H. (2007). Teacher professional development in science. In S. K. Abell & N. G. Ledermann 
(Eds.), Handbook of research on science education. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc. 
Huberman, M. (2000). O ciclo de vida professional de professores. In A. Nóvoa (Ed.), Vida de 
professores (pp. 31-78). Porto, Portugal: Porto Editora.  
Kagan, D. M. (1992). Professional growth among preservice and beginning teachers. Review of 
Educational Research, 62(2), 129–169.  
Lang, M., Day, C., Bunder, W., Hassen, H., Kysilka, H. T., & Tamari, K. (1999). Teacher professional 
development in the context of curriculum reform. In M. Lang, J. Oison, H. Hansen, & W. Bunder 
(Eds.), Changing schools/changing practices. Perspectives on educational reform and teacher 
professionalism (pp. 121–131). Louvain: IPN and Garant. 
Lawall, I. T. et al. (2010a). Dificuldades de professores de física em situação de inovações curriculares e 
em curso de formação. In XII EPEF – Encontro de Pesquisa em Ensino de Física. Águas de 
Lindóia, SP.  
Lawall, I. T. et al. (2010b). Implementação de inovações curriculares no ensino secundário: o 
desenvolvimento profissional de um grupo de professores. In III Encuentro Internacional Sobre 
Investigación en Enseñanza en Ciencias (Vol. 1, pp. 213–224). Burgos-ES. 
Nilsson, P. (2008). Teaching for understanding: The complex nature of pedagogical content knowledge 
in pre-service education. International Journal of Science Education, 30(10), 1281–1299.  
 
 

LAWALL & PIETROCOLA 
162 
 
Ostermann, F., & Moreira, M. A. (2000). Física contemporánea em la escuela secundaria: Uma 
experiencia en el aula involucrando formación de profesores. Enseñanza de las Ciencias, 18(3), 
391–404. 
Pietrocola, M. (2010). Inovação curricular em Física: transposição didática e a sobrevivência dos 
saberes. In Garcia & Nilson (Eds.), Livro de comunicações do EPEF, 105–115. 
Pintó, R., Gutierrez, R. Ametller, J., Andresen, O., Balzano, E., Boohan, R., Chauvet, F., Colin, P., 
Couso, D., Giberti, G., Hirn, C., Kolsto, S. D., Monroy, G., Ogborn, J., Quale, A., Rebmann, G., 
Sassi, E., Stylianidou, F., Testa, I., & Viennot, L. (2001). Teachers transformations trends when 
implementing innovations. STTIS Report RW4 [online]. Retrieved March 15, 2003, from 
http://www.blues.uab.es  
Pintó, R. et al. (2005a). Introducing curriculum innovations in science: Identifying teachers’ 
transformations and the design of related teacher education. Science Education, 89(1), 1–12. 
Pintó, R, Couso, D., & Gutierrez, R. (2005b). Using research on teachers’ transformations of 
innovations to inform teacher education. The case of energy degradation. Science Education, 89(1), 
38–55.  
Ricardo, E. C. (2005). Competências, interdisciplinariedade e contextualização: Dos parâmetros 
curriculares nacionais a uma compreensão para o ensino de ciências. Doctoral Dissertation, 
Federal University of Santa Catarina.  
Richardson, R. J. et al. (1985). Pesquisa social: Métodos e técnicas. São Paulo: Atlas. 
Shulman, L. S. (1986). Those who understand: Knowledge growth in teaching. Educational Researcher, 
15(2), 4–14.  
Tardif, M. (2000). Saberes profissionais dos professores e conhecimentos universitários: Elementos para 
uma epistemologia da prática profissional dos professores e suas conseqüências em relação à 
formação para o magistério. Revista Brasileira de Educação, AN de Pós-Graduação e Pesquisa em 
Educação, 13, 5-13. 
Tardif, M. (2007). Saberes docentes e formação profissional, 2. Petrópolis, RJ: Editora Vozes.  
Terhart, E. (1999). Developing a professional culture. In M. Lang, J. Oison, H. Hansen, & W. Bunder 
(Eds.), Changing schools/changing practices: Perspectives on educational reform and teacher 
professionalism (pp. 27–39). Louvain: IPN and Garant. 
 
Ivani T. Lawall 
Physics Department 
State University of Santa Catarina  
Brazil 
 
Maurício Pietrocola 
Department of Teaching Methodology and Comparative Education 
School of Education of the University of São Paulo 
São Paulo-SP, Brazil 
 

 
M. Pietrocola & I. Gurgel (Eds.), Crossing the Border of the Traditional Science Curriculum, 163–179. 
© 2017 Sense Publishers. All rights reserved. 
ALEXANDRE BAGDONAS, ANDRÉ NORONHA, VITOR MACHADO, 
FELIPE VELÁSQUEZ, AND IVÃ GURGEL 
10. A GAME DESIGNED TO TACKLE 
CONTROVERSIES ABOUT THE NATURE OF SCIENCE 
Debates Regarding Science Funding Based on Studies of the History of 
Cosmology in the First Half of the 20th Century 
INTRODUCTION 
Nowadays, the importance of a rapprochement between history and philosophy of 
science (HPS) and science teaching is almost unanimously accepted among 
researchers in science education. This can be noted in publications, dissertations, 
and theses, as well as in in major national and international conferences and 
seminars (Matthews, 1995; El-Hani, 2006; Vilas Boas et al., 2013; Noronha, 2014; 
Bagdonas, 2015). This shows the strength of this research area, as well as the 
importance attached to HPS for science education, although science curricula in 
many countries have moved very little in recent years towards effectively 
achieving a historical-philosophical approach (El-Hani, 2006, p. 5). Naturally, 
there have been many developments in the area of research and analysis of HPS-
related topics, but even major advances should always be regarded with relative 
caution. 
 
As Matthews (1995 [1992], p. 165) categorically stresses, the disciplines of the 
history, philosophy, and sociology of science do not have all the answers to the 
many issues that confront science education today. Furthermore, it is known that 
HPS may be used for different educational purposes, including those that are 
unforeseen or unexpected according to recent curricular standards.  
 
Meanwhile, there is a quite large predominance of studies that employ the 
history of science to discuss nature of science (NOS) topics in the classroom. 
Currently, a significant portion of these seek to contemplate the so-called 
“consensus view” of the NOS in science education (Lederman, 2007). Although we 
consider these studies valid, we argue that openly discussing the controversial 
issues of the NOS is an important challenge for science educators, one that should 
not be avoided. In the following section, we will discuss the debates regarding non-
consensus about the NOS.  
 
It is currently commonplace for a full scientific education to include processes 
of teaching that not only aggregate scientific content, but also encourage 
reflections about scientific enterprise and knowledge, which is known in the 
literature as NOS. A little less than twenty years ago, the importance of 
approaching issues related to the NOS in science education became a consensus, as 

BAGDONAS ET AL. 
164 
noted in analyses of recent articles about science education (Lederman, 2007; Vilas 
Boas et al., 2013). However, consensus regarding its importance does not imply a 
consensus on the contents of the NOS. There is no full consensus on the following 
issues: What is the proper definition of the NOS? What is its content? What is the 
nature of the NOS? 
 
Recently many authors have philosophically criticized the “consensus view” of 
the NOS (Irzik & Nola, 2011; Matthews, 2012; Rozentalski, Bagdonas & Noronha, 
2012; Bagdonas, Zanetic & Gurgel, 2014; Noronha, 2014, Bagdonas 2015), 
especially the one established by Norman Lederman et al. (2007). Given the 
complexity of science in general, we believe it is too risky to evaluate conceptions 
about NOS as “right” or “wrong”. The criticism extant is mainly directed toward 
the dogmatic assumption of a list of NOS tenets which does not show the variety of 
features of different sciences. It proposes the consideration of (non-consensual) 
issues such as the role of mathematics in science, scientific realism (Matthews, 
2012, p. 20; Noronha, 2014), the criteria used for science demarcation, the 
relationship between science and religion (Bagdonas, 2011), the “social 
construction” of science (Greca & Freire Jr., 2004; Rozentalski, Bagdonas, & 
Noronha, 2012), and so forth. We argue that bringing scientific-philosophical 
controversies to science teaching may enable a deeper understanding of the 
characteristics of science, since such factors were almost always present in the 
history of science (Matthews, 1995, 2012). The diversity of philosophical positions 
which might possibly manifest in discussions on controversial NOS issues is 
extremely interesting to the teaching of physics, for at least two reasons: it mirrors, 
in its own way, the diversity of philosophical positions among scholars of science 
and scientists, and it allows for reflective, non-doctrinaire education about 
scientific knowledge and enterprise. 
RELATIVIST CONTROVERSIES AND THE CONTRIBUTIONS OF  
SOCIAL HISTORY TO SCIENCE EDUCATION 
Several “anti-scientific” movements have emerged and gained strength over the 
last few years. In general, most of these argue on behalf of what can be generically 
called “epistemic relativism”, a posture with several branches. In its most extreme 
versions, it maintains, for example, that nature and society cannot be separated in 
any domain, in such way that “natural events” are defined as “socially-constructed 
events” (Pessoa Jr, 1993, p.9). Notions such as “truth”, “reference”, and “ontology” 
are relativized. These tenets directly attack the scientific realist belief that scientific 
knowledge refers to the exterior, mind-independent world (Chakravartty, 2013, p. 
19). According to the philosopher of science Boghossian (2012, p. 44), many 
people today are drawn to relativist conceptions, even though some of them entail 
very extreme implications. These tensions are often translated into conflicts over 
the value of science. 
 
By contrast, according to the historian of science Shapin, “anti-science rioters” 
have much to learn by listening to scientists and their views about scientific 
practices and knowledge, since they can point to criticism from within (Shapin, 

CONTROVERSIES ABOUT THE NATURE OF SCIENCE 
165 
 
2012, p. 17). Likewise, scientists also have much to learn about their own 
discipline with the help of historians, philosophers, and sociologists of science. A 
broad appeal for philosophical plurality is emerging, which seeks contributions 
from many different perspectives about science and the history of science.  
 
This appeal can be transposed to the aims of science education, in order to 
defend philosophical pluralism in such contexts (Rozentalski, Bagdonas, & 
Noronha, 2012; Noronha & Gurgel, 2014). Presently, the vast majority of research 
holding the so-called “consensus view of the NOS” about students’ conceptions of 
NOS concludes that the one widespread belief that needs to be problematized is 
that experiments can be used to prove that certain theories are true. Gil Perez et al. 
(2001, pp. 129–134) call this an “empirical-inductivist view”, which “highlights 
the role of neutral observation and experimentation, leaving no place for the 
essential role of hypotheses as a research guide, as well that of theories available in 
order to guide the whole process”. 
 
To defend the approximation of the controversies of the NOS to science 
education is to both critically regard different philosophical standpoints such as 
those above, and to contend that many of them can provide interesting 
contributions to the field of science education. On the one hand, it is important to 
avoid a rigid, anti-historical, linear view of science, in order to prevent the 
transmission of a deformed image of science as a decontextualized and socially-
neutral enterprise. This approach contributes nothing to the formation of more 
critical and responsible citizens. Secondly, it is necessary to try understand that 
discussions such those generically called “postmodernist” can enrich debates about 
science by providing a more realistic picture of the multifaceted phenomenon that 
is science, and that is useless simply deny or attack them (Greca & Freire Jr., 2004, 
p. 347). However, certain caveats must be made about what is and what is not 
worth including. Simplified historical conceptions, as in certain radical or naive 
philosophical positions, have been condemned over the years in the literature of 
science education, and should therefore be avoided. However, intermediary and 
critical positions may offer important educational contributions, either at the high 
school or undergraduate level. 
 
The complexity of the epistemological discussions set forth in science education 
may take a progressive route, from early childhood education, incorporating 
simpler and less controversial topics, to teacher education, when important 
philosophical and historical tensions need to and can be explored (Abd-El-Khalick, 
2012). We have developed a tool – the implementation of which we have analyzed 
below – which explores, within a structure of didactic development, the tensions 
and manifestations of political and sociological influences on science and scientists 
in their particular contexts: the Cosmic Game. 
THE COSMIC GAME 
Several researchers have argued that using games in science education is a good 
way to enhance students’ interest and engagement in classes (Gee, 2003; Shaffer, 

BAGDONAS ET AL. 
166 
2006; Antunes & Sabóia-morais 2010, Jann & Leite 2013, Oliveira & Soares 2005, 
Trópia 2011; Brito & Sá, 2010; Matias & Amaral, 2010; Braga & Matos, 2013; 
Bretones, 2013). Many of these games are didactic strategies intended as 
improvements to traditional teaching based on memorization, review, or evaluation 
of scientific concepts. However, with Sabka and his collaborators (2014), we 
believe that the most promising ones are those that aim at a more radical 
transformation of science classes, with less attention to the transmission of 
concepts and more focus on promoting critical thinking about socio-scientific 
issues. Inspired by the practice and research of educators, we created a game which 
aims to stimulate students’ creativity and imagination, and to thereby promote the 
development of important skills like collaborative research and teamwork. 
 
The Epistemic Games Group, at the University of Wisconsin, has developed 
several educational games that aim to develop skills, knowledge, identities, values, 
and epistemologies that professionals may use to think in innovative ways (Shaffer, 
2006). While students play these “epistemic games” in virtual worlds, they are 
invited to reflect about, and seek solutions for, real-world problems. In this way, 
they learn to think and act like historians, journalists, scientists, urban designers, 
and other creative professionals.  
 
One of the most promising strategies for the promotion of critical thinking in 
science education are games based on debates. This kind of strategy, sometimes 
called “Simulated Jury”, has been used to teach physics (Guerra et al., 2002; Silva 
& Martins, 2009; Forato, 2009; Ferry & Nagem, 2009), chemistry (Brito & Sá, 
2010; Matias & Amaral, 2010), and astronomy (Ferreira et al., 2011; Ferreira, 
2013).  
 
In Shafer’s (2006, p. 17) version of this game, known as the “Debating Game”, 
students are invited to learn to think like historians via debating the Spanish-
American War. In his model, discussions are organized as political debates, and 
students are cast as either “debaters” or “judges”. The judges decide which team of 
students presented better arguments, thus producing a winner in the game. 
 
Shaffer argued that the biggest difference between the way high school students 
and historians think is the importance given to information and bias in historical 
discourse. While students want to memorize a great quantity of facts and see bias 
as a binary attribute, historians focus on understanding how bias – given that it is 
an unavoidable facet of knowledge processing – might affect their interpretation of 
historical sources (Shafer, 2006, p. 30). Therefore, the “Debating Game” is a way 
to change history classes so that instead of memorizing many historical facts, 
students are encouraged to think like historians in debates about different possible 
historical interpretations. Playing this game, students won’t really learn the 
complex epistemology of historians, but they may well develop a more authentic 
view of history and also enhance other important abilities, such as writing, reading, 
research, and communication. 
 
The Cosmic Game was developed collectively by science educators in the 
TeHCo group1 at the Institute of Physics of the University of São Paulo. Members 
of the group were high school physics teachers and graduate students, researchers 
in physics education. The game was also inspired by cosmology courses previously 

CONTROVERSIES ABOUT THE NATURE OF SCIENCE 
167 
 
developed by Alexandre Bagdonas, during his master’s thesis, supervised by 
Cibelle Silva. In this project, they developed a course based on the big bang and 
steady state cosmological controversies of the 1950s, in which they investigated 
pre-service teacher conceptions of the connections between science and religion 
(Bagdonas, 2011).  
 
The development of the Cosmic Game included the creation of rules, game 
dynamics, and materials, mainly cards and a game board. We also planned 
activities, such as debates or the explanation of scientific concepts, with videos, 
computer simulations, and other strategies, so that the game became associated 
with a teaching and learning sequence (TLS). The main goal of this sequence was 
to promote a richer understanding of the relations between the development of 
science and its social and historical contexts. For this, game dynamics stimulate 
research regarding not only cosmology during the first half of the 20th century 
(mainly 1914–1939), but also the political, cultural and economic influences on 
science during this period. 
 
In this game and sequence, the general objective is to problematize both the 
notion of the neutral scientist, free of ideological influences, and a naively 
relativistic vision of scientists as completely dominated by ideological influences. 
It is important for the student to understand the development of science as a human 
production influenced by its social and historical contexts, but not as entirely 
determined thereby. 
 
This sequence consists of an introduction to cosmology concepts and the three 
phases of the game, incorporating the search for information related to science and 
cosmology, development of this material, and debate. The three main phases of the 
game (detailed below) were developed so that its main activities involve the 
investigation of those historical events relevant to cosmological development in the 
period 1914–1939, and discussion of the results of these investigations, facilitating, 
through this process, a debate around the various relations between scientific 
development and the social and political history of the world.  
 
One of the challenges faced during the development of this sequence was the 
management of the requirements both of recent historiography of science findings 
and of research in science education regarding the inclusion of historical episodes 
in science curricula (Forato, 2009). Even though the historical quality and precision 
of the texts and other educational materials developed for this project are very 
important, for educational purposes, the inclusion of some fictional elements was 
also beneficial. This helped in promoting a more “playful” and attractive 
experience for students. However, students were carefully and explicitly told which 
elements were fictional, so that all others were assumed to be based on true 
historical facts. 
 
The scenario of the game starts with World War I (1914). The teacher presents 
him or herself as a representative of the division of Agriculture and Natural 
Sciences of the Rockefeller Foundation2. S/he tells the students that they have been 
invited to became investigators in a new subdivision: studies about the universe 

BAGDONAS ET AL. 
168 
(cosmology). At this time, there were no professional cosmologists, and most 
scientists who studied this subject were astronomers, mathematicians, or physicists. 
 
 
 
The students play roles as investigators in the cosmology subdivision of the 
Rockefeller Foundation, and are divided into groups of about five individuals. One 
group has as special role as jury members. The other groups have the goal of 
traveling around the world to do research and decide which countries and scientists 
have potential for the development of cosmology so that the foundation can make a 
grounded decision about its philanthropic funding. After doing research, the 
investigators work within their groups to formulate a collective argument. In some 
phases of the game, they must decide which country should receive funding from 
the foundation. In others, they must choose a specific scientist to receive the 
money. This discussion is then presented orally to the whole class, so that the jury, 
having heard the arguments presented by each group, may decide which is best – 
and thus which group’s choice should be funded. 
 
In the introductory stage of the sequence, the first planned activity is a 
discussion of the meaning of Cosmology, differences between cosmology and 
astronomy and a debate about the overambitious and challenging goal of trying to 
understand the universe as a whole. For these videos about scales and distances in 
the universe stimulate discussions about cosmological questions, like “do you think 
the universe has always existed or there was a beginning?” The second activity 
offered a summary of the main political, technological, and scientific events in 
Europe for the period in which the game starts (the beginning of the 20th century). 
The main focus is on discussions about economic and technological influences 
during the development of the Relativity, such as influence of nationalism in 
science during the Great War. For this, was presented an excerpt of the movie 
“Einstein and Eddington”, which shows the British scientist Arthur Eddington as 
an advocate of the theory of Relativity, a “German” theory, during a period of 
intense rivalry between Britain and Germany. 
 
Aside from the introductory stage, each phase of the game is related to a 
different period (1914–1924; 1925–1931; 1932–1939), and divided into three 
activities: (1) Investigation (the search for information) and choice of a country to 
be funded; (2) Summary of the main events of the period (presented by the 
teacher); and (3) The selection of the scientist who will receive the Rockefeller 
Award.  
 
In the first activity, groups must vote on which country they feel should receive 
financial help from the Rockefeller Institution. This naturally leads students to a 
more contextual debate, with a focus on political and economic influences on 
science. In the third activity, the groups must vote on a scientist, which leads the 
debate from context to content (as detailed below). 
 
In the first activity, students “travel” around the world in search of information 
relevant to the period. This information is obtained by the students via “clues” 
which have been elaborated for the game. These clues are found on cards which 
contain specific information related to the game phase period. They are divided by 
countries, so that a clue for a given country contains information related to this 

CONTROVERSIES ABOUT THE NATURE OF SCIENCE 
169 
 
country. Each clue can contain information related directly to cosmology, related to 
science in general, or related specifically to a relevant political or social aspect of 
the period and country.  
 
Students must decide which countries they want to investigate from the choices 
shown on the game board. Each group may have access to a maximum number of 
five clues (and countries) per round. After taking notes about their investigations, 
the groups begin to formulate an argument about which country should receive 
funding. For this, they have the challenge of making their selection from a pool of 
different and diverse information. 
 
One risk of this phase is that students may try to simply memorize all the names, 
dates, and facts, which would lead to a very inadequate view of the history of 
science. Therefore, it is important that, in the second activity, the teacher discusses 
the most relevant issues in a structured way. The advantage here is that the 
selection of what is relevant is not made by the teacher alone, or by the creators of 
the TLS. The students, playing their roles as investigators, also help the teacher in 
this selection, demonstrating what is most meaningful in their perspectives. In this 
phase, the teacher encourages discussions around the relations between the social 
and political context of the period and the development of science and cosmology, 
and presents the conceptual elements of science related to the period, along with 
the main scientists who developed research on cosmology.  
 
The third activity is mainly focused on argument and debate. The teacher 
presents a list of the scientists under consideration for the Rockefeller Award, in 
recognition for their research during the previous period. Each group must 
formulate arguments supporting a vote for one of these scientists. As with the other 
parts of the game, it is very hard to predict what will happen, since the outcome 
depends very much on the role of the jury, the clues received by each group, and 
the students’ argument-formulating abilities. The next topic of this chapter is a 
detailed description of these activities in physics classes. 
 
Given that each phase of the game is related to a different period, each contains 
unique aspects. In addition, the information given to the students was planned in 
distinct ways which also add complexity. The following is a summary of the most 
relevant information related to each period. 
 
First phase:  
 
1. Investigation: The card-clues were elaborated in such a way as to encourage 
discussion about nationalism after World War I, with information about the 
boycott of German science in the post-war period by French, British and 
American scientists, the first contact with the cosmological models of Einstein 
and De Sitter, and the relationship between Einstein and Friedmann.  
2. Summary: From the relationship between Einstein and Friedmann, a discussion 
is presented about “objectivity” in the process of theory evaluation, and the 
system of peer-review of articles, with a reflection about the possible influences 
in this process, is also explored. 

BAGDONAS ET AL. 
170 
Second phase:  
 
1. Investigation: The clues in this phase provide students with information about 
investigations into redshift and Nebula distances, and information about possible 
interpretations of this sort of astronomical observation, relating these 
observations to cosmological models of the universe (static and dynamic).  
2. Summary: From the contributions of Lemaître and Hubble, discussions about 
possible interpretations of the redshift and disputes about priorities in science 
are presented, with reflections on issues such as fame, researcher authority, and 
nationality. Students encounter the possibility that relationships between 
researchers in the scientific community, as well as scientists’ personal 
convictions and philosophical and religious conceptions, can affect the process 
of acceptance of a scientific theory. Another goal is to present studies of the 
relation between redshift and distance, with analysis of graphs created by 
several astronomers, using the astronomical observation data available at that 
time. Students also debated the possible cosmological interpretations of these 
graphs.  
 
Third phase:  
 
1. Investigation: The clues in this phase contain information about how scientists 
reacted to the theory of the expansion of the universe. Hubble remained 
skeptical and held on to the possibility that new explanations of the redshift 
could be formulated. One such possibility was the “tired light” model 
investigated by Fritz Zwicky. On the other hand, most scientists interested in 
cosmology, like Gamow, Robertson, Tolman, and Lemaître, accepted the 
expansion of the universe. In this period, Georges Lemaître proposed his model 
of a dynamic universe (in expansion) with a “beginning” in time. Since 
Lemaître was a priest as well as a scientist, some critics became suspicious that 
he was impelled to create a cosmological model with a beginning in time 
because it would be compatible with his own faith. This happened especially in 
the USSR, where Communist scientists were arguing against what they called 
the religious propaganda produced by scientists in Western Europe, especially in 
England. Eddington, Milne, Jeans, and other religious scientists were criticized, 
not only in the USSR but also by other scientists in the “West”, for having 
introduced religious arguments into cosmological discussions, especially in 
popular books.  
2. Summary: This phase includes discussion of the “tired light model”, the origins 
of big bang cosmology, and the problem of the age of the universe, estimated as 
a few billion years in the Friedman-Lemaître models (and including a beginning 
point). This figure was lower than the estimated age of the Earth at the time, 
which provided a major challenge for cosmologists until the 1950s. 

CONTROVERSIES ABOUT THE NATURE OF SCIENCE 
171 
 
DESCRIPTION OF THE ACTIVITIES CONDUCTED IN  
HIGH SCHOOL PHYSICS CLASSES 
The participating students, who came from three different public school classes, 
were quite impressed with the videos about various scales of the universe presented 
in the first activity. They debated cosmological questions in a spontaneous way in 
class, and, after that, were invited to write about the questions “The universe is so 
large, while we are so small. Do you think it is possible to understand the universe 
as whole? Is it worth studying?” on the course blog. Most of them valued 
cosmological research, but some believed that there are more practical matters that 
should be prioritized over such theoretical areas of research. In the second activity, 
another video captured the students’ attention. The movie Einstein and Eddington, 
which showed debates about nationalism in World War I, and in which English 
scientists proposed a boycott against German scientists, was mentioned by several 
students in the following activities.  
 
The Cosmic Game started in the third activity, with investigations simulating the 
period of 1914 to 1924. Initially, most groups wanted to explore the United States, 
Germany, or England, probably the most famous and rich countries, where they 
imagined science would be stronger. A few of them chose Russia, but few or no 
groups chose to investigate a neutral country. After reading and discussing the 
information they found, most groups argued either that the foundation should 
invest money in rich countries, because science and cosmology would have more 
of a chance to flourish in that context; or, on the contrary, that it should invest in 
poor countries, in order to help them with faster development. This shows a 
naturalized ideology that directly relates knowledge to economic development. 
 
As expected, almost all student arguments at this point had little or no relation to 
science. Only after the teacher’s explanations about cosmology, during the 
knowledge-organization activities, did cosmology contents appear in the debates.  
 
It was also important to learn how to play the game, since the new “didactic 
contract” was very different from the traditional one. There were no right and 
wrong answers, and students had to learn how to organize useful information in 
order to create meaningful arguments. Student success was assessed not only by 
the teacher, but also by other students. In the second phase of the game, student 
arguments were much more complex and balanced, with a good mix of context and 
content.  
 
In the fourth activity, as with the second, we noted that the plan for expository 
moments included too many different subjects; this led to classes with the teacher 
talking too much, and the students talking too little. We wanted to shape 
knowledge organization with a focus on the issues that were chosen by the students 
in the investigation, but noticed that it is not possible to talk comprehensively 
about such diverse topics as the role of women in science, relations between 
science and religion, the use of chemical weapons in the war, and the static 
cosmological models of Einstein and De Sitter in one session. Therefore, the issues 
discussed in every class were slightly different. In all of them, the debate between 
Einstein and Friedmann was emphasized, which led to interesting discussions 

BAGDONAS ET AL. 
172 
about the system of peer review used for scientific articles, and possible influences 
on this process.  
 
The fifth activity was the moment in which students could use what they had 
learned to choose one scientist to be awarded the “first round prize”. As intended, 
following the classes that focused the debates on cosmological concepts, the 
ensuing arguments were much more complex and balanced, with a good mix of 
context and content. There was a balance between the number of groups that 
supported Einstein and the static universe, and the ones that were on Friedmann’s 
side of the discussion. 
 
Many of the Einstein fans had a comprehensible but naive admiration for the 
scientist chosen by Time Magazine as the most influential person of the 20th 
century. Knowing that Einstein had admitted his mistake as a referee of 
Friedmann’s article, many of the students who supported the expansion of the 
universe valued the latter’s critical attitude in challenging the authority of such a 
famous scientist. His inspiring role for young Russian scientists, in showing that 
common people might challenge ideas accepted even by powerful authorities, was 
celebrated by many students. 
 
This led to an interesting debate in which one group voted for Einstein 
essentially because he had admitted he was wrong. According to them, “it is 
important to acknowledge an error because this helps him understand his own 
theory. Someone from outside helped him to view errors he had not seen”. The 
rival group disagreed, saying that although it is indeed nice to admit your own 
errors, this was not a good enough reason to give the “prize” of the round to 
Einstein. 
 
The prizes of the round were given to three different scientists in the three 
classes: Einstein, because most cosmological models discussed were based on his 
equations of general relativity; Eddington, because he had a good balance of 
theoretical and observational investigations, and was interested in testing 
cosmological models; and Friedmann, because he challenged the authority of a 
much more famous scientist (Einstein), inspiring young scientists in Russia. This 
shows that this game is very complex and rich, with different results every time it 
is played. 
 
The second round of the game started with the sixth activity, in which students 
investigated the period from 1925 to 1931. In this round, Russia was visited by 
many more groups, since they had noticed Alexander Friedmann’s importance. 
Despite the teachers’ efforts to show the prominence of Willem De Sitter, once 
again almost no group investigated a neutral country, and Germany, the United 
States, and England were once more the most chosen countries.  
 
The students naturally accepted the expansion of the universe, once they knew 
that it was posited by Lemaître and Eddington in 1931. Since Einstein himself 
changed his mind in this same year, accepting that his static model of the universe 
was obsolete, no groups doubted that the universe must be expanding. Some 
groups voted for the USA because of its large telescopes, while others voted for 
France and England because of the work of Lemaître and Eddington. There was a 
balance between arguments related to cosmological concepts and to the contextual 

CONTROVERSIES ABOUT THE NATURE OF SCIENCE 
173 
 
aspects of science. The direct association between economic development and 
science appeared again, but comparatively less than in the first round. One group 
voted for investment in the USSR because it was not affected by the crisis of 1929, 
while another group voted for England for the opposite reason: because it had been 
so greatly affected by the crisis. 
 
The second activity in the second round, in which the knowledge that emerged 
from the investigations about the period from 1924 to 1931 was organized, focused 
on debates about the acceptance of the expansion of the universe and priority 
disputes regarding works by Lemaître in 1927 and Hubble in 1929.  
 
The seventh and eighth activities were part of the moment of organization of 
knowledge that emerged from the investigations in the second round. Initially, 
students analyzed graphs of redshift plotted against distance produced by 
Silberstein, Lundmark, and Hubble, noticing that Hubble was not the only 
astronomer who investigated the redshift-distance relation. Later, they debated 
priority disputes about who should be credited with the “discovery” of the 
expansion of the universe. Like historians of science, the groups of students were 
divided: some argued that Hubble deserved credit for having presented more 
accurate measurements of distances of nebulae, leading to a trustworthy linear 
redshift-distance relation, while others argued that Lemaître deserved the credit, 
having argued explicitly and before Hubble that the universe is in expansion. 
 
This polarization was important for the debates in the ninth activity, in which 
the groups had to choose the “second round prize”. For this activity, many students 
prepared studies at home, bringing extra research material obtained from Internet 
websites and other non-trustworthy historical sources to the classroom. This 
influenced many groups to vote for Hubble: all groups chose him in one of the 
classes, which led us to ask them to debate who should be awarded the “second 
prize”. This was considered quite unfair by some groups, which had prepared lots 
of arguments for Hubble, but had few for the other scientists. 
 
Many of the arguments taken from the Internet were historically inaccurate: 
groups voted for Hubble because he “discovered the expansion of the universe”, or 
because his “redshift observations proved that the universe is expanding”. The 
teacher problematized these arguments, noting that in the previous activities it had 
been discussed that Hubble had not even believed in the expansion of the universe, 
and was by no means its only “discoverer”, since several other scientists 
investigated this topic. The creation of the relativistic expanding model of the 
universe was a collective process, extended in time, by several different authors. 
  After Hubble, the scientists that were chosen most often for the prize were 
Lemaître and Eddington. 
 
Since many of the investigation cards presented debates about expansion 
together, many groups voted for one or another scientist with a similar argument: 
they deserve the prize for their contributions to the acceptance of the expansion of 
the universe. The debate shifted to a polarization between groups that valued 
Hubble’s astronomical observations versus the ones that valued Friedmann, 
Lemaître, and Eddington’s theoretical work on expanding relativistic models. 

BAGDONAS ET AL. 
174 
STUDENTS’ CONCEPTIONS ABOUT SCIENCE 
Throughout the activities of the didactic sequence, we analyzed students’ 
conceptions about science. We recorded and transcribed the oral debates that were 
part of the game and read the texts produced by students in classes and posted on 
the course blogs. 
 
Most of them agreed that “cosmology is a reliable and neutral way to know 
‘who we are’ and whether the universe had a beginning or has always existed”. As 
expected by the researchers regarding typical student conceptions of science in the 
last decades, we confirmed that the naïve “empiricist” and “inductivist” views of 
science were the most common perspectives among the high school students 
studied. Most of them trusted science much more than other ways of thinking about 
the origin of the universe, and few religious students stated explicitly that they trust 
their religion over scientific cosmology. We found almost no examples of relativist 
students in this initial investigation. 
 
We started problematizing these naive views about science, debating some 
cultural and political influences on science during World War I, like the boycott of 
“German science” and the theory of relativity by some allied scientists. The result 
was that most students retained their defense of the neutrality and universality of 
science as a value or aim of science, but acknowledged that sometimes scientists 
might act in ways that disregard these values.  
 
We also noted at this juncture that a small number of students expressed certain 
radical relativist views. One student stated that science is not neutral because: 
“each country has its theory, its party, its opinion”. With a radical association of 
scientific knowledge and power, she argued that “if you have a different theory it 
might cause a war against the opponent. If some country is at war against another 
country and this country is stronger, this will give it power over the weaker one”. 
Thereafter, during all the activities, the teacher introduced arguments to criticize 
this kind of view. He emphasized that almost all discussions between scientists 
about cosmology were not personal, but based on theoretical and empirical 
arguments. 
  In the final discussions of the first round, the most prominent debate was 
between the supporters of Einstein and the supporters of Friedmann. We noted that 
many Einstein “fans” had very naive views of science: “Einstein was so intelligent 
and no one doubted him. He never needed any help to become who he was”. This 
kind of myth helps to propagate misconceptions about science, like the idea that 
the “greatest geniuses” of science make discoveries alone, do not make mistakes, 
and should not be questioned.  
 
On the other side of the debate, several Friedmann supporters valued exactly the 
opposite: the fact that the young, unknown Russian scientist had challenged the 
authority of Einstein, who was already quite famous and, at the time, had just won 
the Nobel Prize. This shows that critical enquiry, enquiry that does not submit to 
power or other political and cultural influences, was important for many students. 
Their view of science was much closer to the Mertonian “ethos” of science than to 
postmodern relativism. 

CONTROVERSIES ABOUT THE NATURE OF SCIENCE 
175 
 
 
These students, who were actively engaged in game debates, showed a more 
mature and rich perspective on science. They did not see scientists as infallible 
geniuses and saw errors as a natural part of the process of the creation and 
validation of theories. 
 
In the second phase of the game, debate about the Einstein’s “errors” appeared 
again, because, in 1927, Einstein repeated his position about Friedmann’s universe: 
it would be mathematically correct but physically unimportant. 
 
Most of the groups accepted the expansion of the universe at this point, and the 
number of Einstein supporters was shrinking. One student, who had not 
participated in the previous classes, voted for Einstein, arguing that “he was the 
greatest scientist of all time and created the theory of relativity. Nothing compares 
to him”. This led to heavy and loud criticism from all of the other groups, using 
Einstein’s rejection of Friedmann and Lemaître’s models as arguments against him. 
This time, the claim that “everybody makes mistakes sometimes” was not enough 
to save Einstein, who turned into a minor candidate for the prize in the second 
round. 
 
Finally, in the last debate of the second round, one of the main objectives was to 
show that even though most books and websites about cosmology claim that 
Hubble “discovered the expansion of the universe”, Hubble had in fact gone to his 
grave without entirely accepting this expansion. Instead, he supported a cautious 
interpretation of the cosmological implications of the redshift-distance relation 
until he died. Students also studied the contributions of other astronomers (like De 
Sitter, Silberstein, and Lundmark) to the establishment of the redshift-distance 
relation. 
 
One very nice surprise was that many students decided of their own volition to 
prepare themselves for the last debates, which shows that they were highly engaged 
in the game. However, as we did not expect this, we had given no orientation as to 
appropriate, reliable research materials that could be used to study the history of 
cosmology, since we believed that the material provided on the course blog and the 
cards used in the investigations during the game would be enough. However, 
students themselves decided to search for other resources, especially on the 
Internet.  
 
This led us to realize, as might be expected from the results of former research 
about conceptions of the nature of science, how difficult it is to change students’ 
naive ideas about science. Despite all of our efforts, many groups used their 
Internet research to argue that “Hubble proved the expansion of the universe”.  
 
The teacher problematized these arguments once more, accommodating for the 
more historically adequate claim that Hubble’s measurements of nebular distances 
allowed, with time, the astronomical community as a whole to arrive at an 
interpretation of redshifts supporting the relativistic models of a universe in 
expansion.  

BAGDONAS ET AL. 
176 
FINAL REMARKS 
We have produced a didactic game about cosmology that was used to stimulate 
discussions about controversial science issues in high school physics classes. Since 
most proposals for introducing the history of science in high schools are based on 
reading and discussing texts, this game might be a good way to diversify the kinds 
of didactic strategies used in such science teaching.  
 
The game involves both regional aspects and a process of historical evolution, in 
which each round simulates a time period. In their investigation of the history of 
science in each country and in each historical period, students who play the game 
read about not only scientific concepts, but also about politics, culture, and arts. 
This approach ideally leads players to notice the interrelations between scientific 
activity and these extrinsic influences, thereby learning that science is influenced 
but not determined by its sociocultural context. 
 
The study of historical episodes was important for showing students that 
theories change with time, that scientists make mistakes, and for avoiding the 
notions that scientific theories are absolute truths and scientists are purely rational 
and neutral human beings, isolated from personal and social influences. On the 
other hand, it was also important for students to understand the arguments that led 
scientists to change their views about cosmological models in each period, to 
realize that those debates were not personal, but based on astronomical 
observations and their interpretation via physics theories. In this way, the game can 
help teachers to problematize the simplistic perspectives – whether absolutist or 
relativist – of their students. 
 
The debates undertaken throughout the game proved very productive for 
analysis of the students’ conceptions of science. We noted that discussions between 
students, as supplemented by the interventions of the teacher during the game, 
were effective in problematizing certain naive views about science, such as the 
belief that great geniuses like Einstein are never wrong, or that they make all of 
their important discoveries alone, isolated from sociocultural issues and the 
contributions of other scientists. 
 
It was also interesting to note that many students were engaged in the game to 
such an extent that they decided to search on their own for extra Internet sources on 
the history of cosmology. This led many students to bring historically-inaccurate 
arguments to the debates, which showed us the importance of introducing 
guidelines for reliable historical sources in case students want to prepare for the 
debates on their own when playing this game.  
 
The interesting debates undertaken by the players of this game lead us to 
conclude that it might be developed into an effective and enjoyable didactic 
strategy for the study of other historical episodes and issues about the nature 
science. 
NOTES 
1  Acronym from the Portuguese name for the Theory and History of School and Scientific Knowledge 
group. 
 
 

CONTROVERSIES ABOUT THE NATURE OF SCIENCE 
177 
 
 
2  The Rockefeller Foundation (http://www.rockefellerfoundation.org/our-focus) is a philanthropic 
organization. Its central mission over the past 100 years has been “to promote the well-being of 
humanity throughout the world”. This includes the development of science. Though the foundation 
in our game was based on the real Rockefeller Foundation, it is important to stress that there was 
never a subdivision devoted to funding cosmological research. This was a fictional invention. 
REFERENCES 
Abd-El-Khalick, F. (2012). Examining the sources for our understandings about science: Enduring 
conflations and critical issues in research on nature of science in science education. International 
Journal of Science Education, 34(3), 353–374. 
Antunes, A., & Sabóia-Morais, S. (2010). O jogo educação e saúde: Uma proposta de mediação 
pedagógica no ensino de ciências. Experiências em Ensino de Ciências, 5(2), 55–70. 
Bagdonas, A. (2011). Discutindo a natureza da ciência a partir de episódios da história da 
cosmologia. Master’s Thesis, Instituto de Física, Instituto de Química, Instituto de Biociências, 
Faculdade de Educação – Programa Interunidades em Ensino de Ciências, Universidade de São 
Paulo. 
Bagdonas, A. (2015). Controvérsias envolvendo a natureza da ciência em sequências didáticas sobre 
cosmologia [Controversies regarding the nature of science in teaching and learning sequences about 
cosmology]. Doctoral Dissertation in Science Education. Instituto de Física, Instituto de Química, 
Instituto de Biociências e Faculdade de Educação, Universidade de São Paulo. 
Bagdonas, A., Gurgel, I., & Zanetic, J. (2014). Controvérsias sobre a natureza da ciência como enfoque 
curricular para o ensino de física: O ensino de história da cosmologia por meio de um jogo 
didático. Revista Brasileira de Histórica da Ciência, 7(2), 242–260. 
Bagley, E., & Shaffer, D. (2011). Promoting civic thinking through epistemic game play. In R. Ferdig 
(Ed.), Discoveries in gaming and computer-mediated simulations: New interdisciplinary 
applications (pp. 111–127). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
Boghossian, P. (2012). Medo do conhecimento: Contra o relativismo e o construtivismo. São Paulo: 
Editora SENAC. 
Braga, R., & Matos, S. (2013). Kronus: Refletindo sobre a construção de um jogo com viés 
investigativo. Experiências em Ensino de Ciências, 8(2), 701–719. 
Bretones, P. (2013). Jogos para o ensino de astronomia. Campinas: Editora Átomo.  
Brito, J. Q., & Sá, L. (2010). Estratégias promotoras da argumentação sobre questões sócio-científicas 
com alunos do ensino médio. Revista electrónica de enseñanza de las ciencias, 9(3), 505–529. 
Brousseau, J. (1996). Fundamentos e métodos da didática matemática. In J. Brun, Didática da 
matemática (pp.35-113). Lisboa: Instituto Piaget. 
Chakravartty, A. (2016). Scientific realism. Zalta, N. E. (Ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of 
Philosophy. Available from http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2013/entries/scientific-realism 
(accessed August 6, 2013).  
El-Hani, C. N. (2006). Notas sobre o ensino de história e filosofia da ciência na educação científica de 
nível superior. In C. Silva (Ed.), Estudos de história e filosofia das ciências: subsídios para 
aplicação no ensino (pp. 3–21). São Paulo: Editora Livraria da Física. 
Ferreira, F. (2013). A forma e os movimentos dos planetas do sistema solar: Uma proposta para a 
formação do professor em astronomia. Master’s Thesis, Universidade de São Paulo. 
Ferreira, F., Gama, L., & Bagdonas, A. (2011). Extensão ou comunicação? Discussões sobre um curso 
de extensão universitária para professores de ciências. In Proceedings of VIII ENPEC & I Congreso 
Iberoamericano de Investigación de Enzeñanza de las Ciencias. Campinas.  
Ferry, A., & Nagem, R. (2009) Analogia & contra-analogia: um estudo sobre a viabilidade da 
comparação entre o modelo atômico de Bohr e o sistema solar por meio de um júri simulado, 
Experiências em Ensino de Ciências, 4(3), 43–60. 
 
 

BAGDONAS ET AL. 
178 
 
Forato, T. (2009). A natureza da ciência como saber escolar: Um estudo de caso a partir da história da 
luz. Doctoral Dissertation, Faculdade de Educação, Universidade de São Paulo, 2009. 
Gee, J. (2003). What video games have to teach us about literacy and learning. New York: Palgrave 
Macmillan. 
Gil-Pérez, D., Montoro, I. F., Alís, J. C., Cachapuz, A., & Praia, J. (2001). Para uma imagem não-
deformada do trabalho científico. Ciência & Educação, 7(2), 125–153.  
Greca, I. M., & Freire  Jr., O. (2004). A “crítica forte” da ciência e implicações para a educação em 
ciências. Ciência & Educação, 10(3), 343–361. 
Guerra, A., Reis, J., & Braga, M. (2002). Um julgamento no ensino médio – Uma estratégia para 
trabalhar a ciencia sob enfoque histórico-filosófico. Física Na Escola, 3(1), 8–11. 
Irzik, G., & Nola, R. (2011). A amily resemblance approach to the nature of science for science 
education. Science & Education, 20(7–8), 591–607. 
Jann, P., & Leite, M. (2010). Jogo do DNA: Um instrumento pedagógico para o ensino de ciências e 
biologia. Ciências e Cognição, 15(1), 262–282.  
Lederman, N. (2007). Nature of science: past, present, and future. In S. Abell & N. Lederman (Eds.), 
Handbook of research on science education (pp. 831–880). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates. 
Matthews, M. (1995). História, filosofia e ensino de ciências: A tendência atual de 
reaproximação. Caderno Catarinense de Ensino de Física, 12(3), 164–214 (Claudia Mesquita de 
Andrade, Trans.). 
Matthews, M. (2012). Changing the focus: From Nature of Science (NOS) to Features of Science 
(FOS). In M. S. Khine (Ed.), Advances in nature of science research (pp. 3–26). Dordrecht: 
Springer. 
Mathias, G., & Amaral, C. (2010). Utilização de um jogo pedagógico para discussão das relações entre 
ciência/tecnologia/sociedade no ensino de química experiências em ensino de ciências. Experiências 
em Ensino de Ciências, 5(2), 107–120. 
Noronha, A. (2014). Interpretando a relatividade especial: Discutindo o debate realismo e antirealismo 
científicos no ensino de ciências. Master’s Thesis, Instituto de Física, Instituto de Química, Instituto 
de Biociências e Faculdade de Educação, Universidade de São Paulo. 
Noronha, A., & Gurgel, I. (2014). Beyond the Wittgenstein’s silence: Some considerations about the 
debate realism x anti-realism in science education and a call for the philosophical plurality. In 
Proceedings of 10th European Science Education Research Association, University of Cyprus, 
Nicosia, Cyprus. 
Oliveira, A., & Soares, M. (2005). Jurí químico: Uma atividade lúdica para discutirconceitos 
químicos. Química Nova na Escola, 21, 18–24. 
Pessoa Jr., O. (1993). Filosofia & sociologia da ciência. Aula ministrada na disciplina de HG-022 
Epistemologia das Ciências Sociais do curso de Ciências Sociais da Unicamp, não 
publicado. Available from http://www.ch.usp.br/df/opessoa/Soc1.pdf (accessed February 25, 2013). 
Rozentalski, E., Bagdonas, A., & Noronha, A. (2012). Realismo e antirrealismo científicos: Pela 
pluralidade filosófica no Ensino de Ciências. In Proceedings of II International History and 
Philosophy of Science Teaching Group Latin America (pp. 1–22). Universidad de Mendoza, 
Mendoza, Argentina. 
Sabka, D., Lima Jr., P., & Pereira, A. (2014). Jogos na educação científica para a cidadania: uma análise 
da produção acadêmica recente. In Proceedings of XV Encontro de Pesquisa em Ensino de Física, 
Maresias, Brazil. 
Silva, B., & Martins, A. (2009). Júri simulado: Um uso da história e filosofia da ciência no ensino da 
óptica. Física na Escola, 10(1), 17. 
Shaffer, D. (2006). How computer games help children learn. New York: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Shapin, S. (2012). Nunca pura. Estudos históricos de ciência como se fora produzida por pessoas com 
corpos situadas no tempo, no espaço, na cultura e na sociedade e que se empenham por 
credibilidade e autoridade (Erick Ramalho, Trans.). Col. Scientia. Belo Horizonte: Fino Traço 
Editora. 
 
 

CONTROVERSIES ABOUT THE NATURE OF SCIENCE 
179 
 
 
Trópia, G. (2011). Percursos históricos de ensinar ciências através de atividades investigativas. Ensaio 
Pesquisa em Educação em Ciências, 13(1), 121-137. 
 Vilas Boas, A., Silva, M., Passos, M., & Arruda, S. (2013). Historia da ciência e natureza da ciência: 
Debates e consensos. Caderno Brasileiro de Ensino de Física, 30(2), 287–322. 
 
Alexandre Bagdonas 
Department of Exact Sciences 
Federal University of Lavras (DEX UFLA) 
Brazil 
 
André Noronha 
Federal Institute of São Paulo (IFSP)  
São Paulo-SP, Brazil 
 
 
Vitor Machado 
Dona Ana Rosa de Araújo Public High School  
São Paulo-SP, Brazil 
 
Felipe Velásquez 
University of São Paulo  
São Paulo-SP, Brazil 
 
Ivã Gurgel 
Department of Experimental Physics, Institute of Physics 
University of São Paulo 
São Paulo-SP, Brazil 
 
 
 

 
M. Pietrocola & I. Gurgel (Eds.), Crossing the Border of the Traditional Science Curriculum, 181–205. 
© 2017 Sense Publishers. All rights reserved. 
THAÍS CYRINO DE MELLO FORATO AND  
ALEXANDRE BAGDONAS 
11. A PROPOSAL FOR OVERCOMING OBSTACLES TO 
TEACHING NATURAL SCIENCE 
Evaluating a History of High School Cosmology Courses  
INTRODUCTION 
For some decades, reflections on science and its relations with other fields of 
knowledge have been encouraged among different areas and levels of education 
where such approaches to the history of science have been considered efficient 
methodological resources (Abd-El-Khalick, 2012; Hodson, 2014; Pietrocola, 
2003). 
However, 
how 
may 
we 
appropriately 
bring 
such 
specialized 
interdisciplinary knowledge to high schools? Is it possible to harmoniously 
integrate scientific, epistemic, and non-epistemic contents within the current 
historiographical perspective without incurring distortions (Allchin, 2006; Forato, 
2009)? 
 
Many such questions may be theoretically and methodologically grounded in 
research into the history, philosophy, and sociology of science in science 
education, a line of inquiry which has grown substantially over the last decades and 
offers possibilities for approaching the epistemology of science by means of its 
history (Zanetic, 1989; Martins, 1990; Matthews, 1992; Arduriz-Bravo & 
Izquierdo-Aymerich, 2009; Forato et al., 2012a; Bagdonas & Silva, 2015; Dagher 
& Erduran, 2016). This research allows us to understand fluctuations in scientific 
objectives and the impermanence of some scientific theories, as well as articulating 
scientific content vis-à-vis cultural contexts and social uses (Porto, 2010; Rudge & 
Rowe, 2009; Zanetic, 2006). In fact, comprehending these and other aspects of the 
nature of science (NOS) is considered an essential component of scientific literacy 
today (Lederman, 2007). 
 
Understanding the development of science as a social and historical product 
enables us to reflect on the scientific enterprise and its limitations, an important 
aspect of science education. However, several challenges must be faced in order to 
effectively develop and implement historical approaches for the classroom, 
whether in high schools or in university education. The literature has been pointing 
out issues which range from teachers having difficulties in understanding 
historiographical assumptions and historians of science having difficulties in 
understanding the prerogatives of science didactics (Holton, 2003); to the naive or 
mistaken perspectives nourished by didactic materials (Allchin, 2006); the lack of 
appropriate materials and methodologies for the classroom (Forato et al., 2015; 

FORATO & BAGDONAS 
182 
Martins, 2007); the shortage of properly trained teachers (Gil Perez et al., 2001); 
and conflicts with school contexts in initial teacher training (Höttecke & Silva, 
2010), among others.  
 
It is also necessary to understand that each historical episode may explain only 
certain aspects of the NOS (Martins, 2006). When the NOS is taught based on the 
study of a given historical episode, there is a risk of generalizing what has been 
learned from that specific episode into science as a whole. For example, when 
teaching about the relationship between observation and theory by investigating 
empirical inductivism in the history of optics in Ancient Greece and in the context 
of the 17th century (Forato, 2009), or when discussing the history of cosmology in 
the 20th century (Bagdonas, 2011, 2015), we can’t presume that the different 
epistemological aspects evident in these episodes would be found in all sciences in 
all historical periods. 
 
Some writers have advocated that we ought to be careful when teaching about 
the NOS, to avoid providing students with an essentialist notion of science, 
according to which all different scientific subjects may be equally described by a 
set of fixed lists which do not evolve with time (Eflin et al., 1999; Irzik & Nola, 
2011; Allchin, 2011; Bagdonas et al., 2015a).  
 
Within this range of hardships, this project focused on the challenges and 
obstacles encountered in the development of didactic proposals for high schools, 
through the selection of historical episodes and the construction of pedagogical 
materials and didactic activities.  
 
As a result, we are able in the following to address different obstacles to the 
didactization of the history and epistemology of science, by giving examples of the 
use of methodological supports helpful in offsetting challenges. First, we present a 
brief synthesis of our research, which analyzed the challenges, dilemmas, and 
obstacles at the confluence of historiographical and didactic requisites, during the 
construction and implementation of a history of optics course for high schools 
(Forato, 2009). This analysis lead to the proposal of parameters that aim to assist in 
confronting obstacles to the development of historical approaches as a pedagogical 
strategy for education. The reflections demanded by the parameters provide 
support for seeking consistency between the intended view of science and the 
aspects of the NOS which may be debated in each historical episode narrative 
(Forato et al., 2012a). The core of our proposal involved efforts to avoid 
contradictory views on the NOS. 
 
In the second part of this chapter, we seek to provide an example of how such 
parameters may be used to analyze and/or develop didactic proposals for the school 
environment. We then present the application of these parameters in our analysis of 
a didactic sequence for high schools on the history of cosmology, focusing on the 
period of the first decades of the 20th century (Bagdonas, 2015).  
 
Finally, we present some of the contributions and limitations of the parameters 
as far as overcoming obstacles and supporting decisions about pressing aspects of 
the uses of history of science and NOS education, as well as the possibilities for 
development provided by such analysis. 

OVERCOMING OBSTACLES TO TEACH NATURE OF SCIENCE 
183 
HISTORY AND EPISTEMOLOGY IN THE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT:  
CHALLENGES AND DILEMMAS 
When choosing to add aspects of the NOS to specific physics contents, it is 
necessary to assess whether the historical approach used is coherent with the notion 
of science one seeks to develop. Although debates about the losses for student 
education caused by whig, presentist, and linear historical narratives have been 
taking place for decades (e.g. Kuhn, 1997 [1961]; Brush, 1974; Whittaker, 1979; 
Allchin, 2004), it is still possible to identify naive conceptions of the  
sciences conveyed by the historical narratives currently in use (Gil Perez et al., 
2001; Hodson, 2014). 
 
In general, such usage occurs due to a lack of familiarity with historical 
methodology and historiographical assumptions, both of which forms of 
knowledge are intrinsic to the training of historians (Holton, 2003). On the  
other hand, how can a historian of science, unfamiliar with the didactic 
prerogatives of science and the classroom, develop approaches which are 
appropriate to the school environment and which effectively favor students’ 
learning and participation? 
 
Aiming to deal with this challenge, a case study involving the history of optics 
has been developed (Forato, 2009) by considering the requisites of the 
historiography of the history of science (e.g. Gravoglu, 2008; Jardine, 2003; 
Martins, 2010; Kragh, 1987) and recognizing the different social and formative 
roles of the knowledge produced by specialists and the knowledge effectively 
proposed for high schools (Chevallard, 1991).  
 
This research analyzed the construction and implementation of the course, 
identifying the challenges, strains, and obstacles at three levels of investigation:  
(i) theoretical analysis, (ii) empirical analysis during the construction of the course, 
and, (iii) the comparison of those results with data obtained in the classroom. After 
the global assessment of these three stages, twenty parameters were proposed for 
addressing obstacles in the didactic transposition of the history of science to the 
school environment (Forato, 2009; Forato et al., 2012a). These parameters are 
intended to assist in the development of didactic materials and proposals using the 
history of science as a didactical resource. We present a synthesis of these stages in 
Table 1, which will be discussed in the next sections. 
Theoretical Analysis Comparing Historiographical and Didactic Requisites 
During the theoretical analysis stage, a comparison between the assumptions of 
contemporary historiography and the needs of the classroom allowed us to 
anticipate eight challenges/obstacles in the didactization of historical episodes. In 
addition to this, four dilemmas or strains were also anticipated, which led to 
inevitable risks due to the simplification and omission of historical contents (Table 
2). We present below a synthesis of the result of that analysis. 
 
 

FORATO & BAGDONAS 
184 
Table 1. Stages of research on the history of optics and results obtained.  
(Source: Forato, 2009) 
Stages of research 
Results obtained  
Theoretical analysis comparing 
historiographical and didactic requisites 
– 8 challenges, obstacles 
– 4 dilemmas, strains, risks  
Empirical analysis during the 
construction of didactic materials and 
activities 
– 9 surmountable obstacles 
– 8 avoidable obstacles 
Comparison of theoretical and empirical 
analysis with classroom results 
– 20 parameters 
 
Table 2. Challenges and dilemmas identified during theoretical analysis.  
(Source: Forato, 2009) 
Challenges and obstacles 
Dilemmas, strains, and risks: 
I. Selection of historical content 
II. Didactic time available 
III. Simplification and omission 
IV. The risk of Relativism 
V. The inappropriateness of specialized 
works 
VI. Pseudohistory in the school 
environment 
VII. The alleged “benefits” of linear 
reconstructions 
VIII. Teacher training 
1. Extent versus depth 
2. Comprehensibility versus 
historical accuracy 
3. Simplification or distortion 
4. Objectivism versus 
subjectivism 
 
 
The first challenge is the selection of historical content (I), which is guided by 
the intended scientific-educational purpose and by the epistemological aspects that 
should be designed to engage students (Freire, 1996). Furthermore, this selection 
must satisfy the requirements of the formal educational context (e.g. level of 
education, adopted curriculum, hours), and consider the particular social and 
cultural context and conceptual prerequisites concerned. It is neither obvious nor 
simple to attend to these six requisites. 
 
Developing the proposed content within the didactic time available (II) is the 
second challenge. This assessment is not limited to the number of hours available, 
but considers the interdisciplinary characteristics of the history of science and the 
time necessary to learn complex contents, such as those regarding various 
historical, epistemological, and sociological aspects of science, in addition to 
physics concepts. One should take into account the fact that teachers of the natural 
sciences face challenges in dealing with this new knowledge, which is 

OVERCOMING OBSTACLES TO TEACH NATURE OF SCIENCE 
185 
ontologically and epistemologically distinct from their area of education. 
Therefore, didactic time varies according to educational context and the concept 
encompasses a much wider span than the simple calculation of the period of time 
the teacher has available. It influences the challenges of the selection of historical 
content directly, requiring a deep and detailed analysis, as it will be further 
discussed below. 
The third challenge, simplification and omission (III), involves establishing the 
level of depth to be included in the selected historical content. Using the intended 
epistemological objectives as an indicator, it is necessary to choose which aspects 
of the historic episode to omit. This is as important as selecting the items to be 
addressed, since there is no neutral or complete historical narrative: 
From historical chaos, the historian creates an understandable order, by 
means of a process, which selects what is described and according to the 
connections he/she makes up. Even if his/her selection does not lead to a 
linear history, countless aspects have been omitted and a great simplification 
of historical intricacies has occurred. (Martins, 2010, p. 6) 
It is not a trivial matter to assess the details which may be simplified or which 
could be omitted without compromising the quality of the historical narrative. Any 
choice is affected by implied values that may impact intended objectives. 
Excessively superficial accounts may twist the understanding of the NOS (Forato 
et al., 2015). Reconciling scientific concepts, elements of historical context, and 
epistemological aspects in a limited didactic time is much more than mere 
simplification.  
The risk of incurring extreme relativism (IV) is the fourth challenge. When one 
seeks to interrogate the exclusively empirical-inductivist perspective of science 
generally maintained by science education, the limits of observation of scientific 
research are presented, thereby producing the risk of suggesting or encouraging the 
notion of a complete lack of objective parameters. Criticizing naive empiricism, via 
questioning the exclusive objectivity of science, may lead the student to believe, 
for instance, that the different existing theories which try to explain the same single 
phenomenon are simply personal opinions. The manner in which historical content 
is presented should allow debates about the neutral observation of phenomena and 
experiments, without, however, devaluing the importance of observation, of 
experimental evidence, of rational arguments, and of skepticism in the construction 
of scientific knowledge. 
 
Although consistent with current historiography, the inappropriateness of 
specialized works (V) is another challenge. Even if a teacher is able to find a text 
written by a historian of science which satisfies his/her educational purposes, how 
might s/he use it in the high school environment? Besides not being written for 
high school students, the conceptual prerequisites of the fields involved and the 
depth of historical pieces make such works inappropriate and even boring for 
students. Excerpts from primary sources may provide valuable contributions to 
education only if they are duly contextualized, as the methodology of analyzing 

FORATO & BAGDONAS 
186 
historical documents is complex and reading them anachronically always bears 
significant risks.  
 
Another challenge (VI) is dealing with pseudohistory in the school environment 
as found in the naive narratives of history present in textbooks. These are 
configured as pseudohistories (Allchin, 2004), with all the problems arising from 
such a profound misconception. The standard perspective of the history of science, 
which has been maintained both implicitly and explicitly in science education, is 
exactly that outdated perspective, and is supported by such still-present 
approaches.  
This perspective is reinforced by another challenge, the widespread belief in the 
alleged benefits of linear reconstructions (VII). Even if there are good arguments 
about the envisioned pedagogical benefits of a linear view of history, which 
validate the currently-accepted concepts,1 the losses caused by such versions of 
history cannot be denied.  
The lack of teacher training (VIII) is one of the greatest challenges to be faced. 
All of the above obstacles would be mitigated by teachers trained to deal with such 
obstacles in a critical and sensible manner. We deem it neither possible nor 
necessary to transform teachers into historians or epistemologists of science, but it 
is essential to develop activities that provide elements that help teachers to cope 
with the challenges of the uses of history and philosophy of science in the school 
environment. 
 
The didactization of the history of science implies difficult choices and 
dilemmas; in some cases, any option implies inevitable losses. Will establishing a 
historical framework allow a high school student to understand the role of a certain 
“isolated” historical event in the construction of science? Or even to understand it 
as only one perspective, among several, on events that took place in the past, and 
which are related to a complex variety of cultural factors? Is it possible to present a 
specific account of an historical occurrence without the student losing a broader 
perspective of that event in history? 
Deciding between a specific frame and a broader temporal approach, that is, 
choosing between extent versus depth may become a source of conflict. Again, the 
decision between these approaches ends up depending on the context of the use of 
history and the intended pedagogical goals. 
 
Another conflict which is difficult to resolve and may result in didactic 
dilemmas emerges in the process of going deeper into a chosen historical episode: 
what, exactly, are the aspects to be omitted? In this case, it is also necessary to 
analyze the context of each situation; for instance, a given episode may include 
aspects favorable for addressing a certain aspect of the NOS, but may require an 
overly-extensive approach for a certain classroom context. The intended 
pedagogical objectives, the level of education involved, the conceptual 
prerequisites necessary for student and teacher, as well as approaches that relate to 
specialized aspects of the history of science, are all factors in the latter. In which 
situation should a certain social, historical, or scientific aspect be deemed 
“unnecessary” given the pedagogical objectives pursued? In which situation does a 

OVERCOMING OBSTACLES TO TEACH NATURE OF SCIENCE 
187 
specialized detail become essential for the comprehension of an intended 
objective?2  
 
This may be seen in choices that involve mathematics. Many episodes require 
mathematical knowledge at a level inaccessible to high school students. On the 
other hand, should the omission of mathematics when addressing a concept, 
experiment, or theory be considered simplification or distortion? 
 
Another conflict is related to the text of the historical narrative, not only 
regarding colloquial or scholarly language, but the level of details, connections 
between ideas, complexity of information, and reflections. If we opt for an overly-
simplified historical text, we run the risk of incurring pseudohistory. On the other 
hand, an account that is deeply committed to historical accuracy may be 
incomprehensible to students. Finding the middle way requires persistence, a large 
dose of creativity and, at times, the flexibility to give in to one side or the other. In 
this process, we encounter comprehensibility versus historical accuracy.  
 
Questioning the exclusively empirical-inductivist perspective of science, by 
discussing chosen aspects of the history of science, implies potential risks. 
Criticizing that perspective may convey a misleading devaluation of the role of 
experimentation in science. In addition, in considering such matters as the 
historical construction of science, theories which cannot be proven, and the 
existence of competing explanatory models for many natural phenomena, as well 
as the problems and limitations in long-accepted theories, one may suggest or even 
encourage subjectivism, which may lead to a naive relativist or social determinism 
of science perspective on the parts of students. Therefore, we have the 
conflict/dilemma of objectivism versus subjectivism. 
 
A theoretical analysis which confronts historiographic and didactic requisites 
may point to paths for dealing with challenges in terms of structural obstacles, 
conflicts, and dilemmas. In addition, one can gain from practical experience in 
facing these difficulties in the process of teaching and learning. Thus, an empirical 
analysis was carried out to complement our theoretical approach to confronting 
obstacles, in the development and implementation of a pilot course for senior high 
school. The empirical part included the preparation, application follow-up, and 
analysis of a series of didactic activities which use the history of optics to discuss 
the NOS aspects of the construction of scientific knowledge. Scientific and 
formative aspects were also integrated. 
OBSTACLES FACED IN THE CONSTRUCTION OF A  
HISTORY OF OPTICS COURSE 
Bearing in mind the results of the above theoretical analysis, a 20-hour mini-course 
on the history of optics was developed for senior high school, in the context of a 
public school in the suburbs of the city of São Paulo. The analysis of this empirical 
process, the experience of further challenges, and the solutions proposed for the 
obstacles faced, created another set of results.  
 
During the selection of historical episodes, the elaboration of the texts written 
for the teacher and for the students, and the construction of educational activities, 

FORATO & BAGDONAS 
188 
the eight challenges and four dilemmas which we had expected in theory did in fact 
arise.  
 
In addition to this, new obstacles unfolded along with the expected challenges 
during the empirical process of course planning, providing more details of the 
difficulties which may be encountered in teaching the history and philosophy of 
science (HPS). This new set of results resulted in 17 obstacles inherent to specific 
educational contexts. Table 3 presents a synthesis of those obstacles, and 
distinguishes between those that are surmountable and those that may actually be 
avoided.  
Table 3. Surmountable and avoidable obstacles identified during the empirical analysis. 
(Source: Forato, 2009) 
Surmountable obstacles (SO) 
Avoidable obstacles (AO) 
1. Notion of science to be presented: selection 
of the aspects of NOS. 
2. Selection of the historical aspects to 
emphasize in each episode. 
3. Level of depth of certain historical aspects. 
4. Level of details of non-scientific context.  
5. Level of depth of certain epistemological 
aspects. 
6. If, when, how much, and how to use 
excerpts from primary sources. 
7. Creation of a discourse that is appropriate to 
the intended level of education. 
8. Addressing, diachronically, (a) different 
notions of science; and (b) thinkers of 
different eras; and (c) contents of the history 
of science which are hard for contemporary 
students to understand. 
9. Construction of educational activities which 
are appropriate from pedagogical and 
epistemological points of view. 
1. Naive notions of the history and 
epistemology of science. 
2. Teacher’s lack of preparation. 
3. Inadequacy of specialized history of 
science texts of for high school.  
4. Lack of student prerequisites in 
respect to mathematical, physics, 
historical, epistemological, and 
philosophical knowledge. 
5. Possible preconceptions of teachers 
and students, overvaluing the capacity of 
current science to solve all problems. 
 6. Emphasizing scientific aspects or 
emphasizing factors which are external 
to science. 
7. Amount of information in the form of 
texts. 
8. Extent x depth. 
 
 
In the educational context for which the course was developed, it was possible 
to propose solutions for nine of the obstacles; we have called these Surmountable 
Obstacles. On the other hand, it was not possible to overcome the other eight 
obstacles; in the latter cases, it was necessary to develop remedial strategies. 
Consequently, these were designated as Avoidable Obstacles.3 
 
Data obtained in the classroom demonstrates that the results of our proposed 
strategies exceeded expectations, both regarding students’ capacity to learn about 
the NOS and their motivation and significant change in their engagement with 
physics contents presented during and after the course. Moreover, the teacher, who 
we trained and who taught the course, reported being happy with both her own 
learning and her accomplishments with the students (Forato et al., 2008).  

OVERCOMING OBSTACLES TO TEACH NATURE OF SCIENCE 
189 
 
It was possible to identify limitations too. Some of the conflicts or dilemmas 
predicted in the theoretical analyses manifested following the use in our history of 
optics course of a short narrative of Thomas Young’s contribution to the wave 
theory of light. The absence of some historical information or its excessive 
simplification promoted a naive view concerning scientific endeavor. Of course, in 
most educational settings it is impossible to present a truly detailed historical 
account of scientific episodes (Forato et al., 2015).  
 
In light of this set of results, some questions arise: to what extent could the 
proposed solutions be generalized? Could our results contribute to the construction 
of other educational proposals? Would it be possible to organize the analysis of all 
these difficulties and the proposed solutions so as to provide a base for the 
didactization of the history of science? The next section explores the results of the 
entire project, and seeks to clarify the prepared proposal. 
PROPOSAL FOR COPING WITH OBSTACLES 
The history of optics course was implemented in the last year of senior high school. 
The collection and analysis of data was based on qualitative research, which 
configures a case study, in a specific context, with the researcher immersed in the 
natural environment in which the educational event takes place (Bogdan & Biklen, 
2004; Ericson, 1998). For the triangulation of data, three different sources were 
used: the transcripts of the classes as recorded on video; the answers provided by 
the students during activities and in their final evaluations, as well as the 
researcher’s field notes (Carvalho, 2006). The analysis focused on the process of 
relations between the students and teacher and the HPS contents, looking at 
progressive changes in their views on aspects of the NOS. It consisted of 
comparing classroom dialogs with the epistemological objectives of the proposal, 
and with the students’ written material, as well as the teacher’s lectures (Forato, 
2009). The purpose was to evaluate which reflections, information, discussions, 
and educational activities contributed more effectively to student learning. In 
addition, we sought to determine which piece(s) of information, if any, might result 
in an undesired interpretation. 
 
By carrying out a global analysis of results, considering the challenges and 
obstacles identified in the theoretical and empirical analyses, the educational 
proposals for overcoming them, and the classroom results, we sought to identify 
specific aspects of the construction of the course which were conducive to good 
results, as well as limitations that would need improvement. As a general result of 
that research process, 20 parameters, which are intended to assist in the 
didactization of historical and epistemological content, were prepared. 
 
Such parameters are neither rules nor a recipe for developing didactic material, 
on the contrary, they include details that should be reviewed and reconsidered 
during the whole process of development of any pedagogical proposal. They 
require analysis and reflection as to the questions raised and challenges recalled, 
based on the purpose established for each educational context.4 The parameters 
will appear in italic in the next sections, as items for guiding reflections. 

FORATO & BAGDONAS 
190 
 
Our starting point is an analysis of the consistency between the intended 
pedagogical and epistemological objectives, and the historical narrative, which is 
adopted or constructed by constantly evaluating the selection, omission, emphasis 
on, and simplification of historical contents. Although an evaluation of the 
correspondence between what is sought and what is obtained may seem obvious, 
countless researchers attest to the tenacity of naive perspectives of historiography 
in science education (Abd-El-Khalick, 2012). 
 
Our parameters further suggest some elements to be considered in the creation 
of didactic activities employing the mobilization of one epistemological objective 
in different historical examples and different pedagogical strategies.  
 
The next section presents an example of the application of these parameters in 
the analysis of a history of cosmology course.  
USING THE PARAMETERS: THE HISTORY OF COSMOLOGY IN HIGH SCHOOLS 
In order to explain how the parameters may be employed in the construction and 
evaluation of educational proposals, we are going to present their application in the 
analysis of a didactic sequence on the history of cosmology developed for high 
school physics classes. This sequence was collectively elaborated by several 
members of the TeHCO (Theory and History of School and Scientific Knowledge) 
research group, at the Institute of Physics of the University of São Paulo. It was 
first developed in May of 2012 and was taught at the Escola Estadual Ana Rosa 
(Ana Rosa State School), in São Paulo, between April and June of 2013, as part of 
a doctoral research project on science education (Bagdonas, 2015). Data collection 
and analysis were done following a qualitative research methodology. 
 
Initially, the group’s proposal was to seek, in the study of episodes from the 
history of cosmology (Kragh, 1996; Bagdonas, 2011), aspects which would 
encourage discussions about controversial aspects of the NOS, especially those 
involving the complex relationships between science and its social and historical 
contexts (Bagdonas et al., 2015b). 
 
As a way to find alternative strategies for teaching the history of science and to 
avoid the creation of a sequence based only on reading, discussing, and interpreting 
texts, the group decided to create a didactic game, which is described in detail in 
chapter 10 of this book. In summary, teachers and students play roles as members 
of an institution which supports research on cosmology. Students do research about 
the history of science between 1914 and 1939 in order to formulate arguments 
about which countries and scientists deserve to have funding. That research was 
performed in the classroom, based on reading, and on group discussions of the 
cards prepared by the research group. In addition to this,5 between classes, students 
were able to conduct additional research on the course blog,6 which included all 
cards from previous classes. We expected students to learn to understand history, 
as well as the history of science, as human constructions, taking into account that 
there are a variety of social and political influences on historians’ interpretations of 
historical documents. For that reason, the teacher always highlighted that the 
information included in the cards was not intended as ready-made arguments; in 

OVERCOMING OBSTACLES TO TEACH NATURE OF SCIENCE 
191 
order to formulate an argument, it was necessary to interpret the information. 
Students learned that several factors, such as our beliefs, points of view, and 
ideologies, may influence these interpretations. 
 
One of the main challenges during the collective construction of the didactic 
sequence and of the game was to meet both the recommendations of researchers 
interested in history and philosophy of science education, and the didactic 
necessities of the classroom, which in the group were mainly represented by the 
experience and views of the high school teachers. The group avoided consensus 
and valued disputes, both of a scientific nature (as in disagreements among 
supporters of different theories), and regarding the NOS (Bagdonas et al., 2015; 
Noronha & Gurgel, 2015), especially as involving tensions between rationalist and 
relativist perspectives on science, and the impact of social, cultural, and political 
influences on scientific development. For this reason, the fact that the parameters 
(Forato, 2009) deal with possible frictions between historiographical and 
educational requisites proved appropriate for enriching our discussions. The 
parameters were discussed at length in one of the meetings of the research group in 
September of 2012; this conversation guided the further systematization of the 
proposal that had been under discussion since May of that year.  
 
At that time, some doubts about the use of the parameters remained, but the 
sequence was completed and implemented in the classroom in 2013. Later, in 
2015, after a defense was completed of the dissertation analyzing this didactic 
intervention (Bagdonas, 2015), the authors of this chapter continued their 
reflections about the use of the parameters in this course. This further analysis 
made explicit the aspects of the NOS that had not been clear previously; and 
pointed out elements that might be improved in future iterations. 
 
We present below the results of these new reflections about each parameter. For 
now, this is the final version of our discussions, for, as mentioned in the previous 
section, it is necessary to once again reflect on a given project when we identify an 
inconsistent or incomplete aspect, or when any details under consideration point to 
new developments. 
 
1. Establishing pedagogical purposes for the uses of the history of science in 
education: 
 
The general purpose of the sequence is to allow students to gain a richer 
understanding about the ways science relates to its social and historical context.  
 
We developed a series of specific objectives in order to meet this goal: 
 
A) Learning scientific concepts, such as: 
‒ Cosmological constants and the static universe; 
‒ The expansion of the universe and redshift; the relation between spectrum 
shift and distance (known as the Hubble law); and the different 
interpretations of redshift. 
B) Learning aspects of the NOS, such as: 

FORATO & BAGDONAS 
192 
‒ Questioning the neutral nature of science and empirical-inductivist 
perspectives; 
‒ Questioning social determinism and naive relativism; 
‒ Methodological pluralism: learning about some of the different methods 
employed by scientists; 
‒ Discussing the concept of priority disputes in scientific discovery; 
‒ Realizing that the same experimental data may be analyzed from different 
theoretical perspectives. 
C) Supporting the development of skills, and procedural and attitudinal contents, 
such as: 
‒ The reading and interpreting of texts, graphs, and tables; 
‒ Arguing for a point of view with clarity, listening to opposite positions, and 
debating scientific topics. 
‒ Working in groups, thus contributing not only to ones’ own learning, but 
also to collective learning. 
 
2. Explaining the notion of science adopted and/or the intended epistemological or 
metascientific goals: 
 
The main epistemological objectives are questioning both naive rationalism, the 
idea of a neutral scientist, free from ideological influences; and naive relativism, 
the idea of a scientist whose personal opinion guides his/her conclusions or who is 
dominated by ideological influences. We expect students to see science as a human 
construction influenced, but not determined, by social and historical context. 
 
Cosmology is a branch of science which may be especially suited for allowing 
certain aspects of the NOS to be discussed in more detail. In the first half of the 
20th century, religious, ideological, aesthetic, and political issues notably 
influenced cosmological debates (Bagdonas, 2011, 2015; Kragh, 1996). These 
clear and strong influences were a good reason to choose this scientific field during 
this historical period as a launching pad for discussions about the influence of 
social and historical contexts on science.  
 
Moreover, since it is not possible to perform lab experiments to test 
cosmological theories, studying cosmology provides useful ways to teach students 
that scientists employ a variety of different methods.7 Astronomic observations, 
which allow us to draw inferences about the evolution of the universe, were even 
more limited in the first half of the 20th century, when the huge telescopes, 
satellites, radio telescopes, and other technological apparatus which have 
broadened our observational knowledge of the universe, had yet to be built. Even 
with this technological evolution, our knowledge is still very limited when 
compared to the immensity of the universe as a whole. It is interesting to note that 
this relative scarcity of observational data has not prevented the conception and 
development of several creative, rich, and interesting cosmological models. 
 
The sequence also highlights reflections about the concept of “discoveries” in 
science, drawing attention to common media distortions of theory creation as a 
product of the mind of isolated “geniuses”. Several “candidates” for the discovery 

OVERCOMING OBSTACLES TO TEACH NATURE OF SCIENCE 
193 
of the expansion of the universe are presented, so as to allow students to 
understand that several different scientists contributed to the collective construction 
of those cosmological theories. 
 
Finally, the sequence emphasizes disputes between rival theories, revealing the 
possibility of different scientists or groups positing different theoretical 
interpretations of the same observational data. This is an interesting strategy for 
questioning empirical-inductivist perspectives. 
 
3. Selecting the appropriate topic and historical contents: 
 
We selected the acceptance of the theory of the expanding universe between 1917 
and 1939 as our central topic. As discussed in parameter 2, that subject is 
exceptionally appropriate for our discussion because, at that time, political and 
religious influences over science were particularly important.  
 
4. Selecting the aspects to emphasize and to omit in each history of science 
content: 
 
Aspects to emphasize 
The historical episode comprises three stages, and each stage corresponds to a 
historical period that was explored in the game (see Chapter 9 of this book). 
 
In the first stage, we emphasize the debate between the scientists Albert Einstein 
and Alexander Friedmann about the expansion of the universe, paying special 
attention to the system of peer review by exploring what occurred when Einstein 
was the reviewer of Friedmann’s article in a German magazine. 
 
In the second stage, we look into the contributions of Lemaître and Hubble to 
the theory of the expanding universe, debating who should be considered the 
“discoverer” of this theory. In this stage, we seek to emphasize that this theory is 
the product of a collective process. 
 
Finally, in the third stage, we explore alternative theories for explaining the 
redshifts of galaxies, as a way to discuss different interpretations of the same 
observational data. 
 
In addition to this, it is worth highlighting that during the process of debate 
during the game, several different aspects may be considered, depending on the 
interests of teacher and students. Game cards are not limited to aspects of 
cosmology, but may also include other theories of physics, and even political, 
social, and cultural aspects. For instance, in some groups, there were girls 
interested in female scientists, such as Emmy Noether. On the other hand, some 
boys were particularly interested in the contributions of science to the production 
of weapons during World War I. However, the structure of the game encourages 
students to be increasingly interested in topics related to conceptual aspects of 
cosmology (along with the many benefits to this choice outlined herein, this is also 
a subject less prone to gender divisions). 
 

FORATO & BAGDONAS 
194 
Aspects to omit 
As the didactic sequence sought a balance between addressing cosmology content 
and its historical context, several conceptual aspects had to be omitted. For 
example, we omitted the mathematical formalism of relativistic cosmology, which 
involves differential equations or tensors, since such mathematical requisites would 
not be appropriate for high school students. We also did not address certain 
complex concepts, such as comoving distances, scale factor, and four-dimensional 
space-time, among others. 
 
We also omitted deeper discussions about the differences between astronomy, 
astronautics, astrology, and other fields of knowledge which are sometimes 
confused with cosmology; more detailed explanations of certain astronomic 
concepts, such as methods for measuring the distance of galaxies, spectroscopy, 
absolute and apparent magnitude, and parallax; and in-depth explanations of the 
physics of spectrum shifts, the formation of spectrums, and the concepts of 
electromagnetism and quantum mechanics involved in their explanation. Even 
though all these concepts are important to a formal education in cosmology at the 
university level (since they are directly related to redshift), we speculated that it 
was possible to introduce an initial idea of cosmology while omitting these aspects 
in our high school educational context.  
 
Moreover, according to the historical study frame already mentioned in 
parameter 3, the developments of post-1940 contemporary cosmology – including 
steady state theory, nuclear and particle physics, the origin of chemical elements, 
dark matter, dark energy, and inflation – were also omitted.  
 
5. Comparing the omitted aspects with the intended aspects of the NOS: 
 
The five aspects of the NOS listed in parameter 1, and described in parameter 2, 
were not impacted by the omissions. However, because we omitted several 
mathematical and conceptual aspects, there was a greater risk of overestimating 
political influences, thereby strengthening relativist perspectives or encouraging 
socially-deterministic views, as discussed in the second section of this chapter. We 
describe how to avoid this risk below, in parameters 6 and 7.  
 
6. Defining the level of detail of the non-scientific context to be addressed:  
 
As discussed in parameter 1, non-scientific contextualization is a part of the 
general purpose of the didactic sequence. The game was structured using 
geographical and historical divisions as a base, so that the historical, political, 
cultural, and economic knowledge of the period between the wars was an essential 
part of the intended learning.  
 
Some aspects of the historical context were specifically highlighted, such as the 
impact of World War I on science, when, as nationalism intensified, along with 
disputes between rival countries, so grew the ideological influences on science in 
cosmological debates involving science, religion, and Marxism. This is 

OVERCOMING OBSTACLES TO TEACH NATURE OF SCIENCE 
195 
demonstrated by the impact of the “primeval atom” theory conceived by Lemaître, 
a priest who proposed that the universe began some billions of years ago. 
 
7. Mediating simplifications and omissions, since emphasizing the influence of 
non-scientific aspects may generate extreme relativist interpretations: 
 
As a strategies to avoid students endorsing the simple social determinism of 
science, we emphasized cases during the debates in which two scientists from two 
different social contexts were able to obtain the same results (e.g., Friedmann, 
Lemaître, and Robertson); we attributed importance to mathematics (e.g., in 
discussions between Einstein and Friedmann); and to astronomical observations 
(e.g., observation of the redshifts of the Slipher nebulae, Hubble’s improvement of 
methods for measuring distance).  
 
In analyzing the research data collected during the implementation of the 
didactic sequence, we observed that this strategy seemed to have succeeded, as we 
encountered few naive relativist perspectives during the course, even with the 
omission of the mathematical and conceptual aspects described in parameter 4. 
Most arguments put forward by the students demonstrated that they still value 
science, experimentation, rational arguments, questioning authority, and other 
typical “ethos of science” values (Merton, 1973). Even recognizing that scientists 
occasionally act against these values, most students considered such behavior a 
distortion of proper conduct, and something to be avoided (Bagdonas et al., 
2015b). 
 
8. Assessing when it is possible to overcome or remedy the absence of prerequisites 
in mathematical, physics, historical, and epistemological knowledge: 
 
The absence of certain of the mathematical and physics prerequisites (such as 
knowledge of differential, integral, and tensor calculus, non-Euclidean geometry, 
electromagnetic waves, spectroscopy, the Doppler effect, etc.) required for an 
appropriate comprehension of relativistic cosmology was discussed in parameter 4. 
Many of these concepts were omitted, not only because they are overly complex 
for most high school students, but also because we decided to emphasize other 
aspects of our subject, such as discussions about the NOS. To supplement what 
was omitted, we used educational strategies and resources, such as animations, 
analogies, and comparison with qualitative aspects of the theories (presented in 
parameter 9). 
 
We did not notice issues with a lack of historical prerequisites, as our high 
school students were rather familiar with the historical period in question (the 
students in our study had typically covered the 20th century during history classes 
in their last year of junior high school). However, students in general might benefit 
further from a cooperative approach involving both science and history teachers. 
As suggested and discussed in parameter 19, Forato (2009) has proposed a timeline 
which relates movies (a form of media easily accessible to students) to the 
historical context of the didactic sequence, while addressing other aspects of world 

FORATO & BAGDONAS 
196 
history, such as World Wars I and II, the Russian Revolution, and the crash of 
1929. 
 
Regarding epistemological prerequisites, there are many important NOS 
concepts that were not directly addressed in the sequence, such as those of “law”, 
“model”, “theory”, “scientific method”, and “hypothesis”, among others. While we 
do not expect students to memorize the definition of such concepts, we do expect 
them to understand their meaning and use them accordingly; we remedied this 
situation by accepting a lax use of these terms, as we will discuss in parameter 9. 
 
One historical and epistemological prerequisite, whose absence was 
unfortunately only noticed after classroom intervention, was the need for guidance 
in the selection of appropriate materials for research involving the NOS. Although 
our proprietary materials were carefully created to avoid distortions, we did not 
anticipate that, because they were so engaged in the game, students would be 
interested in doing their own research using other sources, such as websites. Since 
we gave no guidelines for such research, students ended up relying on a variety of 
inappropriate research resources regarding the history of science, such as websites 
containing misleading or erroneous statements (“Hubble proved the expansion of 
the universe in 1929 by means of observation”, and so on). 
 
Another prerequisite for the sequence, which is simultaneously one of its 
didactic purposes, is the capacity to read and interpret texts, formulate arguments, 
and participate in oral debates. The further development of these skills is 
encouraged in the sequence since, even if students have trouble with these 
competences, we believe that it is part of the role of the physics teacher to support 
language and humanities teachers in overcoming student challenges in these areas. 
 
9. Combining a group of different educational strategies and resources may offset 
the lack of knowledge of certain physics and mathematical contents. When omitting 
mathematics/physics per se is not a problem for the intended objectives, other 
possible risks should be considered: 
 
In order to address a lack of physics and mathematical prerequisites, we adopted a 
qualitative approach, making it clear to the students that the course was not going 
to provide the sort of deep understanding of the subject which would only be 
possible through years of studying physics and mathematics at the university level.  
 
Students studied the redshift-distance relation by reading excerpts of papers by 
Silberstein, Lundmark, and Hubble, and we created a computer animation to 
present Fritz Zwicky’s “tired light” theory. We also proposed analogies, including 
discussions about their limitations, such as using a balloon to represent the 
expansion of a 2-dimensional universe.8  
 
The risks involved in this omission were discussed in parameter 7. 
 
We identified another risk related to the proposed activity, the risk of an 
exaggerated competition between students who may be more interested in winning 
than in learning. For that reason, we sought to promote cooperation between 
everyone in the game, taking collective success into consideration in the 
assessment of the class. This kind of strategy implies another risk, since it requires 

OVERCOMING OBSTACLES TO TEACH NATURE OF SCIENCE 
197 
class participation: if students are too lethargic and the teacher fails to motivate 
them, the sequence will not be successful. 
 
10. Defining the level of depth of epistemological content: 
 
As discussed in parameter 2, we seek to question extreme empiricist, inductivist, 
and relativist perspectives. The didactic game debates included different 
perspectives on the NOS, since students had to justify their choices by playing the 
roles of members of an institution which supports scientific research. These 
choices were extremely revealing – and we were able to identify, analyze, and 
discuss students’ opinions of science vis-à-vis their choices.  
 
Obviously, we did not expect students to have a deep understanding of 
epistemological concepts such as “neutrality” or “social determinism”, as this game 
was probably one of the first incorporating studies about the NOS. The arguments 
formulated were considered appropriate even when students used terms such as 
“discovery”, “evidence”, “law”, or “model” incorrectly, as discussed in parameter 
8. Like Forato (2009, p. 185), we created texts adopting the standard rules of the 
Portuguese language, rather than strictly academic language, in an attempt to 
approximate students’ everyday language. Activities were planned so as to use 
epistemological concepts without formally defining them, while constructing 
narratives and discussions which enabled the understanding thereof. 
 
11. Considering the use of primary sources in high schools:  
 
Certain sentences from articles written by scientists and excerpts from their letters 
were included in the creation of the materials and of the game. However, we also 
utilized lots of excerpts from secondary sources, as well as texts that had been 
adapted by members of the research group. All were used to facilitate student 
understanding and to avoid naive interpretations of historical documents. 
 
12. In the effort to diachronically address contents of the history of science which 
might be hard to understand in a contemporary context, one option is to establish a 
connection between the results relevant to the construction of science with 
discarded contents or with contents that might currently be deemed “strange”:  
 
Since our sequence addresses relatively recent subjects, we assume that there is a 
smaller risk of failing because of anachronistic approaches, at least compared with 
learning about developments which are historically more distant, such as 
Aristotelian physics, or even the Copernican revolution. In the physics of the 20th 
century, many concepts considered correct by physicists are seen by non-experts as 
“strange”: the theory of relativity disrupts intuitive notions of space and time; the 
big bang theory and its notion of the creation of the universe out of nowhere is in 
direct conflict with everyday expectations about the conservation of matter and 
energy. The alternative theories, which have fewer supporters, are also strange, as 
in the continuous creation of matter in steady state theory or the supposed loss of 

FORATO & BAGDONAS 
198 
energy of photons in the “tired light” theory. Some students seemed to believe that 
theories from the beginning of the century were strange due to a lack of 
technological development. We tried to challenge this opinion by arguing that 
currently-accepted contemporary theories are equally strange and non-intuitive. 
 
13. In the effort to diachronically address different notions of science and the 
thoughts of the philosophers, natural philosophers, and scientists of different 
periods and civilizations, introducing students to contemporary thinkers working 
with the same methodological assumptions may help them to avoid criticism of the 
past for its prejudices and anachronisms: 
 
The selected historical frame was justified in parameter 3: we chose the period 
comprised between 1914 and 1939, favoring depth to the detriment of extent. For 
example, we explored the fact that one set of data indeed enabled different 
interpretations, but also made it clear that these interpretations depended on the 
scientific methodology accepted at the time, rather than being just a matter of 
personal opinion. This helped us to deal with the risk of extreme relativism, as well 
as to criticize the notion that purely objective and neutral observations occur, 
entirely free from theoretical influences, during the formulation of hypotheses. 
 
Naturally, our didactic sequence would be more efficient if complemented by 
other sequences which approach the same or similar aspects of the NOS from other 
historical episodes such as, for example, the different creation myths of different 
civilizations in ancient times, the Copernican revolution (Reis et al., 2013), or 
contemporary cosmology after World War II (Arthury, 2010; Aguiar, 2010; 
Bagdonas, 2011).  
 
14. Introducing examples of refuted theories in different cultural contexts enables 
us to criticize naive ideas about the history and epistemology of science, as well as 
the idea that modern science may solve all of our problems: 
 
In our historical episode, we showed that general relativity prevailed over 
Newtonian gravity in situations when bodies were travelling at speeds comparable 
to the speed of light. Furthermore, we discussed how the once-new idea of a 
universe consisting of our Solar System was debunked by the theory of a much 
larger universe formed by billions of galaxies, thereby also replacing the 
heliocentric model, since this latter model revealed that the sun (a stationary body 
in the Copernican model) was in fact also moving. This was later augmented by the 
theory of the expanding universe, which was endorsed by the majority of scientists 
interested in cosmology, even though a few authors still argue that the universe is 
static. Even now, contemporary theories contain limited and unexplained elements, 
for example, the challenge of explaining dark matter and dark energy, which seem 
to comprise more than 95% of the observable universe. 
 

OVERCOMING OBSTACLES TO TEACH NATURE OF SCIENCE 
199 
15. Advocating for new ideas incompatible with those prevailing in students’ 
cultural knowledge bases requires the use of strategies capable of creating 
discomfort and conflicts that allow them to question pre-established ideas: 
 
As detailed in parameter 4, we seek to question the stereotype of Einstein as a 
neutral, impartial scientist supporter of internationalism. In introducing the context 
of the 1920s, we first presented Friedmann and Lemaître as unknown people with 
“weird” ideas; we then revealed that they later ended up questioning Einstein’s 
authority and showing he was wrong in certain matters. 
 
Another mindset that is difficult to change is the naive perspective on the NOS, 
which includes such notions as the idea that scientific theories may be categorically 
and finally proven by means of experiments. For that reason, we always try to 
emphasize the possibility of different interpretations of experimental data, 
especially of the spectral shift of galaxies. 
 
16. Offsetting the potential lack of teacher preparation vis-à-vis knowledge of 
history and philosophy of science for the classroom includes preparing him/her to 
identify and question anachronistic manifestations. Educational materials could 
include instructions and warnings about unexpected ideas and offer possible ways 
to deal with such issues:  
 
Students encountered and expressed historical distortions, which were questioned 
during the sequence. They learned, for example, that Hubble did not discover the 
expansion of the universe. The interpretation of spectrum shifts as indicating an 
expanding universe was a gradual and collective process, to which Lemaître, de 
Sitter, Slipher, Lundmark, Silberstein, Wirtz, and others made relevant 
contributions. The cosmological constant was not abandoned by some supporters 
of the expansion of the universe, such as Friedmann and Lemaître. 
 
There are still many further aspects of this process that might be fruitfully 
explored, some of which may be found in Kragh (2011) and Bagdonas (2011, 
2015). The teacher with whom we worked followed up this course by joining a 
group in which such topics were debated. 
 
It is likely that students will ask about unrelated scientific contents; at such 
moments, it is important for the teacher to be prepared to identify anachronistic 
perspectives and other historical distortions to in order to face those challenges in 
ways that contribute to students’ learning processes.  
 
17. Choosing topics (within the selected episode) that inspire curiosity in the 
intended age bracket. The choice should not only consider technical and objective 
criteria, but should essentially involve and engage the students themselves: 
 
We tried to engage students with didactic resources by creating an educational 
game inspired by several board games popular among adolescents, such as War, 
Clue, Pandemic, and Civilization, among others. We also emphasized certain war-
related biographical aspects of the scientists studied, with dramatic narrative 

FORATO & BAGDONAS 
200 
elements intended to resemble action movies or police novels, which proved to 
especially attract boys, while girls seemed especially interested in women’s 
participation in science and prized pacifism over bellicose disputes. Even so, 
gender-biased results contribute another challenge to the educational picture and 
should be addressed. 
 
18. Reflecting on the quantity and depth of the texts: 
 
Rather than having students read vast quantities of text, we tried to filter a great 
amount of information into cards containing reduced, yet concentrated information. 
This bore the risk of students thinking they were supposed to memorize the cards, 
which would have made the didactic sequence informative (rather than formative) 
and rendered it difficult to enact as planned. For this reason, it is always important 
to draw students’ attention to the value of learning how to extract the most relevant 
information from the “sea of information” available, a skill which is more and 
more important in a contemporary world in which young people are constantly 
flooded with endless pieces of information by the Internet. 
 
19. A timeline with important historical events, some of which may be 
accompanied by “commercial” movies (as these are easily accessible to teachers 
and students), may help with the extent x depth dilemma, provided the historical 
approach is diachronic:  
 
We decided to privilege depth of historical period. However, this choice bore a loss 
in terms of extent, as students did not gain a broader idea of the situation of the 
given theories and ideas in the history of human thought. In using a movie-
augmented timeline which notes other important ideas and events of the era, the 
teacher may explore both the place of the historical episode and other well-known 
names, places, and periods in the history of cosmology. Moreover, the teacher may 
explore the broader relationship of science with other areas of human knowledge, 
using movies to help with this contextualization of historical moments.  
 
In using a timeline, it is important to approach each historical event 
diachronically, aiming to avoid a linear and presentist view of HPS. 
 
20. Each intended message about the nature of science can be addressed in 
different didactic activities and different historical episodes: 
 
The idea of potential political influences on science was designed to initially 
emerge in discussions involving the proposal of a boycott of German science after 
World War I. This was seen as a way to reveal the broader social influences 
impacting society as a whole, and to show that scientists are not immune to such 
influences. We also explored the effects of certain psychological and aesthetic 
influences on the individual beliefs of each scientist, as in the episode when 
Einstein, who was already a renowned scientist, rejected the proposal of a young, 
unknown man (Friedmann).  

OVERCOMING OBSTACLES TO TEACH NATURE OF SCIENCE 
201 
 
The importance of political factors was subsequently minimized, through 
emphasizing the facts that, although they were in different contexts, Friedmann, 
Lemaître, and Robertson nonetheless achieved the same results, and that their 
observations of redshifts were the essential factor in the choice between 
cosmological models. 
 
Throughout this process, the different forms of political influences over science 
appeared in different contexts and in different moments of the selected historical 
episode, and then were gathered and organized in the final activity. 
FINAL CONSIDERATIONS 
Initially (in 2012), the TeHCO research group debated parameters intended 
to contribute to the process of the creation of a didactic sequence involving the 
history of cosmology. The author of those parameters was not part of this group 
and did not participate in that discussion. After classroom implementation, a new 
perspective on the parameters9 enabled a reevaluation of the previous proposal, 
suggesting improvements in the teaching-learning sequence and evaluating the 
scope and limits of the parameters themselves. 
 
Both the classroom results and this new reflection enabled us to review, extend, 
and organize the previously-established pedagogical objectives into three 
categories: concepts of cosmology, aspects of the NOS, and formative skills.  
 
Our subsequent analysis showed that the didactic sequence on the history of 
cosmology mobilized more epistemological contents than initially intended, 
especially regarding issues about the NOS, such as the methodological pluralism of 
science. It also reflected the mobilization of procedural and attitudinal contents, 
such as group collaborative work, debate, and interpretation of texts. In addition to 
this, our analysis highlighted the necessity of taking historical and epistemological 
prerequisites into account: it is important to prepare students and teachers to 
identify reliable sources for conducting research in the history and philosophy of 
science. This will allow them to avoid the most common naive NOS conceptions, 
such as those of the experimental evidence of theories, isolated discoveries which 
occur on specific dates, and the reduction of the history of science to a set of facts, 
names, and dates to be memorized rather than discussed or interpreted.10  
 
We also encountered one instance where it became necessary to adapt a 
parameter. The reflection suggested for parameter 12 (to establish a connection 
between the results relevant to the construction of science with discarded contents 
or with contents that might currently be deemed “strange”) did not apply well to 
the sequence of teaching and learning cosmology in the 20th century. The main 
reason for this is because the historical period in question is relatively recent. The 
risk of students seeing old theories as “strange” and the currently accepted ones as 
“normal” was further skewed in the case of modern and contemporary physics, 
since even currently accepted theories – such as the expansion of the universe, the 
creation of time and space in an instant defined as space-time, and other concepts 
involving relativity and quantum mechanics – may be considered “strange”. 

FORATO & BAGDONAS 
202 
 
This reveals one reason why these parameters should not be seen as a simple 
recipe to be strictly followed. They were conceived as general reflections that must 
be adapted to different educational contexts and pedagogical purposes, as well as to 
different historical episodes. This characteristic makes them complex and less easy 
to use, but gives autonomy to each researcher. The deep reflections required in 
using the parameters allows to the researcher to analyze the consistency between 
the intended NOS views and those implicitly and explicitly transmitted by the 
historical narrative.  
 
We noted that using a timeline,11 with representative historical moments and 
thinkers from different civilizations and times, along with “commercial” movies 
easily accessible to teachers and students, provided an interesting visual resource 
for contextualizing the selected episode in a broader temporal perspective on the 
construction of cosmological knowledge. This can provide support for dealing with 
the dilemma or conflict of extent versus depth. 
 
There is another difference between the research (involving the history of 
optics) that gave rise to the parameters and the sequence on the history of 
cosmology which involved choices for dealing with this extent versus depth 
dilemma. The parameters were created from a theoretical analysis and a case study 
of teaching aspects of the NOS by contextualizing different explanations for the 
nature of light in three different and well-defined historical episodes.12 The 
sequence on cosmology, in turn, chose only one – albeit deeper – historical frame. 
It was thus not possible to address the different ideas of science and thoughts of 
philosophers, natural philosophers, and scientists of different periods and 
civilizations in a diachronic fashion. This difference in approach provided 
interesting questions for future research: which aspects of the NOS may be 
generalized for different periods of the history of science? What aspects may be 
characteristic of only some episodes? How can we explore the fact that one cannot 
generalize everything learned from one particular historical case to science as a 
whole? What kind of formative benefit might such debates offer to science 
education? 
 
Despite concluding that the parameters provide a base for the construction and 
analysis of didactic proposals involving HPS, one should recognize their inherent 
complexity and the countless possibilities for their interpretation. This analysis was 
conducted in conjunction with the parameters’ original author, facilitating their use 
and allowing her to clarify aspects that her original text had failed to explain. We 
hope it shows more possibilities for their use beyond those initially conceived, any 
of which will require a thorough and detailed analysis of the epistemic and non-
epistemic aspects of each historical episode. 
 
We have outlined our process of overcoming a range of obstacles to the 
educational use of the history of science in the hopes that our analysis may serve to 
lessen such difficulties for other researchers and teachers who may include this 
resource in their construction of educational material and courses involving 
historical perspectives. 

OVERCOMING OBSTACLES TO TEACH NATURE OF SCIENCE 
203 
NOTES 
1  Kuhn, in 1961, was already criticizing linearity and other historical distortions present in textbooks, 
despite recognizing their usefulness in quickly familiarizing the student with the current paradigm. 
He also criticizes the naive notion of scientific enterprise promoted by such distortion (Kuhn, 1997 
[1961]). 
2  See Forato et al. (2015) on the omission of several features of Young’s contributions to the wave 
theory of light in a short historical narrative, which has led many students to a misunderstanding of 
his role in the establishment of this theory and also has conveyed inadequate messages concerning 
NOS issues. 
3  See a detailed analysis in Forato et al. (2012b), and a synthesis in Forato et al. (2012a). 
4 
Forato (2009, vol. 1, pp. 188–196) and synthesized in Forato and collaborators (2012b). 
5  The didactic material of the sequence of teaching and learning may be viewed on the website of the 
TeHCO Group: www.if.usp.br/tehco 
6  A virtual environment created to make material and information about the subject available. 
7  In spite of that, it is not rare to see science outreaches proposing that large particle accelerators,  
such as the LHC, are going to recreate the “Big Bang”. To read criticism of this type of 
sensationalism, see Mário Novello, July 20, 2008, Estado de São Paulo newspaper. Available from 
http://www.estadao.com.br/noticias/suplementos,alarde-falso,208933,0.htm 
(accessed 
February 
2013). 
8  Another interested analogy is the Expanding Rubber Band Universe (Soares, 2014), published after 
the implementation of our didactic sequence. 
9  The new analysis presented in this chapter was made by the author of the parameters and the main 
author of the history of cosmology course. 
10  For further details regarding historical distortions in textbooks, see Forato (2013), including 
examples of preparing teachers-in-training to identify naive NOS views on didactic materials. 
11 Available from http://www.nupic.fe.usp.br/Projetos%20e%20Materiais/o-eter-a-luz-e-a-natureza- 
da-ciencia (accessed March 17, 2015). 
12  Three different theories in the Classical Age (Leucippus, Empedocles, and Aristotle); debates 
between the vibrational perspective proposed by Christian Huygens and the corpuscular feature of 
light presented by Isaac Newton (end of 17th century); and controversies around the substitution of 
the corpuscular theory of light by the wave theory of light in the beginning of the 19th century, 
involving Thomas Young, Francois Arago, and Agustín Fresnel. 
REFERENCES 
Abd-El-Khalick, F. (2012). Nature of science in science education: Toward a coherent framework for 
synergistic research and development. In Second international handbook of science education (pp. 
1041–1060). Dordrecht, the Netherlands: Springer. 
Aguiar, R. R. (2010). Tópícos de astrofísica e cosmologia: Uma aplicação de física moderna e 
contemporânea no ensino médio. Master’s Thesis in Teaching Physics, Ensino de Ciências (Física, 
Química e Biologia), Universidade de São Paulo. 
Allchin, D. (2004). Pseudohistory and pseudoscience. Science & Education, 13, 179–195. 
Allchin, D. (2006). Why respect for history – and historical error – matters. Science & Education, 15(1), 
91–111. 
Allchin, D. (2011). Evaluating knowledge of the nature of (whole) science. Science Education, 95(3), 
518–542. 
Arduriz-Bravo, A., & Izquierdo-Aymerich, M. (2009). A research-informed instructional unit to teach 
the nature of science to pre-service science teachers. Science & Education, 18, 1177–1192. 
Arthury, L. H. M. (2010). A cosmologia moderna à luz dos elementos da epistemologia de lakatos. 
Master’s Thesis, Curso de Pós-graduação em Educação Científica e Tecnológica, UFSC, 
Florianópolis. 

FORATO & BAGDONAS 
204 
Bagdonas, A. (2011). Discutindo a natureza da ciência a partir de episódios da história da 
cosmologia. Master’s Thesis, Istituto de Física, Instituto de Química, Instituto de Biociências, 
Faculdade de Educação, Programa Interunidades em Ensino de Ciências, Universidade de São 
Paulo. 
Bagdonas, A. (2015). Controvérsias envolvendo a natureza da ciência em sequências didáticas sobre 
cosmologia [Controversies regarding nature of science in teaching and learning sequences about 
cosmology]. Doctoral Dissertation in Science Education, Instituto de Física, Instituto de Química, 
Instituto de Biociências e Faculdade de Educação, Universidade de São Paulo. 
Bagdonas, A., & Silva, C. C. (2015). Enhancing teachers’ awareness about relations between science 
and religion. Science & Education, 24(9–10), 1173–1199. 
Bagdonas, A., Gurgel, I., & Zanetic, J. (2014). Controvérsias sobre a natureza da ciência como enfoque 
curricular para o ensino de física: O ensino de história da cosmologia por meio de um jogo 
didático. Revista Brasileira de Histórica da Ciência, 7(2), 242–260. 
Bagdonas, A., Rozentalski, E., & Polati, F. (2015a). Controversial aspects of the construct NOS in the 
Ibero-American Science Education journals: A literature review. In Proceedings of the IHPST 13th 
Biennial International Conference, Rio de Janeiro.  
Bagdonas, A. Gurgel, I., & Zanetic, J. (2015b). The risk of fostering relativism by teaching cosmology 
through a didactic game that emphasizes the social context of science. In Proceedings of the IHPST 
13th Biennial International Conference, Rio de Janeiro. 
Bogdan, R., & Biklen, S. (1994). Investigação qualitativa em educação: Uma introdução à teoria e aos 
métodos. Porto: Porto Editora. 
Brush, S. (1974). Should the history of science be rated X? Science, 183, 1164–1172. 
Cachapuz, A., Praia, J., & Jorge, M. (2002). Ciência, educação em ciência e ensino das ciências (pp. 
59–94). Lisboa: Ministério da Educação. 
Carvalho, A. M. P. (2006). Uma metodologia de pesquisa para estudar os processos de ensino e 
aprendizagem em salas de aula. In F. Santos & I. Greca (Eds.), A pesquisa em ensino de ciências no 
Brasil e suas metodologias (pp. 13–48). Unijuí: Ed. Unijuí. 
Chevallard, Y. (1991). La transposición didáctica: Del saber sabio al saber enseñado. Buenos Aires: 
Aique. 
Dagher, Z. R., & Erduran, S. (2016). Reconceptualizing the nature of science for science education. 
Why does it matter? Science & Education, 25, 147–164. 
Eflin, J., Glennan, S., & Reish, G. (1999). The nature of science: A perspective from the philosophy of 
science. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 36(1), 107–116. 
Ericson, F. (1998). Qualitative research methods for science education. In J. B. Fraser, & K. G. Tobin 
(Eds.), International handbook of science education, Part one. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic 
Publishers. 
Forato, T. C. M. (2009). A natureza da ciência como saber escolar: Um estudo de caso a partir da 
história da luz. Doctoral Dissertation in Education. São Paulo: Faculdade de Educação da 
Universidade de São Paulo, 2 vols. 
Forato, T. C. M. (2013). Preparação de professores para problematização da pseudohistória em 
materiais didáticos. Enseñanza de las Ciencias, extra volume, 1316–1321. 
Forato, T. C. M., Martins, R. A., & Pietrocola, M. (2012). Teorias da luz e Natureza da ciência: 
elaboração e análise de curso aplicado no ensino médio – A pesquisa de física e a sala de aula: 
Articulações necessárias. São Paulo: Editora Livraria da Física. 
Forato, T. C. M., Pietrocola, M., & Martins, R. A. (2011). Historiografia e natureza da ciência na sala de 
aula. Caderno Brasileiro de Ensino de Física, 28(1), 27–59. 
Forato, T. C. M., Pietrocola, M., & Martins, R. A. (2012a). History and nature of science in high school: 
Building up parameters to guide educational materials and strategies. Science & Education, 21(5), 
657–682. 
Forato, T. C. M., Martins, R. A., & Pietrocola, M. (2012b). Enfrentando obstáculos na transposição 
didática da história da ciência para a sala de aula. In L. Peduzzi; A. Martins, & J. Hidalgo (Eds.), 
Temas de história e filosofia da ciência no ensino (pp. 123–154). Natal: EdUFRN. 

OVERCOMING OBSTACLES TO TEACH NATURE OF SCIENCE 
205 
Forato, T. C. M., Martins, R., & Pietrocola, M. (2015). A little learning is a dangerous thing: The  
nature of science and short historical accounts. In Proceedings of International History, Philosophy 
and Science Teaching Group Thirteenth Biennial International Conference, Rio de Janeiro. 
Available 
from 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/281274917_A_LITTLE_LEARNING_ 
IS_A_DANGEROUS_THING_THE_NATURE_OF_SCIENCE_AND_SHORT_HISTORICAL_ 
ACCOUNTS (accessed September 10, 2016).  
Freire, P. (1996). Pedagogia da autonomia: saberes necessários à prática educativa. Rio de Janeiro: 
Paz e Terra. 
Gil-Perez, D., Montoro, I. F., Alis, J. C., Cachapuz, A., & Praia, J. (2001). Para uma imagem não 
deformada do trabalho científico. Ciência & Educação, 7(2), 125–153. 
Gravoglu, K. et al. (2008). Science and technology in the European periphery: Some historiographical 
reflection. History of Science, 46, 153–175. 
Hodson, D. (2014). Nature of science in the science curriculum: Origin, development, implications and 
shifting emphases. In M. R. Matthews (Ed.), International handbook of research in history, 
philosophy and science teaching (pp. 911–970). Dordrecht, the Netherlands: Springer. 
Holton, G. (2003). What historians of science and science educators can do for one another? Science 
Education, 12(7), 603–616. 
Höttecke, D., & Silva, C. C. (2011). Why implementing history and philosophy in school science 
education is a challenge: An analysis of obstacles. Science & Education, 20, 293–316.  
Irzik, G., & Nola, R. (2011). A family resemblance approach to the nature of science for science 
education. Science & Education, 20(7–8), 591–607. 
Jardine, N. (2003). Whigs and Tories: Herbert Butterfield and the historiography of science. History of 
Science [Part 2], 41(132), 125–140. 
Kragh, H. (1987). An introduction to the historiography of science. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 
Kragh, H. (1996). Cosmology and controversy: The historical development of two theories of the 
universe. Princeton, Princeton University Press. 
Kragh, H. (2011). On modern cosmology and its place in science education. Science & Education, 
20(3–4), 343–357. 
Kuhn, T. S. (1997 [1961]). A estrutura das revoluções científicas (5th ed.). São Paulo: Editora 
Perspectiva. 
Lederman, N. G. (2007). Nature of science: Past, present, and future. In S. K. Abell & N. G. Lederman 
(Eds.), Handbook of research on science education (pp. 831–880). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates.  
Martins, A. (2007). História e filosofia da ciência no ensino: há muitas pedras nesse caminho. Caderno 
Brasileiro de Ensino de Física, 24(1), 112–131. 
Martins, R. A. (1999). O que é a ciência do ponto de vista da epistemologia? Caderno de Metodologia e 
Técnica de Pesquisa, 9, 5–20. 
Martins, R. A. (2006). Introdução: A história da ciência e seus usos na educação. In C. C. Silva (Ed.). 
Estudos de história e filosofia das ciências: Subsídios para aplicação no ensino (pp. 167–190). São 
Paulo: Editora Livraria da Física. 
Martins, R. A. (2010). Seria possível uma história da ciência totalmente neutra, sem qualquer aspecto 
whig? Boletim de História e Filosofia da Biologia, 4(3), 4–7. 
Matthews, M. R. (1992). History, philosophy and science education: The present rapprochement. 
Science & Education, 1(1), 11–47. 
Matthews, M. R. (2014). International handbook of research in history, philosophy and science 
teaching. Dordrecht, the Netherlands: Springer. 
Merton, R. K. (1973). The sociology of science. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Noronha, A., & Gurgel, I. (2015). On the relevance of a non-consensus view of nature of science in 
science education: a political-curricular argument. In Proceedings of 11th Conference of the 
European Science Education Research Association (ESERA), Helsinki, Finland.  

FORATO & BAGDONAS 
206 
Pietrocola, M. (2003). A história e a epistemologia no ensino de ciências: Dos processos aos modelos de 
realidade na educação científica. In A. M. R. Andrade (Ed.), Ciência em perspectiva. Estudos, 
ensaios e debates. (pp. 133–149). Rio de Janeiro: MAST/SBHC. 
Porto, P. A. (2010). História e filosofia da ciência no ensino de química: Em busca dos objetivos 
educacionais da atualidade. In W. L. P. Santos & O. A. Maldaner (Eds.), Ensino de química em foco 
(pp. 159–180). Ijuí: Editora Unijuí. 
Reis, J. C., Guerra, A., & Braga, M. (2013). Estudo de cosmologia moderna no ensino médio através da 
história da física: Diálogos interdisciplinares. In C. C. Silva & M. E. B. Prestes (Eds.), Aprendendo 
ciência e sobre sua natureza: Abordagens históricas e filosóficas (1st ed., pp. 405–418). São Carlos: 
Tipographia Editora Expressa. 
Rudge, D., & Howe, E. (2009). An explicit and reflective approach to the use of history to promote 
understanding of the nature of science. Science & Education, 18, 561–580. 
Whitaker, M. A. B. (1979). History and quasi-history in physics education – Part 1. Physics Education, 
14, 108–112. 
Zanetic, J. (1989). Física também é cultura. Doctoral Dissertation, Faculdade de Educação, 
Universidade de São Paulo. 
Zanetic, J. (2006). Física e arte: Uma ponte entre duas culturas. Pro-Posições, 17(1), 49. 
 
Thaís Cyrino de Mello Forato 
Department of Exact and Earth Sciences – Science Education 
Federal University of São Paulo 
São Paulo-SP, Brazil 
 
Alexandre Bagdonas 
Department of Exact Sciences 
Federal University of Lavras (DEX UFLA) 
Brazil 
 

 
M. Pietrocola & I. Gurgel (Eds.), Crossing the Border of the Traditional Science Curriculum, 207–225. 
© 2017 Sense Publishers. All rights reserved. 
IVÃ GURGEL, MAURÍCIO PIETROCOLA, AND DANILO CARDOSO 
12. THE ROLE OF NARRATIVE THINKING IN 
LEARNING SCIENTIFIC CONCEPTS 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
According to the most recent educational perspectives, dogmatic teaching that is 
centered on the memorization of concepts and on problem solving methods which 
are meaningless for students should no longer have any place in our schools – 
especially at the elementary level. We must therefore replace propaedeutic 
education, which is aimed at preparing elementary school students for eventual 
scientific careers and such, with teaching that is more in line with current thinking 
on education. In contrast to the aforementioned educational concepts, many 
researchers have adopted the perspective of scientific literacy (SL) as more 
appropriate for the teaching of science. This concept has been increasingly utilized 
internationally to explore which methods, practices, and materials should ideally 
comprise the scientific education of all students (Roberts, 2007).  
 
The notion of SL is especially relevant to discussions regarding proposals for 
curricula. Yore (2003) points out that the curricular reforms of the 1990s, which 
took place in Australia, Canada, New Zealand, the United Kingdom, and the 
United States, promoted a standard definition of SL as:  
the abilities and habits-of-mind required to construct understandings of 
science, to apply these big ideas to realistic problems and issues involving 
science, technology, society and the environment, and to inform and persuade 
other people to take action based on these science ideas. (Yore, 2003, p. 690) 
This definition must be viewed as a sort of general directive for science teaching, 
since there is no consensus in the research community regarding the definition of 
SL (Roberts, 2007, p. 729). DeBoer (2000) states that SL is a broad concept that 
has had, and continues to have, a variety of meanings. Even so, he stresses that we 
can conclude that SL “has usually implied a broad and functional understanding of 
science for general education purposes and not preparation for specific scientific 
and technical careers” (p. 594).  
 
Roberts (2007) contends that the diversity of meanings found for the concept of 
SL in the literature can be better comprehended if we consider the possibility of a 
political and intellectual tension inherent to scientific teaching. He refers to two 
legitimate, and potentially conflicting, curricular sources: “science subject matter 
itself and situations in which science can legitimately be seen to play a role in other 
human affairs” (Roberts, 2007, p. 729). For this author, there is a polarizing 

GURGEL ET AL. 
208 
tendency in the SL literature between those who advocate for each of these two 
curricular schools of thought.  
 
To represent this polarization, Roberts (2007) proposes two visions about SL. 
Vision I represents the more “internalist” view of science. It is concerned above all 
with the processes and products of science, and with designating ways of thought 
legitimized by science, such as the ability to interpret charts and use mathematical 
formulas to express concepts. In this vision, the objective of teaching science 
would be to enable the student to articulate these inherent characteristics of science 
and express him/herself in a scientific manner. Therefore, investigating different 
forms of scientific communication becomes fundamental in this context. In other 
words, in this view, thinking about the different languages involved in the 
construction, articulation, and communication of science is indispensable. Vision 
II, “externalist”, is mainly interested in the possible role of science in the solution 
of everyday issues, and in developing social consciousness around the subjects 
involved in the process of science learning. According to the author, this more 
focused perspective on science and society is becoming more prominent in the 
literature.  
 
Stephen Norris and Linda Philips (2003) swim against the tide, however, in 
leaning closer to vision I. In order to defend this stance, they base their argument 
on a distinction they make between a fundamental sense of SL – “reading and 
writing when the content is science” – and a derived sense of SL – “being 
knowledgeable, learned, and educated in science” (p. 224). They argue that the 
fundamental sense is central to SL, since it is a necessary condition for the 
development of other skills, including those related to situations which are not 
strictly scientific. In other words, in order for the student to express scientific 
thinking in the critical manner necessary for any discussion of social matters, it is 
necessary for him/her to first develop the fundamental sense. This shows that 
discussing the different forms of language and thought necessary to the 
development of scientific knowledge can be considered an important step in the 
quest for SL.  
 
Many researchers have dedicated themselves to investigating different schools 
of thought among scientists. Investigations of possible causal relations in scientific 
explanations (Locattelli, 2006; Viennot, 2003), the role of formal and material 
analogies in the development of scientific models (Silva, 2007; Hesse, 1970), and 
the structural nature of mathematical language in physical thinking (Karam, 2012; 
Pietrocola, 2002) are examples of studies which attempt to comprehend certain 
defining aspects of the thoughts and languages of science. However, these studies 
focus, above all, on formal aspects related to scientific knowledge. Despite 
agreeing that these formal aspects are fundamental to the construction and 
structuring of science, we believe we can legitimately raise the following question: 
Can thoughts/languages which are not strictly formal exercise an important role in 
the construction and communication of science? We hold that the answer to this 
question is affirmative; and that a possible way of moving forward in this matter is 
to investigate the role of narratives in science and in its teaching.  

THE ROLE OF NARRATIVE THINKING IN LEARNING SCIENTIFIC CONCEPTS 
209 
 
We have shown in previous studies (Gurgel, 2010; Gurgel & Pietrocola, 2016) 
based on the analysis of original writings by Galileo, Oersted, and Ampère, that 
scientists create – at least in the contexts studied – texts with narrative traits. These 
narratives emerge, above all, in moments of scientific novelty. They emerge in the 
“gestation” of new ideas, an intermediary moment between the conception and the 
birth of a concept. It thus must be considered that the construction and constitution 
of an idea do not occur in a fully defined moment. In other words, a new idea is not 
merely the fruit of a one-time insight, although the latter could be important. A 
new concept is brought to existence by the construction of situations which 
introduce it as the narrative’s core element. In other words, the characters of such 
narratives are the scientific entities themselves and the plot development is focused 
on establishing these characters, giving them specific meanings. In another study 
(Cardoso, 2015), the subject was existing narratives about the gestation of Albert 
Einstein’s theory of general relativity. This study indicated that narratives and 
mathematical language are presented in a complementary way, especially in 
regards to one of Einstein’s thought experiments, referred to in the literature as the 
rotating disc experiment.  
 
The interest in narratives in science teaching has been increasing in recent years. 
In particular, “there is widespread use of narrative in scientific communication as a 
way to make science more relevant for the general audience” (Espinet et al., 2012, 
p. 1399). One of the works that spearheaded this theme was created by a group 
coordinated by Jon Ogborn (1996). These researchers showed that scientific 
explanations in the classroom can be considered narratives or stories. Other 
research, with varied objectives and theoretical foundations, has also shown 
interest in narratives in science education (Ribeiro & Martins, 2007; Klassen et al., 
2007; Avraamidou & Osborne, 2009). 
 
The goal of this chapter is to present an educational situation in which the 
students construct their own scientific narratives, in text form, from 
problematizations formulated by the activity’s proponents. The details, including 
the context of application and the analysis of the narratives produced by the 
students, will be presented later on. First, we will introduce a few ideas that made 
up the foundation for this activity, in regards to the role of narratives in science 
education. There will be a particular emphasis on the ideas proposed by the US 
psychologist Jerome Bruner.  
NARRATIVE AS A WAY OF THINKING 
Jerome Bruner was born in 1915 in New York City. At 22, he graduated from 
Duke University (North Carolina) with a degree in psychology. A few years later, 
in 1941, he received his doctorate from Harvard University. During World War II, 
Bruner worked as a social psychologist in surveys about public opinion, 
advertising, and social behavior (Gardner, 2006, p. 90). After this period, in 1945, 
he became a teacher at Harvard, where he and George Miller founded the Center 
for Cognitive Studies (Leme, 2009). He remained at Harvard until 1970, when he 

GURGEL ET AL. 
210 
accepted an invitation to work at Oxford University. He returned to Harvard in 
1980. In 1991, he became a teacher at the New York University School of Law. 
 
Bruner is considered one of the precursors of the field and continues to be one 
of the most important authors of cognitive psychology. The themes developed by 
this psychologist express, in a general sense, his quest to comprehend the mental 
activity of human beings. Studying the “mind” was not an obvious choice in the 
1950s, since psychology had taken a fairly positivist path up to that point. It was 
believed that psychology should circumscribe its object of study to that which 
could be observed directly, and steer away from any issues involving subjectivity. 
Since psychology sought objectivity, the study of the mind was considered taboo, a 
stance which the cognitive revolution attempted to overcome. Therefore, “the first 
revolutionary movement of Cognitive Psychology screamed against this 
‘objectivity’ and deviation from its true object of study, clamoring for a focus on 
the symbolic activities of human beings” (Correia, 2003, p. 507).  
 
Despite participating in the cognitive revolution, Bruner started criticizing 
certain research paths taken by cognitive psychology, namely developmental 
psychology (Correia, 2003). One of his central criticisms focuses on its 
abandonment of important elements, such as the influence of culture and affection 
in psychological behavior (Leme, 2009, p. 14).  
 
Bruner played an active role in the field of education, and particularly in science 
education. In 1959, for example, by invitation from the National Academy of 
Sciences, he presided at a meeting between researchers and educators that sought 
to formulate the basis for a new science curriculum. Among Bruner’s important 
contributions to education, his idea of a spiral curriculum stands out. Certain 
fundaments from this curriculum can be considered quite controversial, especially 
the contention that it is possible to teach any content to a child in an intellectually 
honest manner. In other words, it is not the nature of the content that hinders its 
learning, but the level of depth. Therefore, the idea of a spiral curriculum is that a 
particular content should be addressed and revisited several times in the education 
process, with increased depth at each turn. According to Leme (2009, p. 16), the 
subjacent thesis to the idea of spiral curriculum is that “intellectual activity, either 
of the scientist or the child in education, involves the same processes, the quest to 
comprehend. The difference is in the depth, not the nature of the subject”.  
 
While in England in the 1970s, Bruner became increasingly interested in studies 
about child development, especially in regards to language. According to Leme 
(2009), Bruner had intensely studied Vygotsky’s work at this point in his 
intellectual trajectory. He was even one of the major publishers of that 
Belorussian’s work in the United States, having been invited to write the preface to 
Vygotsky’s book Thought and Language, by the latter’s colleague, Luria, who 
became a close friend (Leme, 2009, p.14). Upon returning to the US, Bruner 
showed great interest in social and cultural matters,  
[…] rejecting the excessive computationalism of the cognitive perspective 
that he helped to found, he has directed attention to human narrative and 
interpretative capacities […] he has helped to launch yet a third revolution in 

THE ROLE OF NARRATIVE THINKING IN LEARNING SCIENTIFIC CONCEPTS 
211 
psychology – one centered around the practice of cultural psychology. 
(Gardner, 2001, p. 91)  
The role performed by narratives in human thought became one of the Bruner’s 
main research interests, particularly from the 1980s on, when the author decided to 
organize and publish a collection of writings. This initiative resulted in the work 
Actual Minds, Possible Worlds, published in 1986. One of the writings included in 
this book is a major interest for this study: the chapter “Two Modes of Thought”, 
which, according to the author, was put together at the request of the American 
Psychological Association (Bruner, 1986, p. ix). The core idea of this text is 
Bruner’s proposition that there are two basic modes of thought, which he referred 
to as logical-scientific thinking – also called paradigmatic – and narrative thinking. 
To him, these are two modes of cognitive function, which provide different ways 
of organizing experience and constructing reality (Bruner, 1986, p. 11). In addition, 
he stresses that these modes of thought can be complementary, but are irreducible 
to each other. 
 
One of the main distinctions Bruner makes between logical-scientific thought 
and narrative thought is their relation to the truth. While the former seeks universal 
truths by means of formal and empirical evidence, the latter pretends to have 
verisimilitude. With that, the American psychologist argues that many scientific 
hypotheses start out as short stories or metaphors, which achieve scientific maturity 
through a process of conversion by verification, whether formal or empirical 
(Bruner, 1986, p. 12). Years following his first publication about narratives, Bruner 
seemed convinced that this mode of thought could be, in fact, an important asset to 
science. This comprehension is owed, in part, to overcoming the view of science 
outlined by Karl Popper presented by Bruner in the first work cited. In The Culture 
of Education, the author makes his defense:  
[…] you can falsify an awful lot of hypotheses, historians of science make 
clear, without bringing down the theory from which they have been derived. 
Which has suggested to many in recent years that grand theories in science 
are perhaps more story-like than we had expected. (Bruner, 1996, p. 122) 
Bruner argues that “[…] we characteristically convert our efforts at scientific 
understanding into the form of narratives or, say, ‘narrative heuristics’” (1996, p. 
125). With the term “narrative heuristics”, the American psychologist highlights – 
according to our reading – an essential characteristic of narratives: their ability to 
handle problematic situations. He claims that narrative provides a way to promote 
solutions to problems, but it is mainly a means to find them (Bruner, 2014, p.30). 
This process brings into question the knowledge we think of as “correct”. In other 
words, narrative challenges our perception of the canon, in a sort of dialogue 
between what was expected and what actually occurred (Bruner, 2014/2002, pp. 
24–25). According to Bruner: “Stories pivot on breached norms. That much is 
already clear. That places ‘trouble’ at the hub of narrative realities. Stories worth 
telling and worth construing are typically born in trouble” (1996, p. 136). 

GURGEL ET AL. 
212 
 
An important characteristic of the narrative is how it presents a consigned 
structure of time; in other words, the passage of time in a narrative is not defined 
by a clock, but by the course of crucial events – at least in beginning, middle, and 
end. Bruner states that “what underlies our grasp of narrative is a ‘mental model’ of 
its aspectual durativity – time that is bounded not simply by clocks but by the 
humanly relevant actions that occur within its limits” (Bruner, 1996, p. 133). 
Narratives deal with details. Stories are interpreted as if they fall into genres, and 
these interpretations are influenced by cultural and historical contexts. But what are 
genres? To the author, “on the one hand, a genre ‘exists’ in a text – in its plot and 
its way of telling. On the other, it ‘exists’ as a way of making sense of a text – as 
some sort of ‘representation’ of the world” (Bruner, 1996, p. 135). Comedy, 
tragedy, romance, irony, and autobiography are examples of genres. Bruner goes 
on to state that genres “are culturally specialized ways of both envisaging and 
communicating about the human condition” (1996, p. 136).  
 
Narrative is a method – according to Bruner one of the main ones – that we use 
to interpret reality. The very etymology of the word “narrate” indicates that 
narrative can go beyond telling something already known. This word derives from 
both narrare, which is most strictly defined as telling something, and gnarus, 
which means “to know in a particular way”. In other words, the construction of 
narratives can be understood as a particular way of knowing reality. It is worth 
noting that this process inherently regards a constructed reality rather than having, 
as a naive empiricist would dream of, a direct line to the prime reality. Our access 
to the world occurs via mediations, through symbolic constructions. To Bruner, 
narrative is one such means of access. He defends the narrative as a form of 
organizing the outside world. 
 
Bruner considers narrative as the universal currency between our self and the 
social world (Correia, 2003, p. 509), and between the individual and the cultural 
(Gurgel, 2010). Therefore, “exploring the nature of narrative, as long as we are 
sensitive to the context it was revealed in, is to explore a mode of thought” 
(Correia, 2003, p. 509). This mode of thought, which represents both the individual 
and the cultural, allows the new to emerge by reconstructing what was established 
in a dialectic process between imagination and memory.  
 
Therefore, we can define the elaboration of narratives as a creation process 
based on imagination, which nonetheless entails an awareness of reality and 
established cultural forms (Gurgel, 2010). That being said, we consider the 
narrative to be of great interest to science education, particularly because it allows 
the student to have an active role in the composition of knowledge, since the 
student him/herself can create a narrative that may be considered an original, 
intellectual construction without losing sight of science as the basis for this 
construction. This would fit Bruner’s assessment that schools should treat 
knowledge as a construction to fulfill the potentialities wrought by culture (Leme, 
2009, p. 17). In addition, schools should give students the tools to intervene in this 
culture in a dynamic process, since, to Bruner, education  
 

THE ROLE OF NARRATIVE THINKING IN LEARNING SCIENTIFIC CONCEPTS 
213 
is not simply a technical business of well-managed information processing, 
not even simply a matter of applying “learning theories” to the classroom or 
using the results of subject-centered “achievement testing”. It is a complex 
pursuit of fitting a culture to the needs of its members, and its members and 
their ways of knowing to the needs of the culture. (Bruner, 1996, p. 43). 
Although the importance of narratives to science education can be acknowledged, 
it is no easy task to realize their role in scientific knowledge or even how they may 
offer a means of comprehension for certain school subjects such as physics. This is 
the result of the strong positivist point of view that continues to permeate science 
education. In a general sense, education is reduced to the mastery of formal aspects 
of knowledge, such as the ability to operate within the laws described by 
mathematical formulations. Therefore, we will attempt to contribute to this debate 
by introducing a proposal for didactic activity in which education is treated as a 
cultural manifestation (Gurgel & Watanabe, 2012). In it, comprehension of the 
concept of electric charge is constructed via narratives elaborated by the students 
themselves. 
NARRATIVES IN A PHYSICS CLASS 
The teaching scenario described in this section occurred in the year 2009, in a 
school located in São Paulo, Brazil which developed a curriculum that stood out 
quite a bit from the usual standards. Aside from counting on teachers with good 
academic training, the political-pedagogical plan included interdisciplinary 
activities, in which a scientific subject, such as physics, interacted with literature, 
the arts, and history. In the context of natural science topics, discussions were 
sought on the nature of sciences with emphases on science, technology, and 
society. This provided a suitable environment for the development of humanist 
activities.  
 
The activity occurred in a first-year high school classroom comprised of 25 
students, all within the expected age range for this level of schooling (14–15 years 
old). For the most part, the students were cooperative and enjoyed the physics 
course as offered by the teacher. 
 
At this point in their educations, these students had already begun studying 
electricity, having been introduced to the voltaic pile as an energy source. They had 
been presented with an atomic model based on the exchange of ions, and had then 
directly explored notions of electrodynamics, such as current, resistance, and 
voltage, formalizing Ohm’s law. This was followed by discussions about the 
potency consumed by electrical devices and the voltage produced by the current in 
that process. To provide explanatory context, students had explored the electricity 
present in our homes, discussing the energy consumed and the systems used for the 
distribution of electricity. 
 
Our learning scenario was presented in this context, without showing the 
students the concept of electric charge and its implications. However, in talking 
with the teacher, we had decided that it would be important to introduce the class 

GURGEL ET AL. 
214 
to the concept of charged particles, such as protons and electrons, in order to better 
prepare them for the activity. This led to a classroom reading of a text entitled 
“Interview with the Electron”.1 This reading explicitly introduces the electron as a 
physical concept, but, in its “interview”, only a few characteristics are discussed. 
The text discusses the electron as an elementary particle and raises the notion of 
electric attraction. The text narrates experiences such as the charging of a plastic 
straw with electricity as possible ways for students to verify the effect for 
themselves. After this presentation, the electron, as the text’s main character, 
affirms that it can be a source for the explanation of many phenomena, such as 
changes in physical state, the rigidity of a given material, and the reflection of 
light. However, it does not actually explain these effects. 
 
In a class that took place on November 12, 2009, the students read the 
aforementioned text and answered the following question: 
Based on the previous text and your knowledge, list the phenomena we can 
verify in our everyday life based on the electron’s properties. List at least 
eight examples. 
 
The purpose of this question was to make the students extrapolate from that 
which had been presented in the text itself. This could have been based on their 
knowledge of previous classes or even hypotheses of their own conception. Their 
answers included elements such as: heating water; computer manufacturing; a 
shower’s inner workings; electric conductivity; the heating of a spoon in contact 
with a source of heat; the light entering our homes; the melting of chocolate; the 
construction of a wall; leaning and stepping on something consistently while 
walking; a magnet’s attraction to metal; the mechanics of electronic devices; the 
shock we feel on cold days, and more. 
 
We can see from these responses that the students did not limit themselves to 
what was written in the text. This is positive data, because it will be reflected in 
their respective textual constructions. Some effects were tied to thermodynamics 
and electrodynamics, topics they had studied throughout the year. The influence 
from these latter foci resulted in the superimposing of effects more directly linked 
to the electron’s properties with atomic and molecular properties that involve, for 
example, phase changes. We chose to accept these answers because we considered 
it valid to look at the electron within this context. 
 
This activity was finished in the same class and was followed up by assigning 
students a narrative production as homework. The task was presented as follows: 
Imagine that you wake up one day and the electrons of the objects around 
you ‘are on strike’, in other words, they are not producing their usual effects 
on the phenomena in your handouts. Describe what this day would be like 
(try to imagine the most unusual effects from this, but keep in mind that the 
atoms of your body and those of your classmates’ bodies are behaving 
normally and this only affects the objects around you). Write at least one 
page about it. 

THE ROLE OF NARRATIVE THINKING IN LEARNING SCIENTIFIC CONCEPTS 
215 
 
Our goal was to make the class reflect on what an electron is and how electrons 
are tied to diverse effects around us. However, we wanted this to be done in such a 
way that the students would extrapolate from the most immediate perceptions of 
everyday life. Our strategy was to make them consider the repercussions of the 
nonexistence of these electrons. We surmised that the best way to think about the 
presence of electrons in the world around us might well be to consider the exact 
opposite – their absence. 
 
Next, we will show and analyze the texts written by the students. Since there 
were 25 texts in total, we opted to discuss only a sample. Even so, there is no major 
loss in scope, since many narratives wound up being similar and the data began to 
overlap. We concluded that an exhaustive analysis that included all input would 
provide little benefit to our study. Instead, texts were selected in an attempt to 
consider the maximum variety of textual profiles.  
Student 1 
I woke up for what promised to be a normal day, but it turned out to be, in 
fact, the weirdest day of my life. 
First off, I was late, because the alarm clock didn’t work. That was odd, 
because I changed the batteries last night. After that, I found out none of the 
lights were working, or any other electronic devices, including the ones that 
used batteries. 
I ate breakfast and asked mom to take me to school. We got in the car, but the 
battery wasn’t working. 
I walked to school and, to my surprise, none of the cars were working. The 
gasoline simply wasn’t reacting to the oxygen, there was no combustion! 
Once I got to school, without electricity, the first class was chemistry. The 
teacher explained acidic reactions and the basis for creating salts, then we 
went to do experiments in the lab. To our surprise, the reactions just weren’t 
happening, freaking the teacher out. 
The next class was physics, also in the lab. After an explanation about 
electromagnetic forces, we did a few experiments with magnets, but not a 
single magnet was ‘working’. We also tried to electrify a balloon by friction, 
but our efforts were in vain. This was the last straw for the teachers who 
declared the end of the school day until they could investigate these events. 
‘God is punishing us!’ said the religion studies teacher, while the others tried 
to calm her down. 
As the day went by, the events became even more bizarre. Materials lost their 
‘hardness’, it was possible to shatter an iron bar like it was made of 
Styrofoam, things started to lose their ability to refract light. 
Then I thought, ‘That’s it! The electrons are losing their function! That’s why 
the electricity, the magnets, and chemical reactions aren’t working!’ 
But it was too late, the electrons in my body stopped working. I immediately 
died. 
Now I write this from heaven, the teacher was right: God was punishing us! 

GURGEL ET AL. 
216 
 
This text is very well written. It has continuity, which can be seen by the ending 
which reveals why the classroom experiments were not working. The author 
revisits a previous “enigmatic” event and reveals its cause. Not only that, the entire 
text reflects on electrical events, giving it a strong sense of unity. However, the text 
is not repetitive, because the events add up to a real development in the story. This 
shows the progression of the narrative. 
 
Aside from these elements, the text has no contradictions. Although we may 
assume that all the events mentioned could occur simultaneously – as, from a 
physical point of view, they should– the author addresses them be revealing each 
aspect bit by bit. This also shows the articulation of the text. For example, noticing 
that the car’s battery was not working was followed by the realization that the 
engine was not producing any combustion, either. These are distinct nuggets of 
information which are soon linked. In the same way, the phenomena that did not 
occur in the physics and chemistry classes demonstrate the build-up to a 
connection that is not merely elementary. 
 
As for external elements, we see that the author intends to do more than merely 
inform the reader about the physical traits of the entity involved. He meets the 
requirement of envisioning what would have actually occurred differently in his 
imagined scenario. This is highlighted by the ways in which all of the agents of the 
plot react to the events. The teachers themselves are alarmed. This also gives the 
text a good level of legitimacy and fulfills its pre-established didactical role. 
 
All the events brought up are coherent with what could occur in a school day 
and they all involve phenomena relevant to the core subject: electricity. Aside from 
that, the writing contains a lot of non-trivial information. Since this is a requested 
narrative in the context of a course about electricity in the subject of physics, the 
connections the student makes to chemistry concepts (when mentioning the car 
battery, the fuel reactions, and the formation of salts) greatly exceed what was 
expected in terms of information. The student does not limit himself to a repetition 
of the text about the electron, even when it is referred to via the iron’s loss of 
hardness and the absence of light refraction. This also demonstrates the richness of 
intertextual elements in the work. 
 
In regards to narrative aspects, we initially have a plot rich in facts. This is an 
assessment related to the informational elements of the writing. However, we can 
see the text’s introduction foreshadows what is to come. This can be seen when the 
student tells us how it was a strange day, the weirdest in his life. In this way, the 
story announces its complicating factor, regarding how the facts of the narrative 
will be developed. This is continued with the story revealing all of the day’s 
strange occurrences. At first, we only learn that objects are not working. However, 
the story gains weight when scientific phenomena do not work as they should in 
the student’s classes. This leads up to the climax, in which the teachers themselves 
become desperate. Only near the end is the cause behind all the events revealed: 
The electrons are on strike. This revelation alone could make up a resolution in 
regards to the semantic unit of the text. However, there is another complication: 
The student’s own electrons “join” the strike. This leads to a tragicomic ending, the 
student’s death. We can see that all steps of a narrative’s plot have been achieved. 

THE ROLE OF NARRATIVE THINKING IN LEARNING SCIENTIFIC CONCEPTS 
217 
 
The student is an important character because he himself is the narrator. 
However, if we ask who carries out the key actions in the story, or who is 
responsible for every occurrence, we see it is clearly the electrons. Therefore, 
according to the very definition of a character – as an agent responsible for events 
– we could consider the electrons as protagonists. Finally, the setting where all the 
action occurs is part of the student’s everyday life – his home, his school, etc. This 
element shows that he can look in ‘uncommon’ ways at things which are 
‘common’ to his life, showing them in a new light. 
 
To summarize, we can conclude that this is a well-written text developed in a 
narrative form. The text is coherent and cohesive, with its semantic unit established 
around the physical meaning of the concept of electrons. This is one of the most 
important elements of verification for our study. Aside from that, we can see that 
from a narrative point of view, the electron itself is the central character, which 
allows us to define this text as scientific. 
Student 2 
If this happened, maybe I would not be shocked today, because my body 
would not be electrified. 
All objects (or at least most of them) would be reduced to dust, because this 
is one of the electron’s functions, to ‘hold’ materials together. 
If this was a cold day, and I removed my wool sweater, there would be no 
snapping sounds, because the electrons are ‘on strike’. I could even suffer an 
accident. 
At school, the teacher could use me as an ‘experimental object´ for the first 
year of high school. Several materials could stick to my body. 
The TV screen at home would not show any images and I could not groom 
myself in front of the mirror, because I would not see my reflection. 
If I went to the cantina to drink cold juice, ice would not melt in the glass or 
spaghetti would turn into soup when cooked. 
If I went camping with my friends and needed to light a fire like a caveman, I 
would not be able to produce friction between the objects needed. 
I arrived at the conclusion that a day without electrons is tough, because they 
are responsible for a good part of our everyday activities. 
I hope this strike ends soon, otherwise I won’t be able to do my physics 
homework on the PC; there would be no image on the screen. 
Turning the lights on would be impossible, too, so how am I gonna do my 
homework in the dark?! 
On the other hand, it could be fun, I could walk through the wall; my house 
would not need doors and windows. 
 
This text has little continuity. Each paragraph portrays an event with no 
connection to the previous one. We can recognize a running theme since it always 
refers to electric phenomena, but the text is fragmented. However, there is 
progression, since even with the breaks there is little repetition. Only the first and 

GURGEL ET AL. 
218 
second paragraphs show repetition. In the first one, the student refers to the body 
being charged and then to the charge of the sweater. It is worth noting that what 
could be a point of continuity in the text is presented in a desultory way. There is 
no contradiction, mainly because the links between the story’s events are very 
faint. This also means the text has little articulation. 
 
The author has the intention of showing the different nature of this day and does 
so in an acceptable way. Although there is little immersion, the writing is not 
limited to exposition alone. This allows it to conform to the proposed didactic 
situation. Despite the lack of articulation, there are informative aspects. At first, it 
introduces elements from “Interview with the Electron”, but the following 
moments transcend what was shown in class. This occurs when she writes that the 
teacher could stick objects to her during a classroom experiment and when she 
claims she would not need doors and windows in her home. This makes it difficult 
to evaluate the intertextuality, because this is information we do not encounter in 
other classes of this course. 
 
From a narrative point of view, we could say she has a fact-filled plot, but there 
is no build-up. The text has no introduction, skipping straight to development. But, 
since the information is disjointed, there is no developing conflict. There is closure, 
because after going over several life-complicating factors, the student concludes 
positively by stating that, on the other hand, she would not need doors and 
windows. However, given its lack of cohesion, the text cannot be said to have 
much of a plot. 
 
Again, the narrator is the character who experiences the facts, but we can affirm 
that the main character is actually the electron – the agent behind it all. The setting 
is the student’s everyday life, meaning that this student also retreads the 
environment in which she lives in a new way. 
 
Generally speaking, even though it is textually weak, the semantic unit is 
maintained; the discussion about electric phenomena persists. The element that 
supports this unit, albeit weakly, is the use of electron as the narrative’s main 
character. However, its deficiency in articulation demonstrates a dearth of 
reflection as to how the character is linked to the chain of events at the source. 
Student 3 
23:31 
It was almost midnight and I was studying math, darn math that wouldn’t 
enter my brain, when I gave up! 
23:39 
I quit, because it wasn’t making any difference. I was coming down the steps 
to drink some water, when I noticed something weird… It was like 
everything was vanishing, disintegrating. I thought I was just getting sleepy. 
23:58 
That wasn’t right. 
It wasn’t the drowsiness that was consuming me. 
24:00 

THE ROLE OF NARRATIVE THINKING IN LEARNING SCIENTIFIC CONCEPTS 
219 
Darkness. 
My clothes, sheets, bed. Nothing was there anymore, just my necklace, so 
sentimental, I consider it part of my body. 
24:07 
50 meters from me. 
I recognized her by the pale skin of her naked body. It was my neighbor, who 
was more freaked out than me. 
01:30 
Over 200 people, all naked, together, nowhere, with nothing. 
 
This is a continuous text in which the events are linked together. This happens 
from the very beginning as the student shows her struggle to study, which persists 
as everything starts to change. Aside from that, the possibility of drowsiness 
mentioned previously is reconsidered to reveal that drowsiness was not the cause 
behind the events. There is little progression because, even without repetition, few 
facts are presented. However, the text does not contradict itself and that, more 
importantly, makes it well articulated. 
 
The intention is to show how the day, or night in this case, is different. This is 
very well conveyed by the text’s dramatic impact. Therefore, this text is not merely 
informative. That makes it acceptable, since it conforms to the situation proposed 
in the activity. 
 
The text is not very informative because it contains few facts, which also gives 
it little intertextuality. However, there are certain informative aspects, since, in 
showing in depth how all things come undone, the author transcends the expected 
mode of seeing the central fact. 
 
The text is, however, extremely interesting from a narrative point of view. It 
starts with an introductory scene. The drama is well developed, with a weirdness 
that becomes increasingly complicated until, at midnight, it reaches its climax in 
which everything falls apart. This narrative’s closure does not bring resolution, but 
it fulfills its role in a poetic fashion, when the student places everyone “nowhere, 
with nothing”. While this is centered on fact, the plot development makes it very 
significant. 
 
As a character, the electron remains hidden, yet the plot is centered on it, 
making it the protagonist nonetheless. In this case, the setting is more limited, since 
everything happens in the environs of the narrator’s house. But even in this limited 
setting, this is still a form of reviewing a ‘common’, mundane reality in terms of 
the changes brought by the electrons’ strike. 
 
Although it is a short text, it is very coherent and is developed with great 
creativity. Despite this, and its dramatic appeal, it does not lose its scientific aspect, 
since everything in the narrative was the result of electrons going on strike. 
Student 4 
A day in which objects’ electrons go on strike would be funny if it didn’t 
bring up a problem. 

GURGEL ET AL. 
220 
Upon waking up and trying to turn my room’s lights on, my finger would 
stick to the light switch because my body’s electrons would attract the 
switch’s protons. Although that would be annoying, I could still escape that 
but then I would be fighting the sheets stubbornly clinging to my body. 
From then on, everything would be a nightmare. My walk to the bathroom 
would become a game of tag in which I’m ‘it’ and the catchers are the objects 
along the way. 
And the whole day would go on with everybody attracting things as if there 
was some gravitational force inside them all. 
But something good would come from this, nobody would be shocked in 
what would be a really complicated day. Everybody on the streets would 
attract objects or be attracted by them. 
Aside from that, there would be no electricity as long as the electrons 
remained ‘on strike’. 
If this day happened for real, we would get ourselves in all sorts of trouble 
and it would be really lucky if nothing more serious happened. 
Even walking would be a struggle because there would be no attrition, 
meaning that all we could do was wait until the strike was over. 
 
This text retreads the problem of physical attraction several times. Even when 
there is a break from the subject, once the student mentions shock, he immediately 
goes back to the attraction issue. Therefore, there is good continuity in the text. 
Even though he is very focused on attraction between the objects, there is 
progression because the situations vary, that is, the context in which they are 
featured changes. There are no contradictory elements. Even if the issue of attrition 
by the end of the text is a little vague, it does not go against elements shown in the 
text itself. Therefore, there is good articulation in its development. 
 
The author’s intention, as expected, is to show how the loss of electrons 
complicates everything and how such a day would be different. Therefore, this text 
is acceptable in regards to our pre-established objectives and in accordance with 
the assignment proposed. 
 
The text contains little information in regard to the theme. However, it focuses 
on an unusual situation, the attraction of the body’s electrons to all the protons in 
the world, since only the electrons in objects went on strike. This ends up 
compensating for the lack of thematic variation. Since the text has little variation in 
information, it also has little intertextuality. 
 
From a narrative standpoint, the text constructs an introduction by informing the 
reader about the “funny” day to follow. Its development elaborates on the 
strangeness of the day. Although the situation is aggravated in the first half of the 
text, there is no climax in the narrative. This results in a somewhat deficient 
ending, in which the student states they can only wait until the ‘strike’ ends. 
 
However, the pattern of characters is not the same as that found in previous 
writings. Here, the proton is explicitly brought into play, which is an interesting 
approach, rendering the protons’ attraction to the electrons which continue to 
operate in the bodies of people the focus of the narration. Therefore, we have two 

THE ROLE OF NARRATIVE THINKING IN LEARNING SCIENTIFIC CONCEPTS 
221 
conceptual protagonists in the plot. The narrator character is the student himself. 
And the setting is the student’s everyday life. 
 
The text uses a semantic unit in regards to the concept of electric charge. The 
student manages to include it in interesting situations and goes in an unusual 
direction when addressing the protons’ behavior toward the electrons of her body. 
This limits the events of the story a bit, but also makes it more cohesive, and the 
vision it wants to convey becomes increasingly clear over the course of the 
narrative. It is interesting to note that, with the introduction of two main characters, 
the process of significance emerges from the mutual relationship between these 
two. This reinforces the idea that the characters have a large role in the 
construction of the text’s semantic unit. 
Student 5 
One day, I woke up like I would on any other day. But, to my surprise, this 
wasn’t going to be such a normal day. For starters, I was up late, because my 
digital alarm didn’t ring. After that, I found out we had no electricity at home. 
I thought the lack of power was only happening at home, because I couldn’t 
turn the TV or the PC on. 
On my way to school, I couldn’t take the car, because it wasn’t working 
either, just like all the other transportation methods available. 
When I got to school, many classmates were chatting about the weird 
phenomena going on. Since many students and teachers were also confused, 
the physics teacher, who had figured out the cause of this phenomena, 
decided to give an explanatory lecture. 
In this lecture, she explained that the electrons were on ‘strike’. To do that, 
she needed to explain that an electron is a scientific concept known mainly 
for the electrical phenomena it produces. These electrical phenomena are, in 
turn, caused by a property, that of electric charge. She explained that many 
phenomena are caused by electrons, such as the energy we use at home, the 
attraction of certain materials by others, the image that appears on the TV 
screen and the computer, and even the shocks we feel in winter. 
After leaving the school, many students, with their doubts clarified, went 
home and began observing the phenomena that ‘were missing’, in other 
words, phenomena caused by electrons. At home, we couldn’t eat anything 
warm and a lot of food went bad because there was no power to the fridge. 
Something I found very interesting was that there was no change in the 
physical state of the materials. Ice wouldn’t melt, it didn’t turn liquid. 
Something else that caught my eye was that all objects weren’t solid, I could 
get my hand through them! I thought that was the most amazing thing about 
that day. 
At night, to close the day with even more weirdness, there was a storm, with 
its trademark rain and thundering sounds, but there was no lightning, since 
this is also caused by thousands of electrons. Therefore, I concluded that 

GURGEL ET AL. 
222 
electrons make up the vast majority of things and life without them is 
impossible, and really, really weird. 
 
The text has continuity. The element that most embodies this is when the teacher 
explains what’s happening that day. Previously-described strange phenomena were 
thus revisited, having gained an explanation. There is good progression, with the 
addition of new events as the text goes on. However, there is an element of 
contradiction. Near the ending, the student claims that ice doesn’t melt. After that, 
he states that objects are not solid. Although the student intends at one point to 
refer to the electron’s role in chemical reactions and physical state changes, he later 
states that these connections are undone, creating a contradiction, at least in 
phrasing. In the end, this makes the text somewhat disjointed. 
 
His intention is to show how different such a day would be and thus the text is 
acceptable vis-à-vis what we intended for the project; it complies with the school 
assignment for the same reason. Although there are many facts, the text is not very 
informative, which can see through its intertextual elements. The entire section 
dedicated to the teacher’s explanation is based on the text read in class. There 
aren’t many new elements brought to the table. The only divergence from what 
was discussed in class is the claim that he could move his hand through objects. It 
is noteworthy that the author himself mentions this as the most interesting part of 
the day. This shows that this perception was quite new to him. 
 
From a narrative standpoint, the text has good initial exposition, in which the 
student himself ‘reveals’ the different facts. The story is developed in a progressive 
manner. After realizing the problem is not limited to his home, but also extends to 
transportation, the student’s arrival at school escalates the narrative gravity: 
Everybody inside is desperate, including the teachers. However, the teacher’s long 
exposition and the text’s simple closure remove the climactic focus from the 
previous situation. 
 
Once again, the electron is the main character and the student is the narrator. 
The setting varies between the student’s home and the school. The environment is 
the student’s everyday life, and the entire written work consists of things that exist 
around him. 
FINAL CONSIDERATIONS 
We started this study with the following question: Can thoughts/languages which 
are not strictly formal exercise an important role in the construction and 
communication of science? 
 
The natural sciences seek, whenever possible, to comprehend the most intimate 
structures of reality. This is a complex challenge, given the difficulties in thinking 
of ways to produce representations of a world inaccessible to the senses. It involves 
a process of symbolic creation that demands the most of our cognitive and cultural 
faculties.  
 
However, “learning to speak science” is often reduced to an attempt to compile 
uses of formal propositions. In other words, labored concepts are used to enunciate 

THE ROLE OF NARRATIVE THINKING IN LEARNING SCIENTIFIC CONCEPTS 
223 
empty realities. Therefore, we contend that the relationships between thought, 
reality, and language should be taken into account when proposing educational 
activities. 
 
According to Jerome Bruner’s reflections, a narrative is more than a way of 
communicating something to a person. It is also configured as an attempt to make 
reality intelligible, turning it into a means of passing on knowledge. Therefore, we 
can surmise that narrative thought can perform an important role in the 
development and learning of scientific knowledge.  
 
Science, especially physics, creates many entities which become the basis for 
explanations. As part of this project, the authors were able to verify that narratives 
are means of characterizing these entities and turning them into constructs capable 
of producing understanding about the world. Characters are not just created for a 
story, they are created in a story. It is during the course of events that the 
characters’ traits are revealed. 
 
The narratives shown above have diverse characteristics, as indicated by our 
analyses. However, what makes them interesting as didactical resources is the fact 
that a physical entity, in this case the electron, is the protagonist that structures the 
narrative. This means that the concept is not merely “applied to everyday 
situations”, but that the dynamic of story building gives the concept a key role for 
understanding the natural world. 
 
We can affirm that nearly all of the texts created by students in this class were 
very good. The fact they are students at a well-structured school with a humanist-
inclined curriculum really helped in making this accomplishment possible. 
However, it is also worth noting that some prior familiarity with the concepts of 
electricity and magnetism was a fundamental factor, providing a minimum 
repertoire of knowledge with which to engage in this activity. In addition, the 
inclusion of the supplemental text, “Interview with the Electron”, provided strong 
levels of intertextuality, laying important groundwork for student fulfillment of the 
assignment. 
 
We hope the activity presented and studied here will serve as an example for 
teachers in conceiving new initiatives for their classes.  
NOTES 
1  Source: http://www.nupic.fe.usp.br/Projetos%20e%20Materiais/Curso-de-Onda-Particula/textos-
professor/BlocoIII%20-%20Eletricidade%20e%20magnetismo.pdf 
REFERENCES 
Avraamidou, L., & Osborne, J. (2009). The role of narrative in communicating science. International 
Journal of Science Education, 31(12), 1683–1707. 
Bruner, J. (1986). Actual minds, possible worlds. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.  
Bruner, J. (1996). The culture of education. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.  
Bruner, J. (2014). Fabricando histórias: Direito, literatura, vida (Fernando Cássio, Trans.). São Paulo: 
Letra e Voz (Coleção Ideias). 
 
 

GURGEL ET AL. 
224 
 
Cardoso, D. (2015). A complementaridade dos pensamentos narrative e matemático na gestação da 
teoria da relatividade geral. Master’s Thesis, Universidade de São Paulo. 
Correia, M. F. B. (2003). A constituição social da mente: (Re)descobrindo Jerome Bruner e construção 
de significados. Estudos de Psicologia, 8(3), 505–513.  
De Boer, G. (2000). Scientific literacy: Another look at its historical and contemporary meanings and  
its relationship to science education reform. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 37(6), 582–
601. 
Espinet, M., Izquierdo, M.; Bonil, J., & de Robles, S. (2012). The role of language in modeling the 
natural world: Perspectives in science education. In B. J. Fraser, K. G. Tobin, & C. J. McRobbie 
(Eds.), Second international handbook of science education (Vol. 1, pp. 1385–1403). Dordrecht, the 
Netherlands: Springer. 
Gardner, H. (2001). Jerome S. Bruner. In J. A. Palmer (Ed.), L. Bresler, & D. E. Cooper (Advisory 
Eds.), Fifty modern thinkers on education: From Piaget to the present day. London: Routledge.  
Gurgel, I. (2010). Elementos de uma poética da ciência: Fundamentos teóricos e implicações para o 
ensino de ciências. Doctoral Dissertation, Faculdade de Educação, Universidade de São Paulo. 
Gurgel, I., & Pietrocola, M. (2016). O papel do pensamento narrativo na elaboração da ciência: Uma 
proposta a partir da obra de Galileu Galilei. In S. Castellar, & I. Semeghini-Siqueira (Eds.), Da 
educação infantil ao ensino fundamental. São Paulo: CENGAGE Learning. 
Gurgel, I., & Watanabe, G. (2012). Narrativas em aulas de física: A aprendizagem em ciências como 
manifestação cultural. São Paulo: FTD. 
Hesse, M. (1970). Models and analogies in science. Indiana: University of Notre Dame Press.  
Karam, R. (2012). Estruturação matemática do pensamento no ensino: Uma ferramenta teórica para 
analisar abordagens didáticas. Doctoral Dissertation, Faculdade de Educação, Universidade de São 
Paulo. 
Klassen, S., Metz, D., McMillan, B., Clough, M., & Olson, J. (2007). Building a foundation for the use 
of historical narratives. Science & Education, 16, 313–334.  
Leme, M. I. (2009). Jerome Bruner: O ensino e suas formas. Revista Educação: Especial Pedagogia 
Contemporânea, 2, 12–27. 
Locatelli, R. (2006). Uma análise do raciocínio utilizado pelos alunos ao resolverem os problemas 
propostos nas atividades de conhecimento físico. Master’s Thesis, Universidade de São Paulo. 
Norris, S. P., & Phillips, L. M. (2003). How literacy in its fundamental sense is central to scientific 
literacy. Science Education, 87(2), 224–240. 
Ogborn, J., Kress, G., Martins, I., & McGillicuddy, K. (1996). Explaining science in the classroom. 
London: Open University Press. 
Pietrocola, M. (2002). A matemática como estruturante do conhecimento físico. Caderno Catarinense 
de Ensino de Física, 19(1), 89–109.  
Ribeiro, R., & Martins, I. (2007). O potencial das narrativas como recurso para o ensino de ciências: 
Uma análise em livros didáticos de física. Ciência & Educação, 13(3), 293–309. 
Roberts, D. (2007). Scientific literacy/science literacy. In S. K. Abell & N. G. Lerderman (Eds.), 
Handbook of research on science education (pp. 729-780). Mahwah, NJ & London: Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates. 
Silva, C. (2007). The role of models and analogies in electromagnetic theory: A historical case study. 
Science & Education, 16(7–8) 835–848. 
Viennot, L. (2003) Analyse de systèmes physiques: raisonnement commun en physique: Relations 
fonctionnelles, chronologie et causalité. In L. Vienot & C. Debru (Eds.), Enquêt sur le concept de 
causalité (pp. 7-29). Paris: PUF. 
Yore, L., Bisanz, G., & Hand, B. (2003). Examining the literacy component of science literacy: 25  
years of language arts and science research. International Journal of Science Education, 25(6), 689–
725.  
 
 
 
 

THE ROLE OF NARRATIVE THINKING IN LEARNING SCIENTIFIC CONCEPTS 
225 
 
Ivã Gurgel 
Department of Experimental Physics 
Institute of Physics 
University of São Paulo 
São Paulo-SP, Brazil 
 
Maurício Pietrocola 
Department of Teaching Methodology and Comparative Education 
School of Education of the University of São Paulo 
São Paulo-SP, Brazil 
 
Danilo Cardoso 
Post Graduate Program in Science Education  
University of São Paulo 
São Paulo-SP, Brazil 
 

 
M. Pietrocola & I. Gurgel (Eds.), Crossing the Border of the Traditional Science Curriculum, 227–247. 
© 2017 Sense Publishers. All rights reserved. 
MARISTELA DO NASCIMENTO ROCHA AND IVÃ GURGEL 
13. INTERWOVEN THOUGHTS 
Rethinking the Current Picture of Physics Knowledge 
ASSUMPTIONS OF CURRICULUM PROPOSALS 
No educational proposal is possible without certain underlying commitments, 
which may be explicit or implicit. Whether they are political, ideological, social, 
metaphysical, epistemological, and/or educational in nature, all such commitments 
influence our physics teaching practices in particular ways. Usually, a 
preoccupation with social problems will lead educators to make proposals related 
to the influence of science in society; those who criticize traditional ways of 
learning and teaching will tend to propose dialogical and interactive classes; those 
who are worried about the training of engineers will suggest instruction in 
problem-solving exercises; those who are preoccupied with civic participation, the 
teaching of physics concepts related to daily life; and with naïve conceptions about 
physics, themes involving the history and philosophy of science, and so on. 
 
In recent proposals, humanistic perspectives on education which call attention to 
the historical and social character of science have been dominant (Aikenhead, 
2007). Given this point of view, the emerging physics curriculum has been 
concerned with the formation of citizens and the identification of those aspects of 
scientific knowledge that can serve this purpose; it takes into account not only 
social inclusion, but also social change, as is the case in the science, technology 
and society (STS) perspective and the current research on relevance (Aikenhead, 
2007). Likewise, the same tendency is found in student-centered proposals.  
 
However, even if our gaze is concentrated on a certain commitment, it is not 
possible to ignore the existence of others. It is important to note that humanistic 
proposals might not always be compatible with the priorities and values of other 
pictures of the world,1 since other types of commitments will also be stakeholders 
in the cultures of schools. This explains why educational research alone cannot 
change a given educational system. However, there is still one commitment to 
which we have not given sufficient attention: our own views on physics 
knowledge. We have questioned the structure of educational activities, conceptions 
about the nature of science, and the relations between science and technology; in 
addition, we have changed strategies for learning new concepts; but we have not 
yet questioned our own conceptions of physics knowledge, of what a scientific 
concept is, or what it truly means to learn a concept. Our view of physics 
knowledge is fixed.  

INTERWOVEN THOUGHTS 
228 
 
A lack of attention to this commitment can prevent humanist proposals from 
being, in fact, humanist, since the knowledge created by physics is the basis for its 
importance to education. The only possible outlook on physics knowledge in 
science education seems to be the one provided by the final formalization of 
theories, which are presented by physicists as the product of their practices. The 
common conception of physics knowledge is that it is a tool used to classify 
phenomena and to make mathematical descriptions from well-defined principles. 
This conception is a generalization of the picture presented in textbooks, as in the 
following view of Newtonian mechanics2: 
The science of mechanics seeks to provide a precise and consistent 
description of the dynamics of particles and systems of particles, that is, a set 
of physical laws mathematically describing the motion of bodies and 
aggregates of bodies. For this, we need certain fundamental concepts such as 
distance and time. The combination of the concepts of distance and time 
allows us to define the velocity and acceleration of a particle. (Thornton & 
Marion, 2004, p. 48) 
 
This quote is the first paragraph about classical mechanics in an influential 
textbook. This content is followed by definitions of Newton’s three laws, the 
concept of the frame of reference, the equation of motion for a particle, and 
conservation theorems, among others, which form the basis for the exercises and 
problems involving mathematical descriptions and explanations of motion at the 
end of the chapter. Oddly enough, this is the same picture of knowledge found in 
conceptual learning research in classical mechanics, although with less 
mathematical rigor and performed with what would be considered innovative 
approaches. This is the case even when the inclusion of historical and philosophical 
contents is considered as a strategy for learning physics: 
Responses [before the conceptual classes] showed how they thought of 
acceleration as ‘going fast’ or ‘a big force’ rather than ‘a change in velocity’. 
(…) Once students understood the difference between constant and changing 
velocity, Galileo’s inclined-plane experiment was conducted to demonstrate 
the acceleration concept. (Seker & Welsh, 2006, p. 69) 
One simple example [of difficulties in learning] is with common 
misunderstandings of Newton’s third law (…): ‘For every action there is an 
equal and opposite reaction’. This gives no indication about the meaning of 
action and reaction (…). Newton himself stated the law in another, more 
helpful and less misleading, way: ‘the mutual actions of two bodies upon 
each other are always equal, and directed to contrary parts’. (Gauld, 2012, p. 
78) 
 
Hence, even in research which is in line with the current humanistic tendencies 
in science education, to understand a physics concept is to be able to enunciate its 
formal definition and to apply it in exercises designed for this purpose. 
‘Acceleration’ is equated to a change in velocity. Understanding Newton’s third 

ROCHA & GURGEL 
229 
law means identifying mutual actions between forces and their opposite directions. 
If physics language is always fixed in this manner, only content coming from 
science studies can provide humanistic features, and only a utilitarian use of 
concepts can serve the purpose of a humanistic education. It is a contradiction that 
physicist’s practices have humanistic features, but their concepts and language do 
not. 
 
The commitment to this fixed idea of physics knowledge is the basis for current 
utilitarian approaches to the physics curriculum, which focuses on certain 
applications of physical concepts deemed useful in our contemporary lives: 
“canonical science must be transformed into knowledge very different in character 
from the ‘pure science’ knowledge of the science curriculum; as one moves from 
pure science for explaining and describing, to ‘practical science’ content for 
action” (Aikenhead, 2007, p. 887). In the current utilitarian approaches, physics 
knowledge is viewed in itself as non-humanist, fixed, timeless, dogmatic, and 
useful for humanist purposes only for solving specific issues in our lives.  
 
Although humanistic characteristics are recognized as constituents of scientific 
practices, such as those present in the consensus view of the nature of science3; 
scientific concepts and language do not contain these features in their final forms. 
This same conception of scientific knowledge has led educators to think that the 
humanistic features of science can only be learned through the inclusion of science 
studies content, which corresponds to ways of thinking which diverge from those 
considered scientific per se. As a consequence, physics knowledge has no direct 
role in a humanistic education. Physicist practices contain humanistic features, but 
the physics concepts resulting from these practices do not. If, on the one hand, 
conceptual learning and teaching are being renewed by the insertion of HPS 
content (Teixeira, Greca, & Freire Jr., 2012), on the other hand, conceptual 
understanding is still unrelated to its historical-philosophical dimensions. In this 
context, the desired ways of understanding concepts remain similar to the 
traditional ones4: they lack humanistic features, and thus do not allow students to 
be autonomous and critical thinkers with regard to learning physics knowledge. 
 
We cannot deny that the proposals for humanizing science education have been 
successful in some regards. However, this success is very limited, since such 
proposals are still based on a limited picture of knowledge. This limitation is in 
turn based on an ingenuous picture of language, as we are going to demonstrate in 
the next sections, which incorporate Ludwig Wittgenstein’s (1889–1851) 
philosophy of language. If, instead of looking at the final formalization of theories, 
we explore the ways physicists use concepts in their practices, then we will frame 
physics knowledge as constituting a form of life, an approach which creates new 
possibilities for the sort of deep thinking and knowing that cannot be learned only 
from isolated applications of concepts. We are also going to demonstrate how 
overcoming our current picture of physics knowledge will lead us to perceive it as 
composed by different traditions of thinking, which go beyond what is presented in 
the formalized theories. We are going to exemplify this by showing how the 
philosophical way of thinking is interwoven with ways of thinking in physics, 
allowing us to change the current role of philosophy in physics teaching and to 

INTERWOVEN THOUGHTS 
230 
conceive of physics concepts from a humanistic perspective, in which students can 
be autonomous and critical thinkers with regard to the learning of physics 
knowledge. Finally, taking this relationship into account, we are going to suggest a 
new approach to classical mechanics. 
LANGUAGE: AN AGREEMENT BETWEEN FORMS OF LIFE 
The relationship between language, thinking, and the world was Ludwig 
Wittgenstein’s major concern. In this section, we are going to consider his second 
phase of thought, which is represented by his Philosophical Investigations (PI) 
(1953). Wittgenstein criticized the common model of language as representation, 
which considers words as labels naming the objects they represent, just as the word 
‘table’ names the object ‘table’. In this model, the meaning of each word in our 
language is “the object for which the word stands” (PI, §1). Our discourse would 
thus be composed of connections between words that have the sole function of 
representing reality and thoughts with an independent existence from ourselves. 
 
For Wittgenstein, we tend to generalize this representational use of words to all 
that we call language (PI, §11). Since there are so many words naming objects, we 
tend to believe that all words are used in the same way. However, this tendency is 
caused by the lack of a panoramic view of the ways in which we use words, since 
we do not always use them as a reference: 
(…) we do the most various things with our sentences. Think of exclamations 
alone, with their completely different functions: 
Water! 
Away! 
Ow! 
Help! 
Fine! 
No! 
Are you still inclined to call these words ‘names of objects’? (PI, §27) 
 
Additionally, the reference model of language also contains the idea that 
language can only name and describe (Hacker & Backer, 1986). However, there 
are other types of actions performed by language, such as doubting, formulating 
hypotheses, asking, thanking, calculating, and questioning (PI, §23). Perceiving 
language as mere representation is not incorrect, but it is limited, since there are 
other uses of words as well. Wittgenstein’s intention is to perform a sort of 
“therapy” for the picture of language as representation, by inviting the reader to 
view language in a panoramic way. Observing how language works in other 
linguistic contexts is useful for showing us how not to fall prey to generalizations. 
 
When we realize that words have different uses, we also realize that they are 
surrounded by conventional rules. We can teach someone how to name objects 
with ostensive gestures, but this is not adequate for teaching that person how to use 
the word in different contexts. By the way, even in this case it is necessary to be 
familiar with the meaning of ostensive gestures and naming activities. 

ROCHA & GURGEL 
231 
Additionally, “with different training the same ostensive teaching of these words 
would have effected a quite different understanding” (PI, §6). Think of the 
example of teaching the meaning of ‘two’: 
The definition of the number two, ‘That is called two’ – pointing to two nuts 
– is perfectly exact. – But how can two be defined like that? The person one 
gives the definition doesn’t know what one wants to call ‘two’; he will 
suppose that ‘two’ is the name given to this group of nuts! He may suppose 
this; but perhaps he does not. (PI, §28) 
 
Hence, two individuals may participate in the same experience and understand it 
in a different manner. Words are not only representations of things, but assume the 
most different roles in the praxis of language. That is why their meanings do not 
rest on representations, but on the implicit normativity of language, which is 
connected to the way we act in different activities. The same word can be used in 
different manners, following different rules. Think of how differently we could 
teach a child to use the word ‘water’: to ask for water to drink, or to look at a body 
of water, or even as a signal that s/he needs help, for instance. A representation of 
the word ‘water’ would not be helpful to indicate how it should be used in 
connection to these practices.  
 
For this reason, Wittgenstein frames language as ‘the language-game’, or a 
conjunction of language-games, a term created to highlight that “the speaking of a 
language is part of an activity, or of a form of life” (PI, §23). The meaning of 
words is not understood anymore as their reference, but as their use in language-
games (PI, §43). What allows us to use the same word with different meanings is 
the family resemblance relationship, as with the resemblances and differences 
between the members of a family.  
 
Wittgenstein’s notions also have a family of meanings. Hence, the term 
language-game can be applied to primitive language-games, such as giving names 
to things; but also to more complex ones, such as reading, representing, doubting, 
formulating hypotheses, and criticizing; or be used in a more comprehensive 
manner, for understanding a style of thinking such as that found in mathematics.  
 
The rules in which concepts and language-games are embedded constitute our 
understandings of them – in the same manner as the meaning of ‘two’ is connected 
to the certainty that it is a number and can be used to count. It is possible to have 
different degrees of understanding, in accordance with different purposes (PI, §29). 
If it is enough to know that the number ‘two’ means that group of nuts, then there 
is no need for knowing the concept of the number, but one does not go far with this 
type of learning. If the word ‘two’ is used to count, it is because we know that it is 
an allowed action within the language-games we learned involving numbers and 
counting. To only identify a reference for a word is not enough, we need to teach 
ways to use words within language-games, in which one learns about the 
normativity that is the condition which must be understood: “When one shews 
someone the king in chess and says: ‘This is the king’, this does not tell him the 
use of this piece – unless he already knows the rules of the game up to this last 
point: the shape of the king” (PI, §31). Hence, knowing the meaning of words 

INTERWOVEN THOUGHTS 
232 
requires the foreknowledge of the place in which they will be used (PI, §31) 
necessary to master a language-game. Language-games are constituted by a 
normativity, in Wittgenstein’s words, a grammar,5 of techniques, traditions, 
conventions, or rules that constitute the way we do things; these are not subject to 
analysis as to truth or falsehood, but are, rather, historically successful ways of 
doing things.  
 
To learn a concept is to learn its normativity by using it in different language-
games, in order to form a family resemblance relationship between the different 
uses. This will enable the recognition of a new language-game for its connections 
to what is already known. For instance, to learn the concept ‘game’, one learns to 
apply it to different games, such as basketball, chess, football, and so on. We form 
this concept after passing through a sufficient number of games to form the family 
resemblance relationships between them, thereby becoming able to recognize new 
games, even if they have not been seen before, or to create a new one. This is why 
only one application of a word is not enough to form a concept: because it would 
be like teaching someone what a ‘game’ is by showing them only the game of 
chess.  
 
To understand a language-game is to understand a grammar. Two individuals 
can understand each other if they have the same linguistic background, the same 
picture of the world. The correct use of words,6 made possible when one masters a 
grammar, is what constitutes understanding (PI, §199). Additionally, it is not 
possible to accept only one rule of our grammars, since they are connected to the 
others in a necessary manner. Hence, it is not possible to learn a language through 
only learning isolated applications of words, disconnected from the language-
games from which they emerged. We cannot fall prey to dogmatic thinking and 
believe that concepts can be defined by a single precise rule, isolated from the 
others and from practices. For language to be autonomous, it is necessary to form 
family resemblance relationships between different uses of concepts and between 
different language-games, which will allow for new applications of words, new 
possibilities for following the rules of our grammars, and new ideas to surge. 
 
As with words, the rules of our language-games cannot be learned separately 
from the games themselves. We could try to explain the normativity of language by 
explaining it with other words, by interpreting. However, “And what about the last 
definition in this chain?” (PI, §29). At some point, it will always be necessary to 
actually show how rules are followed in a language-game. For instance, we can 
explain what it means ‘to walk’, explaining that it is what we do to move, or that is 
when people place one leg in front of the other, but eventually we will have to 
show someone walking, since diverse understandings of the aforementioned 
definitions would always be possible. Obviously, when one has minimally 
mastered a language, it becomes possible to obtain some understandings by 
interpretations and explanations, but only if we have previously participated in 
language-games. For this reason, the conventions of language are not arbitrary, 
since they are connected to the way we live. In practice, the conventions of 
language do not determine action, but they do work as guides, for example, in 
showing where one should or should not go, as with traffic signs (Z,7 §440). 

ROCHA & GURGEL 
233 
 
Language is autonomous, and grammar is the condition for meaning, as it is not 
a candidate for being judged true or false. What is true or false is based on deeper 
agreements of language. For instance, the certainty that ‘all objects have extension’ 
is neither true or false, but an agreement implicit in our language-games: it is the 
way things work for us. This certainty is what allows one to say, “This table is two 
meters long”. The decisions of individuals are the fruit of reasoning within a style 
of thinking. 
 
Because language is not only a tool for representation, but also constitutes its 
own thoughts and actions, we can acquire powerful abilities when we learn a new 
language. Consider how differently one may think when learning a new style of 
painting or a foreign language. This power of language is what can allow for 
freedom, since it allows access to dimensions never before explored. The formation 
of family resemblances enables us to be the authors of our own actions, ideas, and 
thoughts. Our concepts are not limited and new uses can be imagined. 
THERAPY FOR THE PICTURE OF PHYSICS 
In the field of physics teaching, we are used to textbooks, in which concepts have 
one single rule, usually of a mathematical nature. Physics knowledge is fixed – and 
all the subjectivity, problems, and hypotheses present in its process of construction 
are typically suppressed. However, physics language should not be considered as 
only comprising its formalizations: 
If concepts, transformed in the new theory that structures them, receive their 
physics meaning from relations in the theory (and, definitely, from the 
principles that regulate them), and if these relations are expressed through 
equations, it does not imply that the theory is reduced to the equations 
expressed therein. (Paty, 2001, p. 318) 
 
There are a number of implicit certainties in physics language-games that relate 
the laws and concepts we are used to seeing in textbooks to the physical world and 
to subjective ways of understanding,8 which can only be perceived when observing 
how physics language is used by physicists in their different activities. 
 
Textbooks, as with science education research, usually take the formalized 
language-games of physics – in which concepts are used with formalized 
meanings, such as laws and equations, for purposes such as describing and 
predicting phenomena – as representative of physics knowledge. This picture is 
obviously correct, since various language-games in physics contain descriptions 
and predictions of phenomena. We need only recall mathematical physics, eclipse 
predictions, meteorology, econophysics, the building of dozens of precise 
experiments, or any number of other such constructs, to realize how this picture of 
physics is important to its language-games. 
 
However, this picture is limited if generalized to everything we call physics 
language. We can imagine how physicist’s practices might unfold if they could 
only describe and predict phenomena from formalized theories. How would they 
know how to connect theories to the physical world, since mathematical 

INTERWOVEN THOUGHTS 
234 
abstractions do not correspond directly to reality? Certainly, there are other 
underlying assumptions besides those that explicitly compose a given theory. 
Otherwise, changes in physics knowledge would not be possible. Those who hold 
that experiments could be the sole source of change believe the impossible, since 
analyzing and building experiments involves questioning theories’ foundations, an 
approach that is not possible when relying only on formalized theories. In order to 
indicate a more truly progressive course of practice, we shall here follow 
Wittgenstein’s lesson and view language in a panoramic way, in order to see how 
physics language works. We are going to observe how physics concepts are used in 
the different language-games of classical mechanics.9  
 
On the first level, the language of physics is connected to the physical world by 
different dimensions, such as acoustics, cosmology, gravitation, fluids, chaos, 
geophysics, environment, meteorology, ballistics, thermodynamics, and so on. 
From these observations, we can already appreciate that Newtonian mechanics 
goes far beyond describing and predicting velocities and accelerations of bodies in 
an empty universe. Theories are connected to the physical world. Physics has its 
own objects, made possible from its new language, which are not technological 
objects. 
 
There are moments in which physicists theorize, share ideas with peers, write 
papers, participate in conferences, dialogue. We can further restrict the language-
games and say that physicists criticize (data and theories), make hypotheses, make 
approximations, models, experiment (mentally and physically), question, try to 
solve theoretical and empirical problems, and so on. In the language-games of 
physics, we find certainties that indicate how we should know the world, what it 
means to exist, what reality is, and what theories, laws, principles, and methods 
are. At other times, physicists also analyze their own concepts. 
 
The concept of induction, for instance, appears explicitly in Newton’s work 
‘Optiks’ (1706), and implicitly in his correspondences with Cotes (1713) and 
Oldenburg (1672) (McGrew, Alspector-Kelly, & Allhoff, 2009). Therefore, even 
as just demonstrated in this one example, physics language encompasses more 
concepts then those that appear in its formalized theories. However, based on our 
initial concern about the concepts that are explicit in theories, we will give them 
priority, in order to perform our therapy. It is important to mention that we 
consider epistemological concepts to be an essential complement to theories, rather 
than merely a subject for history and philosophy classes. 
 
Physics concepts are constituted by a normativity that goes beyond their 
formalized rules, and can only be recognized when we see how they are used in the 
practice of physics language. There are rules from different dimensions, allowing 
the application of concepts in different language-games. Ernst Mach, criticizing 
Newtonian mechanics, writes: 
Let us now examine the point on which Newton, apparently with sound 
reasons, rested his distinctions of absolute and relative motion. If the earth is 
affected with an absolute rotation about its axis, centrifugal forces are set up 
in the earth: it assumes an oblate form, the acceleration of gravity is 

ROCHA & GURGEL 
235 
diminished at the equator, the plane of Foucault’s pendulum rotates, and so 
on. All these phenomena disappear if the earth is at rest (…). This is, indeed, 
the case, if we start ab initio from the idea of absolute space. But if we take 
our stand on the basis of facts, we shall find we have knowledge only of 
relative spaces and motions. (1983, pp. 231–232) 
 
In this criticism, we can observe that different rules are guiding the use of 
concepts, allowing their applications in different situations and for different 
actions. For instance, it is part of the concepts of ‘motion’, ‘velocity’ and 
‘acceleration’, that they can be relative or absolute. These concepts are not only 
related to rates of change of mathematical quantities. It is part of ‘centrifugal force’ 
that it appears when a body is describing an accelerated and absolute motion in 
relation to absolute space. If Mach had considered only the concept of space as 
equated to that of distance, as we are used to learn (e.g. velocity as changes in 
space – distance – and time), he would not be able to make such objections. Mach 
was able to create a different application for the concept of space because he knew 
its normativity. On the other hand, hypotheses are also part of the normativity of 
concepts. Knowing the absolute space hypothesis as part of Newtonian mechanics, 
which is the privileged frame of reference for measuring the absolute motions 
represented by the three laws, allowed Mach to think critically – and to conceive a 
new hypothesis that could10 give birth to a new theory. 
 
Moreover, in Mach’s criticism, it is implicit that we can only measure relative 
motion. This is a certainty physicists have; it is how things work in physics 
practices. Some empirical descriptions made possible within physics language-
games also become part of its normativity, since it guides physicists’ thoughts. 
Newton, in his notes about The System of the World, writes: 
 
As when as a stone is projected obliquely, that is, any way but in the 
perpendicular direction, the continual deflection thereof towards the earth 
from the right line in which it was projected is a proof of its gravitation to the 
earth, no less certain than its direct descent when suffered to fall freely from 
rest; so the deviation of bodies moving in free spaces from rectilinear paths 
and continual deflection therefrom towards any place, is a sure indication of 
the existence of some force which from all quarters impels those bodies 
toward that place. (McGrew, Alspector-Kelly, & Allhoff, 2009, p. 179) 
 
The experimental result of the trajectory of a stone is part of the normativity of 
the concepts of gravity, motion, velocity, and force, since this observation justifies 
some of their applications. Newton talks about gravity not only as a downward 
force caused by the Earth or an acceleration calculated by the second law, but also 
as part of an attempt to explain the motions observed in nature, both in the heavens 
and in the Earth. 
 
The concept of force is at the origin of changes in trajectories of bodies; force 
removes them from their inertial state. The many such facets of normativity are not 
always explicit when physicists use their concepts, especially if they are only using 
them to describe motions for a certain purpose. However, normativity nonetheless 

INTERWOVEN THOUGHTS 
236 
remains as part of all concepts and will appear when needed. Moreover, it allows 
for different actions. In this case, physics arguments – in favor of gravity and of 
certain properties of forces – were made possible. Changes in physicists’ language-
games serve to reveal how they know the normativity of the concepts they use. 
Therefore, teaching only the possible descriptions of this type of motion, 
disconnected to other rules that are part of the concepts themselves, is an activity 
which lacks a considerable amount of the information necessary for building a 
deep sense of the concepts in question.  
 
Rules and concepts of a mathematical nature, which do not appear as part of the 
formalized theories, are also part of physics language, enabling different 
capabilities that go beyond descriptions and predictions. Concepts such as 
continuity, proportion, infinity, area, rates of change, stretch, or the circle, are also 
responsible for the meanings of physics concepts. Newton refutes the Cartesian 
theory of the gravitation of bodies in this manner: 
That forces should be directed to no body on which they physically depend, 
but to innumerable imaginary points in the axis of the earth, is an hypothesis 
too incongruous. It is more incongruous still that those forces should increase 
exactly in proportion of the distances from this axis; for this is an indication 
of an increase to immensity, or rather to infinity; whereas the forces of 
natural things commonly decrease in receding from the fountain from which 
they flow. (McGrew, Alspector-Kelly, & Allhoff, 2009, p. 180) 
 
There are mathematical hypotheses about the behavior of objects in the physical 
world underlying Newton’s refutation. In this sense, we could say that even the 
mathematical way of thinking is not adequate in textbooks, as well as in the image 
we have of physics knowledge, since both typically select only those mathematical 
concepts that are useful for making descriptions and predictions. 
 
Historically-raised problems continue to partially constitute theories, working as 
part of their normativity. The laws formulated in Newtonian mechanics are 
answers to questions. The need to explain the appearance of centrifugal forces 
guided Newton’s investigations (Ghins, 1991). This is what allows critical 
questioning, as in Einstein’s introduction of special relativity in 191611:  
I stand at the window of a railway carriage, which is travelling uniformly, 
and drop a stone on the embankment, without throwing it. Then, disregarding 
the influence of the air resistance, I see the stone descend in a straight line. A 
pedestrian who observes the misdeed from the footpath notices that the stone 
falls to earth in a parabolic curve. I now ask: Do the ‘positions’ traversed by 
stone lie ‘in reality’ on a straight line or on a parabola? (Einstein, 1999, p. 12) 
 
Einstein begins his argument in favor of special relativity by analyzing the 
concepts of space and time in Newtonian mechanics, turning to the problem of 
explaining the true motion of bodies. Newton tried to answer the same question in 
his mechanics (Ghins, 1991). Einstein showed how it is possible to formulate a 
different answer to this question. Obviously, this question was not the only 
influence in the generation of special relativity, since there were other questions 

ROCHA & GURGEL 
237 
and assumptions, such as those related to the explanation of experimental results. 
However, it was an important part of Newtonian mechanics and retains its crucial 
meaning for special relativity. 
 
Physics language becomes noticeably humanistic when we perceive that its 
products are answers to questions, and that these answers may change. If the choice 
for a frame of reference to measure motion were not part of the normativity of the 
concept of motion, it would not be possible to apply it in different contexts, to 
criticize it, or to make a new hypothesis. That is why the concept of motion is not 
only related to that of velocity. There are other underlying assumptions as well, as 
in any physics concept, and especially in those that are most fundamental to the 
discipline. 
 
These rules that appear to not constitute formalized theories are part of them 
when physics language is being used in physics practices. This implicit normativity 
is the condition for meaning for concepts, their relations, principles, and laws – as 
connected in physics rationality (Paty, 2001). Together with theoretical 
abstractions, physics’ normativity allows for different actions within physics 
thinking. In physics teaching and teacher training, a knowledge of this normativity 
emerges as essential, since teachers are the creators and enactors of teaching 
activities. 
THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN PHYSICS THINKING AND  
PHILOSOPHICAL THINKING 
First, it is important to note that the relationship presented here is one of the first 
order, in other words, philosophical thinking is part of physics thinking in its effort 
to understand the world. This is different from the philosophy of science, which is 
a second order study, and considers science as its object. Certainly, there are 
moments in which physicists philosophize in a second order mode (Serra, 2008), 
but this dimension is well known in science teaching. The first-order relationship is 
expressed by the need for a connection between the high abstract formalizations of 
theories and the physical world, in which there is a tension between the formal and 
empirical dimensions: 
On the one hand, the theory, in the axiomatic transparency of its statements, 
would give its own meanings (in other words, its content, in this case, 
physical content). On the other hand, if the content has nature as its object (in 
our case, the reality of physics), it is connected to experience (therefore, it 
can be called empirical), and cannot be reported only by its formal structure. 
The statements of a theoretical science imply, therefore, a tension between 
the formal character of theories and their contents, referring to the need for 
reality. (Paty, 1992, p. 107) 
 
This tension is overcome by the constructions of meaning within physics 
language-games. The physicist, trying to understand observations and phenomena, 
will restructure concepts and give new meanings to words, constantly re-
elaborating the old ones. At this moment, s/he will also work on the enunciation of 

INTERWOVEN THOUGHTS 
238 
meanings – which is when we realize the ways in which they were already part of 
theories. Moreover, our first interpretations of the physical world are made from a 
minimum degree of conceptualization, and, therefore, themselves contain 
meanings. These meanings compose theories in their relations to the world, since 
they bring in themselves the need for their own interpretations (Paty, 1993, p. 103). 
Hence, the construction of meanings is not left to philosophers of science, who 
have the role of unveiling, but not constructing, meaning. 
 
The need for meaning connects physics thinking to philosophical thinking, 
creating rules of a philosophical nature as part of the normativity of physics. 
Philosophy also provides physics with a critical style of thinking, by making 
available techniques for the clarification and organization of concepts. These rules 
can have a metaphysical nature, such as those related to the structure of space and 
time and the composition of matter, or an epistemological one, related to concepts 
such as laws, principles, causality, and induction. 
 
In times of crisis, it is common to consider philosophy as part of physics, since 
physics performs the typical philosophical activity of clarifying concepts. This 
reflects the critical dimension of theories, without which physics rationality does 
not exist (Costa, 1997). At such moments, physicists need to clarify the 
assumptions of theories and search for new answers to old questions, or try to 
develop new questions and new meanings. However, in order for this critical 
activity to be possible, it is necessary for these expectations to already be part of 
theories, pertaining to their own language. Among them will be those of a 
philosophical nature, bringing philosophical problems and hypotheses that make it 
possible to connect theories to the physical world. Theoretical constructs cannot all 
be verified by experience, but we can interpret phenomena and physical properties 
as a whole (Paty, 1992). 
 
Answers to problems of a philosophical nature, which cannot be verified by 
experience but only justified by a chain of reasons, inherently bear certain 
limitations, making it possible to arrive at different answers and, thus, holding 
great importance in the construction of new ideas. Here is the site where criticism 
may thrive. At the same time, the philosophical character of physics is also its 
strength: 
In the hands of such physicists as Helmholtz, Boltzmann and Hertz, 
philosophy was used as an instrument to ensure and expand the autonomy of 
science. In other words, science is capable of choosing its problems, the 
methods for solving them and the criteria for recognizing suitable solutions. 
(Videira, 2013, p. 12) 
 
The philosophical dimension provides intellectual autonomy to physics, 
allowing for the existence of a new field of action, which is less constrained than 
those used in experiments and mathematics. By means of (non-isolated) 
philosophical rules, criticism, the construction of physics meanings, the 
clarification of concepts, and the formulation of hypotheses are all possible. The 
application of words in physics language will also take into account its 
philosophical rules. The certainty of a statement such as ‘absolute motion 

ROCHA & GURGEL 
239 
is the translation of a body from one absolute place to another’ will indicate how 
we use words such as motion, change, place, space, and so on, within classical 
mechanics. 
 
To say that philosophy is part of physics rationality does not mean that it will be 
present in all physics language-games. Philosophy is part of the normativity of 
physics, particularly regarding its more fundamental concepts. However, there are 
cases in which physics knowledge will have only mathematical meanings. What 
will show the pertinence of such knowledge to physics is its family resemblance 
relationship with other language-games. Although there are games in which 
criticism plays a lesser role, as in the case of mathematical physics, these games 
will certainly be connected to language-games with philosophical dimensions, 
since physics needs to refer to the world. 
TEACHING A NEW STYLE OF THINKING: USING NORMATIVITY TO TEACH 
NEWTONIAN MECHANICS 
How might we teach physics language in a more humanist manner? First, we 
should consider the need for knowledge to be taught in connection with its 
normativity. This process can only be effective when language is working, so we 
will be including the subject as the author of different language-games. We are 
forced to leave behind the old view of physics language as facts, descriptions, and 
rules about the world, and to instead be concerned with its connections to actions. 
We will be responsible for teaching the normativity of physics, via including 
students in physics language-games and allowing them to think and act in new and 
different ways only imaginable within the possibilities offered by the language of 
physics. 
 
The human dimension of physics knowledge can be effectively represented by 
including philosophical assumptions together with those of empirical and 
mathematical natures,12 offering students access to the history that persists as part 
of theories. When we present philosophical hypotheses and problems, we are 
considering physics knowledge, in fact, in its tentative and changing character. 
Knowing the normativity of physics allows for the emergence of a new 
autonomous field of action, which does not determine thinking13 but functions as a 
guide. Moreover, problems and hypothesis of other types can also be presented as 
part of philosophical thinking, where useful in enunciating and creating physics 
meanings, as we have discussed. 
 
We are going to present a humanist model for teaching the Newtonian school of 
thought, based on our experience with high school and pre-service teachers. This 
model will consider which should be the most fundamental aspects of normativity 
to be taught in classical mechanics in order to lose neither its humanist features nor 
its connections to experience and mathematics, although we give priority to the 
philosophical dimension. We do not believe in proposals that determine teacher’s 
actions, but in building models of normativity that can allow them to choose 
different paths. 

INTERWOVEN THOUGHTS 
240 
 
This model draws upon an analysis of the metaphysical hypotheses and 
problems14 that appeared in the construction of Newtonian mechanics, supported 
by the philosophers Michel Ghins (1991) and Eduardo Barra (1993). In this 
historical episode, Newton was trying to explain the appearance of centrifugal 
forces and searching for a frame of reference, which led him to propose his 
absolute space hypothesis. It should be stressed that this analysis served to 
recognize the normativity of the concepts involved, which is an exercise that 
teachers should do themselves in the classroom context. In the latter, the teaching 
of normativity will not occur within the way of thinking of philosophers or 
historians of science, but through inserting students in physics language-games in 
which they can follow these rules.15 Our purpose is not to teach students a 
philosophical way of thinking, but a physics one. 
 
First, the intention of Newtonian mechanics is to understand the movements 
observed in nature – and this should be conveyed to students in some way. The 
need for understanding motion is not self-evident – why did physicists choose 
motion as their main concern in classical mechanics? When teachers start 
mechanics classes by talking about the rates of change of movements and their 
relation to distance and velocity, they are skipping an important aspect of classical 
mechanics which can influence students to start thinking about the world from the 
point of view of movement. The assumption of the importance of movement for 
understanding nature seems to be obvious, but it is not so for all students. 
Likewise, the importance of mathematical abstractions is not self-evident. Hence, a 
discussion about these intentions and assumptions is important, leading students to 
observe that motion can be found in every phenomenon observed in nature, and to 
realize that pondering and understanding motion is thus of real value. 
 
Physicists desire to understand the movement of the Sun, planets, and bodies on 
the Earth. To speak of motion, its representation is required. However, such 
representation is the fruit of successive mathematical abstractions of the natural 
world; we are used to these abstractions and able to make sense of them, but 
students are not. In our educative experiences, asking students about their 
knowledge of motion has produced positive results. Interacting with the teacher, 
students can deduce common properties of the different types of familiar motions. 
It is always important to remember that the teacher must not expect students to 
discover all the known abstractions constructed in physics history. At some point, 
teachers will have to tell their students about the conventions used for analyzing 
motion. It is, however, imperative to give students opportunities to think for 
themselves within the new style of thinking provided by physics, guided by their 
teachers, who will already be speaking from a particular language-game and from 
implicit certainties. This should be viewed as a change (not elimination) of 
language-games, from those of students’ everyday lives to those of physics. The 
teacher will invite them to change the frame of reference through which they are 
used to seeing the world. 
 
A second important abstraction in Newtonian mechanics is the inertial and non-
inertial classification of motions. For the philosophical dimension of this 
theorization, mental experiments could be used,16 such as Galileo’s inclined plane 

ROCHA
and G
empiri
of ine
motion
there a
 
It is
such d
variati
mecha
and 
differe
Showi
also im
rest: 
 
 
Fro
forces 
forces.
self-ev
discus
perceiv
observ
2015).
 
Que
happen
others?
It is u
previo
studen
that an
questio
Newto
any ob
emerg
bodies
A & GURGEL 
iordano Bruno
ical dimension
ertial forces i
n, in which ce
are other types
s essential to 
differences b
ions using the 
anics, 
inert
third 
laws 
ent conclusio
ing the existen
mportant. Take
F
m A’s referen
appear, but 
. It should be
vident and als
s the need fo
ve any type o
ve motions in
. 
estions that em
n?’ ‘Why can
?’ ‘Why do ob
usually easier
ous knowledge
nts to argue for
ny observer sh
on, ‘Is there a
on also wished
bserved trajec
es about relat
s or a relation b
o’s17 idea of t
n, observing m
s important;
ntrifugal force
s of inertial for
highlight the 
by considering
natural prope
tial 
motion
explain 
it
ons regarding
nce of circular
e, for instance
Figure 1. A body
nce frame, B 
from B’s, A 
e noted that th
so need eluci
or a material 
of motion, sin
n themselves,
merge from th
n we observe
bservers in dif
r to start from
e of Newtoni
r the existence
hould have the
any true moti
d to answer!) A
ctory of a bo
tive and absol
between them
throwing an o
motions in whi
teachers migh
e is observed,
rce, in classro
differences b
g one prope
erty as a refere
n 
is 
natu
ts 
variations
g the traject
r motions in w
e, the case of a
y B rotates arou
describes a c
describes a c
he concepts o
idation. In ou
and visible f
nce students u
 independent 
hese differenc
e centrifugal f
fferent frames 
m the second
ian mechanics
e of true motio
e right to obse
ion after all?’
Alternatively,
dy equivalent
lute motion, a
m. 
object up on a
ich is possible
ht include ex
and of accele
om activities.
between motio
rty as natura
ence (Toulmin
ural 
and 
s. 
Two 
ob
tories and v
which there is
a body B rotati
 
und a body A at 
circular motion
circular motio
of rest and ref
ur work with
frame of refe
usually believe
of any refe
ces include: ‘W
forces in som
of reference s
d question, si
s. The second
on, while othe
erve true moti
 (Which is, in
 is any frame 
t to the other
and whether sp
a moving boat
 to perceive th
xplorations of
rated motion, 
ons. Physicists
al and descri
n, 1953). In N
Newton’s 
bservers 
ma
velocities of 
no centrifuga
ing around a b
t rest 
n in which ce
on without ce
ferential frame
h students, we
rence to mea
e that it is po
rential frame 
Why do these
me motions bu
see different m
ince the first 
d question lea
ers argue for th
ion, which lea
n fact, a ques
of reference v
rs? Here, a d
pace is indepe
241 
t. For the 
he effects 
f circular 
in which 
s explain 
ibing all 
ewtonian 
second  
ay 
have  
objects.  
al force is 
body A at 
entrifugal 
entrifugal 
e are not 
e always 
asure and 
ossible to 
(Rocha, 
e motions 
ut not in 
motions?’ 
requires 
ads some 
he notion 
ads to the 
stion that 
valid and 
discussion 
endent of 

INTERWOVEN THOUGHTS 
242 
 
Once students have understood these problems, which will lead them to think 
within the mechanical style of thinking, the teacher can then present Newton’s 
arguments and answers. Newton argues via the difference between inertial and 
non-inertial motions. In the case of body B rotating around body A,18 Newton 
interpreted B’s motion as true, since in this case the centrifugal force appears, 
while in A’s motion this force does not exist. Newton could have chosen A’s 
motion as true (by the way, this is a common issue for students). However, he 
chose B because it can also explain why centrifugal forces appear. 
 
For Newton, inertial motion would be that existing naturally, without the need 
of forces. When some force tries to move a body from its natural state, centrifugal 
forces appear as an attempt to avoid that force. That is why B’s motion is true, 
since B’s true acceleration would have generated a surge of centrifugal force. A’s 
circular motion, viewed from B, is not true, since no centrifugal force appears – 
indicating an inertial state of motion. Therefore, there are two classes of true 
motions, inertial and non-inertial (in which inertial forces appear). Accelerated 
motion in which there is no inertial force is considered an illusion. 
 
From this classification, the remaining question is to determine the frame of 
reference, since this is necessary for measuring motions. Students often indicate A 
as this referential, but when we ask from which frame of reference we could know 
A’s motion, they answer that a third frame of reference is necessary, and so on. 
They often compare this situation with the Earth rotating around the Sun, and the 
Sun rotating around our galaxy, etc. If no material body can be chosen as the 
privileged frame of reference, what can we do? Students usually make the most 
interesting proposals in trying to answer this question, some of them very similar to 
those made by Ernst Mach, who proposed the center of mass of all bodies in the 
universe as the frame of reference (Rocha, 2015). 
 
Newton proposes choosing absolute space as the privileged frame of reference, 
defining true motions as changings of place in this space. This decision is due to 
the need for choosing a frame of reference that is not material and is external to 
matter; absolute space, as independent of matter, immovable, and present in all 
places, fits these requirements for the privileged frame of reference. Students often 
question this hypothesis. At the same time that they find it unbelievable, students 
recognize it as the best way to solve the problems posed to them, given the 
knowledge and tools available. 
 
However, if we recall that we can only detect and measure motion from a 
certain frame of reference, how can we measure motion in relation to invisible, 
homogeneous absolute space? For Newton, it was enough to choose bodies at rest 
in relation to this space (this is also a common proposal among students), since, 
from there, we could observe the same motions as if we were in absolute space – 
these are the well-known inertial frames. At this point, students usually become 
curious about the impossibility of differentiating between rest and rectilinear and 
uniform motion. This is precisely one of those limitations of Newtonian mechanics 
which opened a field to posterior criticism in the history of physics (Ghins, 1991). 
Students usually discuss this limitation and try to think of alternatives. At this 
moment, the teacher can connect the conversation with some of the criticisms 

ROCHA & GURGEL 
243 
levelled against Newton by his successors. For this reason, inertial frames of 
reference must include rectilinear and uniform movements in relation to absolute 
space. Only from them is it possible to observe true motions.  
 
Students usually question the existence of inertial frames of reference, since all 
bodies in the universe are under the influences of, at the very least, gravitational 
force. Here is when the necessary approximations of the theory appear. Newtonian 
mechanics are valid when we can abstract from the outside world and consider a 
body on Earth at rest in relation to absolute space (in that sense taking the Earth as 
absolute space – and disregarding its motion around the Sun). This consideration is 
useful for the study of bodies on Earth without significant displacements. For 
studies on a larger scale, this approximation is not enough, as when planets are 
studied, in which case the Sun usually is a good referential.  
 
In summary, Newton’s three laws are connected in a system. The first tells us 
what natural motions in the universe are like when there is no interaction with 
other bodies. This motion depends solely on the shape of space (Euclidian 
geometry). In this case, the only possibilities are to be at rest or in rectilinear and 
uniform motion in relation to absolute space. What it means to be in relation to 
absolute space is crucial to understanding the meaning of inertial motion. It is 
helpful to extrapolate this knowledge to common situations familiar to students, 
such as the movement of a person in a decelerating bus, which approximates the 
Earth as absolute space. This is important in order to avoid distorting the meaning 
of inertia. Without these considerations, it might seem that any rectilinear motion, 
observed from any frame of reference, is inertial, which substantially distorts its 
meaning.  
 
The second law, which benefitted from the observations of many earlier 
scientists, relates force, mass, and acceleration, indicating how a body may be 
removed from its inertial state. Force is needed to accelerate the body, the impact 
of which will depend on the body’s inertial mass (which is different from 
gravitational mass). A body without mass, and, hence, without inertia, would be 
infinitely accelerated. Newton’s second law gives us a tool to explain why a body 
was removed from its inertial state. At this point, connections with the 
mathematical dimension of the concepts of velocity, acceleration and force are 
required. Newton’s third law describes the consequences of removing a body from 
its inertial state: inertial forces will appear (reaction), a phenomenon for which 
absolute space is responsible. When an inertial force appears, we then realize that 
we are not in an inertial frame. Understanding inertial forces is crucial to 
understanding Newtonian thought. From them, it is possible to justify the adoption 
of the concepts of inertial frames of reference and absolute space.  
 
Teachers can follow this normativity through different strategies and themes. 
For instance, the Newtonian style of thinking can emerge from a discussion about 
the motion of planets and other celestial bodies (centrifugal force is responsible for 
the oval shape of earth) – in this case, students should have previous knowledge of 
these facts. Different thought experiments, activities, observations, experiments, 
and exercises can be included in order to teach the above-mentioned abstractions 
and assumptions of Newtonian mechanics. Teaching this philosophical dimension 

INTERWOVEN THOUGHTS 
244 
will allow the emergence of questions, hypotheses, and criticism, just as was the 
case over the course of the history of physics – for instance, where the ether 
hypothesis was proposed as a substitute for absolute space in electromagnetic 
theory, and to allow new ways to answer this question in relativity theory. 
Although we have focused on the philosophical dimension, this normativity is 
stronger when considered together with its related mathematical and empirical 
aspects.  
FINAL CONSIDERATIONS 
We have shown how the current picture of physics knowledge is equated to that 
presented in its formalized theories and based on an ingenious view of the way 
language works. We have demonstrated how this conception, which tends toward 
utilitarianism, is not compatible with humanistic claims, even if educative 
proposals are accompanied by humanistic intentions. We have argued, from 
Wittgenstein’s philosophy of language, for a consideration of how language works 
when used by physicists in their practices, and concluded that physics language is 
not only a tool for communication and representation, but constitutes forms of life. 
Hence, physics knowledge cannot be conceived in a predominantly utilitarian 
manner if we want to offer students a humanistic education. Physics language can 
provide new possibilities for knowing, thinking, and acting, which are only 
achieved if we go beyond its utilitarian use.  
 
The concepts presented in formalized theories are connected to the normativity 
of physics practices, encompassing more rules than those presented in the final 
theory as we see it in textbooks. We have argued for a consideration of the 
philosophical dimension of this normativity as a way to bring a more humanistic 
approach to physics knowledge, and proposed an example within Newtonian 
mechanics. We contend that it is not enough to know ‘that’, but that students 
should also learn ‘how’. In other words, it is not enough to teach students that 
physics is a human endeavor via the insertion of history and philosophy of science 
in science teaching, teachers must also learn to teach ways of thinking about 
physics in a humanist manner. Students should learn this way of thinking using the 
new language of physics. 
 
Naturally, a utilitarian use of physics concepts can help students to understand 
devices and objects such as cellular phones, electricity bills, or hydroelectric 
plants; these are all important things to comprehend in our current social contexts, 
and will enable some actions and activities. However, the scientific rationality 
present in our society is more deeply entrenched than such a treatment of physics 
can elucidate. Moreover, the meaning of concepts will depend on the normativity 
of which they are part. We cannot teach all possible applications of physics 
concepts, but we can teach students their normativity, which grants students 
precious and crucial autonomy of thought. If all applications of concepts in a 
physics curriculum are previously determined, the teacher loses her/his authority 
and identity (Young, 2010). Utilitarian uses of concepts cannot overcome everyday 

ROCHA & GURGEL 
245 
experience – they are more useful as local tools we can offer to students, which 
may easily be incorporated into their conventional ways of thinking. 
 
Scientism is the most pervasive influence of the scientific way of thinking in our 
society, spreading the ideology of the natural sciences as the only and correct way 
of knowing. This ideology is mainly based on the power of predicting and 
describing phenomena through its mathematical dimension. People, cultures, and 
ethnicities are reduced to numbers, laws, and reports. Learning the style of physics 
thinking we have proposed allows students to perceive how, when, and why this 
thinking is efficient, and to realize its abstractions, limitations, and intentions, as 
well as its historical character. Hence, we can avoid generalizations to fields that 
are not compatible with physics’ intentions. In addition to understanding the scope 
of physics knowledge, we can offer students a new picture of the world, allowing 
them to develop both intellectually, through new learning experiences and 
language-games, and in their identities, for having taken a role in the shared 
development of physics knowledge. The power of learning physics resides 
precisely in learning its way of thinking.  
NOTES 
1  The term ‘picture of the world’ is used in a Wittgensteinian sense, as the end of our reason chain, 
directing our thoughts in one direction. “It is like a pair of glasses on our nose through which we see 
whatever we look at. It never occurs to us to take them off” (PI, §103). 
2  In this work, we are going to give examples from Newtonian mechanics, in order to facilitate 
comparisons, since we are going to build a proposal for the teaching of this theory. 
3  See Lederman et al. (2002, p. 499). In this publication, the authors present a consensus list of 
knowledge about the nature of science which is gleaned from the consensus from international 
standard documents. This view is well known and used in science education research. 
4 
As demonstrated in a recent review by Teixeira, Greca, and Freire Jr. (2012). 
5  Not to be confused with the use of the word grammar related to the structure of sentences. 
6 
There are degrees of correctness. 
7 
Zettel, published in 1967. 
8  Paty (2001) demonstrates the necessary relationship between both the subjective and the objective 
dimensions in physics theories. 
9  We could analyze other types of language-games, with an even more panoramic view. However, we 
want to emphasize physics language as related to theories, since it seems difficult to see how they 
are embedded in physics practices; showing this can also allow for different abilities when we 
consider how they are used. 
10  Mach had not finished his new mechanics, but nonetheless significantly influenced Albert Einstein 
(see Fitas, 2009). 
11  We consider Einstein’s analysis as, in a sense, part of Newtonian mechanics, because this theory 
contains its own prospects for criticism. 
12  Hacking (2012) argues for the existence of different styles of thinking in science, and the three 
mentioned here can be framed to represent what he calls the laboratory, hypothetical modeling, and 
mathematical styles. 
13  This is different from teaching students how to apply concepts in particular situations external to 
physics practices. These applications are learned in a very determined way (e.g. learning how to 
calculate the electric resistance of the shower in order to know how much of the electric bill is for 
the shower). This is a necessary facet of understanding, but to understand the concept only from a 
particular application is to determine thinking,  
 
 

INTERWOVEN THOUGHTS 
246 
 
14  We prioritize metaphysical assumptions within the variety of philosophical ones. In a broader study, 
it would be interesting to analyze assumptions of an epistemological nature, such as the notion of 
causality embedded in Newtonian mechanics.  
15  Historical episodes should be taken into account in planning educative proposals, helping teachers to 
identify the normativity surrounding concepts.  
16  The fact that something has been approached in a certain way historically does not mean that it 
should be approached in the same way in the classroom. It is not necessary to perform the same 
analysis as a historian would, since this mode can be left to a separate discipline involving the 
history of science. First, students need to understand these problems and then be encouraged to learn 
how to think about them in new ways.  
17  To see examples of mental experiments, see Gilbert and Reiner (2010). 
18  Newton presents another mental experiment. See Ghins (1991). 
REFERENCES 
Aikenhead, G. S. (2007). Humanistic perspectives in science curriculum. In S. K. Abell & N. G. 
Lederman (Eds.), Handbook of research on science education (pp. 881–910). Mahwah, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.  
Baker, G. P., & Hacker, P. M. S. (2009). Wittgenstein rules, grammar and necessity. Oxford: Wiley – 
Blackwell. 
Barra, E. (1993). Newton sobre o movimento, espaço e tempo. Cadernos de Historia e Filosofia da 
Ciencia, 1(2), 86-155.  
Costa, N. C. A. (1997). O conhecimento científico. São Paulo: Discurso Editorial.  
Einstein, A. (1999). Relativity: The special and general theory. London: Barnes & Noble.  
Fitas, A. J. S. (1998). Mach: O positivismo e as reformulações da mecânica no séc. XIX. In Conference 
Proceedings of the 3rd Meeting on History and Philosophy of Science (pp. 115–134). University of 
Evora, 11–12 November. 
Gauld, C. (2014). Using history to teach mechanics. In M. R. Matthews (Ed.), International handbook 
of research in history, philosophy and science teaching (pp. 57–98). Dordrecht, Heidelberg, New 
York, London: Springer.  
Ghins, M. (1991). A inércia e o espaço-tempo absoluto. De Newton a Einstein. Campinas: Editora da 
Unicamp.  
Greca, I. M., & Freire Jr., O. A. (2004). A “crítica forte” da ciência e implicações para a educação em 
ciências. Ciência e Educação, 10(3), 343–361.  
Hacker, P. M. S. (1986). Insight and illusion. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
Hacking, I. (2012). Language, truth and reason. Studies in History and Philosophy of Science, 43, 599–
609. 
Gilbert, J. K., & Reiner, M. (2010). Thought experiments in science education: Potential and current 
realization. International Journal of Science Education, 22(3), 265–283. 
Gottschalk, C. M. C. (2009). Uma leitura do álbum para a pesquisa educacional [A reading of the album 
for educational research]. In A. R. Moreno (Ed.), Wittgenstein – Como ler o álbum? (pp. 247–280). 
Campinas: Unicamp, Centro de Lógica, Epistemologia e História da Ciência. 
Lederman, N. G., Abd-El-Khalick, F., Bell, R. L., & Schwartz, R. S. (2002). Views of nature of science 
questionnaire: Toward valid and meaningful assessment of learner’s conceptions of nature of 
science. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 39(6), 497–521. 
Mach, E. (1902). The science of mechanics (J. McComack, Trans.). Chicago: Open-Court. (Originally 
published in 1883.) 
McGrew, T. Kelly, Alspector-Kelly, M., & Alhoff, F. (2009). Philosophy of science. An historical 
anthology. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing.  
Paty, M. (1992). Endo-referência de uma ciência formalizada da natureza. Estudos Avançados, 6(14), 
107–141. 
 
 

ROCHA & GURGEL 
247 
 
Paty, M. (1993). Einstein, cientista e filósofo? Estudos Avançados, 7(19), 91–132. 
Paty, M. (2001). Os conceitos da física: Conteúdos racionais e construções na história. Principia, 5(12), 
209–240. 
Rocha, M. N. (2015). A necessidade do pensamento filosófico para a compreensão da física: Um estudo 
inspirado em Wittgenstein no contexto da mecânica newtoniana. Master’s Thesis, PIEC (Interfaculty 
Program in Science Teaching), University of São Paulo.  
Seker, H., & Welch, L. C. (2006). The use of history of mechanics in teaching motion and force units. 
Science & Education, 15(1), 55–89. 
Serra, J. M. P. (2008). Filosofia e ciência. LusoSofia. Available from http://www.lusosofia.net/ 
textos/serra_paulo_filosofia_e_ciencia.pdf (accessed March 10, 2015). 
Teixeira, E. S., Greca, I. M., & Freire Jr., O. F. (2012). The history and philosophy of science in physics 
teaching: A research synthesis of didactic interventions. Science & Education, 21, 771–796. 
Thornton, S. T., & Marion, J. B. (2004). Classical dynamics of particles and systems. Belmont: 
Thomson. 
Toulmin, S. (1953). The philosophy of science. An introduction. London: Hutchinson. 
Videira, A. A. P. (2013). A inevitabilidade da filosofia da ciência na passagem do século XIX. Rio 
Grande do Sul: Unijuí. 
Wittgenstein, L. (1999). Investigações filosóficas (José Carlos Bruni, Trans.). São Paulo: Nova Cultural. 
(Originally published in 1953.) 
Wittgenstein, L. (1967). Zettel (O. Castro & C. U. Moulines, Trans.). London: Basic Blackwell. 
Young, M. (2010). The future of education in a knowledge society: The radical case for a subject-based 
curriculum. Pacific Asian Education, 22(1), 21–32. 
 
Maristela do Nascimento Rocha 
Post Graduate Program in Science Education 
University of São Paulo 
São Paulo-SP, Brazil 
 
Ivã Gurgel 
Department of Experimental Physics 
Institute of Physics 
University of São Paulo 
São Paulo-SP, Brazil 
 

