Timothy E. Parker
Senior Crossword Puzzle Editor, 
USA Today Crosswords
•  Solve 150 puzzles from easy to 
treacherous
•  Stimulate your brain and increase your 
mental fitness
•  Reduce eyestrain with a large-print 
format and oversized answer grids  
•  Solve clues that are appropriate for 
prime-timers
Learn to:
Crosswords 
For Seniors
Making Everything Easier!™

Start with FREE Cheat Sheets
Cheat Sheets include
 
• Checklists
 
• Charts
 
• Common Instructions
 
• And Other Good Stuff!
Get Smart at Dummies.com 
Dummies.com makes your life easier with 1,000s 
of answers on everything from removing wallpaper 
to using the latest version of Windows. 
Check out our
 
• Videos
 
• Illustrated Articles
 
• Step-by-Step Instructions
Plus, each month you can win valuable prizes by entering 
our Dummies.com sweepstakes. *
Want a weekly dose of Dummies? Sign up for Newsletters on
 
• Digital Photography
 
• Microsoft Windows & Office
 
• Personal Finance & Investing
 
• Health & Wellness
 
• Computing, iPods & Cell Phones
 
• eBay
 
• Internet
 
• Food, Home & Garden
Find out “HOW” at Dummies.com
*Sweepstakes not currently available in all countries; visit Dummies.com for official rules.
Get More and Do More at Dummies.com®
To access the Cheat Sheet created specifically for this book, go to 
www.dummies.com/cheatsheet/crosswordsforseniors

by Timothy E. Parker,
with Joan Friedman
Crosswords 
For Seniors
FOR
DUMmIES
‰

Crosswords For Seniors For Dummies®
Published by
Wiley Publishing, Inc.
111 River St.
Hoboken, NJ 07030-5774
www.wiley.com
Copyright © 2009 by Wiley Publishing, Inc., Indianapolis, Indiana
Published by Wiley Publishing, Inc., Indianapolis, Indiana
Published simultaneously in Canada
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any form or 
by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning or otherwise, except as permit-
ted under Sections 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior written 
permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the 
Copyright Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax (978) 646-8600. 
Requests to the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley 
& Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, (201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or online at http://
www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
Trademarks: Wiley, the Wiley Publishing logo, For Dummies, the Dummies Man logo, A Reference for the 
Rest of Us!, The Dummies Way, Dummies Daily, The Fun and Easy Way, Dummies.com, Making Everything 
Easier, and related trade dress are trademarks or registered trademarks of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. and/
or its affi liates in the United States and other countries, and may not be used without written permission. 
All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners. Wiley Publishing, Inc., is not associated 
with any product or vendor mentioned in this book.
LIMIT OF LIABILITY/DISCLAIMER OF WARRANTY: THE PUBLISHER AND THE AUTHOR MAKE NO 
REPRESENTATIONS OR WARRANTIES WITH RESPECT TO THE ACCURACY OR COMPLETENESS OF 
THE CONTENTS OF THIS WORK AND SPECIFICALLY DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, INCLUDING WITH-
OUT LIMITATION WARRANTIES OF FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. NO WARRANTY MAY BE 
CREATED OR EXTENDED BY SALES OR PROMOTIONAL MATERIALS. THE ADVICE AND STRATEGIES 
CONTAINED HEREIN MAY NOT BE SUITABLE FOR EVERY SITUATION. THIS WORK IS SOLD WITH THE 
UNDERSTANDING THAT THE PUBLISHER IS NOT ENGAGED IN RENDERING LEGAL, ACCOUNTING, OR 
OTHER PROFESSIONAL SERVICES. IF PROFESSIONAL ASSISTANCE IS REQUIRED, THE SERVICES OF 
A COMPETENT PROFESSIONAL PERSON SHOULD BE SOUGHT. NEITHER THE PUBLISHER NOR THE 
AUTHOR SHALL BE LIABLE FOR DAMAGES ARISING HEREFROM. THE FACT THAT AN ORGANIZA-
TION OR WEBSITE IS REFERRED TO IN THIS WORK AS A CITATION AND/OR A POTENTIAL SOURCE 
OF FURTHER INFORMATION DOES NOT MEAN THAT THE AUTHOR OR THE PUBLISHER ENDORSES 
THE INFORMATION THE ORGANIZATION OR WEBSITE MAY PROVIDE OR RECOMMENDATIONS IT 
MAY MAKE. FURTHER, READERS SHOULD BE AWARE THAT INTERNET WEBSITES LISTED IN THIS 
WORK MAY HAVE CHANGED OR DISAPPEARED BETWEEN WHEN THIS WORK WAS WRITTEN AND 
WHEN IT IS READ.
For general information on our other products and services, please contact our Customer Care 
Department within the U.S. at 877-762-2974, outside the U.S. at 317-572-3993, or fax 317-572-4002.
For technical support, please visit www.wiley.com/techsupport.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print may 
not be available in electronic books.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2009931745
ISBN: 978-0-470-49157-7
Manufactured in the United States of America
10   9   8   7   6   5   4   3   2   1

Publisher’s Acknowledgments
We’re proud of this book; please send us your comments through our Dummies online registration form 
located at http://dummies.custhelp.com. For other comments, please contact our Customer Care 
Department within the U.S. at 877-762-2974, outside the U.S. at 317-572-3993, or fax 317-572-4002.
Some of the people who helped bring this book to market include the following:
Acquisitions, Editorial, and Media Development
Project Editor: Natalie Faye Harris
Acquisitions Editor: Lindsay Lefevere
Copy Editor: Christine Pingleton
Assistant Editor: Erin Calligan Mooney
Editorial Program Coordinator: Joe Niesen
Technical Editor: David W. Fisher 
(http://puzzles.about.com/)
Editorial Manager: Christine Meloy Beck
Editorial Assistants: Jennette ElNaggar, David Lutton
Cartoons: Rich Tennant (www.the5thwave.com)
Composition Services
Project Coordinator: Katie Crocker
Layout and Graphics: Brooke Graczyk, Erin Zeltner
Proofreader: Betty Kish
Publishing and Editorial for Consumer Dummies
Diane Graves Steele, Vice President and Publisher, Consumer Dummies
Kristin Ferguson-Wagstaffe, Product Development Director, Consumer Dummies
Ensley Eikenburg, Associate Publisher, Travel
Kelly Regan, Editorial Director, Travel
Publishing for Technology Dummies
Andy Cummings, Vice President and Publisher, Dummies Technology/General User
Composition Services
Debbie Stailey, Director of Composition Services

Table of Contents
Introduction ..................................................................1
Part I: Crossword Strategies and Brain Benefits ..............5
Chapter 1: Completing the Grid: How to Solve a Crossword  . . . . . . . 7
Chapter 2: Staying Sharp: Giving Your Brain 
a Workout. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles ........................................25
Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
Part III: Checking the Solutions .................................329
Chapter 4: Checking the Solutions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 331
Part IV: The Part of Tens ...........................................371
Chapter 5: Ten Tricks for Successfully Tackling 
the Trickiest Puzzles  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 373
Chapter 6: Ten Web Resources to Try 
When You’re Stuck. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 377

Introduction
F
or my money, the best hobbies are inexpensive, portable, and beneficial to 
your health. And one of the best hobbies I can think of is solving crossword 
puzzles. (As a professional puzzle editor, I admit that I’m ever-so-slightly biased.)
You may be thinking that “inexpensive” and “portable” make sense, but what good 
can crosswords do for your health? Plenty! I’m not asking you to work crosswords 
during a yoga class or while you’re on a treadmill (although if you can manage it, 
more power to you!). Crosswords have health benefits even if you’re sitting on the 
couch. Your glutes and abs may not notice whether you’ve managed to fill in every 
blank on a crossword puzzle grid, but your synapses will. (Remember synapses? 
They’re the junctions between the neurons in your brain. I talk about them in 
Chapter 2.)
The benefits of working puzzles occur within your brain. Essentially, working 
crosswords can do for your mental health what water aerobics do for your 
cardiovascular health. Whether you realized it or not, you picked up a book 
that can help your gray matter become fit and trim.
Oh, and by the way, crosswords are a lot of fun too. After all, what good is an 
inexpensive, portable, healthy hobby if you don’t enjoy doing it?
About This Book
The heart of this book is crossword puzzles: page after page of entertaining, 
challenging crossword puzzles. If you’re a puzzling pro and can’t wait to dive in, 
you have my blessing to pick up your pencil (or pen) and go.
But if you’ve never worked a crossword puzzle before, take heart: I devote 
the first chapter of this book to explaining the basics of how crosswords are 
constructed and how they can be solved. I list the various types of clues you’ll 
encounter, resources you may want to have on hand, and how to make solving 
crosswords a group activity if that’s your thing.
If you’re even the least bit curious about the health benefits of doing crosswords 
and other puzzles, spend a little quality time with Chapter 2. In its pages, I explore 
how you can work on improving your brain’s health by getting lots of fun, stimulat-
ing mental exercise.

2
Crosswords For Seniors For Dummies 
Brain health is a hot topic for a couple key reasons:
 
✓ A growing senior population: It’s no surprise that we have a large — and 
expanding — senior population in the United States. As of this writing, more 
than 37 million Americans are 65 or older. The U.S. Census Bureau projects 
that by the year 2050, that number will grow to more than 86 million!
 
✓ The prevalence of Alzheimer’s: We also have many cases of Alzheimer’s 
disease in our midst. The Alzheimer’s Association estimates that more 
than 5 million Americans are living with the disease now and that 10 million 
Baby Boomers will develop Alzheimer’s during their lifetime.
If you’re north of 60, chances are you know someone — or several someones — 
struggling with the harsh realities of mental deficiency. And chances are you’re 
willing to work hard to avoid the same fate. A growing body of research indi-
cates that there are concrete (and often very simple) steps you can take to give 
your brain the proper fuel for long-term fitness. Chapter 2 offers lots of ideas 
for how to start a mental fitness routine.
Conventions Used in This Book
I include a handful of Web site addresses in this book so you can explore additional 
resources if you’d like. The Web addresses appear in monofont, which makes them 
easier to locate if you want to go back and find them after you’re done reading.
Keep in mind that when this book was printed, some Web addresses may have 
needed to break across two lines of text. If that happened, rest assured that we 
haven’t put in any extra characters (such as hyphens) to indicate the break. So, 
when using one of these Web addresses, just type in exactly what you see in 
this book, pretending as though the line break doesn’t exist.
Foolish Assumptions
I try not to make any assumptions about how much experience you have with 
working the types of puzzles that appear in this book. That’s why Chapter 1 
helps you get familiar with crosswords and how to solve them. That’s also 
why I include puzzles of varying levels of difficulty in this book. I’ve grouped 
puzzles together into four categories: Easy, Tricky, Tough, and Treacherous. 
So whether you’re a crossword novice or expert, you’ll find puzzles to give 
you the challenge you need.

3
 Introduction
My only assumption is that you want to have fun and stimulate your brain at 
the same time. Oh, and that you bring two critical tools with you: pencils and 
patience!
How This Book Is Organized
The bulk of this book is devoted to what you came looking for: crossword 
puzzles (and their solutions). But I’ve tucked a few extra goodies around that 
exciting center.
Part I: Crossword Strategies 
and Brain Benefits
My first task in this part is to get you familiar with crossword puzzles. If you’re 
a crossword aficionado, you may just want to skim Chapter 1 to see whether 
you can pick up any new ideas for how to approach a puzzle. If you’re new to 
crosswords, you’ll likely benefit from a complete reading of Chapter 1 so you 
can understand how crossword grids are constructed, what types of clues 
you’re likely to encounter, and how you may want to go about solving each one.
In Chapter 2, I explore some fascinating reasons for spending quality time with 
this book. I introduce you to what recent research says about the importance 
of mental exercise and the impact it can have on your cognitive abilities — 
including your memory — as you age.
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles
If you’re looking for the meat of the book, you’ll find it in Part II. This part 
contains 150 crosswords: easy puzzles, challenging puzzles, and maddening 
puzzles that may have you screaming. I’ve included puzzles with a variety of 
themes, so you’re certain to find lots that pique your interest.
Part III: Checking the Solutions
One sure way to improve your puzzling skills is to push yourself to find solu-
tions even when you’re pretty sure your brain is maxed out. So use Part III as 
a way to pat yourself on the back after your hard work rather than as a crutch 
whenever you feel wobbly solving a puzzle.

4
Crosswords For Seniors For Dummies 
Part IV: The Part of Tens
Every For Dummies book includes a Part of Tens, which features chapters that 
offer quick bites of information. The morsels I provide include ten of my best 
tips for solving even the trickiest puzzles and ten great Web resources that you 
may want to add to your “favorites” list.
Icons Used in This Book
In the Part I chapters, you’ll notice two icons in the margins that help you navi-
gate the text:
 
When you see this icon, know that the text next to it contains a helpful hint for 
solving crossword puzzles.
 
This icon points out information that you want to tuck into your mental filing 
cabinet — it’s worth holding on to.
Where to Go from Here
Your entry point into this book depends on your relationship with crosswords. 
If you’re a newbie, I recommend that you spend some time with Chapter 1 
before putting pencil to paper.
If you’re already a puzzling pro and picked up this book knowing exactly how 
to tackle the grid, go ahead and jump into the good stuff: the puzzles in Part II. 
But even if you’re fairly experienced, consider starting with a puzzle labeled 
“Easy” — it always helps to get to know the puzzle editor’s style before moving 
on to the tougher challenges.
My only rule is that you cannot jump directly to Part III! I don’t want you eyeing 
the solutions before you’ve wined and dined at least one puzzle. But I assume that 
because you’ve taken the time to read this Introduction, you’re a pretty patient 
person and you’re not going to spoil your fun by looking at the answers first.
No matter what your crossword background is, I hope you’ll stop by Chapter 2 
at some time during your journey through this book. I find the topic of brain 
fitness fascinating, and I think you will too.

Part I
Crossword 
Strategies and 
Brain Benefits

In this part . . .
C
hapter 1 introduces you to the basics of 
solving a crossword puzzle, including what 
you’re seeing when you look at a crossword grid, 
resources you may want to have on hand, and 
tips to apply when you’re truly stuck.
In Chapter 2, I explore the mental benefits of 
scheduling some quality crossword time into 
your day. I explain what current research says 
about the importance of exercising your brain, 
why crosswords fit the bill so perfectly, and 
what other activities you may want to add to 
your mental workout routine.

Chapter 1
Completing the Grid: 
How to Solve a Crossword
In This Chapter
▶ Getting to know crossword elements
▶ Letting the theme guide you
▶ Recognizing various types of clues
▶ Tapping helpful resources
M
any of us started working crossword puzzles in elementary school, 
when our teachers had us fill in puzzles that reinforced our spelling, 
reading, science, or social studies lessons of the day. Chances are you’ve been 
familiar with the structure of crossword puzzles for a long time, and you’ve 
probably had at least some experience working them.
But that doesn’t necessarily mean you’re comfortable with them. In fact, you 
may feel downright nervous when you sit down to work a crossword these 
days. After all, what better way is there to test how much knowledge you’ve 
accumulated — and retained — over the years? And what better way to feel like 
a complete moron than to find yourself staring blankly at clue after clue?
Maybe you’ve long avoided crosswords precisely because they point out how 
much you don’t know. And maybe you’re now ready to overcome your fears. As 
I explain in Chapter 2, the benefits of working crosswords are potentially great. 
Plus, they’re a lot of fun — after you get past the fear and frustration.
I offer lots of suggestions in this chapter for how to become a decent cross-
word puzzler. It doesn’t matter what your IQ is or how many years of schooling 
you’ve had — you can enjoy crosswords, and I’m happy to show you how.

8
Part I: Crossword Strategies and Brain Benefits 
Becoming Familiar with Some 
Puzzle Components
I want to first explain a few basics about how crossword puzzles are constructed. 
Maybe you’ve never thought about it before, but puzzle constructors follow some 
pretty strict rules when they sit down to create new puzzles. I’m not just talking 
about the fact that some clues are labeled “Across” because their answers are 
written horizontally on the crossword grid, and some clues are labeled “Down” 
because their answers are entered vertically on the grid. The rules they follow are 
a bit more complicated than that, and knowing them provides information you can 
use to develop your own crossword-solving strategy. Here are a few key rules:
 
✓ Each crossword puzzle grid is a perfect square and is perfectly symmet-
rical. In other words, the pattern of black and white squares is the same 
if you look at the puzzle right-side-up and upside-down. These facts don’t 
affect how you solve the puzzle, but they’re part of what makes a cross-
word puzzle a thing of beauty.
 
✓ On a crossword puzzle grid, you shouldn’t encounter any unchecked 
squares — white squares that are used in an Across entry but not in a 
Down entry, or vice versa. If unchecked squares were allowed, that would 
make your life harder — you’d have only one opportunity to figure out 
what belongs in that square. Instead, you always get two chances to fill a 
square: by solving the Across clue or the Down clue.
 
✓ The phrasing of the clues largely determines the difficulty of the puzzle. 
The answers themselves may be words you use every day, but the clues 
may or may not lead you directly to the answers. That’s part of the beauty 
of making crosswords: The puzzle constructor can be straightforward or 
extremely creative and oblique, depending on how easy or difficult a puzzle 
needs to be. And that’s part of the beauty of working crosswords: The more 
time you spend with a particular puzzle, the more familiar you’ll become 
with how the puzzle constructor is phrasing the clues.
 
✓ Each clue should be the same part of speech as its answer. Puzzle con-
structors aren’t perfect, and sometimes they mess up this rule, but in gen-
eral you can rely on this being true. If the clue calls for a verb, the answer 
will be a verb.
 
✓ No clue should contain a significant word that appears in its answer. For 
example, “Chicago Sox” would be a lousy clue for the answer WHITESOX.
If you find yourself attracted to the symmetry of the crossword grid and won-
dering whether you have what it takes to construct puzzles, pick up a copy of 
Crossword Puzzle Challenges For Dummies by Patrick Berry (Wiley). In it, you’ll 
find all kinds of information about how to craft a terrific crossword.

9
 Chapter 1: Completing the Grid: How to Solve a Crossword
Considering the Theme
Many crossword puzzles — including those you find in Part II of this book — 
are developed around a central theme. What does that mean? It means that the 
puzzle constructor gives the crossword a title (other than just a number), and 
some, or possibly all, of the clues in the puzzle relate to that title — another 
tool to help you establish your puzzle-solving strategy. You just have to figure 
out what the title means!
Here are a few examples from this book:
 
✓ One of the Easy puzzles in Part II is titled “New Shoes,” as in “Baby needs a 
new pair of shoes.” Some of the clues and answers relate to gambling.
 
✓ You can find a Tough puzzle titled “Ringing in the Ears” in Part II that con-
tains clues and answers relating to things that make noise.
 
✓ One of the Treacherous puzzles in Part II is titled “Off to the Shrink” and 
features psychiatric terms and phobias.
Identifying Specific Types 
of Hints and Clues
In any crossword puzzle, you’re bound to find various types of clues. In the fol-
lowing sections, I explain some of the most common types you’ll encounter and 
offer hints for solving them.
Filling in blanks
The fill-in-the-blank clue is often the easiest type to solve, which is why I men-
tion it first. The clue usually takes the form of a familiar phrase or a title (of a 
book, movie, play, or TV show, for example). The puzzle constructor has left 
out one or more words from the phrase or title, and she uses an underline to 
indicate where those words are missing.
Here’s an example: “A Tale ___ Cities.” Even if you haven’t read Dickens for 
years, you may recall that the novel referenced here is A Tale of Two Cities. 
That means the answer to this clue is OFTWO, and that’s what you’d write in 
the crossword grid.

10
Part I: Crossword Strategies and Brain Benefits 
Answering trivia
The trivia clue is often another fairly easy type of clue to answer. That’s 
because if you don’t know the answer to a trivia clue, you can probably find it 
if you’re willing to use outside resources. For example, you may see a clue like 
“2008 best-director brothers” or “Ben Franklin birthplace.” If you don’t know 
that the COENS won the 2008 Oscar for their direction of No Country for Old 
Men or that Franklin was born in BOSTON, chances are you can find out by 
going online or to the right printed resources.
 
As I explain in the upcoming section “Gathering Your Resources,” some people 
refuse to use outside resources because they think doing so is equivalent to 
cheating. I respectfully disagree. Using outside resources is part of the process 
of increasing your reservoir of knowledge. Ideally, the more puzzles you work, 
the more information you’ll have stored in your brain, and the less frequently 
you’ll need to turn to books or Web sites for help. But I see no shame in using 
these resources when you need them.
Punning around
This type of clue can be fairly challenging, depending on how the puzzle con-
structor phrases it. Unlike with a trivia clue, you probably won’t get much 
help from outside resources to solve puns; you’ll be left to your own creative 
thinking.
The pun clue is often (but not always) followed by a question mark to indicate 
that a play on words is at hand. Consider this example: The clue is “What cows 
dance to?” and the answer is MOOSIC. (Feel free to groan.)
Playing with descriptions
The puzzle constructor can get really creative here because there are endless ways 
to describe a single word or phrase. To get the answer ORANGE, for example, you 
might see a clue as simple as “Citrus fruit,” which would require that you eliminate 
other possibilities (such as lemon, grapefruit, and lime) in order to arrive at the 
right answer. But the puzzle constructor could also pose a more oblique clue, such 
as “Rhyme eluder,” which would require that you understand he’s referring to a 
word that doesn’t lend itself easily to rhymes.

11
 Chapter 1: Completing the Grid: How to Solve a Crossword
Solving analogies
Maybe it has been a while since you took a standardized test, but this type of 
clue is something that educators love to include on them. Basically, the puzzle 
constructor offers three pieces of information, and you need to fill in the 
fourth. The way to do so is to determine the relationship between the first two 
pieces of information.
For example, you may see a clue such as “Poodle:Dog as Arabian:__.” The way 
to read this clue to yourself is to say “Poodle is to Dog as Arabian is to Blank.” 
When you figure out the relationship between “Poodle” and “Dog” (a poodle is 
a breed of dog), you can determine that your answer is HORSE.
Figuring out abbreviations
Answers can sometimes be abbreviations, and the clues should let you know 
that. An obvious way for the puzzle constructor to tip you off is for the clue to 
include “Abbr.” For example, the answer to “U.S. central bank: Abbr.” would be 
FED (instead of FEDERALRESERVE).
 
Another way that the puzzle constructor can indicate an abbreviation is 
required is by using an abbreviation within the clue itself. For example, in the 
sample puzzle shown later in this chapter, the clue for 37 Across is “Hosp. 
aides.” The fact that you see “Hosp.” instead of “Hospital” tells you that the 
answer will be an abbreviation (RNAS).
Speaking a foreign language
Just as the puzzle constructor has to let you know when an answer should be 
an abbreviation, he also must let you know if the answer should be in a foreign 
language. And as with abbreviations, he has a variety of ways to do so.
If the answer is supposed to be in French, you may see one of the following in 
the clue:
 
✓ The tag “(Fr.)”: The answer to “Love (Fr.)” would be AMOUR, for example. 
This type of clue is rarely used nowadays.
 
✓ Where the answer would likely be heard: The answer to the clue “Love in 
Paris” would also be AMOUR.
 
✓ Another word or phrase from the same language: To arrive at AMOUR, 
you may see “Love, s’il vous plait,” for example.

12
Part I: Crossword Strategies and Brain Benefits 
Gathering Your Resources
Let’s get real: Most of us can’t work a crossword puzzle without a little outside 
help. Or a lot of it. Even fairly easy crossword puzzles are bound to contain a 
few clues that stump you. And when you build up the courage to work on the 
toughies, well . . . you may feel like you’re doing battle. And no one should go 
into battle alone.
Thanks to the Web, the number of resources available to you while you’re 
working a puzzle is pretty much infinite. But that doesn’t mean I recommend 
entering the key words in every clue into a search engine to see where they 
lead you. Not only does that suck the fun out of puzzling, but it’ll also probably 
lead you astray about 95 percent of the time.
Instead, I recommend that you spend some time gathering a handful of key 
resources that you’re likely to use again and again. Whether you prefer online 
resources or the hard-copy versions, here are some I suggest you keep handy:
 
✓ A dictionary (particularly a crossword dictionary)
 
✓ A slang dictionary
 
✓ A thesaurus
 
✓ A quotation resource
 
✓ An atlas
 
✓ An almanac
In Chapter 6 at the end of this book, I list some specific Web sites that I con-
sider worth using as resources.
If you have a friend who’s particularly brainy or a fellow puzzler, feel free to 
consider that person part of your resource list as well. Puzzling can absolutely 
be a shared experience.
 
Some people consider it cheating to use any outside resource when working a 
puzzle. I respect that opinion but don’t think it works for most of us. The fact is, 
nobody knows every word in the English language, every city in the world, every 
source of every quote that’s ever been spoken. It doesn’t matter how fit your 
synapses are, you’re bound to need help sometimes. And if using an outside 
resource helps you learn something new, I’m all for it.

13
 Chapter 1: Completing the Grid: How to Solve a Crossword
Sample Puzzle: “How Grueling!”
With the information from the preceding sections in mind, consider how you 
would begin to tackle the following puzzle: 
Across
 1. Type of lap dog once 
owned by Minnie Mouse
 5. Road shoulder
 9. K-9 attack command
 14. Place for an iris
 15. Mountains bordering 
China
 16. As a friend, in French
 17. They go with studs
 19. “Care for ___ of tea?’’
 20. Jumble of spilled letters?
 21. “A votre ___!’’
 22. Scot’s “not’’
 23. Member of a team that 
visits once per year
 25. Historic Dead Sea 
fortress
 29. Old phone user
 30. Saint ___ Fire
 31. Presley’s costar in 
Love Me Tender
 32. He can make you safe at 
home
 35. 440-yard-long path
 36. Huey and Howie
 37. Hosp. aides
 38. Battle of nations
 39. One of the “Hi ho, hi 
ho’’ septet
 40. Lead guitarist’s output
 41. It may be defended by a 
scholar
 43. Flying off the shelves
 44. Reply to a knock
 46. Org. that gets you out 
of a rut?
 47. Area of South Africa
 48. “Perfect!’’
 54. “Not ___ in the world”
 55. Klingons or Vulcans, 
for example
 56. Most unsatisfactory
 57. Lease length, often
 58. Expressions of puppy 
love?
 59. Cosmologist Lauder
 60. D.C. group
 61. Honeymoon interrupter
Down
 1. “___ sock in it!’’
 2. Witch’s eye
 3. Live up to your 
promises
 4. A pop
 5. Cote cry
 6. Elmer’s contented cow
 7. Thoroughly involved
 8. Femme fatale of The 
Muppets
 9. Oceanic flavoring
 10. Zonkers
 11. Early morning favorite
 12. Play act
 13. Bishop’s headdress
 18. Domain
 24. Explorer John and 
others
 25. Calico’s comment
 26. Thomas-Edison link
 27. A good breakfast for a 
genius?
 28. “You’ve got mail’’ co.
 29. Borge and Andersen, 
for example
 31. Self-centered 
chatterboxes
 33. Hammerhead kin
 34. “Hey you!’’
 36. “Rikki Don’t ___ That 
Number’’
 37. “Get ___ of it!’’
 39. Empty out
 40. Make good use of class 
time
 42. Suffering from 
phonasthenia
 43. Some Consumer 
Reports employees
 44. Wide-eyed with wonder
 45. Fiesta fare
 46. Strain of flu
 49. Peter Fonda’s 
beekeeping role
 50. Nest eggs, briefly
 51. John Irving title 
protagonist
 52. Medicare org.
 53. Microphone word

14
Part I: Crossword Strategies and Brain Benefits 
 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61

15
 Chapter 1: Completing the Grid: How to Solve a Crossword
With your pencil in hand, read through the clues and see whether any seem 
obvious. I think most people find that fill-in-the-blank clues can be fairly easy, 
such as these found in our sample puzzle:
 
✓ 19 Across: “Care for _____ of tea?”
 
✓ 30 Across: Saint _____ Fire
 
✓ 54 Across: “Not _____ in the world”
 
✓ 1 Down: “_____ sock in it!”
 
✓ 37 Down: “Get _____ of it!”
If you can fill in even a half-dozen entries with certainty in this first stage, that’s 
a great start.
Next, go back and troll the clues for less-obvious items that you can answer 
with at least some confidence — especially those that intersect with the entries 
you’ve got on the grid already. If you think you may have an answer but aren’t 
certain, pencil the entry in lightly on the grid. If you get confirmation that one 
or more letters is correct (by solving clues that intersect with that entry), 
you’ve saved the time of having to return to that clue later.
Because our sample crossword has a theme, you may next want to consider how 
that theme plays out in the grid. If you’ve solved a few clues already, you’ll notice 
that they don’t all relate to the theme. But keeping in mind that some entries will 
be food-related (that’s where the “gruel” comes from) may put you in the right 
frame of mind to solve some clues. For example, 20 Across (“Jumble of spilled 
letters?”) may lead you to ALPHABITS more quickly if the theme is on your mind.
As a next step, consider which clues could be solved more easily if you consulted 
an outside resource. For example, you could probably solve 15 Across (“Mountains 
bordering China”) and 25 Across (“Historic Dead Sea fortress”) with the help of 
your favorite search engine. If you’re willing to go that route, now would be a good 
time to fill in some additional entries by consulting your resources.
Identifying plural entries may be a good next step. For example, 17 Across 
(“They go with studs”), 31 Down (“Self-centered chatterboxes”), and 50 Down 
(“Nest eggs, briefly”) seem likely to end in S. (And, in fact, they all do.) You can 
pencil in that letter on the grid until you solve the clues themselves. It may 
seem like small potatoes, but you never know when a single letter may help 
solve an intersecting clue!
 
Speaking of 50 Down (“Nest eggs, briefly”), it’s a good example of the creative ways 
that puzzle constructors alert you that entries need to be abbreviations. You don’t 
see “Abbr.” here, but “briefly” is a hint that the answer will be abbreviated — in 
this case, IRAS.

16
Part I: Crossword Strategies and Brain Benefits 
If you’ve made it this far and still have lots of blank boxes staring you in the 
face, don’t sweat it. Be proud of what you’ve accomplished already, take a 
break from this puzzle, and come back to it with fresh eyes later. Or, if friends 
or family members are nearby, share some clues and see whether they can help 
with one or two. You may be surprised by how solving just one clue can unlock 
other entries that had you stumped before.
And when you’re truly ready to close the book on this sample puzzle, feel free 
to turn to the beginning of Part III for its solution.

Chapter 2
Staying Sharp: Giving Your 
Brain a Workout
In This Chapter
▶ Realizing why brain fitness matters
▶ Being mentally active every day
▶ Working crosswords into your mental fitness routine
▶ Finding out more
T
onight on my local PBS station, the prime-time program is titled Magnificent 
Mind at Any Age. It’s described as exploring “the many natural ways that we 
can not only keep our brains healthy as we age, but improve and enhance our 
brain power.” Shows like this — along with countless newspaper and magazine 
articles, books, and Web sites — are increasingly focusing our attention on the 
subject of brain fitness.
Maybe you’re a PBS fan and already know lots about this subject. Maybe you 
and your doctor have talked about how to prevent and even potentially reverse 
signs of brain aging. Or maybe these words are the first you’ve ever read about 
this exciting topic, in which case I feel privileged to introduce it to you! Either 
way, I hope this chapter opens your mind to new ideas about how to keep itself 
sharp throughout your golden years.
Stimulating Your Brain: 
It’s Never Too Late
You may have been raised to believe that education is for kids and at a certain 
point, adults know everything they need to know to survive. And that may be 
true. But what you need to survive is much different than what you need to 
thrive, and I suspect most of us are more interested in thriving.

18
Part I: Crossword Strategies and Brain Benefits 
An ever-growing body of scientific research demonstrates that what our brains 
require in order to thrive — especially as our bodies get older — is lots of stim-
ulation. I’m not talking about loud music or pungent smells here: I’m talking 
about the type of stimulation that encourages you to think new thoughts, get 
creative, and push your brain to work harder than ever before.
Work harder? Isn’t that a bit unfair? After all, you get to a certain age and 
expect to reap some benefits from all the work you’ve done before. You know 
more now than you did when you were 16, right? Why isn’t that good enough?
Your brain can’t rest on its laurels any more than your body can rest on its 
past achievements. Maybe when you were 16 you could do 50 pushups without 
breaking a sweat, but that doesn’t mean you’ve got arms of steel today. We all 
know that our bodies change — significantly — as we age. What you also need 
to know is that your brain changes in similar ways. And just as you recognize 
the need to exercise in order to fend off the worst effects of aging on your body, 
you must also recognize the value of exercising your brain.
Touring your brain
To follow the logic behind the brain fitness phenomenon, I’m going to take you 
on a quick tour of what’s happening in your brain right now. I’ll start with a 
couple key definitions:
 
✓ Neurons: Neurons are cells that control your central nervous system: your 
brain and spinal column, and the nerves connected to them.
 
✓ Synapses: Synapses are tiny gaps between the neurons in your brain.
 
When synapses are working correctly, they allow your neurons to communi-
cate with each other, which keeps your nervous system functioning the way it 
should. Your nervous system must function properly in order for you to learn 
new things, retain information, and use your powers of logic and reason.
You have about 100 billion neurons in your brain. And you have literally tril-
lions of synapses — possibly even a quadrillion (that’s a 1 followed by 15 
zeroes). With numbers like that, it may seem as if you have plenty to spare. 
However, as you age, your synapses deteriorate. And because your brain activ-
ity takes place courtesy of synapses, their deterioration equates to a decrease 
in your brain function, including memory.
So to have a healthy mind, you must keep your synapses in top condition. How 
do you do that? Keep reading!

19
 Chapter 2: Staying Sharp: Giving Your Brain a Workout
Looking at recent research
In the late 1980s, a study published in the Annals of Neurology raised questions 
about why some people develop symptoms of Alzheimer’s disease and others 
don’t. Autopsies were conducted on 137 nursing home patients. As expected, 
the brains of those who had demonstrated symptoms of Alzheimer’s were filled 
with plaques (brain deposits made up of dead cells and proteins) and tangles 
(nerve cells that had become tangled together) — characteristic physical signs 
associated with the disease.
Here’s the unexpected part: The brains of ten patients who didn’t show any 
symptoms of Alzheimer’s contained the same levels of plaques and tangles. If 
the physical reasons for the disease were present in those people, why didn’t 
they get the symptoms?
There was another twist: The ten patients in question had heavier brains and 
more neurons than they should have had given their age. What made these ten 
people different from their peers?
 
As a result of this study, a new theory emerged: the cognitive reserve theory. It 
essentially says that people who have a larger reserve of neurons and stronger 
cognitive abilities can tolerate some brain deterioration without showing symp-
toms. In other words, the more you use your brain, the greater your chances of 
avoiding symptoms of Alzheimer’s. Strong stuff, huh?
Obviously, no one is offering guarantees here. I can’t promise that anything I sug-
gest in this book will add X number of years to your life, and that those years will 
be free of any symptoms of memory loss or other mental decline. But study after 
study in the past two decades has shown that mental activity can have a positive 
effect on your quality of life in the long run, and I can’t argue with that.
How do you build a cognitive reserve? The same ways that you keep your syn-
apses happy and healthy. Keep reading — I offer specific suggestions starting in 
the next section of this chapter.
 
The key to a strong cognitive reserve seems to be to start as early as you can. 
The younger you are when you begin actively pursuing brain fitness, the greater 
the reserve you can accumulate. But assuming you’re already past “early,” don’t 
panic — just make the commitment to start now. Some studies have shown that 
even people well into their 70s can improve their cognitive health by making life-
style changes and increasing their mental stimulation.

20
Part I: Crossword Strategies and Brain Benefits 
Creating a New Health Routine
The way I see it, there are two broad categories of activities you can do to take 
care of your gray matter:
 
✓ The things you’re already supposed to be doing to improve your physical 
health
 
✓ Things that specifically rev up your brain by giving it more stimulation 
than it’s used to
I discuss each category in turn.
Following your doctor’s advice
Here’s a lightning-quick tour through some activities you’re supposed to do 
to benefit your physical health — which also have pleasant side effects for 
your brain:
 
✓ Reduce stress. You probably already know that stress affects blood pres-
sure, heart function, and much more. But did you know that stress causes 
synapses to malfunction?
 
 Long-term stress can cause a neurotransmitter (a chemical that carries mes-
sages between nerve cells) called glutamate to build up in your synapses. 
If enough of it accumulates, it can become toxic and interfere with your 
memory and your ability to learn.
 
✓ Get aerobic exercise. Aerobic exercise can strengthen your heart and 
help you manage and resist stress. A bonus: Studies suggest that it also 
stimulates the creation of new neurons and strengthens the connections 
between them.
 
✓ Eat a diet rich in antioxidant foods. If your physical health alone hasn’t 
inspired you to stock up on blueberries and spinach, do so for your mental 
health. Foods rich in antioxidants may help counteract effects of free radi-
cals in your brain. (Free radicals are molecules that contain oxygen and 
attack cells throughout your body. They have been linked to cancer and 
heart disease, as well as brain deterioration.)
 
✓ Control high blood pressure and diabetes. A study published in the jour-
nal Neurology in 2001 showed that the mental abilities of participants with 
high blood pressure or diabetes declined more rapidly than those of other 
participants. High blood pressure is a risk factor for a condition called 
vascular dementia, in which a series of tiny strokes can affect memory and 
other cognitive abilities.

21
 Chapter 2: Staying Sharp: Giving Your Brain a Workout
 
 Early diagnosis and tight control of these conditions may help prevent 
some of the ill effects on your cognitive health.
Revving up your synapses
So you’re already trying to reduce your stress, exercise, eat right, and get serious 
health conditions under control. What else could you possibly have time for?
Please believe me when I say that stimulating your brain doesn’t have to be a 
complicated process. And it certainly isn’t a one-size-fits-all proposition. In a 
nutshell, here are the goals:
 
✓ To encourage your brain to work in new ways by engaging in new activities 
or doing your routine activities in new ways
 
✓ To achieve the first goal on an ongoing basis, which means continually 
shaking up your routines
An infinite number of roads can lead to these goals. Here are just a handful of 
ideas to get you thinking:
 
✓ Add new workouts to your exercise routine: Not only will your muscles 
be challenged, but if you’re trying something new to you, your mind will 
have to be engaged as well. Consider doing something truly challenging, 
such as taking a dance class or joining a sports team for seniors.
 
✓ Volunteer for an organization that truly interests you: Make sure you’re 
coming from a place of genuine interest — not obligation. Choose an organi-
zation whose mission you find fascinating, and let the staff know that you’re 
eager to learn new things.
 
✓ Read something new: One of the best ways to boost your brain power is 
to read more — and to read more carefully. Consider types of books and 
magazines that you’ve never picked up before. If the only books on your 
shelf are mystery novels but you think historical biographies might pique 
your interest, visit the library and give one a try.
 
✓ Take a class: Some colleges and universities offer special programs that 
allow seniors to take courses at discounted tuition rates. Also, check with 
community centers, churches, and other nonprofit organizations that may 
offer classes. Again, new is best: If you’ve been knitting for 40 years, an intro-
ductory knitting class may offer social opportunities (which are always good 
for mental stimulation) but not much in the way of a challenge.
 
✓ Get together with friends: Staying social is key to keeping your brain in gear. 
But don’t get stuck in routines: If you find yourself hearing the same conver-
sations every time you see certain people, figure out how to shake things up. 

22
Part I: Crossword Strategies and Brain Benefits 
Come armed with questions to ask about current events, politics, movies, 
books . . . anything that may get all of you thinking and interacting in new 
ways.
 
✓ Tackle some puzzles: In the next section, I talk about how crosswords can 
play a part in your mental fitness routine. But don’t limit yourself to cross-
words. Sudoku, logic puzzles, riddles, word searches . . . any type of puzzle 
that really engages you is going to get your mind working.
Whatever activities you choose to do to keep your brain stimulated, you need 
to enjoy them enough to do them regularly. You can’t get your body fit by 
working out three hours in a row and then ignoring your health altogether 
for two weeks (because you’re so sore from the marathon workout that you 
can’t move!). You benefit much more from working out consistently for shorter 
amounts of time — for example, every day for 30 minutes, or four days a week 
for 45 minutes each time.
 
The same is true of mental exercise. Your goal should be to make time for mental 
stimulation at least several days a week, if not every day. If you can’t devote time 
to working a crossword puzzle or taking a class every day, no problem. But don’t 
let a month go by between mental workouts.
Realizing Why Crosswords Fit the Bill
Working a crossword puzzle is all about stimulating your mind and testing your 
memory. Any given clue is going to prompt you to pore through your mental 
filing cabinet searching for names, places, events, foreign words, and other items 
that you knew once upon a time but perhaps haven’t thought about in years.
 
Working crosswords on a regular basis can give your memory a boost for a 
couple reasons:
 
✓ The more puzzles you work, the more you’ll want to rely on your own 
knowledge base for answers (as opposed to using outside resources). It’s 
simply more satisfying to pull the answer from your own brain than to pull 
it from an atlas or a Web search engine.
 
✓ You’ll discover that puzzle constructors have certain words that they 
like to work into puzzles on a regular basis. The more of these words you 
commit to memory, the easier working crosswords becomes.

23
 Chapter 2: Staying Sharp: Giving Your Brain a Workout
Demanding discipline
Most crossword puzzles require at least an hour to solve. Some require two 
hours or more. When you tackle a crossword, you’re taking on a pretty serious 
mental commitment, and succeeding requires discipline.
It’s normal to feel frustrated when you get stuck halfway through the puzzle 
and can’t seem to fill in any more entries. But if you’re going to complete a 
crossword grid, you have to develop the discipline to back up, reread clues, 
consider what resources you may want to consult, and chip away at the empty 
spaces.
Touring the world from your kitchen table
In Chapter 1, I explain that while some people bristle at the idea of using out-
side resources to help solve crossword clues, I think doing so is fine. Better 
than fine, in fact. If you get stuck on a clue, what are your options? You can 
give up and flip to the solution (not my preference), ask someone else for help 
(a great idea), or check for the answer in a book or on a Web site.
If your goal is to give your brain lots of new fodder, researching challenging 
answers seems like a great way to accomplish it. With a dictionary, a thesaurus, 
a book of quotations, and lots of other resources on hand, you have a world 
of knowledge at your fingertips. And with the crossword clues prompting you, 
you have lots of motivation to seek out that knowledge.
Revisiting your curiosity
Curiosity is one of the things we love about kids (except when you’re on a long 
car trip with a 3-year-old grandchild in the why phase). When a child encounters 
something completely new, he asks questions about it and genuinely wants to 
find out more. He wants to understand it and figure out how it relates to the stuff 
he already knows.
Carrying adult responsibilities (and schedules) often squeezes the life out of 
curiosity. But working crosswords can inspire you to be more curious. You may 
find that one little clue with a surprising solution leaves you wanting to know 
more about why that answer is correct. Feel free to put your puzzle on hold and 
find out more, right then and there. Your brain will benefit from it.

24
Part I: Crossword Strategies and Brain Benefits 
Finding Out More about Brain 
Fitness: Key Resources
This chapter barely scratches the surface when it comes to brain fitness, and 
I encourage you to find out more (especially if you’re truly curious about it, 
because what better way to stimulate your brain than to read about stimulating 
your brain?). Following is just a handful of resources to consider:
 
✓ Alzheimer’s Association: From the home page (www.alz.org), you can 
find a wealth of information on the disease. If you click on the “We Can 
Help” tab and go to “Brain Health,” you’ll find helpful links, including one 
to a crossword puzzle site!
 
✓ American Association of Retired People (AARP): The Web site, www.
aarp.org/health/brain, features links to articles on the latest brain 
research and tips for keeping your brain healthy.
 
✓ Brain Fitness Channel: At http://bfc.positscience.com, you can test 
your current level of brain fitness, read news stories about brain research, 
study how the brain functions, take part in online forums that focus on 
specific subjects that may interest you, and more.
 
✓ Prevention: The magazine’s Web site (www.prevention.com) features a 
Brain Fitness section that you access through the “Health” tab on the home 
page. You’ll find lots of articles that link physical and mental fitness, and 
you can join the Prevention online community to share stories or ask for 
feedback from other people with similar interests and concerns.
 
✓ SharpBrains: The home page of www.sharpbrains.com provides links 
to more information than any one brain may be able to absorb. Whether 
you want to read about brain-training software, nutrition, memory, stress 
management, or just about anything else brain-related, you have a good 
chance of finding what you’re looking for here.

Part II
Tackling the 
Puzzles

In this part . . .
G
ot your pencil ready? Good. Ready for a 
mental workout? Terrific. In this part, you 
can choose whatever level of puzzle challenge 
you feel up to, from Easy to Treacherous. And you 
can tackle as many puzzles as you’d like, all at the 
same time. (Doing so can ease the frustration of 
getting stuck on one puzzle for too long.) So settle 
into a comfortable chair, pick a page, and show 
that grid who’s boss!

Chapter 3
Tackling the Puzzles
P
lease be aware that not all crosswords are created equal. Puzzle con-
structors aim to please, and that means that they create puzzles with 
a wide variety of difficulty levels to satisfy the needs of a wide variety of 
puzzle lovers. 
The puzzles in this book are labeled by difficulty level. Levels are Easy, Tricky, 
Tough, and Treacherous, with “Easy” being (of course) the easiest puzzles, and 
“Treacherous” being the most difficult puzzles.
If you’re new to working crosswords, don’t jump to the puzzles labeled 
“Treacherous” in this book. Chances are you’ll only get frustrated, and your 
puzzling career will come to a premature end. It’s sort of like trying to run a 
10K race when you’ve never strapped on running shoes before in your life. 
Be honest with yourself about the difficulty level you can handle. Better to 
start easy and build your skills slowly than to burn out in a quick burst of 
frustration.
 
If you’re going to work the puzzles in your daily newspaper, find out whether 
the difficulty level is different on different days. For example, USA TODAY runs 
its easiest crosswords on Mondays, and the difficulty level ramps up each day 
through Friday. (The Universal Sunday puzzle is intended to mirror the difficulty 
level of a Thursday puzzle.)
When you finish solving all of these puzzles, please see Part III for the answers. 
Good luck!

28
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. “Dancing Queen” 
quartet
 5. Chicago terminus
 10. Determines a sum
 14. Agile deer
 15. Body parts that have 
lifelines
 16. Roman numerals for 
Henry
 17. Was right on time
 20. You ___ Your Life
 21. Eagle by the sea
 22. Eat away at the beach?
 23. Sound from the 
meadow
 24. They’re found beside 
temples
 26. Shrubs with lavender 
blooms
 29. Lawnmower part
 30. Sign at a broadcasting 
station
 31. Make judgments
 32. Doctor of sci-fi
 35. 19th-century England
 39. Nice hot time?
 40. Garner
 41. ___ prosequi (charges 
will be dropped)
 42. Awakens
 44. Burns with water
 45. Soft, light, and fluffy
 48. Galactic bit
 49. Regarding birds
 50. Cripple
 51. ___ Palmas
 54. Starting location
 58. Peter Fonda title role
 59. Sing Swiss-style
 60. Peyton Place first name
 61. Stack part
 62. One cubic meter
 63. Lacking in liveliness
Down
 1. “Ahab the ___” (Ray 
Stevens song)
 2. Cause yawning
 3. Former Miss America 
host Parks
 4. “___ was saying . . .”
 5. Met productions
 6. Common contraction
 7. Balm ingredient, 
perhaps
 8. L.B.J.’s successor
 9. Low or high end?
 10. Not favoring
 11. Mischievous pranks
 12. Tube invented in 1904
 13. Internet destinations
 18. Zipper substitute
 19. Beer foam
 23. Can of worms, maybe
 24. Geriatric orbiter of ’98
 25. Item with a gooseneck
 26. Puppy follower?
 27. “What’s ___ for me?”
 28. “Chantilly ___” (The Big 
Bopper’s biggest hit)
 29. “Lions and tigers and 
___, oh my!”
 31. Frank account?
 32. Humorist Rogers
 33. Business phone button
 34. English I readings
 36. Horse-and-buggy 
handful
 37. Put down stakes?
 38. Niagara Falls sound
 42. Ear bone
 43. Morrison or Tennille
 44. Archie Bunker command
 45. Cuisine featuring 
dirty rice
 46. Rudimentary seed
 47. What X may mean
 48. Less hazardous
 50. How something is done
 51. One not to be believed
 52. First name in a Tolstoy 
novel
 53. Seize with a toothpick
 55. Sen. Clinton once 
represented it
 56. Came by
 57. Word with hat or school
Puzzle 1: A Pinpoint Solution
Easy

29
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63

30
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Bat the breeze
 5. Steakhouse order, 
perhaps
 10. “Here comes trouble!”
 14. “If I Were a ___ Man”
 15. DNA structure
 16. Space-race goal
 17. ___ snuff (adequate)
 18. “___ we all!”
 19. Pierce player on 
M*A*S*H
 20. Early yarn machine
 23. Fiji’s neighbor
 24. Wee colonist
 25. Talk, talk, talk
 28. Start of a cheer
 32. Greg’s sitcom wife
 34. Half-wit
 38. Cafe au ___
 39. He goes in circles
 42. Tennis star Mandlikova
 43. Porridge-type foods
 44. With fervor
 47. Bad to the bone
 48. Herbal brew
 49. Driver of a four-horse 
chariot, in myth
 51. Jed Clampett portrayer 
Buddy
 56. Certain halftime 
performers
 61. The world, to Mr. Magoo
 63. Pope John Paul II’s first 
name
 64. Strip the skin off
 65. Vidal’s Breckenridge
 66. Play hard to get
 67. “Beauty ___ the eye . . .”
 68. What some willows do?
 69. “Walk Away ___” (Four 
Tops)
 70. Baby duster
Down
 1. The mashed potatoes 
on shepherd’s pie
 2. Fantasia ballerina
 3. Be a cast member of
 4. Beachwear that leaves 
little to the imagination
 5. Cambodian’s neighbor
 6. Swiss capital
 7. Mr. Cassini
 8. Old Japanese 
mercenary
 9. Stretch outward
 10. Arabian monarchy
 11. Famed chalice
 12. East of Eden
 13. Stop ___ dime
 21. Bellybutton
 22. Nonacademic degree
 26. Out of order
 27. Financial shellacking
 29. Roll call reply in French 
class
 30. Italian wine
 31. Aquarium 
microorganisms
 33. Thomas ___ Edison
 34. “___ a dream” (Martin 
Luther King)
 35. Kind of golf
 36. One of the Brady Bunch
 37. 1999 Ron Howard film
 39. “Huh?”
 40. Beatles label
 41. Make available to new 
tenants
 45. Island necklace
 46. The New ___ (humor 
magazine)
 50. Bondservant
 52. Suit
 53. Dance or sauce
 54. Correspondence 
created on keyboards
 55. Former boy-band
 57. Fur stole
 58. Ayatollah’s land
 59. Lymph, for one
 60. Feeling of delight
 61. Pricey wheels
 62. Caustic substance
Puzzle 2: Turn-Ons
Easy

31
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70

32
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Latch on to
 6. Part of an abbey, 
perhaps
 10. Kids’ getaway
 14. Studio alert
 15. Santa’s revenge
 16. Canton locale
 17. Aerial maneuver
 19. Solidifies
 20. Oil or gas, for example
 21. Vapid
 22. Run around naked
 26. Harangues
 28. Haydn genre
 31. Picture puzzle
 32. Some noblemen
 33. Emeril’s word
 36. The Haj author
 37. It holds a ballerina’s leg
 38. Barn-dance seat, 
perhaps
 39. Oyster’s place
 40. Battle of the ___
 41. Campeche cash
 42. Some speedy 
transports
 44. Soon
 47. Annie Get Your Gun 
subject
 48. Quietly understood
 49. Circle or final start
 51. Newspaper section, 
briefly
 52. Threat at sea
 58. Iridescent gemstone
 59. Grad
 60. Mirror’s offering
 61. Bit of force
 62. Love crazy
 63. Bass-baritone Simon
Down
 1. Whipped cream unit
 2. Genetic “messenger”
 3. Swiss river that flows 
into the Rhine (Var.)
 4. Respectful address 
for a man
 5. Some economical 
homes, briefly
 6. For many, it may 
be a lot
 7. Combine
 8. Erie mule of song
 9. 90-degree letter
 10. French brandy
 11. A good way to leave 
Vegas
 12. Hundred Acre Wood 
creator A.A.
 13. They’re struck by 
models
 18. New Testament book
 21. It controls a pupil’s size
 22. Clean with elbow grease
 23. Expression of sympathy, 
when doubled
 24. Fanatical
 25. Earthbound Aussies
 26. Small tower
 27. Greek getaway, for 
example
 29. “I mean it!”
 30. The Simpsons character
 33. Pesto base
 34. Isolated
 35. Like some divorces
 37. Positive Wall Street 
figure
 38. Falcon feature
 40. Ashtray remnant
 41. Treeless plain
 42. Clydesdale controller
 43. Hefty volume
 44. Didn’t get a seat
 45. “Satisfied now?”
 46. It has arms and waves
 49. Self-satisfied
 50. Jane Austen title
 52. Old witch
 53. ___ carte
 54. ___ Pinafore
 55. ___ and run
 56. Mature
 57. ___ Plaines
Puzzle 3: Shoot!
Easy

33
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
55
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63

34
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Interstate hauler
 5. Calcutta misters
 9. Coffee preference
 14. Abruptly dismissed
 15. Monastery man
 16. End of “the end of”
 17. Tenacious bug?
 20. Musical refrain syllables
 21. “Goodness gracious!”
 22. “Elvis ___ left the 
building”
 23. Disappoint
 26. Curious bug?
 31. Open-air rooms
 34. ___-tat-tat (machine gun 
sounds)
 35. Nastase of the tennis 
courts
 36. Beehive, for one
 38. Skirmish
 40. Backdrop for Heidi
 41. Jazzman’s lick
 45. Leopard’s coat 
characteristic
 46. Comical bug?
 49. Schedules
 50. Razor-billed bird
 53. Square-dance step 
or call
 57. Complain
 59. Squirm-producing bugs?
 62. Evening wrap
 63. Canine from Kansas
 64. Desiccated
 65. Aspirations
 66. ___ Mawr
 67. Breakfast-in-bed 
facilitator
Down
 1. “Thus ___ the Lord”
 2. Word before “Read all 
about it!”
 3. Flat-topped rises
 4. Pastoral poem
 5. Happy face icon
 6. Palindromic antenna 
turner
 7. Playable serves
 8. Where stars shine
 9. Frasier Cranes’ live-in
 10. Wife of Geraint
 11. Hand over
 12. Environs
 13. Jamie of M*A*S*H
 18. Troubadour’s offering
 19. “Who cares?”
 24. Some forensic evidence
 25. Giant player-manager 
Mel, 1942–47
 26. Good place to be in?
 27. Like cigarette smoke
 28. To boot
 29. Happy tune
 30. Wine sediment
 31. Melville captain
 32. Imaginary narrative
 33. Ready for the pickin’
 37. The Beaver State
 39. Exhausts, as a supply
 42. “When Will ___ Loved” 
(Everly Brothers)
 43. Geisha’s accessory
 44. On edge
 47. Word on some doors
 48. The Far Side cartoonist
 50. “Li’l” one of comics
 51. Extreme
 52. Sometimes a Great 
Notion author
 53. Race of 100 yards
 54. “I’m ___ your tricks!”
 55. Telegram punctuation 
word
 56. “Here on Gilligan’s ___”
 58. Boom support
 60. N.Y. wagering place
 61. Negative link
Puzzle 4: Stop Bugging Me!
Easy

35
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67

36
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Evil Norse giant
 5. Humphrey’s nickname
 10. Nautical hazard
 14. “. . . ___ to tell a lie”
 15. Item in a cheek pouch, 
sometimes
 16. Alternative to pizzicato
 17. Escapees from a 
mythical box
 18. “. . . with ___ of 
thousands!”
 19. Fraught with danger
 20. New World explorer
 22. Calculator that doesn’t 
need batteries
 24. Super duper?
 25. Show scorn, in a way
 26. Humidor item, perhaps
 29. Galsworthy’s The 
Forsyte ___
 30. Chop down
 33. Rocky Rockies ridge
 34. St. ___ Cathedral, 
London
 35. Chronology component, 
perhaps
 36. Mudder’s father
 37. Social class
 38. People rush to get in 
here
 39. It goes over the road
 40. Old-time transportation
 41. Nene and brant
 42. That, in El Salvador
 43. Like a squid’s squirt
 44. Beginning of a tape
 45. Mrs. F. Scott Fitzgerald
 47. Title for Helmut Kohl
 48. Stun with brilliance
 50. Portuguese navigator
 54. Barbra’s Funny Girl guy
 55. Born yesterday
 57. Relaxation
 58. “Stormy Weather” 
singer Horne
 59. Air raid alert
 60. Downhill aids
 61. Eve’s grandson
 62. Make scholarly 
revisions, for example
 63. Word with catbird or 
bleacher
Down
 1. Not of the clergy
 2. Scandinavian capital
 3. To ___ a Mockingbird
 4. Set apart
 5. Sheepish farewell?
 6. Transpire
 7. Wear the disguise of
 8. They handle a lot of 
returns
 9. Knot up
 10. M*A*S*H company 
clerk
 11. Greenland explorer
 12. Eggshell color
 13. Far from friends
 21. First word of “The Battle 
Hymn of the Republic”
 23. Feathery neckware
 25. Prepare mushrooms, 
in a way
 26. Urgency
 27. Opera solos
 28. Certain Italian navigator
 29. Smart-mouthed
 31. Use a pencil end
 32. Firefighter’s need
 34. Nanook’s coat
 37. Abridge
 38. Unafraid
 40. Nob or Bunker, for 
example
 41. Pretty Woman star
 44. Paul Bunyan, for 
example
 46. Pound and Cornell
 47. Place to seek sanctuary
 48. 1996 presidential 
candidate Bob
 49. Congregational 
response
 50. Wet, spongy earth
 51. One place to get fresh 
water
 52. It touches the 
Pacific Rim
 53. Digs of twigs
 56. Intent
Puzzle 5: From the Crow’s Nest
Easy

37
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63

38
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Type of carved pole
 6. Juvenile salamanders
 10. March through mud
 14. Giraffe cousin
 15. Handlebar feature
 16. Public art show, for 
example
 17. “An apple a day . . .” 
is one
 18. Stare open-mouthed
 19. Baloney producer
 20. It opens with a click
 23. Place for sweaters
 26. Fa follower
 27. ___ on a Grecian Urn
 28. Countdown of top tunes
 31. Bridge locales
 36. Curved arch
 37. African plains grazer
 38. Clog
 39. Horse with a 
graysprinkled coat
 40. Heart chambers
 42. Sorvino of Mighty 
Aphrodite
 43. Florentine, for example
 45. Rhea relative
 46. Mice, to owls
 47. Mrs. Peel’s partner
 48. Cost increase
 50. “Who ___ to judge?”
 52. Cowboy Ritter
 53. Wee bit
 54. Best Actor of 1931 and 
1946
 60. Miner’s strike
 61. School talent show 
staple
 62. Studio stand
 66. Kelp, for example
 67. Model Macpherson
 68. Stockholm native
 69. Sharp-witted
 70. Cincinnati sluggers
 71. Emulate Sonja Henie
Down
 1. Aunt Polly’s nephew, in 
a Twain classic
 2. Volga tributary
 3. Uncle Sam collects it
 4. Gone with the Wind, 
for one
 5. Bloody Mary alternative
 6. Ratatouille requirement
 7. Haus wife
 8. Move with stealth
 9. The going rate?
 10. Word with “taught” or 
“effacing”
 11. 62, in old Rome
 12. Stone with color flashes
 13. Pierce with a tusk, for 
example
 21. Railroad tycoon J.P.
 22. Monthly payment, for 
many
 23. Summer attire
 24. Engorge oneself
 25. “Relax, soldiers!”
 29. Coins for Sherlock 
Holmes
 30. German engraver 
Albrecht
 32. Pizazz
 33. The ___ of St. Louis
 34. “What a great 
discovery!”
 35. Incapable of littering
 38. Chinaware piece
 41. Copies
 44. Jewish month before 
Nisan
 48. Deli dill
 49. Overindulgence
 51. Tight-fisted type
 54. Strong criticism
 55. Auditioner’s quest
 56. Upper hand
 57. Faculty boss
 58. Gentle
 59. Atlanta basketball pro
 63. Kind of lion or horse
 64. Summer hrs. in N.Y.C.
 65. Enter the Dragon star
Puzzle 6: Hut, Two, Three, Four
Easy

39
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71

40
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Superior at work
 5. ___ of Two Cities
 10. Directed
 14. A little of this, a little 
of that
 15. Board, as a train
 16. Together, in music
 17. A clothes-knit union?
 18. Les ___-Unis (the United 
States, in France)
 19. Created
 20. Family financial figure
 23. Some checkers men
 24. “So, there you are!”
 25. Eye covering
 28. Entice
 30. Span. lady
 33. It goes with “wash”
 34. Petitions
 36. Reuters competitor
 39. Baby beds
 40. Ancient theaters
 41. No seats sign, briefly
 42. Physicist Fitch and 
actor Kilmer
 43. Gorillas in the Mist 
author Dian
 45. Legal matter
 46. Lectern platform
 47. Flier with two Us in its 
logo
 54. Baby-sitter’s nightmare
 55. Nita of silent films
 56. Worst possible market 
share
 57. Freedom from hardship
 58. Blood leaves one
 59. Gentle firelight, for 
example
 60. “Oh, me!”
 61. ___ living (bring home 
the bacon)
 62. Disrespectful back talk
Down
 1. Anjou alternative
 2. A shortening, in more 
ways than one
 3. Anna and the King 
of ___
 4. Some hats
 5. Meeting outline
 6. Heads of France
 7. Just ___ (not much)
 8. An Iceland Fisherman 
author Pierre
 9. Caught in a trap
 10. Polynesian island group
 11. Wax-wrapped cheese
 12. Sans clothes
 13. Kicker’s need
 21. Cash or cloth additive
 22. Nestling’s noise
 25. Cotton-tipped sticks
 26. Migrants’ advocate 
Chavez
 27. Attachment to a rodeo 
saddle, often
 28. Some Baltic natives
 29. Functions
 30. Garage relatives
 31. Visit for a second time
 32. Analyze, as an ore 
sample
 34. Yellow, edible Indian 
fruit
 35. Channel events
 37. Musk-secreting mammal
 38. Somehow
 43. A Little Rascal
 44. Squeak-stopping 
application
 45. Word after “last” or 
before “of passage”
 46. Slew
 47. Range separating 
Europe and Asia
 48. Org. with many missions
 49. Computer input
 50. Banned fruit tree 
chemical
 51. Vincent Lopez hit of 
1922
 52. The Dukes of Hazzard 
deputy
 53. Hems but doesn’t haw?
 54. Maude star Arthur
Puzzle 7: Get It Together
Easy

41
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62

42
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Jesse Owens event
 5. Site of thousands of 
flowers, perhaps
 10. Biosphere sci.
 14. Black Stallion boy
 15. Fats Domino’s 
“Whole __ Loving”
 16. Kemo ___ (The Lone 
Ranger)
 17. Ghostbusters star
 19. Country club 
instructors
 20. Depict deceptively
 21. One of the major 
leagues, briefly
 22. Horace collection
 23. Gives a pep talk to
 25. Piece of an orchestra?
 27. Broadway latecomer’s 
sign
 28. Terribly upset
 31. Enticing word on a sign
 34. You, in the Bible
 37. Demand at a breakup
 38. Rock hound’s find
 39. Routine thing
 41. One who cries foul, 
briefly
 42. Hurler’s delivery
 44. Aerobic instructor’s 
word
 45. Lively, perhaps for 
one’s age
 46. Enmities
 48. Bit for a stable diet?
 50. Overseas money
 51. Some tan sources
 56. Where you might turn 
up a lot of dirt
 58. Gershwin and Levin
 60. Streetside pickup
 61. It could be in your throat
 62. Deserving attention
 64. Like some history
 65. Photographer’s 
problem
 66. Short list shortener
 67. Glass unit
 68. ___ and Sensibility
 69. Moist in the morning
Down
 1. Temple figure
 2. 1979 Sigourney Weaver 
thriller
 3. Biological units
 4. Celestial phenomenon
 5. Winter malady
 6. Greene of Bonanza
 7. Spanish others
 8. Rat tail?
 9. Twelfth U.S. president
 10. Get married
 11. One with an ace up his 
sleeve?
 12. Double-reed orchestra 
instrument
 13. With a discount of
 18. Golda’s surname
 24. Portnoy’s creator Philip
 26. Core of a canine, for 
example
 28. Salad veggie, perhaps
 29. Who or when 
conclusion
 30. Stand up to
 31. Frosh, next year
 32. Cantatrice’s offering
 33. Star seen late at night?
 35. British pianist Myra
 36. Good mo. for candy 
companies
 39. Sonny’s song partner
 40. Drifters’ classic ___ the 
Roof
 43. Buckle
 45. Appeared in the lead
 47. Happenings
 49. Chorus voice
 51. Beelzebub
 52. Product requirements
 53. Not glossy, as a photo
 54. “Fiddle-faddle!”
 55. In a demure way
 56. Decided failure
 57. Surrounding glow
 59. It’s credited
 63. Pint-size
Puzzle 8: It’s In the Mail
Easy

43
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69

44
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Catch forty winks
 5. Charger’s acquisition
 9. Bony fish
 14. Cut from the same cloth
 15. Friendly intro?
 16. “Egads!”
 17. Be offended by
 18. College sports gp.
 19. Act the lurker
 20. Of lesser importance
 22. Big teeth
 23. Christmas carol
 24. Leave it, editorially
 26. Prohibit
 29. Authentic
 31. Breakfast order
 35. Nebraska city
 37. Old Soviet news agency
 39. Three ___ Island
 40. Puerto ___
 41. Jerk’s creations?
 42. Opera solo
 43. Stocking shade
 44. Not kosher
 45. Flying pests
 46. Bogart film High ___
 48. Nautilus captain
 50. Dick and Jane verb
 51. Actress Lollobrigida
 53. Swarm
 55. Chew out
 58. Castles in the air
 63. Like some Vatican bulls
 64. Japanese people
 65. “Dagnabbit”
 66. Be the life of the party
 67. March fifteenth, to 
Caesar
 68. Crowning point
 69. In disarray
 70. Pro ___ (proportionate)
 71. Moistened clay
Down
 1. Glen Canyon and Grand 
Coulee
 2. Grapes of Wrath 
character
 3. Coating metal
 4. “___ a high note” 
 5. Hogan role
 6. Moving staircase
 7. One of a storied 
threesome
 8. Cafeteria items
 9. Bettor’s aid
 10. Revolutionary War 
figure
 11. Barely achieves, 
with “out”
 12. A drop in the bucket, 
perhaps
 13. “Bad!” sounds
 21. Mrs. Nick Charles
 25. Play horseshoes
 26. Drills a hole
 27. Latin friends
 28. Mother-of-pearl
 30. Heavily burdened
 32. Turkish money units
 33. Social crème de la crème
 34. Add body to hair
 36. Primitive timepiece
 38. Trapeze artist’s security
 41. Comic Laurel
 45. Word with movie or 
party
 47. Black Hawk Down 
director Scott
 49. Snake-haired woman of 
myth
 52. Noted fighter of oil fires
 54. Olympic quest
 55. Canned meat brand
 56. “And it ___ to pass . . .”
 57. Major musical 
composition
 59. Verdi opera
 60. With the bow, in music
 61. I Remember ___
 62. Cherry part
Puzzle 9: Now’s the Time
Easy

45
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71

46
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Turkish honorific
 5. Colossal, moviewise
 9. Woven fabric
 13. Motel unit
 14. Volcano shape
 15. Serve broth, or a broth 
server
 16. Short-cropped hairstyle
 18. Victims of the Iroquois
 19. River bottom
 20. Lean (on)
 21. Wavy hairstyle
 22. Like some vaccines
 24. Where a famous stone 
was discovered
 25. Shoulder-length 
hairstyle
 28. Neck and neck
 29. Primal impulse
 30. Hammer-operator, for 
example
 32. Ballet step
 35. Onion relatives
 37. Event from 1914 to 
1918, briefly
 38. Compete in a bee
 40. ___: A Dog
 41. Birchbark watercraft
 44. Savvy about
 45. Trunk of a tree
 46. Type of crew-cut 
haircut
 48. Thought a lot of
 51. Something ___ 
(extraordinary thing)
 52. Rogaine alternative
 53. Network signal
 55. Greek letter
 58. Prefix for “net” or 
“state”
 59. Upswept hairstyle
 61. Borough near 
Manchester
 62. Hawking’s A Brief 
History of ___
 63. Christiania, nowadays
 64. Williams and Turner
 65. Wing-shaped
 66. First name in slapstick
Down
 1. Fine mount
 2. Y2K runner-up
 3. Showed off
 4. “Who ___ to judge?”
 5. Troops arranged in a 
line
 6. Combine, as resources
 7. Like an octopus’ defense
 8. Bee chaser?
 9. Beatty of Reds
 10. King’s proclamation
 11. Admiral’s charge
 12. Unit of flux
 15. Some new car drivers
 17. Seafood delicacy
 21. Pawn to Queen’s 
Bishop 3, for example
 23. Stink to high heaven
 24. Load off the mind
 25. Skeet shooter’s shout
 26. Region
 27. Displayed boredom
 31. Sands of ___ Jima
 32. Whitsunday
 33. Singing voice
 34. Hog filler
 36. They pass the plate?
 39. Kitchen equipment
 42. Away from the wind
 43. Woody Allen film
 45. Two-footed ones
 47. Burghoff’s costar
 48. Not perfectly upright
 49. Gift recipient
 50. Stifled
 53. Aluminum sheet
 54. Mrs. Peel on The 
Avengers
 56. Maui dance
 57. Its work is decreasing?
 59. Sch. group sans kids
 60. Spanish couple?
Puzzle 10: Hair Today, Gone Tomorrow
Easy

47
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66

48
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Bolivia’s capital
 6. Genesis victim
 10. They’re for hacks
 14. Rounded molding
 15. Brand of toy blocks
 16. Solo delivered at the Met
 17. Emulating a private
 20. Uncommon dice rolls
 21. Type of meat or pepper
 22. Works dough
 23. At that time
 25. The thing there
 26. Biblical Promised Land
 29. Bowl over
 30. Did the butterfly
 34. Bitter
 35. Blazing
 37. Mother of  
6-Across
 38. Getting nowhere
 41. Nameless woman
 42. Drops of sadness
 43. Trunk with a chest
 44. Old name at the pumps
 46. You can dig it
 47. Census unit
 48. Monocle part
 50. Come in behind the 
others
 51. Borg and Edberg, for 
example
 54. Aurora’s counterpart
 55. Capital on a fjord
 59. In last place
 62. Do high-tech surgery
 63. Sandpaper surface
 64. Otello composer
 65. Makes a choice
 66. Launching org.
 67. Licorice-flavored seed
Down
 1. Artist’s studio
 2. State with assurance
 3. Ball-and-mallet game
 4. Premier players
 5. Disorderly situation
 6. Sci-fi character
 7. Reach for your toes
 8. Fabergé creation
 9. Photographer’s request
 10. Military trainees
 11. General vicinity
 12. Boston Celtic legend, 
Larry
 13. Backtalk
 18. Meadowlark’s warbling 
cousin
 19. Stuff studied in genetics
 24. Tough thing to kick
 25. Mary Kate and Ashley, 
for example
 26. Secret storage spot
 27. Aspirin targets
 28. Closes in on
 29. Prefix for “mentioned”
 31. Deteriorates from use
 32. Dispatch boat
 33. Item in a patch
 35. Seaweed extracts
 36. Colorado park
 39. Broadway 
attention-getter
 40. Ripped into, as a bag of 
chips
 45. They’re golden
 47. Swanky
 49. Slim, slimy swimmer
 50. “Whole ___ Shakin’ 
Goin’ On”
 51. Town of Normandy
 52. “That’s a ___!” 
(director’s shout)
 53. Geographic area
 54. Sponsorship
 56. Wrap for a rani
 57. Digital displays
 58. Depression-era migrant
 60. Gun owners’ grp.
 61. One of the Gabors
Puzzle 11: To the Rear
Easy

49
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67

50
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. “Come to ___”
 5. Horse’s hock
 10. Downhill aids
 14. Diving duck
 15. Pertaining to the moon
 16. Astronomer Sagan
 17. Shrewd investment
 20. A three-year-old is one
 21. Bridge table seat
 22. Way to go
 23. Rate of progress
 24. Speak with spotty 
knowledge
 26. Warship assemblage
 29. Loses leaves or hair
 30. Mean partner
 31. Word with “tag” or 
“booth”
 32. Public transport
 35. Value appraisal
 39. Engage in espionage
 40. Creeping plants
 41. Citrus hybrid
 42. Haughty gaze
 43. Fragrant resin
 45. Stays on
 48. Mammoth tooth
 49. Certain graduate exams
 50. It may stop a runaway
 51. “That’s yucky!”
 54. Like a sound 
investment
 58. Slight advantage
 59. Indian princess
 60. First gardener
 61. Bassoon accessory
 62. Fed the kitty
 63. Word with “ghost” or 
“boom”
Down
 1. “Ahem!”
 2. A loaded gun is full of it
 3. About 60 percent of the 
world’s wetlands
 4. Belt-maker’s tool
 5. Llama kin
 6. Tend with tenderness
 7. Wrinkle one’s brow
 8. Fond du ___ (Wisconsin 
city)
 9. Poetic “before”
 10. Moves hastily
 11. Out of commission
 12. Fit to be tied
 13. More cunning
 18. Promising clue, to a 
detective
 19. Wall Street type
 23. Twinge of distress
 24. Chases away
 25. Mouth-watering reading 
material
 26. Priestly vestments
 27. Harvest grain
 28. It comes before happy 
returns
 29. Less vocal
 31. Is a busybody
 32. Computer software 
glitches
 33. Pacific Ten sch.
 34. Milk label word, 
perhaps
 36. Polish off
 37. Heating apparatus
 38. Kind of mail
 42. Like some margarita 
glasses
 43. Held up?
 44. Stat equivalent
 45. Crew member
 46. Wear away
 47. Homer Simpson’s wife
 48. Number of scores in 
sixty
 50. Got going
 51. Useful word processing 
feature
 52. Emulate a beaver
 53. Song of praise
 55. Historical period
 56. It may move you
 57. Make “all gone”
Puzzle 12: Money, Honey
Easy

51
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63

52
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Mil. branch since 1947
 5. Wolfgang Puck, for 
example
 9. Partner of Brahma and 
Vishnu
 14. Bucks intro
 15. Blast furnace sound
 16. Exhibit supporter
 17. English carriage
 18. Something to grow on
 19. American novelist 
Cather
 20. Be last
 23. They’re supportive
 24. Kind of duck
 25. Cautiously
 28. Unusually intelligent
 30. Muscat’s milieu
 34. Swindler’s name, 
perhaps
 35. Basketmaker’s willow
 37. Narcissist’s problem
 38. Emulate a sheep
 41. Weather vane letters
 42. Explosives ingredient
 43. Encumbrances
 44. Cincinnati baseball club
 46. Syndicate head
 47. William Kidd, for one
 48. Hand wringer’s feeling
 50. Direction from Eden?
 51. Pull an upset
 58. Without a connection
 59. Musical McEntire
 60. Watch part
 62. Ointment
 63. “I second that!”
 64. Not very clear
 65. UFO passenger
 66. Indicates yes, in a way
 67. Your family is part 
of one
Down
 1. “Kill the ___!” (ball park 
cry)
 2. 1999 war combatant
 3. Fort Apache actor, 1948
 4. Hereditary
 5. Rock-strewn and steep
 6. First word in magic
 7. Dodge City lawman
 8. Fingerboard ridge
 9. Made a dress
 10. Pageboy, for example
 11. Any of the Antilles
 12. The Sail (southern 
constellation)
 13. Wing-shaped
 21. Ozzie or Harriet
 22. It has its reservations
 25. Symbol of thinness
 26. Unaccompanied
 27. Agitated
 28. Anemic looking
 29. Marina feature
 31. She was jilted by Jason
 32. Secret one
 33. Scandinavian language
 35. Preminger or Graham
 36. Dog topper
 39. Having greater extent 
from one side to the 
other
 40. Like some alibis
 45. Turn abruptly
 47. Praiseful songs
 49. “Come here ___?”
 50. Receded
 51. What Castro calls 
home?
 52. Milky-white gem
 53. West African republic
 54. Mediterranean port
 55. Office note
 56. Get closer to
 57. Knock for a loop
 61. Salinger’s grain
Puzzle 13: Back Me Up
Easy

53
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67

54
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Altar areas
 6. Lake in Africa
 10. Headliner
 14. Courage
 15. Man of the Haus?
 16. Perry Mason creator 
Gardner
 17. Monkey business
 19. Tender entree
 20. Hosp. area for critical 
cases
 21. Put on notice
 22. Sunny and bright, as a 
personality
 24. Beat it
 26. Oblique
 28. Told a fish story
 30. Sea creature that may 
be smoked
 31. Wrestling official
 34. Bowler’s nightmare
 37. ___ St. Vincent Millay
 39. Occupy the throne
 40. Bit of baloney
 43. Pay to join the hand
 44. Someone usually brings 
it up
 45. Famous Colorado peak
 46. Encouraging word
 47. It can be fresh or hot
 48. Visibility reducer
 50. Right to enter
 53. Chronological records
 57. Beatty of Bonnie & 
Clyde
 59. Some sturdy trees
 61. Monotonous routine
 62. Golden Fleece ship
 63. Horseplay
 66. What equestrians hold
 67. Mater starter
 68. Honey badger
 69. Show restlessness, 
in a way
 70. Goatish glance
 71. Greta Garbo was one
Down
 1. Agricultural pest
 2. Take the silver
 3. Break of day
 4. Catholic theologian 
who opposed Luther
 5. Design meaningful 
contrails
 6. Blacken, as meat
 7. Redhead’s secret?
 8. Covenant holder
 9. Work for George 
Jefferson
 10. Common dice roll
 11. Bole
 12. Controversial pesticide
 13. Bank (on)
 18. Finely chopped liver
 23. Roach of Hollywood
 25. One of The 
Honeymooners
 27. Madrid Misters
 29. Puts off until later
 32. Ultimatum ender
 33. Fixed charges
 34. Prepare for a bout
 35. ___ colada
 36. Sluggish
 38. Modern-day evidence
 39. Royal rule
 41. Type of rug
 42. Backers with the bucks
 47. Top of a suit
 49. Shark variety
 51. Witchlike woman
 52. River past Amiens
 54. Sharp narrow mountain 
ridge
 55. Enticed
 56. What the rich live in?
 57. Get bent out of shape
 58. Field or field of 
expertise
 60. A distant point
 64. Grand-Opry connector
 65. Order partner
Puzzle 14: Fool Me Once
Easy

55
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
19
20
21
18
17
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
32
31
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71

56
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. “Abraham, Martin, and 
John” singer
 5. Switch partner
 9. Family men
 14. Part of a magician’s 
phrase
 15. It could be part of a plot
 16. Woolly-haired cud 
chewer
 17. Scouts’ supervisor
 19. Its first is for fools
 20. Certain playing marble
 21. Roald Dahl book
 23. What libraries do
 24. Nevada’s second largest 
city
 25. Knights-in-training
 28. Word with “ill,” “well,” 
or “mild”
 32. “Tut-tut!”
 33. Purplish colors
 35. Fish with a long snout
 36. Bestowed titles
 37. Sisters’ three
 38. Until all hours
 39. Swell place?
 40. Sleep inducers, once
 41. “Rag Mop” brothers
 42. Arrange with some 
effort
 44. They take the cake
 45. Heading for morph
 46. Also known as H.H. 
Munro
 48. Hard to interpret
 51. Place for Earl Grey and 
light snacks
 55. Natural talent
 56. Between-classes area
 58. Quiz answer, perhaps
 59. Construction wood
 60. Lamb’s Essays of ___
 61. Knight’s mount
 62. Goes on and on and . . .
 63. Claim innocence
Down
 1. Some family members
 2. “Likely story!”
 3. Alencon is its capital
 4. How some shall remain
 5. Drive home, as a run
 6. Yearned
 7. Fury
 8. Prison stretch
 9. Typewriter rollers
 10. Skiing style
 11. Charades or Pictionary, 
say
 12. Centrally located
 13. Hacienda room
 18. Shouts at a bullfight
 22. Gunsmoke star
 25. Like yesterday’s news
 26. Completely unfamiliar
 27. Neighborhood event
 28. One deep in thought
 29. State point-blank
 30. Polished-off
 31. Kind of rehearsal
 33. Sort of shower
 34. Tennis legend Arthur
 38. Expended profusely
 40. Hung in there
 43. Cut into
 44. Word of assent
 46. Was awful
 47. Culex’s cousin
 48. Switch positions
 49. Utter loudly
 50. Glimpse from afar
 52. Hearty partner
 53. Lena of Havana
 54. Kind of bill
 57. Familia member
Puzzle 15: Nice House!
Easy

57
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63

58
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Hot, melted cheese dish
 6. ___ of the tongue
 10. Pantheon members
 14. ___ of expertise
 15. Deteriorated
 16. Fencing sword
 17. U.S. ambassador’s 
employer
 20. Came apart at the seams
 21. Arabian Sea gulf
 22. Thickness
 23. Hay unit
 25. Relations
 26. Internal combustion 
device
 33. Standoffish
 34. Souvenirs from 
53-Down
 35. Bond creator Fleming
 37. “___ of Love” 
(Bacharach song)
 38. Looks ___ everything
 40. “Lamp ___ My Feet”
 41. Sternward
 42. The “dismal science,” 
for short
 43. ___ Joe (Twain 
character)
 44. McQueen film classic
 48. Grow older
 49. River leading to the 
Caspian
 50. Line dance
 53. It grows on trees
 55. Words of horror
 59. Union in Chicago, for 
example
 62. It turns a bachelor into 
a woman
 63. “Add ___ to the fire”
 64. Pang
 65. “____ light through 
yonder window . . .”
 66. It can precede the last 
word of 17-, 26-, 44- and 
59-Across
 67. They may be found 
hanging in malls
Down
 1. Like some inaccurate 
watches
 2. “___ take arms 
against . . .” (Hamlet)
 3. Within shouting 
distance
 4. You can plan on it
 5. ___ NO HOOKS
 6. Garbo’s homeland
 7. Easy stride
 8. Persia, since 1935
 9. ___ capita
 10. Sign of the twins
 11. Essay page, for short
 12. Nick’s kin?
 13. Dickens’ Pecksniff
 18. Painter of limp watches
 19. Sprigs
 24. Houseguest from 
Melmac
 25. Purl counterpart
 26. Swinging event
 27. Among the clouds
 28. Starter for “fast” or 
“sayer”
 29. “Maria ___” (Dorsey hit, 
1941)
 30. Poetic time of day
 31. Type of warrior
 32. Really enjoy
 36. What one little piggy 
had
 38. 43,560 square feet
 39. Certain egg mass
 40. Disrobe
 42. Actress Samantha
 43. Rose-rose connector
 45. Bald baby bird?
 46. Skirmish
 47. Once, once
 50. All hands on deck?
 51. Curse or vow
 52. Actress Talbot or Naldi
 53. A Hawaiian island
 54. Polish border river
 56. Give employment to
 57. When many go to lunch
 58. Unnamed people or 
things
 60. Out of tune
 61. Ma Bell
Puzzle 16: Fire!
Easy

59
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67

60
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Worldly rather than 
spiritual
 5. Bringing up the rear
 9. Pound prospect
 14. “Money ___ object”
 15. Length × width
 16. Cast mightily
 17. Quit working
 19. Instrument at the 
ballpark
 20. Removes by ballot
 21. Elbow counterpart
 23. Suffix with “lemon” or 
“lime”
 24. Nautical hazard
 26. Come to the rescue
 30. Cola mixers
 32. “If ___ say so myself”
 34. Green Gables girl
 35. Fly in the ointment
 37. TV time that begins in 
the evening
 39. Mommy deerest?
 40. Not available for use
 43. Canton in Switzerland
 44. Trumped-up
 45. They’ll question you
 46. Invite letters
 48. Short winter illness
 49. Take wing
 50. Do a slow burn
 52. Prerequisite for gain?
 54. Greek letter
 57. Woofer output
 59. Refrigerator drawer
 61. Argo pilot
 64. Went to pieces
 66. Tale of the Trojan War
 67. City in Yemen
 68. The vain put them on
 69. Well-bred Londoners
 70. Velvety growth
 71. Lazy Susan, for example
Down
 1. Astrological sign
 2. Start of a comparison 
involving a beet
 3. Not running
 4. Blast-furnace fuel
 5. Soup dippers
 6. “___ by any other 
name . . .”
 7. Hem, but not haw
 8. It may be full of gas
 9. Closet staples
 10. Mother of mercy
 11. Certain piano piece
 12. Sinatra’s Gardner
 13. It’s tender to the 
Japanese
 18. Drum cover?
 22. Wynonna’s mom
 25. Braces
 27. Needing parts
 28. Condescending type
 29. They’re between 12 
and 20
 31. Sci-fi vehicle
 33. Phone call cost, in 
Bogart films
 35. Goes bad, as milk
 36. Nightingale or Barton, 
for example
 37. Survey
 38. Baltic republic
 41. Coffeehouses
 42. One of the seven water 
sources
 47. Kennedy’s was 109
 49. Warning devices
 51. Clock parts
 53. Highest points
 55. ___ firma
 56. ___-craftsy
 58. Hoodwink
 60. Minor quarrel
 61. Rustic dance
 62. Hearty pub order
 63. Pride, lust, or envy
 65. Fuss
Puzzle 17: Mr. Fix-it
Easy

61
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71

62
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. A good one is usually 
square
 5. The end, in Revelation
 10. Snatch
 14. Auto part
 15. Punic Wars soldier
 16. Dude ranch prop
 17. Renders suspect
 19. Protected, nautically
 20. Brothers who 
popularized “Mom 
always liked you best!”
 21. Fruity-smelling 
chemical compounds
 23. Australia’s largest lake
 24. Homesteader’s stake
 25. Farm measures
 27. Comes into one’s own
 30. Which cheek to turn?
 31. Word with “booby” or 
“sand”
 32. Sandra or Ruby
 33. Occasion at Minsky’s
 34. Cleaners’ concern
 35. Small price to pay
 36. Plumber’s connection
 37. The Hatfields and the 
McCoys, for example
 38. Teen hangouts
 39. Having a finger in 
every pie
 41. Oater prop
 42. Appears
 43. Columnist Barrett
 44. Common airline 
carry-on
 46. Meathead, to Archie
 50. Mr. Gardner’s first name
 51. Way out West, once
 53. Glum drop?
 54. More than merely ready
 55. Jasmine or morning 
glory, for example
 56. Verbalizes
 57. Isn’t supporting
 58. Resurgently
Down
 1. Raincoats, in Liverpool
 2. Academic challenge
 3. “And another thing . . .”
 4. Received a varsity 
award
 5. They may be marching
 6. Van Dyke co-star
 7. Layers of green eggs
 8. Some consider it a gift
 9. Deer playmate, in song
 10. Without charge
 11. They’re often emulated
 12. Copycat
 13. Partner of birds
 18. Less vocal
 22. Talk trash to
 24. Smackers
 25. Whale of ___
 26. Simple task, for example
 27. Fetch
 28. Edison’s park
 29. The sun does it 
every day
 30. Neighbor of Provo
 31. Mission start?
 34. Sneaks a peek
 35. Amorously inclined male
 37. Asp victim, for short
 38. Word with depressive
 40. Puts a damper on
 41. Extreme introverts
 43. Received, at NASA
 44. Answer to “Shall we?”
 45. Kind of rug
 46. Roots, for example
 47. (Has) reclined
 48. Teenage problem that 
breaks out
 49. Exclamation of exertion
 52. Tit for ___
Puzzle 18: Top Performance
Easy

63
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58

64
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Unexpected 
development
 6. Kind of tense?
 10. Felt sorry about
 14. The Good ___ (Pearl 
Buck)
 15. Grades 1-12, for short
 16. Golden rule preposition
 17. Knightly wear
 18. Appear imminent
 19. Evening, in some ads
 20. Classic sitcom
 23. Lobe’s location
 24. Actress Deborah
 25. 1900, on a cornerstone
 28. South of the border 
order
 31. Ran amok en masse
 35. Flower of one’s eye?
 37. Sticky-tongued critter
 39. Ex-New York governor, 
Mario
 40. Careless disregard
 43. Causing chill bumps
 44. Lilliputian
 45. Collection of facts
 46. Loofah, for example
 48. Peon
 50. “May I help you?”
 51. Coastal flooding factor
 53. Western treaty grp.
 55. “To boldly go,” for 
example
 63. Branch of math
 64. Conflicted
 65. Submarine equipment
 66. Per
 67. Designer Cassini
 68. Those opposed
 69. Denial from Yeltsin
 70. Figure of interest
 71. Sierra ___
Down
 1. Short-necked duck
 2. Silver ending?
 3. My Friend ___
 4. Kitchen appliance
 5. Bit of saber-rattling
 6. Clobber with snowballs
 7. “Thanks ___ !”
 8. Rattled
 9. Woodsman’s cry
 10. Evasive treatment
 11. Inst. of higher learning
 12. Novel ending?
 13. Procrastinator’s 
opposite
 21. Incensed
 22. Writer Jong
 25. Bogs down
 26. Move in typical 
rush-hour traffic
 27. Prefix for “phone” or 
“miniskirt”
 29. Part of any profit 
calculation
 30. Mirage subject
 32. Before midnight
 33. Overact
 34. Ladies of Spain
 36. Close-fitting, as an 
outfit
 38. Citizen of Denmark
 41. On the up and up
 42. “Don Juan” poet
 47. Newspaper executive
 49. Saudi Arabian king
 52. Gay over Hiroshima
 54. Biblical weapon
 55. British weapon
 56. Evangelist’s suggestion
 57. Wingless suckers
 58. Guitar part
 59. Come Back, Little Sheba 
playwright
 60. “Out of the frying pan, 
___ . . .”
 61. Stuck on oneself
 62. Irish language
Puzzle 19: Bye!
Easy

65
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71

66
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Hole in a Vegas machine
 5. Teeny finish
 11. Watch the baby
 14. Vagrant
 15. Maryland state bird
 16. Sting action
 17. He’s no pro
 18. Stunk up the place
 19. Marching syllable
 20. One shoe
 23. Wallach of The Two 
Jakes
 24. Hero in The Matrix
 25. Canine coating
 28. Ecclesiastical assembly
 30. Surveillance org.
 33. Tarzan’s weapon
 34. “My country ___ of 
thee . . .”
 36. Percent addition
 38. Common knowledge
 39. One shoe
 42. Three-toed bird
 44. Sherpa’s beast of 
burden
 45. Lamb’s mama
 46. Change, as bylaws
 48. Baking meas.
 50. Wealthy John Jacob
 54. Cement mixture
 56. Keeper’s charge
 58. Stand buy
 59. One shoe
 63. Bearded beast
 65. Fountain sound
 66. Suffix with “gab” or 
“slug”
 67. Summer mo.
 68. Ogle
 69. Electrical safeguard
 70. Game-deciding stat
 71. Walks onstage
 72. Engage in repartee
Down
 1. Some eyewear
 2. In need of 
companionship
 3. Gain possession of
 4. Work hard
 5. Water or air attachment
 6. Eugene’s place
 7. Like Browning’s piper
 8. Nudge
 9. Professeur’s charge
 10. Loss indicator, on paper
 11. Plotting
 12. Gambler’s last resort
 13. Blasting material
 21. Home of the sacred cow
 22. Poodles and pit bulls, 
for example
 26. Gee antecedent
 27. Sign in the zodiac
 29. European strait
 31. Jockey’s attire
 32. Foreman fighter
 35. Optimist’s limit
 37. Vane direction
 39. Rathskeller vessels
 40. Have something
 41. “All ___ for Christmas is 
my two . . .”
 42. Battering device
 43. Medical service grp.
 47. Be suspended
 49. Structural support
 51. Begin, as a hobby
 52. Potemkin mutiny locale
 53. One paying a flat fee?
 55. Where Joan of Arc died
 57. Moscovite’s negatives
 60. ___-a-porter (ready to 
wear)
 61. Shrek, for one
 62. Switch positions
 63. Deficit
 64. Bolt’s adjunct
Puzzle 20: New Shoes
Easy

67
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72

68
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. “Once ___ time . . .”
 6. Featherbrain
 10. Use a bubble pipe
 14. French philosopher 
Georges
 15. Anagram of vile
 16. Another anagram of vile
 17. Doberman’s warning
 18. Absolute must
 19. Gazetteer datum
 20. What a firefly does
 23. Shade tree
 24. Fire, so to speak
 25. Move out
 29. Overdo the TLC
 31. Play piece
 34. Revered image
 35. Plumbing problem
 37. Charmed animal?
 39. Polishes the pumps
 42. E-mail predecessor
 43. Fast time?
 44. Remote button
 45. Balaam’s transport
 46. Word in a song 
performed at midnight
 48. TV screen grid
 50. Roadie’s load
 51. Perched
 52. Feels puffed up
 60. Cornfield measure
 61. Malarial fever
 62. Mixologist on The Love 
Boat
 64. Companion of thick
 65. Kimono cousin
 66. Part of UHF
 67. Warty-skinned critter
 68. “Phooey!”
 69. Implied
Down
 1. Destroyer letters
 2. Ping-___
 3. ___ Roberts University
 4. Seneca’s student
 5. Completely off-base
 6. Levi’s material
 7. Where one’s goose is 
cooked?
 8. Atkins offering
 9. Outdated
 10. Main part of a knife
 11. It equaled 100 kurus
 12. Partner of “done with”
 13. Like light-colored coffee
 21. Bob’s vehicles?
 22. Biz bigwigs
 25. Panoramic view
 26. Charley horses
 27. Spring features
 28. Frank with a famous 
diary
 29. Went to a fancy 
restaurant
 30. Candid
 31. Give or take
 32. Minoan’s island
 33. Stun gun
 36. 50 pennies
 38. Resistance units
 40. Finals
 41. Bikini part
 47. Northbound, on maps
 49. Courtyard
 50. Change a bill
 51. Ream component
 52. Cotton stuffing
 53. Sound effect
 54. High point at the Met
 55. Humpbacked helper
 56. Brass member
 57. Avalon, for one
 58. Facts and figures
 59. Bring in
 63. Kind of burglar
Puzzle 21: Lit Up
Easy

69
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69

70
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Statue’s bottom
 5. Trucker’s rig
 9. Sounds of shock
 14. They come in bars 
(Abbr.)
 15. Powerful particle
 16. To extremes
 17. The Enterprise, for 
example
 19. Stupefy
 20. Certain addition
 21. Andress role, 1965
 22. Munchkin
 24. Pressure meas.
 25. You may get a rise out 
of it
 27. Angle of a circle
 30. Western transport
 35. Like some famous 
fables
 38. Military blockade
 39. Small area of ground
 40. One of The 
Honeymooners
 43. Natural depression
 44. Put on cloud nine
 46. Moved to the middle
 48. Commuter’s alternative
 51. Selfish person
 52. Symbols of silliness
 56. Historic period
 59. Mischievous child
 60. Reverence
 62. 1968 hit “Harper 
Valley ___”
 63. A long, backless sofa
 65. Slow-moving craft
 68. Frosting
 69. At the summit
 70. Farm section
 71. Assays
 72. Display, as a dean’s list
 73. “What happened 
next . . .”
Down
 1. Buddy Holly player 
Gary
 2. Kind of butter
 3. La ___, Milan opera 
house
 4. PC tilde topper
 5. Pane’s place
 6. Heavenly
 7. Miss Piggy’s question
 8. Obstruct
 9. Bursts of deep, loud 
laughter
 10. Apiece, in scores
 11. Organ part
 12. Those with know-how
 13. Bombay dress
 18. Prevent legally
 23. It participates in 
coverups
 26. Terrier type
 28. Ointments for bruises
 29. Lack of sophistication
 31. By way of
 32. Paraphernalia
 33. Girl-watch or boy-watch
 34. Can’t live without
 35. Imitator
 36. Raines of ’40s–’50s films
 37. Stuff in a bar?
 41. Mexican coins
 42. One-point Scrabble tiles
 45. Borders
 47. Large Asian feline
 49. Male cat or turkey
 50. Foundation of broken 
stones
 53. Time to remember
 54. Be conspicuous
 55. Devoured
 56. Make a change for the 
verse?
 57. Chinese staple
 58. Latin bird
 61. Showed sorrow, in a way
 64. Household pest
 66. Prime Minister Hirobumi
 67. Cave creature
Puzzle 22: Getting Around
Easy

71
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73

72
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Male cheerleader’s 
move
 5. Ball’s partner
 10. Syndicate bigwig
 14. “Texaco ___ Theater”
 15. “Who goes ___?”
 16. First guy
 17. King of sports
 20. Autocrat
 21. Drive back
 22. Fat farm feature
 24. Summer, in France
 25. Try not to be pinned 
down?
 27. Quiets down
 29. Unmixed, to a 
mixologist
 30. Gained a lap
 31. Sandusky’s lake
 32. Stopped marching
 34. King of cable
 39. Burden bearers
 40. Factory whistle time, 
perhaps
 42. Certain bunt, on a 
scorecard
 45. Kind of market or circus
 46. Scandal subject, in the 
music business
 48. Went after
 50. Attila, for one
 51. Relay segment
 52. Plenty sore
 53. Year-end temps
 55. King of horror
 60. Geometry class 
calculation
 61. Way to go
 62. Word repeated 
after “Que”
 63. Long and lean
 64. This snake counts?
 65. Site of temptation
Down
 1. Acid, to a hippie
 2. “What was ___ think?”
 3. Disney film of 1940
 4. City betrayed by a 
horse?
 5. Plate appearances
 6. River through Lyons
 7. Barber’s call
 8. Jackie’s second spouse
 9. Path to enlightenment
 10. Bistros
 11. Turns a book into a 
film, for example
 12. Dallas role
 13. Breakfast or brunch 
order
 18. For the taking
 19. Gingerbread house 
visitor
 22. Any ship at sea
 23. Knitting stitch
 25. Whip marks
 26. Tat-tat preceder
 28. Trumpeter Alpert
 29. 1993 treaty acronym
 32. Watered the lawn
 33. Fashion initials
 35. Stop at the pump
 36. Ivy League school
 37. Backyard building
 38. Meadow rodent
 41. Old horse
 42. Tap type
 43. Northern sky sight
 44. Chicken-hearted
 46. Fourth-down specialist
 47. Poker-pot starter
 49. “Turf,” not “surf”
 50. It makes waste
 53. Breeding horse
 54. Basilica end
 56. Gershwin or Levin
 57. Ground layer
 58. Before, to Browning
 59. Palindromic Bobbsey
Puzzle 23: Kingdoms
Easy

73
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65

74
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Mite
 5. Type of car in San 
Francisco
 10. Salt measure
 14. Bonito shark
 15. Galactic visitor
 16. Raines of Phantom Lady
 17. Neutral hue
 18. Charlton Heston epic
 19. Handy to
 20. No-goodnik
 22. Pilfer
 24. They can bear cafeteria 
food
 26. You can’t row, row, row 
your boat without one
 27. Checkers, compared to 
chess
 30. How some boxers fight
 35. Crookedly
 36. Zodiac dozen
 37. Coffeehouse container
 38. Cookie selling org., 
originally
 39. Held title to
 40. ___ for tat
 41. Back muscle, to a 
bodybuilder
 42. Sidewinder, for one
 43. Man with many parts
 45. How some like to see 
things
 47. Quick on the uptake
 48. Humble dwelling
 49. Less common
 51. Uno, for one
 54. After a while
 58. Holder of combs, 
perfumes, and so on
 59. Gerald Ford’s 
birthplace
 62. Heavenly glow
 63. Give some lip to
 64. Pat or Richard
 65. Word with “line” or 
“post”
 66. The other team
 67. Wield, as influence
 68. Princely Italian family
Down
 1. Brothers who sang “Rag 
Mop”
 2. Crunchy Tex-Mex 
munchie
 3. Stew vegetable
 4. Dudley Do-Right, for 
example
 5. Julius or Sid
 6. Metal mixture
 7. Pen or lighter
 8. Sweet-smelling necklace
 9. Contiguous
 10. Taxi Driver star
 11. On the safe side, at sea
 12. Montenegro native
 13. Fabled fast starter
 21. Accepted a gunslinger’s 
challenge
 23. Pillboxes and porkpies
 25. Word in a Bugs Bunny 
catchphrase
 27. Bird of prey
 28. Ore examination
 29. Make tracks on ice
 31. Molding type
 32. “___ Frutti” (Little 
Richard tune)
 33. Celestial hunter
 34. Journal item
 36. Dance romantically
 39. Kind of confrontation
 42. Causing puckering
 43. Vicinity
 44. Horror film feature, 
sometimes
 46. Belief in one God
 47. Legendary Bear of 
Alabama
 50. Find loathsome
 51. Bird’s-___ soup
 52. Beehive State
 53. Erato, for one
 55. Twosomes
 56. Impish one
 57. Harvard rival
 60. Be sociable
 61. Give the heave-ho
Puzzle 24: Connected
Easy

75
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68

76
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Gossipy gal
 6. Lift in Aspen
 10. Wild way to run?
 14. Purfle
 15. Dashiell’s colleague
 16. Prom-goer’s pursuit
 17. Network test show
 18. Word with “act” or 
“gear”
 19. Hardly ruddy
 20. Snitcher
 23. Peg of the links?
 24. For each
 25. Fast North American 
snakes
 27. Start for “day” or “wife”
 30. Forster’s had a view
 33. Peter the Great, for 
example
 34. Sal the mule’s canal
 36. Lustrous gem
 38. Aluminum 
manufacturer
 41. Fall guy
 44. Shenanigan
 45. House of Lords title
 46. Jidda native
 47. Swedish chain
 49. Gestured greeting
 51. Like some wines
 52. Picked out
 54. “Murder, ___”
 56. She may feel cooped up
 57. Easy target
 64. Asian caregiver
 66. Tie at anchor
 67. Insurance ploy
 68. One in a million
 69. Oppositionist
 70. Berry’s Johnny B.
 71. Cameo stone
 72. Pinky and Spike
 73. Toaster, often
Down
 1. Talks noisily
 2. Cut out the boring 
scenes
 3. “___ contendere” (no 
contest plea)
 4. Group of Girl Scouts, for 
example
 5. Deer’s tine
 6. Dustin’s Tootsie costar
 7. Cell at sea
 8. Succulent perennial
 9. Witty reply
 10. 1961 Susan Hayward 
film
 11. Plastic supplier?
 12. Wise leader
 13. The Jolson Story actress
 21. Smoking gun
 22. Describing the nose 
passages
 26. Lily variety
 27. Flat tableland with 
steep edges
 28. It’s south of Georgia
 29. Definitive book?
 31. Mayberry resident
 32. Colorful parrot
 35. Satie and Estrada
 37. Italian coin no longer 
minted
 39. Mr. Sharif
 40. “Dear” adviser
 42. Slurpees competitors
 43. Famous chipmunk
 48. Member of a certain 
kingdom
 50. Mesh gears
 52. Gyrating guitarist
 53. Defender of Castle 
Greyskull
 55. Computer drive insert
 58. Tuning fork’s output
 59. Shopping bag
 60. Subject for Monet
 61. Sports org. based in 
Colorado
 62. Secret language
 63. Dummy’s perch
 65. Evil spell
Puzzle 25: Visiting the Zoo
Easy

77
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73

78
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Weakens, as support
 5. Thin cracker
 10. Pack gently
 14. Hoodwink
 15. Bakery lure
 16. Above
 17. Approach the gate
 18. Businesses
 19. Spanish surrealist
 20. Madison and Lincoln, 
for example
 23. Reason for a shot in the 
arm?
 25. Boat’s stopover
 26. Beneficiary
 27. Brisk
 29. Senior celebration
 31. Speedy delivery
 35. Blubber
 38. Stink big-time
 39. Some oilmen
 40. Fashion magazine
 41. Be human, so they say
 42. 18th Amendment 
outgrowths
 44. Officer Malloy of 
Adam 12
 45. Ditto!
 46. One place to roll in
 49. Forefather
 52. FDR’s successor
 53. Baloney!
 57. Campus sports org.
 58. Cropped up
 59. Important stretches of 
time
 62. “Now hear ___”
 63. South Korea’s capital
 64. Apportion
 65. New Year’s word
 66. Great expectations
 67. Inkling
Down
 1. Young newt
 2. Constrictor, for example
 3. Church meal, perhaps
 4. Buttonhole, for example
 5. Floats through the air
 6. Israel’s Sharon
 7. Military might
 8. Samms of Dynasty
 9. Grating sound
 10. Hand-beaten drum
 11. Birdlike
 12. Haggard songwriter?
 13. The written word
 21. Hand lender
 22. Matinee is one kind
 23. “___ Jacques”
 24. Less strict
 28. Annoy
 29. Monopoly place
 30. Shine’s partner
 32. Mo. for sapphires
 33. Barrie bad guy
 34. She played Rosemary
 35. Emulated a snake
 36. Spreads on breads
 37. Ply with drink
 40. Legal conclusion?
 42. Tiresias, for one
 43. Pre-meal word, perhaps
 44. Gratify
 46. Cousin providers
 47. Like some trigger 
fingers
 48. Laundry problem
 49. Eavesdropper
 50. Magazine installment
 51. Staggers
 54. A Beautiful Mind subject
 55. Cookie treat
 56. Big rig
 60. Partook of
 61. Kind of horse
Puzzle 26: What Did You Say?
Easy

79
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67

80
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. German family member
 5. Bossa ___
 9. Avalon author
 14. Doctor’s advice
 15. Steel girder
 16. “Rawhide” singer
 17. Put one’s chips on the 
table?
 18. To a smaller extent
 19. Think alike
 20. Wedded pair
 23. Net receipt?
 24. Physics particles
 25. Sports network
 28. She played Laurie 
Partridge
 29. Be beholden to
 31. ___ Paulo, Brazil
 33. Tic-tac-toe winner
 34. Cowgirl Dale
 36. Protective covering
 38. Quiet business 
associate
 42. Part of a play
 43. Evidence of cooking
 44. Herd word
 45. Afternoon affair
 48. Type of liner
 49. It’s pressed for cash
 52. First name in mysteries
 54. Jazzy Fitzgerald
 56. Turf starter
 58. Certain look-alike
 61. Garden gastropod
 63. On the apex
 64. Key partner
 65. Camping digs
 66. Hardly genteel
 67. Sal the mule’s canal
 68. Out
 69. Earned a citation
 70. “I guess so”
Down
 1. Like mirrors and 
windows
 2. Appellative change
 3. How the innocent may 
be led
 4. Development areas?
 5. World’s longest river
 6. Yielding to supervision
 7. ___ da Gama
 8. Illegal firings?
 9. Stick starter
 10. Two below par
 11. Tedious
 12. Penultimate word in a 
countdown
 13. Part of an extended 
name
 21. “What a great gift!”
 22. Patriotic shout
 26. Flimsy, as an excuse
 27. Neither counterpart
 30. Pallid
 32. Kind of cookie
 34. Wallach, for one
 35. Treadmill site
 37. Genetic messenger 
letters
 38. Mark left by a healed 
wound
 39. Pisa residents
 40. Three-digit number
 41. Singer Orbison
 42. Lincoln’s nickname
 46. Velvet ender
 47. Religious platforms
 49. On the job
 50. Nixon’s daughter
 51. Business beginner
 53. Corrects copy
 55. Illuminated
 57. Pope of the fifth century
 59. Apart from this
 60. Did a Little bit?
 61. NASCAR advertiser
 62. Class-conscious org.?
Puzzle 27: Two of a Kind
Easy

81
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70

82
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Hula-Hoops, lava 
lamps, and so on
 5. Colored portion of 
the eye
 9. Confound
 14. “Hard ___!” 
(helmsman’s cry)
 15. Vegas lighting
 16. At no time
 17. Cerebellum section
 18. Certain short skirt
 19. Sports setting, 
sometimes
 20. In great shape
 23. Immature newt
 24. The go-to guys on staffs
 25. Choir members
 29. Beer-drinker’s overhang
 30. Married Italian woman
 31. Spick-and-span
 34. Narrow strip of wood
 36. Cork source
 37. In excellent condition
 41. Brain wave record
 42. It’s good when they 
meet
 43. Church recesses
 44. Bitter, as in taste
 47. Part of a Morse code 
letter
 48. What tennis balls are 
packaged in, typically
 49. Support in wrongdoing
 51. Calendar abbr.
 54. In fine fettle
 57. Bow application
 60. Electricity conductor
 61. Inspiration for an author
 62. Amid
 63. Aroma if pleasant, smell 
if bad?
 64. Exclamation of sorrow
 65. Ridges of wind-blown 
sand
 66. Oculist’s piece
 67. Ancient musical 
instrument
Down
 1. Trumped-up
 2. Emotionally detached
 3. Broadway opening
 4. Scene homophone
 5. Still in one piece
 6. Recycle
 7. Very small amounts
 8. Cold-shoulder
 9. Similar to another thing
 10. Arthurian magician
 11. Cousin of St. or Blvd.
 12. Buddhist sect
 13. Bullpen stat
 21. Intimidate
 22. Andrew Lloyd Webber 
musical
 26. Beer from Golden, 
Colorado
 27. Obliterate
 28. “Land ___ alive!”
 29. “Sleepy Time ___” 
(1925 song)
 30. Insolence
 31. Flimflam
 32. Freeloader
 33. Enthusiastic
 34. Put in harmony
 35. A Shropshire ___
 38. It should set off alarms
 39. Country on the island 
of Hispaniola
 40. Choose
 45. Process, as sugar
 46. Homo sapiens, for 
example
 47. Yields
 49. Stage whisper, perhaps
 50. Title of nobility
 51. Strangely
 52. Understandable
 53. Display poor 
sportsmanship
 55. MP’s prey
 56. I–XII locale
 57. X-ray unit
 58. Cassowary kin
 59. Wally, to Ward
Puzzle 28: Physically Fit
Easy

83
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67

84
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Expressed disdain, 
in a way
 6. Computer info
 10. It may cause one to 
scratch one’s head
 14. Relative of the giraffe
 15. Prayer finale
 16. Draft animal
 17. Leading
 19. Domain of a king and 
queen
 20. Get Smart enemy 
spy org.
 21. Vex
 22. Maniacs
 24. Christiana, today
 26. Endangered giant
 27. Some long-time 
Manhattanites?
 31. Prepare to propose
 32. Where you can be all 
you can be?
 33. Some change it 
regularly
 35. Thumbs-up votes
 36. Apothecary measures
 38. Dance that tells a story
 39. One feted in June
 40. Automatic start?
 41. Small digit
 42. Laura Bush?
 46. Use it to stand tall
 47. Alley cry
 48. Literary spoof
 50. Tampa Bay NFLer
 51. 1871 Verdi opera
 55. Gang’s territory
 56. Cookout leftover?
 59. Central Asian sea
 60. Hooligan
 61. Telemarketer’s 
necessity
 62. R&B singer Marvin
 63. Hook’s underling
 64. Fishy or fishing stories
Down
 1. Left the ground (with 
“off”)
 2. Northern seabird
 3. “Green Hornet” driver
 4. Sitcom segments
 5. “Gunga ___”
 6. Scopes’ defender
 7. One way to run
 8. Alexander Hamilton bill
 9. Some small colonies
 10. Obstruct
 11. Reverse course
 12. Lummox
 13. They’re tailor-made
 18. Register as a candidate
 23. One of Pac-Man’s 
pursuers
 25. NBC show for three 
decades, briefly
 26. Skin opening
 27. Ryan or Tatum
 28. Guide down the wrong 
path
 29. Mr. Arafat
 30. Soft and smooth
 31. The Spanish Tragedy 
dramatist
 34. “Now I ___ me down to 
sleep”
 36. Blocks
 37. Leave out
 38. Longfellow’s Native 
American hero
 40. Cook’s instruction
 41. Al Fatah’s org.
 43. Repress
 44. Mark from dirty fingers
 45. Type of support
 48. Large male deer
 49. Saintly quality
 50. Sad color?
 52. Worshiped celeb
 53. Completed
 54. Word on a toy package
 57. Electrician’s measure
 58. Decide
Puzzle 29: Opposites Attract
Easy

85
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64

86
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Off-the-cuff comment
 6. Fearless and daring
 10. Electrical framework
 14. Fess Parker role
 15. Polo explored it
 16. Gave a hard time to
 17. Dead end
 19. Shakespeare’s stream
 20. Still, to poets
 21. Small combo
 22. Beautiful
 24. Italian greeting
 25. Address for a king
 26. Impediment
 32. Task for a child
 33. Sounds coming from 
inside a bowl
 34. Forty-niner’s tool
 35. Decorative vases
 36. Approached with 
stealth
 38. Locks in a barn?
 39. Hillbilly band 
instrument
 40. Downfall
 41. Word in some 
temperature readings
 42. Place for hurdles
 46. Fit of shivering
 47. Encourage heartily
 48. Self-evident truth
 51. Etc. relative
 52. Faux ___ (blunder)
 55. Word with “dance” or 
“union”
 56. Traffic-jam cause
 59. River through Pisa
 60. Beach bird
 61. Ranchero’s rope
 62. Verb with “down” 
or “out”
 63. Target of a swift kick
 64. Nautical spar
Down
 1. Ex of Cugie
 2. 1996 presidential-race 
loser
 3. Choice meat cut
 4. Room offerer
 5. “Nighty-night” time
 6. King of Scotland, 
1292–96
 7. Scandinavian capital
 8. Tell it like it isn’t
 9. Vampire’s undoing
 10. Driveway stones
 11. Travel randomly
 12. Joss house figure
 13. Declare untrue
 18. Damascus resident
 23. The sun, moon, and 
planets, for example
 24. Mutts
 25. Rice Krispies sound
 26. Hedge unit
 27. Ice cube grabbers
 28. “Goodnight ___”
 29. Gemstones from 
Australia
 30. Craft for Pocahontas
 31. Was familiar with
 32. Stephen King novel
 36. Salad ingredient
 37. Ruffle feathers
 38. A ___ bagatelle
 40. From ___ to riches
 41. “Taps” players
 43. One who hems but 
doesn’t haw
 44. Single-masted sailing 
vessel
 45. Tough exam
 48. Dissolve, as ice
 49. Pink, to a chef
 50. It parallels a radius
 51. Sicilian rumbler
 52. Anjou or bosc
 53. Play opener
 54. Card game for three
 57. Piece of mine?
 58. Tuck partner
Puzzle 30: Careful!
Easy

87
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
35

88
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Isaac Hayes classic
 6. Some files
 11. Did not stand for it?
 14. “I ___ Symphony,” 
(Supremes hit)
 15. Keep from happening
 16. Alleged mentalist Geller
 17. Post-thaw restlessness
 19. Election-year ammo, 
maybe
 20. Word with “boot” or 
“pole”
 21. Wool coat wearer
 22. Executive’s deg.
 23. Lovey-dovey
 27. Short end of the stick
 29. Lord of the ring, once
 30. Twice-monthly tide
 32. Bring up, as kids
 33. Way over there
 34. Sticks together, in a way
 36. Phonograph records
 39. Aware of
 41. Maze word
 43. Red’s meaning, at times
 44. Holders of many frames
 46. Spud
 48. Lord’s Prayer opener
 49. Descartes the 
mathematician
 51. Founder of Time and 
Life
 52. Bean counter, for short
 53. Apt to break
 56. Janitor’s aid
 58. Surfing site
 59. Part of TGIF
 60. Hawaiian garland
 61. Wall St. deal
 62. World Series
 68. Feather mate
 69. Arctic shelter
 70. Dubya’s wife
 71. Street often near Oak
 72. Out of humor
 73. Chilling forecast
Down
 1. Calls for quiet
 2. Cool, in the ’50s
 3. Bernese flower
 4. Search, as a perp
 5. Doing horribly
 6. Spitfire org.
 7. “Hail!” to Horace
 8. Discontinue, as 
relations
 9. Period prior to 1941, in 
the United States
 10. Scattered about
 11. Certain theater 
productions
 12. Caribbean paradise
 13. Pertaining to neap 
and ebb
 18. MacKenzie of Your Hit 
Parade
 23. “Key to the City” 
presenter
 24. Having no company
 25. Something school kids 
hope for in December?
 26. Stamping ground
 28. Place for roasting
 31. “He loves me” piece
 35. Deceptive scheme
 37. Two-door vehicle
 38. Fine drops of water
 40. Table tub
 42. Carmaker’s woe
 45. Kick the bucket
 47. Closes again, as an 
envelope
 50. Infuriate
 53. Come together
 54. Sherpa’s home
 55. Some pickles, familiarly
 57. Hemp fiber
 63. Studio site
 64. Affectedly modest
 65. Seek redress
 66. It makes one hot
 67. One familiar with litter
Puzzle 31: A Little Seasoning
Easy

89
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73

90
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Whimpers
 6. Take it easy
 10. “Deck the Halls” 
syllables
 14. “Farewell, François”
 15. Soft spread
 16. NYSE rival
 17. Irish export
 18. Certain championship 
event
 20. “___ A Beautiful 
Morning”
 21. Economize
 23. Spooky
 24. Oft-kicked item
 25. Perpetual
 27. Mirror, of yore
 31. Making eyes at
 32. Falsify, as prices
 33. Put to the test
 36. Crinkled cotton fabric
 37. It shoots the breeze
 38. In a foul mood
 40. It may be tapped
 41. Jackie’s second
 42. Golf great Arnold
 43. Site for a state slogan, 
perhaps
 46. Books that may display 
where and tear?
 49. Maui music makers
 50. Hackneyed
 51. Crossed one’s fingers
 53. GPs
 56. Yellow flower
 58. Net letter
 60. Need liniment
 61. Ives of song
 62. Work on a pumpkin, 
perhaps
 63. Pebble Beach pegs
 64. ___-bitsy
 65. Manipulate dough
Down
 1. African republic
 2. Abridge, maybe
 3. First number in season 
records
 4. Remick or Strasberg
 5. Hawaii draw
 6. Type of proposition
 7. Styptic material
 8. Dirigible balloon
 9. Classified ad letters
 10. Mailing supply
 11. Love in Milan
 12. Author Sinclair
 13. Rods on rigs
 19. Warren Beatty flick
 22. Word with crab or cobra
 24. Hop, ___, and jump
 26. Faultfinder
 27. It may be picked
 28. Storybook monster
 29. Cassini of fashion
 30. Type of alcohol
 33. Plebe’s sch.
 34. Annotation in 
proofreading
 35. Bronte governess
 37. Like some flowers
 38. Stereo accessory
 39. Building additions
 41. Crackerjack
 42. Lap dog, for short
 43. Some coffeehouse 
orders
 44. “That makes sense”
 45. Furnish
 46. Trip to the plate
 47. Break in hostilities
 48. Supple
 52. Possessive pronoun
 53. She ain’t what she used 
to be
 54. Opera star
 55. Cold weather transport
 57. Box score stat
 59. “A ___ Called Horse”
Puzzle 32: Table Setting
Easy

91
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65

92
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Church fixture
 6. Chianti, for example
 10. ASAP, to an MD
 14. Lead-and-tin alloy
 15. Tied
 16. Place for a honey 
bunch?
 17. Endangered tropical 
region
 19. The African Queen 
screenwriter James
 20. Participants in a debate
 21. Interferes (with)
 23. Regions
 25. Penitent one
 26. Strolls leisurely
 29. Set of clothes
 31. Misfortune
 34. Modern Greece’s 
legislative assembly
 35. Billie Holiday’s “You 
Can’t Be Mine (And 
Someone ___ Too)”
 36. Suffix with rigor
 37. Word with “cheeks” or 
“outlook”
 38. Culpability
 39. Pipkins
 40. Kind of can
 41. Saturday Night Fever 
setting
 42. Podge attachment
 43. Funnyman Brooks
 44. “Dedicated to the ___ 
Love”
 45. School assignment
 46. Israeli leader Barak
 48. Ages and ages
 50. Ensnared
 53. Okay, informally
 57. Louie De Palma’s office 
setting
 58. 1942 Sabu flick
 60. Air conditioner units
 61. Viva voce
 62. “When ___ You” (Irving 
Berlin)
 63. Have a session
 64. Former nickname for 
Brigitte Bardot
 65. 100,000 in a newton
Down
 1. Big name in razors
 2. Maude producer 
Norman
 3. Advanced math
 4. Once a year
 5. Ring authority
 6. Vice ___
 7. “___ Got You Under My 
Skin”
 8. Bird’s-___ soup
 9. Precise
 10. Mold
 11. He’s responsible for 
long drives
 12. State
 13. Eighteen on a course
 18. Taconite and tinstone
 22. State of confusion or 
disorder
 24. Pt. of the British West 
Indies
 26. Sarai’s mate
 27. Large ruminant
 28. Second-rate
 30. Christiania, today
 32. Income’s antithesis
 33. Ruhr industrial center
 35. The life of Riley
 38. College graduate’s goal, 
perhaps
 39. Perhaps
 41. Ill-humored
 42. Actor Paul of 
Casablanca
 45. Recline
 47. 1952 Eniwetok event
 49. American symbol
 50. Subject of SALT
 51. Hoopster Archibald
 52. Simple partner?
 54. Hired thug
 55. Running attire?
 56. Some adv. purchases
 59. Capture, as a fugitive
Puzzle 33: Brushing Up
Easy

93
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65

94
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Dangerous reptile
 4. Mail org.
 8. Acknowledges with 
one’s fedora
 13. Nada, zip
 14. Bowler’s 7-10, for 
example
 15. Florida citrus center
 16. Barely achieve 
(with “out”)
 17. George’s brother
 19. Bric-a-brac stand
 21. Takes umbrage
 22. Formerly
 23. Radio station sign
 24. Place to haggle
 28. Important time, 
historywise
 31. Off-Broadway theater 
award
 32. Instant greenery
 33. Missing-person locator
 35. Fatty compound
 37. Highly reliable evidence
 39. Range
 40. Handsome young man
 42. Stowe’s little heroine
 44. Zeno’s birthplace
 45. Stimpy’s cartoon buddy
 46. Classroom diversion
 49. They may be locked or 
blown
 50. Brewed drink
 51. Attire
 54. Not deep at all
 58. Certain researcher
 60. Pub potion
 61. The Canterbury Tales 
pilgrim
 62. Second or sixth 
president
 63. One getting the red 
carpet treatment
 64. Canadian physician 
Sir William
 65. Turner and Cole
 66. Picnic problem
Down
 1. “There’s ___ day 
dawning . . .”
 2. Punjabi believer
 3. “Guilty,” for example
 4. Displaces
 5. Blinds crosspiece
 6. Snowball in Animal 
Farm
 7. Breastbones
 8. Some FBI files
 9. Fall color
 10. Kowtow
 11. Dart
 12. Without
 14. Scorch
 18. Do a double-take, for 
example
 20. Absorb
 23. Been there, done that
 24. Grinding tooth
 25. Tolerate
 26. Wisconsin college town 
and college
 27. Peas’ place
 28. Eleve’s place
 29. Drive back
 30. “He’s ___ nowhere man” 
(Beatles)
 34. Compound used in 
perfume manufacture
 36. Chaos
 38. Clark’s Mogambo costar
 41. Hag
 43. National songs
 47. Temporarily at the 
museum
 48. Beloved ones
 49. Split
 51. Dr. J wore one
 52. Slapstick-movie missiles
 53. Rind
 54. Game with 32 cards
 55. Magma exposed
 56. Actress Lena
 57. Turned on the 
waterworks
 59. Nutritional advisory, 
abbr.
Puzzle 34: Off to the Races
Easy

95
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66

96
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Disney dog
 6. Party type
 10. Peaked
 14. “I was out of town,” for 
example
 15. Head of France
 16. Russian “John”
 17. 200 milligrams
 18. Suspicious of
 19. Wither
 20. Secretly watch
 21. Hollywood investment
 24. Epsom product
 25. 747 kitchen
 26. Ms. Lansbury
 29. Be revolting?
 30. Collector’s ultimatum
 33. Dallas inst.
 36. Alda or Arkin
 37. Be under the weather
 38. Famous septet
 39. Soak
 40. Impersonal mail
 44. Treats hides
 45. More cruel
 46. Attack
 49. Oriental
 51. Gridiron goof
 53. “A bird,” “a plane,” or 
“Superman” preceder
 56. Sweet sandwich
 57. Bedouin
 58. ___ Is Enough 
(TV show)
 60. Bring up
 61. Urn
 62. Be crazy about
 63. Slips up
 64. Pitcher
 65. Roman meeting place
Down
 1. Anatomical pouches
 2. Show fan support
 3. Stadium without a 
dome?
 4. Deg. for Wall St.
 5. Trap
 6. Ermine
 7. Big tops
 8. Aleutian isle
 9. Virgil work
 10. Nonsense
 11. Do the trick
 12. Big dipper?
 13. One on a Nixon list
 22. Gung-ho spirit
 23. Relaxation
 24. Penn in pictures
 26. At some distance
 27. Battle of the ___, 1798
 28. Punkie
 29. Lunar valley
 31. Skiff propellers
 32. “Tiny” Dickens character
 33. Observed
 34. Stable mom
 35. Cold War concern
 38. Getz on the sax
 40. Pass alternative
 41. Vacationing
 42. Ludwig or Jannings
 43. Shredded and bagged 
item
 44. Small drums
 46. In advance
 47. More certain
 48. Apply lipstick poorly
 49. Humiliate
 50. It has a duel purpose
 52. Performer who fills the 
club
 53. Inventor Sikorsky
 54. Drive-___ (fast food 
convenience)
 55. Blossom support
 59. Words that leave you in 
a bind?
Puzzle 35: Heard Through the Beanstalk?
Easy

97
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65

98
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Ear parts
 6. Sort of skirt
 10. Taj Mahal locale
 14. Accumulated
 15. Andy’s friend
 16. Party cheese
 17. Author Loos
 18. Hideaway
 19. Result of downsizing
 20. Look at seductively
 23. Narc org.
 24. ___ and terminer
 25. Name appendages, 
sometimes
 28. Hit sign?
 30. Goes to school for the 
right reasons
 35. Hud star Patricia
 37. “No way!”
 40. Essential oil from 
flowers
 42. She’s busy in Apr.
 43. Humpty Dumpty’s 
sound
 44. Nicholson in Chinatown, 
for example
 47. Fodder structure
 48. Certain Beethoven work
 49. Law & Order: ___
 51. Corn holder, perhaps
 52. He’s tickled
 55. Spanish year
 57. She’s cherished
 64. Blue dye
 65. Silents star Naldi
 66. Back-forty measure
 67. Second of a series
 68. ___ bon
 69. Historical novels
 70. Noted lake
 71. Placed in the mail
 72. Irregularly notched
Down
 1. Use a trawl, for example
 2. Indian princess
 3. Pt. of UNLV
 4. Stifled
 5. Outpourings
 6. Form check box, 
perhaps
 7. Insect stage
 8. Decorative mat
 9. Begin, for example
 10. Part of a ready trio
 11. Western novelist Zane
 12. You may do it with 
the sun
 13. Political monogram of 
’52 and ’56
 21. Mata ___
 22. Lees
 25. Goes over the edge
 26. Type of rocket
 27. Sheet material, perhaps
 29. Nursery rhyme starter
 31. Some vipers
 32. Venerated object
 33. African antelope
 34. Not vacillating about
 36. Hawaiian bubbly?
 38. Primatologist’s subject
 39. Proves worthwhile
 41. Honey badger
 45. Mimicry and 
musicianship, for 
example
 46. Writer Hunter
 50. Discomfort
 53. Rippled-surface fabric
 54. More than occasionally
 56. Prize for 35-Across
 57. Again
 58. Pocket bread
 59. A or B, for example
 60. Kiln
 61. Thus
 62. Some voters
 63. Latin I lesson word
 64. Many are crunched
Puzzle 36: Eyes Right
Easy

99
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72

100
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. One true thing
 5. Proclamation
 10. Inconclusive, as a jury
 14. Donkey delivery
 15. Medicinal plant
 16. Storybook villain
 17. Start of a quip by 
Mamie Van Doren
 20. It may become bald
 21. Infection fighter in the 
blood
 22. Melancholy mood music
 25. Meager
 29. Collapse in a weary 
heap
 30. Reptilian killer
 33. Sleep soundly?
 34. 1918–19 scourge
 35. Meals on wheels 
server?
 38. Son of Seth
 39. Middle of the quip
 42. Concerning
 44. Dr. Seuss’ title reptile
 45. Meas. of national wealth
 48. Stores
 50. Opposite of paleo
 51. They may have 
Hawaiian roots
 53. Naturally illuminated
 55. Shah ousted by 
Khomeini
 57. Brainstorming goal
 60. Tranquil
 61. End of the quip
 67. Thirties jazz
 68. Touched by an Angel 
star, Della
 69. Chromosome occupant
 70. Aquatic resorts
 71. President of Syria
 72. Stropping result
Down
 1. Org. with a lab
 2. Type of studio
 3. Be skeptical about
 4. Key personnel?
 5. German industrial city
 6. ___ Moines, Iowa
 7. “Put a sock ___!”
 8. Cable network
 9. They may be passed 
around campfires
 10. Emergency phone links
 11. Exclamation of disgust
 12. Org. with many arms?
 13. Attain
 18. “Prometheus” muralist
 19. Brotherhood since 1868
 22. Sunscreen letters
 23. More than most
 24. Where everything’s 
coming up roses, 
maybe?
 26. Initially embroidered
 27. Debater’s position, 
sometimes
 28. It’s an okay word
 31. Sexologist Hite
 32. Occurring after surgery, 
briefly
 36. Flexible choice
 37. Norton, to Kramden
 40. Good-for-nothings
 41. Deadly
 42. A Midsummer Night’s 
Dream animal
 43. Alphabet run
 46. Black Fri. time
 47. Chi follower
 49. Word with “walk” or 
“kick”
 52. Claim
 54. Caesar’s land
 56. Role-played
 58. Many moons
 59. Visits
 61. Attire for the wee hrs.
 62. Dangerous tide
 63. One of the Perons
 64. Super-secretive 
government org.
 65. Half of a celebrated set 
of twins
 66. Formerly known as
Puzzle 37: Opposite Attraction
Easy

101
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72

102
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Duel invitation
 5. Tramp’s love
 9. ___ Benedict
 13. American Indian corn 
bread
 14. Basic French verb
 15. Large-eyed primate
 17. Official records
 18. Cookbook direction
 19. People and verbs have 
them
 20. It may be used to test 
for phosphorus
 23. Two-star performance?
 24. One billion years, in 
astronomy
 25. Much of Cuba
 27. Visual aid, perhaps
 31. All in
 32. Meadow
 33. National Velvet author 
Bagnold
 35. Had trouble 
pronouncing “s”
 38. Homer’s issue?
 40. Schoolyard game
 42. Leave helpless with 
laughter
 43. Emanating from stars
 46. Whipping site at sea
 49. Hail from the past
 50. Altar promise
 52. Read, as a bar code
 54. Showed curiosity
 57. Commemorative poem
 58. Smear with grease or 
mud, for example
 59. One who works his 
own land
 64. Deformed circles
 66. Make a blunder
 67. 15th Amendment topic
 68. West Coast pro
 69. What the “poor dog” got
 70. Cupid’s counterpart
 71. Smaller amount
 72. Burned rubber
 73. Making its way there
Down
 1. Where jets don’t fly
 2. Meshuga
 3. With the enemy, 
perhaps
 4. Went ding-dong
 5. Arab League member
 6. Energy source
 7. Tap problems
 8. Deliver a mouthful
 9. Hackberry, for example
 10. “My word!”
 11. First floor proposal
 12. The hit on a 45, usually
 16. Grounded fleet
 21. Sensitive to the touch
 22. Sermon subject, 
sometimes
 26. Noted Onassis, to 
friends
 27. Island east of Corsica
 28. Supportive voices
 29. Catastrophic event
 30. Kind of boss or bull
 34. Equine mother
 36. Roof part
 37. Not natural, as hair
 39. Bothers
 41. Word with “tank” or 
“range”
 44. Wheel of Fortune 
purchase
 45. Baltimore or Fauntleroy, 
for example
 47. Displayed disdain
 48. “I did it!”
 51. Wields the scepter
 53. Impulse transmitters
 54. Person or object of 
devotion
 55. Type of blockade
 56. Hang down
 60. Sound quality
 61. Second helping, for 
example
 62. Type of collar
 63. Take a load off
 65. Many dads, briefly
Puzzle 38: On the Surface
Easy

103
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73

104
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Quits wavering
 5. Certain Pindaric poem
 8. Cipriano, Americo, or 
Fidel
 14. Snow remover
 15. ___ Paese (cheese)
 16. It goes overboard
 17. Wan and not tan
 18. “Flapper” follower
 19. One with fixed eyes
 20. TV sitcom from ’75 to ’84
 23. Religious repast
 24. It’s not gross
 25. Lawyers’ grp.
 28. Tokyo, before 1868
 29. Touch-and-go game
 31. Disciple of Paul
 35. More threatening
 37. They put you in your 
place
 38. TV sitcom from ’77 to ’84
 41. Lao-tzu follower
 42. Steer clear
 43. Blew a gasket
 45. Flub
 46. DNA synthesizer
 49. Replies of refusal
 50. “The ramparts” lead-in
 52. Words with “two” or 
“hole”
 54. TV sitcom from ’77 to ’81
 59. Minor but aggravating 
problem
 61. AAA’s opposite?
 62. Stratagem
 63. Making less sense
 64. Hotel addition?
 65. Between ports, for 
example
 66. “Anti” attachment
 67. Lennon’s bride
 68. Suburban sale venue
Down
 1. Avoid agreement
 2. Shaved wood
 3. Holy city?
 4. Bjorn Borg, for example
 5. Follow orders
 6. Disturbs mentally
 7. Make one’s day and 
more
 8. Playbill listing
 9. “Social” leader
 10. Source of illegitimate 
income
 11. Promise punishment, 
for example
 12. Sole source
 13. Bruins’ legendary Bobby
 21. Most bohemian
 22. Downed a sub
 26. Cover to conceal
 27. Beast of burden
 30. Range ridge
 32. Unconfirmed info
 33. Remedy taken in pairs
 34. Certain herring
 35. Plumbing problem
 36. Letters on some TVs 
and VCRs
 38. Tropical tuber
 39. Minded the mansion, 
for example
 40. Supervised
 41. “Lords a-leaping” 
number
 44. Point to be made?
 46. Author Alcott
 47. One who’s casting 
about?
 48. Use a guillotine
 51. Letters from childhood
 53. “You’re kidding!”
 55. “Money ___ everything”
 56. Type of club
 57. Munchen man of the 
house
 58. First name in 
architecture
 59. That guy
 60. Santa ___
Puzzle 39: What’s On?
Easy

105
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68

106
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Ruth on the field
 5. Splash clumsily
 10. Cypress, for one
 14. Got 100 on, as a test
 15. Overly self-confident
 16. Certain something
 17. Wild guess
 18. More than disliked
 19. Tip, nautically
 20. Schedule limitations, 
hiding transit
 23. Be it–humble link
 24. Engine disks
 25. Foul-weather overshoe
 28. Plenty
 32. Tijuana two
 35. Behave bullishly?
 36. Et cetera relative
 37. Store sign, hiding transit
 41. Hardly bland
 42. “Nobel” ending
 43. Do likewise
 44. Turgenev heroine
 45. Like a dive
 48. Sound of clothing tags 
being removed
 50. Feature of some boots
 54. Unquestioned style, 
hiding transit
 59. Detected
 60. On ___ (counting 
calories)
 61. Sail support
 62. Cookie magnate
 63. Brainy gang
 64. Luau root
 65. Acoustic measure
 66. Favorite of Elizabeth
 67. Peevish mood
Down
 1. Cookbook instruction, 
sometimes
 2. Part of The Tempest
 3. Former NYC mayor 
Abraham
 4. Court star Stefan
 5. Certain student
 6. Savings counterpart
 7. Some short months?
 8. Quickie portrait, 
perhaps
 9. Monster slain by 
Hercules
 10. It works like a charm
 11. Totally wreck
 12. While beginning?
 13. Puts away the 
groceries?
 21. R.E. Lee’s org.
 22. Violinist’s heirloom, 
perhaps
 26. “. . . ___ flag was still 
there”
 27. Sally Field role
 29. Bargain type
 30. Pronunciation difficulty
 31. Effortlessness
 32. Two tablets, maybe
 33. Birthstone for 7-Down
 34. Golfer Ballesteros
 36. Certain levy
 38. Meaningless words
 39. Coin replaced by the 
euro
 40. Put to the test, in a way
 45. Play suit?
 46. “B.C.” anteater’s sound
 47. Leavening agents
 49. Part of Caesar’s boast
 51. It covers Congress
 52. Nintendo’s precursor
 53. Also-ran of 1996
 54. “Stupid ___ stupid does”
 55. Office transmittal
 56. Latin American laborer
 57. Compartments
 58. ___ majeste
Puzzle 40: Waist Management
Easy

107
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67

108
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Zig or zag
 5. Easily bullied
 9. Bit of snowfall
 14. Suffix with “corrupt” or 
“contempt”
 15. Follow an order
 16. Sheets, tablecloths, and 
so forth
 17. Barker at SeaWorld
 18. Heartfelt
 19. Preamble
 20. Italian meal starter, 
perhaps
 22. Bartletts and Boscs, for 
example
 23. “If all __ fails . . .”
 24. Fight, but not seriously
 25. “He Ain’t ___, He’s My 
Brother”
 28. Item in a dentist’s office
 32. Sister of Emily and 
Charlotte
 33. Card dispenser
 35. Prefix for pod or angle
 36. Decay
 37. Summer outings
 38. “When Will ___ Loved?”
 39. The “ugly” to Clint’s 
“good” and Lee’s “bad”
 40. Current terminals
 41. Former stitch location, 
perhaps
 42. Dance craze of the ’90s
 44. Thinks ahead
 45. Caesar’s bad day
 46. Ray of The Haunted 
(1979)
 48. Tree with fluttering 
leaves
 50. Period before the 
Middle Ages
 55. Barb-filled ceremony
 56. Stovetop items
 57. Emotion displayed with 
hand-rubbing
 58. ___-frutti
 59. Diabolical
 60. Fats Domino’s 
“Blueberry ___”
 61. Some swords
 62. Tony Curtis classic, The 
Great ___
 63. Hawk
Down
 1. American Express 
alternative
 2. Desire Under the Elms 
son
 3. Israel’s southernmost 
city
 4. Substitute for, as a 
pitcher
 5. Ice cream parlor orders
 6. Beyond pleasantly 
plump
 7. Pedal pushers
 8. Proofreader’s find, 
hopefully
 9. Snorkeler’s wear
 10. One-dimensional
 11. Land way down south
 12. From Here to Eternity 
actress
 13. He had a grandmother 
named Eve
 21. Work busily
 24. Glasses
 25. Male seal’s bevy
 26. ___ Gay (infamous B-29)
 27. Look forward to
 28. Bamboo consumer
 29. “I cannot tell ___”
 30. Citified
 31. Shore platforms
 33. Has an elegant meal
 34. Financial subj.
 37. Word after “in loco,” in 
a phrase
 41. Stagnant swamps
 43. Carol title word
 44. ASAP
 46. Where the last flight 
ends?
 47. Cotton thread
 48. Johnson of “ver-r-r-ry 
interesting” fame
 49. Liquid nourishment
 50. Copycat
 51. Spectacular star
 52. Tennis champ Nastase
 53. “Don’t ask, don’t ___”
 54. Scream
Puzzle 41: Pantry Raid
Tricky

109
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63

110
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Struggle for air
 5. Apple center
 9. Actress LuPone
 14. Fort Apache actor, 1948
 15. Sherman Helmsley/
Clifton Davis sitcom
 16. Ladybug’s lunch, 
perhaps
 17. Like the spotted owl
 18. Season of penitence
 19. Bacteria
 20. Song that could carry 
you away
 23. Word before “ignition . . . 
liftoff!”
 24. Screen siren West
 25. Tract ending
 26. Young feller
 29. Song that could carry 
you away
 32. Ranis’ garments
 35. Grazing land
 36. Arcade patron, perhaps
 37. Have a bias
 38. Out of joint
 40. Test answer with a 
50/50 shot
 41. Garden beauty
 42. Wipe lightly
 43. Fine rains
 44. Song that could carry 
you away
 48. Dry, as in wine
 49. Intention
 50. Dr. No author Fleming
 51. Is down with
 54. Song that could carry 
you away
 58. Highly proficient
 60. Word with cafe or film
 61. Tiny Greek letter?
 62. Type of train
 63. “Great Caesar’s ghost!”
 64. Today’s Siamese
 65. Place for a convict’s 
bracelet
 66. Cravings
 67. ___ Grey (kind of tea)
Down
 1. Ninotchka actress Greta
 2. “You can say that ___!”
 3. “Beetle Bailey” 
character
 4. The hunted
 5. Opera’s Maria
 6. Egg dish
 7. Where people arrive to 
split
 8. Twists together
 9. Heathens
 10. High point
 11. Mystery novels, for 
example
 12. A Christmas Carol boy
 13. Personality parts
 21. Feathered six-footers
 22. Senatorial wraps
 27. Northern inhabitant
 28. Units of force
 29. Belarus capital
 30. Excuse
 31. Toys in the ___ (1963)
 32. Banana peel mishaps
 33. Condor nest, for 
example
 34. Something a fair-
weather fan might use?
 38. Firefighter Red
 39. Emergency cash
 43. Musician Manfred
 45. Longhorns, and so forth
 46. Mystery author ___ 
Jackson Braun
 47. Scottish landowners
 51. Uproarious commotion
 52. Wedding site
 53. Epitome of slowness
 55. October birthstone
 56. Former Venetian 
magistrate
 57. Quote
 58. ___ mode
 59. Godfather
Puzzle 42: Road Rules
Tricky

111
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67

112
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. 2,051, in old Rome
 5. Play in a mud puddle, 
for example
 10. Madame Bovary
 14. “I’m listening”
 15. Truant’s game
 16. Butcher’s offering
 17. Certain UFO
 19. It’s found in a round
 20. M*A*S*H prioritizing 
system
 21. Lab example
 23. Gold vein
 25. Big name in electronics
 26. Detective’s assignments
 29. Bonanza network
 32. Aquarium fish
 35. Billing unit, for some
 36. Like a numismatist’s 
greatest treasure
 38. Molder
 39. Work unit
 40. Spanish clan
 41. In the past
 42. Words with “loss” or 
“glance”
 43. Gives the heave-ho
 44. Pond film
 45. Vegetable knife
 47. Fantasy Island neckwear
 48. Bo, Luke, and Daisy
 49. “Buenos ___!”
 51. Santa ___, Calif.
 53. Gourmet onions
 57. Appear on the scene
 61. Get one’s feet wet, in a 
way
 62. Mayor, for example
 64. General’s gofer, for 
example
 65. Prepare to be knighted
 66. Hot streak
 67. ___ Mawr College
 68. Too sentimental
 69. Cornstalk features
Down
 1. Ones minding the store 
(Abbr.)
 2. The Hound of the 
Baskervilles locale
 3. Viaud’s pen name
 4. Asthma sufferer’s gadget
 5. Measure, as of dignity
 6. Word with Alamos or 
Altos
 7. Cries of amazement
 8. Bounce across water
 9. Excessively promotes
 10. Marilu Henner’s Taxi 
role
 11. Certain career path
 12. He’s not one to talk
 13. Soon, ere now
 18. Alter ___
 22. Terra ___
 24. Hard dental layer
 26. Penny-pinching
 27. Blood vessel that 
begins at the heart
 28. Ingenue’s benefactor, 
perhaps
 30. Streisand’s Funny Girl 
role
 31. John Havlicek was one
 33. Scoundrel
 34. Molecular components
 36. British rule prior to 1947
 37. “___-boom-bah!”
 40. Like a wild animal
 44. Type of pancake (with 
“crepe”)
 46. Brennan of Private 
Benjamin
 48. Russian parliament
 50. Knee-highs and argyles
 52. Test a modified paper 
airplane
 53. Mariner’s mop
 54. Cueball’s lack
 55. Frank’s daughter
 56. Resign (with “down”)
 58. Flightless bird
 59. Shifter’s selection
 60. Flubs it
 63. Cowpoke assent
Puzzle 43: Parental Control
Tricky

113
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69

114
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Eyelid inflammations
 6. Word with sugar or 
walking
 10. Powder holders
 14. “Ain’t!” retort
 15. Spanish rivers
 16. Place avoided by 
Rushdie
 17. Roots character
 19. Busted
 20. “Y” pluralized
 21. Well-versed folks?
 22. Response to “Who’s 
there?”
 23. Good-hearted
 24. It’s rung out on 
December 31
 26. Signs of modesty
 30. Letters of satisfaction
 31. Pertaining to an arm 
bone
 32. Kick out
 34. Pre-college yrs.
 38. Jacob’s twin
 39. Pound unit
 40. Base runner’s steps off 
the bag
 41. They’re on the books
 42. Part of et al.
 43. Slick goo
 44. Little fox
 46. Gridiron orgs.
 48. Accompaniments
 52. Unrestrained anger
 53. George and Rod’s ex
 54. City ESE of Bombay
 56. Drink with crumpets
 59. Army chow
 60. Founder of the Mongol 
dynasty
 62. Check point?
 63. In the thick of
 64. Feature of city life
 65. He’s no pro
 66. Bitter middle?
 67. Muscle power
Down
 1. H.H. Munro’s pen name
 2. ___ or false
 3. Sweet tooth and 
Japanese coin
 4. Superlative suffix
 5. Filled with more 
melodrama
 6. Made public that you 
were wronged
 7. ___ Misbehavin’
 8. “That’s a lie!”
 9. Taiwan or Peking 
addition
 10. Jackie Oh! author
 11. Do blackboard duty
 12. Delta preceder
 13. Unkind look
 18. Hawaiian coffee town
 22. Bachelor’s last words?
 23. Paganini actor
 25. Not when expected
 26. Fill with gas
 27. Casablanca role
 28. Cause persistent worry
 29. No ___ Venice
 33. Construction-site sights
 35. Film princess
 36. Mia of the USA World 
Cup soccer team
 37. Mid-month date for 
Caesar
 39. Inauguration Day 
highlight
 43. Puts through a sieve
 45. Call ___ night (retire)
 47. Moon goddess
 48. Viola da ___
 49. Modern fat substitute
 50. Negative contraction
 51. Foam
 55. Tony Award relative
 56. Companion of thick
 57. “At ___, soldier!”
 58. In a different way
 60. Krazy of comics
 61. Carp in some garden 
ponds
Puzzle 44: 2K Race
Tricky

115
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67

116
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. “. . . and make it 
snappy!”
 5. Young, migrating 
salmon
 10. 455, in old Rome
 14. Walt Kelly comic strip
 15. Western adventure
 16. “King ___” (1950–65 
comic strip)
 17. About to end
 20. Added just before time 
ran out
 21. Machinations
 22. Some are three-legged
 24. Caboodle’s companion
 25. Result of baby’s first 
spaghetti dinner
 28. Heavy weights
 30. Employs an ambulance 
chaser, for example
 34. Buffet selections, often
 37. Goat’s milk product
 39. Plunked oneself down
 40. About to end
 43. Extra qtrs., for example
 44. Piece of window glass
 45. “Madness” of a 1936 film
 46. Librarian’s admonitions
 48. Many crossword puzzle 
themes
 50. Word with “fire” or 
“white”
 51. Pickup compartment
 53. Joins the choir
 56. Some bakery items
 60. Gives comfort to
 64. About to end
 66. Metrical romance
 67. Tiny arachnids
 68. “An apple ___ . . .”
 69. Persuade
 70. Keep for later
 71. A good cloud to be on
Down
 1. Abbey area
 2. “Deal!”
 3. All ___ (excited)
 4. Carpenter’s tool
 5. Type of boom
 6. Powerful attractor
 7. Baseball legend Mel
 8. Many popes
 9. Jesse Owens, notably
 10. Some insertion marks
 11. Avoirdupois unit
 12. St. Elmo’s Fire actor
 13. Some remote 
abbreviations
 18. She’s “sweet as apple 
cider”
 19. Greek X
 23. Cushions
 25. Old PC operating 
system
 26. Home base for everyone
 27. Partner of burn
 29. Classical prefix
 31. Good ol’ country, for 
short
 32. Meeting room prop
 33. Cubic meter
 35. Party snack
 36. Some fedoras
 38. Baron von Richthofen, 
for one
 41. New homophone
 42. A math sign
 47. Barely adequate
 49. Many a bridesmaid
 52. Help out
 54. Ominous loop
 55. ___ few rounds (spar)
 56. Easter fare
 57. All hands on deck
 58. One of the Simpsons
 59. Fit of anger
 61. “___ known . . .”
 62. Verve
 63. Eyelid flare-up
 65. Muscle car of the ’60s
Puzzle 45: Finishing Up
Tricky

117
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71

118
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Magic Dragon of song
 5. Bean spillers
 9. It consists of high spirits
 13. Ending with “buck” or 
“stink”
 14. Be a verbal rubber 
stamp
 15. Game surface, 
sometimes
 16. All in the Family 
producer
 17. Revered expert
 18. Sane
 19. TOM
 22. Hag
 23. Valentine’s Day’s 
signature color
 24. Pampered
 27. Fertility goddess
 29. Support system?
 32. Last of a series
 33. One who looks down 
a lot?
 34. “___ here long?”
 35. FRANK
 38. Change Money?
 39. Dwarf’s refrain words
 40. Paquin and Pavlova
 41. Hole that’s inhabitable
 42. Something to build on
 43. In a warm, comfortable 
way
 44. Antagonist
 45. Muffled sounds of 
impact
 47. OSCAR
 54. Tree that provides for 
chocoholics
 55. Mound miscue
 56. The younger Guthrie
 57. Tedium
 58. “The Lake ___ of 
Innisfree”
 59. Word processor 
command
 60. Boy Scout’s undertaking
 61. “What happened 
next . . .”
 62. Cubicle fixture
Down
 1. Lifeline locale
 2. Fertilizer ingredient
 3. One with a stable 
family?
 4. Seeing ahead
 5. Admiration
 6. Sharp or severe
 7. CHUCK
 8. Like some dough
 9. Off one’s ___ (crazy)
 10. Shortage
 11. Canal of song
 12. Jacuzzi action
 15. Rhythm partner
 20. Use a crib sheet
 21. Survivor group
 24. Apt to doodle, perhaps
 25. Potassium ____
 26. ___ the Beguine
 28. Manhattan area
 29. Extraterrestrial, for 
example
 30. Of the kidneys
 31. Tending to fidget
 33. Words with “goes” or 
“seems”
 34. Item in some family 
games
 36. Fence supplier
 37. Cute zoo bear
 42. “Me too” relative
 43. Like some treasures
 44. Better Business Bureau 
subject
 46. Berry that’s easy on the 
eyes
 47. Got a hole in one on
 48. Grow faint
 49. Troubling marks for 
high schoolers?
 50. Brief note in passing?
 51. Item for certain 
surgeons
 52. Automaker Ransom
 53. Mobile castle
Puzzle 46: Guy Talk
Tricky

119
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62

120
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Pieces of two-pieces
 5. Small progression
 9. Addis ___ (Ethiopia’s 
capital)
 14. Tube diameter
 15. Popeye, after eating 
spinach
 16. Docket fill
 17. Actress Blanchett
 18. Complain, complain, 
complain
 19. Pleasant surprise
 20. It’s a capital place
 23. Bradley and Trixie’s 
husband
 24. Comstock load
 25. Brings to the boiling 
point
 29. Wet, spongy ground
 31. Some are natural; some 
are broken
 35. Takes wing
 36. Object in a quiver
 38. Child seat?
 39. It’s a capital place
 42. Palindromic 
conjunction
 43. “. . . ___ evil, speak . . .”
 44. Audio signal receiver
 45. Put through the paces
 47. Word with “takers” or 
“day now”
 48. Takes the helm
 49. They precede mis, on a 
music scale
 51. Haggard work
 52. It’s a capital place
 60. 18 holes, for example
 61. “Honeybunch”
 62. They may be beaten
 64. Compel through 
coercion
 65. No one’s in until this is 
put in
 66. Got on one’s high horse?
 67. Trusty mount
 68. Unpleasant situation
 69. Otherwise
Down
 1. I, Claudius network
 2. Yellow Brick, for one
 3. Laugh-In comedian 
Johnson
 4. “As ___ on TV!”
 5. Does an office chore
 6. They’re shed
 7. Roberts of Runaway 
Train
 8. Game of chukkers
 9. Action may make him 
laugh or cry?
 10. Wine container
 11. On the Baltic
 12. Form droplets
 13. Regarding
 21. Lawsuit preposition
 22. Get ready to surf
 25. Coveted quality
 26. Dame’s introduction?
 27. Stares with open mouth
 28. Newsworthy period of 
history
 29. Like the ocean
 30. Yes ___ (one of two 
answers)
 32. Not with another
 33. Spring offering
 34. Practices for a boxing 
match
 36. Communicant’s word
 37. Damper
 40. The absolute minimum
 41. Cash’s boy, in a song
 46. Hypnotic sleep
 48. Coastlines
 50. Finished
 51. Part of a full house?
 52. Canine sounds
 53. Horn sound
 54. Work as a barker
 55. Father of Cain and Abel
 56. Tunney of the ring
 57. Horror film fare
 58. Adored one
 59. Increases (with “to”)
 63. Figure out
Puzzle 47: Capital Idea!
Tricky 

121
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69

122
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Course taken after trig, 
often
 5. January 2 event
 9. Bureau
 14. Nabisco cookie
 15. Product mention
 16. Star-crossed lover
 17. “___ me up, Scotty!”
 18. Indian tourist mecca
 19. Allow inside
 20. Star of 38-Across
 23. Benz ending
 24. Cost to be dealt in
 25. Fitted within one 
another
 27. Nova follower
 30. Brief contact
 32. Tin Man’s desire
 33. Transmission part
 34. Electrifying swimmers?
 38. Hit show starring 
20-Across
 41. Plateau relative
 42. London Magazine 
essayist
 43. Born yesterday
 44. Not the final copy
 46. School notebook
 47. Bedtime recitation
 50. Interstate hauler
 51. Female octopus
 52. Costar of 20-Across
 58. Isolated
 60. 26 of 32 counties of 
Ireland
 61. Highly rated
 62. Beauty parlor
 63. Where most humans 
reside
 64. Social blunder for 
Nanette?
 65. Put forth effort
 66. Fermented honey 
beverage
 67. Laurel in The Music Box
Down
 1. On the Waterfront star 
Lee J.
 2. Wilderness or staging, 
for example
 3. Shakespearean king
 4. Prepared for battle
 5. Rival of Athens
 6. Pond growth
 7. Fly on a hook
 8. Yipes!
 9. Large waders
 10. Mortar tray
 11. Irish patriot Robert
 12. Parisian waterway
 13. Packed a gun
 21. Novelist Loos
 22. Get used (to) (Variation)
 26. Deceitful tricks
 27. Wooden gap-filler
 28. Relinquish
 29. They row, row, row your 
boat
 30. Suit
 31. Indian prince
 33. It’s played in rounds
 35. Camelot character
 36. Like early television
 37. Tarot reader
 39. Stiller’s partner
 40. Opposite of persona
 45. Cry uncle
 46. Blow the foam off a 
brew?
 47. Distinct stage
 48. Hang loose
 49. American chameleon
 50. It’s over Jordan, 
on a map
 53. Twenty quires
 54. Ascend
 55. Like some points
 56. ___ and the King of Siam
 57. Type of big city light
 59. Here–there link
Puzzle 48: Blink, Blink
Tricky

123
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67

124
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Absolute
 6. Short distance
 10. Very plentiful
 14. Upstate New York city
 15. Lime cover
 16. Egg without a shell
 17. Brother on a noted TV 
sitcom
 19. Source of misery
 20. Exaggerator’s suffix
 21. Swarm
 22. Sudden emotional pang
 24. Like Death’s horse
 25. Feature of Colorado
 26. Jellied side dishes
 29. Outlet insert
 30. Searched for bugs
 31. The Ghost and Mrs. ___
 32. Rival of Bjorn
 36. “. . . through the air 
with the greatest of ___”
 37. Jazz legend Chick
 38. Be a peddler
 39. Holiday cherub
 40. French articles
 41. Desist partner
 42. Informal farewell
 44. Trust in
 45. Titanic or Star Wars, for 
example
 48. Old salts
 49. Maltreatment
 50. Evening in Milan
 51. Cumberland, for one
 54. Word repeated before 
“pants on fire”
 55. Network actor
 58. Town in Italy, New 
Jersey, or California
 59. Shah’s domain, once
 60. Humped antelope
 61. Suit to ___
 62. Brain scans, for short
 63. Dude ranch woes
Down
 1. Tony-winner Tommy
 2. “(Sittin’ On) The Dock of 
the Bay” singer Redding
 3. Compete in Camelot
 4. Red Baron, for example
 5. The end for 
playwrights?
 6. Buying binge
 7. Jets, Mets, or Nets
 8. Velvet end?
 9. Overabundance
 10. A Rage in Harlem 
actress
 11. Marla’s predecessor
 12. Toadstools and 
mushrooms, for 
example
 13. Middle East prince
 18. Some Disney 
collectibles
 23. Lose or draw 
alternative
 24. Carrie actress
 25. Makes an effort
 26. Whaling, for example
 27. Dog-paddled, for 
example
 28. Item for a Mexican pot?
 29. Less sullied
 31. “Haystacks” artist
 33. Job for Mr. Fixit
 34. Start of many words?
 35. Ancient garden location
 37. Attractive one
 41. Wide-mouthed servers
 43. Patient replies?
 44. The Belle of Bowling 
Green author Amelia
 45. Actress Jovovich
 46. T.S. or George
 47. Forest clearing
 48. They’re coming of age
 50. Deer fellow?
 51. Watchdog’s sound
 52. Dermatology problem
 53. Goals for many
graduate students
 56. “. . . ___ I saw Elba”
 57. U.N. labor arm
Puzzle 49: Bird Watching
Tricky

125
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63

126
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Place for a keystone
 5. Fitted by a smith
 9. Wound remnant
 13. Royal Crown product
 14. Prepare mushrooms, 
in a way
 15. Handed-down 
knowledge
 16. Type of ring that goes 
with bell-bottoms
 17. It settles the score
 19. Tall, flightless bird
 20. Charlie’s Angels star
 21. Gully
 22. Condescend
 24. It’s the key factor in 
inflation?
 25. “I hate to ___ and run”
 26. Checkout device
 30. Sigourney Weaver 
classic
 31. Woman treated as an 
object?
 32. California campus
 36. Bonnie and Clyde 
director
 37. Type of semiconductor
 39. Part of Indochina
 40. Indiscriminating hirers, 
initially
 41. The Twilight Zone 
creator Serling
 42. “Father of 
Impressionism”
 43. Darth Vader foe
 47. Briquette remnant
 50. Romans’ caviar
 51. From a certain grain
 52. Drop off for a bit
 54. Jimmy Durante 
trademark
 55. Cyclotron particle
 58. Pane frame
 60. Pound of poetry
 61. Mimicked
 62. Bewildered
 63. “Able to ___ tall 
buildings . . .”
 64. Capone pursuer
 65. Pro votes
 66. Not up to much
Down
 1. High point
 2. Forster’s had a view
 3. State of bliss
 4. “If I ___ a Hammer”
 5. Verbally refused
 6. Colored
 7. Racetrack alternative, 
briefly
 8. Backside
 9. Ukrainian, for example
 10. Commentator Roberts
 11. Site for Globetrotters
 12. Che Guevara attire
 14. Stiffly theatrical
 18. Doo-wop classic “Duke 
of ___”
 20. Lender’s backup
 23. Still
 24. Reading position, 
sometimes
 26. Attire for the Headless 
Horseman
 27. “The low-priced spread”
 28. TV’s Morgenstern
 29. Green Wave school
 33. Given sainthood
 34. Client for Clarence 
Darrow
 35. Piedmont province
 37. Off-street parking area
 38. Hawkeye State
 42. Apportion
 44. Clown of early TV
 45. Lasso loops
 46. Buckwheat cereal
 47. Dam extending across 
the Nile
 48. Take potshots
 49. Sharpens, as skills
 53. “Against All ___”
 54. Space Age org.
 56. Type of surgeon
 57. Mane spot
 59. ___ Anne de Bellevue, 
Que.
 60. Wallach of The 
Magnificent Seven
Puzzle 50: Buckle Up
Tricky

127
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66

128
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Data transfer rate
 5. Nourishes
 10. Festive gathering
 14. Adjust, as a motor
 15. Garret
 16. Nick and Nora’s dog
 17. In custody
 20. Overindulges
 21. Bric-a-brac holder
 22. Waistcoat
 25. Ancient Persians
 26. Saint Petersburg 
neighbor
 30. Further away, in a way
 33. Local language
 34. “___ in a Manger”
 35. West in Night After Night
 38. Flaunt the SEC
 42. CPR specialist
 43. San Pablo Bay island
 44. Long-time Yankee 
skipper
 45. Fragments
 47. Boleyn and Hathaway
 48. WWII beachhead
 51. Sportscast tidbit
 53. Dance or music program
 56. Underlings
 60. Fun standard, 
traditionally
 64. Leif’s father
 65. Gloomy
 66. It has many slots
 67. Pops
 68. With regard to
 69. Yemen port
Down
 1. Approx. 252 calories
 2. Bea Taylor, to Andy
 3. Take down, as hair
 4. Not shallow
 5. Many a test answer
 6. Ike’s command
 7. Substitute for the 
unlisted
 8. Bank check?
 9. Improvise with 
numbers?
 10. Harass
 11. Part of FAQ
 12. Cubic meter
 13. 19th president
 18. Bring up to snuff
 19. Anthroponym
 23. Having only magnitude, 
but no direction
 24. Facing
 26. Proverbial healer
 27. Famous evictee
 28. Excellent condition
 29. Hawaiian dish
 31. Most current
 32. Batiking need
 35. “September ___” 
(Neil Diamond)
 36. For some, it could be 
a lot
 37. Achieves with difficulty 
(With “out”)
 39. Actress Thurman
 40. Borough island
 41. 32,000 ounces
 45. Avoids work
 46. Loathing
 48. Formed into a circle
 49. Actress/comedian Anne
 50. Unpleasantly pungent
 52. Nautical direction
 54. Portrayer of Pierce
 55. Desolate
 57. Green pod
 58. Have to have
 59. “Auld Lang ___”
 61. Honorarium
 62. Irish Sea isle
 63. Gun’s offspring?
Puzzle 51: I Want It All
Tricky

129
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69

130
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Aerie area
 5. Bit of information
 10. Julie’s Dr. Zhivago 
costar
 14. Sonny of Sonny and Cher
 15. Sidestep
 16. Windmill blade
 17. Suit
 19. Similar in nature
 20. Where the successful go
 21. Bitter end?
 23. Guinness World 
Records suffix
 24. Hospital name
 28. Threads tennis shoes 
again
 30. Payee of consequences
 32. Middlin’
 33. Offshore structure
 34. Bill attachment
 36. Potato sack wt., 
sometimes
 39. ___ uproar
 41. Barbary Coast city
 43. Suit to ___
 44. Incandescent
 46. Like a flying carpet
 48. One of the Perons
 49. “___ I care!”
 51. Dogpatch dweller
 53. Tenor Andrea
 56. Signified
 57. Lichtenstein’s forte
 58. Jennifer on WKRP in 
Cincinnati
 60. Then partner
 61. Secret retreat
 63. Suit
 68. Prep school near London
 69. Word to the chauffeur
 70. Creole vegetable
 71. Iniquitous rooms?
 72. Goat-legged deity
 73. “Read ’em and ___!”
Down
 1. 60 Minutes network
 2. 1973 Supreme Court 
decision name
 3. The Atom ___ Show 
(1960s TV cartoon)
 4. Bungle
 5. Dilapidated
 6. Cookbook phrase
 7. Rotate
 8. It’s pulled on a farm
 9. Predicaments
 10. In vitro items
 11. Suit
 12. Plant of the carrot 
family
 13. Payments on Boardwalk 
or Park Place
 18. Hindu ascetic
 22. Mailbox feature
 24. Narrow furrow
 25. A noun might be one
 26. Suit
 27. Autumn Joy
 29. Cruising between ports
 31. Pertaining to the 
kidneys
 35. Stiff as a board
 37. Mississippi restraint
 38. Oft-trimmed item
 40. Rudolph’s prominent 
feature
 42. Hit man’s accessory
 45. Last ___ and testament
 47. Watercraft
 50. Annual Nile 
occurrences
 52. Dog’s utterance, in 
kiddie lit
 53. Made hay?
 54. Pontificate
 55. Prefix with “red” or 
“structure”
 59. “___ ain’t broke . . .”
 62. They may administer IVs
 64. Plant that can climb the 
walls
 65. Just manage (with “out”)
 66. Live and breathe
 67. Knock on wood
Puzzle 52: Suits Me Fine
Tricky

131
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73

132
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Apple pie pros
 5. They supplied your 
cousins
 10. Roughly
 14. “Clinton’s Ditch”
 15. River to the Rhone
 16. Jezebel’s deity
 17. Corporate big shot
 20. “All systems go”
 21. Break in friendly 
relations
 22. Models who get a lot of 
exposure?
 23. Prie-___ (prayer bench)
 24. Soap and water results
 26. Women’s volunteer 
organizations
 31. Driver’s 180
 32. Gomer of classic TV
 33. End of many URLs
 36. Lay off, to a batter
 37. Determine if it’s gold
 39. Opera goddess
 40. Pronoun for a ship
 41. Nobel Institute locale
 42. Errand boy
 43. Rookie of the Year’s 
concern
 47. Selected, as straws
 48. 1949 peace org.
 49. One place to flounder
 52. It has a primed and 
painted body
 53. High mountain
 56. Congressional rookie
 60. British isles
 61. Ed with seven Emmys
 62. Bindlestiff
 63. Civil rights activist Parks
 64. The mating game
 65. Andy’s partner of old 
radio
Down
 1. Flat-topped hill, 
especially in U.S./
Mexican deserts
 2. Cookie since 1912
 3. Expensive fur
 4. Cinque follower
 5. More ventilated
 6. Serving a purpose
 7. Call to the head of the 
line?
 8. Uno + due
 9. Wall Street police
 10. Angle that’s greater 
than 90 degrees
 11. Speak-easy’s risk
 12. Rescue
 13. Barcelona bravos
 18. Men in Black cat
 19. Exceeding what is 
appropriate or normal
 23. Fraught with danger, as 
some circumstances
 24. Dionne Warwick’s “I ___ 
Little Prayer”
 25. The ___ Duckling
 26. Sticks out or protrudes
 27. 45th state
 28. Microwaves, informally
 29. England’s ___ Downs
 30. Jules Verne milieu
 34. Kitchen hot spot
 35. Noted critic of capitalism
 37. Tennis legend Arthur
 38. Tap the brakes
 39. Martial arts school
 41. O founder
 42. Advance in age
 44. Port city on an arm of 
the Black Sea
 45. Heavy burdens
 46. Consumer Reports 
employees
 49. A long way off
 50. Peter, Paul, and Mary, 
for example
 51. Places for making soaps?
 52. Mrs. Shakespeare
 53. Fermi’s fascination
 54. Wolf in the western U.S.
 55. Most Masters 
participants
 57. Brit’s raincoat
 58. It’s grate stuff
 59. Sound of insight
Puzzle 53: School Days
Tricky

133
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65

134
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Fish steerer
 4. Earth tone
 9. What Oscar winners do 
at the podium
 14. “___ matter of fact . . .”
 15. Scarlett of Gone With 
the Wind
 16. Robinson Crusoe’s 
creator
 17. Son of Cratchit
 18. William Thackeray hero
 20. Rose supporter
 22. Fifties automotive 
clunker
 23. Bovine outbursts
 24. They may be checked
 26. Poe and Pound, for 
example
 28. Ivanhoe setting
 33. Chili hotness unit
 34. Pop up, as a question
 35. Catch participant, 
perhaps
 38. Like the Marx Brothers’ 
comedies
 39. Instrument with 88 keys
 40. Robust
 41. Complete
 42. Date night option
 43. Blue-haired mom
 44. It starts January 1
 46. Non-European New 
Zealander
 48. Played for a sucker
 49. Leader of the masses?
 50. Lions and Tigers and 
Bears
 54. Lowly laborer
 57. “My dog ate my 
homework,” for example
 60. Face off
 61. 45-degree serving of 
pizza
 62. Bandleader married to 
Ava and Lana
 63. Winter hazard
 64. Elaborate yarns
 65. Taxi ticker
 66. Took the initiative
Down
 1. Jackie Gleason’s role in 
The Hustler
 2. “Who ___?” (Response 
to a knock)
 3. Familiar trademark
 4. Sound of amazement
 5. Snappy comment?
 6. Something to shake or 
lend
 7. Gets it wrong
 8. The Farmer’s Daughter 
star Martha
 9. Results of some QB 
passes
 10. Surrounded (with “in”)
 11. Underway, to Sherlock 
Holmes
 12. Restrictions
 13. Shoes once made 
by the United States 
Rubber Company
 19. Westernmost county in 
Texas
 21. Take the plunge
 25. High school facility
 27. Small bill
 28. Labyrinth
 29. Panache
 30. Born yesterday, so to 
speak
 31. Wood feature
 32. ___ one’s pockets 
(profited unfairly)
 35. Harum-scarum type
 36. Rootless plant
 37. The yearling, for one
 39. Courteous
 40. President after Grant
 42. Damage
 43. Union label?
 44. Bully
Puzzle 54: Breaking Bread
Tricky

135
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
 45. Outback dweller
 46. Bread or cabbage
 47. Month known for its 
showers
 49. Verbal elbow in the ribs
 51. Major test
 52. Land unit
 53. Kennel Club reject
 55. Uncle Ben’s
 56. Livestock lunch
 58. Ballot option
 59. Poetic contraction

136
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. “My word!”
 5. Org. that gives tips on 
pet care
 9. William Tell’s target
 14. Test answer, at times
 15. It may be read at a fair
 16. Old-time newsman
 17. Soothing beverage
 19. Ship of fuels
 20. LAX info
 21. Fillable bread
 22. Stereo components
 23. Part of a rodeo
 26. Make the first bid
 27. “C’___ la vie!”
 28. Cake partner
 31. Org. involved with
the Scopes trial
 34. Accepted as true
 36. 1984 Chuck Norris film
 40. Commendation
 41. Mandlikova of the courts
 42. Affectionate name 
within the family
 43. Cable TV news network
 44. Song for the fat lady?
 47. Utter mayhem
 52. What grease
monkeys do
 55. Theater award
 56. “No” to Rob Roy
 57. Up in arms
 58. What some buy their 
milk in
 60. Revealing skirts
 61. Field of study
 62. First name in fashion
 63. Redolence
 64. Sibilant summons
 65. Some loaves
Down
 1. Mrs. Robert Kennedy
 2. The Great Garbo
 3. Psychics supposedly 
read them
 4. Ball belle
 5. Emulate a film editor
 6. George C. Scott’s Oscar-
winning role
 7. Not carrying a piece
 8. “I ___ Rock” (Simon and 
Garfunkel hit)
 9. Guitar with no plug
 10. Finger attachment
 11. Stack
 12. Offensive expression
 13. Goofs
 18. Phrase following dollar 
amounts, sometimes
 22. Electrical pioneer 
Nikola
 24. March king
 25. Suffix with “four” or 
“six”, but not “five”
 28. Nike competitor
 29. Former White House 
Chief of Staff Panetta
 30. Mystery writer 
Buchanan
 31. Gremlins and Pacers
 32. 103, in old Rome
 33. WWII transports
 34. Storage container
 35. Wharton’s Frome
 37. Most restless
 38. Forty-___ (gold rush 
participant)
 39. Vanished
 44. Strolls leisurely
 45. Criticize harshly
 46. Prefix with “gram” or 
“graph”
 47. Pillow material
 48. Laughs loudly
 49. “Have a great time!”
 50. It could be made from 
apples
 51. Lily plants
 52. Parts of eyeglasses
 53. Guitarist Clapton
 54. Sheet of stamps
 58. It may be between your 
teeth
 59. Point-of-purchase 
equip. giant
Puzzle 55: Ladies, Ladies, Ladies
Tricky

137
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65

138
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Football gear
 5. Twangy, as a voice
 10. Some pops end up in 
here
 14. Prefix with ballistic, 
dynamic, or lite
 15. Playground marble
 16. Nabisco nibble
 17. Caterer’s item
 18. Mortise connection
 19. Three, in a casino
 20. Funny dynamic duo
 23. Shogun belt
 24. Kind of maid or moon
 25. Ben-Hur garb
 27. Tennis great Ivan
 29. Conscious
 33. In the past
 34. Row with the flow
 36. Place to overnight
 37. Bouillabaisse, for 
example
 38. Magical dynamic duo
 42. Highland hillside
 43. Service charge
 44. Charm with flowers and 
candy
 45. For each
 46. Make recompense
 48. Like the Arctic
 52. Oversentimental
 54. China’s Zhou En-___
 56. Lonely number
 57. Smoking dynamic duo
 62. Ounce of liquor
 63. Afghanistan’s Karzai
 64. Dubai VIP
 65. It’s pitched
 66. Good-night girl of song
 67. Surrealist painter 
Magritte
 68. Mosquitoes, to 
dragonflies
 69. Voice between alto and 
baritone
 70. Advantageous position
Down
 1. Make the rounds in a 
police car
 2. Bacterium requiring 
oxygen
 3. Attract
 4. ___ bean
 5. Birth-related
 6. To-do list
 7. Beach blanket?
 8. It may be smashed 
in a lab
 9. Olin in Romeo Is 
Bleeding
 10. “Don’t tread on me,” for 
example
 11. Pipe in water
 12. Adolescent
 13. Whirligig, for example
 21. Pitcher Ryan
 22. Short highway?
 26. Female pig
 28. Ready to serve
 30. Enlarge, as a road
 31. Formicary resident
 32. Was familiar with
 35. Castaway’s creation
 37. Blackthorn fruit
 38. One familiar with the 
Gospel
 39. Transistor-radio 
accessory
 40. New prefix
 41. Reasoning
 42. Modem speed
 46. Buccaneer’s affirmative
 47. Weather whipping boy
 49. Was imminent
 50. Scorecard division
 51. Standard accreditation
 53. Small-minded
 55. Scotland’s only 
poisonous snake
 58. Restaurant check
 59. Meadow denizen
 60. Prayer finale
 61. Word in a James Jones 
title
 62. Auto additive product 
that is a NASCAR 
sponsor
Puzzle 56: Puzzle for Two
Tricky

139
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70

140
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Absolutely detest
 5. Yin counterpart
 9. Certain advanced 
degrees (Abbr.)
 13. All ___ (excited)
 14. Sigmund’s daughter
 15. Get on, as a horse
 16. They’re a form of 
consumer protection
 18. Ship’s lowest deck
 19. Awake, faire Muse, for 
example
 20. Human ending?
 21. Comic strip segment
 23. Make tea
 25. What a bank becomes, 
sometimes
 28. California white oak
 31. One of a temporary 20 
in children
 33. Join the army
 35. Cows’ fields
 36. Animal facility
 37. It can be ear-piercing
 38. Goad
 40. Tim of WKRP in 
Cincinnati
 41. Employment ad letters
 42. Ark set
 43. First female to swim the 
Channel
 45. She’s more than a 
babysitter
 48. Cartoon mirages
 49. Hardest hit to get in 
baseball
 50. Pitcher’s place
 52. Thin nails
 54. One-time Camaro rival
 55. Denver time zone, briefly
 58. Ferber novel
 60. Orange-and-black flower
 63. Do penance
 64. Shamrock isle
 65. Preindication
 66. Sound that may bring a 
bad act to an end
 67. Hammerhead end
 68. Destroyer of sandcastles
Down
 1. Angel’s aura
 2. Added years
 3. “Come ___” (Mathis hit)
 4. “I” affliction
 5. New Haven student, 
informally
 6. Garland for the head, 
formerly
 7. U-turn from SSE
 8. Fight for air
 9. West Side Story star Rita
 10. They’re used to make 
the grade
 11. A year in the Yucatan
 12. “The racer’s edge”
 15. Some Louvre attractions
 17. Students study them
 22. Basic hydrocarbon
 23. Barely made it home?
 24. A Plymouth colony 
founder
 26. French star
 27. Sort of scholar
 28. Take umbrage
 29. One place to promote a 
new CD
 30. County fair award, 
perhaps
 32. Former manager 
Durocher
 34. Like a span of oxen
 39. Scala of The Guns of 
Navarone
 40. Do one of the three R’s
 42. Mammal’s coat
 44. Blood giver
 46. Water source or season
 47. Type of bag from a 
restaurant
 51. Volunteer state sch.
 53. “__ right up!”
 55. Mrs. Eisenhower
 56. Tireless thing to ride
 57. Actress Daly
 58. Get droopy
 59. Member of a Platte 
River people
 61. Fury
 62. Builder’s buy
Puzzle 57: Shark Attack
Tricky

141
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68

142
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. A Leeward Island
 6. Gaping hole
 11. CEO’s place
 14. Big name in household 
cleaning
 15. Aka Myanmar
 16. “___ Daba Honeymoon”
 17. Stay in the shade
 19. Burns of documentaries
 20. Blacken, in a way
 21. Atomic energy org.
 22. Connecticut collegian
 23. Deep cuts
 26. Terribly weak, as an 
excuse
 28. AAA recommendation
 29. Title for Coptic bishops
 31. Ebenezer’s exclamation
 32. Country in the news
 34. Van Gogh had one in his 
later years
 35. Grandparents, often
 38. Mixed with water
 40. Dictionary
 41. Shiny cotton fabric
 42. ___ Lingus
 43. Wine county
 44. Ben-___
 45. Garlic bulb segment
 47. Frat party staple
 48. Pollyannaish
 51. Wedges in firmly
 53. Friend of Wynken and 
Blynken
 54. Like some vbs.
 55. Conversation filler
 56. Be in the red
 57. Be just what the doctor 
ordered
 62. Acapulco aunt
 63. Perfect
 64. Where to find clowns
 65. Sea delicacy
 66. “The First Noel,” for one
 67. The rain here falls 
mainly on the plain
Down
 1. Celebrant’s robe
 2. “A pocketful of ___ . . .”
 3. Country blessed by Lee 
Greenwood
 4. Make a mess of
 5. Tennis player Gibson
 6. Good buddy, often
 7. “What did you say?”
 8. Gladiators’ milieus
 9. Like Mensa members
 10. Car maker of note?
 11. Be extraordinary
 12. Manuscript marks
 13. Stock market crash 
preceder
 18. Many a one-hit wonder, 
today
 23. Components of 
crosswords
 24. Heart chambers
 25. Make it official
 26. Golfer’s goal, at the 
least
 27. Eschew the restaurant
 30. Dog-scolding word
 33. Waiting line
 35. Whirling one
 36. Captured, at a 
64-Across
 37. Unexpected obstacles
 39. “That’s wonderful!”
 40. “When I Need You” 
singer Sayer
 42. Nothing counterpart
 45. Ringlet-producing 
gadget
 46. Mideast bigwigs
 48. Bill worth 10 sawbucks
 49. Deal or No Deal name
 50. Singer in ABBA
 52. Jazz genre
 55. “___ cost you!”
 58. ___-Tse (Chinese 
philosopher)
 59. Rhoda mom
 60. Wahine’s gift
 61. Contemporary of Bela
Puzzle 58: Verbs on the Run
Tricky

143
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67

144
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Beatlesque hairstyles
 5. Kind of radio
 9. Parts of Scottish 
accents
 14. Moran of Happy Days
 15. Water or land sport
 16. Sci-fi writer Asimov
 17. Treble clef reader
 18. Dropped leaflets, 
perhaps
 20. See 58-Down
 22. Singapore Sling 
ingredient
 23. Center or cure 
beginning
 24. Put down
 25. Confirmation phrase
 27. Boris Godunov, for 
example
 29. Revolving firework
 31. Type of reaction
 33. Singer McCartney
 34. Sanyo competitor
 38. See 58-Down
 41. Eye problem
 42. Some deer
 43. Striped critter
 44. “. . . with ___ in sight”
 46. Electrical safeguard
 47. Big name in small 
planes
 50. ___ Lingus
 51. USSR successor
 54. Tokyo tie
 55. See 58-Down
 59. Famed Italian educator
 61. Earthenware pot
 62. Bar in Fort Knox
 63. Hogan’s Heroes actor 
Dixon
 64. Aquarium problem
 65. Some Duma votes
 66. “Sighted sub, sank ___”
 67. “For ___ — with Love 
and Squalor”
Down
 1. Gettysburg figure
 2. Fourth deck of a ship
 3. Master gland of the 
endocrine system
 4. Arrogant and annoying 
person
 5. Show up
 6. Snakelike fish
 7. Beat badly
 8. Brood about
 9. Foot part
 10. Olympic dream team
 11. Shortstop’s asset
 12. Forearm bones
 13. Hardly adequate
 19. Saintly founder of 
scholasticism
 21. Grassy plain
 26. Holds responsible
 28. Warning sounds
 29. Dwindled
 30. Kisses companions
 31. The “eye” in 
broadcasting
 32. Castaway’s dwelling
 33. Subatomic particle
 35. Silly individuals
 36. Tolstoy title start
 37. Chicken-king connector
 39. Creates, as havoc
 40. Light blue
 45. Beginnings
 46. Catlike
 47. Sam & Dave’s “Hold On! 
I’m ___”
 48. Wood from India and Sri 
Lanka
 49. Burn off feathers or hair
 50. James ___ Garfield
 52. Koran religion
 53. Execute an unwritten 
agreement, in a way
 56. Egyptian fertility 
goddess
 57. Astral flare-up
 58. This puzzle’s 
underground or 
undercover thing
 60. Rug rat
Puzzle 59: Spy Game
Tricky

145
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67

146
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Pulverize
 5. Catches in the act
 9. Covered with a 
hemispherical roof
 14. Dealer’s call
 15. Raines of The Suspect
 16. Steer clear of
 17. Reason to use a 
clothespin, perhaps
 18. Symbol of craziness
 19. Use mouthwash
 20. Bring-a-dish event
 23. Animal’s breadbasket
 25. Earthquake relief, for 
example
 26. Standard of perfection
 27. Tillable
 29. Hard-to-swallow 
verbiage
 31. Microwave’s nemesis
 32. Hunger sign
 33. Concert gear
 37. Informal event
 40. Arthur of the courts
 41. Big celebration
 42. Mediterranean gulf
 43. Gold rush city of 1900
 44. More minuscule
 45. Printer type
 48. Who blows thar?
 49. Word with “doctor’s” or 
“greens”
 50. Pregame get-together
 54. Open-air rooms
 55. Shah’s homeland
 56. Employs a scope
 59. Belgian treaty city
 60. Partner of a promise
 61. Heal, as a radius
 62. Bog plant
 63. They exist to have 
a ball
 64. Like meringue
Down
 1. Longtime Chinese 
leader
 2. As well
 3. One’s seen on 60 Minutes
 4. White-hat wearer, in 
stereotypes
 5. Nervous one
 6. Orally
 7. Group that votes alike
 8. Went to the bottom
 9. Treat with contempt
 10. Like a sheep
 11. Food from heaven
 12. Ford Foundation 
co-founder
 13. Forest ungulates
 21. Running total
 22. Australian wild dog
 23. Venomous black snake
 24. Sectors
 28. Harden by heat
 29. Serve, as stew
 30. Peruvian of yore
 32. Baby buggy in Hyde 
Park
 33. Cut from the same cloth
 34. Changing in form
 35. Blender setting
 36. Look in wonder
 38. Greek marketplace
 39. Wickerwork willow
 43. Make ineffective
 44. They’re given in 
November
 45. Bat-maker’s tool
 46. Broadcasted
 47. It supports the cast
 48. Michener novel
 50. Merchandise markers
 51. Arcade foul
 52. Buffalo shore
 53. Give partner
 57. Fighter plane
 58. Place to wallow
Puzzle 60: Light Dining
Tricky

147
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64

148
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Father Knows Best 
actress Jane
 6. Withhold wages from
 10. Sacred bird
 14. Be overly attentive, as a 
waiter
 15. First name in scat
 16. Bringing Up Father girl
 17. “. . . and the ___ of 
defeat”
 18. Sprat’s preference
 19. Hale of Gilligan’s Island
 20. Behave
 23. Latish lunchtime
 24. Unvaried
 25. Spoiler from the sky
 28. Prominent span of 
years
 31. Bar choices
 35. Barley fibers
 36. Finished
 38. Neighbor of 12-Down
 39. Slap the cuffs on
 40. Pencil game entries
 42. Beach color
 43. Bleak, in verse
 45. They’re cut by dancers
 46. Discovery
 47. Sketch over
 49. Ring around the collar?
 50. Swing a scythe
 51. Tournament freebies
 53. Before of yore
 55. Complete a contract
 63. Passing sentences?
 64. People shoot it for fun
 65. Place for a Chicago 
touchdown?
 66. Glittering vein
 67. Popular cookie brand
 68. Fracas
 69. Satyric stare
 70. Swallow flat
 71. Rathbone’s expression, 
often
Down
 1. Collision noise
 2. “Pic-a-nic” basket 
seeker
 3. This company rings a 
bell
 4. Sinews
 5. Get a feel for
 6. Take-out order?
 7. Picador’s praise
 8. Puts palms together
 9. Dorothy’s home
 10. In a silly manner
 11. Font property, 
sometimes
 12. Mideast country
 13. Word preceding “souci” 
or “serif”
 21. Requisites
 22. Squirrel away
 25. Short time off to relax?
 26. In the know
 27. Under cover
 29. Sound from Simba
 30. Make void
 32. Shaw of swing
 33. Prince Harry’s mom
 34. Wall St. “500”
 37. You’re tense on this
 40. Physician’s photos
 41. Willow for wicker
 44. Dispute settler
 46. Add ice, as to an old 
drink
 48. It can be concealed
 52. Napper’s noise
 54. Suite things
 55. Kewpie
 56. Clarinet cousin
 57. Surfer’s concern
 58. The Johns we don’t 
know
 59. Congeal
 60. Telemarketer’s aim
 61. December purchase
 62. Soothsayer
Puzzle 61: To the Letter
Tricky

149
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71

150
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. 4-0 World Series win, for 
example
 6. Abraded
 10. Airport queue
 14. Co-creator of The 
Flintstones
 15. Dead Sea region
 16. Peace Prize city
 17. Yale of Yale University
 18. Bunker buster
 19. Where esnes slaved
 20. Morning eating place
 23. GI with stripes
 24. Smaller than small
 25. One-time protest site
 31. Brothers of soul
 32. Island-hopper’s stop
 33. Brewpub feature
 36. Can’t do without
 37. Mushroom stem
 38. Ruinous agent
 39. Stumble
 40. “I ___ Song Comin’ On”
 41. Bridge directions
 42. Dapper one’s wear
 44. Just say yes
 47. Biblical lifesaver
 48. End-of-the-day noshes
 55. Fall into a chair
 56. “Waiting for the 
Robert ___”
 57. Dazzling effect
 58. Roll call yell
 59. Reporter’s quest
 60. Fuel-yielding rock
 61. Service closer
 62. Big top, for example
 63. Creedal statement
Down
 1. “The Purple People 
Eater” singer Wooley
 2. A ridge, especially on 
cloth
 3. Idylls of the King 
character
 4. Highlighted
 5. Corpulent
 6. Friday on TV
 7. Shark stimulus
 8. City on seven hills
 9. Fortify, as a town
 10. Strongbox
 11. Like the yak
 12. Smile on
 13. Sentimental soul
 21. Happy associate
 22. Stem-to-stern part
 25. Come-on
 26. Web surfer
 27. Cub or Met, for short
 28. Granola-like
 29. Being of service
 30. Like some stock
 33. Tedious undertaking
 34. Kick in to a pot
 35. Royal pain
 37. Feeling
 38. It could cause one to 
lay down on the job
 40. Huckleberry or Mickey
 41. Heartfelt
 42. Intensify
 43. Bk. after Hebrews
 44. Omega’s antithesis
 45. City of witch hunts
 46. Part of some chains
 49. Exultation
 50. Chopped down
 51. Crammer’s concern
 52. Family group
 53. Crinkly cabbage
 54. Leave in after all
Puzzle 62: Eat!
Tricky

151
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63

152
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Bibliographic space 
saver
 5. Crude dwellings
 9. Nat and Natalie
 14. Abnormal breathing
 15. Brilliantly colored food 
fish
 16. Worship
 17. Flowering plant from 
South Africa
 18. Burrowing insectivore
 19. Leg bone
 20. Comet
 23. Stolen, slangily
 24. Anti-price-fixing agcy.
 25. Cable channel
 28. Physicist Niels
 31. Old undergarment
 36. Coffee, Tea ___?
 38. Angora output
 40. It was given statehood 
in 1820
 41. Comet
 44. Milo or Tessie
 45. Powerful shark
 46. Some female parents
 47. Like a cloudless night
 49. Bart’s sister
 51. Corned beef holder
 52. Gumshoe
 54. Shade provider
 56. Comet
 65. Vocally
 66. Nondairy spread
 67. Folk singer Mitchell
 68. Crown
 69. Barbecue offering, 
perhaps
 70. Final notice, briefly
 71. It’s a crying need
 72. British nobleman
 73. Wagers
Down
 1. Estrada of TV
 2. Kind of dancer
 3. Returned to the perch
 4. Lifestyles of the Rich and 
Famous host
 5. Everybody has one
 6. Well briefed about
 7. Baby powder ingredient
 8. Rock ledge
 9. Underground burial site
 10. God of war and poetry
 11. Evert specialties
 12. Pennsylvania county
 13. Cook quickly
 21. Fireplace ledge
 22. And so on (Abbr.)
 25. Santa remarks
 26. French seaport
 27. Creighton University 
site
 29. 1947 Oscar winner 
Celeste
 30. Part of RCMP
 32. Event at Minsky’s
 33. Lute of India
 34. Foe
 35. Concise
 37. Always
 39. Norse god of discord
 42. Environmentalists’ 
celebration
 43. Big game in college
 48. Vote for
 50. Chicken ___ king
 53. Like some calls
 55. Low-paying 
employment, slangily
 56. Shower alternative
 57. Pelvic bones
 58. Shark’s offering
 59. Wait in hiding
 60. Jazzy Fitzgerald
 61. Planetary revolution
 62. Honshu seaport
 63. Air conditioner, for 
example
 64. Cherry parts
Puzzle 63: Comet Watching
Tricky

153
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73

154
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. George Herman Ruth, 
familiarly
 5. Burn slightly
 9. MacKenzie of old 
beer ads
 14. Curtain color
 15. This Gun for ___
 16. Rabbit fur
 17. Surgery reminder
 18. Monumental
 19. Elroy Jetson’s dog
 20. Toss the dice, for 
example
 23. Use an ax
 24. Disrespects verbally
 25. This and that
 27. Aviation-related prefix
 30. Executor’s concern
 33. Surmise
 37. Matures
 39. Camelot lady
 40. Payment for a crossing
 41. Shirley Temple 
trademark
 42. Prep school since 1440
 43. Charles Lamb
 44. Pub potables
 45. Rock concert venue
 46. Predatory bird
 48. What Sinbad sailed
 50. The Tortoise and the 
Hare writer
 52. Not just again
 57. “Big” burger, at 
McDonald’s
 59. Bet a long shot
 62. “Love”-ly word in a 
Stevie Wonder song
 64. Sponge or facial feature
 65. They make waves
 66. “. . . miss is as good 
as ___”
 67. Related by blood
 68. It may be about a foot?
 69. Hall of Let’s Make A 
Deal
 70. Baker’s dozen of popes
 71. Male turkeys
Down
 1. Outperforms
 2. Ghana’s largest city
 3. Donkey sounds
 4. Transnational money
 5. Kind of cake
 6. A 36 of a famous 
measurement
 7. Seed sheath
 8. Divide the deck again
 9. Satisfies the thirst
 10. Faux ___
 11. Call one’s bluff
 12. Fraught with danger, as 
circumstances
 13. It may be on the 
mountaintop
 21. Close by
 22. Game that features 
mating
 26. Rodeo attendee
 28. Brother of Fidel
 29. Mythical meanies
 31. Suffix used to form 
abstract nouns
 32. Show Boat playwright 
Ferber
 33. Road for Nero
 34. Vincent Lopez song
 35. One way to make a 
decision
 36. Tickle pink
 38. “Is there anything ___?”
 41. Yuletide song
 45. Arthur, the tennis legend
 47. Sea bird
 49. Greek capital
 51. Like some Vatican bulls
 53. Chickens come home to 
do it
 54. State known for 
potatoes
 55. Kind of drive, in a 
computer
 56. Letters that create 
hurdles for lispers
 57. Polite palindromic 
address
 58. Bullets and such
 60. Pair up, as oxen
 61. Group of three
 63. Farthest or highest, 
briefly
Puzzle 64: You Bet!
Tricky

155
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71

156
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Lad’s sweetheart
 5. Decrease in intensity
 10. Famous literary bear
 14. Ruler part
 15. Sticky substance
 16. Highest or lowest in the 
deck
 17. TV twosome (1975–79)
 20. Postulation
 21. Goddess of abundance 
and fertility
 22. Linda Lavin’s sitcom 
role
 23. Songbird
 25. Sporting spots
 26. Road danger
 31. Tristan’s love
 32. Fifth and Sixth, in N.Y.C.
 33. Janitor’s closet item
 36. It’s all three words of a 
liar’s policy
 37. End ties
 39. Variety of cotton
 40. Before, poetically
 41. Brogan, for example
 42. Insightfulness
 44. Working a second job
 46. Retirement option
 49. More than want
 50. Some stuff stuffed in 
tubs
 51. Clothe
 53. Wedding vow word
 57. Trendy theme 
restaurant
 60. Scope lead-in
 61. Blackfoot’s abode
 62. Key of Valor author 
Roberts
 63. Montgomery’s ___ of 
Green Gables
 64. Tom Mix prop
 65. Goblet part
Down
 1. Santa’s got a long one
 2. Opening chip, in poker
 3. Read rapidly
 4. In a cunning way
 5. Lifesaving craft?
 6. Above partner
 7. “Right now!”
 8. Cookie holders
 9. Wind up
 10. Overly aggressive 
fighter
 11. Join the cast of
 12. Holiest city of Islam
 13. Powdery remains
 18. Valuable violin, briefly
 19. Rabbit relatives
 24. Range of vision
 25. Batting statistic
 26. One of two in a game
 27. ___-friendly
 28. What the “poor dog” got
 29. “Concerto for the Left 
Hand” composer
 30. Suffix with “correct”
 33. “La Bohème” soprano
 34. Prophetic sign
 35. Hunger feeling
 38. Many millennia
 39. Insults
 41. Drench
 43. Like gummy bears
 44. Unification Church 
follower, informally
 45. Hearths
 46. Momma’s guy
 47. Tim or Steve
 48. Long for
 51. “Take ___ Train”
 52. Utterance after a spill
 54. Tooth or hair part
 55. Very painful
 56. Dutch cheese
 58. Final amt.
 59. MGM mascot
Puzzle 65: Look Up
Tricky

157
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65

158
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Psycho actress Miles
 5. Knitted blanket
 11. Barbecue offering
 14. Yoked pair
 15. City on the Rio Grande
 16. Night before
 17. Poker dealer’s 
command
 19. Didn’t get bought
 20. Bye, in France
 21. Fateful Roman date
 22. Some are cooped up
 23. Roscoe ___ Brown
 24. Wharton deg.
 26. Rude and sullen
 27. What to do to a Vegas 
slot machine
 31. Two-wheeled carriage
 34. “O ___ Night”
 35. A Beatle’s spouse
 36. Gave a buzz
 37. Bloodline?
 39. Provides succor
 40. Creative result
 41. Unpopular spots
 42. Acts the drum major
 44. Roulette maneuver
 47. Reach a higher level?
 48. 2002 Winter Olympics 
host
 49. Place for losers?
 52. Crazy as a ___
 53. Bolshevik target
 56. Hollow-fanged snake
 58. So-so link
 59. What crapshooters do
 61. Bridal bio word
 62. Brooks Robinson 
was one
 63. Low in fat
 64. Filling degree?
 65. Greater in excellence
 66. Show Boat author 
Ferber
Down
 1. Not shy with one’s 
opinion
 2. Discharge gradually
 3. Fix a loose shoelace, for 
example
 4. Poker buy-in
 5. Guinness specialty
 6. Beauty parlor treatment
 7. Degree holder, for short
 8. Where I wish you were
 9. Makes a contribution
 10. Refusals
 11. Water tower
 12. Three-time U.S. Open 
champ
 13. Famous seamstress
 18. Partially decomposed 
organic matter
 22. Shade
 25. Laundry additive
 26. Kind of dog
 27. Pot-bellied critter
 28. Lost on purpose
 29. Very popular
 30. Gladdens the heart
 31. Bad way to touch down 
in a plane
 32. Speared, as a whale
 33. Direct opposites
 38. “Take ___”
 39. Have a bug
 41. Tennis tour letters
 43. Bob’s partner?
 45. Woman of habit?
 46. Rush violently
 49. Went undercover
 50. Pie choice
 51. Sports center
 53. Ran like the dickens
 54. Skirt vent
 55. Jillions
 57. Sitting on one’s hands
 59. Mary’s Dick Van Dyke 
hubby
 60. Yonder damsel
Puzzle 66: Feeling Lucky?
Tricky

159
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
57
56
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66

160
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Hinged implement
 6. Industrial haze
 10. Like Dorothy’s slippers
 14. Certain Nordic person
 15. River to the Rhine
 16. Big pot of stew
 17. Draft
 19. E pluribus ___
 20. Judge Lance
 21. Resort town near Santa 
Barbara
 22. Joe-to-go packets?
 24. What two fins equal
 26. Go well together
 27. Norse god of war
 28. Post-arson markdown
 32. Victrola successor
 35. Push-button 
predecessor
 37. Firmaments
 38. “Oh, you wish!”
 39. Bee “bite”
 41. Significant times, 
historically
 42. Office workers, 
collectively
 44. Disaster ___
 45. Proof goof
 46. Unwanted overhang
 48. Fond du ___, Wisconsin
 50. Lean (on)
 51. Seasoned vet
 55. San Fernando Valley 
city
 58. Ignored the limit
 59. Peeples or Long
 60. Ellery contemporary
 61. Draft
 64. Actress Cameron
 65. Lady who rings 
doorbells
 66. What a glass of warm 
pop has?
 67. Treater’s words
 68. They have many teeth
 69. Knight’s mare
Down
 1. Implicit
 2. Stand up and speak
 3. Synthetic textile
 4. Cowpoke’s sweetie
 5. Charles Schulz 
character
 6. 1978 co-Nobelist Anwar
 7. Wailuku’s isle
 8. Food scrap
 9. Yellowstone attraction
 10. Draft
 11. Elbow-to-wrist bone
 12. Obscure
 13. Oft-candied tubers
 18. Norwegian bays
 23. Plays for a sucker
 25. Good thing for a 
cooling-off period?
 26. Creator of a storybook 
Robin
 28. Kind of tale
 29. Well-ventilated
 30. Clear a hurdle
 31. Old gas station 
identification
 32. Padlock mate
 33. “That’s all there ___ it!”
 34. Royal order
 36. Boot-shaped country
 40. Ship’s mess
 43. Satellite transmission
 47. Andean beasts
 49. Enhancing accessories
 51. Hangs out one’s shingle
 52. Bill’s Groundhog Day 
costar
 53. Sibling’s daughter
 54. Had the nerve
 55. Go back to the drawing 
board
 56. Green land?
 57. It’s grand in baseball
 58. What a plow plows
 62. Reproductive cells
 63. Fall into decay
Puzzle 67: On Tap?
Tricky

161
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69

162
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Concerning the ear
 5. They can be 
programmed
 9. Four-flusher
 14. “___ contendere” (no 
contest plea)
 15. Quaker State port
 16. Mend the lawn
 17. ___ the Red
 18. Preakness entries
 20. Swindles
 22. Waste allowance
 23. Prefix for field or stream
 24. Response to a weak 
joke, perhaps
 27. Chamberlain epithet
 30. OB-GYN’s org.
 33. Habitations at high 
altitudes
 35. Anger
 36. Words with “pour” or 
“pass”
 37. Swindles
 40. Seth’s son
 41. Vitiate
 42. Literary ridicule
 43. Domestic retreat
 44. Largest African nation
 46. Word with “common” 
or “horse”
 47. Frazier or Friday
 48. Doing business
 50. Swindles
 56. What some speculate in
 57. 1948 film The Fallen ___
 59. Make a change
 60. Wee thing
 61. Bad thing to be under
 62. Some stingers
 63. Telescope part
 64. Sasquatch’s kin
Down
 1. Hydrogen’s number
 2. Cause for civil action
 3. Operatic Trojan 
princess
 4. Some mixed drinks
 5. Chapter and ___
 6. Arts companion
 7. Miami Vice cop
 8. Farsighted one?
 9. Loss’s opposite
 10. Salome’s royal audience
 11. ___ buco (trattoria dish)
 12. December song
 13. QB’s gain or loss
 19. Small villages
 21. Bald eagle’s cousins
 24. Displayed a big mouth?
 25. Go back to school, 
in a way
 26. Sweater material
 28. Coronation coronet
 29. It’s so taxing!
 30. Ordered out
 31. Peatlands
 32. Parisian’s year
 34. Clemens and Gompers
 36. Grow stronger
 38. It’s all the craze
 39. Desert meccas
 44. Detoxifies (with “up”)
 45. Carney’s Honeymooners 
role
 47. Mint ___
 49. They rhyme with 
reason
 50. Creme-creme center
 51. Nosebag filler
 52. Bibliographer’s abbr.
 53. Oscar nominee 
Blanchett
 54. Adams in The 
Apartment
 55. Put into piles
 56. Like the fish in sashimi
 58. Lanai necklace
Puzzle 68: Tricky Situation
Tricky

163
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64

164
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Ancient Roman spas
 6. 29th state as of 1846
 10. Con game
 14. Cause for a blessing
 15. Emulate a mouse or 
beaver
 16. Tag along
 17. Cry “uncle!”
 20. 20-20, for example
 21. Likewise
 22. Ambulance attachments
 23. Valedictory deliverer, 
for example
 26. Folk knowledge
 27. Peyton Place was one
 32. Most people, really
 34. Shepherd’s purse, for 
example
 35. Genetic info carrier
 36. Healthful juice source
 37. Gave dinner to
 38. Elvis–Presley link
 39. Abbreviation after a 
comma
 40. Irish Rose’s lover
 42. Adding to the payroll
 44. Major depression out 
West?
 47. “That ___ hay!”
 48. Uncle of Lot
 51. Hair care concoction
 54. “Unaccustomed ___ 
am . . .”
 55. Year, in Cuba
 56. Top-notch
 60. Captain Hook’s 
right-hand man
 61. Run without moving
 62. Shamu and Keiko, for 
example
 63. Trueheart of the comics
 64. Tugboat blast
 65. Palette pigment
Down
 1. Quilt stuffing
 2. ___ off the old block
 3. Some suits in court?
 4. “Yoo-___!”
 5. Propagate
 6. Deliberately not notice
 7. In the know about
 8. Baby’s cry
 9. Causing wonder or 
astonishment
 10. Passes the plate?
 11. Sewing machine 
innovator
 12. Last word spoken at 
night, for many
 13. Alice’s diner
 18. Newsy nuggets
 19. Hackneyed, as a joke
 24. “I smell ___!”
 25. Family reunion 
attendees
 26. Served up a whopper
 28. Word from a bird
 29. Utah senator
 30. Erelong
 31. Twinge of hunger
 32. Support when one 
shouldn’t
 33. Son of Adam and Eve
 37. Brava manufacturer
 38. Opera highlight
 40. Come to light
 41. Charity event
 42. Behavioral pattern
 43. Mt. Carmel locale, 
briefly
 45. Deep cuts
 46. Short-legged hound
 49. Puts ___ to the ground
 50. Telegraph inventor
 51. More than half
 52. “You want a piece ___?”
 53. Members of the 
Shoshonean people
 54. “Alice’s Restaurant” 
name
 57. Swearing-in words
 58. Try to win over
 59. Jump a gap, as 
electricity
Puzzle 69: Clean Up
Tricky

165
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65

166
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. “. . . the gamut of 
emotions from ___”
 5. Helvetica, for example
 9. Enterprise medical 
officer
 14. Site of Samson’s 
jawbone slaughter
 15. French cheese
 16. Geneva’s river
 17. Smart as a whip
 19. Bone below the femur
 20. It emits a shrill warning
 22. Those in favor
 23. Piece of the whole, 
briefly
 24. Utterly unyielding
 26. Mark of the serpent?
 29. British alphabet enders
 32. Moo ___ pork
 33. Natural cattle pen
 36. Feeling of foreboding
 40. Mediocre
 41. Board projection
 43. Signing gorilla
 44. They pull their load
 46. Game based on 
following directions
 48. Femur’s upper end
 50. Dynamic start?
 51. Electric guitar pioneer 
Paul
 52. Perch atop
 56. It’s omitted in 
alphabetization
 58. Panic in the Streets 
director Kazan
 59. High-pitched signal 
device
 65. Gracefully slender
 67. Trash bag closers
 68. Hold in high esteem
 69. Kind of formality
 70. Feline film heroine
 71. Let’s Make ___
 72. Irish singing star
 73. Ides of March rebuke
Down
 1. Priestly garb
 2. Tenure
 3. Glenn’s home state
 4. Fleeces
 5. Special investigator
 6. Word with “history” or 
“hygiene”
 7. Member of a famous 
sailing trio
 8. Popular aquarium fish
 9. “I pity the fool” speaker
 10. Shrill singers
 11. Snake preyed on by the 
mongoose
 12. Bulb vegetable
 13. Brewery need
 18. TV hostess Gibbons
 21. Rx writers
 25. “I knew it!”
 26. Is retrocessive
 27. Destructive rodent
 28. Word with “eye” or 
“final”
 30. Goes platinum?
 31. The Merry Widow role
 34. It makes a shrill noise 
for attention
 35. Coastal Alaskan city 
 37. World Cup announcer’s 
cry
 38. Scottish isle
 39. Eighty-six
 42. Oil production area
 45. Swill opposite
 47. Like seven Ryan games
 49. Group of seals
 52. Brazilian rainforest
 53. Troy story?
 54. Every song has one
 55. One reply to “Who did 
this?”
 57. First name in cosmetics
 60. Damn Yankees dancer 
Verdon
 61. Lean and sinewy
 62. Medieval contest
 63. “___ we forget . . .”
 64. Jacob’s brother
 66. Underwater shocker
Puzzle 70: A Shrilling Puzzle
Tricky

167
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73

168
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Dromedary features
 6. Get out of its way!
 10. Word with “electrical” 
or “red”
 14. Take by force
 15. “Garfield” canine
 16. Land of plenty?
 17. Southern Indian
 18. Type of balloon
 19. Proofreader’s notation
 20. Oscar vehicle for Jack 
Palance
 23. Florida retirement 
mecca, informally
 26. Seasoned sailor
 27. Big name in TVs
 28. Bert of The Wizard 
of Oz
 29. Defense org. since 1949
 32. Unexpected sports 
result
 34. Neck of the woods
 35. Historic introduction?
 36. Hilo souvenir
 37. Pitney title song for a 
movie
 43. Rummy-player’s word
 44. Work unit
 45. Mountain stat.
 46. Judge’s need
 49. Like the Chrysler 
Building
 50. One way to transfer 
money
 51. “Hail, Caesar!”
 52. Cause damage to
 54. Chase-scene noises
 56. New York weekly since 
1955 (with The)
 60. Gutter locale
 61. Complain violently
 62. Nonsensical
 66. Checklist detail
 67. Author Gardner
 68. Linen shades
 69. Shows a profit of
 70. They may be black or 
private
 71. Gable’s Butler
Down
 1. Primitive shelter
 2. Olympic basketball 
team
 3. With mouth shut
 4. Buyer’s minimum-to-
maximum
 5. Acrobatic maneuver
 6. Sacred
 7. Fruity drinks
 8. Theater district
 9. Image-maker’s tool
 10. Chore
 11. Fall flowers
 12. Puncture
 13. Annoys
 21. Bowling target
 22. Salad oil holder
 23. Blinds piece
 24. Hawaiian tuber
 25. Narrow escape 
exclamation
 30. Word with 49-Across
 31. Snickering sound
 33. Plumber’s tool
 36. Bela of Dracula
 38. First name in Bedrock
 39. Mythical monster
 40. Nastase of tennis
 41. Fork-tailed shore bird
 42. St. Laurent of fashion
 46. Cried “Uncle!”
 47. Fly an aircraft
 48. Luxurious fabric
 49. Like a dismal day
 53. Fail to clash
 55. More likely to cause a 
skid
 57. Moon-landing 
transports
 58. Repulsive
 59. Spanish cheers
 63. Will be now?
 64. Pistachio, for one
 65. Ultimate suffix
Puzzle 71: Community Puzzle
Tricky

169
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71

170
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Dinnertime annoyances
 6. Tell good jokes
 11. Help wanted notice?
 14. The Beatles’ “Eight 
Days ___”
 15. Saunter
 16. Classic TV mom
 17. TV landlady
 19. A ___ of Flanders
 20. Before, in poesy
 21. Loserless outcomes
 22. Ballpark figures
 24. Eden denizen
 26. Nixon said he was 
not one
 27. Keogh plan relative
 28. Some sharp turns
 31. Walks in the water
 34. Cooking or sewing term
 35. Forbes profilee, 
sometimes
 36. Cabbie of old radio
 37. In need of paving, 
perhaps
 38. Card game for three
 39. Thieves’ hideout
 40. Martinique landmark
 41. Musical interludes
 42. Old-time school desk 
features
 44. What did ewe say?
 45. Peter and a Wolfe
 46. Shipping measure
 50. Part man, part machine
 52. Miner matters
 53. Mauna ___, Hawaii
 54. Statute
 55. TV surgeon
 58. Realtor’s offering
 59. Agenda details
 60. Actress-dancer 
Champion
 61. Powerful pols
 62. Twins share them
 63. Web destinations
Down
 1. Bat hideouts
 2. Bird on ___ (Gibson 
film)
 3. Prying bar
 4. Sweet-smelling necklace
 5. Figure-eight performers
 6. WWII GI, today
 7. Extinct, flightless birds
 8. “Anchors Aweigh” grp.
 9. Word with “blanket” or 
“guard”
 10. Unsightly sight
 11. Potential theme for this 
puzzle
 12. “Phew!” inducer
 13. Bends in the middle 
under weight
 18. La ___ (weather 
influence)
 23. ’50s high school event
 25. Slapstick props
 26. Societal division
 28. Abhors
 29. Orderly
 30. Overdrinkers
 31. Sahara depression
 32. Service sign-off
 33. TV lawman
 34. Optimistic traders
 37. Move
 38. Actor Penn
 40. Old-fashioned topper
 41. Kidnappers’ demands
 43. Benign growth
 44. Certain South African
 46. Lock not on a door
 47. Ready for anything
 48. Deep ravine
 49. Relieves, as pain
 50. ___ Ha’i
 51. Computer image
 52. Treater’s announcement
 56. Japanese capital
 57. Moo goo ___ pan
Puzzle 72: Hi, Chum!
Tricky

171
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63

172
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Go back and forth
 5. Physical beginning
 9. Grill meat
 14. Use an IBM Selectric
 15. Nutritive mineral
 16. Spine information
 17. Mann’s The Magic 
Mountain locale
 18. “Open 24 hours” sign 
material, perhaps
 19. Liszt piece
 20. Thanksgiving dessert
 21. G?
 23. Ears or eyes?
 25. Kind of temper or 
treatment
 26. Lady Sings the Blues 
star
 27. Royal Leamington 
feature
 29. Renaissance name of 
fame
 33. “It” girl Bow
 35. Persona’s opposite
 37. Female military gp.
 38. B?
 41. Line of dramatic 
development
 42. Gardener’s support
 43. Vegetable spreads
 44. Woods’ pocketful
 46. Word of encouragement
 47. Count calories
 48. Umbrage
 50. De Klerk’s successor
 53. T?
 58. Negative joiner
 59. Unconcerned
 60. Bit of urban noise
 61. Creature not welcomed 
on Wall Street
 62. Lacking sense
 63. Without repetition
 64. Briny bully
 65. At a different time
 66. Jury member, in theory
 67. Pallid
Down
 1. Kind of infection
 2. Poet Elinor
 3. First sighting
 4. Thumbs-up
 5. Flirtatious females
 6. In an upright position
 7. Hammer, for one
 8. Grandma Moses
 9. Great bargain
 10. Diacritical dot
 11. Small ornamental case
 12. Ray of The Marrying 
Kind
 13. Intellectually acute
 21. Some English 
compositions
 22. Home of the Dolphins
 24. Mi-fa lead-in
 27. Serpentine
 28. Air freshener scent
 30. Further inducements
 31. Tampico lunch, perhaps
 32. Immature newts
 33. Gabfest
 34. Myth kin
 35. Yonder
 36. Consecrate with oil
 39. Playful water animal
 40. Tireless carrier
 45. French writer Beauvoir
 47. Gloomier
 49. Send, as to a specialist
 50. Recipe directive
 51. Slender freshwater fish
 52. Orderly grouping
 53. Harness the wind
 54. Bone in the arm
 55. Castle guard
 56. Boutique
 57. Perfect, as one’s skills
 61. Muscular snake
Puzzle 73: To the Letter
Tricky

173
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67

174
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Omit, in diners
 5. Began playing on 
Broadway
 11. Tackle
 14. Young Mayberry 
resident
 15. Copy illegally, as 
software
 16. Dijon water
 17. Type of help wanted
 19. Wire measure
 20. Chicago sightings
 21. Little wave
 23. Melville effort
 24. Furnish for free
 25. Informs, fink-style
 28. Hollered
 31. Clash by Night 
playwright
 32. Track tipsters
 33. Short highway?
 34. They may be strained in 
young families
 35. Amusingly outlandish
 36. Comic vignette
 37. Tree with tough, useful 
wood
 38. Impressionist Claude
 39. Knight or rook, for 
example
 40. They’re cold-blooded
 42. Common aquarium 
fishes
 43. Aviation hero of ’27
 44. Surround
 45. Dumas dueler
 47. Retirement incomes
 51. Typical question
 52. Type of help wanted
 54. Riddle-me-___ (children’s 
book catchword)
 55. Build a fire under, say
 56. Greek goddess of 
marriage
 57. Babi ___ (historical 
WWII site)
 58. Complicated situations
 59. Tick-___
Down
 1. Hydrant hookup
 2. Foreign car make
 3. Tuneful cadence
 4. Does a freezer-related 
chore
 5. Cruise control or CD 
player, for example
 6. It might be grand
 7. Plays a wrong note
 8. Rebel slave Turner
 9. It goes on and on
 10. Mocks
 11. Type of help wanted
 12. Transportation mode
 13. Season to be jolly
 18. Greek island
 22. Group of seals
 24. Emulate Dante’s Peak
 25. Three’s Company 
landlord
 26. An Astaire
 27. Type of help wanted
 28. ___ a Horseman
 29. New York city
 30. Heads of France?
 32. U.S. chief justice 
1836–64
 35. Fever blister
 36. “Be patient!”
 38. Lightweight recorder
 39. Intrinsically
 41. Dickens child
 42. Traces of color
 44. Web-footed honkers
 45. Off-course
 46. Ostrich look-alike
 47. Summer’s sign?
 48. Cookie snack
 49. Decoy to dealers
 50. Coyote St.
 53. ___ Gatos, California
Puzzle 74: Get a Job
Tricky

175
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59

176
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Yields, as territory
 6. Elephant baby
 10. Chowder favorite
 14. Of a central line
 15. Skin cream ingredient
 16. Surrounding glow
 17. Panorama
 18. Agree, with allies
 20. Abbreviation meaning 
“plus additional things”
 21. Restaurant bill
 23. Steep in brine
 24. Like an old bucket of 
song
 26. Give off
 28. Agree, in business
 33. Small and sprightly
 34. Bus Stop playwright
 35. Large tub
 37. King of beasts
 38. Peninsula in 
northeastern Egypt
 40. Natalie Wood’s sister
 41. Average score for the 
golf course
 42. Vehicle for the golf 
course
 43. One type of bear
 44. Agree, as in a 
gentlemen’s agreement
 48. Roman poet
 49. From another planet
 50. Goteborg resident
 53. Distinctive and stylish 
elegance
 54. First name among 
baseball ironmen
 57. Agree, as in 
negotiations
 60. Resort lake
 62. Tandoor, for one
 63. Peruvian capital
 64. Happening
 65. Notable exploit
 66. Good earth
 67. Stopwatch button
Down
 1. Bat hideout
 2. Sign by a door
 3. Pain, for example
 4. Absorb, as a loss
 5. Become looser
 6. Place to gamble
 7. Hit the runway softly
 8. Birling surface
 9. Low, swampy marsh
 10. He wrote In Cold Blood
 11. Waikiki wingding
 12. Pendulum paths
 13. Last word in a chess 
match
 19. Stage whisper
 22. Yon lady
 25. Ugandan despot, Idi
 26. It blew its stack in Italy
 27. Bethlehem trio
 28. Beatles album
 29. Rap sheet name, 
perhaps
 30. Kings Peak range
 31. Snow disasters
 32. Hawaiian isle
 36. Cascades lake
 38. Hector Hugh Munro
 39. Made angry
 40. Theater box
 42. Musky cat
 43. Laser or inkjet
 45. Rat or beaver, for 
example
 46. Fir tree
 47. Pie ___ mode
 50. Component of urban air
 51. Whitecap
 52. Just gets by (with “out”)
 53. Peel, played by Rigg
 55. Top-notch
 56. Riga denizen
 58. Corner letter?
 59. Blame It on ___
 61. Old greeting for Caesar
Puzzle 75: Shake!
Tricky

177
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67

178
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Prerecorded
 6. Baseball’s Ripken
 9. Joplin of ragtime fame
 14. Honshu port
 15. Stretch the truth
 16. Movie tough guy Peter
 17. Summer Olympics 
event
 19. Merger
 20. Before, formerly
 21. “___ the season . . .”
 22. Neaten, as a napkin
 23. Break in the action
 25. Minor transgression
 28. Immigration island
 30. Word with “fly” or 
“clap”
 31. One ’twixt 12 and 20
 32. Term of affection
 34. 90 degrees from norte
 36. AARP members
 37. Words after the end of
17-, 25-, 53-, and 62-A
 40. K.C. time zone
 43. One way to get to 
elementary school
 44. Workers’ incentives
 48. Sounds of insight
 50. Curved molding
 52. “You’ve got the wrong 
guy!”
 53. Monaco resort
 56. Bum, to some
 57. Fertilizer ingredient
 58. Italian monk
 60. Order to a firing squad
 61. French states
 62. Banded beast
 65. Sidewalk show
 66. Cooked–turn link
 67. Xenophobe’s fear
 68. Musial and Getz
 69. Tub trio
 70. Does a darn good job?
Down
 1. Dried (off)
 2. Generally speaking
 3. Kneecap
 4. Barely manage (with 
“out”)
 5. Kind of board
 6. Skeleton site
 7. Feel malaise, for 
example
 8. MGM’s lion
 9. Swerved
 10. Meat cooked and 
preserved in its own fat
 11. Some birds
 12. Certain fisherman
 13. Sinews
 18. Apple seed, for example
 22. Bird of prey
 24. Former Italian bread
 26. Spreading plant
 27. Like some transactions
 29. Absolution targets
 33. Former Gracie Mansion 
resident
 35. Distinctive flair
 38. Nickname of Aqueduct 
Racetrack
 39. Name that’s quite 
fashionable
 40. Some park dwellers
 41. Try for
 42. Clarion blast
 45. Arrive quietly
 46. Sent via a click
 47. Some weekly messages
 49. New York island
 51. Dharma & Greg star
 54. Steven Spielberg 
openings?
 55. “. . . man ___ mouse?”
 59. First of all
 62. Bread box?
 63. Lobster coral
 64. Project end?
Puzzle 76: Look Here!
Tricky

179
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70

180
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Washed out
 6. WWI art innovation
 10. Revered expert
 14. Spry
 15. Notable Haymarket 
Square event
 16. ICBM launcher
 17. Game that leaves you 
strung out?
 19. Son and son-in-law to 
Claudius
 20. Toll rd., perhaps
 21. Princely
 22. Smiley novel A 
Thousand ___
 23. Builders of military 
bases
 25. Tangled tale
 27. Enticed deceptively
 29. World’s third-largest 
island
 33. Stretch for the stars?
 36. Seek redress, in a way
 37. Join formally
 38. It can bring tears to 
your eyes
 40. Price fixer?
 42. Bond investor’s 
concern
 43. City ravaged by a 1666 
fire
 45. River into the Gulf of 
Tonkin
 47. Sad comment
 48. Rundown condition
 49. Olympic gymnast Kerri
 51. Labor Dept. watchdog
 53. Genealogist’s quest
 57. Spare-time filler
 60. Raisin cousin
 62. Poet Sylvia’s poet 
husband
 63. Laotians’ neighbors
 64. Batter’s change of mind
 66. Rumor propagator
 67. Reply to a pen pal?
 68. Hairlike cell growths
 69. Rich vein
 70. Circular current
 71. Sleek, furry swimmer
Down
 1. Particulars
 2. Surprised-looking
 3. Bears Super Bowl coach
 4. Some monorails
 5. Order from on high
 6. Prolongs
 7. Opera’s slave princess
 8. Madame Alexander 
creations
 9. Downed
 10. Artillery mount
 11. Product endorser, 
hopefully
 12. Once-in-a-lifetime
 13. Sci-fi sights
 18. Oboe parts
 22. Intense suffering
 24. Red Cross vehicle
 26. Nickname associated 
with honesty
 28. Closes in on
 30. Carol word
 31. Singer with Louis and 
Duke
 32. Henry Ford rival
 33. Singer/dancer Falana
 34. Party to
 35. Salt source
 39. In need of a muffler
 41. Hit the jackpot, say
 44. “I’d rather not”
 46. Imbibe
 50. World org. based in 
Paris
 52. Crop pest
 54. Leaning
 55. It might come out with 
a rub
 56. Ventriloquist Bergen
 57. WWW language
 58. All-Amerian Soap Box 
Derby state
 59. Minus locks
 61. Rip apart
 64. British miler Sebastian
 65. Cleverness
Puzzle 77: Oh Baby
Tricky

181
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71

182
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Sail support
 5. Wall of earth
 9. Clavicle cover
 14. Wash up, for example
 15. 1997 role for Peter 
Fonda
 16. Abode above
 17. Two-dimensional 
calculation
 18. Repair
 19. Static attraction
 20. Captain Kirk’s 
command, perhaps
 23. “___ Loves You” (The 
Beatles)
 24. First name in daytime 
talk
 25. Source of a princess’s 
discomfort
 28. Round figure
 30. Common street name
 31. Bloodletter?
 34. Type of alert
 36. Cushiness
 38. Fable, for example
 39. Literary listing
 42. Doesn’t dawdle
 43. Kilmer creation
 44. The Tin Woodsman’s 
quest
 45. Kind of dog
 46. Title for Walter Scott
 47. Otic organ
 49. Install, as tile
 50. Zeros (in on)
 52. Burgle
 54. Globe-trot
 60. Texas cook-off dish
 61. Little dipper?
 62. Level
 63. Throw with force
 64. Get exactly right
 65. Group with a common 
ancestor
 66. Coastal cove
 67. Spiral
 68. Parade recipient, 
perhaps
Down
 1. Corned beef sandwich 
go-with
 2. Start to sail?
 3. Orate with assurance
 4. Collects, as wheat
 5. Type of crop
 6. Robert of the CSA
 7. Taylor or Adoree
 8. Intrusive
 9. Indian chief
 10. Spartan queen
 11. Diva’s deliverance
 12. Tighten a spring
 13. Pants part
 21. Word with “patrol” or 
“leave”
 22. First Tonight Show host
 25. Primrose and bridle, for 
two
 26. Compaq communique
 27. Westminster, for one
 29. Shortly
 31. Ear area
 32. Prefix meaning 
“extremely”
 33. On edge
 35. The six of Little Nellie 
Kelly
 37. Deck denizen
 38. Start of a giggle
 40. Express one’s view
 41. Kind of pillow
 46. Part of USSR
 48. Ring of color (Var.)
 50. Split
 51. Go off the path
 53. Screw up
 54. Afterwards
 55. Iran currency
 56. Realm recipient
 57. Get one’s goat
 58. Shakespearean King
 59. Feared Fleming foe from 
fiction
 60. Greek “X”
Puzzle 78: It’s About Time
Tricky

183
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68

184
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Online journal
 5. Electric stun gun
 10. Rude and insensitive one
 14. Pan counterpart
 15. Be taken with
 16. It may be uncontrollable
 17. No longer one-sided
 18. Star Wars director
 19. Company’s alternative 
to bankruptcy
 20. Gradually decrease
 21. Hebrew judge
 22. Followed unobserved
 24. “Wreck” or “car” 
preceder
 26. Fay’s role in King Kong
 27. Take back
 30. Made varsity
 35. Rustic poems (Var.)
 36. Fever fit
 37. Conserve
 38. ___ colada
 39. Chip off the old urn?
 40. Blade of yore
 41. They’re offensive and 
looking to score
 42. Latin bandleader 
Puente
 43. Alter to make better
 44. Father of basketball
 46. Dieter’s bane
 47. L-o-n-g time
 48. Big name in cosmetics
 50. Eggnog enhancement
 53. Norma or Charlotte
 54. Have problems sleeping
 58. Fine steed
 59. Cream of the crop
 61. Cowell’s show, 
familiarly
 62. A sudden numbing 
dread
 63. Kidney-related
 64. Bump on a log, for 
example
 65. Friend in need
 66. Indications
 67. Reunion attendee
Down
 1. Start to form, as a 
storm
 2. Source of basalt
 3. Pizza producer
 4. United Nations group
 5. Scout’s discovery
 6. Insect stage
 7. Gregarious get-together
 8. Period of distinction
 9. Put another way
 10. Use for the conference 
room
 11. Like some vaccines
 12. Eye unsubtly
 13. Accordion component
 23. Formicary member
 25. Three for nanny?
 27. Become edible, in a way
 28. Absolutely Fabulous 
character
 29. Grammy winner Lauper
 31. Bologna buck
 32. Hindu royal (Var.)
 33. Fight card listing
 34. Papers signifying 
ownership
 36. “We want ___!” 
(baseball fans’ chant)
 39. Brandy-based drinks
 43. Gape producer
 45. Man among Stooges
 46. Hardens
 49. Paradise Lost character
 50. ___ Valley, Calif.
 51. Russian river or 
mountains
 52. Skyscraping
 55. Fish market feature
 56. Kind of cracker
 57. Runners support it
 60. Lanai ring
Puzzle 79: Join In
Tricky

185
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67

186
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Lip cosmetic
 6. Bible book
 10. One of 39-Across
 14. Sing at Sing Sing?
 15. Fans do it!
 16. Short-tailed wildcat
 17. Teddy Roosevelt’s 
daughter
 18. Minor land?
 19. Fontainebleau lady 
friend
 20. One of 39-Across
 22. They’re non grata at 
some motels
 23. Do the wrong thing
 24. Curing agent
 26. Bargain hunter’s scene
 31. Famous Ford
 35. Farm creature
 36. Distribute
 38. Baseball as opposed to 
football
 39. They’re fun for all
 43. Pig sound
 44. Pad site, perhaps
 45. Hadrian’s hello
 46. Last six lines of poetry
 48. Tailor
 51. Like half of all major 
league baseball games
 53. Abundance
 54. Bambi, notably
 57. One of 39-Across
 63. Cassini of fashion
 64. Inventor’s specialty
 65. Egyptian Nobelist, 1978
 66. Moon valley
 67. Hunan, Keemun, etc.
 68. Irregularly notched
 69. Diminutive suffix
 70. Afflictions
 71. One of 39-Across
Down
 1. Snatch
 2. “Deck the Halls” 
syllables
 3. Mayberry character
 4. Clobbered
 5. Villainous visages
 6. Fine equine
 7. ___ Nostra (crime 
syndicate)
 8. Works a double shift, 
for example
 9. Hogan’s Heroes setting
 10. Pretentious talk
 11. Type of tick-borne 
disease
 12. Type of pricing
 13. Simple signatures
 21. Role for Chaplin
 25. ___-majeste
 26. Safecrackers
 27. On the qui vive
 28. Uncle of Song of the 
South
 29. Bulb related to onions
 30. Some waist-length 
jackets
 32. Musical key
 33. Take off
 34. Launderette purchase
 37. Olympic blade
 40. Knot up
 41. Slow-cooked meal
 42. Office user’s deal
 47. Papeete is its capital
 49. Made chaotic 
(with “up”)
 50. World’s largest desert
 52. Sing Swiss-style
 54. Golfer’s call
 55. Returned to the perch
 56. Raised stripe
 58. Kind of estate or time
 59. Answer with attitude
 60. Wood pussy’s defense
 61. Map section
 62. Jeanne d’Arc et al.
Puzzle 80: Having Fun
Tricky

187
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71

188
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. It’s nothing to Pedro
 5. Acknowledges applause
 9. Allays
 14. Aeneid figure
 15. Song for Callas
 16. Deplete
 17. Rainier locale
 20. Abbr. before an office 
number
 21. Game with matadors
 22. Thought
 23. Storm start
 24. One destined to receive?
 25. Italian tenor of note
 28. New Year’s Eve word
 29. Withdraw (with “out”)
 32. They have pull
 33. Breathing apparatus
 35. “Hubba hubba” sayer
 37. A capital place
 40. Standoffish
 41. Denuded
 42. Barnstorming feat
 43. Flat sound
 44. Fall short
 46. Witchlike women
 48. Gulf War missile
 49. Large, round, wicker 
basket
 50. It can be concealed
 53. Computer symbol
 54. Stable bit?
 57. Canadian industrial 
center
 60. City on the Penobscot
 61. God’s was little, in 
fiction
 62. Nightingale’s symbol
 63. One who wants to know 
something
 64. We the Living author
 65. Last word in an 
ultimatum
Down
 1. Cronkite’s delivery
 2. Smell ___ (detect 
wrongdoing)
 3. 10 cc, perhaps
 4. ___ Lawn (James 
Monroe’s home)
 5. Finance
 6. Church staple
 7. Two-time figure-skating 
gold medalist of the 
1980s
 8. Paulo lead-in
 9. Oater saloon feature
 10. Awake and moving 
about
 11. Meat type
 12. Trumpet accessory
 13. Risked getting points
 18. “Stupid ___ stupid does”
 19. Pomp and Circumstance 
author Coward
 23. Con game
 24. More gargantuan
 25. Pepsi and Coke, but 
not 7UP
 26. Botanical angles
 27. Former attorney 
general and Nevada city
 28. Yearly record
 29. ’50s middleweight 
champ Bobo
 30. Superior grade of 
black tea
 31. Game keepers?
 34. Not an auctioned suit, 
in cards
 36. Lively dance in duple 
time
 38. Bawdy
 39. Summoned silently
 45. Travels with My ___ 
(Graham Greene)
 47. $50 Boardwalk outlay
 48. Body part mentioned in 
“That Old Black Magic”
 49. Show contempt toward
 50. Horse halter
 51. “I’m all ___”
 52. Without self-control
 53. Peruvian Indian
 54. Like some confessions
 55. Uses a scope
 56. Drink like a fish
 58. Pole
59. Hearty drink
Puzzle 81: Facing Bills
Tough

189
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65

190
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Bugaboo
 5. Habitation
 10. Home economics’ 
counterpart
 14. “Hard ___!” (helm 
command)
 15. Carpenter’s tool
 16. Knitting term
 17. Arsonist’s cry?
 19. Substitute spread
 20. Long-eared equine
 21. Desiccated
 22. City of Brotherly Love, 
briefly
 24. Margin mark, perhaps
 25. Sleuth Vance
 26. Braved the rapids
 29. Water quantity, often
 32. It has a very large floor
 33. Wheat husks, for 
example
 34. Back
 35. Gregory Peck role
 36. Council of ___ (1545–
1563)
 37. Creche trio (with “the”)
 38. No-frills resting place
 39. Celestial ram
 40. Microwave feature
 41. Bamboozle
 43. Mousetrap temptation
 44. Monk’s mantle
 45. Kicker’s target, 
sometimes
 46. Italian island
 48. Moisturizer ingredient, 
perhaps
 49. Contender for your title
 52. Seek opinions
 53. Gun storage for ewe?
 56. Catchall Latin citation
 57. Commonwealths
 58. Swiss chard, for 
example
 59. Means partner
 60. Notched and jagged
 61. Noted volcano
Down
 1. Ali ___ and the 40 
Thieves
 2. “’Tis a pity!”
 3. Front-page stuff
 4. Sniggler’s quarry
 5. Wayne’s butler
 6. Suit
 7. “Art of Love” poet
 8. “___ Rosenkavalier” 
(Strauss)
 9. Mammoth’s kin
 10. Victors’ reward?
 11. Place for the greatest 
nut-shellers?
 12. City south of Moscow
 13. Stratagem
 18. Like granola
 23. Vent sound
 24. Seize with a toothpick
 25. Schemata
 26. Our Gang producer Hal
 27. Word preceding a 
blessing, perhaps
 28. What a great sculpture 
may be?
 29. What unintelligible 
writing is to me?
 30. Prompts
 31. River in France
 33. Threshold
 36. Velocipede
 37. Personal appearance
 39. MP’s prey
 40. Recipient of a stop 
order?
 42. Fire safety activities
 43. Pick partner
 45. Snow conveyances
 46. Eject, as molten lava
 47. Whit
 48. “___ extra cost to you”
 49. Be a worrywart
 50. Good sign or bad sign
 51. Spanish 1 verb 
conjugation
 54. Skiff need
 55. Mount Rushmore man, 
honest!
Puzzle 82: Write On!
Tough

191
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61

192
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. “. . . and to ___ good 
night”
 5. Dish for Twist
 10. Tumultuous sit-down
 14. “Tres ___!”
 15. Above average in size
 16. Tear asunder
 17. Words with “here I 
come”
 19. Often used Latin 
abbreviation
 20. Forbidding
 21. Reflexive pronoun
 23. Horse course
 24. Odorize by burning
 26. Wedding cake feature
 29. Piper’s due
 30. Spot for shots
 34. Low in fat
 35. Approximately
 37. Eruption fallout
 38. They’re hot south of the 
border
 39. Move aimlessly
 40. “Last chance!”
 42. Acronymic computer 
truism
 43. It may be light or grand
 44. Back muscle, to 
weightlifters
 45. They sometimes 
accompany ejections
 46. Respond to, as 
information
 48. ___ Salvador, El Salvador
 49. Brunei’s island
 52. Priest’s simple 
ceremony
 56. All het up
 57. When to call me?
 60. Editor’s option
 61. Certain Alaskan
 62. First of 13 popes
 63. Sniggler’s haul
 64. “The Winding Stair” poet
 65. Masher’s look
Down
 1. Part of a hocus-pocus 
phrase
 2. “In ___ of flowers . . .”
 3. Areas between woods
 4. Words with “now”
 5. Denzel Washington film
 6. Infrequent
 7. Caterer’s vessel
 8. Psyche division
 9. Admit
 10. Find a buyer 
beforehand
 11. A type of beer
 12. Shape of the old pigskin
 13. Filthy lucre
 18. Orbital period
 22. Ivan and Peter
 24. Camel string
 25. Shoelace place
 26. Steppe sister?
 27. Fable composer
 28. A name for the God of 
the Old Testament
 29. Grapefruit relative
 31. Initiate
 32. English teacher’s 
concern
 33. It was opened before 
Windows
 35. Homo sapiens
 36. “. . . ___ the fields we go”
 38. Use caller ID
 41. They are often juggled
 42. Saloon
 45. Cower
 47. It’s here before 
tomorrow
 48. Puts first things first
 49. Beseeched
 50. S-shaped molding
 51. Paper-towel unit
 52. Stumblebum
 53. The Morning Watch 
author
 54. Clog, for example
 55. Prepare paint
 58. XXX drink, in the 
comics
 59. A floor vote
Puzzle 83: Or What?
Tough

193
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65

194
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Basilica projection
 5. Standard
 10. Green ___ and Ham
 14. Fifth Avenue retailer
 15. Part of UNCF
 16. Butler, for Gable
 17. Fodder for Freud
 20. Bo Derek’s number
 21. Telephone line acronym
 22. They may fall over the 
crowd
 23. Ad agency award
 24. It may be checkered
 25. Get in the way of
 28. Classify
 29. ___ Tome and Principe
 32. Carolers’ selections
 33. Diva ___ Te Kanawa
 34. They lay around the 
farm
 35. With nothing in reserve
 38. Ages upon ages
 39. Golfers’ props
 40. Victory ___ (1954 film)
 41. Docs’ helpers
 42. Argued, as a case
 43. Like the knoll 
associated with J.F.K.
 44. “Ah, those were the 
days”
 45. Boats like Noah’s
 46. Mythical inferior deity
 49. “That makes sense”
 50. Something the picky 
pick?
 53. Ready for battle
 56. Equestrian’s grip
 57. Like Harvard’s walls
 58. Costa ___
 59. ___ and features
 60. Street-smart
 61. K–12, scholastically
Down
 1. Abbr. in many job titles
 2. Color-deficient
 3. Largest human organ
 4. Clairvoyant skill
 5. Word on strikers’ signs
 6. Heated argument
 7. Exclamations of disgust
 8. Bells ___ Ringing (Judy 
Holliday’s last film)
 9. Fictional ladies’ man
 10. ___ & Young 
(accounting firm)
 11. Vincent van ___
 12. Model airplane kit 
requirement
 13. Visualizes
 18. Wise, presumably
 19. Give the boot to
 23. Placates
 24. Docking locales
 25. Make a deduction
 26. Dummkopf
 27. Lowly workers
 28. Blind or broad 
attachment
 29. Cat in the Hat author
 30. Adds to the kitty
 31. Western comic strip 
“Rick ___”
 33. Believers may fall on 
theirs
 34. Words before “Hades” 
or “a pistol”
 36. Ocean off Maine
 37. Grocery store
 42. Walk heavily
 43. Wanting it all
 44. Revival shouts
 45. Showing evidence of 
fright
 46. Pub missile
 47. Environs
 48. Kuwaiti noble
 49. “Put ___ writing”
 50. First name among 
moonwalkers
 51. Cast wearer’s problem
 52. It’s the talk of Bangkok
 54. They travel through 
fallopian tubes
 55. Before, in poesy
Puzzle 84: Open Wide
Tough

195
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61

196
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. “___, poor Yorick . . .”
 5. Classic TV show, F ___
 10. ___ at Sea (Laurel and 
Hardy movie)
 14. Wax bananas?
 15. Start to be sorry?
 16. Doctor Dolittle actress 
Pratt
 17. Sarah McLachlan hit or 
an opera backwards
 18. M*A*S*H extra
 19. Woman of the ___ 
(Tracy/Hepburn film)
 20. TV trio
 23. Wheel of Fortune buy
 24. Dressing may make it 
better
 25. Jerry Lewis film, The 
___ Professor
 27. Nickname for 
Hemingway or Haydn
 30. Rita of West Side Story
 33. Othello conspirator
 37. Just-for-fun activity
 39. Attorney played by 
Raymond Burr
 40. TV trio
 43. Begin, as winter
 44. Philip of From Here to 
Eternity
 45. Civil War side (with 
“the”)
 46. Nancy Reagan’s 
designer
 48. Michelle of Crouching 
Tiger, Hidden Dragon
 50. Loses one’s footing
 52. Meet the ___
 56. Paul’s Exodus co-star
 58. TV trio
 62. “___ a man with seven 
wives”
 64. Very practical
 65. “Lamp ___ My Feet”
 66. Dibs on collateral
 67. Windward Island 
Saint ___
 68. Law & Order: Special 
Victims ___
 69. Retained
 70. Satisfy the store owner
 71. “Auld Lang ___”
Down
 1. Saroyan’s My Name Is 
___
 2. “The ___ Got Potential” 
(Song from Evita)
 3. Hill who went to 
Capitol Hill
 4. Lesley of 60 Minutes
 5. Emmy-winning Cagney 
& Lacey costar
 6. Libertine
 7. Yours, Mine and ___
 8. James of The 
Andromeda Strain
 9. Fully attended meeting
 10. It’s above us all
 11. Sailor’s response, 
perhaps
 12. ___ 9 from Outer Space
 13. Two Mules for Sister ___ 
(Clint Eastwood movie)
 21. ___ sheet (police arrest 
record)
 22. Leaf pores
 26. Police adversary of 
39-Across
 28. El ___, Texas
 29. “The Sheik of ___”
 31. Mrs. Nick Charles
 32. ___ Angels Have Wings
 33. ___ Mad Mad Mad Mad 
World
 34. Stunned
 35. Enter Dreamland
 36. Darby ___ and the Little 
People
 38. “Trick” joint
 41. Not suitable
Puzzle 85: A Trio of Trios
Tough

197
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
 42. Insult or a “gorgeous” 
introduction
 47. Letter from an Unknown 
Woman director Max
 49. Mins. and mins.
 51. Put together
 53. Richard Burton film
 54. Favorable forecast
 55. Sleek fabric
 56. Another sleek fabric
 57. She’s a sweetie in Tahiti
 59. Of ___ and Men
 60. Lena of Havana
 61. Act like a grandparent
 63. You’ll get a bang out of it

198
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Pantomimist Jacques
 5. Warn a la Lassie
 10. Envelope feature
 14. Arabian Sea gulf
 15. Counting word
 16. “I lack iniquity” speaker
 17. The Islamic community
 18. Asian weight units
 19. Minks and sables
 20. Spicy stews
 22. QED middle
 23. Create a yen
 24. Couturière Schiaparelli
 26. Fuel source
 30. Cosmonaut’s home 
away from home, once
 33. Central, for one
 36. Actor who played Oskar 
in Schindler’s List
 37. Form of quartz
 39. Embryo-sac encloser
 41. What this puzzle is 
about, briefly
 42. Garrisons
 43. Many end in .com
 44. Meaningful
 46. Cognac rating
 47. “That’s a funny one!”
 48. Child’s wonderland
 51. Certain draft
 53. Like some enemies
 57. ___ and away
 59. Simple questions
 63. Bring the house down
 64. Made an “oopsie”
 65. Tyrrhenian Sea island
 66. Knock for a loop
 67. Creator of Peg 
Woffington
 68. Part of a jukebox
 69. Trinity novelist
 70. They have their ups 
and downs
 71. Lat. and Ukr., once
Down
 1. Gray-brown
 2. They create spots
 3. Play the siren
 4. Up the creek
 5. “Be serious!”
 6. Collect with a harvester
 7. “__’Clock Jump”
 8. Basketball’s Chamberlain
 9. Abate
 10. Shrill woodwinds
 11. Faye Dunaway role
 12. Uttar Pradesh city
 13. Last name in etiquette
 21. The Name of the Rose 
writer Umberto
 25. A new one may be 
turned over
 27. Watergate figure
 28. Former fillies
 29. “No thanks!”
 31. “Tell ___ the judge”
 32. Poll answerer (Abbr.)
 33. Ritzy
 34. Sneaker brand
 35. Laugh In regular
 38. Nanny
 40. Where el sol rises
 45. Ointments for 
ducktails?
 49. Cantankerous
 50. Louis XIV, for example
 52. They’re crossed in 
Olympic competition
 54. Goes public
 55. Resting place in a 
garden
 56. Future attorneys’ exams
 57. Language of Pakistan
 58. The Jack before Johnny
 60. Twist-off snack
 61. Give a hee and a haw
 62. Fix over
Puzzle 86: In the Waiting Room
Tough

199
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71

200
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Candied tuber
 4. Casablanca cafe
 9. Native plant life
 14. “. . . man ___ mouse?”
 15. Moral code
 16. Hood of renown
 17. “Ick!”
 18. Land depletion
 20. “Equatorially” ample
 22. Things stacked in a 
parlor
 23. He anointed Saul and 
David as kings
 25. Sold out, as an arena
 30. Like some criticism
 32. Follow suit
 33. H.S. dropouts’ 
achievements
 35. Southeast Asian 
language
 37. A dropped pop, for 
example
 38. Once around the block
 39. Street gang combat
 42. Grenade ingredient, 
perhaps
 43. Heep of fiction
 45. Whimsically strange
 46. “Take ___ Train” (Duke 
Ellington song)
 47. Melancholy poems
 50. Make obscure
 52. Like a ghost town
 54. Spanish wife
 57. Makeshift money
 59. Someone who makes a 
lot?
 60. Ducks for cover
 65. Serpent’s mark?
 66. Sporting wings
 67. Beethoven’s last 
symphony
 68. Bank worry
 69. Andrew ___ Webber
 70. Diminutive suffixes
 71. Last word of “America 
the Beautiful”
Down
 1. Acts unpredictably, as a 
stock price
 2. Antilles resort
 3. Prepare faux chocolate 
pastries?
 4. Tend to the bird feeder
 5. “How was ___ know?”
 6. Elegantly stylish
 7. Drug smuggler’s 
measures, perhaps
 8. Act start
 9. Less genial
 10. Article for Alamos
 11. It’s fit to be tied
 12. Bravo or Lobo
 13. Massachusetts cape
 19. Paper measure
 21. Grabs some rays
 24. Ripsnorter
 26. 81⁄2-x-11-inch size, briefly
 27. Bulldozers, for example
 28. Item used in curling
 29. Sealy competitor
 31. Drop target, sometimes
 33. Bonded, in a way
 34. Bogart’s role in High 
Sierra
 36. Switch setting
 39. Hungered partner
 40. Fly catcher
 41. Supporting ballots
 44. Survey blank
 46. Rocker Turner
 48. Impress indelibly
 49. Calm and unruffled
 51. Plumb-line measures
 53. “I ___ my way . . .” 
(famous lyrics)
 55. Las Vegas show, 
perhaps
 56. Boxing locale
 58. Pub serving, sometimes
 60. Actor Holbrook
 61. Not well
 62. It’s universal, in 
Chinese philosophy
 63. Shoat place
 64. Map abbreviation
Puzzle 87: Smooth Landing
Tough

201
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71

202
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Expect anon
 6. Piano exercise
 11. Racer’s relative
 14. California city or cotton 
cloth
 15. House components
 16. Seashell seller
 17. Showed trepidation
 19. Lion or Tiger
 20. A Midsummer Night’s 
Dream quartet
 21. Downhill racer
 22. Completely unfamiliar
 24. Jocular Johnson
 25. Burly
 26. Gangster’s weapon
 29. Fleming characters
 31. Poetry Muse
 32. Hood
 33. Bit of mosaic
 37. Lost one’s temper
 40. Responds in Jeopardy!
 41. Eye of ___ (part of a 
Macbeth recipe)
 42. Be fearful of
 43. City near Brigham City
 45. Lengthy recitation
 46. Withered hags
 49. Granola ingredients
 50. Fastener for Rosie
 51. Cookie sheetful
 53. Follow a Vail trail
 56. Gardner of Hollywood
 57. Compassionate
 60. Scuff up, for example
 61. Rub out
 62. Herman’s Hermits’ 
leader
 63. Layer
 64. Bocelli’s pitch
 65. “Nifty!”
Down
 1. Feel pain
 2. Batman sound effect
 3. Assists
 4. Monsters, ___
 5. Machine shop area
 6. Marsh growth
 7. Java joint
 8. State with conviction
 9. Poe’s “Annabel ___”
 10. What you will?
 11. Jellied garnish
 12. Ogre of note
 13. Flashy flower
 18. Mandolin cousin
 23. Skills of yesterday
 24. Display unity
 25. Lovelorn’s utterance
 26. Country’s McEntire
 27. Cinnabar, taconite, and 
so on
 28. Potato holder
 29. Displayed
 30. Masters’ stroke
 32. Archaic pronoun
 34. Invention beginning
 35. Mean partner
 36. Little whirlpool
 38. Drops the curtain on
 39. Lily Tomlin character
 44. Jump in the pool
 45. Arsenic and Old ___
 46. Swimmer’s bane
 47. Romantic competitor
 48. Part of a floral carpel
 49. It may be just past 
significant
 51. Fiber source
 52. “Are not!” retort
 53. Classical colonnade
 54. Superman, most often
 55. Lead-in for “gram” or 
“graph”
 58. Were now?
 59. Lobster coral
Puzzle 88: Temperature Rising
Tough

203
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65

204
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Call Me ___ (Hope film)
 6. “What a pity!”
 10. Strike breaker
 14. Ticks off
 15. Type of defense
 16. Glee club member
 17. International hold-up 
man?
 18. Wedding cake layer
 19. Word with “base” or 
“summer”
 20. By any means
 23. Rumanian coin
 24. Congenial
 25. No so great
 28. Polished off
 29. Gangster’s gun
 30. TV actress Charlotte
 31. Not yet solidified
 34. Kind of alert
 36. Scholarly book
 37. However one can
 40. Oracle’s sign
 41. Ultimatum word
 42. Delineates
 43. Go ___ (freak out)
 44. Uh-huh
 45. Someone or something 
special
 46. Give a pounding
 48. Molecule piece
 50. Pressure unit
 53. Without constraint
 56. Exploitive fellow
 58. Light green legume
 59. Stocking shade
 60. Musical pause
 61. Arab ruler
 62. Nepal’s neighbor
 63. Agcy. known to shoot 
for the stars
 64. Elbow benders
 65. Advantageous purchase
Down
 1. Donnybrook
 2. Slender branch
 3. Reduce, as fears
 4. Full-strength, as a drink
 5. Give one’s approval for
 6. People conquered by 
Cortés
 7. French wine valley and 
river
 8. In a fresh way
 9. Blood bank science
 10. Gives the axe
 11. Teacher’s milieu
 12. Bread machine?
 13. Monk’s style
 21. Engage in a contest
 22. Warning hue
 26. Ireland’s De Valera
 27. Smells awful
 28. Eternity
 29. Friar’s attire
 31. WWII predator
 32. Insect larva
 33. Transparent quality
 34. Flatfish
 35. Bride’s new title
 36. Even off
 38. Peepers’ places
 39. Ornamental flowering 
vine
 44. Cinder
 45. Old salt
 47. Heart line
 48. Own up to
 49. Some past despots
 50. Goody-goody
 51. Rich brown pigment
 52. Standard of perfection
 54. VIP transport
 55. Babble angrily
 56. Footed vase
 57. Bounding main
Puzzle 89: Rules are Rules
Tough

205
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65

206
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Some cantata singers
 6. Fine-grained mineral
 10. “Want to hear a secret?”
 14. Small hand drum
 15. Truant, in the USMC
 16. Blues singer James
 17. It doesn’t leave a paper 
trail
 18. Linda Ronstadt hit
 20. Olfactory stimuli
 22. Parking lot topper
 23. Hosp. employee
 24. Brainstorm
 26. Sweetest and kindest
 28. Bobby Darin hit
 33. It could be stuffed
 34. Actor Erwin
 35. Stadium sounds
 39. Fall, while surfing
 42. Finch
 44. Glance impolitely
 45. U.S.A. defense agency
 47. Diamond-studded 
topper
 48. Part of an Otis Redding 
hit
 52. Puget Sound city
 55. Combat for two
 56. Familiar vow
 57. Exist
 59. Footwear giant
 63. Henry Mancini hit
 66. Got into pitch
 68. Gardner of fiction
 69. Roman ruler
 70. Step into
 71. Lull
 72. Trouble persistently
 73. Pitiless
Down
 1. “It must have been 
something I ___!”
 2. Spiritual leader
 3. A winter lift
 4. Miscellanea
 5. Rebel Without a Cause 
actor
 6. Programmed command 
for fixed indentations
 7. Leatherworker’s tool
 8. Big galoot
 9. Makes quite a profit
 10. Word with “soup” or 
“shooter”
 11. Vogue
 12. F3.5 and F4.0
 13. Reproach bitterly
 19. It’s cheesy
 21. Cookbook direction
 25. Patient sounds?
 27. King novel
 28. Big sports event
 29. Peace Nobelist Wiesel
 30. “Oh, my!”
 31. Strain one’s muscles
 32. Toy store aliens
 36. League type
 37. Israeli dance
 38. Oscillate
 40. Not concerned
 41. “For shame!”
 43. They participate in big 
games
 46. Icelander’s catch
 49. Tent tycoon
 50. Plow line
 51. Start of a giggle
 52. Official recorder
 53. Hold precious
 54. Chills
 58. Free from fluctuations
 60. It can be a drag
 61. Understanding
 62. Quick-witted
 64. Spiker’s barrier
 65. Historic time
 67. Unbuttered
Puzzle 90: Water Ways
Tough

207
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73

208
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Jazz variation
 6. Word with “bar” or 
“binary”
 10. Little bits
 14. Roll with the punches
 15. Cutlass, for one
 16. Heir to the Ponderosa
 17. Try
 19. Diving position
 20. Counterfeiters’ nemeses
 21. Japanese Prime 
Minister Hirobumi
 22. “It’s been ___ pleasure”
 23. Try
 27. Certain woodwind 
player
 29. Comparer’s words
 30. Plays in city after city
 31. Places for idols
 36. “___ the season to be 
jolly”
 37. Buenos ___
 38. Bud’s funny bud
 39. White-flowered shrubs
 42. Fife player’s percussion
 44. Track-and-field contest
 45. Cause to expand, as 
pupils
 46. Try
 51. 007, for example
 52. Guy who’s all thumbs
 53. Foot portion
 56. Cape Town cash
 57. And try again . . .
 60. Lid irritation
 61. Asia’s shrinking sea
 62. Smooths, as the way
 63. ___ over heels
 64. Like an owl, supposedly
 65. Mules, hinnies, and 
such
Down
 1. Sheet of matted cotton
 2. Coated dairy product
 3. Where breads, cakes, 
and pastries may be 
made
 4. Kind of concert or 
market
 5. “Harper Valley ___”
 6. Raccoon relative
 7. James of The 
Andromeda Strain
 8. Outlawed pesticide
 9. Suffix with Taiwan or 
Peking
 10. Carrot’s principal 
feeder
 11. “Farewell” from France
 12. Capital of Senegal
 13. Small, silvery fish
 18. Pinball violation
 22. Hamlet fivesome
 24. Naval monogram on 
many ships
 25. The Prince of ___
 26. “Sweet” suffixes
 27. “Beetle Bailey” dog
 28. A way to cook eggs
 31. Michelangelo work
 32. Make a faux pas
 33. Obstacle to success or 
large sea bird
 34. Burglar’s swag
 35. Completely convinced
 37. Middle East gulf
 40. Changed for the better
 41. Nice and tidy
 42. Comedian Conway
 43. Llama cousins
 45. Resist with boldness
 46. Swampland
 47. Fine print, perhaps
 48. Safari country
 49. Old Roman wraps
 50. Knights of the Round ___ 
(1953)
 54. Canadian Native 
American
 55. Pianist Dame Myra
 57. Like most fish in sushi
 58. “Mentalist” Geller
 59. Red or Dead body of 
water
Puzzle 91: Who’s Trying Now?
Tough

209
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65

210
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Frost in the air
 4. Thespian’s trophy
 9. Type of position
 14. Suffix with “hero”
 15. Stuff in the attic?
 16. Word with “zinc” or 
“nitrous”
 17. It may be pulled or bent
 18. Cockney’s challenge
 19. Jewish calendar month
 20. Bumbling ones
 23. Close again, as an 
envelope
 24. Gray’s area?
 28. City south of Moscow
 29. Downright unpleasant
 32. Prefix for “term” or 
“wife”
 33. Movie critic Roger
 35. Flower holders
 37. Pasta choice
 41. Meet the ___
 42. Metric measures
 43. “I love” to Latin lovers
 44. She vanted to be left 
alone
 46. Freelancer’s enc.
 50. Endangered Florida 
creature
 53. Motion of the ocean 
result
 55. Hilarious
 58. So old that it’s new
 61. Stringed Renaissance 
instruments
 62. Actress Gretchen
 63. “The Hollow Men” poet
 64. Escape detection
 65. Miner’s discovery
 66. Divine Poems author
 67. Scotch partners?
 68. Chocolate factory need
Down
 1. Pitching brothers Joe 
and Phil
 2. More mindless
 3. Examine closely
 4. Bay of Japan
 5. Not yet used
 6. ___ d’Azur
 7. Gothic doorway shape
 8. Prepare leftovers
 9. The Grapes of Wrath 
actor
 10. Occupy time and space
 11. “___ better to have 
loved . . .”
 12. This org. has a lot of 
pull
 13. Cariou in The Four 
Seasons
 21. Famous folks
 22. “___ other questions?”
 25. Writing on the wall, for 
example
 26. La Boheme heroine
 27. PGA measurements
 30. Kind of wrestling
 31. Garden support
 34. Diddley and Derek
 35. BO sign
 36. 50-50 chance
 37. At Wit’s End author 
Bombeck
 38. Former heavyweight 
champion Spinks
 39. Op. ___ (footnote abbr.)
 40. Star of a classic sitcom
 41. Grier or Shriver
 44. “Wow!” to Beaver 
Cleaver
 45. Passes a rope through
 47. The Gods Themselves 
author Isaac
 48. Lady in Spain
 49. Aerie newborn
 51. Ohio’s rubber city
 52. Gov’t security
 54. Cathedral parts
 56. Minuteman’s home?
 57. With the volume on 10
 58. Roulette play
 59. “Turn to Stone” group
 60. Oz woodman’s 
composition
Puzzle 92: Check Out the Joint
Tough

211
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68

212
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Wryly amusing
 6. Swedish import
 10. Abbr. in a real estate ad
 14. Like The Twilight Zone
 15. “___ boy!”
 16. Moreno or Hayworth
 17. Ward and June’s 
decision?
 20. Monty Python star
 21. With 53-Across, a 
Beatles song
 22. More than required
 23. Kind of vibes
 24. Start with school
 25. Used “th” in place of “s”
 29. Do home work?
 34. “___ nous” 
(confidentially)
 35. Brewer’s kiln
 36. Opposite of stet
 37. Lose one’s cool
 40. It may be tall
 41. Aft
 42. Heathen
 43. They may travel by 
butterfly
 45. Balance sheet item
 46. Brian of rock
 47. Ring cheer
 48. Bogart’s role in 
Casablanca
 52. Caesar’s welcome
 53. See 21-Across
 57. Use up all the alibis
 60. “That makes ___ of 
sense”
 61. Neighbor of 
Turkmenistan
 62. Dear, as a price
 63. Sandwich staple
 64. Pullman and passenger, 
for two
 65. Type of bear
Down
 1. Bagel source, often
 2. Bassoon part
 3. Verbalized
 4. “___, from New York . . .”
 5. To Kill a Mockingbird 
author
 6. Full and satisfied
 7. Member of a bar assoc.
 8. Start of a vol. 1 heading
 9. Yankee legend
 10. Bric-a-___
 11. Low-class joint
 12. 66 and others
 13. Utopia Plains setting
 18. “If ___ a Hammer”
 19. Farrow and Gardner, in 
Sinatra’s life
 23. “Where’s the ___?”
 24. Tough question
 25. Some turns
 26. Nonblood relative
 27. Record groove cutters
 28. Introduction
 29. Punch-line payoff
 30. Best and Ferber
 31. Marsh plant
 32. ___ ease 
(uncomfortable)
 33. High schoolers
 35. Alamogordo’s county
 38. Frantic
 39. Church section
 44. Computer selection 
screen
 45. Author Haley
 47. Many operate on gas
 48. Obnoxious young’un
 49. Pip
 50. Many a lit. author
 51. Jot
 52. Not nearby
 53. Burlap ingredient
 54. Secondhand
 55. Exploit
 56. Catch sight of
 58. Man-mouse filler
 59. Chicago clock setting
Puzzle 93: Bye Bye!
Tough

213
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65

214
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Mr. Bean portrayer 
Atkinson
 6. FBI agt.
 10. Our portliest president
 14. Europe’s second largest 
lake
 15. Declaim wildly
 16. Out of work
 17. Animal in a roundup
 18. “Pretty maids all in ___”
 19. Timely benefit
 20. “Auld’” land
 21. Stop at the outset
 24. Elevator inventor Otis
 26. Old West tales
 27. Kind of saw or tire
 29. Colonial insect
 30. Love deity
 31. Very light brown
 34. Operating room 
substance, once
 39. Make a bust?
 41. Van Gogh’s sacrifice
 42. It’s full of holes
 43. Lugs around
 44. First word in many 
letters
 46. Biblical utopia
 47. Orangutan
 49. Displaced person
 51. Historic Harlem theater
 55. Seinfeld friend
 57. Celeste Holm musical
 59. ___ Lucky Night (1945)
 62. Smoky mist
 63. Glossary entry
 64. Semiconductor device
 66. Unnamed people or 
things
 67. Brainstorming session 
result
 68. NBA Hall-of-Famer 
Baylor
 69. McCarthy’s prey
 70. Barracks beds
 71. Bowler’s button
Down
 1. Betsy or Diana
 2. “Hang ___ your hats”
 3. Remove unwanted 
elements
 4. “Act your ___!”
 5. Land in C.S. Lewis’s 
Chronicles
 6. Economics textbook 
feature
 7. West Side Story song
 8. Shakespeare’s river
 9. “Danke Schoen” singer 
Wayne
 10. Seven Years in ___
 11. Baked brick building
 12. Bakery staple
 13. Works the garden
 22. ___ of Wight
 23. Finds intolerable
 25. Tightly twisted thread
 27. Take a breather
 28. With the bow, in music
 29. Surrounding glow
 32. Formally hand over
 33. Diff’rent Strokes actress 
Charlotte
 35. Promotional link
 36. Large rodents with 
sharp bristles
 37. “. . . lived happily ___ 
after”
 38. Actress Russo
 40. Verse from King David
 45. Raise children
 48. Kind of justice
 50. Weather forecast word
 51. More than dislike
 52. Carpenter’s tool
 53. Seeped slowly
 54. Rich soil deposit
 55. Everglades resident
 56. Succotash beans
 58. Decorate anew
 60. Entertaining Adams
 61. Monthly expense, for 
some
 65. ___ de France
Puzzle 94: Gardening 101
Tough

215
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71

216
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. 1 on the Mohs scale
 5. Former NATO 
Mediterranean 
headquarters
 10. Gravy spoiler
 14. Black-and-white delight
 15. Therapeutic plants
 16. Translucent gem
 17. A car might have one 
on it
 18. Puts on the market
 19. 1995 Dodger phenom 
Hideo
 20. Massive
 22. Summer pest
 23. Chef’s catch phrase
 24. Thurston Howell III type
 26. Bonnie’s tie with Clyde?
 29. Secured, as a deal
 32. Base individuals?
 36. Apply paint hastily
 38. Spielberg soldier
 40. Poetic Dickinson
 41. Kachina fashioner
 42. Trial companion
 44. Become hazy
 45. Symbol for electrical 
resistance
 47. Site of the fabled forges 
of the Cyclopes
 48. Teamster’s truck
 49. Hora’s featured shape
 51. Brood overseers
 53. Initials of a crack team?
 54. Vent sound
 56. Noche’s antithesis
 58. Building location
 61. Difficult tasks
 67. Hole in a sweater?
 68. Universally accepted 
principle
 69. Have ___ in one’s 
bonnet
 70. Inflammation suffix
 71. Describing pitch
 72. Blame bearer
 73. Anthroponym
 74. Antagonist
 75. Denouements
Down
 1. Crossing cost
 2. Domingo piece
 3. Disconcerting look
 4. “1-2-3-kick” dance
 5. One-sided contest
 6. Tess of the D’Urbervilles’ 
cad
 7. Entertainer Falana
 8. Acts the stoolie
 9. Thumbs-up
 10. Acts of desperation on 
the gridiron
 11. Conversant about
 12. Cradle call
 13. It sometimes thickens
 21. “Y” wearer
 25. Pitchblende is one
 26. For this purpose only
 27. Ruth’s mother-in-law
 28. Super conclusion?
 30. Jane of fiction
 31. First name among film 
villains
 33. Lubricated
 34. Fashionable feather
 35. UAR component
 37. High muck-a-muck
 39. ___ the wiser
 43. With no apparent 
pattern
 46. Fatima’s husband
 50. What you will, perhaps
 52. Knight, by definition
 55. The “S” of WASP
 57. Traditional truism
 58. Wheel of Fortune option
 59. Cyclops’s I?
 60. Minimal haircut
 62. Waiter’s place
 63. Good soil
 64. Dark, poetically
 65. Library byword
 66. They’re erected on 
Broadway
Puzzle 95: Try It On
Tough

217
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75

218
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. East of ___
 5. Speaker go-with
 8. Co-Nobelist with Begin
 13. Baltimore Colt Hall of 
Famer Marchetti
 14. Remarkable deed
 16. Prepare for painting
 17. Deserves a slap, perhaps
 19. Red Square mausoleum 
occupant
 20. Have the same views
 21. “Take This Job 
and ___ It”
 23. Carbon-14 
determination
 24. Hee Haw banjoist Clark
 25. Right from the oven
 28. Net gains?
 30. End of a college address
 31. Existed
 33. Where Ivory soap and 
the pop-top can were 
invented
 37. Desert spot
 41. It flows through a 
conductor
 44. English test, perhaps
 45. Four-footed friends
 46. Two Years Before the 
Mast writer
 47. Gym alternative
 49. “Hey there”
 51. “Not a minute 
afterward”
 57. Contemptible fellow
 60. Encouraging word
 61. “Is that your ___ 
answer?”
 62. Idolize
 64. What the fat lady sings
 66. One-time paperback
 68. Combat doctor
 69. Call of the Wild vehicle
 70. Melodious Horne
 71. Condensed but 
memorable saying
 72. Some NCAA basketball 
players
 73. Carhop’s load
Down
 1. British actress 
Samantha
 2. Mexican artist Rivera
 3. Contestants’ costs
 4. Race-winning margin, 
sometimes
 5. Neighbor of Eur.
 6. Reagan attorney 
general
 7. Ottoman official
 8. Display of grandeur
 9. Butterflies ___ Free
 10. Talk-show hostess 
Shore
 11. Southwest sidekick
 12. Group principle
 15. Shoe man McCann
 18. Parker of Old Yeller
 22. Go for the gold
 26. Thursday is named 
for him
 27. Property protectors
 29. One way to pay
 31. Quilters’ get-together
 32. Singh rival
 34. Place to shoot from
 35. It may be crushed
 36. World Series mo.
 38. Auto sprucer-upper
 39. Country lodging
 40. RR stop
 42. Word processing 
decision
 43. Org. that delivers the 
goods
 48. Clay, today
 50. Cutup with Oliver
 51. Fragrance
 52. For later viewing
 53. Screen vixen Bara
 54. Sentence joiners
 55. Coin toss choice
 56. Glue name
 58. Gladiator setting
 59. Postponement
 63. Numskull
 65. Predetermine the 
outcome
 67. Sullivan and Koch
Puzzle 96: New Approach
Tough

219
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73

220
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Critically injure
 5. More, to minimalists
 9. Relieve of weapons
 14. Major suffix
 15. Differential-gear locale
 16. Salk’s conquest
 17. Run wild
 19. Native of Peru
 20. Touch lightly in passing
 22. Some like it felt
 23. Beehive State tribesman
 24. Maternally related
 28. It Wasn’t All Velvet 
autobiographer
 31. “Spring forward” letters
 34. It became independent 
in 1821
 36. Place to find a porter
 37. Its tail flaps in the wind
 38. Party hearty
 41. It’s supportive for those 
eating in bed
 42. Start of the Lord’s 
Prayer
 43. Encircled and attacked
 44. Fashion monogram
 45. Lose one’s mind
 47. In the poorhouse
 48. Music scale note
 49. Former name of Tokyo
 51. Brilliant idea
 59. Sports complex
 60. Group of street 
musicians from 
34-Across
 62. Clerk of the 4077th
 63. Midmonth day
 64. Foreign currency
 65. To the left, to sailors
 66. Abound
 67. Tool repository
Down
 1. One of the “Little 
Women”
 2. Get from ___ (progress 
slightly)
 3. Ripley’s Believe ___ Not!
 4. It’s got food all over it
 5. Shaping machine
 6. Old-fashioned stage 
direction
 7. Prelude to a duel
 8. Word sung by Doris Day
 9. Awake into the wee 
hours
 10. “Honest!”
 11. Alda of M*A*S*H
 12. Eyeglass frames
 13. Castle defense
 18. Facet
 21. Cajun concoctions
 24. E, on a gas gauge
 25. Closes in on
 26. Located around a 
central hub
 27. Like Ho’s bubbles
 29. Reason to buy Met 
tickets
 30. Same old grind
 31. Mournful melody
 32. One of The Avengers
 33. White House nickname
 35. My Favorite Year star
 37. Cap site
 39. What you want your car 
engine to do
 40. Ryder of Tinseltown
 45. Racing vehicle
 46. Extent
 48. Coast Guard equipment
 50. Certain religious 
philosophy
 51. Title sister in an 
Eastwood film
 52. Links hazard
 53. More than patch up
 54. Leave unsaid
 55. Age blue jeans
 56. Cold confections
 57. “Nope”
 58. Mudder’s father
 61. Turf
Puzzle 97: Masterpiece!
Tough

221
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67

222
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. You may want more for 
your buck
 5. Well suited to the task
 10. Wimbledon score
 14. Get an ___ effort
 15. “Message received”
 16. Two-dimensional 
measure
 17. Place of Scarlett fever?
 18. Grouse
 19. Potatoes partner
 20. U
 23. Bambi’s mother
 24. Bummed
 25. Some Gillette razors
 28. Erie Canal mule, of song
 31. Showed concern
 35. Emulated Ederle
 36. Napoleon cousin
 38. June phrase, for many
 39. YOU
 42. It’s average for students
 43. Tranquility
 44. Make an artistic 
impression
 45. The Buckinghams hit, 
“Kind of ___”
 47. Suggested object for a 
tit for tat
 48. Toyota model
 49. Laughing substance
 51. Inner-tube innards 
 52. EWE
 60. Delivery at a nightclub
 61. Catchers do it
 62. Privy to
 63. One of the great wet 
ones
 64. Prevention measure?
 65. It may leave its mark
 66. Decimal units
 67. Doctor locator
 68. Backtalk
Down
 1. Mongol conqueror, 
Khan
 2. Like Churchill’s country
 3. Ibsen’s Doll
 4. Some Pontiacs
 5. Make a case
 6. Campus quarters
 7. Plate armor
 8. ___ up (energizes)
 9. Long baskets, in 
basketballese
 10. Greek letter
 11. Cookie often eaten 
inside out
 12. Piccata meat
 13. Don the feedbag
 21. One of the Cyclades
 22. PC shortcut
 25. Animal support org.
 26. Certain jacket
 27. Closer to extinction
 28. Land’s end?
 29. Pewter or brass
 30. Subscription 
termination
 32. Protests gone awry
 33. Draw out
 34. Hawaiian warbler
 36. Lansing-to-Flint dir.
 37. Fury
 40. Heart, but not soul
 41. Close call
 46. Is in sync
 48. Word with “sugar” or 
“cream”
 50. Bulletin board overseer
 51. Diet ad caption
 52. Party pooper
 53. Similar in nature
 54. Lung opening?
 55. It can help you reach 
the next level
 56. Bait fish
 57. Crooner Paul
 58. Clark’s colleague
 59. Partner of odds
 60. West Side Story gang 
member
Puzzle 98: Just Be U
Tough

223
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68

224
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Piglet’s mom
 4. Milan’s La ___
 9. Scarlett O’Hara, for one
 14. Rapa ___ (Easter Island)
 15. Weighty books
 16. Time partner
 17. SSTs once crossed it 
(Abbr.)
 18. Bakers, really
 19. Intimidated
 20. Dated “Darn!”
 23. Hidden
 24. Big Ten sch.
 25. Disencumber
 28. Child’s play
 30. Fried Japanese dish
 33. Skirt shape
 36. Catch
 38. Musical Copland
 39. Change of heart?
 43. Some waves
 44. “Scram!”
 45. Choice word
 46. Less lenient
 49. Source of a blast?
 51. It adds 10 to 8?
 52. Caribbean liquor
 54. Reciprocal
 58. Symbol of abundance
 61. Fabled fabulist
 64. Symbol of strength
 65. Partner of wide
 66. Regular writing
 67. Spanish diacritic
 68. Blind rage
 69. Not leftover
 70. Quite a bit
 71. “My country, ___ of thee”
Down
 1. Major malfunction
 2. ___ the open
 3. Uninhabited regions
 4. Swiped
 5. Formal agreement
 6. “My Cup Runneth Over” 
singer
 7. Slow, in music
 8. Lend a hand
 9. Forth partner
 10. Some may be gigantic in 
Hollywood
 11. Order partner
 12. Cypress Point 
placement
 13. Word with “tight” or 
“loose”
 21. Hopelessness
 22. Word with “ball” or 
“card”
 25. Bucolic
 26. Removes clotheslines?
 27. Divine poet?
 29. What golfers try to 
break
 31. Where you may be 
given some latitude?
 32. Color range
 33. Word with “saw” or “sea”
 34. Wax eloquent
 35. Dandy poet?
 37. Do a supermarket job
 40. Alternative to smoking?
 41. Tuck partner
 42. Bull rush?
 47. Blow it
 48. Seeks solace from
 50. Dour
 53. Unifying theme
 55. Ill-suited
 56. Arcade game pioneer
 57. Ancient instruments
 58. It may wind up on the 
side of a house
 59. Sesame starter
 60. Sensed
 61. King Kong, for one
 62. Distinctive time
 63. Lush
Puzzle 99: And the Band Played On
Tough

225
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71

226
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Leisurely stroll
 6. “Pipe down!”
 11. Serpent’s warning
 14. Beat
 15. Opera set in Rome
 16. Russian Blue, for 
example
 17. Clock radio feature
 19. Spanish river
 20. Schedule letters
 21. Perry’s creator
 22. River in New York state
 24. Beans go-with
 25. Short-tempered one
 26. Island country in the 
eastern Mediterranean 
Sea
 29. Easy mark, slangily
 30. Sign a new lease
 31. More robust
 32. Where Daniel was 
placed
 35. Some batteries
 36. Theme of this puzzle
 37. Came apart at the 
seams?
 38. Humorously ironic
 39. Brings under control, as 
a horse
 40. Liquor measures
 41. Clears a disk
 43. Lady Godiva got them
 44. It looks good when 
ripped
 46. ___ monde (high 
society)
 47. Intimate address
 48. Kind of insurance
 49. Blonde shade
 52. Hospital dept.
 53. Many look up to her 
in N.Y.
 56. Leg, in slang
 57. Where troops camp 
after a day’s march
 58. Advantage
 59. Crystal ball, for 
example
 60. The Magnificent ___
 61. Shorelines do it
Down
 1. Mug for the camera
 2. Jemima or Millie
 3. Greek promenade
 4. Tokyo, long ago
 5. Seep slowly, as ketchup 
from a bottle
 6. Celery unit
 7. Deep impression
 8. Surfin’ locale of song
 9. Christmas season 
grumps
 10. Popular house pet
 11. Mosquito season need
 12. Steppe antelope
 13. Offered one’s seat
 18. Flubs it
 23. Doctor of sci-fi
 24. Veep’s superior
 25. Components of rolling 
landscapes
 26. Bird’s pouch
 27. Wine connoisseur’s 
concern
 28. Acted as if one was in 
the dark
 29. Looks inferior by 
comparison
 31. Macho guys
 33. Harper’s Bazaar 
illustrator
 34. Robert Stack role
 36. Standard amount, as 
interest
 37. “How do you like ___?!”
 39. South of the border 
orders
 40. Trip and almost fall
 42. Caviar, for example
 43. Delhi dress
 44. Spanish friend
Puzzle 100: Ringing in the Ears
Tough

227
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
 45. One way to get around 
town
 46. Troy beauty
 48. Eschew the mouse
 49. Fleece-bearing craft
 50. Type of diamond 
earring
 51. Exaggerated publicity
 54. Org. for warwounded
 55. Suffix with “rocket” or 
“profit”

228
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Duck Soup brother
 6. Hook alternatives
 10. ___ mater
 14. Chili-hotness unit
 15. Surface extent
 16. Hamburger grade
 17. Change careers, for 
example
 20. Barely conceal one’s 
anger
 21. Clapping animal
 22. Symbol of easiness
 23. Acerb
 25. Done up in braids
 27. Like Granny Daisy Moses
 30. Certain Badge color
 32. Northern diving bird
 33. Coaching great 
Parseghian
 34. Irritated
 36. Printed goofs
 40. Try again
 43. Become unsteady 
applying lipstick
 44. Stats for hats
 45. Old cloth measure
 46. Chester White’s home
 48. New York athlete
 49. Baited a trooper
 50. War memorials, for 
example
 54. Emptied a barrel?
 56. Dawn personified
 57. Violist’s clef
 59. Develop over time
 63. Begin anew
 66. Pre-owned
 67. Two-tone snack
 68. Found pleasant
 69. Gardening supplies
 70. The Absent-Minded 
Professor actor Keenan
 71. Contents of some 
packets
Down
 1. Actors who mug
 2. Aves have them
 3. Autumn tool
 4. “___ Woman” (Orbison 
tune)
 5. Brando’s birthplace
 6. It holds the mayo?
 7. Iliad figure
 8. Assailed on all sides
 9. Arid area in Africa
 10. PC keyboard key
 11. Bounds companion
 12. An Osmond
 13. Pitched in, and got a 
hand
 18. Rabbit chaser
 19. Holmes and Chan, 
for two
 24. State number 28
 26. Terrier breed
 27. Hangs heavy
 28. Proper partner
 29. Carry on wildly
 31. The best overall 
material?
 34. Type of reality
 35. Catches a few winks
 37. Attend Andover, for 
example
 38. Let one know you’re 
interested
 39. Completely convinced
 41. Word with “Anglia” or 
“Berlin”
 42. Restraint
 47. Green component
 49. Prop for George Burns
 50. Arrange, as a blind date
 51. Ruin of a statue, 
perhaps
 52. Heretofore
 53. Building level
 55. Deformed circles
 58. Where one’s goose is 
cooked?
 60. One place to get fresh 
water
 61. Contended
 62. Wraps up
 64. Some paper rectangles
 65. Period of many years
Puzzle 101: Keep Trying
Tough

229
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71

230
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Adenoidal
 6. Short-winded
 11. X-ray cousin
 14. “Be-Bop-___” (Gene 
Vincent hit)
 15. Perceived by the ear
 16. Auric’s creator
 17. Strenuous exertion
 19. Set afire
 20. Carreras, for one
 21. Tax type
 23. When DST begins
 25. Kind of cheese
 28. Rider’s handful
 29. Thumb (through)
 31. Snoop
 34. House & Garden topic
 36. Word with “chuck” or 
“covered”
 37. Being tested or tried
 40. Grammy winner 
Manchester
 44. Ancient Hebrew 
prophet
 46. Dud on wheels
 47. Assent without action
 52. What Babe Ruth was, 
sometimes
 53. Feverish chill
 54. Java emanation
 56. Bad thing to break
 57. “I don’t believe my 
eyes!”
 60. Word with “basin” or 
“wave”
 62. Fingerlings-to-be
 63. Pedestrian shoppers
 68. Bard’s before
 69. Two to one, for one
 70. Noted game show 
announcer
 71. Paced the field
 72. Time after time
 73. Lovers’ rendezvous
Down
 1. Glasgow turn-down
 2. One hundred percent
 3. Take away
 4. Burn balm
 5. Some bowling sites
 6. Bodega setting, perhaps
 7. Quebec street
 8. Keogh relative
 9. Alleviate
 10. Show muscle?
 11. Environment
 12. Cookie addition, 
perhaps
 13. Denote or connote
 18. Word with “evening” or 
“night”
 22. Political pals
 23. Tough-guy actor Ray
 24. Claw alternative
 26. Chicago-to-Memphis dir.
 27. It’s in stitches
 30. Emulate Cassandra
 32. Get more mature
 33. Turn over and over
 35. Work up
 38. Cause of inflation
 39. Hawaiian bubbly?
 41. Pip-squeak
 42. Couch potato’s place
 43. With a clean slate
 45. Title for Arthur Conan 
Doyle
 47. Hardy partner
 48. Pay no heed to
 49. Put through a blender
 50. T-shirt material
 51. Kuwaiti head
 55. Rewrite for Hollywood
 58. Voluminous do
 59. Lounge around
 61. Off in the distance
 64. Baseball great Mel
 65. Casual Friday castoff
 66. Bouncers read them
 67. Barracks bed
Puzzle 102: Parts of the Body
Tough

231
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73

232
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. ___ and all (as is)
 6. Draw in
 10. Word of hearty 
concurrence
 14. Ready for anything
 15. Made cheddar better
 16. Sheltered spot
 17. Weathercaster’s tool
 18. Plug in the mouth
 19. Delineated
 20. Gifted child’s 
performance, perhaps
 23. Compass heading
 24. On a roll
 25. Star of the rotation
 28. Tang anagram
 31. Tyrannous type
 36. Apple or pear
 38. Face-to-face exam
 40. Alan Ladd classic
 41. Some are unsuitable for 
children
 44. “Uncle!”
 45. Grain storage locale
 46. Give a hand?
 47. Ogles
 49. Hebrides hats
 51. Resort in the Ardennes
 52. It has a wet floor
 54. NASA thumbs-up
 56. Construction 
superintendent’s 
nightmare
 65. Auspicious
 66. Wart cause, in folklore
 67. Private preceptor
 68. Assures, in slang
 69. “Not ___ many words”
 70. Chopin piece
 71. Urbane fellow
 72. Dear partner?
 73. Compensate
Down
 1. Star Trek speed
 2. Apple treatment, once
 3. Change the look of
 4. Word with “secret” or 
“school”
 5. Kind of bikini
 6. Full of frills
 7. Sounds of disgust
 8. Arm’s length
 9. Depp role
 10. Current choice
 11. Oliver Twist’s request
 12. From now on
 13. Ex-speaker’s name
 21. Salami city
 22. 1998 headline event in 
India
 25. Doctor repellent?
 26. Comic “Professor” 
Irwin ___
 27. Get melodramatic
 29. Two of all fours
 30. Unspoken
 32. Tool repository
 33. Glass squares
 34. Ready for use
 35. Current wizard
 37. Poacher’s needs?
 39. Marlene Dietrich role in 
Blue Angel
 42. Play reveille
 43. Start of a Donne quote
 48. Jelly ingredient
 50. More malleable
 53. Words before “time” or 
“another”
 55. Fonda-Sutherland film
 56. Libertine’s opposite
 57. Wedding shower?
 58. Candid
 59. Wisecrack
 60. Hombre’s dwelling
 61. Landfill problem
 62. Words with “live” or 
“give”
 63. Sonata finale
 64. Part of a low straight
Puzzle 103: PC
Tough

233
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73

234
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Distinctive clothing
 5. A lot, for many?
 9. Ignominy
 14. Lotion lily
 15. Timely blessing
 16. Word with “cap,” “bear,” 
or “Regions”
 17. Discovery zone?
 19. Place setting?
 20. Minor planet
 21. Manet or Monet, for 
example
 22. You can dig it
 23. Caesar’s penultimate 
words
 24. Exorcist’s adversary
 28. Ignore, as an insult
 33. Wear away, as 
popularity
 34. James of The Godfather
 35. Red or White baseball 
team
 36. Quote
 37. Squatter’s right
 39. Miss Kitty’s friend
 40. Outstanding tennis 
serve
 41. Head of 42-Across
 42. Stout cousin
 43. To be classified as
 46. Word with “soap” or 
“grand”
 47. Greek god of war
 48. Last qtr. kickoff
 50. Loud and blaring
 53. Type of relationship
 58. Up the ante
 59. Mythical place where 
sleep is paramount
 60. Pearl Mosque country
 61. The Grapes of Wrath 
character
 62. Horsewhip
 63. Ford failure
 64. Took advantage of
 65. “Auld Lang ___”
Down
 1. Type of affair
 2. Shakespearean 
“Bummer!”
 3. Decisive defeat
 4. “Stand By Me” singer 
___ King
 5. More than dislike
 6. Workplace fixture
 7. Hope/Crosby film title 
word
 8. Windup
 9. Marked by frugality
 10. Spa amenity
 11. “___ want for Christmas 
is . . .”
 12. The Valachi Papers 
author Peter
 13. Formerly, formerly
 18. Old hag
 21. Special Forces unit
 23. Actor Morales
 24. Coffee type, briefly
 25. Fear of Fifty writer Jong
 26. Psycho setting
 27. Horatian creation
 29. Caesar’s “veni”
 30. Midwest native
 31. Campaign target
 32. More than required
 37. Rock rabbit
 38. Young men
 39. Where X marks the spot
 41. Marine mammal
 42. State revenue generator
 44. Timmy’s pal
 45. Former White House 
nickname
 49. Handed over
 50. Soft cheese
 51. The Fountainhead 
novelist Ayn
 52. Pitches in
 53. Tara’s neighbor, 
Twelve ___
 54. Does in, mob-style
 55. Word of exclusivity
 56. When two hands meet?
 57. What trained athletes 
look for
 59. Bud’s partner
Puzzle 104: Take Off
Tough

235
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65

236
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Operatic villains, often
 6. Bit of a tiff
 10. Oration location
 14. Sneak ___ (look quickly)
 15. Mark’s successor?
 16. Early South American
 17. Yukon hero
 20. Jack London sailor
 21. Tick’s cousin
 22. Dry with a twist
 23. Tater topper, perhaps
 25. Elation
 27. Good, on the street
 30. Bring to a boil?
 32. Skip a turn
 36. Diminish, in a way
 38. Commandment 
violation
 39. Mezzo’s colleague
 40. Medical soap?
 44. 1961 chimp in space
 45. Precious eggs
 46. At pique’s peak?
 47. Tropical root
 48. Dis
 51. Do followers on a music 
scale
 52. Starring role
 54. Small paving stone
 56. Bit of broccoli
 59. Wife of Charlie Chaplin
 61. Be a little hoarse
 65. Long-running kid’s 
show
 68. The African Queen 
screenwriter
 69. First name in game 
show production
 70. Neptune’s realm
 71. Marsh plant
 72. Say grace
 73. Feature on an old 
Lincoln?
Down
 1. Camden Yards marker
 2. Followed suit
 3. Withering
 4. Musical repeat sign
 5. Musician Turner
 6. Junior’s namesake
 7. Minor stroke
 8. Chord whose notes 
are played in rapid 
succession
 9. Rocky peak
 10. Condition of needing to 
be fixed
 11. Member of the 
opposition
 12. Elvis, to many
 13. Ratted, in mob lingo
 18. Preacher’s closing
 19. Meadow mother
 24. Stare amorously
 26. Telescope piece
 27. Procreate, biblically
 28. Sphere of competition
 29. Generous sort
 31. Fire proof?
 33. Setting for a bachelor’s 
last day
 34. Washington, for one
 35. Pumps have them
 37. Depopulated
 41. La Scala show-stopper
 42. Tube patron
 43. Brad of Hollywood
 49. Seabees’ branch of the 
military
 50. Like Jack Sprat’s diet
 53. Notable time
 55. Slightest evidence
 56. Rhinoplasty reminder
 57. Capitol Hill worker
 58. Cousin of a foil
 60. Gumbo pod
 62. ___ code
 63. Fly high
 64. Fishing hole, perhaps
 66. Street urchin
 67. Whipped cream serving
Puzzle 105: What’s Your Rank?
Tough

237
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73

238
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Arabian Nights flying 
creature
 4. Agenda contents
 9. Pie choice
 14. Santa ___, Calif.
 15. What the Beatles 
inspired
 16. Battery terminal
 17. N.Y.C. subway
 18. It features catkins
 20. Second-longest human 
bone
 22. Most microscopic
 23. Important business to 
many states
 26. Boxing officials, briefly
 27. Establish a better 
foothold, as with plants
 29. Miniature golf club
 33. Special-interest grp.
 35. Kama ___
 37. First name in hoteliers
 38. Part of a tooth or 
orange
 40. Participant in a 
confidence game
 42. Give off, as rays
 43. Turn swords into 
plowshares, for example
 45. Beverages from Japan
 47. Audiophile’s stack
 48. Daytime showing
 50. Very energetic person
 52. Jagged rock
 54. Type of egg
 57. Precipitating in winter, 
in a way
 61. Impolite looker
 62. Diagonally
 65. Bit of financial planning, 
for short
 66. Loud, as the surf
 67. Delicate purple
 68. Little bit of liquor
 69. Strong tastes or 
pungent odors
 70. Fix firmly in place
 71. Wait partner
Down
 1. “Nick of Time” singer 
Bonnie
 2. Blame It ___ (Michael 
Caine film)
 3. Sneaky thief
 4. Makes inoperable
 5. Athenian T
 6. Nearly half of 99?
 7. Atomizer output
 8. Nay follower
 9. Sore
 10. Volunteer recruit
 11. Merry king
 12. Commotions
 13. Colorful amphibian
 19. What to do after you 
“read ’em”
 21. Dander
 24. Old French coins
 25. Emperors in the closet?
 28. Three-tone chord
 30. Mixologist’s creation, 
perhaps
 31. National Velvet author 
Bagnold
 32. Exterminator’s targets, 
sometimes
 33. Musical composition
 34. Ancient alphabetic 
character
 36. Substance used in 
adhesives and paints
 39. Place to check for a 
markdown
 41. What an actor may flub
 44. Sufferers for causes
 46. Took pleasure in
 49. Worldly rather than 
spiritual
 51. Russian fighter
 53. Dwarf of fable
 55. Macabre
 56. Hang loosely
 57. Three-handed card 
game
 58. Italian coin of old
 59. College on the Thames
 60. Metric system unit
 63. Pencil stump
 64. Halloween, to All Saints’ 
Day
Puzzle 106: Finding Felines
Tough

239
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71

240
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Cotton seed pod
 5. Individual
 10. Confession confessions
 14. Vicinity
 15. City on the Ruhr
 16. Medicinal plant
 17. Difficult spot
 20. The first of September?
 21. Cultivates, perhaps
 22. Steinway product
 23. Tailless feline
 24. Not as spicy
 26. Show up
 29. Pirate treasure
 30. Cannery Row character
 31. Spiral-shelled gastropod
 32. Sanford and ___
 35. Words after “Well, ain’t 
that”
 39. Something to do for the 
camera
 40. Hack’s passengers
 41. Comes to the rescue
 42. Worked diligently
 43. Respectful gesture
 45. Rabbit ears
 48. Towel word
 49. Inclination
 50. Starship hit
 51. Hardwood variety
 54. Equally unattractive 
choices
 58. Piece of fencing?
 59. Paycheck
 60. It might wind up on a 
lake?
 61. Geeky guy
 62. Clear the board
 63. Baxter of The Ten 
Commandments
Down
 1. Pedestal part
 2. Food scraps
 3. Souvenirs with scents
 4. Lancelot du ___ (knight 
of the Round Table)
 5. Over and above
 6. English county on the 
Thames
 7. Egyptian goddess
 8. Shrimp snare
 9. Large African antelope
 10. Lustrous and smooth
 11. Story of Achilles
 12. Nary a soul
 13. Tijuana title
 18. Mongol chieftain
 19. Unconcern
 23. Malicious
 24. Adherences
 25. Out of one’s mind
 26. Rodin sculpture
 27. Bean curd food
 28. Math course, for short
 29. Showed 
obsequiousness
 31. Nuclear reactor parts
 32. Word with “monkey” or 
“birthday”
 33. Race track figures
 34. Meddlesome
 36. Some score notes
 37. Flag Alex Rieger’s 
vehicle
 38. Galley gear
 42. Held to the mat
 43. Cherry red
 44. Asian range
 45. Drained of color
 46. Split to unite
 47. Not as well-done
 48. Charon’s underworld
 50. The Forsytes had one
 51. Sign for a seeress
 52. Last word in Bibles
 53. Leafy greens
 55. IOU component
 56. Kind of cry
 57. Historic time
Puzzle 107: Problems, Problems
Tough

241
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63

242
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Glaswegian headgear
 5. Flat-bottomed freight 
boat
 10. Tasty paste
 14. Berth place
 15. Judge’s decision, 
sometimes
 16. German industrial 
valley
 17. Growth-regulating spray
 18. Migratory tribesman
 19. School founded by King 
Henry VI
 20. Fighter of yore
 23. Work period
 24. Farm machinery 
company
 25. The Gold Coast, now
 28. Coastline feature
 32. First houseboat
 35. Republic in southern 
Asia
 38. Tropical fruits
 41. Gracefully agile
 42. Florida national park
 44. Word in the society 
pages
 45. Stairway post
 46. Part of a willing trio
 49. Brainy bunch
 52. Russian spirit?
 56. Useful items for 
painters
 60. Edible tubes
 61. Maker of cameras and 
copiers
 62. Black, in verse
 63. Seamus Heaney’s land
 64. On twos, rather than 
fours
 65. Point-to-point 
connector
 66. Mysterious loch
 67. Tend to a loose 
shoelace
 68. Gang follower?
Down
 1. Former Winter Palace 
residents
 2. Distribute 
proportionately
 3. Home of the Heat
 4. Bounded
 5. Explosive sound
 6. Too far off base?
 7. Sacred Islamic month
 8. Evaluate eggs, for 
example
 9. Leave It to Beaver 
character
 10. Puts on an act
 11. Train alternative
 12. Norse god of thunder
 13. South end?
 21. To the ___ degree
 22. Cantata vocal solos
 26. Famous murder victim
 27. They were responsible 
for finding Atlantis?
 29. Revolutionary Trotsky
 30. For ___ – With Love and 
Squalor
 31. Quaker pronoun
 32. The last word in 
worship
 33. Enthusiastic review
 34. Was acquainted with
 36. Type of singing club
 37. Da Vinci model
 39. 1984 comic horror film
 40. Gave the twice-over
 43. Jack Webb show
 47. Home entertainment 
system component
 48. Sings in peak form?
 50. Miss Congeniality, 
compared to the others
 51. Part of a drummer’s kit
 53. Bookkeeper’s entry
 54. Danish coin
 55. Moore’s TV editor
 56. Marshmallow toaster’s 
necessity
 57. He gave us a lift
 58. Centers of great activity
 59. Poker buy-in
 60. Branch of Buddhism
Puzzle 108: Glad Inside
Tough

243
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68

244
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Recurrent theme
 6. Capital of Manche
 10. Lofty peaks
 14. “Maria ___” (Dorsey 
tune)
 15. Use the maxilla and 
mandible
 16. Bring exasperation
 17. Printing technique
 19. Fastening item
 20. Fa-la link on a musical 
scale
 21. Terms of enlistment
 22. Place for hope?
 23. Demonstration site, 
1965
 24. Blackball
 25. Be agreeable
 28. Children’s classic
 32. Phony deal
 33. ___ Raymond Cobb of 
baseball fame
 34. Sixth word of the 
Gettysburg Address
 35. Meet, as expectations
 38. Lacking zest
 40. First name in cotton gins
 41. Nixon’s undoing
 43. Editing mark
 44. “Charge of the Light 
Brigade” poet
 46. Mushroom cells
 48. Lose freshness, as 
lettuce
 49. Crocodile drops?
 51. Lightweight fabric
 53. Down Under dog
 54. “Breastwork”
 57. Sudden transition
 58. White-scutted creature
 60. Roofer’s concern
 61. Give wolfish looks
 62. Set apart as sacred
 63. Frankfurt’s river
 64. Cold one
 65. Wax eloquent
Down
 1. Army chow
 2. Vaudeville shtick
 3. Break the news
 4. It looks good on paper
 5. Secure, in a way
 6. Rugby formation
 7. Psychologist’s 
prescription
 8. Bottom-of-the-barrel 
stuff
 9. Have exclusively
 10. Literary king
 11. Writer’s supply, 
perhaps
 12. “And . . .”
 13. Paving stone
 18. Belmont entry
 22. Game believed to be of 
Indian origin
 23. Truck stop sight
 24. Cause to be immobile
 25. Thing of value
 26. Deli counter item
 27. Interlacing technique
 29. Goddess with a golden 
apple
 30. Light on one’s feet
 31. Bumps on a log
 33. What thsi is
 36. Counterpart of 
substance
 37. Eschew edibles
 39. Wedding vows
 42. Give the right to
 45. His Master’s Voice 
pooch
 46. Pudding base
 47. In nothing flat
 50. “Come in!”
 51. Singer Laine
 52. Do one of the three R’s
 53. Former Genoese 
magistrate
 54. Ali ___ and the 40 
Thieves
 55. Wild disorder
 56. ___ vera (lotion plant)
 58. Corn-eater’s throwaway
 59. Adhesive for feathers
Puzzle 109: Material World
Tough

245
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65

246
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. One of the Marx 
brothers
 6. QED verb
 10. Depletes
 14. Group of Coral islands
 15. Jazz singer Horne
 16. ___ Mountains (Eurasia 
divider)
 17. Vatican-related
 18. Jeopardy! first name
 19. Animal ethics org.
 20. Sound advice for 
fishermen
 23. Cracker’s focus
 26. Result of a witch’s 
hocus-pocus
 27. Clear the boards
 28. Went silent (with “up”)
 30. Obsessive whaler of 
fiction
 32. Not just feuding
 33. Page with views, briefly
 34. Turndowns
 37. Sound advice for 
rowing crews
 41. Snake’s sibilant sound
 42. Some retirement accts.
 43. Crimea conference 
attended by Churchill
 44. Lugosi’s Son of 
Frankenstein role
 45. Tax loophole
 47. Wife of Abraham
 50. Consumed consomme
 51. Study surface
 52. Sound advice for deck 
hands
 56. Hip to
 57. Reverse, as a typo
 58. Billionaire with a book 
club
 62. Possessive declaration
 63. Naval rum
 64. Blue-blooded
 65. Defendant, to a juror
 66. Bronte’s Jane
 67. Avocet’s cousin
Down
 1. Last sound some bugs 
hear
 2. Schedule letters
 3. Weasel sound?
 4. Diner souvenir
 5. Bulging earthenware 
vessel
 6. Tickled pink
 7. Partner of sit back
 8. From scratch
 9. Urban conveyance
 10. First-rate
 11. Site for Globetrotters
 12. Cracker spreads
 13. Party’s pick
 21. “Thar ___ blows!”
 22. Nickname for a 
sharpshooter
 23. Hordes
 24. Some hers singing 
hymns?
 25. Gushes (over)
 29. He’s out there, 
hopefully
 30. Appropriate
 31. Cynical laugh sound
 33. Green-lights
 34. Cape Fear star
 35. “Maneater” duo Hall 
and ___
 36. Kind of contrast
 38. ___ y Plata (Montana 
motto)
 39. Jam ingredient?
 40. Unmopped area?
 44. Tedious affair
 45. Shemp, for one
 46. Like cool cats
 47. Pinch pennies
 48. Broadway orphan
 49. Wide World of Sports 
creator Arledge
 50. Gusto
 53. Unusually large
 54. Professor ’iggins, to 
Eliza Doolittle
 55. Billion-year increments
 59. A homer provides at 
least one
 60. Alternative to nothing
 61. Riled (up)
Puzzle 110: On the Sea
Tough

247
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67

248
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Lava forerunner
 6. Sneak ___ (look quickly)
 11. TV watchdog
 14. Stern with a bow
 15. Painter Matisse or 
Rousseau
 16. Result of raising 
hackles
 17. Workshop machine 
invented by Tabitha 
Babbitt
 19. Bled in the laundry
 20. Legal right of passage
 21. Least at risk
 23. Finish
 24. Lacking natural light
 25. Straighten, in a way
 29. Satellite radio name
 30. They serve up 
whoppers
 31. First ruler of all Egypt
 32. El ___ (Spanish hero)
 35. Plot size, perhaps
 36. Shows concern
 37. Moon shot org.
 38. Pen tip
 39. 20 Mule Team product
 40. One of Snow White’s 
seven
 41. Slanted type
 43. Grumpy “old” men
 44. Honeymooners star
 46. In good shape
 47. St. John’s player
 48. Degas subject
 53. “Long, Long ___”
 54. Typist’s fluid invented 
by Bette Nesmith 
Graham
 56. Kilmer of Batman 
Forever
 57. Tease
 58. Base eight system
 59. Building wing
 60. Flounder through water
 61. This and that
Down
 1. Of ___ and Men
 2. Large land mass
 3. Needlefishes
 4. Nutmeg-based spice
 5. Insights
 6. Lend ___ (help)
 7. Impudent
 8. Printer’s measures
 9. Blackboard deletions
 10. Community group since 
1915
 11. Lifesaving invention of 
Anna Connelly
 12. Uncouth
 13. Word on a nickel
 18. Give for a while
 22. Type of vaccine
 24. Vicks spray brand
 25. ___ Bator
 26. Heading on Santa’s list
 27. Ruth Handler’s 
invention that girls love
 28. Before, poetically
 29. Block of ice on a glacier
 31. Actor Cheech
 33. A Cosby show
 34. Fortnight’s 14
 36. Pre-Revolutionary 
period
 37. Faultfinder
 39. Volcanic rocks
 40. Popular club
 42. Scottish topper
 43. Real bargain
 44. Final resting place
 45. Corporate department
 46. Hope and charity 
partner
 48. Presses for cash
 49. Apiece
 50. Words with “the 
minute” or “no good”
 51. Seven on a map
 52. First name in 
courtroom drama
 55. “___ Vadis”
Puzzle 111: Mother of Invention?
Tough

249
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61

250
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Capital of Ghana
 6. Not proximately
 10. Farmer’s yield
 14. One a’courting
 15. Pickling veggie
 16. General feel
 17. Made a boo-boo
 18. Meal with mutton
 20. Blind alley, for example
 22. Carson’s sidekick
 23. Large ocean vessel
 24. Who’s Who entry
 25. Whispered call
 27. Dangerous emission
 29. Cook’s meas.
 33. Actor Sir McKellen
 34. Comic canine
 35. Popular garden flower
 37. It’s fit for a queen
 39. Major broadcaster
 41. Singer Rimes
 42. Capital that replaced 
Istanbul
 44. Word with “horse” or 
“human”
 46. Garfield or Morris
 47. Watch part
 48. Fabric pattern
 50. Biathlon gear
 51. Candied tuber
 52. Abhorrence
 54. Highlight
 58. Bureaucratic runaround
 61. 1990s campaigner
 63. German pistol
 64. “Lonely Boy” singer 
Paul
 65. Eye desirously
 66. Susan Lucci role
 67. SALT I signer
 68. Network signal
 69. Knocks to the canvas
Down
 1. Made one’s jaw drop
 2. Seedy place?
 3. Colorful slitherer
 4. Make additional 
corrections
 5. Our Miss Brooks star
 6. Harmful downfall
 7. PETA peeve
 8. With hands on hips and 
elbows bent outward
 9. Cancel, as a law
 10. Cuban’s house
 11. Babe that’s famous
 12. Popular cookie since 
1912
 13. Expendable chess piece
 19. Med. group
 21. Unlikely prom king
 25. They’re pocketed in 
delis
 26. New Orleans athlete
 28. Actress Winger
 29. “T” in “GWTW”
 30. Sorcery
 31. Biblical mountain
 32. Suit part
 34. Low-tech propeller
 36. Steak and ___
 38. Zodiac creature
 40. Frolicked
 43. Informed about
 45. Hand over
 49. Come forth
 50. Hospital stitch
 51. Uh-huh
 53. Ran in neutral
 54. German Mrs.
 55. Many, many millennia
 56. Seeks permission
 57. Russian Revolution 
victim
 59. Eight quarts
 60. Historical periods
 62. Grand ___ Opry
Puzzle 112: Sea to Shining Sea
Tough

251
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69

252
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Aeries, for example
 6. Something to bank on
 9. Hoity-toity type
 13. Silas Marner novelist 
George
 14. Crow
 16. Hand over
 17. Orphaned boy of 
comics
 18. Type of type
 19. First name among the 
Cheers cast
 20. Tomatoes
 23. Fallopian tube travelers
 25. Watch chain
 26. Commotion
 27. Lettuce
 31. “. . . the ___ of defeat”
 32. Third largest city in 
South Korea
 33. “Hogwash!”
 36. Enticement
 37. Like two of Beethoven’s 
symphonies
 38. Cello music marking
 39. Poker option
 40. Like the Smoky 
Mountains
 42. Search high and low
 43. Pickles
 45. Even though
 48. Preposition in poetry
 49. Zuider ___
 50. Mustard
 54. Snip a snap
 55. Plunder
 56. Lady’s beau
 59. Authentic
 60. Like a fashionable 
arrival
 61. British actress 
Samantha
 62. Prelude to a deal, 
perhaps
 63. Word with “flung” or 
“fetched”
 64. Plow pioneer
Down
 1. Beatty in Network
 2. “Don’t Bring Me Down” 
rock band
 3. Destination of the first 
Hope/Crosby “Road” 
picture
 4. Well-___ (wealthy)
 5. Utilize a wok
 6. Fit
 7. The Andrews Sisters, 
for example
 8. Ginobili of the NBA
 9. Theater hangings
 10. Jacket of the ’60s
 11. The Life of Riley 
character
 12. Admirer of Beauty
 15. Attend sans date
 21. Part of TGIF
 22. Revered leader
 23. Some gemstones
 24. Ambiguous
 28. Elmira-to-Syracuse dir.
 29. Hawaiian island
 30. Where many doubles 
land
 33. Early period of 
civilization
 34. Like some angles
 35. Centaur, in part
 38. Biggest diamond
 40. Facial contortion
 41. Spin the same yarn
 42. Did refinery work
 43. Streisand classic
 44. ___ de Triomphe
 45. Port city of Ghana
 46. Filmdom’s Sophia
 47. Puff up, as an ego
 51. Plenty of bread
 52. Very small amount
 53. Egg on
 57. Scratch the surface?
 58. “View” start
Puzzle 113: The Works
Tough

253
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64

254
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. “Arrivederci ___”
 5. Pythias’ partner
 10. Sheffield stroller
 14. ___ Bator, Mongolia
 15. The Life of ___ Zola
 16. Philbin’s sidekick
 17. Big top B’s
 20. Terrestrial amphibian
 21. Hit bottom
 22. Where to begin 
negotiating from
 23. Give way
 24. Charged atoms
 26. B’s on the table
 32. Music to a comic’s ears
 33. It lands at Ben Gurion
 34. Bale fodder
 35. Checked out
 36. Herculean types
 38. Gael’s language
 39. Balderdash
 40. Place for an ace
 41. Does the get-away 
driving, for example
 42. B’s 1948 Oscar-winning 
song
 46. Double-curved molding
 47. Mediterranean gulf
 48. Pleasant scent
 51. “___ plaisir!”
 52. Type of station
 55. B’s roadside stop
 59. Give off
 60. Antelope with twisted 
horns
 61. Song for Madama 
Butterfly
 62. Rat Pack nickname
 63. Map collection
 64. Roentgen discovery
Down
 1. Hayseed
 2. Scandinavian name
 3. K follower
 4. Abby’s twin
 5. Strong request
 6. Kitty of Gunsmoke
 7. Ritzy wrap
 8. Timeworn
 9. Bird’s honker
 10. A man of the cloth
 11. Provoke
 12. Mimicked
 13. Baseball’s “Say Hey 
Kid”
 18. “___ directed” (Rx 
order)
 19. Void, as a marriage 
certificate
 23. It’s drawn with a rifle?
 24. Not up to anything
 25. Firth of Lorn resort
 26. Marshy arm
 27. Gable role
 28. Ancient Greek games 
site
 29. Hurled
 30. Some bridge players
 31. Food grains
 32. Parsley or peppermint, 
for example
 36. Make perfect, as one’s 
skills
 37. “Anything ___?”
 38. Dark, poetically
 40. Incredible Hulk?
 41. Sternward
 43. Pizza paste
 44. Nine days of services
 45. Doesn’t look forward to
 48. Tucked in
 49. Do followers
 50. Frigg’s husband
 51. Asian salt sea
 52. She had a Tootsie role
 53. Where the Amur flows
 54. Reprieve from the 
governor
 56. Fed watchdog
 57. Short order?
 58. Office staple
Puzzle 114: B Hive
Tough

255
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64

256
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Pincushion alternative
 5. Rajiv Gandhi’s 
grandfather
 10. Slightly open
 14. Former German capital
 15. In great haste, at sea
 16. Drawn fish
 17. Love-in-a-mist bouquet
 19. Hit the ground
 20. Lounging locale
 21. Love of life
 22. Club that sings
 23. Smoke detector
 25. Off the beaten track
 27. Veto
 30. Cast of characters?
 34. Stat that’s good 
when low
 35. “Stormy Weather” 
singer
 37. End, in the Bible
 38. Word with “base” or 
“summer”
 40. It’s removed by a 
stripper
 42. Cutty ___ (historic ship)
 43. Sure-footed creatures
 45. The Love Boat 
employee
 47. Old name preceder
 48. Security feature
 50. Cockscombs
 52. Child’s reward, perhaps
 53. Proper word, at times
 54. Tableland
 56. Muse of history
 59. Humidified
 63. Czech runner Zatopek
 64. Term of endearment
 66. Without self-control
 67. Massey of old movies
 68. You can stick with it?
 69. Turns into leather
 70. Fine and ___
 71. Powerful emotion
Down
 1. Goes back to sea?
 2. Track tipster
 3. “___ Thee Oh Lord”
 4. Vocalize, as in James 
Earl Jones
 5. Veep under G.R.F.
 6. One who runs the show
 7. Heist tally
 8. Gifford’s successor
 9. Open, as a change 
purse
 10. Word games
 11. Reagan’s love
 12. Tahiti sweetie
 13. Memorization method
 18. Historic time
 24. Telegram punctuation
 26. One of the five W’s
 27. Go over again
 28. Do blackboard duty
 29. Impromptu jazz 
performance
 30. Cookie flavoring
 31. See 35-Across
 32. Plume’s source
 33. Confiscates
 36. Guard on the deck
 39. Morale builders
 41. Sandwich with a crunch
 44. Doo-wop syllable
 46. Morsel
 49. Greenhouse plant
 51. “Stop it!”
 53. “. . . with ___ in sight”
 54. Food group
 55. 1816 Jane Austen novel
 57. Singer Falana
 58. Barge ___ (interrupt)
 60. To Live and Die ___ 
(1985)
 61. Bunny tail
 62. “Of ___ I sing”
 65. “Yippee!”
Puzzle 115: Toasty
Tough

257
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71

258
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Put in a snit
 5. Suffer from self-pity
 9. Dropped in importance
 14. ___ Fjord (inlet of the 
Skagerrak)
 15. In business right now
 16. Accustom to hardship
 17. Beer-swilling sailor?
 20. Just put on the market
 21. Wampum in Yemen
 22. Assists
 23. Ones going through a 
stage?
 24. Clinic or spread
 25. Participate in a limping 
contest?
 32. Shampoos tell you to 
do it twice
 33. Coffee variety
 34. Offer
 35. Forget to include
 36. The time of one’s life?
 37. Summoned the butler, 
for example
 38. Detectives, for short
 39. Measly problem?
 41. Italian bowling game
 42. Trips on some garden 
tools?
 46. First-rate
 47. Oxford feeder
 48. Foam
 50. Potato holder
 51. Word on either side 
of “-a-”
 54. Like Dick Button?
 57. Transform
 58. Pout
 59. The Little Red Hen denial
 60. Is ahead
 61. Doesn’t shut up
 62. Hog filler
Down
 1. Groan associate
 2. Wight, for one
 3. Rode the wind
 4. Watch pocket
 5. In the current fashion 
or style
 6. Poppy plant derivative
 7. Lime cover
 8. Keyboard key
 9. Blotto
 10. Not digital, as a watch
 11. Group (together)
 12. Memorable times
 13. Home of the cubs
 18. Speak pompously, for 
example
 19. Disgrace
 23. Dermatologist’s concern
 24. Riot-subduing stuff
 25. Stage objects
 26. Constrain
 27. Spice for absinthe
 28. Traffic signal
 29. One way to be taken
 30. Slice and dice
 31. Borders
 36. Adolescent affliction
 37. Multihued horse
 39. Some similar chemical 
compounds
 40. Buffed
 41. Tamed, as a horse
 43. Stopped
 44. Intensify
 45. Engraves
 48. Fish entree
 49. Middle Eastern bread
 50. Ancient Greek 
colonnade
 51. 16th-century stringed 
instrument
 52. Engrossed with
 53. Hop-jump connector
 54. Buddy
 55. Dickens’s Little Dorrit
 56. They may administer IVs
Puzzle 116: B Exterminator
Tough

259
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62

260
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Part of DJ
 5. Dazzling display
 10. International 
marketplace
 14. Kings Peak locale
 15. Looking-glass girl
 16. Collapsed under 
pressure
 17. Melchior’s trio
 18. Fabric in an Ellington 
title
 19. Multiply
 20. Daisy’s cousin?
 23. Went underground, for 
example
 24. Adam’s third son
 25. North Dakota neighbor
 30. Reason for a temporary 
shop closure
 34. Get long in the tooth
 35. Walleye or white cloud, 
for example
 37. Scratching-post 
scratchers
 38. Bearer of bell-shaped 
flowers
 42. God in the Quran
 43. Without moisture
 44. Neither fold nor raise
 45. Human rubber stamp
 47. Bilko or Pepper
 50. Diagnostic scanners, 
briefly
 52. Slangy name for a 
stranger
 53. Wild carrot fit for 
royalty?
 60. Contented tabby sound
 61. Electricity, slangily
 62. Haley of Roots renown
 63. Adjutant
 64. Scent source
 65. Puddle-jumper’s 
destination, perhaps
 66. Tater
 67. Forward-looking group?
 68. Putrefies
Down
 1. Type of bell or waiter
 2. Sloping type, briefly
 3. Narrative of heroic 
exploits
 4. Trendy dresser
 5. Gave some slack
 6. Ali, once
 7. Beer choice
 8. Etcher’s supply
 9. Grammar topics
 10. Shade of white
 11. Silent star Theda
 12. “___ calling!”
 13. Arrow wood
 21. Drum set, for example
 22. Ancient neighbor of 
Carthage
 25. Asia’s ___ Peninsula
 26. Sure-footed
 27. Gwyn and Carter
 28. Quarter halves?
 29. Volcanic emissions
 31. Popular condiment
 32. “’Twixt” partner
 33. To date
 36. Roll call response
 39. Complained whiningly
 40. Windy City landing site
 41. 17th-century Dutch 
painter’s masterpieces
 46. Japanese mercenaries
 48. Nitrous oxide, for 
example
 49. Filled pastry
 51. Pan-fry
 53. Clever remark
 54. Pakistani tongue
 55. Evening, on 
Nickelodeon
 56. “Tar Heels” state, 
briefly
 57. What’s more
 58. Irish or Welsh, for 
example
 59. Mates, once
 60. ___ de deux
Puzzle 117: Nice Arrangement
Tough

261
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68

262
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Palm whack
 5. Shopping excursion
 10. Holds title to
 14. Give a mighty heave
 15. Labyrinth locale
 16. Lucy Lawless character
 17. In international waters, 
for example
 18. Totaled, as a bill
 19. Put out the candle
 20. Start of a riddle
 23. Up to
 24. ___-doodle-do
 27. Riddle (Part 2)
 33. Knot on a tree
 34. Birthstone for 
36-Across
 35. ___ the Explorer
 36. What 10 may stand for, 
briefly
 37. Low-altitude cloud 
formation
 40. Weekly NBC offering
 41. That alternative
 43. Global Surveyor subject
 44. Heat headliner
 46. Riddle (Part 3)
 49. Ball partner?
 50. Schedule abbr.
 51. Answer to the riddle
 59. Give away, in poker
 61. Lead car, sometimes
 62. Say positively
 63. Sheltered
 64. Revolted
 65. Ruffle some feathers
 66. SALT participant
 67. Residence of a 
clergyman
 68. Party to a defense pact
Down
 1. Pygmalion playwright
 2. Rife with vegetation
 3. Length times width
 4. It may be uncovered 
before use
 5. Dead Sea document
 6. Make pleas on one’s 
knees?
 7. Nevada town
 8. Famous last words?
 9. Anti-discrimination 
agcy.
 10. Dress shoe color, 
sometimes
 11. Carefully selected, as in 
words
 12. St. Louis-to-Chicago dir.
 13. Toothed tool
 21. How some numbers 
were entered, once
 22. Oldenburg exclamation
 25. Egyptian temple near 
Luxor
 26. “Big ___ outdoors”
 27. Popeye’s tattoo
 28. Reasons
 29. Synagogue item
 30. Eyeball-bending 
drawings
 31. ___ Rizzo (’69 Hoffman 
role)
 32. Lexington, Virginia inst.
 33. Must, informally
 38. HBO competitor
 39. Somewhat, informally
 42. More petite
 45. Popular honeymoon 
spot
 47. Prop in many action 
films
 48. Wall hanging, often
 52. Unwelcome e-mail
 53. Fictional plantation
 54. Computer symbol
 55. Scottish Loch of renown
 56. It’s not good
 57. Gimme a Break star 
Carter
 58. Domino with three pips
 59. Sigma follower
 60. Chi-town trains
Puzzle 118: Off the Market
Tough

263
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68

264
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Missouri river
 6. Brown pigment
 11. Place to get a peel
 14. Fax predecessor
 15. Name of some French 
kings
 16. Proverbial brickload
 17. Packed item that might 
make a racquet?
 19. Caught stealing, for 
example
 20. Word with “cedar” or 
“hope”
 21. Unaccompanied
 23. Boot camp attendee
 27. Branches of knowledge
 28. Divvies up
 29. Duke of Edinburgh
 31. Tropical rain forest, for 
example
 32. Doesn’t succeed
 33. Its logo includes an 
eagle and a balance
 36. Roman letter
 37. Abrupt movements
 38. 1958 Pulitzer winner 
James
 39. Ultimate degree
 40. Heals
 41. Leather with a napped 
surface
 42. Circumvents
 44. Ring-shaped surface
 45. Preposterous
 47. Honey-do trips
 48. Longest river in Europe
 49. Arab country
 51. Nickname for young 
Skywalker
 52. Packed item that might 
get mashed?
 58. It’s kept by a keeper
 59. Cognizant of one’s 
surroundings
 60. Made on a loom
 61. Potassium hydroxide, 
for example
 62. Closer to retirement
 63. Celsius or Borg, for 
example
Down
 1. Giants Hall of Famer 
Mel
 2. Melville’s inspiration
 3. Liturgical vestment
 4. Hair product
 5. Carry out, as a task
 6. Precipitation type
 7. Many millennia
 8. Football strategy
 9. Super Bowl won by the 
Jets
 10. Attacks vigorously
 11. Packed item that might 
fly away?
 12. 100 pence
 13. Initial contributions
 18. “With ___ ring . . .”
 22. Luau wreath
 23. Fifth prime minister of 
Israel
 24. The Waste Land writer
 25. Packed items that might 
take a number?
 26. Italia’s capital
 27. German river
 29. Blanches
 30. The 2,876 of 1-Down
 32. Golfer’s call
 34. Took from the top
 35. They’re for the birds
 37. Kiss the Girls star
 38. Pervasive quality
 40. Resort island
 41. Causes of grief and 
regret
 43. Nut type
 44. Ensnare
 45. Be useful
 46. Pretty, in Dundee
 47. Inhalation anesthetic, 
once
 49. Stereo times two
 50. Vineyard unit
 53. It may whoop it up at 
night
 54. Haul out to the garage
 55. Reverential salutation
 56. WJM’s Baxter
 57. It’s for the money?
Puzzle 119: Moving Crew
Tough

265
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63

266
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Public person?
 6. Frasier’s first 
sister-in-law
 11. Bottom line?
 14. Parting remark
 15. “___ you the lucky one!”
 16. Latin 101 word
 17. Island near Miami
 19. Pvt.’s superior
 20. Period of note
 21. It may come after life?
 22. Suburbanite, on some 
autumn days
 24. Zaragoza’s river
 25. Accepted a proposal
 27. Not blatant
 30. Cream serving
 31. Danish fruit
 32. Thicket of trees
 33. Subsidy, for example
 36. Movie mutt
 37. Markedly masculine
 38. Opposing voice
 39. Create using shuttles 
and thread
 40. Unskilled writers
 41. Ollie’s cohort
 42. Mitchell clan
 44. Stevenson character
 45. Make sudden impact
 47. Prepares for feathering?
 48. Was in need of a good 
rubdown
 49. Humorist Bombeck
 50. Chess pieces
 53. Far–many link
 54. Variety of hibiscus
 58. Debut of 10/11/75, 
briefly
 59. Friend, slangily
 60. Kind of tube
 61. It is its own square root
 62. Mature, as fruit
 63. Sans clothing
Down
 1. Boxing’s LaMotta
 2. Baltic Sea tributary
 3. Informal greeting
 4. Buzzard’s beak, for 
example
 5. Split hairs
 6. Former Portuguese 
territory (Var.)
 7. “I smell ___!”
 8. Marina del ___
 9. Bethlehem sellout
 10. Clinically clean
 11. Mischief
 12. Roast host
 13. Heather-covered lands
 18. Word with “thumb” or 
“loser”
 23. Hustle and bustle
 24. Lab burner
 25. Some undergrads
 26. Likewise
 27. Petty quarrel
 28. Celestial bear
 29. Corner for talking 
purposes
 30. Marina features
 32. Source of chocolate
 34. Contraction with “do” 
or “work”
 35. It had all your 
telephone numbers
 37. Shopping place
 38. Northern seafowl
 40. Railroad worker’s 
transport
 41. Hair protein
 43. Leave quickly
 44. Tight spots
 45. Dustin’s role in Midnight 
Cowboy
 46. Coll. with a husky 
named Jonathan XII
 47. Check the fit of
 49. Slight advantage
 50. Expensive coat
 51. Type of sword
 52. Overly bookish sort, 
stereotypically
 55. Start of Cain’s query
 56. Tuck partner
 57. Letters with “messenger” 
or “transfer”
Puzzle 120: In the Pocket
Tough

267
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63

268
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. “Cloud hoppers”
 5. ___ Zapata!
 9. Antler-bearers
 14. Result of splitting hairs?
 15. All tied up
 16. Vietnam capital
 17. Short break
 20. Hush-hush
 21. Marksman of Swiss 
legend
 22. Peg of Woods
 23. Fancy jug
 25. Bears the expenses of
 27. Saintly circle
 30. Malevolent
 32. Stout cousin
 33. Silver Gavel Award org.
 34. Buttinsky
 36. Opening words
 40. Clean break
 43. Pupil of Socrates
 44. Soothing substance
 45. Tony winner Brooks
 46. Key on a keyboard
 48. Palter
 49. Start from scratch
 50. Drawing rooms
 54. Yggdrasill, for example
 56. The Soul of a Butterfly 
memoirist
 57. Not naughty
 59. Record-holder
 63. Lucky break
 66. The ones right here
 67. Word of exclusivity
 68. Balder’s father
 69. Lowered, as pressure
 70. Remunerates
 71. Dim-light sensors
Down
 1. “Be on the lookout 
messages,” briefly
 2. “If I Didn’t ___” (The Ink 
Spots)
 3. “All By Myself” singer 
Carmen
 4. A woofer is part of one
 5. Bone in a column
 6. Suffix with correct
 7. Part of Maverick’s attire
 8. Made a larger pot?
 9. Product’s freshness 
period
 10. Old seaman
 11. West Side Story 
character
 12. Overly sentimental
 13. Contesting teams
 18. Oligarchical group
 19. Emotional request
 24. Spring events
 26. It’s overhead
 27. It’s a lock when pinned
 28. Member of the first 
family
 29. Molten spew
 31. Burglar-alarm warning
 34. Drawn-out
 35. Kindled again
 37. Word with “study” or 
“bomb”
 38. Swamp thing 
 39. Holmenkollen 
overlooks it
 41. Plus others, briefly
 42. Fills with happiness
 47. Singer plus two, for 
example
 49. A man of the cloth
 50. Cut counterpart
 51. See ya in Hawaii?
 52. “Blue” singer
 53. Reporter’s goal
 55. Toreador’s trophy
 58. Buchanan or Ferber
 60. Accolade
 61. Camelot character
 62. Teller’s stack
 64. Chin attachment?
 65. Succeed, as a proposal
Puzzle 121: Give Me a Break
Treacherous

269
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71

270
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Belling the Cat author
 6. Ones of a kind?
 10. Brief attempt
 14. Pasta source
 15. Use a lot?
 16. Cabbage family member
 17. Heroic 1920s sled dog
 18. 1953 Pulitzer playwright 
William
 19. Otherwise
 20. Commitment minus one 
year?
 23. Of majestic proportions
 24. Con’s dream
 25. Monroe film minus one 
year?
 30. First letter of “census,” 
for example
 31. From point ___ point B
 32. Caterwaul
 36. Middle Eastern org. 
founded in 1964
 37. Shaded, like some ’50s 
cars
 41. John, to Ringo?
 42. Muralist Jose Maria
 44. Bean counter, for short
 45. ML pitchers that hit
 47. Time for some to vote, 
minus one year?
 51. Nobel laureate 
Sakharov
 54. Group standard
 55. Certain work force, 
minus one year?
 60. Vesuvius relative
 61. First in a string of 
popes
 62. Opposite of waxed
 64. Pine nut, for example
 65. Aykroyd and Fogelberg
 66. More than like
 67. ___ buco (veal dish)
 68. Editorial notation
 69. Acquiescent responses
Down
 1. Andrews or Edwards, 
briefly
 2. Ardor
 3. Catch of the day, 
perhaps
 4. Where many American 
pioneers settled
 5. Potential client
 6. Per person
 7. Six-pack units
 8. “Cogito, ___ sum”
 9. Type of key
 10. Like some details
 11. A costar of Sylvester
 12. Columnist brothers 
Joseph and Stewart
 13. Designer Geoffrey
 21. Randall’s 6 Rms ___ Vu
 22. George Lucas attended it
 25. Cough syrup amts.
 26. Moth’s legacy
 27. Get an ___ effort
 28. Birth-related
 29. “What was ___ think?”
 33. Dairy case spread
 34. Like bald tires
 35. Bottom-line bummer
 38. Star of The Bank Dick
 39. “O Henry, ___ thine 
eyes!” (Shakespeare)
 40. Door, for example
 43. Destructive funnel
 46. Citrus drink
 48. Word with “well” or 
“force”
 49. Join up
 50. Whisper one’s affection
 51. “You ___ Beautiful”
 52. Lecture souvenirs
 53. Desert features
 56. Ravioli filling, perhaps
 57. Corn cake
 58. Baseball’s Slaughter
 59. In desperate need of 
water
 63. Goethe’s Die Leiden ___ 
jungen Werthers
Puzzle 122: Lend Me Your Year
Treacherous

271
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69

272
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. ___ Set (Tracy/Hepburn 
film)
 5. Like Rambo
 10. Wanders (about)
 14. Bar on a car
 15. Garment for a cook
 16. Etcher’s purchase, 
perhaps
 17. Biggest portion
 19. Bonnie one
 20. Familiar octagon
 21. Mary Lincoln’s maiden 
name
 22. Mel who scored 1,859 
runs
 23. Warren Beatty flick
 24. Like a Seoul man
 26. Full of dandelions, say
 28. Peculiar to a locale
 29. Edible root
 30. Colorful, flowering 
shrub
 33. Electronic-music 
pioneer Brian
 34. Golden-brown quartz 
stone
 37. The highest degree
 40. Toyota model
 41. Insect life stage
 45. Mexican-American
 47. Where Alice worked
 48. Outcome
 49. Queen of the Nile, 
informally
 52. PC display device
 53. Laura director 
Preminger
 54. Cuisine served in 
24-Across?
 56. Captain Picard’s 
counselor
 57. Is obviously successful
 59. Wolf head?
 60. Middle of some plays
 61. Team attachment?
 62. Vanderbilt and Tan
 63. Parenthetical script 
comment
 64. Refrain from Dorothy 
and hint to the theme
Down
 1. ___ segno (from the 
repeat sign, in music)
 2. Had a life
 3. Having narrow grooves
 4. Kin of bingo
 5. En ___ (in one group)
 6. Ladybug snack
 7. Rugged rocks
 8. Unicorn feature
 9. A wee hour
 10. Aplenty
 11. University environment
 12. Scorn
 13. ’60s radical sit-in org.
 18. Like Granny on The 
Beverly Hillbillies
 21. Yesterday’s tomorrow
 22. “. . . I ___, so off to work 
I go”
 24. Prepare to present a 
proposal?
 25. Sgt., for example
 27. “I” piece?
 28. “Will there be 
anything ___?”
 30. Paid go-between
 31. Abysmal test score
 32. Bow-shaped line
 35. Cosmicomics author 
Calvino
 36. Prefix with center or 
dermis
 37. Point-of-purchase 
equip. giant
 38. Pythagorean 
proposition
 39. It’s all in the past
 42. Crude
 43. Daily allowance
Puzzle 123: 64-Across
Treacherous

273
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
 44. “Jealous mistress,” to 
Emerson
 46. Adorable ones
 47. Tip, as a hat
 49. Raccoon relative
 50. Gruesome, as some 
details
 51. Trademarked cow
 54. Parts of mins.
 55. Approximately
 56. U.S. airline, once
 57. Rambouillet remark
 58. Give it a go

274
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Becomes worthy of
 6. Golden Horde member
 11. “A clue!”
 14. Bad business partner
 15. Plus end, for example
 16. Response to “When do 
we want it?”
 17. It’s almost lucky?
 19. Application before 
feathers
 20. Aspirin has several
 21. Aristotle’s H
 22. Supermarket section
 24. Having pauses in 
conversation
 27. Squirming baby, 
sometimes
 31. Reporter’s need
 35. No longer together
 36. Richard Branson, for 
example
 38. Ankle bones
 39. It’s almost lucky?
 42. Commercial suffix with 
“Star” and “Sun”
 43. “___ honor . . .” (oath)
 44. Apt to stay put
 45. Big building
 47. Dodges
 48. In a harmonious 
manner
 51. Penetrating cold
 54. Formal requirement
 55. Astronomer’s sighting, 
perhaps
 59. Center of activity
 60. It’s almost lucky?
 64. Steak partner
 65. Low pair
 66. Word with “main” or 
“blessed”
 67. Push to the limit
 68. Set out suddenly
 69. Serves beer after beer, 
for example
Down
 1. Lamp shade shade
 2. Armenia’s chief river
 3. It goes on after a bath
 4. British bigwigs
 5. “___ Utah!” (license 
plate phrase)
 6. Discernment
 7. Pavlova and Karenina
 8. “___ Much” (Presley 
chart-topper of ’57)
 9. Sun spots in Baltimore?
 10. Make further 
corrections
 11. Certainly not pro
 12. Cold coating
 13. All wrong
 18. Certain duck
 23. A source of chloroform
 24. “Don’t get ___ with me!”
 25. Bring together
 26. West Point alternative
 27. Applesauce-topped 
treat
 28. Agricultural pest
 29. Zoroastrian
 30. In a troubled state
 32. Asphalt worker
 33. “Heads up!,” for 
example
 34. Agronomist’s samples
 36. John Brown’s Body 
author
 37. Paul McCartney album 
of 1971
 40. Graph points
 41. History of Rome author
 46. Coastal coves
 47. Not aweather
 49. Type of alcohol
 50. Scatterbrained
 51. Many people now do it 
online
 52. Sinuous dance
 53. Alpine goat
 55. Field of granular snow
 56. Child’s appliance?
 57. Sell by machine
 58. Woodpecker’s prey
 61. A Kiss Before Dying 
novelist Levin
 62. It sticks to your hair
 63. Net judge’s call
Puzzle 124: Rotten Luck
Treacherous

275
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69

276
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. ’90s Philippines 
president
 6. It’s on the staff
 10. Drops off
 14. Correct the camber
 15. Dwarf’s refrain words
 16. Race pace, sometimes
 17. An upright citizen, for 
example
 20. Parting phrase
 21. Bark component
 22. The Spanish Tragedy 
playwright
 23. Create a stir
 24. Well-to-do gents
 28. Genesis paradise
 29. Marketplace near the 
Acropolis, perhaps
 30. Where most people are
 31. Has a bawl
 35. A strong person, 
emotionally
 38. It takes two to make 
eleven
 39. Some Korean imports
 40. Passerine bird
 41. Larson of The Far Side
 42. Hinge
 43. Benchwarmer
 47. Make public
 48. Desdemona’s faithful 
servant
 49. Temporary inactivity
 54. Part of a balancing act?
 56. Toward the mouth
 57. Chicago star
 58. Wall tapestry
 59. Wall St. landmark
 60. Meaning of wavy lines, 
in the comics
 61. Mythical weeper
Down
 1. Absorbed
 2. “Et” or “inter” follower
 3. Beverage for Wally and 
the Beaver
 4. Act like a wolf
 5. Munchie locale
 6. A musician may strike it
 7. Limb partner
 8. Expressions of 
confusion
 9. Hiking boots, for 
example
 10. Tour of duty
 11. Where some sports 
teams play
 12. Catch phrase?
 13. “Funny Girl” composer
 18. Beta and gamma
 19. 28-Across exile
 23. Mine entrances
 24. Brussels-based org.
 25. Dramatic conflict
 26. Former heavyweight 
champ Riddick
 27. Borax and bauxite, for 
example
 28. Swift work
 30. Blazing
 31. Short cut?
 32. Grimm creature
 33. Bingo call, perhaps
 34. Wearing 9-Down
 36. Botswana river
 37. Your average Joe
 41. Dispiriting
 42. “Mon ___!”
 43. Military scouting 
mission, briefly
 44. Atlanta university
 45. ___ Marner
 46. Slip past
 47. Dogpatch denizen
 49. Big, round do
 50. Rock shelter
 51. Roman ruler
 52. Fiddler on the reef?
 53. In ___ (existing)
 55. Noted Brit lexicon
Puzzle 125: Construction Crew
Treacherous

277
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61

278
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. “. . . against ___ of 
troubles” (Shakespeare)
 5. Gardeners’ repositories
 10. Dungeons and Dragons 
beasts
 14. Bellyache
 15. Like much of Poe’s 
work
 16. Fish with an uphill 
battle
 17. Tom, Dick, and Harry
 18. One place to get 
slapped
 19. Adam’s oldest
 20. Dwelling type
 23. Sympathetic attention
 24. Symphony or sonata
 25. Woo musically
 30. Gaucho’s lariat
 34. Japanese leader 
Hirobumi
 35. Airplane boarding site
 37. Little bits
 38. Certain insurance claim
 42. Diciembre–febrero link
 43. Actress Thompson of 
Family
 44. West of old films
 45. Determine whether it’s 
gold
 46. Most insolent
 49. They break in the 
morning
 52. 10th anniversary 
material
 53. Kentucky Derby, for one
 61. Shiva’s spouse in 
Hinduism
 62. Caribbean island whose 
capital is Oranjestad
 63. Type of historian
 64. Bypass
 65. Company clerk of 
classic TV
 66. G permits them all
 67. Lovers’ quarrel
 68. Save alternative
 69. Successful crossword 
solver’s cry
Down
 1. Macbeth quintet
 2. Bombay garb
 3. “___ go bragh!”
 4. Highest point in an 
orbit
 5. It’s wasteful to Ed 
Norton
 6. “Three cheers” 
recipient
 7. Word maven Partridge
 8. Music associated with 
the ’70s
 9. Play matchmaker
 10. Wedding or birthday, 
for example
 11. Chestnut red horse
 12. Dressed by Armani
 13. Panasonic competitor
 21. Interlinked computing 
abbr.
 22. Jewish festival
 25. Musician’s better half?
 26. Some stiff collars
 27. Men on the make
 28. Lectern platform
 29. Old lab equipment
 31. Classic TV sitcom, One 
Day at ___
 32. Suffolk send-offs
 33. Till now
 36. Scandinavian myth
 39. He had a part in Thelma 
& Louise
 40. Like a friend in need
 41. From Colorado to 
Kansas
 47. Wasting food, says Mom
 48. Encroachment
 50. Millennium makeup
 51. Throw out
 53. Boxing decisions
 54. Motorcycle daredevil’s 
apparatus
 55. Mother of Romulus and 
Remus
 56. Uncivil
 57. Scottish seaport
 58. Jason’s command
 59. D-Day city target
 60. Word in a conditional 
statement
Puzzle 126: Making Progress
Treacherous

279
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69

280
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Bargain basement sign
 5. What clematis plants do
 10. Token punishment
 14. Adjective for Death 
Valley
 15. Wireless apparatus
 16. Heap
 17. “Charlie Hustle” Rose
 18. Alamogordo event
 19. Ore deposit
 20. Emphatic last words
 23. New York Giants pitcher 
Maglie
 25. Mr. ___ (old mystery 
game)
 26. Not just damp
 27. Analyzes chemically
 29. Major Barbara author
 31. Foot in the forest
 34. Bio-Bio locale
 35. A Prayer for ___ Meany
 36. First name in wit
 37. Pilot’s last words
 40. Osprey’s cousin
 41. Swimmer’s practice
 42. Vantage point
 43. Plaines preceder
 44. Young, female swine
 45. Rude one
 46. Decline in value
 47. Loss leader?
 48. They’re not from 
around here
 49. Last words in 
animation?
 55. Get to one’s feet
 56. Violin bow application
 57. Presque ___, Maine
 60. New Balance 
competitor
 61. “The Rural Muse” poet
 62. Dramatist Simon
 63. Type of performer
 64. Is unable to stand
 65. Catch sight of
Down
 1. Aphid’s sustenance
 2. “Who ___ you kidding?”
 3. A doctor may check 
them
 4. East of ___
 5. Some hold peaches
 6. Motorized shop tool
 7. Concept
 8. Rain forest feature
 9. The former 
Bechuanaland
 10. Bowler’s bane
 11. Zodiac creature
 12. Swit colleague
 13. Slip hazard
 21. Washroom appliance, 
often
 22. “Chosen” quantity
 23. Like some vows
 24. Walking the beach, for 
example
 28. Avoiding the draft?
 29. Did a household chore
 30. One of a matching pair?
 31. Advances steadily
 32. Protective charm
 33. Tends to the plants, 
in a way
 35. Elliptical
 36. Bart’s educator
 38. Member of a small 
governing faction
 39. Pertaining to birth
 44. Beetles go nowhere 
without it?
 45. Rollers in a saw
 46. It may be served rarely?
 47. Like a house ___
 49. Green flanker
 50. Bee flat?
 51. Mt. Everest locale
 52. Kinks classic
 53. Wannabe attorney’s 
hurdle
 54. Cattle, archaically
 58. Type of service
 59. A TV Tarzan
Puzzle 127: At Last!
Treacherous

281
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65

282
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Dreadlocks sporter, for 
short
 6. Certain Arabian 
garments
 10. Agt.’s cuts
 14. A Lesson From ___
 15. The Andrews Sisters, 
for example
 16. What little things mean?
 17. Common currency
 19. Sly tactic
 20. A Vanna turnover
 21. Island explored by 
Magellan
 22. Find abhorrent
 24. Certain military force
 26. Western mount?
 27. Talk in the ’60s?
 28. Some shop machines
 32. Warm and pleasant
 35. Alley-___ (basketball 
maneuver)
 36. Damascus is its capital
 37. Keystone State port
 38. Dig up dirt?
 39. “___ In the Clowns”
 40. Some freshwater fishes
 42. Cross or crow finale
 43. Tent post
 44. From a poor plan
 46. It could start 17- and 
58-Across and 10- and 
25-Down
 47. Give it ___ (make an 
attempt)
 48. Nail and tooth 
coverings
 52. 1972 Jack Lemmon film
 55. “Take ___ from me” 
(follow advice)
 56. Zhou En-___
 57. Like this crossword 
puzzle
 58. It may hold your 
reading glasses
 61. Oppositionist
 62. Befuddled
 63. It takes two to do it
 64. Paragon of redness
 65. “Afterward . . .”
 66. City near Great Salt 
Lake
Down
 1. M*A*S*H character
 2. In bad company, to 
Ambrose Bierce
 3. Neither liquid nor 
gaseous
 4. ___ Aviv-Jaffa
 5. American botanist
 6. Cornered, as a hunted 
animal
 7. Part of some hats
 8. Feel malaise
 9. Convinced of
 10. Governmental form in 
Britain
 11. Game with a 
candlestick
 12. Turn partner
 13. Editor’s override
 18. Hindquarters
 23. Partner of odds
 25. Highwayman with a 
weapon
 26. News follower
 28. Display displeasure to a 
performer, in a way
 29. Floor measure
 30. Playful signal
 31. Marquis de ___
 32. Earth bank
 33. Wild African sheep
 34. They’re blown in anger
 35. Expression of delight
 41. Rectangular paving 
stone
 43. Gets the ball in 
the hands of the 
quarterback
 45. Show pleasure toward
 46. “Don’t bet ___!”
 48. Wharton’s Frome
Puzzle 128: One for All
Treacherous

283
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
46
45
44
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
 49. Fawn-colored antelope
 50. Tootsie Oscar winner
 51. Ancient Phoenician city
 52. White-whale pursuer
 53. Wind direction 
indicator
 54. “Verrry interesting” 
Johnson
 55. 1958 Pulitzer winner 
James
 59. Relative of “-esque”
 60. License plate

284
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Firewood, finally
 4. Beau Geste author
 8. Irrigation aid
 13. Commando’s mission
 15. Piece of 
correspondence
 16. Climb up on the 
soapbox
 17. Start of a mystery-
solving quip
 20. Avoid ignorance
 21. Birth-related
 22. Pro-___ (certain 
tournaments)
 23. Love ___ Many-
Splendored Thing
 25. Weaver’s apparatus
 27. Start of a mystery-
solving quip (Part 2)
 35. That gentleman’s
 36. Hairy Himalayan 
mystery
 37. Tuck of legend
 38. Suffix denoting 
residents of
 40. Underwater detection 
system
 43. Taj Mahal’s town
 44. Twisted fastener
 46. Blueprint item
 48. “If I ___ a Hammer”
 49. Start of a mystery-
solving quip (Part 3)
 53. Mock fanfare
 54. Bauxite, for example
 55. Farming tool
 58. Slowly, in music
 61. Tokyo’s entertainment 
district
 65. End of a mystery-
solving quip
 68. Absolutely astound
 69. Construction piece
 70. Fit to be tried
 71. Examinations
 72. Presses for payment
 73. Many of Joe Louis’s 
wins
Down
 1. Nutmeg cover
 2. Umpire’s call, 
sometimes
 3. Casual greeting
 4. Boise-to-Portland dir.
 5. Book manufacturer’s 
leather
 6. Italian volcano
 7. Vex
 8. Simmer down
 9. Old Testament craft
 10. Peter Pan dog
 11. Small matter
 12. Ayres and Wallace
 14. Greek order of 
architecture
 18. Far from bashful
 19. Art colony in New 
Mexico
 24. They may be split in 
casinos
 26. Sorvino with an Oscar
 27. Early form of bridge
 28. Sudden snag
 29. River to the Rhone
 30. Palindromic Platte 
River people
 31. Capital of Belarus
 32. Political wing?
 33. Isaac’s mother
 34. What they do on Wall 
Street
 39. Chip off the old flock?
 41. Rue Morgue killer
 42. Gambling mecca
 45. Pequod crew
 47. Welsh barker
 50. “What’s the big ___?”
 51. Like Funt’s camera
 52. They hold their horses
 55. Weight
Puzzle 129: Mystery Solved
Treacherous

285
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
 56. Leer lasciviously
 57. They may be boosted 
or fragile
 59. Forbidden cologne?
 60. “Do not take ___ empty 
stomach”
 62. Mont. neighbor
 63. Founder of Stoicism
 64. Tomahawks, for 
example
 66. Decay
 67. Many, many mos.

286
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Certain Arabian
 6. “Open, Sesame!” speaker
 10. A Farewell to ___
 14. De Niro film
 15. Bruised or inflated items
 16. Crotchety one
 17. ___ first (diamond call)
 18. Hard to believe, as a 
story
 19. Grayish yellow
 20. Weasel-like animal
 23. Understanding
 24. About 22 degrees
 25. “From ___ shining . . .”
 27. Frowned-on, fire-
resistant material
 32. It may be gross
 35. Leader of the Long 
March
 36. Spine-tingling
 38. A Bell for ___
 39. Border on
 41. Dustin in Midnight 
Cowboy
 43. Lenin’s police org.
 44. Like many bathroom 
floors
 46. “___ pray” (pulpit 
petition)
 48. Pt. of EEC
 49. “Positively!”
 51. They know the drill
 53. Ano Nuevo time
 55. Something to chew
 56. General address?
 58. One place to golf
 64. Likelihood ratio
 66. Flying prefix
 67. Hindu gentleman
 68. “How peachy keen!”
 69. This answer contains a 
lot of letters
 70. Andes fleece provider
 71. Like venison
 72. A Light in the Attic 
author Silverstein
 73. Elizabeth I’s ill-fated 
favorite
Down
 1. B’way hit signs
 2. Summer month in 
France
 3. “. . . ___ dust shalt thou 
return”
 4. Hannah and Her Sisters 
Oscar-winner Wiest
 5. Like extreme emotions
 6. Type of blocker
 7. Culture contents
 8. Frankenstein monster 
features
 9. Fast follower?
 10. Maven
 11. Solid old hymn?
 12. Greater quantity
 13. Bowl over
 21. Olympic measure
 22. Japan’s first capital
 26. Words with “well”
 27. Valuable violin
 28. Polio vaccine developer
 29. It was renamed for 
Herbert Hoover
 30. Type of history
 31. Situated
 33. Contributed 
suggestions
 34. Travels with the band
 37. Punta del ___ (Uruguay 
resort)
 40. Ump chaser?
 42. Gold measure
 45. Profound
 47. Five o’clock shadow
 50. Sleep images
 52. Models of excellence
 54. African witchcraft
 56. ___ and dance
 57. You might bounce it off 
someone
 59. Cheese enjoyed with 
Chardonnay
 60. Hang in the hammock, 
for example
 61. Bedouin robes
 62. “Rain” or “shine” 
preceder
 63. Fraudulence
 65. It’s fit for a pig
Puzzle 130: Solid
Treacherous

287
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73

288
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. 1979 Roman Polanski 
film
 5. Mil. training class
 9. “A likely story!”
 12. Eye nerve
 14. Geometry calculations
 16. Matter of self-interest?
 17. Delaying strategy
 19. Set aflame
 20. One supporting a habit?
 21. Company that bought 
Time Warner
 22. Goes ballistic
 24. Big game?
 26. Leather cleaner
 29. Assaults olfactorily
 31. It comes before a 
dropped name
 32. Lincoln, for one
 33. It may whiz past one’s 
knees
 35. Chaplin prop
 38. Vietnamese holiday
 39. Archivist’s material
 42. Lively dance
 45. Sought damages from
 46. Begs
 50. Guthrie Center founder
 52. ___ Moines, Iowa
 54. Polio fighter Albert
 55. Gracious winners, for 
example
 59. Elvis’s daughter
 60. Open, in a way
 61. It gradually increases 
in depth from mouth to 
head
 63. One way to make a 
bough break
 64. They may be ripped or 
crunched
 65. Virginia shipbuilding 
center
 69. Norma ___ (Sally Field 
film)
 70. Challenged
 71. Assistant who handles 
letters
 72. Many AARP members
 73. Use an IBM Selectric, 
for example
 74. Vanquish
Down
 1. Word in the title of a 
Steve Martin/Goldie 
Hawn film
 2. Shoulder adornment
 3. Bugs Bunny, according 
to Bugs Bunny
 4. Kennel order
 5. Sweater style
 6. End of some e-mail 
addresses
 7. Japanese ceremonial 
drink
 8. Bedouin transporter
 9. Lend a hand
 10. Stir up
 11. Popular nightclub
 13. KGB counterpart
 15. Waterless
 18. Discouraging words
 23. It’s in the heart of 
Jerusalem?
 25. Read quickly
 27. Reader of secret 
messages
 28. Unhearing
 30. Winter transports
 34. Old gold coin
 36. Bit of brandy
 37. Wings on buildings
 40. Overhaul
 41. Sit-down occasion
 42. Jacksonville team
 43. Jail cell feature
 44. Women’s lip 
applications
 47. Site of the Eisenhower 
Library
 48. Renounces
Puzzle 131: Remote Target
Treacherous

289
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
 49. Responds harshly to
 51. Horace work, for 
example
 53. Walked
 56. Hourglass filler
 57. Fabric fold
 58. Business letter 
addressee, perhaps
 62. Off-road rambler, for 
short
 66. Like some humor
 67. Zing
 68. Collar

290
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Mayberry’s Otis, for 
example
 4. It has a point
 9. Ambergris source
 14. ___ for the books
 15. Suggestion box fill
 16. A status symbol
 17. Asimov book that 
became a sci-fi classic
 20. Arena parts
 21. Pulitzer-winning 
columnist Herb
 22. Setting for many jokes
 23. “A” or “an”
 26. Pot-bellied pet
 27. PC key
 28. De Niro classic
 31. Smash into
 34. Jack Benny’s 39
 35. Abominable snowmen
 38. Commiserator’s word
 40. Floor models
 43. Relinquish
 44. One of Zeppo’s brothers
 46. Tiny Tim’s instrument, 
briefly
 47. Caviar, for example
 48. 1964 Best Picture
 53. Fifth sign
 55. Chinchilla’s coat
 56. Alarm clock, for 
example
 60. Tabloid aviators, briefly
 61. Bass or treble, for 
example
 63. Sound beginning?
 64. Film about a Little 
League team
 68. Noted billionaire
 69. Virus carrier, 
sometimes
 70. Coxcomb
 71. Surprise attack
 72. Annie’s pooch
 73. Spider’s parlor invitee
Down
 1. Feature of the word 
“car” but not “cake”
 2. Broadcasting
 3. Basic principle
 4. Total disaster
 5. Pitched messages
 6. Track record?
 7. Worldly rather than 
spiritual
 8. Con’s preoccupation
 9. Bad way to be 
convicted
 10. Today, in Madrid
 11. Statue material, 
perhaps
 12. Word with “tender” 
or “aid”
 13. Exercise, as influence
 18. “What’s your sine?” subj.
 19. One of seven, to Salome
 24. Washday unit
 25. Part of a blade
 29. Biggest human bone
 30. Former nuclear agcy.
 31. Bit of a cheer
 32. ___ mode
 33. Long-tailed South 
American monkeys
 36. Wedding promise
 37. Come to understand
 39. Operative
 41. Sooners’ st.
 42. Seal in the juices
 45. Thrown aside
 49. “___ Lang Syne”
 50. Papas and Castle
 51. Twofold or a way to be 
sure
 52. Type of log
 53. Fire, euphemistically
 54. ___ Frome
 57. Type of car or nurse
 58. Filmdom’s Flynn
 59. Unpleasantly grating
 62. Disaster relief org.
 65. It may sting a little
 66. Obi-___ Kenobi
 67. Caesar’s first name
Puzzle 132: Classic!
Treacherous

291
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73

292
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Break a certain 
commandment
 6. Mess maker
 10. David, for one
 14. Verdi forte
 15. Poi party
 16. Atlas datum
 17. Like Mozart’s flute
 18. Entomologist’s 
specimens, perhaps
 19. The Alienist author
 20. Vader’s psionic 
weapon?
 23. Bass attachment
 24. New issue on the NYSE
 25. Temporary, as a 
position
 29. Annapolis initials
 31. Escape clause
 34. Word with “brain” or 
“blind”
 35. Partner of “aid”
 36. Hybrid fruit
 37. Where votes for best 
films are counted?
 40. Fit to ___
 41. Noted international 
marketplace
 42. Oliver Mellors, to Lady 
Chatterley
 43. “Why, certainly!”
 44. Tang anagram
 45. Cutting beams
 46. Sailor, slangily
 47. Place to hang your hat
 48. Kermit making a 
significant change?
 57. Reverse, on a PC
 58. James of The Godfather
 59. Greek salad morsel
 60. Bullet point
 61. Firing chamber
 62. Like beasts of burden
 63. Region
 64. Do in, as a dragon
 65. Put forth
Down
 1. Search thoroughly
 2. Gem for some Libras
 3. Lyra star
 4. Colonizer of Greenland
 5. Supplement, as a bill
 6. “Hast thou ___ the 
Jabberwock?”
 7. Air chamber
 8. Invective
 9. Raid, perhaps
 10. Chocolate source
 11. Certain Middle 
Easterner
 12. Insignificant
 13. Henry VIII’s last wife
 21. Cabin component
 22. Curative waters
 25. In check
 26. Bucket of bolts
 27. Western bulrushes
 28. Avalon, for one
 29. Lusitania sinker
 30. Like the Beatles’ Sadie
 31. Pointed architectural 
arch
 32. Worrier’s health risk
 33. La Scala features
 35. Self-titled 1975 pop 
album
 36. Tabloid subjects
 38. Two “Lincolns”
 39. Attachment to 
government buildings
 44. Understood
 45. Poet’s pasture
 46. Folklore dwarf
 47. Small amount of change
 48. Quickie exam
 49. “Do ___ others . . .”
 50. Middle Eastern gulf
 51. Correspondence
 52. Land for the looney?
 53. Linen fiber source
 54. Aptly named astronaut
 55. “Your turn,” in 
radiospeak
 56. Chap
Puzzle 133: Before and After?
Treacherous

293
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65

294
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. “Let’s not forget . . .”
 5. Urban oasis
 9. Swahili boss
 14. Carson’s Carnac, for 
example
 15. Fencing gear
 16. Lent a hand
 17. Finish superficially
 20. Similar
 21. Supplement (with 
“out”)
 22. Moved about 
energetically
 26. Come to grips
 30. Disentangled
 31. Smudge on Santa
 32. Audio receiver
 33. Christie’s The Seven ___ 
Mystery
 34. Pseudonym of H.H. 
Munro
 35. Garage compartments
 36. Get right down to 
business
 39. Oodles
 40. Beam
 41. Whistles when the 
police are spotted
 43. Roman candle path
 44. Chuck wagon fare
 45. Slim and trim
 46. Have through a gene
 48. Ms. Clinton
 49. Kettle and Barker
 50. Bed end
 51. Waste no time with
 59. Adds one to three, for 
example
 60. Gala event
 61. Classic opera
 62. Dave Thomas’s kid
 63. Cold feet
 64. Contrary current
Down
 1. Ember, in the end
 2. Orchid necklace
 3. Harden
 4. Bit for the dog bowl
 5. Cheated at hide-and-
seek
 6. Pest for a rose
 7. Restraining influence
 8. Powder container
 9. Hoop dunk
 10. Diaper bag items
 11. Shakespearean fuss
 12. Where many surf
 13. Commercial blurbs
 18. Most robust
 19. Awe-inspiring
 22. Potato eye
 23. Horned creature
 24. Steadfast
 25. Fights with lances
 26. Snatched from 
dreamland
 27. Old World prickly 
plants
 28. Baby shower gift, 
perhaps
 29. Sounds of hesitation
 31. Hindu’s sir
 34. Walk like a chanticleer
 35. Genesis tower
 37. Like a giant of fairy 
tales
 38. Must
 39. ___ chi (martial art)
 42. Coral, for one
 44. Flush with fescue
 45. April event
 47. Improve text
 48. Terra ___
 50. Complimentary
 51. Kittenish call
 52. Hail to Caesar
 53. He’s a real doll
 54. Wide of the mark
 55. Actress ___ Dawn Chong
 56. The Karate ___ (1984)
 57. Roulette play
 58. Wray in King Kong
Puzzle 134: Busy, Busy, Busy
Treacherous

295
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64

296
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Curly Howard’s 
replacement
 6. Russian pancake
 11. Spicy
 14. “Mangia!”
 15. Angry, and then some
 16. Vladimir Nabokov novel
 17. Conjecture
 19. Spare part
 20. Type of coach (Abbr.)
 21. Cinco minus cuatro
 22. Rise and shine!
 24. Brownish-red 
chalcedony
 26. Tight situation
 27. State positively
 30. Name in a Harold 
Robbins title
 31. Conjecture (with 
44-Across)
 33. Persuade
 37. Reproductive cells
 38. Solid ground
 41. Lead-in for Branco or 
Bravo
 42. Dispense
 44. See 31-Across
 46. Vegetates
 49. Slip away, as time
 50. Publisher’s payment
 53. Cosby TV series
 54. Tristan’s secret love
 55. It does a bang-up job
 56. Man of Steel’s 
accessory
 60. Put down
 61. Attempt
 64. It may need massaging
 65. From the East
 66. Joe Louis, for one
 67. Referendum choice
 68. Aussie tennis star 
Fraser
 69. Tropical nut or palm
Down
 1. Big name in home video 
games
 2. Herr’s home
 3. Summers on the Seine
 4. Words with “TV” in an 
old NBC slogan
 5. Second letter 
addendum
 6. Hunter’s hiding place
 7. Wheels for wheels
 8. ___ Toguri (Tokyo Rose)
 9. Dummy
 10. Standards of perfection
 11. Concubine center
 12. Ill will
 13. St. Pete neighbor
 18. Chelonian reptile
 23. Low islands
 25. Graceful steed
 26. Stop on a line
 27. Molecular component
 28. Create interest?
 29. Game with 32 cards
 30. Livestock abodes
 32. Uplift morally
 34. Finish a take
 35. A show of vanity
 36. Couple for a brace
 39. Coffers
 40. Seaweed
 43. Airline to Tel Aviv
 45. Modern workplace perk
 47. River of song
 48. Private instruction?
 50. NBA coach Pat
 51. Inedible orange
 52. Toys that go around the 
world
 53. Absurd
 55. Pond-dwelling duck
 57. Watch for the cops, 
maybe
 58. Glazier’s cutting
 59. Inclusive abbr.
 62. Hyundai competitor
 63. Check for drinks
Puzzle 135: Not Quite Sure
Treacherous

297
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69

298
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Toast comparative
 5. Dust busters?
 10. Sellers’ market?
 14. Fancy needle case
 15. Brains, for sure
 16. Jiggs’ daughter
 17. Deutschland divider, 
once
 19. Type of wire
 20. Castrogiovanni, today
 21. Chemical salts
 23. Moroccan’s capital
 26. Turkey mo. in the U.S.
 28. Oka River city
 29. Words to the wise
 31. Be a pain
 33. Bull foe
 34. Exasperates
 35. Blue
 38. Has it wrong
 39. “___ porridge hot . . .”
 41. “___ added expense”
 42. Variety of whale
 43. Kind of film
 44. Put in the pen
 46. Go by
 48. Reduce to rag condition
 49. Hammer’s target, 
sometimes
 50. Real attachment
 52. They come a courting?
 53. Storied invader
 55. Nora’s terrier
 57. “Makes sense!”
 58. Boundary one can 
cross
 63. Some disinformation
 64. Wipe the slate clean
 65. Cut of veal
 66. It’s absolutely not right!
 67. Tear repairer
 68. Ho-ho-ho time
Down
 1. Part of a baseball mitt
 2. Filled the bill?
 3. Capek’s notable play
 4. Expense account 
factors
 5. Thomas who wrote The 
Magic Mountain
 6. Nile-regulating dam
 7. “It ___ far, far better 
thing . . .”
 8. Comes through
 9. Manche dept. capital
 10. Plenary
 11. Texas or Vermont, for 
example
 12. Tempestuous spirit?
 13. Hound sounds
 18. Act or play start
 22. Pointillist’s points
 23. Motel posting
 24. Be wild about
 25. Offshore coral ridge
 27. Painkillers
 30. Use a sponge or biscuit
 32. Shooting sport
 36. The Hulk’s catalyst
 37. Type A types
 40. Chez Hamlet
 41. In fact
 43. Muslim judge
 45. Far from nice
 47. Gossip (with “the”)
 49. Count on the 88s
 51. Parson’s place
 53. Paper producer
 54. Good opening pair
 56. Hoop ending
 59. Car makers’ grp.
 60. Debtor’s paper
 61. Zippo
 62. Chemical suffix
Puzzle 136: Stopping Points
Treacherous

299
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68

300
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Backless footgear
 5. Word after 17-, 38-, and 
59-Across, and 11- and 
34-Down
 10. Coal carrier
 14. Play to ___ (deadlock)
 15. Vacuous
 16. “Now then, where ___?”
 17. Form of liquor 
smuggling
 19. October birthstone
 20. Distinguishing feature
 21. “Clue” piece
 23. Clothes lines?
 26. Take ___ off (sit down)
 27. Conceal from danger
 29. Special talents
 32. Jocularity
 35. Meadowland
 36. Transmitting
 37. Infant fare
 38. Naval veteran
 40. Dull daily routing
 41. Show with clarity
 43. File suit against
 44. Teachers’ favorites
 45. The Balcony playwright
 46. You, at this very 
moment
 48. Informed
 50. Go awry
 54. Steakhouse order
 57. Per ___ (yearly)
 58. Prefix meaning “bone”
 59. Wintertime affliction
 62. Letters on some planes
 63. Dobie Gillis’s buddy
 64. Ultimatum’s ultimate 
word, usually
 65. Retained
 66. Biblical matriarch
 67. Penn with an Oscar
Down
 1. Cuban patriot José
 2. Auto maneuver
 3. Succotash, in part
 4. Least explainable
 5. Best the rest
 6. ___ Arbor, Michigan
 7. Follow furtively
 8. Group of nine
 9. Majestic
 10. Poker holding, perhaps
 11. In quick succession
 12. Letters of haste
 13. Eight furlongs
 18. Zion National Park 
location
 22. Give less than 100 
percent
 24. Choreographer Agnes 
de ___
 25. Tournament ranking
 28. Cowboy’s apparatus
 30. Fastening item
 31. Pepper and Preston 
(Abbr.)
 32. Computer image file 
format
 33. Roof overhang
 34. Band in a 1984 film 
parody
 36. Pain relief brand
 38. Group of eight
 39. New Year’s word
 42. 1960s political 
movement
 44. Charles, William, and 
Harry
 46. Spanish woman’s title
 47. The Blackboard Jungle 
novelist Hunter
 49. Neil Diamond’s “Love 
on the ___”
 51. Iguanalike critter
 52. Oklahoma city
 53. German port city
 54. Queeg’s creator
 55. To be, to Brutus
 56. ER part
 60. Wharton deg.
 61. City in Kyrgyzstan
Puzzle 137: Thirsty?
Treacherous

301
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67

302
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Thermometer’s 
terminus
 5. Island handouts
 9. Arab cloaks
 13. “Not ___” (“Think 
nothing of it”)
 15. Straddling
 16. Upholstered piece
 17. Country with a red, 
white, and blue flag
 18. Term used in hockey
 20. Algonquian speaker
 22. It’s not returnable, in 
tennis
 23. This year’s grads
 24. Florida citrus center
 26. Retained
 28. Strongbox
 31. Term used in darts
 35. Sternward
 36. Officer Malloy of 
Adam 12
 37. Kind of curtain
 38. Sleep stage abbr.
 39. Airport components
 40. Wells or Lupino
 41. Myanmar locale
 43. Tiresome routines
 44. French impressionist 
painter Claude
 46. Term used in squash
 48. Destroy or injure 
severely
 49. Kitten’s plaything
 50. “Nothing ___!”
 52. “___, drink, and be 
merry”
 54. Tack on
 56. North Pole twosome
 60. Term used in rugby
 63. Without worldly 
sophistication
 64. Ballpark level
 65. Word after “rest” or 
“staging”
 66. Shakespearean forest
 67. Earthly paradise
 68. “. . . ___ and not heard”
 69. Bang-up result?
Down
 1. “Nozze di Figaro” part 
for Dr. Bartolo
 2. 45th state
 3. Dalai ___ (chief Tibetan 
monk)
 4. Fail to attend, as a party
 5. Jacket part
 6. D.D.E.’s WWII command
 7. 29th state
 8. Trout features
 9. Nile creature
 10. Supporting
 11. Many miles away
 12. What Simon does
 14. Sharp surgical 
instrument
 19. Projectionist’s unit
 21. “In one ___ and out the 
other”
 25. Assisted in crime
 27. Abbreviation on tires in 
Greece?
 28. Jeweler’s weight
 29. Needing to take off?
 30. Genealogist’s map
 32. Salt Lake City students
 33. Sing Swiss-style
 34. Mother’s relative
 36. Epistle apostle
 39. Family matriarchs
 42. King intro?
 44. Tomorrow, in a Peggy 
Lee song
 45. Alert
 47. Monorail unit
 48. Wire measure
 51. Great expanse
 52. Powerful Italian family
 53. Word with “rock,” 
“rain,” or “test”
 55. Venture
 57. Rectangle or triangle 
part
 58. Uniform
 59. Dispatched
 61. Final resting place, for 
some
 62. Word from Beaver 
Cleaver
Puzzle 138: Game Time
Treacherous

303
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69

304
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Brand bought by Wile E. 
Coyote
 5. Acts as lookout, for 
example
 10. Pt. of IRA
 14. Attempt to persuade
 15. Camp David accords 
participant
 16. Ayatollah’s predecessor
 17. “. . . or ___ me?”
 18. Poppycock
 19. Fillable bread
 20. 1978 Best Picture 
(with The)
 22. The “dismal science,” 
for short
 23. Where some jams are 
made
 24. Noise from the farm
 26. Vivacious actress West
 27. Barbecue rod
 29. Bowlike curve
 32. ___ d’art
 35. Rosary items
 36. Arrived lifeless, briefly
 37. Plain of Jars locale
 38. Loads the hook
 39. ___ Window
 40. Tough wood
 41. It may be grand
 42. Watering hole items
 43. Boggy area
 44. Dover specialty
 45. X-ray unit
 46. Raw information
 48. Dunce
 52. “Bullets” in poker
 54. Period of suspended 
activity
 57. Needle apertures
 58. Sing the praises of
 59. In ___ (bored with 
things)
 60. One in a million
 61. Wheel brace
 62. Like some 
circumstances
 63. Addition column
 64. Chromatic nuances
 65. Divination practitioner
Down
 1. Acetic and nitric
 2. Mathematical grouping
 3. Gold medalist skier 
Hermann
 4. They’re polar
 5. On the ball
 6. Sights in the country
 7. Prepare for publication
 8. Word with “deck” or 
“measure”
 9. Banned NFL substances
 10. Forest quaker
 11. Word in a W.C. Fields 
film title
 12. “The Elder” of history
 13. “Better you ___ me!”
 21. Kind of wave
 25. Part of TGIF
 27. Take by force
 28. Fancy chopped liver
 30. Laugh heartily
 31. What some plants 
produce
 32. Patron saint of Norway
 33. Bag of diamonds?
 34. Plow pioneer
 35. What some people 
jump
 38. With the most breadth
 39. Lucille Ball and many 
others
 41. Western time
 42. Roseanne, before Tom
 45. Searches through
 47. Hinny and ninny, for 
example
 48. Pig in ___
 49. Ghastly strange
 50. Color of a clear sky
 51. Dissuade
 52. Aviation prefix
 53. Primary color in 
photography
 55. Public art show or 
former Montreal athlete
 56. British school
Puzzle 139: Passing Grade
Treacherous

305
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65

306
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Curtail
 5. Rodeo necessity
 10. Lloyd Webber musical 
role
 13. 440-yard path
 14. Herr Schindler
 15. Not yet up
 16. Sneaky fellow?
 17. Aka follower
 18. Rosary piece
 19. “Keep Out!” follower
 22. Nongrammatical case
 23. Acrobat catcher
 24. Dickens’ Mr. Pecksniff
 25. How the weasel goes
 28. Bloom of the fall
 32. Unit of time
 34. It may be glossed over
 36. Maven
 37. He or she
 43. Fertility clinic needs
 44. Pharmaceutical giant 
Lilly
 45. “. . . there remained not 
___.” (Ex. 8:31)
 46. On edge
 49. “___ Me Call You 
Sweetheart”
 51. Male turkeys
 54. Trains on high
 56. Virginia Dare’s colony
 59. Slips and such
 64. Spike to shuck
 65. Moliere’s forte
 66. Pedal appendages
 67. Pennsylvania city
 68. Corby of The Waltons
 69. Italian wine-producing 
region
 70. Block
 71. Tiresias and 
Nostradamus, for 
example
 72. ___ majeste
Down
 1. Family man
 2. Dodges
 3. Emu or ostrich, for 
example
 4. Promotes
 5. Reluctant
 6. Numb, as a foot
 7. Opt to omit
 8. River from the Vosges 
Mountains
 9. Mork’s supervisor
 10. Radio-active driver
 11. Qualifying race
 12. Oceanic whirlpool
 15. Aids in dirty deeds
 20. Cause for a blessing
 21. Brain size
 26. Stan’s chum
 27. Die spot
 29. Chinese “way”
 30. Former French coin
 31. “In the Good Old 
Summertime” lyricist 
Shields
 33. Compass hdg.
 35. ___ forma
 37. Flower holder
 38. Holiday precursor
 39. Took off
 40. Nothing alternative
 41. Ready to use
 42. Concerning newborns
 47. River of Paris
 48. America’s Liberty Tree 
was one
 50. Inquiry for a lost 
package
 52. Bummed out
 53. Kilters, in poker
 55. Items with dials
 57. Kicks off
 58. Dinsmore of children’s 
books
 59. One way to serve coffee
 60. The Thin Man wife
 61. It’s on your car
 62. Fisherman’s offering?
 63. Perry’s creator
Puzzle 140: Secret Solving
Treacherous

307
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72

308
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Economical Halloween 
costume
 6. Gin flavoring
 10. “. . . sting like ___”
 14. Beauty queen 
adornment
 15. The Piltdown man, for 
example
 16. “Agreed!”
 17. Suffering from 
nyctophobia
 20. Zero, in soccer
 21. Heist haul
 22. Maltreat
 23. Helvetica, for one
 24. Equipped
 25. Brings down
 28. Bird of Old Rome
 29. CBS show set in 
Las Vegas
 32. Not moving
 33. Without ___ (daringly)
 34. Hemoglobin component
 35. Xenophobia
 38. Object of desire?
 39. Settles with certainty
 40. Send to seventh heaven
 41. School of tomorrow?
 42. Dolt
 43. Examine
 44. Shed, snake-style
 45. Pro ___ (free)
 46. One way to be washed
 49. Spring bloom
 50. Ceiling figure
 53. Suffering from 
zoophobia
 56. Home of ancient Irish 
kings
 57. Triumphant cry
 58. Pathogens
 59. Follow the code
 60. Meshworks
 61. Explosive trial
Down
 1. “___ the Man” Musial
 2. CD player ancestor
 3. Sandwich man?
 4. Slice of history
 5. Adapt for
 6. “Go ahead and ask”
 7. Studio site, sometimes
 8. Bit in a horse’s mouth?
 9. Initial bit of evidence
 10. Discombobulate
 11. Gal’s sweetheart
 12. They usually listen well
 13. Sommer of films
 18. Gangland bigwigs
 19. Pipe bends
 23. Take to the bank?
 24. Says with no uncertainty
 25. Permanent pen pal?
 26. Bridge bid, briefly
 27. Intertwine
 28. Paid to play
 29. Floorboard sound
 30. To some degree
 31. Map feature
 33. Knotted neckwear
 34. Home of Nanook of the 
North
 36. Worked as a sub
 37. Advertising lure
 42. Heart
 43. Cut of meat
 44. Coral reef denizen, 
perhaps
 45. Grain husks
 46. Concerning
 47. Striker’s anathema
 48. Fabled napper
 49. “___ ain’t broke . . .”
 50. Supervision
 51. Poor box donations
 52. “Hey, over here!”
 54. Have bills
 55. Bumped into
Puzzle 141: Off to the Shrink
Treacherous

309
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61

310
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. “Couldn’t have said it 
better myself”
 5. There’s no accounting 
for it
 10. Turkish topper
 13. Amount spent
 14. Greek alphabet starters
 16. George’s musical 
brother
 17. Nature personified
 19. Con’s sheet
 20. Zeta-theta connection
 21. Courage
 22. Cheer for the matador
 24. Assemble
 26. Owing on one’s 
payments
 30. Negligent
 32. Clinging part of a 
climbing plant
 33. Start to dominate?
 34. Cartridge holder
 35. Mortar rounds
 36. Bygone
 39. Weaselly critters
 42. One way to follow a 
pattern
 43. ___ mater (brain 
membrane)
 45. Long, long time
 46. Type of reaction
 48. Pizza sauce enhancer
 50. Respectable
 53. Shuffle
 55. Has down pat
 57. Butting bighorn
 58. Molded, frozen dessert
 60. By way of
 61. Slugging stat
 63. A bit too serious
 66. Valdez cargo
 67. 40th president of 
the U.S.
 68. Player’s stake
 69. Tarzan film character
 70. Improve, as a text
 71. Angler’s prize
Down
 1. Heights of perfection
 2. More debatable
 3. Elvis’ Graceland, for 
example
 4. Unspecific degree
 5. Poi source
 6. French historian de 
Tocqueville
 7. New World colonizer
 8. Imperil
 9. Gormandize
 10. Combat supplies
 11. Historical time
 12. Laser gun sound effect
 15. Like many a sheep
 18. Napoleon’s realm
 23. “___ and the Swan” 
(Yeats)
 25. Guy who cries foul
 27. Back out
 28. Frost
 29. Give me a brake?
 31. Star close to Venus?
 34. Word with “fraternity” 
or “hair”
 36. Olfactory perception
 37. Tackle box item
 38. Without much cheer
 40. Night light
 41. Chump
 44. Indian tourist site
 47. Comaneci 
accomplishment
 49. Museum suit
 50. Abase
 51. Repeated Catholic 
prayer
 52. Ironic turns
 54. Eat more than one’s fill
 56. Eats more than one’s fill
 59. Group marching, 
perhaps
 61. Scottish hero Roy
 62. Short life story?
 64. Rock singer Bobby
 65. Capture a crook
Puzzle 142: Cover Your Rear
Treacherous

311
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71

312
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Band of seven
 7. First of billions
 11. 16.5 feet
 14. Rocky villain
 15. Andean city
 16. Wax trapper
 17. Antic
 18. Yankee in the news, 
informally
 19. Four-stringed 
instrument, for short
 20. Doc wannabes
 23. Tadpole cousins
 27. Hobby-store buys
 28. Pumas’ pads
 29. Balsamic, cider, or 
white
 31. Seat for two or more
 32. Gain access
 33. Nullify
 36. Always, in verse
 37. Perfectly away from 
either bank
 40. Test starter?
 43. Polyphonic song
 44. Old photo tint
 48. Go back
 50. Thoroughly
 52. Rousseau novel
 53. Draped dress
 55. Little one
 56. Garb for the jet set
 59. “___ Gotta Be Me”
 60. Walk with weariness
 61. Make-believe food
 66. Fractional monetary 
unit of Japan
 67. Water drainer
 68. Foreign Affairs Pulitzer 
winner Lurie
 69. Time of the 75th 
meridian
 70. Cultivated grasses
 71. Identifying
Down
 1. The Wild Bunch director 
Peckinpah
 2. 1972 DDT banner
 3. Container of peas
 4. ICU specialty
 5. Big Bad John actor Jack
 6. Brown v. Board of 
Education city
 7. “With ___ of thousands!”
 8. Pub competition
 9. Baseball brothers’ 
surname
 10. Area near the 
Mediterranean
 11. Get exes to become 
ex-exes
 12. Yellow ribbon bearer
 13. Armoire kin
 21. Most urgent
 22. Snack or nosh
 23. Time before anything 
important
 24. Jaws sighting
 25. It does blowups
 26. Appear to be
 30. Scythe-bearing visitor
 31. 180 degrees from NNW
 34. 66, for one (Abbr.)
 35. Conductor Toscanini
 38. URL punctuator
 39. Satisfy, as demands
 40. Assumption
 41. Subtracts
 42. Clearly visible
 45. Snoop
 46. Kind
 47. Supporter’s response
 49. Folklore being
 51. Jack Haley role
 53. What push comes to
 54. Executive’s staff
 57. Leave helpless with 
laughter
 58. Toni Morrison novel
 62. Not very bright, really
 63. Chi–Omega connection
 64. Accord ender?
 65. Chang’s bosom buddy?
Puzzle 143: One Vowel Off
Treacherous

313
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71

314
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Like user-friendly 
notebook paper
 6. Federal organization 
that may inspect your 
workplace
 10. Super-deluxe
 14. Esteem to the extreme
 15. Continuous-play tape
 16. First words in the title of 
Mae West’s “angelic” film
 17. Captain Hook’s “Jolly 
Roger”
 19. Road to Damascus 
figure, later
 20. Greek island that is part 
of the Cyclades
 21. “Switch” or “buck” 
attachment
 22. The “E” in Einstein’s 
formula
 24. Greg, to Carol Brady
 26. He eulogized Julius
 27. Word screamed with joy 
before “a boy” or “a girl”
 28. Orlando’s love in As You 
Like It
 32. Visually-challenged 
excavators
 35. Greg Louganis’s 
specialty
 36. “I saw ___ kissing Kate” 
(tongue twister)
 37. Eurasian range
 38. Like wartime messages
 39. Eyes a bull’s-eye
 40. It’s gassy and exists to 
get your attention
 41. Breaks new ground
 42. When it comes to the 
atlas, it’s not the big 
picture
 43. Questionable patent 
medicines
 45. Snoopy, when wearing 
his scarf
 46. Red-___ (franks)
 47. Hammer and anvil mate
 51. Lyricist with Richard 
Rogers, Hart
 54. Dagwood’s creator
 55. Get some good out of
 56. Son of Zeus and Hera
 57. Feature of a gas stove, 
but not an electric one
 60. Mild partner?
 61. River associated closely 
with Shakespeare
 62. Glowing, smoldering 
coal
 63. Good wine quality
 64. Half of an infamous dual 
personality
 65. Heidi author Johanna
Down
 1. Displays astonishment, 
with the mouth
 2. Dostoevsky’s ding-a-ling
 3. It can be found in runes
 4. Cenozoic, for one
 5. Hates with a passion
 6. “Maximus to Gloucester” 
poet Charles
 7. Trendy Manhattan area
 8. ___ polloi
 9. Mollified
 10. Flexible tufted wire for 
meerschaum users
 11. Noted tent tycoon
 12. Comfortable and cozy
 13. Sacrosanct
 18. February 14 figure
 23. Org. that sticks to its 
guns?
 25. Half-baked utopia?
 26. They’re recorded in 
chess columns
 28. Fair offers?
 29. Cow-headed goddess of 
fertility
 30. Although you have a
first and last, your last 
is often used
 31. Composition of some 
very dirty clouds
 32. Buddenbrooks novelist 
Thomas
 33. Little pat on your buns?
 34. Vientiane is its capital
 35. Destines to a tragic fate
 38. Yiddish audacity
 42. Eaves droppers?
Puzzle 144: It R Squared
Treacherous

315
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
 44. He’s right up there with 
Mick
 45. Words with “while 
you’re” or “take a crack”
 47. Glittered
 48. British sport that 
resembles American 
football
 49. One who’ll help you get 
with the program?
 50. Microorganism-growing 
dish
 51. It’s younger than ewe?
 52. Cookie sold in a White 
Fudge version in winter
 53. From Here to Eternity 
Oscar winner, Donna
 54. Clump of earth
 58. It’s creepy, but they 
love it at Wrigley’s Field
 59. Mischievous little 
rascal

316
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Motivation to keep a 
doctor’s appointment
 5. Rhymester
 9. Trumped-up
 14. Let fall, as tears
 15. Restless yearning
 16. Bermuda border
 17. Indication of detachment
 20. Change in a major way
 21. Place to walk
 22. “Chances ___” (Johnny 
Mathis hit)
 23. The Cask of Amontillado 
author
 25. Sidekicks
 29. Aping avian
 31. Drove up the wall
 33. Genetic material
 34. Chain of mountains
 36. In the offing
 38. Cornered
 42. Arabian coffee
 43. Prepared a pineapple
 44. Boat propeller?
 45. One who’ll put you in 
your place
 47. Bit of a tiff
 51. Commandment
 54. Showy dance maneuver
 56. Letter from Greece?
 57. WWII predator
 59. Like some escapes
 61. How the sensible stand
 65. Commence
 66. Viscount’s superior
 67. Pre-Soviet royalty
 68. Humor with a twist
 69. Something to do to the 
music
 70. Slippery and slimy
Down
 1. Getaway with a guru
 2. Chipper
 3. Realm for St. Peter
 4. Work attributed to 
Snorri Sturluson
 5. Zero in on
 6. Mel with 511 home runs
 7. Twice-heard sound
 8. From that place
 9. System of numbering 
pages
 10. One struck Chicken 
Little
 11. Romanian money
 12. Down in the dumps
 13. Printer’s measures
 18. Little rascal
 19. It may be drawn by 
hand?
 24. Hence
 26. Figure in a pagoda, 
perhaps
 27. Organic compound
 28. Wasn’t off one’s rocker?
 30. Sole’s curve
 32. Sailing ship
 35. Wanted-poster 
abbreviation, perhaps
 36. Reverent wonder
 37. Passing fancies
 38. Lord of the Flies 
creature
 39. “God’s Little ___”
 40. Did groundbreaking 
work
 41. In a mistaken manner
 42. Implement in a bucket
 45. Abreast of
 46. Union members
 48. Examine with attention 
to detail
 49. Lacking a musical key
 50. Cheap and shoddy
 52. Interrupt, as a news 
broadcast
 53. Dark black hardwood
 55. Big deal for a duffer
 58. Springtime occurrence
 60. Education by 
memorization
 61. Edgar J. Hoover’s org.
 62. Auction end
 63. Braggart’s problem
 64. Historical segment
Puzzle 145: Ear to the Ground
Treacherous

317
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70

318
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Long, long time
 5. Defense grp. that 
includes the U.S.
 9. Inflict a heavy blow on
 14. Foul
 15. Gossip topic
 16. Office copier need
 17. “I knew ___ instant . . .”
 18. Horror film feature
 19. Management course 
subject?
 20. Night application, for 
some
 23. Be decisive
 24. Suspect’s demand 
(Abbr.)
 25. Exhausting, hectic 
routines
 30. Betty or Barney, of 
cartoons
 34. A quarter of four
 35. Involuntarily let go
 37. Respiratory noises
 38. Illusionist’s feat
 42. Kate’s sitcom partner
 43. Used a firehouse pole
 44. Feminine subject
 45. Close by
 47. Woodworker’s worry
 50. Work as a barker
 52. One-time queen of Spain
 53. Auction-ending 
statement
 60. “Lemon Tree” singer 
Lopez
 61. Ultimatum conclusion
 62. Queue after R
 63. Daniel follower, in the 
Bible
 64. Deadly septet
 65. “___ boy!”
 66. Washstand containers
 67. Small children
 68. Stone’s throw, for 
example
Down
 1. Tel ___, Israel
 2. Actress Lollobrigida
 3. Brio
 4. Year on campus
 5. Romantic evening 
extender
 6. Yours, to the French
 7. Gull relative
 8. The ___ Man (Heston 
film)
 9. Bravura performance
 10. Wells Fargo pickup
 11. Swenson of Benson
 12. Rain, but good
 13. Behave humanly?
 21. Masseuse employer
 22. Basketball pos.
 25. 1956 movie monster
 26. Old-womanish
 27. Electrical pioneer 
Nikola
 28. They’re no longer 
together
 29. Navy elite
 31. Criticize in no uncertain 
terms
 32. Cafe con ___ (coffee 
with milk)
 33. Acid–alcohol 
compound
 36. Icicle starter
 39. People can get quite 
high on it
 40. Funnel-shaped flowers
 41. Inaction
 46. URL ending, sometimes
 48. Gerund finale
 49. Pesters
 51. Cast off from the body
 53. Mushroom
 54. Seine feeder
 55. Hodgepodge
 56. Does not exist
 57. Sergeant Snorkel’s dog
 58. Cashews or filberts
 59. Gabor and Peron
 60. Not just any
Puzzle 146: Vanishing Ink
Treacherous

319
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68

320
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. ___ Flanders
 5. Home in Havana
 9. Surrounded by
 13. Lacking human warmth
 15. Trashy trait?
 16. Arhus native
 17. Space to maneuver
 19. It may be compact
 20. Any French king
 21. Hardly ordinary
 22. Kitchen appliance
 24. Kind of alert
 26. Place for hands
 27. Blackjack card with two 
values
 28. Show with a prince and 
fairies
 32. Mobile site
 33. Sturgeon yield
 34. Always, poetically
 35. White, brown, or 
basmati
 36. Choose
 38. British Revolutionary 
War commander
 42. Judge Judy’s org.
 45. Japanese ceremonial 
drink
 47. Modern auction site
 48. Business that doesn’t 
want to keep the books
 53. Vancouver-to-Calgary 
dir.
 54. Trade org. since 1960
 55. Tear violently
 56. Letter opener, 
sometimes
 58. Architect I.M.
 59. Center of activity
 62. “. . . marching ___ war”
 63. Investment choice
 66. TV crime show
 67. Anagram of lies
 68. Potato, for one
 69. Spacious type of bag
 70. Fifth Ave. crime fighters
 71. Main point
Down
 1. Bryn ___ (Pennsylvania 
college)
 2. Vaudeville shtick
 3. Related to the handling 
of details
 4. Birling unit
 5. Appliance attachment
 6. Fuss
 7. Appease
 8. Wardrobe relative
 9. Comments further
 10. Drink with rum and lime
 11. Air-breathing arthropod
 12. Edict
 14. Amaze
 18. Mystery Writers of 
America award
 23. Altar area
 25. Flockhart role
 26. Doubting Thomas
 28. Maker of checkout 
devices
 29. Tell’s home canton
 30. Business VIP or dove 
call
 31. Root for
 37. Gymnast’s dream score
 39. Capital of the United 
Arab Emirates
 40. You may step on it or 
burn it
 41. Pupil’s place
 43. Short personal profiles
 44. Medicine cabinet staple
 46. Achieve harmony
 48. Intellectual showoff
 49. Promoter of intl. 
cooperation
 50. “Get outta here!”
 51. Opinion opposed to 
usual belief
 52. It should set off alarms
 57. Floral gift
 58. Answered a charge
 60. All-purpose trucks
 61. Parks of Atlantic City?
 64. Jungfrau, for example
 65. Indication of a fish on a 
line
Puzzle 147: Elbow Room
Treacherous

321
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71

322
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. High dudgeon
 6. Go well together
 10. “Fernando” singers
 14. Green Acres character
 15. Mixed bag
 16. Layer of ore
 17. Mixed it up
 20. Grant opponent
 21. “Mockingbird” singer 
Foxx
 22. Nymphs of Greek myth
 23. Made waves?
 25. Price fixer
 27. From the top
 29. Packing material
 33. Mixed it up
 37. ___ Beta Kappa
 38. Gathering dust
 39. Infamous Ugandan 
Amin
 40. Big name
 41. One of The Three 
Stooges
 42. Mixed it up
 46. Affirm
 48. “En garde” weapon
 49. Silent screen’s Harold
 51. Impact noise
 55. Swamp
 58. Monetary exchange 
premium
 60. China “way”
 61. Mixed it up
 64. First name in diarists
 65. Popular cookie since 
1912
 66. Goddess of home and 
family
 67. Stages of a journey
 68. Handful of straw
 69. “Abandon hope, all ye 
who ___ here”
Down
 1. Impudent youngster
 2. Hindu noblewoman
 3. It makes you hot
 4. 4:00 refreshment, 
perhaps
 5. Sanitary measures
 6. Ways and means
 7. My Fair Lady lady
 8. Commandment 
violation
 9. Sinatra’s hometown
 10. In the wake of
 11. Old videotape format
 12. Tread-bare
 13. City on the Skunk River
 18. Put the kibosh on
 19. Parts of a house
 24. Mass-produce
 26. New soft drink of 1961
 28. Element of Dr. Seuss’s 
work
 30. Capable of
 31. Grow genial
 32. They’re dubbed
 33. Flaccid
 34. Polecat’s trademark
 35. Marc Antony’s love, 
familiarly
 36. Dedicatory verse
 40. 1977 Triple Crown 
champion Seattle ___
 42. Rostropovich’s 
instrument
 43. Henceforth
 44. Some nerve you’ve got
 45. Be incumbent on
 47. Lucky breaks
 50. Secluded valleys
 52. “This is only ___!” 
(radio message)
 53. ___ blanche
 54. ’80s–’90s quarterback 
Bernie
 55. Inclusive abbr.
 56. Love points
 57. Saucer-shaped 
instrument
 59. Baby food, more or less
 62. Exodus hero
 63. “. . . all ___ are created 
equal”
Puzzle 148: Fighting Words
Treacherous

323
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69

324
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Word in Einstein’s 
equation
 5. Ye ___ shoppe
 9. Screenwriter Chayefsky
 14. “Gymnopedies” 
composer Satie
 15. Lowing places
 16. Leave out
 17. Let Us Now Praise 
Famous Men author 
James
 18. Crazed
 19. Eskimos’ kissers?
 20. “Do You Believe in 
Magic” band
 23. Gregg specialist, for 
short
 24. Blunt sword
 25. Be decisive
 28. Bowery bums
 31. Draws out
 33. Campgrounds residue
 36. Jude or James
 39. Ms. Teasdale
 40. 1962 Polanski film
 44. Reckless
 45. Land and sea meeting 
place
 46. Curvy letter
 47. Skater Baiul
 50. Program command
 52. Marshal of Waterloo
 53. There are 54 in a game, 
usually
 56. Okra soup
 60. Decision spot
 64. Gambler’s loss, 
figuratively
 66. Spaghetti sauce brand
 67. Kind of van or bus
 68. Cockney’s challenge
 69. Emerald Isle
 70. Commodious crafts
 71. Steep-walled land 
formations
 72. Adept
 73. Hatchling’s home
Down
 1. Square trio
 2. In-group lingo
 3. Colander kin
 4. Coils of yarn
 5. Automotive pioneer
 6. Spring
 7. Actor Willem
 8. Prohibit legally
 9. Like some fattened 
livestock
 10. Felipe, Jesus, or Matty 
of baseball
 11. Disjoint
 12. H.S.T. successor
 13. Conciliatory response
 21. Lariat’s end
 22. Born
 26. Shimon of Israel
 27. Pre-Revolution leaders
 29. Mai ___
 30. Confessor’s revelations
 32. Superpower’s letters
 33. Ohio city
 34. Grass inhabitant?
 35. Whiny temper tantrums
 37. Highest degree
 38. Archaic pronoun
 41. Agcy. for homeowners
 42. East or West ending
 43. Golf club
 48. Some bridge positions
 49. Shore bird
 51. Start of a James Coburn 
film title
 54. Out of gas
 55. Drum type
 57. Watery-patterned cloth
 58. Safe places?
 59. Keats or Milton, notably
 61. Killer whale
 62. End of the workweek 
letters
 63. Peck partner
 64. Uncle of 32-Down
 65. Hurry
Puzzle 149: Table Setting
Treacherous

325
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73

326
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 
Across
 1. Basil or sage
 5. Legwear of yore
 10. Some Morse symbols
 14. Middle Eastern 
potentate
 15. Take one’s sweet time
 16. With a clean slate
 17. Wheels for wheels
 18. Peculiar speech form
 19. Vehicle at an auction, 
perhaps
 20. Whipped along
 21. It’s colorful in your head
 23. Norton Sound city
 25. Reverberated
 26. Rapeseed oil
 29. Small speck
 31. Not under one’s breath
 32. Parcheesi, for example
 37. Yard holder
 38. Irritable
 39. Very funny one
 40. Canned fruit
 42. It may be cast out
 43. They’re caught on the 
beach
 44. Daily ritual, below the 
border
 45. Joint injury
 49. Trumpeting bird
 50. Bechamel, for example
 53. Ballet finale, for 
example
 57. Freedom from hardship
 58. Pondered
 59. Mountains of Russia
 60. Befuddled
 61. “Goodnight” girl of song
 62. Water source
 63. Glossary entry
 64. Some pastries
 65. Fawning females?
Down
 1. First of two parts
 2. First name in Olympic 
long distance running
 3. Frosty covering
 4. Power company 
problems
 5. Mark of infamy
 6. Military chaplain
 7. Verdi’s “Caro nome,” for 
example
 8. Helen’s destination
 9. Feature of crossword 
grids
 10. Villainous Vader
 11. ___ a customer
 12. Wickiup relative
 13. Scimitar, for example
 22. Scored perfectly
 24. Word with “Glory” or 
“Testament”
 26. Summer getaway
 27. Winglike
 28. Narrow victory margin
 29. Painting Grandma
 30. Horse feed
 32. Group of quails
 33. Foreigner’s work permit
 34. Aspires
 35. Subject to debate
 36. Peak seen from the 
Ionian Sea
 38. Pass on, as a genetic 
trait
 41. Canal with a mule 
named Sal
 42. Day in Durango
 44. Nobel and others
 45. Blood–tears link
 46. Full moon or first 
quarter, for example
 47. Stair part
 48. Col. Hannibal Smith and 
friends
 49. Olfactory sensation
 51. Surrounding glow
 52. Manipulative person
 54. Spicy stew
 55. Hill partner
 56. Is green without envy?
Puzzle 150: Color Wheel
Treacherous

327
 Chapter 3: Tackling the Puzzles
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65

328
Part II: Tackling the Puzzles 

Part III
Checking the 
Solutions

In this part . . .
T
his part serves two very important functions. 
First, it offers you a nice pat on the back if 
you’ve solved an entire puzzle and just want to 
check your accuracy. (You don’t really need 
to check your accuracy if you’re confident about 
your answers and the grid is complete, but the 
validation sure does feel nice, doesn’t it?) Second, 
it offers the answers to those oh-so-frustrating 
clues that threaten to keep you awake at night. 
Just promise me you won’t peek at a solution until 
you’ve given your puzzle of choice a run for the 
money!

Chapter 4
Checking the Solutions
H
opefully you know better than to read through this chapter before you 
have a chance to work on the puzzles in Chapter 3! However, there is one 
answer I can show you right now, which is the answer to the puzzle example in 
Chapter 2:
 
Sample Puzzle: How Grueling!
P E K E
B E R M
S
I C E M
U V E A
A L A
I
E N A M I
T
I E C L A S P S
A S P O T
A L P H A B
I
T S
S A N T E
N A E
P R A N C E R
M A S A D A
D
I A L E R
E L M O S
P A G E T
U M P
O V A L
L O N G S
R N A S
W A R
D O P E Y
L
I C K S
T H E S
I S
R E D H O T
I
T S O P E N
A A A
N A T A L
J U S T R
I G H T
A C A R E
A L
I E N R A C E
W O R S T
Y E A R
A R F S
E S T E E
S E N S
S P A T
Answers to the remaining puzzles in this book begin on the next page!

332
Part III: Checking the Solutions 
Puzzle 1: A Pinpoint Solution
A B B A
O H A R E
A D D S
R O E S
P A L M S
V
I
I
I
A R R I
V E D O N T H E D O T
B E T
E R N E
E R O D E
B L A T
G L A S S E S
L
I
L A C S
B L A D E
O N A I R
D E E M
W H O
V
I C T O R
I A N P E R
I O D
E T E
E A R N
N O L L E
S T
I
R S
S C A L D S
C O T T O N Y
S T A R
A V I A N
M A I M
L A S
J U M P
I N G O F F P O
I N T
U L E E
Y O D E L
L A N A
N E S S
S T E R E
D R A B
Puzzle 2: Turn-Ons
C H A T
T B O N E
O H N O
R
I C H
H E L
I X
M O O N
U P T O
A R E N T
A L D A
S P
I N N I N G J E N N Y
T O N G A
A N T
G A B
V
I V A
D H A R M A
I M B E C I
L E
L A I
T
W H I R L
I N G D E R V
I
S H
H A N A
O A T M E A L S
A V
I D L Y
E V I
L
T E A
E O S
E B S E N
T W I R L
I
N G T E A M S
B L U R
K A R O L
F L A Y
M Y R A
E V A D E
I
S
I N
W E E P
R E N E E
T A L C
Puzzle 3: Shoot!
G R A S P
A P S E
C A M P
O N A
I R
C O A L
O H I O
B A R R E L R O L L
G E L S
F U E L
I
N A N E
S T R E A K
T I
R A D E S
C H A M B E R M U S
I
C
R E B U S
E A R L S
B A M
U R I
S
B A R R E
B A L E
B E D
B U L G E
P E S O S
B U L L E T T R A I N S
S H O R T L Y
O A K L E Y
T A C
I
T
S E M I
O P E D
H A M M E R H E A D
O P A L
A L U M
I M A G E
D Y N E
G A G A
E S T E S
Puzzle 4: Stop Bugging Me!
S E M I
S R I
S
D E C A F
A X E D
M O N K
A N E R A
I
T S Y B I
T S Y S P
I D E R
T R A L A L A
O H D E A R
H A S
L E T D O W N
F L Y O N T H E W A L L
A T R I A
R A T A
I
L
I
E
H A I R D O
T U S S L E
A L P S
R
I
F F
S P O T S
B E E T L E B A I
L E Y
A G E N D A S
A U K
D O S
I D O
G R U M B L E
A N T S
I N O N E S P A N T S
S T O L E
T O T O
S E R E
H O P E S
B R Y N
T R A Y

333
 Chapter 4: Checking the Solutions
Puzzle 7: Get It Together
B O S S
A T A L E
S E N T
O L
I O
G E T O N
A D U E
S E A M
E T A T S
M A D E
C O M B
I N E D
I N C O M E
R E D S
A H A
S C L E R A
L U R E
S R A
W E A R
B E S E E C H E S
A S S O C I A T E D P R E S S
B A S S
I N E T S
O D E A
S R O
V A L S
F O S S E Y
R E S
D A I
S
U N I
T E D A
I R L
I N E S
B R A T
N A L D I
N O N E
E A S E
S T A
I N
G L O W
A L A S
E A R N A
S A S S
Puzzle 8: It’s In the Mail
R A C E
F L O A T
E C O L
A L E C
L O T T A
S A B E
B I
L L M U R R A Y
P R O S
B E L
I
E
N A T L
O D E S
I N S P
I R E S
O P U S
S R O
C R U S H E D
S A L E
T H O U
L E A V E
O R E
C H E C K U P
R E F
P I
T C H
S T E P
S P R Y
H A T R E D S
O A T
E U R O
S U N L A M P S
F A R M
I R A S
T R A S H
L U M P
N O T E W O R T H Y
O R A L
G L A R E
E T A L
P A N E
S E N S E
D E W Y
Puzzle 5: From the Crow’s Nest
L O K I
B O G I E
R E E F
A S
I N
A C O R N
A R C O
I
L L S
A C A S T
D I
R E
C O L U M B U S
A B A C U S
L
I A R
S N O R T
H A V A N A
S A G A
H E W
A R E T E
P A U L S
E R A
S
I R E
C A S T E
F R A T
T A R
H O R S E
G E E S E
E S A
I N K Y
L E A D E R
Z E L D A
H E R R
D A Z Z L E
M A G E L L A N
O M A R
N A I
V E
E A S E
L E N A
S
I R E N
S K
I S
E N O S
E M E N D
S E A T
Puzzle 6: Hut, Two, Three, Four
T O T E M
E F T S
S L O G
O K A P I
G R
I P
E X P O
M A X
I M
G A P E
L
I A R
C O M P U T E R F
I
L E
S P A
S O L
O D E
H I
T P A R A D E
N O S E S
O G E E
G N U
S T O P U P
R O A N
A T R
I A
M I R A
T U S C A N
E M U
P R E Y
S T E E D
P R
I C E H
I K E
A M I
T E X
T A D
F R E D R I
C M A R C H
L O D E
S K I
T
E A S E L
A L G A
E L L E
S W E D E
K E E N
R E D S
S K A T E

334
Part III: Checking the Solutions 
Puzzle 11: To the Rear
L A P A Z
A B E L
C A B S
O V O L O
L E G O
A R
I A
F O L L O W I N G O R D E R S
T W O S
R E D
K N E A D S
T H E N
T H A T
C A N A A N
A W E
S W A M
A C E R B
A F
I R E
E V E
C H A S I N G O N E S T A
I
L
H E R
T E A R S
T O R S O
E S S O
O R E
P E R S O N
L E N S
L O S E
S W E D E S
E O S
O S L O
T R A
I
L
I N G T H E P A C K
L A S E
G R I
T
V E R D I
O P T S
N A S A
A N
I
S E
Puzzle 12: Money, Honey
P A P A
A N K L E
S K I
S
S M E W
L U N A R
C A R L
S M A L L P R I C E T O P A Y
T O T
E A S T
R O U T E
P A C E
S M A T T E R
A R M A D A
S H E D S
L E A N
P H O N E
B U S
B A N G F O R Y O U R B U C K
S P Y
I V
I
E S
U G L
I
S N E E R
B A L S A M
R E M A I N S
T U S K
O R A L S
W H O A
U G H
W O R T H E V E R Y P E N N Y
E D G E
R A N E E
A D A M
R E E D
A N T E D
T O W N
Puzzle 9: Now’s the Time
D O Z E
D E B T
S M E L T
A K
I N
U S E R
Y
I K E S
M I
N D
N C A A
S N E A K
S E C O N D A R Y
T U S K S
N O E L
S T E T
B A N
R E A L
O M E L E T
O M A H A
T A S S
M I
L E
R I
C O
S O D A S
A R
I A
E C R U
T R E F
G N A T S
S
I
E R R A
N E M O
S E E
G I N A
T E E M
S C O L D
D A Y D R E A M S
P A P A L
A I N U
D R A T
A M U S E
I D E S
A C M E
M E S S Y
R A T A
L O A M
Puzzle 10: Hair Today, 
Gone Tomorrow
A G H A
E P
I C
W E F T
R O O M
C O N E
L A D L E
A R T
I C H O K E
E R I
E S
B E D
R E L Y
M A R C E L
O R A L
R O S E T T A
P A G E B O Y
E V E N
U R G E
N A I
L E R
P A S
L E E K S
W W I
S P E L L
L A D
C A N O E S
O N T O
B O L E
F L A T T O P
A D M I R E D
E L S E
T O U P E E
F E E D
C H I
I N T E R
P O M P A D O U R
L E E D S
T
I M E
O S L O
T E D S
A L A R
S T A N

335
 Chapter 4: Checking the Solutions
Puzzle 15: Nice House!
D
I O N
B A
I
T
P A P A S
A B R A
A C R E
L L A M A
D E N M O T H E R
A P R
I
L
S T E E L
I E
M A T
I L D A
L E N D
R E N O
P A G E S
M A N N E R E D
A L A S
M A U V E S
G A R
S
I R S
E S S E S
L A T E
S E A
E T H E R S
A M E S
E N G I N E E R
O V E N S
E N D O
S A K
I
O B S C U R E
T E A S H O P
F L A I R
S T U D Y H A L L
F A L S E
P
I
N E
E L
I
A
S T E E D
Y A K S
D E N Y
Puzzle 16: Fire!
F O N D U
S L
I
P
G O D S
A R E A S
W O R E
E P E E
S T A T E D E P A R T M E N T
T O R E
A D E N
W I D T H
B A L E
K I N
G A S O L
I N E E N G I N E
A L O O F
L E
I
S
I A N
L O O K
A R E N T
U N T O
A F T
E C O N
I N J U N
T H E G R E A T E S C A P E
A G E
U R A L
C O N G A
M O S S
O H N O
R A I
L R O A D S T A T
I O N
E T T E
F U E L
T H R O E
W H A T
F
I
R E
T E E N S
Puzzle 13: Back Me Up
U S A F
C H E F
S H I
V A
M E G A
R O A R
E A S E L
P R A M
A C R E
W I
L L A
B R I N G U P T H E R E A R
L E G S
O D D
W A R I
L Y
A P T
O M A N
A L
I A S
O S
I E R
E G O
F O L L O W T H E L E A D E R
E N E
N I
T E R
L
I
E N S
R E D S
D O N
P
I R A T E
W O E
E A S T
C O M E F R O M B E H I N D
A P A R T
R E B A
G E A R
S A L V E
A M E N
H A Z Y
A L
I
E N
N O D S
T R E E
Puzzle 14: Fool Me Once
A P S E S
C H A D
S T A R
P L U C K
H E R R
E R L E
H A N K Y P A N K Y
V E A L
I C U
W A R N
C H E E R Y
D E P A R T
A S L A N T
L
I
E D
E E L
R E F
S P L
I
T
E D N A
R U L E
P
I
E C E O F N O N S E N S E
A N T E
R E A R
P
I K E S
R A H
A I R
S M O G
A C C E S S
A N N A L S
W A R R E N
O A K S
R U T
A R G O
T O M F O O L E R Y
R E
I N
A L M A
R A T E L
P A C E
L E E R
S W E D E

336
Part III: Checking the Solutions 
Puzzle 19: Bye!
T W I
S T
P A S T
R U E D
E A R T H
E L H
I
U N T O
A R M O R
L O O M
N
I
T E
L E A V E
I
T T O B E A V E R
E A R
K E R R
M C M
T A C O
R I O T E D
I R I
S
T O A D
C U O M O
R E C K L E S S A B A N D O N
E E R I
E
T
I N Y
D A T A
S P O N G E
S E R F
Y E S
T
I D E
O A S
S P L
I
T
I N F
I
N I
T
I
V E
T R I G
T O R N
S O N A R
E A C H
O L E G
A N T
I
S
N Y E T
R A T E
L E O N E
Puzzle 20: New Shoes
S L O T
B O P P E R
S
I
T
H O B O
O R
I O L E
C O N
A N T
I
R E E K E D
H U T
D E A L
I N G D E V
I C E
E L
I
N E O
E N A M E L
S Y N O D
N S A
K N I
F E
T
I
S
I
L E
I N F O
B R A K E L
I N
I N G
R H E A
Y A K
E W E
A M E N D
T S P
A S T O R
M O R T A R
I N N
A D E
M O N O P O L Y T O K E N
G N U
G U R G L E
F E S T
A U G
L E E R A T
F U S E
P T S
E N T E R S
S P A R
Puzzle 17: Mr. Fix-it
L A I C
L A S T
S T R A Y
I
S N O
A R E A
H E A V E
B R O K E D O W N
O R G A N
R E P E A L S
K N E E
A D E
R E E F
A S S
I
S T
R U M S
I D O
A N N E
S N A F U
P R I M E
D O E
O U T O F C O M M I
S S
I O N
U R I
F A L S E
T E S T S
R S V P
F L U
S O A R
S E E T H E
P A
I
N
E T A
B A S S
C R
I
S P E R
J A S O N
C A M E A P A R T
I
L
I A D
A D E N
A
I R S
G E N T S
M O S S
T R A Y
Puzzle 18: Top Performance
M E A L
O M E G A
G R A B
A X L E
R O M A N
R O P E
C A S T S D O U B T
A L E E
S M O T H E R S
E S T E R S
E Y R E
C L A
I M
A C R E S
B L O S S O M S
O T H E R
T R A P S
D E E
R A I
D
G R I M E
C E N T
E L L
C L A N S
M A L L S
M E D D L
I
N G
L A S S O
S E E M S
R O N A
L A P T O P
S O N I
N L A W
E R L E
S T A G E C O A C H
T E A R
E A G E R
V
I
N E
S A Y S
S T A R S
A N E W

337
 Chapter 4: Checking the Solutions
Puzzle 23: Kingdoms
L
I
F T
A R N A Z
C A P O
S T A R
T H E R E
A D A M
D O N O F B O X
I N G F A M E
T Y R A N T
R E P E L
S P A
E T E
W R E S T L E
H U S H E S
N E A T
S A T
E R I E
H A L T E D
L A R R Y O F T A L K T V
B E A S T S
N O O N
S A C
F L E A
P A Y O L A
P U R S U E D
H U N
L E G
I
R A T E
S A N T A S
N O V E L
I
S T S T E P H E N
A R E A
R O U T E
S E R A
L A N K
A D D E R
E D E N
Puzzle 24: Connected
A T O M
C A B L E
D A S H
M A K O
A L
I E N
E L L A
E C R U
E L C I
D
N E A R
S O A N D S O
T H I
E V E
T R A Y S
O A R
E A S
I
E R
T O E T O T O E
A S K E W
S I G N S
U R N
G S A
O W N E D
T
I
T
L A T
S N A K E
A C T O R
E Y E T O E Y E
B R A
I N Y
H U T
R A R E R
N U M E R O
B Y A N D B Y
E T U
I
O M A H A
A U R A
S A S S
N
I X O N
G O A L
T H E M
E X E R T
E S T E
Puzzle 21: Lit Up
U P O N A
D O D O
B L O W
S O R E L
E V
I
L
L
I
V E
S N A R L
N E E D
A R E A
G L O W S I N T H E D A R K
E L M
A X E
V A C A T E
D O T E
A C T
I C O N
D R I
P
C O B R A
S H I N E S O N E S S H O E S
T E L E X
L E N T
M U T E
A S S
A U L D
R A S T E R
A M P
S A T
B E A M S W I
T H P R I D E
A C R E
A G U E
I
S A A C
T H I N
R O B E
U L T R A
T O A D
D R A T
M E A N T
Puzzle 22: Getting Around
B A S E
S E M I
G A S P S
U P C S
A T O M
U L T R A
S P A C E S H I
P
F L O O R
E L L
S H E
E L F
P S I
Y E A S T
R A D I A N
C O V E R E D W A G O N
A E S O P I A N
S
I E G E
P L O T
A L
I C E
V A L E
E L A T E
C E N T E R E D
R A P
I D T R A N S I
T
E G O I
S T
G E E S E
E R A
I M P
A W E
P T A
D I V A N
R I
V E R B O A T
I C I N G
A T O P
A C R E
T E S T S
P O S T
T H E N

338
Part III: Checking the Solutions 
Puzzle 27: Two of a Kind
F R A U
N O V A
S E T O N
R E S T
I
B A R
L A
I
N E
A N T E
L E S S
A G R E E
M A R R I
E D C O U P L E
E M A
I
L
I O N S
E S P N
D E Y
O W E
S A O
O O O
E V A N S
A R M O R
S
I
L E N T P A R T N E R
A C T
I
I
A R O M A
B A A
T E A
E Y E
A T M
E R L E
E L L A
A S T R O
I
D E N T
I C A L T W I N
S N A
I
L
A T O P
L O C K
T E N T S
R U D E
E R
I
E
P A S S E
S P E D
O K A Y
Puzzle 28: Physically Fit
F A D S
I R
I
S
A M A Z E
A L E E
N E O N
N E V E R
L O B E
T U T U
A R E N A
S O U N D A S A B E L L
E F T
A C E S
V O I
C E S
G U T
S
I G N O R A
C L E A N
S L A T
O A K
H E A L T H Y A S A H O R S E
E E G
E N D S
A P S E S
A C E R B
I C
D I
T
T H R E E S
A B E T
O C T
F
I
T A S A F
I D D L E
R E S
I N
W I R E
I
D E A
A M O N G
O D O R
A L A S
D U N E S
L E N S
L Y R E
Puzzle 25: Visiting the Zoo
Y E N T A
T B A R
A M O K
A D O R N
E R L E
D A T E
P
I
L O T
R I O T
A S H Y
S T O O L P
I G E O N
T E E
P E R
R A C E R S
M I D
R O O M
T S A R
E R I
E
O P A L
A L C O A
S A C R I
F
I C I A L L A M B
A N T
I C
E A R L
A R A B
I
K E A
W A V E
D R Y
C H O S E N
I N C
H E N
S
I
T T
I N G D U C K
A M A H
M O O R
A R S O N
R A R E
A N T
I
G O O D E
O N Y X
L E E S
E M C E E
Puzzle 26: What Did You Say?
E B B S
W A F E R
T A M P
F O O L
A R O M A
O V E R
T A X I
F
I R M S
M I R O
S T A T E C A P
I
T A L S
F L U
I S L E
D O N E E
R A P I
D
P R O M
E X P R E S S M A I
L
S O B
R E E K
E M I
R S
E L L E
E R R
S P E A K E A S I
E S
P E T E
M E T O O
A I
S L E
S
I R E
H S T
U T T E R N O N S E N S E
N C A A
A R O S E
E R A S
T H
I S
S E O U L
M E T E
S Y N E
H O P E S
I D E A

339
 Chapter 4: Checking the Solutions
Puzzle 31: A Little Seasoning
S H A F T
R A S P S
S A T
H E A R A
A V E R T
U R I
S P R
I N G F E V E R
M U D
S K I
E W E
M B A
M A W K I S H
R A W D E A L
A L
I
N E A P
R E A R
Y O N
G L U E S
D
I S C S
O N T O
E N T E R
S T O P
R E E L S
T A T E R
O U R
R E N E
L U C E
C P A
U N S O U N D
P A S S K E Y
N E T
F R I
L E
I
I
P O
F A L L C L A S S
I C
T A R
I G L O O
L A U R A
E L M
T E S T Y
S L E E T
Puzzle 32: Table Setting
M E W L S
L A Z E
L A L A
A D I
E U
O L E O
A M E X
L I N E N
S U P E R B O W L
I T S
S K
I M P
E E R I E
S H I
N
E N D L E S S
L O O K
I N G G L A S S
O G L
I
N G
R
I G
U S E
C R E P E
F A N
T E S T Y
K E G
A R I
P A L M E R
L
I C E N S E P L A T E
A T L A S E S
U K E S
T R I
T E
H O P E D
M D S
B U T T E R C U P
E M A I
L
A C H E
B U R L
C A R V E
T E E S
I
T S Y
K N E A D
Puzzle 29: Opposites Attract
T S K E D
D A T A
I
T C H
O K A P
I
A M E N
M U L E
O U T
I N F R O N T
P R O M
K A O S
I R K
F
I
E N D S
O S L O
P A N D A
O L D N E W Y O R K E R S
K N E E L
A R M Y
O I
L
Y E A S
D O S E S
H U L A
D A D
S E M I
P
I N K Y
L A S T F
I
R S T L A D Y
S T
I
L T
M E O W
S A T
I R E
B U C
A I D A
T U R F
C O L D H O T D O G
A R A L
T H U G
P H O N E
G A Y E
S M E E
T A L E S
Puzzle 30: Careful!
A D L
I B
B O L D
G R I
D
B O O N E
A S
I A
R O D E
B L
I N D A L L E Y
A V O N
E E N
T R I O
L O V E L Y
C I A O
S I R E
S T U M B L
I N G B L O C K
C H O R E
R A H S
P A N
U R N S
C R E P T
M A N E
J U G
R U I
N
B E L O W
O B S T A C L E C O U R S E
A G U E
U R G E
T R U I S M
E T A L
P A S
H A L L
B O T T L E N E C K
A R N O
E R N E
R
I
A T A
W E A R
R E A R
S P R I
T

340
Part III: Checking the Solutions 
Puzzle 35: Heard Through 
the Beanstalk?
S C A M P
S T A G
P A L E
A L
I
B I
T E T E
I V A N
C A R A T
O N T O
F A D E
S P Y
F E A T U R E F
I
L M
S A L T S
G A L L E Y
A N G E L A
R I
S E
F
I N A L N O T
I C E
S M U
A L A N
A
I
L
S E A S
R E T
F O R M L E T T E R S
T A N S
M E A N E R
A S S A I
L
A S I A N
F U M B L E D B A L L
I
T S
O R E O
A R A B
E
I G H T
R E A R
V A S E
A D O R E
E R R S
E W E R
F O R U M
Puzzle 36: Eyes Right
D R U M S
M I D I
A G R A
R A N U P
A M O S
B R
I E
A N I
T A
L A I R
L E S S
G I
V E T H E G L A D E Y E
D E A
O Y E R
S R S
S R O
L E A R N S
N E A L
I N A P I G S E Y E
A T T A R
C P A
S P L A T
P R I V A T E E Y E
S
I
L O
S O N A T A
S V U
C A N
E L M O
A N O
A P P L E O F O N E S E Y E
A N I
L
N I
T A
A C R E S
B E T A
T R E S
S A G A S
S W A N
S E N T
E R O S E
Puzzle 33: Brushing Up
A L T A R
V I N O
S T A T
T E R N E
E V E N
H I
V E
R A I N F O R E S T
A G E E
A R G U E R S
T A M P E R S
A R E A S
R U E R
A M B L E S
T O G S
W O E
B O U L E
E L S E S
O U S
R O S Y
F A U L T
P O T S
A S H
D I
S C O
H O D G E
M E L
O N E I
L E S S O N
E H U D
A E O N S
I N A T R A P
A L R I G H T
C A G E
J U N G L E B O O K
B T U S
O R A L
I
L O S T
M E E T
B E B E
D Y N E S
Puzzle 34: Off to the Races
A S P
U S P S
D O F F S
N
I
L
S P L
I
T
O C A L A
E K E
I
R A G E R S H W I
N
W H A T N O T
R E S E N T S
A G O
O N A I
R
M A R K E T P L A C E
E R A
O B I
E
S O D
T R A C E R
L
I
P
I D
D N A
S C O P E
A D O N I
S
E V A
E L E A
R E N
S H O W A N D T E L L
H O R N S
T E A
A P P A R E L
S H A L L O W
F
I
E L D W O R K E R
A L E
R E E V E
A D A M S
V
I
P
O S L E R
N A T S
A N T

341
 Chapter 4: Checking the Solutions
Puzzle 39: What’s On?
O P T S
O D E
C A S T R O
P L O W
B E L
A N C H O R
P A L E
E R A
S T A R E R
O N E D A Y A T A T
I M E
S E D E R
N E T
A B A
E D O
T A G
E R A S T U S
D I R E R
U S H E R S
T H R E E S C O M P A N Y
T A O I
S T
A V O I D
E R U P T E D
E R R
L A B
N O S
O E R
I N O N E
E I G H T
I
S E N O U G H
H A S S L E
E E E
W I
L E
I
N A N E R
I
E R
A S E A
M A T T E R
O N O
Y A R D
Puzzle 40: Waist Management
B A B E
S L O S H
T R E E
A C E D
C O C K Y
A U R A
S T A B
H A T E D
L
I S T
T
I M E C O N S T R A I
N T S
E V E R S O
C A M S
G A L O S H
A M P L E
D O S
B U Y
E T A L
I
A
O P E N F O R B U S
I N E S S
S A V O R Y
I S T
A P E
E L E N A
S L E A Z Y
S N I
P
T O E C A P
I M P E C C A B L E T A S T E
S E E N
A D
I E T
S P A R
A M O S
M E N S A
T A R O
S O N E
E S S E X
S N I
T
Puzzle 37: Opposite Attraction
F A C T
E D
I C T
H U N G
B R A Y
S E N N A
O G R E
I
T S P O S S
I B L E T H A T
T
I R E
T C E L L
S A D S O N G
S K
I M P Y
P L O T Z
A S P
S N O R E
F L U
C A R H O P
E N O S
B L O N D E S A L S O
A S T O
Y E R T L E
G N P
S T O W S
N E O
T A R O S
S U N L
I
T
P A H L A V
I
I D E A S
C A L M
P R E F E R G E N T L E M E N
J
I
V E
R E E S E
G E N E
S P A S
A S S A D
E D G E
Puzzle 38: On the Surface
S L A P
L A D Y
E G G S
P O N E
E T R E
L O R I
S
A C T A
B O I
L
M O O D S
S O I
L S A M P L E
D U E T
E O N
S A V A N N A S
E Y E D R O P
T
I R E D
L E A
E N I D
L
I S P E D
B A R T
T A G
S L A Y
A S T R A L
M A S T
A V E
H O N O R
S C A N N E D
I N Q U I R E D
O D E
D A U B
D I R T F A R M E R
O V A L S
G O O F
V O T E
L A K E R
N O N E
E R O S
L E S S
S P E D
S E N T

342
Part III: Checking the Solutions 
Puzzle 43: Parental Control
M M L
I
S L O S H
E M M A
G O O N
H O O K Y
L O I N
M O T H E R S H
I P
A M M O
T R I
A G E
S P E C I M E N
L O D E
S O N Y
C A S E S
N B C
T E T R A
H O U R
R A R E S T
R O T
E R G
F A M I
L
I A
A G O
A T A
E J E C T S
S C U M
P A R E R
L E
I
D U K E S
D
I A S
C R U Z
S H A L L O T S
E M E R G E
W A D E
C
I
T Y F A T H E R
A I D E
K N E E L
T E A R
B R Y N
S A P P Y
E A R S
Puzzle 44: 2K Race
S T Y E S
C A N E
K E G S
A R E S O
R
I O S
I R A N
K U N T A K I
N T E
T A M E
I E S
P O E T S
I
T S M E
K I
N D
O L D Y E A R
F
I G L E A F S
A O K
U L N A R
O U S T
E L H
I
E S A U
O U N C E
L E A D
L A W S
A L
I A
S L
I M E
K I
T
N F L T E A M S
G O W I
T H S
F U R Y
A L A N A
P O O N A
T E A
M E S S
K U B L A
I K H A N
B A N K
A M I D
N O I
S E
A N T
I
T E E S
S
I N E W
Puzzle 41: Pantry Raid
V E E R
S O F T
F L A K E
I B L E
O B E Y
L
I N E N
S E A L
D E E P
I
N T R O
A N T
I
P A S T O
P E A R S
E L S E
S P A R
H E A V Y
P A P E R C U P
A N N E
D E A L E R
T R I
R O T
P I C N I
C S
I B E
E L
I
A N O D E S
S C A R
M A C A R E N A
P L A N S
I D E S
A L D O
A S P E N
A N T
I Q U I
T Y
R O A S T
P O T S
G L E E
T U T T
I
E V
I
L
H I
L L
E P E E S
R A C E
S E L L
Puzzle 42: Road Rules
G A S P
C O R E
P A T T
I
A G A R
A M E N
A P H I D
R A R E
L E N T
G E R M S
B I G Y E L L O W T A X
I
O N E
M A E
I O N
L A D
M U S T A N G S A L L Y
S A R I
S
L E A
T E E N
L E A N
A M I S S
T R U E
I R I
S
D A B
M I
S T S
P
I N K C A D
I
L L A C
S E C
A
I M
I A N
H A S
H O T R O D L
I N C O L N
A D E P T
N O I R
I O T A
L O C A L
E G A D
T H A I
A N K L E
Y E N S
E A R L

343
 Chapter 4: Checking the Solutions
Puzzle 47: Capital Idea!
B R A S
S T E P
A B A B A
B O R E
H E R O
C A S E S
C A T E
R A
I
L
T R E A T
D E N V E R C O L O R A D O
E D S
O R E
A N G E R S
B O G
L A W S
S O A R S
A R R O W
L A P
S T P A U L M I N N E S O T A
E R E
S E E N O
T U N E R
T E S T
A N Y
S T E E R S
R E S
S H E
A T L A N T A G E O R G I A
R O U N D
D E A R
O D D S
F O R C E
A N T E
R O D E
S T E E D
M E S S
E L S E
Puzzle 48: Blink, Blink
C A L C
S A L E
C H E S T
O R E O
P L U G
R O M E O
B E A M
A G R A
A D M I
T
B A R B A R A E D E N
E N E
A N T E
N E S T E D
S C O T
I A
B R U S H
H E A R T
G E A R
E E L S
I D R E A M O F J E A N N I
E
M E S A
E L
I A
N A I
V E
D R A F T
B I
N D E R
P R A Y E R
S E M I
H E N
L A R R Y H A G M A N
A L O N E
E
I R E
A O N E
S A L O N
A S I
A
N O N O
E X E R T
M E A D
S T A N
Puzzle 45: Finishing Up
A S A P
S M O L T
C D L V
P O G O
O A T E R
A R O O
S L O W I N G T O A C R A W L
E D G E D I N
S C H E M E S
R A C E S
K I
T
M E S S
T O N S
S U E S
S A L A D S
F E T A
S A T
D R A W I N G T O A C L O S E
O T S
P A N E
R E E F E R
S H H S
P U N S
S A L E
C A B
S
I N G S
E C L A
I R S
S O O T H E S
G R I N D I N G T O A H A L T
G E S T
M I
T E S
A D A Y
S W A Y
S T O R E
N I N E
Puzzle 46: Guy Talk
P U F F
R A T S
G L E E
A R O O
E C H O
B O A R D
L E A R
G U R U
L U C I D
M A L E C A T O R T U R K E Y
S H R E W
R E D
B A B
I
E D
I S
I S
B R A
O M E G A
S N O B
B E E N
R I G H T T O T H E P O I N T
E D I
T
H I H O
A N N A S
D E N
S
I
T E
S N U G L Y
F O E
T H U D S
A W A R D F O R A N A C T O R
C A C A O
B A L K
A R L O
E N N U I
I S L E
R E D O
D E E D
T H E N
D E S K

344
Part III: Checking the Solutions 
Puzzle 51: I Want It All
B A U D
F E E D S
B A S H
T U N E
A T T
I C
A S T A
U N D E R L O C K A N D K E Y
T O P E S
E T A G E R E
V E S T
M E D E S
T A M P A
C O L D E R
I D
I O M
A W A Y
M A E
M A N I
P U L A T E S T O C K
E M T
M A R E
T O R R E
S H A R D S
A N N E S
O M A H A
S T A T
R E C I
T A L
P E O N S
B A R R E L O F M O N K E Y S
E R
I K
D R E A R
R E N O
D A D S
A N E N T
A D E N
Puzzle 52: Suits Me Fine
C R A G
D A T U M
O M A R
B O N O
E L U D E
V A N E
S E T O F C A R D S
A K I N
F A R
N E S S
E S T
S T L U K E S
R E L A C E S
T H E P
I P E R
S O S O
R
I G
R I D E R
T E N L B
I
N A N
T U N I S
A T E E
A G L O W
M A G I C
E V A
A S
I
F
L
I
L A B N E R
B O C E L L
I
D E N O T E D
A R T
L O N
I
N O W
L A I R
O F F
I C E W E A R
E T O N
D R
I
V E
O K R A
D E N S
S A T Y R
W E E P
Puzzle 49: Bird Watching
T O T A L
S T E P
R I
F E
U T
I C A
P E E L
O V U M
N I
L E S C R A N E
B A N E
E S T
T E E M
T W I N G E
P A L E
T H I
N A I R
A S P
I C S
P R O N G
S W E P T
M U
I R
I
L
I
E
E A S E
C O R E A
V E N D
A M O R
U N E S
C E A S E
L A T E R
B A N K O N
M E G A H
I
T
T A R S
I
L L U S E
S E R A
G A P
L
I A R
P E T E R F
I N C H
L O D I
I R A N
E L A N D
A T E E
E E G S
S O R E S
Puzzle 50: Buckle Up
A R C H
S H O D
S C A B
C O L A
S A U T E
L O R E
M O O D
T
I E B R E A K E R
E M U
L A D D
R A V
I N E
D E
I G N
A
I R
E A T
C O N V E Y O R B E L T
A L
I E N
H E R
U C L A
P E N N
D I O D E
L A O S
E O E S
R O D
M A N E T
O B I W A N K E N O B
I
A S H
O V A
O A T E N
S N O O Z E
N O S E
I O N
W I N D O W S A S H
E Z R A
A P E D
A T S E A
L E A P
N E S S
Y E A S
I D L E

345
 Chapter 4: Checking the Solutions
Puzzle 55: Ladies, Ladies, Ladies
E G A D
S P C A
A P P L E
T R U E
P A L M
C R
I E R
H E R B A L T E A
O I
L E R
E T A
P
I
T A
T U N E R S
L A S S O C O N T E S T
O P E N
E S T
A L E
A C L U
B E L
I E V E D
M I
S S
I
N G
I N A C T
I O N
C I
T A T
I O N
H A N A
S I
S
C N N
A R I A
S H E E R M A D N E S S
R E P A
I
R
O B
I
E
N A E
I R A T E
G A L L O N J U G
M I
N I
S
A R E A
C O C O
S C E N T
P S S T
R Y E S
Puzzle 56: Puzzle for Two
P A D S
N A S A L
M I
T T
A E R O
A G A T E
O R E O
T R A Y
T E N O N
T R E Y
R O W A N A N D M A R T
I N
O B I
O L D
T O G A S
L E N D L
A W A K E
A G O
O A R
I N N
S T E W
P E N N A N D T E L L E R
B R A E
F E E
W O O
P E R
A T O N E
G E L
I
D
S A P P Y
L A
I
O N E
C H E E C H A N D C H O N G
S H O T
H A M I D
E M I
R
T E N T
I R E N E
R E N E
P R E Y
T E N O R
E D G E
Puzzle 53: School Days
M O M S
A U N T S
O R S O
E R
I E
I
S E R E
B A A L
S E N I O R E X E C U T
I
V E
A O K
R I
F T
N U D E S
D I E U
S U D S
J U N I O R L E A G U E S
U T U R N
P Y L E
C O M
T A K E
A S S A Y
D I
V A
S H E
O S L O
G O F E R
S O P H O M O R E J
I N X
D R E W
N A T O
A T S E A
A U T O
A L P
F R E S H M A N S E N A T O R
A I
T S
A S N E R
H O B O
R O S A
C H E S S
A M O S
Puzzle 54: Breaking Bread
F
I N
O C H E R
T H A N K
A S A
O H A R A
D E F O E
T
I M
H E N R Y E S M O N D
S T E M
E D S E L
M O O S
B A G S
P O E T S
M E R R Y E N G L A N D
A L A R M
A R I
S E
D A D
Z A N Y
P I A N O
H A L E
E N D
M O V
I
E
M A R G E
C A L E N D A R Y E A R
M A O R
I
U S E D
P O P E
T E A M S
S E R F
S O R R Y E X C U S E
V
I
E
S L
I
C E
A R T
I E
I C E
T A L E S
M E T E R
L E D

346
Part III: Checking the Solutions 
Puzzle 59: Spy Game
M O P S
A M F M
B U R R S
E R I N
P O L O
I S A A C
A L T O
P R O P A G A N D A
D O U B L E A G E N T
G
I N
E P
I
L A Y
S O B E
I T
T S A R
W H E E L
C H A I
N
P A U L
A I W A
B U R R O W I N G M A M M A L
S T Y E
R O E S
Z E B R A
N O E N D
F U S E
C E S S N A
A E R
C
I S
O B I
S K I N B L E M I
S H
M O N T E S S O R I
O L L A
I N G O T
I V A N
L E A K
N Y E T S
S A M E
E S M E
Puzzle 60: Light Dining
M A S H
N A B S
D O M E D
A N T E
E L L A
E V A D E
O D O R
L O O N
R I
N S E
P O T L U C K D I N N E R
M A W
A I D
I D E A L
A R A B L E
L
I N E
M E T A L
P A N G
A M P S
B A C K Y A R D C O O K O U T
A S H E
G A L A
S
I
D R A
N O M E
T
I N
I
E R
L A S E R
S H E
F E E
T A I
L G A T E P A R T Y
A T R I A
I
R A N
A
I M S
G H E N T
L
I C K
K N I
T
S E D G E
T E E S
E G G Y
Puzzle 57: Shark Attack
H A T E
Y A N G
M B A S
A G O G
A N N A
M O U N T
L E M O N L A W S
O R L O P
O D E
O I D
P A N E L
S T E E P
L E N D E R
R O B L E
M I
L K T O O T H
E N L
I S T
L E A S
Z O O
S T U D
E G G O N
R E
I D
E O E
P A I
R
E D E R L E
N U R S E M A
I D
O A S E S
T R
I
P L E
M O U N D
B R A D S
G T O
M S T
S O B
I G
T
I G E R L
I
L Y
A T O N E
E R I N
O M E N
G O N G
P E E N
T
I D E
Puzzle 58: Verbs on the Run
A R U B A
C H A S M
T O P
L Y S O L
B U R M A
A B A
B E A T T H E H E A T
K E N
C H A R
N R C
E L
I
G A S H E S
P A T H E T
I C
R T E
A B B A S
B A H
I R A Q
E A R
D O T E R S
D I
L U T E D
L E X
I C O N
S A T E E N
A E R
N A P A
H U R
C L O V E
K E G
C H E E R F U L
I M B E D S
N O D
I
R R
I S E E
O W E
F
I
L L T H E B I
L L
T
I
A
I
D E A L
R O D E O
E E L
C A R O L
S P A I N

347
 Chapter 4: Checking the Solutions
Puzzle 63: Comet Watching
E T A L
H U T S
C O L E S
R A L E
O P A H
A D O R E
I
X
I A
M O L E
T
I
B I A
K I
T C H E N C L E A N S E R
H O T
F T C
H B O
B O H R
C O R S E T
O R M E
W O O L
M A
I N E
H E A V E N L Y O R B
I
T E R
O S H E A
M A K O
D A M S
S T A R R Y
L
I
S A
R Y E
T E C
E L M
B I
L L H A L E Y B A C K U P
A L O U D
O L E O
J O N I
T
I A R A
S L A W
O B I
T
H A N K Y
E A R L
B E T S
Puzzle 64: You Bet!
B A B E
C H A R
S P U D S
E C R U
H
I
R E
L A P
I N
S C A R
E P
I C
A S T R O
T R Y O N E S L U C K
H E W
S A S S E S
T H E S E
A E R O
E S T A T E
I N F E R
A G E S
E N I D
T O L L
C U R L S
E T O N
E L
I A
A L E S
A R E N A
R A P T O R
S E A S
A E S O P
T H R
I C E
M A C
P L A Y T H E O D D S
A M O U R
P O R E
O A R S
A M I L E
A K I N
S H O E
M O N T Y
L E O S
T O M S
Puzzle 61: To the Letter
W Y A T T
D O C K
I B I
S
H O V E R
E L L A
N O R A
A G O N Y
L E A N
A L A N
M I N D O N E S P S A N D Q S
O N E
S A M E
R A I N
E R A
S A L A D S
A W N S
D O N E
S Y R I A
N A B
X S A N D O S
T A N
D R E A R
R U G S
F I N D
R E D R A W
L E I
R E A P
B Y E S
E R E
D O T
I
S A N D C R O S S T S
O B I
T
P O O L
O H A R E
L O D E
O R E O
M E L E E
L E E R
N E S T
S N E E R
Puzzle 62: Eat!
S W E E P
W O R E
C A B S
H A N N A
E D O M
O S L O
E L
I H U
B O M B
F
I
E F
B E D A N D B R E A K F A S T
N C O
T E E N S Y
L U N C H C O U N T E R
I S L E Y
A T O L L
T A P
N E E D
S T
I
P E
B A N E
E R R
F E E L A
E A S T S
D
I N N E R J A C K E T
A S S E N T
A R K
L A T E N I G H T S N A C K S
P L O P
E L E E
E C L A T
H E R E
N E W S
S H A L E
A M E N
T E N T
T E N E T

348
Part III: Checking the Solutions 
Puzzle 67: On Tap?
T O N G S
S M O G
R U B Y
A R Y A N
A A R E
O L L A
C A L L O F D U T Y
U N U M
I T O
O J A I
S U G A R S
T E N S P O T
M E S H
T Y R
F
I R E S A L E
H I
F
I
D
I A L
S K
I
E S
A S
I
F
S T
I N G
E R A S
S T A F F
A R E A
T Y P O
P O T B E L L Y
L A C
R E L Y
O L D H A N D
R E S E D A
S P E D
N I A
E R L E
M O N E Y O R D E R
D I
A Z
A V O N
N O I C E
O N M E
S A W S
S T E E D
Puzzle 68: Tricky Situation
O T
I C
V C R S
P H O N Y
N O L O
E R
I E
R E S O D
E R
I C
R A C E H O R S E S
T A K E S F O R A F O O L
T R E T
M I D
G R O A N
S T
I
L T
A M A
A E R I
E S
I R E
I
T O N
P U L L S A F A S T O N E O N
E N O S
M A R
S A T
I R E
D E N
S U D A N
S E N S E
J O E
O P E N
D O U B L E C R O S S E S
R E A L E S T A T E
I D O L
A L T E R
A T O M
F
I R E
W A S P S
L E N S
Y E T
I
Puzzle 65: Look Up
L A S S
A B A T E
M A M A
I N C H
R E S I N
A C E S
S T A R S K Y A N D H U T C H
T E N E T
O P S
A L
I C E
W R E N
A R E N A S
S U N D A Y D R I V E R
I
S O L D E
A V E S
M O P
D E N Y
S E V E R
P
I M A
E R E
S H O E
A C U M E N
M O O N L
I G H T
I N G
P A Y O U T
N E E D
O L E O S
T O G
W O R S E
P L A N E T H O L L Y W O O D
P E R I
T E P E E
N O R A
A N N E
L A S S O
S T E M
Puzzle 66: Feeling Lucky?
V E R A
A F G H A N
R
I
B
O X E N
L A R E D O
E V E
C U T T H E C A R D S
S A T
A D
I E U
I D E S
H E N S
L E E
M B A
S U R L Y
P U L L T H E L E V E R
C H A I
S E
H O L Y
O N O
R A N G
A O R T A
A I
D S
A R T
A C N E
T W I R L S
S P
I N T H E W H E E L
H O P U P
U S A
S P A
L O O N
T S A R
V
I P E R
A N D
R O L L T H E D I
C E
N E E
O R I O L E
L E A N
D D S
B E T T E R
E D N A

349
 Chapter 4: Checking the Solutions
Puzzle 71: Community Puzzle
H U M P S
H A R M
T A P E
U S U R P
O D I
E
A S
I A
T A M I
L
L E A D
S T E T
C I
T Y S L
I C K E R S
S T P E T E
T A R
R C A
L A H R
N A T O
U P S E T
A R E A
P R E
L E
I
T O W N W I
T H O U T P I
T Y
G I
N
E R G
E L E V
G A V E L
D E C O
W I
R E
A V E
M A R
S I
R E N S
V
I
L L A G E V O I C E
E A V E
R A
I
L
I
N A N E
I
T E M
E R L E
E C R U S
N E T S
E Y E S
R H E T T
Puzzle 72: Hi, Chum!
C A L L S
A M U S E
S O S
A W E E K
M O S E Y
I D A
V
I V
I A N V A N C E
D O G
E R E
T
I
E S
U S H E R S
S E R P E N T
C R O O K
I R A
H A I R P
I N S
W A D E S
B A S T E
C E O
A M O S
R U T T Y
S K A T
D E N
P E L E E
R E S T S
I N K W E L L S
B A A
N E R O S
T O N N A G E
B I O N I C
O R E S
L O A
A C T
W A Y N E R O G E R S
L O T
I
T E M S
M A R G E
I N S
G E N E S
S
I
T E S
Puzzle 69: Clean Up
B A T H S
I O W A
S H A M
A C H O O
G N A W
C O M E
T H R O W I N T H E T O W E L
T
I
E
T O O
S
I R E N S
S P E A K E R
L O R E
P R
I M E T
I M E S O A P
A S
I A N S
W E E D
R N A
B E E T
F E D
A R O N
E T C
A B I
E
H
I R I
N G
T H E G R E A T B A S I N
A
I
N T
A B R A H A M
M O U S S E
A S I
A N O
O F T H E F
I R S T W A T E R
S M E E
I D L E
O R C A S
T E S S
T O O T
O C H R E
Puzzle 70: A Shrilling Puzzle
A T O B
F O N T
M C C O Y
L E H
I
B R I
E
R H O N E
B R I
L L
I
A N T
T
I B I A
S M O K E A L A R M
P R O S
S E G
A D A M A N T
E V E
Z E D S
S H U
B O X C A N Y O N
A N G S T
B L A H
T E N O N
K O K O
S E M I
S
S I M O N S A Y S
H I P
A E R O
L E S
S I
T U P O N
T H E
E L
I
A
D O G W H
I
S T L E
L
I
T H E
T W I S T T
I
E S
V A L U E
M E R E
E L S A
A D E A L
E N Y A
E T T U

350
Part III: Checking the Solutions 
Puzzle 75: Shake!
C E D E S
C A L F
C L A M
A X
I A L
A L O E
A U R A
V
I
S T A
S
I G N A P A C T
E T C
C H I
T
S O U S E
O A K E N
E M I
T
H A M M E R O U T A D E A L
E L F
I N
I N G E
V A T
L
I O N
S
I
N A I
L A N A
P A R
C A R T
P O L A R
S T R I K E A B A R G A I
N
O V
I D
A L
I
E N
S W E D E
E L A N
C A L
M A K E T E R M S
T A H O E
O V E N
L
I M A
E V E N T
G E S T
L O A M
R E S E T
Puzzle 76: Look Here!
T A P E D
C A L
S C O T T
O S A K A
L
I E
L O R R E
W A
T E R P O L O
U N I O N
E R E
T
I S
R E F O L D
L U
L L
P E C C A D
I
L L O
E L
L I
S
T R A P
T E E N
D E A R
I E
E S T E
S R S
A N D B E H O L D
C S
T
S K I
P
R A
I
S E S
A H A S
O G E E
N O T M E
M O N T E C A R L O
R E A R
P O
T A S H
F R A
A I M
E T A T S
A R M A D
I
L L O
R A R E E
T O A
A L
I
E N
S T A N S
M E N
M E N D S
Puzzle 73: To the Letter
S W A Y
M E T A
S T E A K
T Y P E
I R O N
T
I
T L E
A L P S
N E O N
E T U D E
P I
E
E X C L A M A T
I O N
H E A D S E T
I
L L
R O S S
S P A
E S T E
C L A R A
A N I M A
W A F
H O N E Y O F A N
I N S E C T
A R C
S T A K E
O L E O S
T E E S
T R Y
D I
E T
I
R E
M A N D E L A
S U M M E R S H I
R T
N O R
A L O O F
H O N K
B E A R
I N A N E
O N C E
O R C A
L A T E R
P E E R
A S H Y
Puzzle 74: Get a Job
H O L D
O P E N E D
T R Y
O P
I E
P I R A T E
E A U
S E L F S T A R T E R
M I
L
E L T R A
I N S
R I
P P L E
O M O O
E N D O W
R A T S O N
C R
I
E D O U T
O D E T S
T O U T S
R T E
P E A S
C A M P Y
S K I
T
E L M
M O N E T
P
I
E C E
R E P T
I
L E S
T E T R A S
L
I
N D Y
G I R T
A R A M I
S
P E N S
I O N S
W H Y
C O L L E G E G R A D
R E E
A R O U S E
H E R A
Y A R
M E S S E S
T O C K

351
 Chapter 4: Checking the Solutions
Puzzle 79: Join In
B L O G
T A S E R
B O O R
R A V E
A D O R E
U R G E
E V E N
L U C A S
S A L E
W A N E
E L
I
T A I
L E D
R E N T A
A N N
R E C A N T
L E T T E R E D
I
D Y L S
A G U E
S A V E
P
I N A
S H A R D
S N E E
E N D S
T
I
T O
A M E N D
N A I
S M I
T H
S W E E T S
E O N
E S T E E
N U T M E G
R A E
T O S S
A R A B
E L
I
T E
I
D O L
P A L L
R E N A L
N O D E
A L L Y
S
I G N S
G R A D
Puzzle 80: Having Fun
G L O S S
A C T S
C L U E
R A T O N
R O O T
L Y N X
A L
I C E
A S
I A
A M I
E
B A S K E T B A L L
P E T S
E R R
S A L T
Y A R D S A L E
G E R A L D
E W E
M E T E
S A F E R
G A M E S P E O P L E P L A Y
G R U N T
K N E E
A V E
S E S T E T
S E A M S T E R
A W A Y
S E A
F A W N
H O R S E S H O E S
O L E G
I D E A
S A D A T
R I
L L
T E A S
E R O S E
E T T E
I
L L S
D A R T S
Puzzle 77: Oh Baby
F A D E D
D A D A
G U R U
A G I
L E
R I O T
U S A F
C A T S C R A D L E
N E R O
T P K
R E G A L
A C R E S
S E A B E E S
S A G A
L E D O N
B O R N E O
L
I M O
S U E
E N R O L L
O N I O N
T A G
Y
I E L D
L O N D O N
R E D
A L A S
A N E M I
A
S T R U G
O S H A
L
I
N E A G E
H O B B Y
P R U N E
T E D
T H A I
C H E C K S W I N G
M I
L L
O I N K
C I
L
I
A
L O D E
E D D Y
O T T E R
Puzzle 78: It’s About Time
S P A R
B E R M
S H A W L
L A V E
U L E E
A E R I
E
A R E A
M E N D
C L
I N G
W A R P S P E E D A H E A D
S H E
E L L E N
P E A
O R B
E L M
C U T
A M B E R
E A S E
T A L E
T A B L E O F C O N T E N T S
H I
E S
P O E M
H E A R T
S L Y
S
I R
E A R
L A Y
H O N E S
R O B
T R A V E L T H E W O R L D
C H I
L
I
O R E O
T
I E R
H E A V E
N A I
L
C L A N
I N L E T
G Y R E
H E R O

352
Part III: Checking the Solutions 
Puzzle 83: Or What?
A L L A
G R U E L
P L O P
B I E N
L A R G E
R I
V E
R E A D Y O R N O T
E T A L
A U S T E R E
I
T S E L F
H A Y
C E N S E
L A Y E R
P A Y
A L B U M
L E A N
M O R E O R L E S S
A S H
T A M A L E S
G A D
N O W O R N E V E R
G I G O
O P E R A
L A T
F I N E S
A C T O N
S A N
B O R N E O
L O W M A S S
A G O G
D A Y O R N I G H T
D E L E
A L E U T
L E O I
E E L S
Y E A T S
L E E R
Puzzle 84: Open Wide
A P S E
U S U A L
E G G S
S A K S
N E G R O
R O L E
S L
I P O F T H E T O N G U E
T E N
W A T S
H U S H E S
C L
I O
P A S T
I M P A I
R
S O R T
S A O
N O E L S
K
I R I
H E N S
F R O M H A N D T O M O U T H
E O N S
T E E S
A T S E A
R N S
P L E D
G R A S S Y
A L A S
A R K S
D A E M O N
I
S E E
N I
T
A R M E D T O T H E T E E T H
R E
I N
I
V
I
E D
R I C A
T A R S
C A N N Y
E L H I
Puzzle 81: Facing Bills
N A D A
B O W S
C A L M S
E R O S
A R
I
A
U S E U P
W A S H I N G T O N S T A T E
S T E
S K A T
O P
I N E D
B A R N
H E
I R
C A R U S O
A U L D
O P T
O X E N
L U N G
O G L E R
L
I N C O L N N E B R A S K A
A L O O F
B A R E
L O O P
S S S
F A I
L
C R O N E S
S C U D
S K E P
W E A P O N
I
C O N
O A T
H A M I
L T O N O N T A R I O
O R O N O
A C R E
L A M P
A S K E R
R A N D
E L S E
Puzzle 82: Write On!
B A N E
A B O D E
S H O P
A L E E
L E V E L
P U R L
B A W L O F F
I R E
O L E O
A S S
A R I D
P H I
L L Y
S T E T
P H
I
L O
R A F T E D
G L A S S F U L
O C E A N
B R A N S
F R O
A H A B
T R E N T
M A G I
C O T
A R I E S
T
I M E R
H O O D W I N K
C H E E S E
F R O C K
S H
I N
S
I C
I
L Y
A L O E
F O E
P O L L
C O T E O F A R M S
E T A L
L A N D S
B E E T
W A Y S
E R O S E
E T N A

353
 Chapter 4: Checking the Solutions
Puzzle 87: Smooth Landing
Y A M
R I C K S
F L O R A
O R A
E T H I C
R O B I N
Y U K
S O I
L E R O S I O N
O B E S E
C O N E S
S A M U E L
S E A T L E S S
U N D U E
I M I
T A T E
G E D S
L A O
E R R O R
L A P
T U R F W A R
T N T
U R I A H
F E Y
T H E A
E L E G I
E S
B E D I M
D E S E R T E D
S E N O R A
S C R I P
P A V E R
H
I
T S T H E D I
R T
E V E
A L A T E
N I N T H
R U N
L L O Y D
E T T E S
S E A
Puzzle 88: Temperature Rising
A W A I
T
S C A L E
A S P
C H I N O
E A V E S
S H E
H A D C O L D F E E T
P R O
E M S
L U G E R
A L
I
E N
A R T E
S T O C K Y
R O S C O E
S P I
E S
E R A T O
T H U G
T
I
L E
B E C A M E H O T H E A D E D
A S K S
N E W T
D R E A D
O G D E N
L
I
T A N Y
C R O N E S
O A T S
R I V E T
B A T C H
S K I
A V A
W A R M H E A R T E D
M A R
E R A S E
N O O N E
P L Y
T E N O R
N E A T O
Puzzle 85: A Trio of Trios
A L A S
T R O O P
S A P S
R A N T
Y O U L L
K Y L A
A D I A
N U R S E
Y E A R
M Y T H R E E S O N S
A N A
S A L A D
N U T T Y
P A P A
M O R E N O
I A G O
L A R K
M A S O N
T W O G U Y S A N D A G I R L
S E T
I
N
O B E R
G R A Y
A D O L F O
Y E O H
S L
I P S
P R E S S
S A L
T H E M O D S Q U A D
I M E T
U T
I
L E
U N T O
L
I
E N
L U C I A
U N I
T
K E P T
S P E N D
S Y N E
Puzzle 86: In the Waiting Room
T A T
I
G R O W L
F L A P
A D E N
E E N I
E
I A G O
U M M A
T A E L S
F U R S
P E P P E R P O T S
E R A T
E N T
I C E
E L S A
C O A L M I N E
M
I R
P A R K
L
I A M
A G A T E
O V U L E
D R S
F O R T S
S I
T E S
D E E P
V S O P
H A H
T O Y S T O R E
B E E R
M O R T A L
U P U P
N O B R A I N E R S
R A Z E
E R R E D
E L B A
D A Z E
R E A D E
S L O T
U R I
S
Y O Y O S
S S R S

354
Part III: Checking the Solutions 
Puzzle 91: Who’s Trying Now?
B E B O P
C O D E
T A D S
A D A P T
O L D S
A D A M
T A K E A T A S T E
P I
K E
T M E N
I
T O
A R E A L
H A U L
I
N T O C O U R T
O B O I
S T
I
S T O
T O U R S
P E D E S T A L S
T
I
S
A I
R E S
L O U
O L E A N D E R S
T A B O R
M E E T
D I
L A T E
M A K E A N A T T E M P T
A G E N T
O A F
A R C H
R A N D
R U G B Y S C O R E
S T Y E
A R A L
E A S E S
H E A D
W I
S E
A S S E S
Puzzle 92: Check Out the Joint
N I
P
O S C A R
F E T A L
I N E
S T O R E
O X
I D E
E A R
A I
T C H
N
I
S A N
K N U C K L E H E A D S
R E S E A L
A N A T O M Y
O R E L
N A S T Y
M I
D
E B E R T
S T E M S
E L B O W M A C A R O N I
P R E S S
K I
L O S
A M O
G R E T A
S A S E
M A N A T E E
N A U S E A
K N E E S L A P P
I N G
R E T R O
V
I O L S
M O L
E L
I O T
E L U D E
O R E
D O N N E
S O D A S
V A T
Puzzle 89: Rules are Rules
B W A N A
A L A S
S C A B
R
I
L E S
Z O N E
A L T O
A T L A S
T
I
E R
C A M P
W H A T E V E R W O R K S
L E Y
N I
C E
L E S S E R
A T E
R O D
R A E
U N S E T
S M O G
T O M E
B Y H O O K O R B Y C R O O K
O M E N
E L S E
L
I M N S
A P E
A Y E
G E M
T H R A S H
A T O M
P S
I
N O H O L D S B A R R E D
U S E R
L
I M A
T A U P E
R E S T
E M I R
I N D
I A
N A S A
S O T S
S T E A L
Puzzle 90: Water Ways
A L T O S
T A L C
P S S T
T A B L A
A W O L
E T T A
E M A I
L
B L U E B A Y O U
A R O M A S
T A R
L P N
I D E A
N
I C E S T
B E Y O N D T H E S E A
O L
I
V E
S T U
R A H S
W I
P E O U T
S P A R R O W
L E E R
N S C
T
I A R A
D O C K O F T H E B A Y
T A C O M A
D U E L
I D O
A R E
R E E B O K
M O O N R I
V E R
T U N E D
E R L E
N E R O
E N T E R
R E S T
G N A W
S T O N Y

355
 Chapter 4: Checking the Solutions
Puzzle 95: Try It On
T A L C
M A L T A
L U M P
O R E O
A L O E S
O P A L
L
I E N
S E L L S
N O M O
L A R G E S C A L E
G N A T
A L A
S N O B
A N D
I C E D
T R O O P S
D A U B
R Y A N
E M
I L Y
H O P
I
E R R O R
B L U R
O M E G A
E T N A
S E M I
C
I R C L E
H E N S
D E A
H
I S S
D
I A
S
I T E
T A L L O R D E R S
P O R E
A X
I O M
A B E E
I
T I
S
T O N A L
G O A T
N A M E
E N E M Y
E N D S
Puzzle 96: New Approach
E D E N
A M P
S A D A T
G I N O
F E A T
P R I M E
G E T S F R E S H
L E N I N
A G R E E
S H O V E
A G E
R O Y
S T E A M I N G H O T
F
I S H
E D U
B E E N
O H
I O
O A S
I
S
E L E C T R I
C C U R R E N T
E S S A Y
P E T S
D A N A
S P A
P S S T
A T T H E L A T E S T
C A D
R A H
F
I N A L
A D O R E
O P E R A
D
I M E N O V E L
M E D
I C
S L E D
L E N A
A D A G E
S R S
T R A Y
Puzzle 93: Bye Bye!
D R O L L
S A A B
B D R M
E E R I E
A T T A
R I
T A
L E A V E
I T T O B E A V E R
I
D L E
H E Y
E X C E S S
B A D
P R E
L
I
S P E D
H O U S E S
I T
E N T R E
O A S T
D E L E
F L Y O F F T H E H A N D L E
T A L E
R E A R
P A G A N
S W I M M E R S
A S S E T S
E N O
O L E
B L A I N E
A V E
J U D E
R U N O U T O F E X C U S E S
A L O T
I R A N
S T E E P
T U N A
C A R S
T E D D Y
Puzzle 94: Gardening 101
R O W A N
G M A N
T A F T
O N E G A
R A V E
I
D L E
S T E E R
A R O W
B O O N
S O D
N I P
I N T H E B U D
E L
I
S H A
O A T E R S
R A D
I A L
A N T
E R O S
E C R U
E T H E R
S C U L P
E A R
S
I
E V E
T O T E S
D E A R
E D E N
A P E
E M I G R E
A P O L L O
E L A I
N E
B L O O M E R G I R L
H E R
H A Z E
T E R M
D
I O D E
O N E S
I D E A
E L G I
N
R E D S
C O T S
R E S E T

356
Part III: Checking the Solutions 
Puzzle 99: And the Band 
Played On
S O W
S C A L A
B E L L E
N U I
T O M E S
A G A I N
A T L
O V E N S
C O W E D
F
I D D L E S T
I C K S
U N S E E N
O S U
R I D
S N A P
T E M P U R A
H O O P
N A B
A A R O N
O R G A N T R A N S P L A N T
R A D I O
G I
T
E L S E
S T E R N E R
P A S T
E E N
R U M
M U T U A L
H O R N O F P L E N T Y
A E S O P
S T E E L
F A R
P R O S E
T
I
L D E
I R E
E A T E N
O F T E N
T
I
S
Puzzle 100: Ringing in the Ears
P A S E O
S H U S H
S S S
O U T D O
T O S C A
C A T
S N O O Z E A L A R M
R I O
E T A
E R L E
O S W E G O
P O R K
H O T H E A D
C Y P R U S
P
I G E O N
R E L E T
H A L E R
D E N
A A A S
B E L L S
T O R E
W R Y
T A M E S
S H O T S
E R A S E S
S T A R E S
A B D O M E N
H A U T
M Y D E A R
T E R M
A S H
I C U
L A D Y L
I B E R T Y
G A M
E T A P E
L E G U P
O R B
S E V E N
E R O D E
Puzzle 97: Masterpiece!
M A
I M
L E S S
U N A R M
E T T E
A X L E
P O L
I O
G O O N A T E A R
L L A M A
B R U S H U P A G A
I N S T
P E N
U T E
E N A T E
T O R M E
D S T
M E X I
C O
P U B
K I
T E
P A
I N T T H E T O W N R E D
T R A Y
O U R
S
I
E G E D
Y S L
G O M A D
N E E D Y
S O L
E D O
S T R O K E O F G E N
I U S
A R E N A
M A R I A C H
I S
R A D A R
I
D E S
E U R O
A P O R T
T E E M
S H E D
Puzzle 98: Just Be U
B A N G
A D E P T
L O V E
A F O R
R O G E R
A R E A
T A R A
G R
I
P E
M E A T
U R A N
I U M S S Y M B O L
D O E
S A D
A T R A S
S A L
C A R E D
S W A M
E C L A
I R
I
D O
P E R S O N A L P R O N O U N
C E E
R E P O S E
E T C H
A D R A G
E Y E
P A S E O
G A S
A I R
B A R N Y A R D F E M A L E
J O K E
S Q U A T
I N O N
E R
I
E
O U N C E
S K
I D
T E N S
P A G E R
S A S S

357
 Chapter 4: Checking the Solutions
Puzzle 103: PC
W A R T S
L U R E
A M E N
A L E R T
A G E D
C O V E
R A D A R
C H A W
D R E W
P R O D I G Y S C O N C E R T
E N E
H O T
A C E
G N A T
D E S P O T
P O M E
O R A L
S H A N E
P R O G R A M C O N T E N T S
L E T G O
S
I
L O
D E A L
E Y E S U P
T A M S
S P A
S E A
A O K
P R O J E C T C O N F L
I C T
R I P E
T O A D
T U T O R
I C E S
I N S O
E T U D E
G E N T
N E A R
R E P A Y
Puzzle 104: Take Off
G A R B
A C R E
S H A M E
A L O E
B O O N
P O L A R
L A U N C H P A D
A T L A S
A S T E R O
I D
A R T
I
S T
O R E
E T T U
D E M O N
R I
S E A B O V E
E R O D E
C A A N
S O X
C I
T E
C L A I M
M A T T
A C E
F O A M
L A G E R
F A L L U N D E R
O P E R A
A R E S
O C T
B R A S S Y
O N E T O O N E
R A I
S E
L A N D O F N O D
I N D I A
O K I
E
F L O G
E D S E L
U S E D
S Y N E
Puzzle 101: Keep Trying
H A R P O
J A B S
A L M A
A L A R M
A R E A
L E A N
M A K E A F R E S H S T A R T
S E E T H E
S E A L
P
I E
T A R T
T R E S S E D
S P R Y
R E D
A U K
A R A
V E X E D
T Y P O S
G I V E
I
T A N O T H E R G O
S M E A R
S
I
Z E S
E L L
S T Y
M E T
S P E D
S T A T U E S
S H O T
E O S
A L T O
E V O L V E
T R Y A L L O V E R A G A I N
U S E D
O R E O
L
I K E D
P O T S
W Y N N
S E E D S
Puzzle 102: Parts of the Body
N A S A L
B R
I
E F
M R I
A L U L A
A U R A L
I A N
E L B O W G R E A S E
L
I
T
T E N O R
E X C I
S E
A P R
S W I S S
R E
I N
L E A F
N O S E A R O U N D
D E C O R
W A G O N
O N T R I
A L
M E L
I S S A
E L
I
A S
L E M O N
L I P S E R V I
C E
S A F E
A G U E
A R O M A
L A W
U N R E A L
T
I D A L
R O E
F O O T T R A F F
I C
E R E
R A T
I O
P A R D O
L E D
O F T E N
T R Y S T

358
Part III: Checking the Solutions 
Puzzle 107: Problems, Problems
B O L L
B E
I
N G
S
I N S
A R E A
E S S E N
A L O E
S T
I
C K Y S
I
T U A T
I O N
E S S
H O E S
P
I
A N O
M A N X
B L A N D E R
A T T E N D
B O O T Y
D O R A
C O N C H
S O N
A F
I
N E H O W D O Y O U D O
M U G
F A R E S
A
I D S
P L
I
E D
C U R T S Y
A E R
I A L S
H E R S
S L A N T
S A R A
O A K
H O R N S O F A D I
L E M M A
E P E E
W A G E S
R E E L
N E R D
E R A S E
A N N E
Puzzle 108: Glad Inside
T A M S
B A R G E
P A T E
S L
I P
A W A R D
R U H R
A L A R
N O M A D
E T O N
R O M A N G L A D I A T O R
S T
I N T
D E E R E
G H A N A
I N L E T
A R K
B A N G L A D E S H
M A N G O E S
L
I S S O M E
E V E R G L A D E S
N E E
N E W E L
R E A D Y
M E N S A
V O D K A
F O L D I N G L A D D E R S
Z
I
T
I
C A N O N
E B O N
E R I N
E R E C T
L
I N E
N E S S
R E T
I E
S T E R
Puzzle 105: What’s Your Rank?
B A S S
I
S P A T
D A I S
A P E E K
E U R O
I N C A
S E R G E A N T P R E S T O N
E D E N
M I
T E
W R I N G
O L E O
G L E E
B A D
E N R A G E
P A S S
E R O D E
S
I N
A L T O
G E N E R A L H O S P
I
T A L
E N O S
R O E
I R A T E
T A R O
I N S U L T
R E S
L E A D
S E T T
S P E A R
O O N A
R A S P
C A P T A I N K A N G A R O O
A G E E
M E R V
O C E A N
R E E D
P R A Y
B E A R D
Puzzle 106: Finding Felines
R O C
I
T E M S
P E C A N
A N A
M A N
I A
A N O D E
I R T
P U S S Y W I
L L O W
T
I B
I
A
T E E N
I E S T
T O U R
I S M
R E F S
R E R O O T
P U T T E R
O R G
S U T R A
L E O N A
P U L P
S H
I
L L
E M I
T
U N A R M
S A K
I
S
C D S
S E R
I
A L
D Y N A M O
C R A G
D E V
I
L E D
S L E E T
I N G
O G L E R
K I
T T Y C O R N E R
I
R A
A R O A R
M A U V E
N
I P
T A N G S
E M B E D
S E E

359
 Chapter 4: Checking the Solutions
Puzzle 111: Mother of Invention?
M A G M A
A P E E K
F C C
I
S A A C
H E N R I
I R E
C I R C U L A R S A W
R A N
E A S E M E N T
S A F E S T
E N D
S U N L E S S
U N B E N D
S
I R I
U S
L
I A R S
M E N E S
C I D
A C R E
C A R E S
N A S A
N E B
B O R A X
H A P P Y
I
T A L
I C
F O G E Y S
G L E A S O N
F
I
T
R E D M A N
D A N S E U S E
A G O
L
I Q U I D P A P E R
V A L
T A U N T
O C T A L
E L L
S L O S H
T H O S E
Puzzle 112: Sea to Shining Sea
A C C R A
A F A R
C R O P
W O O E R
C U K E
A U R A
E R R E D
I R I
S H S T E W
D E A D E N D
M C M A H O N
L
I N E R
B
I O
P S S T
R A D O N
T B S P
I A N
O D
I
E
D A H L
I A
T I
A R A
N B C
L E A N N
A N K A R A
R A C E
C A T
S T E M
W E A V E
S K
I S
Y A M
O D I U M
F E A T U R E
R E D T A P E
R O S S P E R O T
L U G E R
A N K A
O G L E
E R I
C A
U S S R
F E E D
D E C K S
Puzzle 109: Material World
M O T
I
F
S T L O
A L P S
E L E N A
C H E W
R I
L E
S
I
L K S C R E E N
T N U T
S O L
T O U R S
C H E S T
S E L M A
S H U N
A S S E N T
P E T E R P A N
S C A M
T Y R U S
A G O
S A T
I S F Y
I N S
I P
I D
E L
I
T A P E S
D E L E
T E N N Y S O N
S P O R E S
W I
L T
T E A R S
C R E P E
D I N G O
B R A
L E A P
C O T T O N T A I
L
E A V E
O G L E
T A B O O
O D E R
B E E R
O R A T E
Puzzle 110: On the Sea
Z E P P O
E R A T
S A P S
A T O L L
L E N A
U R A L
P A P A L
A L E X
P E T A
C A S T A W I
D E N E T
S A F E
H E X
E R A S E
C L A M M E D
A H A B
A T W A R
O P E D
N O S
D O N T R O C K T H E B O A T
S S S
I
R A S
Y A L T A
Y G O R
S H E L T E R
S A R A H
A T E
D E S K
K N O W T H E R O P E S
I N O N
U N D O
O P R A H
M I N E
G R O G
N O B L E
P E E R
E Y R E
S T
I
L T

360
Part III: Checking the Solutions 
Puzzle 115: Toasty
E T U
I
N E H R U
A J A R
B O N N
A M A I N
N E M O
B U T T E R C U P S
A L
I
T
S T O O P
E L A N
G L E E
N O S E
A W R Y
R E J E C T
A L P H A B E T
E R A
H O R N E
O M E G A
C A M P
P A
I N T
S A R K
A S S E S
I
S A A C
N E E
P E E P H O L E
C R E S T S
S T A R
N O U N
M E S A
C L
I O
M O I
S T
E M I
L
H O N E Y B U N C H
A M O K
I
L O N A
G L U E
T A N S
D A N D Y
H A T E
Puzzle 116: B Exterminator
M I
F F
M O P E
P A L E D
O S L O
O P E N
I N U R E
A L E B O D I
E D S E A M A N
N E W
R
I A L
H E L P S
C A S T
M A Y O
P L A Y T H E L A M E G A M E
R I N S E
I
C E D
B
I D
O M I
T
A G E
R A N G
P
I
S
I
T C H
B O C C E
S T E P S O N T H E R A K E S
A O N E
E T O N
S P U M E
S A C K
V
I S
P O I S E D A T T H E R I
N K
A L T E R
M O U E
N O T
I
L E A D S
Y A P S
S L O P
Puzzle 113: The Works
N E S T S
A T M
S N O B
E L
I O T
B R A G
C E D E
D O N D
I
L
I N O
R H E A
G O R G E O U S G I R L S
O V A
F O B
T U M U L T
P A P E R D O L L A R S
A G O N Y
D A E G U
B A H
L U R E
I
N F
A R C O
S E E
G R E A T
S C O U R
P R E D
I C A M E N T S
A L B E
I
T
E R E
Z E E
C O L O N E L
I N C L U E
C R O P
L O O T
T R A M P
R E A L
L A T E
E G G A R
A N T E
F A R
D E E R E
Puzzle 114: B Hive
R O M A
D A M O N
P R A M
U L A N
E M I
L E
R I P A
B A R N U M A N D B A I
L E Y
E F T
S A N K
N E E D S
B E N D
I O N S
B R E A D A N D B U T T E R
H A H A S
E L A L
H A Y
E Y E D
H E M E N
E R S E
R O T
H O L E
A B E T S
B U T T O N S A N D B O W S
O G E E
O R A N
A R O M A
A V E C
G A S
B E D A N D B R E A K F A S T
E M I
T
E L A N D
A R I A
D
I N O
A T L A S
X R A Y

361
 Chapter 4: Checking the Solutions
Puzzle 119: Moving Crew
O S A G E
S E P I
A
S P A
T E L E X
L O U I
S
T O N
T A B L E T E N N I
S
O U T
C H E S T
A L O N E
R E C R U I
T
F
I
E L D S
A L L O T S
P H I
L
I P
B I O M E
F A I
L S
I R S
I O T A
J O L T S
A G E E
N T H
C U R E S
S U E D E
E
L U D E S
T O R O I D
A B S U R D
E R R A N D S
V O L G A
Q A T A R
A N I
C O U C H P O T A T O
I N N
A W A R E
W O V E N
L Y E
O L D E R
S W E D E
Puzzle 120: In the Pocket
J O H N Q
M A R
I
S
H E M
A D
I
E U
A R E N T
A M O
K E Y B I
S C A Y N E
N C O
E R A
B O A T
R A K E R
E B R O
S A I D Y E S
S U B T L E
D O L L O P
P R U N E
C O P S E
A
I D
A S T A
M A C H O
A N T
I
T A T
H A C K S
K U K L A
O H A R A S
J E K Y L L
R U N
I N T O
T A R S
A C H E D
E R M A
M E N
T O O
C A N D Y S T R I
P E
S N L
A M I G O
I N N E R
O N E
R I P E N
N A K E D
Puzzle 117: Nice Arrangement
D
I
S C
E C L A T
E B A Y
U T A H
A L
I C E
G A V E
M A G I
S A T
I N
G R O W
B L A C K E Y E D S U S A N
H I D
S E T H
M A N I
T O B A
S
I
E S T A
A G E
F
I
S H
C L A W S
L
I
L Y O F T H E V A L L E Y
A L L A H
S E R E
S E E
Y E S M A N
S E R G E A N T
M R I
S
M A C
Q U E E N A N N E S L A C E
P U R R
J U
I C E
A L E X
A
I D E
A T T A R
I
S L E
S P U D
S E E R S
R O T S
Puzzle 118: Off the Market
S L A P
S P R E E
O W N S
H U R L
C R E T E
X E N A
A S E A
R A N T O
B L E W
W H A T D O Y O U C A L L
T
I
L
C O C K A
A R E A L T O R W H O H A S
G N A R L
O P A L
D O R A
O C T
S T R A T U S
S N L
T H I S
M A R S
O N E A L
T O O M U C H T O D R I
N K
A R N A Z
E T A
A L
I
S T
I N G A G E N T
T E L L
P A C E R
A V E R
A L E E
A R O S E
R
I
L E
U S S R
M A N S E
A L L Y

362
Part III: Checking the Solutions 
Puzzle 123: 64-Across
D E S K
M A C H O
G A D S
A X L E
A P R O N
A C I D
L
I O N S S H A R E
L A S S
S T O P S
I G N
T O D D
O T T
R E D S
K O R E A N
W E E D Y
E N D E M I C
E D D O
A Z A L E A
E N O
T
I G E R S E Y E
N T H
T E R C E L
P U P A
C H I C A N O
D I N E R
R E S U L T
C L E O
C R T
O T T O
S O U L F O O D
T R O I
B E A R S F R U I
T
W E R E
A C T
I
I
S T E R
A M Y S
A S
I D E
O H M Y
Puzzle 124: Rotten Luck
E A R N S
T A T A R
A H A
C R O O K
A N O D E
N O W
R A B B I
T S N O S E
T A R
U S E S
E T A
D A I R Y
C A E S U R I C
L A P F U L
N O T E P A D
A P A R T
B R I
T
T A L
I
T H R E E L E A F C L O V E R
K I S T
O N M Y
I N E R T
E D I
F
I C E
A V E R T S
U N I
T E D L Y
C H I
L L
T
I E
N O V A
H U B
E
I G H T E L E V E N
A L E
T R E Y S
E V E N T
T A X
S A L L Y
T E N D S
Puzzle 121: Give Me a Break
A C E S
V
I V A
S T A G S
P A R T
E V E N
H A N O I
B R I E F R E S T P E R I O D
S E C R E T
T E L L
T E E
E W E R
D E F R A Y S
H A L O
B A D
A L E
A B A
P R I E R
I N T R O
S E V E R A N C E O F T
I E S
P L A T O
S A L V E
M E L
A L T
L
I E
R E D O
P A R L O R S
T R E E
A L
I
N I C E
J A C K E T
S O M E G O O D F O R T U N E
T H E S E
O N L Y
O D I N
E A S E D
P A Y S
R O D S
Puzzle 122: Lend Me Your Year
A E S O P
A C E S
S T A B
F L O U R
P A R K
K A L E
B A L T O
I N G E
E L S E
N E W S R E S O L U T
I O N
E P
I C
E S C A P E
T H E S E V E N I
T C H
S O F T C
A T O
Y O W L
P L O
T W O T O N E
L O O
S E R T
C P A
N L E R S
O F F E L E C T
I O N S
A N D R E
I
N O R M
R O U N D E M P L O Y E E S
E T N A
L E O I
W A N E D
S E E D
D A N S
A D O R E
O S S O
S T E T
Y E S E S

363
 Chapter 4: Checking the Solutions
Puzzle 127: At Last!
S A V E
C L
I M B
S L A P
A R
I D
R A D I O
P
I
L E
P E T E
A T E S T
L O D E
A N D T H A T S F
I N A L
S A L
R E E
W E T
A S S A Y S
S H A W
P A W
C H
I
L E
O W E N
E R M A
R O G E R O V E R A N D O U T
E R N E
L A P S
A N G L E
D E S
G I
L T
S T A R E R
S A G
A T A
E T S
T H A T S A L L F O L K S
R I
S E
R O S I
N
I
S L E
A V
I A
C L A R E
N E
I L
P E A K
H A T E S
E S P Y
Puzzle 128: One for All
R A S T A
A B A S
P C T S
A L O E S
T R I O
A L O T
D O L L A R B
I
L L
R U S E
A N I
G U A M
D E T E S T
R E D A R M Y
P O N Y
R A P
B A N D S A W S
B A L M Y
O O P
S Y R I A
E R I
E
H O E
S E N D
R U D D S
B A R
S T A K E
M I S B E G O T
O N E
A T R Y
E N A M E L S
A V A N T
I
A T
I P
L A I
H A R D
N I G H T S T A N D
A N T
I
A S E A
T A N G O
B E E T
T H E N
O G D E N
Puzzle 125: Construction Crew
R A M O S
C L E F
S A G S
A L
I G N
H I H O
T R O T
P
I
L L A R O F S O C
I E T Y
T A K E C A R E
T A N N
I N
K Y D
A G I
T A T E
N A B O B S
E D E N
A G O R A
A S I A
S O B S
T O W E R O F S T R E N G T H
O N E S
K I A S
V
I R E O
G A R Y
D E P E N D
R E S E R V E
A I R
E M I
L
I A
A B E Y A N C E
C O L U M N O F N U M B E R S
O R A D
G E R E
A R R A S
N Y S E
O D O R
N
I O B E
Puzzle 126: Making Progress
A S E A
S H E D S
O R C S
C A R P
E E R I
E
C O H O
T R I O
W R I S T
C A I N
S I N G L E O C C U P A N C Y
E A R
O P U S
S E R E N A D E
R I A T A
I
T O
G A T E
I O T A S
D O U B L E
I N D E M N I
T Y
E N E R O
S A D A
M A E
A S S A Y
S A S S I E S T
D A Y S
T
I N
T R I
P L E C R O W N R A C E
K A L
I
A R U B A
O R A L
O M I
T
R A D A R
A G E S
S P A T
S P E N D
D O N E

364
Part III: Checking the Solutions 
Puzzle 131: Remote Target
T E S S
R O T C
H A H
O P T
I C
A R E A S
E G O
W A I
T
I N G G A M E
L
I
T
N U N
A O L
E R U P T S
E L K S
S A D D L E S O A P
R E E K S
N E E
A U T O
S T R
I K E
C A N E
T E T
M I C R O F
I
L M
J
I G
S U E D
P L E A D S
A R L O
D E S
S A B
I N
G O O D S P O R T S
L
I
S A
U N S E A L
R I
A
L O P
A B S
N E W P O R T N E W S
R A E
D A R E D
V A N N A
S R S
T Y P E
B E S T
Puzzle 132: Classic!
S O T
F A B L E
W H A L E
O N E
I
D E A S
R O L E X
F A N T A S T
I C V O Y A G E
T
I E R S
C A E N
B A R
A R T
I C L E
P
I G
A L T
G O O D F E L L A S
R A M
A G E
Y E T
I
S
A L A S
D E M O S
C E D E
H A R P O
U K E
R O E
M Y F A I R L A D Y
L E O
F U R
A R O U S E R
E T S
C L E F
U L T R A
T H E B A D N E W S B E A R S
G A T E S
E M A I
L
F O P
O N S E T
S A N D Y
F L Y
Puzzle 129: Mystery Solved
A S H
W R E N
C A N A L
R A I
D
N O T E
O R A T E
I
F Y O U W A N T T O K N O W
L E A R N
N A T A L
A M S
I S A
L O O M
W H I
C H C O M E S F
I
R S T
H
I S
Y E T
I
F R
I A R
I
T E S
S O N A R
A G R A
S C R E W
S P E C
H A D
T H E C H
I C K E N O R T H E
T A D A
O R E
H O E
L E N T O
G I
N Z A
E G G R E A D A N Y
I N D E X
F L O O R
I B A R
S A N E
T E S T S
D U N S
K O S
Puzzle 130: Solid
S A U D
I
B A B A
A R M S
R O N I
N
E G O S
C O O T
O U T A T
T A L L
E C R U
S T O N E M A R T E N
K E N
N N E
S E A T O
A S B E S T O S
P R O F
I
T
M A O
E E R I
E
A D A N O
A B U T
R A T S O
O G P U
T
I
L E D
L E T U S
E U R
I
N D E E D
D E N T
I
S T S
E N E R O
C U D
S
I R
P E B B L E B E A C H
O D D S
A E R O
B A B O O
N E A T
M A I
L
L L A M A
G A M Y
S H E L
E S S E X

365
 Chapter 4: Checking the Solutions
Puzzle 135: Not Quite Sure
S H E M P
B L
I N I
H O T
E A T U P
L I
V
I D
A D A
G U E S S T
I M A T E
R I M
A S S T
U N O
W A K E U P
S A R D
D I
L E M M A
A S S E R T
B E T S Y
T A K E A L E A P
S W A Y
O V A
B E D R O C K
R I O
M E T E
I N T H E D A R K
L O A F S
E L A P S E
R O Y A L T Y
I
S P Y
I
S O L D E
T N T
C A P E
L A Y
M A K E A S T A B A T
E G O
A S
I A N
A R E N A
Y E S
N E A L E
B E T E L
Puzzle 136: Stopping Points
W A R M
M A I D S
E B A Y
E T U I
A S S E T
N O R A
B E R L
I
N W A L L
T R I P
E N N A
I O D I D E S
R A B A T
N O V
O R E L
A D A G E S
P E S T E R
T O R E R O
I R K S
S A D
E R R S
P E A S E
A T N O
S E
I
C U L T
E N C A G E
E L A P S E
T A T T E R
B R A D
I
S M
S U E R S
M A R T
I
A N
A S T A
I
S E E
C O U N T Y L
I N E
L
I
E S
E R A S E
L O I N
L E F T
S E W E R
Y U L E
Puzzle 133: Before and After?
C O V E T
S L O B
C A M P
O P E R A
L U A U
A R E A
M A G I C
A N T S
C A R R
B L A C K L
I G H T S A B E R
O O N
I P O
A C T
I N G
U S N A
O U T
T R U S T
A B E T
U G L
I
B A L L O T B O X O F F
I C E
A T E E
E B A Y
L O V E R
Y E S
G N A T
L A S E R S
G O B
P E G
Q U A N T U M L E A P F R O G
U N D O
C A A N
O L
I
V E
I
T E M
K
I
L N
L A D E N
Z O N E
S L A Y
E X E R T
Puzzle 134: Busy, Busy, Busy
A L S O
P A R K
B W A N A
S E E R
E P E E
A I
D E D
H
I
T T H E H
I G H S P O T S
A K I
N
E K E
B U S T L E D
W R E S T L E
U N T
I
E D
S O O T
E A R
D
I A L S
S A K I
B A Y S
C U T T O T H E C H A S E
T O N S
G R
I N
A B E T S
A R C
G R U B
S V E L T E
I
N H E R I
T
C H E L S E A
M A S
F O O T
M A K E S H O R T W O R K O F
E V E N S
F E T E
A
I D A
W E N D Y
F E A R
E D D Y

366
Part III: Checking the Solutions 
Puzzle 139: Passing Grade
A C M E
A B E T S
A C C T
C O A X
S A D A T
S H A H
I
S
I
T
T R
I P E
P
I
T A
D E E R H U N T E R
E C O N
S T R E E T S
O I N K
M A E
S P
I
T
A R C
O B J E T
B E A D S
D O A
L A O S
B A
I
T S
R E A R
A S H
P R
I
Z E
B E E R S
F E N
S O L E
R A D
D A T A
A
I R H E A D
A C E S
D E E P F R E E Z E
E Y E S
E X T O L
A R U T
R A R E
S P O K E
D
I R E
O N E S
T O N E S
S E E R
Puzzle 140: Secret Solving
P A R E
L A S S O
C H E
O V A L
O S K A R
A B E D
P E T E
A L
I A S
B E A D
P R I
V A T E P R O P E R T Y
A T T A C H E
N E T
S E T H
P O P
A S T E R
E O N
L
I
P
A C E
P E R S O N A L P R O N O U N
O V A
E L
I
O N E
T E N S E
L E T
T O M S
E L S
R O A N O K E
I N T
I M A T E A P P A R E L
C O R N
F A R C E
T O E S
E R I
E
E L L E N
A S T
I
D A M
S E E R S
L E S E
Puzzle 137: Thirsty?
M U L E
W A T E R
T R A M
A T
I
E
I N A N E
W A S I
R U M R U N N
I N G
O P A L
T R A I
T
L E A D P
I P E
I N S E A M S
A L O A D
S H
I E L D
G I
F T S
J E S T
L E A
A
I R
I N G
P A P
O L D S A L T
R U T
E V
I N C E
S U E
P E T S
G E N E T
S O L V E R
A W A R E
D E V
I
A T E
W E L L D O N E
A N N U M
O S T E
C O M M O N C O L D
U S A F
K R E B S
E L S E
K E P T
S A R A H
S E A N
Puzzle 138: Game Time
B U L B
L E I
S
A B A S
A T A L L
A T O P
S O F A
S A M O A
P O W E R P L A Y
S H A W N E E
A C E
S R S
O C A L A
K E P T
C O F F E R
B U L L S E Y E
A B A F T
P E T E
I
R O N
R E M
G A T E S
I D A
A S
I A
R U T S
M O N E T
T E L L T A L E
M A N G L E
Y A R N
D O I
N G
E A T
A D D
C L A U S E S
S C R U M M A G E
N A
I
V E
T
I
E R
A R E A
A R D E N
E D E N
S E E N
D E N T

367
 Chapter 4: Checking the Solutions
Puzzle 143: One Vowel Off
S E P T E T
A D A M
R O D
A P O L L O
C A L
I
E A R
M A D C A P
A R O D
U K E
M E D S T U D E N T S
E F T S
K I
T S
L A
I R S
V
I N E G A R
S E T T E E
E N T E R
E R A S E
E E R
M I D S T R E A M
P R E
M O T E T
S E P I
A
R E V E R T
U T T E R L Y
E M I
L E
S A R I
T Y K E
M O D F A S H I O N S
I
V E
P L O D
M U D P I
E
S E N
E A V E
A L
I
S O N
E S T
R Y E S
N A M I N G
Puzzle 144: It R Squared
L
I
N E D
O S H A
P O S H
A D O R E
L O O P
I M N O
P I
R A T E S H I
P
P A U L
I O S
E R O O
E N E R G Y
S T E P S O N
M A R C
I
T S
R O S A L
I
N D
M O L E S
D
I V E
E S A U
A L A I
C O D E D
A I M S
N E O N
H O E S
I
N S E T
N O S T R U M S
A C E
H O T S
S T
I
R R U P
L O R E N Z
C H I C
U S E
A R E S
P I
L O T L
I G H T
M E E K
A V O N
E M B E R
B O D Y
H Y D E
S P Y R I
Puzzle 141: Off to the Shrink
S H E E T
S L O E
A B E E
T
I A R A
H O A X
D E A L
A F R A
I D O F T H E D A R K
N
I
L
L O O T
I
L L U S E
F O N T
A B L E
L O W E R S
A V
I
S
C S
I
I
N E R T
A N E T
I R O N
F E A R O F S T R A N G E R S
E N V Y
I
C E S
E L A T E
R O E
C L O D
L O O K A T
M O L T
B O N O
A S H O R E
I R
I
S
C A P
S C A R E D O F A N
I M A L S
T A R A
I W I N
G E R M S
O B E Y
N E T S
N T E S T
Puzzle 142: Cover Your Rear
A M E N
T A S T E
F E Z
C O S T
A L P H A S
I R A
M O T H E R E A R T H
R A P
E T A
M O X
I
E
O L E
S E T U P
I N A R R E A R S
R E M I S S
T E N D R I
L
P R E
P E N
A M M O
O L D
E R M I
N E S
S E W
D U R A
E O N
G U T
O R E G A N O
D E C E N T
R E A R R A N G E
K N O W S
R A M
B O M B E
V I A
R B I
O V E R E A R N E S T
O I
L
R E A G A N
A N T E
B O Y
E M E N D
B A S S

368
Part III: Checking the Solutions 
Puzzle 147: Elbow Room
M O L L
C A S A
A M I D
A L O O F
O D O R
D A N E
W I G G L E R O O M
D I
S C
R O I
O D D
T O A S T E R
S M O G
S H
I P
A C E
N U T C R A C K E R S U I
T E
C R I B
R O E
E E R
R
I C E
O P T
G A G E
A B A
T E A
E B A Y
P U B L
I S H
I N G H O U S E
E N E
O P E C
R E N D
D E A R S I R
P E I
H U B
A S T O
R E A L E S T A T E
N C I
S
I
S L E
T U B E R
T O T E
N Y P D
G I
S T
Puzzle 148: Fighting Words
W R A T H
M E S H
A B B A
H A N E Y
O L
I O
S E A M
E N G A G E D
I
N B A T T L E
L E E
I N E Z
O R E A D S
P E R M E D
A S K E R
A N E W
P E A N U T S
L O C K E D H O R N S
P H
I
I
D L E
I
D
I
S T A R
M O E
C A M E T O B L O W S
P R O F E S S
E P E E
L L O Y D
T H W A C K
E N G U L F
A G I O
T A O
T O O K O N A L L C O M E R S
A N N E
O R E O
V E S T A
L E G S
W I
S P
E N T E R
Puzzle 145: Ear to the Ground
A C H E
P O E T
F A L S E
S H E D
I
T C H
O C E A N
H E A D
I N T H E C L O U D S
R E V A M P
O N A
I R
A R E
P O E
C R O N I
E S
M Y N A
I R K E D
D N A
R A N G E
A F O O T
B A C K T O T H E W A L L
M O C H A
C O R E D
O A R
U S H E R
S P A T
P R E C E P T
D I
P
E T A
U B O A T
N A R R O W
F E E T O N T H E G R O U N D
B E G I
N
E A R L
T S A R
I
R O N Y
S W A Y
E E L Y
Puzzle 146: Vanishing Ink
A G E S
N A T O
S M I
T E
V
I
L E
I
T E M
T O N E R
I N A N
G O R E
A N G E R
V A N I
S H
I N G C R E A M
O P T
A T T Y
R A T R A C E S
R U B B L E
O N E
A X E D
R A L E S
D I
S A P P E A R I N G A C T
A L L
I
E
S L
I D
S H E
N E A R T O
S P L
I
N T E R
L U R E
E N A
G O I N G G O I N G G O N E
T R
I N I
E L S E
S T U V
H O S E A
S
I N S
A T T A
E W E R S
T O T S
T O S S

369
 Chapter 4: Checking the Solutions
Puzzle 149: Table Setting
M A S S
O L D E
P A D D Y
E R I K
L E A S
E L
I
D E
A G E E
D A F T
N O S E S
L O V I N S P O O N F U L
S T E N O
E P E E
O P T
S O T S
E D U C E S
A S H
S A
I N T
S A R A
K N I
F E
I
N T H E W A T E R
R A S H
S H O R E
E S S
O K S A N A
U N D O
N E Y
O U T S
G U M B O
F O R K
I N T H E R O A D
S H I R T
R A G U
M I
N I
A I
T C H
E R I N
A R K S
M E S A S
D E F T
N E S T
Puzzle 150: Color Wheel
H E R B
S P A T S
D O T S
A M I R
T A R R Y
A N E W
L
I M O
I D
I O M
R E P O
F L E W
G R A Y M A T T E R
N O M E
E C H O E D
C A N O L A
M O T E
A L O U D
B O A R D G A M E
M A S T
T E S T Y
R I
O T
P R E S E R V E S
D E M O N
R A Y S
S
I
E S T A
S P R A I
N
S W A N
W H I
T E S A U C E
C O D A
E A S E
M U S E D
A L A I
A S E A
I R E N E
R I
L L
T E R M
T A R T S
D O E S

370
Part III: Checking the Solutions 

Part IV
The Part of Tens

In this part . . .
E
ven the best puzzlers get stuck sometimes. 
After all, we puzzle masters can be a tricky 
lot. That’s why in this part I offer ten of my best 
tips for solving even the trickiest puzzles, as well 
as a list of ten great Web resources that you may 
want to check when solving certain types of clues. 
(Don’t think of it as cheating — think of it as 
expanding your knowledge base with the assis-
tance of some very helpful Webmasters.)

Chapter 5
Ten Tricks for Successfully Tackling 
the Trickiest Puzzles
In This Chapter
▶ Preparing for success
▶ Taking some simple steps when you’re stuck
▶ Seeking outside help
T
his chapter offers ideas for how to set the stage to succeed at working a 
challenging crossword. I also offer some simple tricks for trying to push 
through the inevitable solver’s block: the feeling that you’re truly stuck mid-
puzzle and can’t find a way to move forward.
Nailing Down Your Puzzle Editor’s Style
The person responsible for compiling and styling the puzzles in a certain news-
paper, book, or Web site is called the puzzle editor, and it can help to get familiar 
with that person’s style. As I mention in Chapter 1, the difficulty level of a cross-
word depends on how the clues are written. Whether the puzzle editor creates 
each crossword himself or edits crosswords from other puzzle constructors, his 
influence on the style of each puzzle is strong. For this reason, when you first start 
working puzzles, it can help to focus on puzzles published in the same source. 
Setting the Mood
The right environment to work a crossword depends on your personal prefer-
ences, of course. For me, these things are essential:
 
✓ A comfortable chair
 
✓ Silence or soft music
 
✓ Good lighting

374
Part IV: The Part of Tens 
 
✓ Easy access to resources (whether books or a computer)
 
✓ Ample time to complete the puzzle — or at least to make a good effort!
Analyzing the Theme
Not every puzzle constructor creates themed crosswords. You’ll often see 
crosswords that don’t have titles, which means they don’t have themes. But 
all the puzzles I edit, including the ones in this book, are themed, and the title 
hints at the theme.
The theme of a crossword is simply a central idea that the longer clues tie back 
to. For example, I created an Easy puzzle for this book called “Now’s the Time” 
that contains many time- and date-related clues.
If a puzzle does have a theme, try to keep it in mind as you read each clue. 
Doing so may help you tap into the puzzle constructor’s point of view, which 
may make solving clues easier.
 
The puzzle title doesn’t always present the theme in a crystal-clear way: 
Sometimes you have to give the title a bit of thought (and work a few clues) 
before figuring out what it means. For example, the Tough puzzle in this book 
titled “Open Wide” could, I suppose, have been about dentistry. It’s not. Instead, 
many of its clues relate to speech and speaking.
Focusing on Fill-in-the-Blanks
As I explain in Chapter 1, fill-in-the-blank clues are often the easiest type to solve. 
These clues usually involve a familiar phrase or title from which one or more 
words have been deleted. The puzzle constructor uses an underline to indicate 
where those words are missing, and you have to determine what they are.
Studying Crosswordese
I bet you didn’t realize that working crosswords involves learning a new lan-
guage. In truth, crosswordese is just a subset of English words — specifically, 
a group of words that you often run across in crosswords but don’t often 
use when you talk to your friends and family. Puzzle constructors love cross-
wordese because it’s chock full of short words (usually three to five letters 
long) that can get them out of jams. They try not to use too many of them in 
any given puzzle, but they do lean on them pretty regularly.

375
 Chapter 5: Ten Tricks for Successfully Tackling the Trickiest Puzzles
Let me give you just three examples of the types of words I’m talking about:
 
✓ An epee is a type of fencing sword.
 
✓ A gam is a pinup model’s leg.
 
✓ Another name for margarine is oleo.
Getting Familiar with Common Fillers
In addition to crosswordese, puzzle constructors sometimes fall back on certain 
short entries to help them make a puzzle gel. Following are three types of these 
short entries you’re likely to encounter if you work crosswords often enough:
 
✓ Compass points: If you come across a two- or three-letter entry whose clue 
asks for a direction, you know you’re being asked for a compass point. A 
two-letter entry has only these four possible answers: NE, NW, SE, and SW. 
A three-letter entry has eight possible answers: NNE, NNW, SSE, SSW, ENE, 
ESE, WNW, and WSW.
 
✓ Roman numerals: If it’s been a while since you’ve worked with Roman 
numerals, you may find that crosswords force you to reacquaint yourself 
with this numbering system. You may run across clues that even force you 
to do some math! Here’s a simple example: The clue “Half of XXVI” requires 
that you first know that you’re looking at the number 26. Then you divide 
by 2 to get 13, and finally you translate 13 into Roman numerals to arrive at 
your answer: XIII.
 
✓ Latin words: While we’re doing as the Romans did, you may want to 
brush up on your basic Latin — especially Latin abbreviations. I explain 
in Chapter 1 that puzzle constructors often create entries from foreign 
words (and must alert you to which language they’re looking for). Along 
with French and Spanish, Latin is a favorite, in part because it’s chock full 
of short words (such as circa, vox, and unum) and abbreviations (such as 
A.D., ibid, and etc.) that can serve as the glue holding together an unwieldy 
section of a puzzle.
Picking Out Plurals
As I mention in Chapter 1, a simple but useful trick when you’re stuck mid-puzzle 
is to search your list of unanswered clues to find those written in a plural form. 
If the clue is plural, the answer must be plural as well (assuming your puzzle 
constructor is doing a decent job!). Using a pencil, lightly write an S at the end of 
each grid entry that you know must be a plural word or phrase. You can’t assume 

376
Part IV: The Part of Tens 
that the S will work in every case — the English language is never that easy 
(think about the plural forms of mouse, dice, or child, for example). But in many 
cases, that S will be correct. And you’ll be surprised at how often a single letter 
may inspire you to solve an intersecting clue.
Looking at Verb Tenses
Again, if the puzzle constructor is worth his salt, the verb tense used in a clue 
will match the verb tense used in the answer. So if you’re looking at a clue that 
contains a verb in the past tense, you may want to pencil in the letters ED at 
the end of the corresponding entry. Of course, the English language has a lot 
of irregular verbs that don’t end in -ed in the past tense (consider think, eat, 
and write). But if you’re stuck mid-puzzle and are searching for ways to break 
through your solver’s block, this tip is definitely worth a try.
Clues that contain verbs ending in -ing are worth a look as well. Depending on 
how the clue is written, the answer could also end in ING.
Gathering Great Resources
Throughout this book, I encourage you to consider outside resources (whether 
books, Web sites, or friends and family members) as fair game when you’re 
working a crossword. You may know people who think otherwise — who con-
sider cracking open a dictionary while working a crossword the ultimate form 
of cheating. But I consider it a simple act of learning and a very appropriate 
means of becoming a better puzzler.
Taking a Breather!
If you’ve worked for a long time on a puzzle and still can’t quite figure it out, 
walk away. Do something else that you enjoy — even another (perhaps easier) 
puzzle — and return to your challenge with fresh eyes. Working puzzles should 
be fun — even when it’s frustrating. So if the frustration threatens to smother 
the fun, give yourself a break!

Chapter 6
Ten Web Resources to Try 
When You’re Stuck
In This Chapter
▶ Looking up abbreviations, quotations, and biblical names
▶ Finding translations
▶ Using an online atlas, thesaurus, and encyclopedia
W
e all have our online favorites, and depending on the specific nature of 
the clues that are tripping you up, the resources I list here may or may 
not be useful. But I suspect the ten I feature here will come in handy if you work 
crosswords frequently.
Abbreviations
If you’re stuck on a clue that contains or asks for an abbreviation, the Web site 
at www.abbreviations.com is a gold mine. Here’s how it works: If you need 
to find out what an abbreviation means, type it into the search box at the top 
of the home page and click “Search.” For example, say you need to know what 
“var” stands for. The page that pops up gives you a list of options, in order of 
the popularity of their usage. So, from most to least popular, “var” could mean 
variation, variety, value at risk, variante, value added reseller, and so on.
If you need to find the accepted abbreviation for a word or phrase, you change 
the setting on the home page to “word >> abbreviation.” Then type your word 
or phrase (for example, “British pound”) and click “Search.” If more than one 
answer is available, you get a list ordered by popularity. If not, you get a single 
response: In this case, GBP.

378
Part IV: The Part of Tens 
Bartleby Quotations
This site (www.bartleby.com/quotations) features tens of thousands of 
famous quotations that you can search using the words you know. For example, 
say the puzzle clue is “‘. . . against ____ of troubles’ (Shakespeare).” On the home 
page, type “against of troubles” into the search box and press “Go.” The list of 
possibilities that appears includes a quote from Hamlet that features the words 
“against a sea of troubles.”
Bible Gateway
If you’re stuck on a clue that contains a biblical reference, this site (www.
biblegateway.com) may be able to help. On the home page, you can type 
in key words you know (such as a name or place) and click “Search the Bible.” 
The list that appears lets you know which Bible books and verses contain 
references to that name or place, and a quick scan of the possibilities may 
lead you to a helpful passage.
For example, say the crossword clue asks you to identify “Mordecai’s cousin.” You 
may recall that Mordecai is a biblical name (as opposed to, say, a Shakespearean 
character) but not remember anything more. By typing “Mordecai” in the search 
box, you get a list of passages from the Book of Esther — who was, indeed, 
Mordecai’s cousin.
English/Latin Dictionary
The Web site at www.freedict.com/onldict/lat.html translates words 
between Latin and English. As I mention in Chapter 5, puzzle constructors love 
Latin, and you may feel the love for this Web site if you get stuck on a clue that 
calls for a Latin translation. On the home page, you have two search boxes to 
choose from: “English to Latin” and “Latin to English.” Type your word into the 
appropriate box and click “Search.” Presto! (To translate between English and 
another language, check out www.translate.google.com, which I explain 
later in this chapter.)
The Internet Movie Database
The Internet Movie Database (www.imdb.com) is the place to turn for baffling 
clues related to movies and TV shows and their stars and directors. The search 

379
 Chapter 6: Ten Web Resources to Try When You’re Stuck
box at the top of the home page lets you type in what you know (perhaps the 
name of a film or an actor) and click “go.” What shows up is a laundry list of 
info about that film, TV show, actor, or director.
For example, maybe you can’t recall the name of the actress who played Louise 
Jefferson on the TV show The Jeffersons. If you type in “The Jeffersons,” one of 
the many pieces of information that shows up is a cast list that identifies the 
actress as Isabel Sanford.
Infoplease World Atlas
If your world geography is rusty (and whose isn’t?), this site (www.infoplease.
com/atlas) offers an easy way to get reacquainted with countries and major 
cities. The home page features a world atlas. Click on a continent to get a look at 
its countries, and then click on a country to zoom in on its cities.
This site features lots of other handy tools as well, including lists of all the 
oceans and seas in the world, the world’s highest mountains, and the languages 
spoken in each country. Even if you aren’t stuck on a crossword clue, check 
this site out just for the fun of it!
Thesaurus
Often, a puzzle clue will ask you to figure out a synonym for a word. You can turn 
to the thesaurus at www.thesaurus.com for help in that situation. Simply type 
in the word that’s been given in the clue, click “Search,” and pore through the list 
of results for words that match your length requirements. For example, say the 
clue is “peevish.” Maybe you know that the eight-letter answer must begin with 
CH, and you just can’t figure out what word would work. From the list of possibili-
ties on this site, you can identify two possibilities: “childish” and “churlish.”
Google Translate
This Web site (www.translate.google.com) offers an easy way to translate 
from English to another language or vice versa. On the home page, you find a 
large box in which to type the word or phrase you need translated. Below the 
box, you choose which language to translate from and which language to trans-
late to. Say you want to find out the French word for “bread,” for example. Type 
in “bread” and set the translation from English to French. Click “Translate,” and 
you get the word “pain.”

380
Part IV: The Part of Tens 
 
Keep in mind that Latin is not one of the languages featured on this site. Check 
out www.freedict.com/onldict/lat.html (which I introduce earlier in the 
chapter) if you’re in need of Latin translation.
Wikipedia
This online encyclopedia (www.wikipedia.org) is a handy resource for his-
torical and bibliographical information. If you’re looking at a clue that refer-
ences a historical event or an important person, you’re likely to find an entry 
on Wikipedia that offers the information you’re seeking.
 
You can start your search at the Wikipedia home page if you like, but I find it’s 
just as easy to type “Wikipedia” and my search term into my search engine. 
Doing so should lead you directly to the online article(s) that covers the topic 
in question.
And If You’re Truly Stuck . . . 
Crossword Dictionary
Okay, so you’re really stuck on a certain entry. It’s eight letters long, and you 
have just three of the letters filled in. You’ve tried searching other resources 
and gotten nowhere. You can’t figure out any other intersecting entries, and 
you don’t want to turn to the puzzle solution because you want to work this 
puzzle through to the end. What to do?
If you’ve exhausted your other possibilities for solving the clue, give the Web site 
at www.crossword-dictionary.com a try. Type a period to indicate any letter 
you don’t know in the word you’re trying to solve. For example, with our eight-
letter word example, maybe you know the first letter is P, the fifth letter is E, and 
the last letter is D. Type “p . . . e . . d” in the search box and click “Search.” You 
get back a list of possible entries, including packeted, pampered, and pandered. 
With luck, one of them will make perfect sense to solve your clue.

         Open the book and find:
•  The basics of solving crosswords
•  Various types of clues you’ll 
encounter
•  The health benefits of solving 
puzzles
•  Hints for improving your 
memory and brain power
•  Fully worked-out solutions to 
all puzzles
•  Ways to make crosswords a 
group activity
•  Tips for tackling the 
trickiest puzzles
•  Web resources to try when 
you’re stuck
Timothy E. Parker is the “World’s Most Syndicated Puzzle Compiler” 
according to Guinness World Records. He is also the creator and senior 
editor of the Universal Crossword, the Internet’s most popular cross-
word puzzle since 1998, and the author of the annual bestselling USA 
Today Crossword Calendar.
Games/Puzzles/Crosswords
$14.99 US / $17.99 CN / £9.99 UK
ISBN 978-0-470-49157-7
Go to Dummies.com®
for videos, step-by-step photos, 
how-to articles, or to shop!
Do you love crossword puzzles? Can’t find ones that appeal to 
you? This puzzle-packed guide is bursting with crosswords that 
are not only in large print to ease eyestrain, but also feature 
clues that are appropriate for those in their golden years. Plus, 
you’ll discover how you can improve your brain’s health through 
stimulating mental exercise.
•  Spruce up your solving strategies — become familiar with the puzzles, 
consider themes, identify types of clues, and use outside resources 
•  Get the lowdown on brain benefits — see what current research has 
to say about the importance of mental exercise and the impact it can 
have on your cognitive abilities
•  Tackle the puzzles — from easy to tough to treacherous, solve 150 
crossword puzzles with a variety of themes
•  Check the solutions — push yourself to find solutions to improve 
your puzzle-solving skills and, when your brain is drained, check the 
answer section to see how well you did
•  Pique your interest — find puzzles on topics of interest to prime-
timers, from Ed Sullivan to Watergate to Wolfgang Puck
Your fun and easy guide to solving and 
enjoying crosswords

