Cyber Security Awareness for
CEOs and Management

Cyber Security Awareness for
CEOs and Management
David Willson
Contributing Editor
Henry Dalziel
AMSTERDAM • BOSTON • HEIDELBERG • LONDON
NEW YORK • OXFORD • PARIS • SAN DIEGO
SAN FRANCISCO • SINGAPORE • SYDNEY • TOKYO
Syngress is an imprint of Elsevier

Syngress is an imprint of Elsevier
225 Wyman Street, Waltham, MA 02451, USA
Copyright r 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means,
electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any information storage and
retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher. Details on how to seek
permission, further information about the Publisher’s permissions policies and our arrangements
with organizations such as the Copyright Clearance Center and the Copyright Licensing Agency,
can be found at our website: www.elsevier.com/permissions
This book and the individual contributions contained in it are protected under copyright
by the Publisher (other than as may be noted herein).
Notices
Knowledge and best practice in this field are constantly changing. As new research and
experience broaden our understanding, changes in research methods or professional practices,
may become necessary.
Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own experience and knowledge in
evaluating and using any information or methods described herein. In using such information
or methods they should be mindful of their own safety and the safety of others, including
parties for whom they have a professional responsibility.
To the fullest extent of the law, neither the Publisher nor the authors, contributors, or editors,
assume any liability for any injury and/or damage to persons or property as a matter of products
liability, negligence or otherwise, or from any use or operation of any methods, products,
instructions, or ideas contained in the material herein.
ISBN: 978-0-12-804754-5
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress
For Information on all Syngress publications
visit our website at http://store.elsevier.com/Syngress

ABOUT THE CONTRIBUTING EDITOR
Henry Dalziel is a serial education entrepreneur, founder of Concise
Ac Ltd, online cybersecurity blogger, and e-book author. He writes
for the Concise-Courses.com blog and has developed numerous
cybersecurity continuing education courses and books. Concise Ac
Ltd develops and distributes continuing education content (books and
courses) for cybersecurity professionals seeking skill enhancement and
career advancement. The company was recently accepted onto the
UK Trade & Investment’s (UKTI) Global Entrepreneur Programme
(GEP).

INTRODUCTION
As a CEO, corporate executive or member of management are you
concerned about cyber security, that inevitable data breach, how you
will react, whether you will be sued or fired, and what you can do
about it? This book provides an overview of the cyber threat/risks to
your business and you or your position, and will discuss what you
need to do, especially as CEOs, executives and management, to lower
the risk, reduce or eliminate liability, and protect the reputation of the
company, and yourself, as it relates to information security, data
protection and data breaches.
Here’s a little bit about my background: I grew up in New York.
After attending law school I went on active duty with the U.S. Army.
I spent 20 years in the Army as a JAG officer. During that time I
engaged in a lot of trial work, prosecution and defense work. Halfway
through my career I transitioned into operational and international

law provided legal support for satellite operations and space control
and then cyber operations, CNA, CND, and CNE, (computer network
attack, defense and exploitation) providing legal advice on attacking,
defending, and exploiting networks to defeat the enemy. During that
time frame I was at the National Security Agency (NSA) and helped
establish what is now called CYBERCOM. When I retired from
the Army I started Titan Info Security Group. I’m a licensed attorney
in
New
York,
Connecticut,
and
Colorado.
I
hold
the
CISSP
(Certification for Information System Security Professional). As the
owner and sole practitioner of Titan Info Security Group I do risk
management, risk assessments, security audits, policy and compliance
work, incident response, management and oversight, support to law
firms, hackback or active defense, and address all sorts of cyber and
legal-related issues.
Here’s the agenda. We’ll cover how bad it is and should you be
concerned—and I tell you, absolutely you need to be concerned—what
the problem is as I see it, how data is lost and stolen, who the hackers
are; it’s important to know who’s attacking you in order to defend
yourself. What can you do to protect yourself and your business? And
at the end we’ll cover what are some of your fiduciary responsibilities
and obligations as CEO or management, and so on and so forth.
Let’s begin with two questions: First, will you or your company/
firm be breached or hacked over the next year? And Second, will
someone else or another firm be breached or hacked over the next
year? Typically when I ask the first question only about 10% of the
hands go up. But with the second question typically 80% to 90% of
the hands go up. This begs the question, “why do you believe that
your security is better than the guy next to you or some other
company? Is your security better than the White House, the Pentagon,
many large companies, Target, Sony, Home Depot, Scott Trade, the
Office of Personnel Management (OPM), it goes on and on. So what is
it about your security that you think makes you much better than
everyone else?” The answer to that typically comes down to two argu-
ments. Most do not really believe their security is better, but what they
believe is that their company is too small for hackers to bother with,
and, they don’t have anything the hackers want. Throw those two
theories out of the window. Face it, your company or firm will be
x
Introduction

breached. If it hasn’t happened already, which is hard to believe, then it
is just a matter of time. More likely is that you have been breached and
don’t even know it. Hackers want everything they can steal. Let’s go
ahead and look at the issues.
David Willson
xi
Introduction

CHAPTER 11
How Bad Is It Out There?
Let’s discuss about how bad it is, and whether or not you should be
concerned. First of all, cyber threats, hacking and theft of data is
much worse than most understand and would believe. So yes, you
should be very concerned.
Here’s a great analogy. As a gun owner, good safety dictates you
assume and treat every gun as if it is loaded. The same applies to cyber
security. Assume every network or computer device is or has been
compromised in one way or another. I go through life assuming that
my laptop and other computing devices have been compromised and
there’s nothing I can do about it. You have to make that assumption
because unless you’re a forensic examiner or malware analyst, can
look at your computer logs daily and determine whether you have
been infected or compromised, you can never be sure and it’s better to
be safe than sorry. If you assume you have been compromised you will
be much more cautious with your data. With that in mind, preparation
is the key. You must identify and attempt to lower risk, and take
action to attempt to prevent a breach. But, as stated, preparation is
the key. Prepare for that inevitable breach because it will happen.
Breaches - Hacks
In the Media
2014
2015
Target
40 million credit
card numbers
------------------
Home Depot
56 million accounts
------------------
Sony
25 gigs of sensitive
employee data
------------------
OPM
Over 19 million
impacted
------------------
Anthem
-------------------
80 million
healthcare accts
AshleyMadison.com
------------------
Over 37 million
impacted
YOU??
Were you
breached?
What could you
lose?
Cyber Security Awareness for CEOs and Management. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-804754-5.00001-5
© 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Let’s review some recent major breaches. This is just a small sampling
of what has appeared recently in the media. If you look at some of the
websites that report data breaches, you’ll see there’re hundreds of busi-
nesses that are breached every month and sensitive information lost. Some
of the major breaches most of us are familiar with include Target, 40 mil-
lion credit card numbers; Home Depot, 56 million accounts; Sony, 25 gigs
of sensitive employee information; Office of Personnel Management
(OPM), this one is personal for me since I was in the military, 19 to 21 mil-
lion, and the figure is likely much larger now. The latest news is that the
OPM breach included the theft of fingerprints. With that number of
records stolen, anyone who served in the military has to assume that their
personal information was part of that breach. And it continues. Anthem
Health, 80 million medical records stolen; Ashley Madison, 37 million,
and not just names and social security numbers, but very personal infor-
mation to include people being outed left and right as cheaters. So, where
do you stand? Do you even know whether your business or firm has been
breached? You need to assume you have been and plan from there. This
attitude puts you in a much better perspective than saying to yourself,
“I’m not worried, it won’t happen to me.” You’re kidding yourself if you
follow that line of thinking. The breaches are real and impacting all.
Later we will provide some more in depth discussion about the
hackers, who they are, how they get in and the technology behind their
techniques. Briefly though, the techniques of a hacker are not like
those of someone breaking into a bank, your house, or shoplifting.
Hackers use automated tools from the security of wherever their com-
puter is, and operate virtually anonymously hopping from network to
network to mask who they are and their location.
Imagine if someone was able to implant tools in retail stores or in
banks all around the country, and at the press of a button these auto-
mated tools, like little robots, would begin stealing or shoplifting and
tossing the merchandise into a device which then, like a pneumatic
tube, transports the merchandise to wherever the thief desires. Usually
to a storage space of some other unknowing warehouse owner. That is
an attempt at a physical world analogy of the techniques utilized by
hackers. Automated systems/software are used to compromise compu-
ters, home networks, business networks, etc. These compromised
machines/networks are then used to target companies and other net-
works and steal and disrupt things. For instance, a botnet is a series of
2
Cyber Security Awareness for CEOs and Management

infected machines that are controlled by one or more hackers to com-
promise other machines and networks, send out phishing attacks,
implement denial of service attacks, etc. Some of the largest botnets in
the world consist of over a million infected computers and networks.
Let’s consider the law of averages. How often does a hacker or attacker
have to be right? Just once. How often do we, the defenders, defending
our networks have to be right? One hundred percent of the time. It’s 1%
versus 100%. Those are some serious losing odds. Yet another reason why
you should be so concerned. We are fighting a losing battle.
Before getting back to the hackers, let’s look at another issue
hindering companies. The IT companies and departments have been
saddled with the job of security, and many do not have the budget,
time, or even expertise to adequately do the job. Additionally, for most
companies management treats cyber security as an IT/technical issue
and therefore don’t bother to pay attention and understand what is
really going on. Now understand, my goal is not to pick on IT depart-
ments and IT people. They do a great job. But what is their focus? For
most companies, it is uptime. Back in the day before cyber was a con-
cern, the primary focus of IT was to install computers, setup the net-
work, install software, get everything up and running, and make sure
everyone is online and has 24/7 access. Today that is still the focus.
Security is a distant second to that goal. Helpdesk support takes up
much of the IT department’s time. If you’re using an outsourced IT
company, security, in most cases, is really an afterthought, sort of an
additional duty. The primary goal of many of these companies, based
on what their clients requirements are, is to make sure the client is up
and running. In order to be cost effective, most attempt to do this using
automation to minimize the number of employees needed, as well as to
limit the use of resources. The issue really becomes that of IT versus
Suits. Suits want uptime, and IT knows it. Yes, management is con-
cerned with and wants to know about threats, but most who do not
have an IT background seem to treat the threats as sort of a theoretical
or amorphous threat and fall prey to the attitude of, “I don’t really
think it will happen to me.” Also, unfortunately, many IT support per-
sonnel, for a myriad of reasons, do not want to tell the leadership how
bad the state of security is, how vulnerable the company really is, or
how many attacks the company has actually suffered. The attitude
appears to be, “I don’t want to tell the emperor he has no clothes,” “I
3
How Bad Is It Out There?

don’t want to tell everybody how vulnerable we really are because it
makes me look bad, and makes me look like I’m not doing my job.” In
addition there are some IT personnel who believe they are the superman
of all things technical and possess the attitude, “I can do it all” and,
“nobody will ever get into my network.” I’ve worked with a few of
them or done assessments on a few of their companies, and typically it
takes all of about 5 minutes to get in. Yes, five minutes. It is usually
very simple, especially with that attitude.
The problem with some IT personnel believing they can do it all is
that most are not cyber security experts, they are IT experts and the
two jobs are not synonymous. For example, would you go to a podia-
trist for back surgery, or a dermatologist for brain surgery? Similarly,
you wouldn’t hire your website designer to set up your network. So,
don’t assume your IT guy or Company is qualified to secure your net-
work and data. Unfortunately this assumption is made a lot. I once
worked with a big hospital in New York, the president told the IT
guy, “Hey the HVAC (heating, ventilating and air) system is down.
It’s run by a computer. Go fix it. You’re a computer guy.” The IT guy
looked at the president like he was crazy and said, “I don’t know any-
thing about HVAC systems.” Don’t make those assumptions. Don’t
assume your IT guy or your IT company is also a cyber security com-
pany unless they show that they have that expertise.
4
Cyber Security Awareness for CEOs and Management

Moving on. Nobody truly knows how bad the threats and vulner-
abilities are until you have that sort of nuclear event in the company
when all explodes and everyone is scrambling to figure out what hap-
pened and how to react. You must be prepared. It’s coming.
The more classes and lectures I give and the more assessments I do, the
more I realize that many people don’t understand the dynamics behind
cyber security. First of all, there is no silver bullet. There is no piece of
hardware, no piece of software, no process or procedure that’s going to
keep you secure. Security is a process, and that process must be managed.
First you must identify and understand the risk, threats, and vulnerabil-
ities. As stated above, IT does not equal security. IT ensures your equip-
ment is set up and running and continues to run efficiently, e.g., uptime.
Security is completely separate. Security utilizes technology, but the tech-
nology is just a tool. You must also understand how the vulnerabilities
are created by understanding the behaviors of the users, how the data is
collected, processed, stored, and utilized, along with other factors.
Currently, the end-user is likely to be the greatest vulnerability and threat
to your data. Technology can help lower the end user risk, but training
plays a much larger role in reducing that threat and vulnerability.
Understanding and protecting the data is why current advice recommends
that companies appoint a Chief Information Officer (CIO), and/or a risk
manager. Obviously, these roles will depend on the size of the company,
budget, and other factors, but at a minimum, one or more can be assigned
as extra duties.
5
How Bad Is It Out There?

While we are on the topic of what does and does not equal security,
you need to understand that compliance, such as HIPAA/HITECH,
SOX, GLBA, PCI, etc., does not equal security. Just because your
company is HIPAA compliant or PCI compliant does not mean you’re
secure. For example, HIPAA requires a password. But, one, two,
three, four is not a good password. So you may be compliant with the
password requirement, but that doesn’t mean you’re secure.
Where is the weakest link in the chain?
The End User!
You are the weakest link!
So what or who is the weakest link in the chain? As stated above,
we are, the end users, the people behind the computers on the key-
boards. We are the weakest link because of our behaviors and actions.
6
Cyber Security Awareness for CEOs and Management

We click on everything, open everything. It is our actions and beha-
viors with regard to technology that allows the compromise to the net-
work and to our most sensitive data in most cases. Yes, there are still
vulnerabilities and weaknesses in the network hackers attempt to
exploit, but the end user is probably one of the easiest ways to get in.
Consider this quote from an Experian Data Breach survey: “Survey
results show that a data breach is often the result of human error or a
crime—neither of which can be 100 percent prevented. As such, com-
panies must put measures in place—training, preparedness plans,
guidelines, etc.—to help protect their customers’ information.” As
stated
above,
training,
preparedness
plans,
guidelines,
incident
response, data breach plans, business continuity, disaster recovery; it’s
all a process. You can’t simply put a security program together and
forget it. Security is not a set and forget concept. Put the plans in place
and then exercise them and make sure everybody knows and under-
stands their role.
The million dollar question then is, what constitutes good or rea-
sonable security? Currently no set standard exists as the gold standard
for good security which will ensure you company will not be breached
and thus sued. The best you can do is implement a process and man-
age that process. You security should be based on your budget, the
information you collect, and the resources available at the time and a
risk assessment. You must be able to show due diligence in implement-
ing and managing your security program. You must be able to declare,
“I implemented reasonable security and managed it.” That way, when
everything hits the fan, you can confidently claim that you did A, B,
and C to try and protect information; that was the best you could do.
That should be the goal: implement reasonable security and manage it.
Don’t look for a standard to make you secure. Standards are good as
guidance and many provide a decent base for setting up and imple-
menting a program, but there is no one standard that’s going to
achieve the reasonable security goal all by itself. A little later we will
discuss this concept more.
7
How Bad Is It Out There?

CHAPTER 22
How Is Data Stolen?
Now, let’s discuss how data is lost and stolen. Focusing on the end
user as the greatest vulnerability, the three main avenues hackers use
and that cause data to be lost or stolen are email, Internet, and social
media. I say lost or stolen because in many cases data is lost due to
our own negligence and mistakes, e.g. lost phones, mobile devices, etc.
First, clicking is probably one of your worst enemies. When we received
email and it contains a link or an attachment, most of us will click the link
in the mail or click on and download the attachment without even a second
thought. Worse yet, most of us have pictures and Internet enabled links
activated so when we open an email the pictures appear as well as Internet
images. These pictures and images could potentially be downloading mal-
ware or viruses to your computer without your knowledge. First tip, your
email should be set up so that pictures and Internet or HTML text does
not load automatically but you have to actively request to load them. This
book is not long enough to walk you through how to do this but, ask your
IT person or search on “How to protect or secure email” on the Internet.
Another avenue hackers utilize to steal data is the Internet. We do a
lot of Internet searches using Google or other search browsers. Hackers
either attempt to trick us into going to fake websites or seed legitimate
websites with malware or viruses. For instance, you click a link in an
email believing it is taking you to a legitimate website, but in reality it is
a fake site made to look like the real one. Maybe a banking site. Once
there, you insert your username and password and either the site for-
wards you to the real site or you get a 404 error. Either way the hackers
now have your username and password. Similarly, as you click around
legitimate sites you could be unknowingly downloading malware or
viruses that have been inserted by hackers who breached the website. So,
beware. In many cases this type of malware and viruses would be very
difficult to detect and defeat. But if you keep it in the back of your mind
that it exists, and if your Spidey sense alarms as you're clicking through
websites, then get out of it and move on. Paranoia, in the context of
Cyber Security Awareness for CEOs and Management. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-804754-5.00002-7
© 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

technology, is probably a very good thing. Just remember, clicking can
get you in hot water, so caution and a touch of paranoia are good.
This is not to say you can never click the links in emails. I do fre-
quently if I trust the email and the sender. If you know you can trust it,
then fine. For most of us we get a lot of emails every day and quickly
flip through them, in fact blast through them. It can be exciting to see a
clip, picture, or video someone sent, or see if you have a potential cus-
tomer. Someone may send you an email with a link claiming, “Check
this out.” It could be from somebody legitimate or could be a fake. So,
you open and download it or you click the link and boom, you’ve been
compromised and not even know it. Many of us are also very distracted
as we email. An extreme example is when I see people on the highway,
zipping down the road at 60 miles an hour looking at text messages
and emails. First of all, it’s extremely dangerous and second you’re
clicking on things not even really paying attention to it because you’re
supposed to have your eyes on the road. So every click is a potential
virus, malware, and/ or message stating you’ve been hacked or
breached. Obviously you’re not going to get a message saying you’ve
been hacked or breached, but that’s the end result.
Let’s review some phishing attack emails. This first one is supposed
to make you believe it is from the FBI. When you get an email
from someone you do not recognize, the first thing you should look for
10
Cyber Security Awareness for CEOs and Management

is whether it looks suspicious and how many misspellings you see. The
reason for this is that many phishing emails come from overseas where
English is not their first language, and, in many cases, they don’t bother
with spell check. Trust your gut if it tells you something does not look
right. In this email, the email address scheme looks correct, it includes
IC for intelligence community as well as FBI.gov which appears correct.
But the email address: judiciary@sonustar.com gives me a little pause
and should cause your Spidey sense to go up. This is obviously a fake
email based on the way it’s written. These types of emails, from organi-
zations like the FBI, are meant to be a scare technique to get you to
click the link in the email quickly out of fear or concern. As stated, stop,
take a breath and investigate a little. There is no reason why the FBI
would be contacting you. If the FBI was looking for you, more than
likely they would knock on your door, or kick it in. Anyway, don’t click
on the link. If you really need to know, this email includes a phone
number, you can call, or you can contact your local FBI office or even
their website to investigate more about the email. You could also see if
this Laura person, allegedly an agent, answers if you call the mobile
number. You might even Google this type of message and see if there’s
a scam out there. When I receive suspicious emails I check the Internet
for the particular scam. Another investigation technique would be to
type the URL www.judiciaryreport.com/fbi into your browser and see
what pops up. But the bottom line is, you just need to be cautious.
11
How Is Data Stolen?

This next email appears to come from the Navy Federal Credit
Union. If you look at the top of the email you’ll see it says Nevy
Federal Alert, Navy spelled with an “E.” This is your first clue that this
is probably not a legitimate email. I can tell you that all of the banks
that I’ve spoken with stated that they do not send emails to customers
as a generic email. They always include the customer’s name. This email
was sent to me as is evident from my email addresses on the “To” line.
Similar to the last email there’s a link the hackers, or phishing attackers
or scammers, want you to click on. Another red flag is the link. Why
would a navy federal credit union want me to click on the link that
says: drdiegohernandez.com/contact? This is obviously a huge red flag.
Do not click the link. Finally, when you look at the envelope informa-
tion or the metadata in the properties of the email it reveals where the
email actually came from. It was not from the credit union.
This next email is a typical legal scam. The scammers are seeking to
scam attorneys, typically into laundering money for them. Look at the
header information and you will see that no name or email address is
listed in the “To” line. The only data shown is “recipients list not
shown” on the “CC” line. The “From” line indicates infonicholas.
ferris@gmail.com sent the email from a Gmail account. Also, a close look
12
Cyber Security Awareness for CEOs and Management

of the body of the email reveals very poor English: “Please I seek legal
representation.” Additionally no contact information exists, there’s noth-
ing to click on and nothing to download. In this case, the scammers are
hoping you will respond back via email, agree to take the case and ask
for a retainer of $XXX.XX amount. The scammers will then send you
the retainer and likely a short time later will notify you that they decided
not to pursue the case and ask you to please send the retainer back
minus your fee. When you do this, basically what you’ve done is laun-
dered money for these people. There are other types of scams along this
line. So, be very cautious of this, especially attorneys.
This next email appears to come from Wells Fargo. Similar to the
Navy Credit Union email above, in this one, no customer name
appears. For me a huge red flag is the fact that I do not bank with
Wells Fargo. Unlike the emails we have looked at so far, in this email
the scammers are looking for recipients to click on the attachment
rather than a link. As it states, “You can do this by downloading the
attached file and updating necessary fields.” When I created the image
of the email the attachment that was with the email didn’t show on the
copy, but there was an attachment with this email. Just as you should
not click on a link, you should certainly not click on the attachment.
Obviously it’s a scam. As stated above, look for misspellings, improper
English, or things that just don’t seem right. If you are really con-
cerned about something like this, call the bank and ask them about it.
13
How Is Data Stolen?

In this image we will look at how you can explore deeper and research
the IP address from where the email was sent to provide clues as to its
legitimacy. First, you need to know that email addresses can be spoofed.
Let’s say, through some investigation, either via your website or searching
social media, I determined your name and/or email address. I can then
send an email to whoever my target is and make it look like it’s coming
from you. When you look behind that email address at the properties, the
envelope header or the metadata, you can see the actual IP address from
where that email was sent. For instance, this email says it’s from Holley
Twomey, with an email address of: kj@worksmartllc.com. The first red
flag is that the name and email address do not appear to match. Second,
when you go to the worksmartllc.com website it has nothing to do with
what this email or this person seems to be talking about. It’s possible that
the Worksmartllc website was compromised or their email server was
compromised and someone is using the server to send out scam or phish-
ing emails. Also, like many of the others emails we have reviewed, there
is a link the scammers want you to click on. Again, don’t do it. Also, ran-
dom names appear in this email as recipients, none of which make sense.
The fact that you do not know the person should raise at least a small red
flag. If you were really interested in Oprah and what this was about you
could simply Google it, but don’t click the link. In the alternative you
could type the URL into your browser to see where it takes you. Be cau-
tious about this as well since hacker sites, fake but legitimate looking
sites, can create problems for you as well. Finally, another technique
14
Cyber Security Awareness for CEOs and Management

I have used if the URL is too long is to right-click the link, copy, paste it
into a Word document so that anything unseen behind it is stripped out.
You can then copy the URL from the Word document and paste it into
your browser to see what comes up.
Similar to the fake emails that can be created, fake web links can be
created. For instance, as a hacker if you want get people to go to your
hacker site, www.mymalwaresite.com, but are concerned no one will
click it out of fear of contracting a malware or virus, you can disguise
the URL to say whatever you want. You can change the name of the
URL to something like www.freemoney.com, but when your victims
click this link they will actually be taken to www.mymalwaresite.com.
This next email appears to be from USAA, and is another bank email.
Many phishing attacks appear to come from banks. As you can see, this
one, like others, is sent to unknown recipients and does not address a
15
How Is Data Stolen?

named individual, but states, “Dear USAA customer.” This is your first
alert. Also, the S and two A’s are in small caps, which should cause more
suspicion. Again, similar to others, the scammers want you to click on the
link. Also, as stated with the FBI email, in many of these phishing attacks,
it’s all about urgency. The scammers want you to do something quickly
and that’s how they’re trying to trip you up. Obviously in this email it
states, “Your online banking account has been suspended.” As you look
closer, the link they want you to click reads, bolivspine.com/wp, which is
normally a Word Press site. At the bottom of the email you can see I have
written the actual address the email came from as well as the IP address:
“Received from. tx3-csb2.smtp.ucla.edu ([169.232.46.189]” This is not a
typical IP address for a banking site. This is a typical internal IP address for
a company network, which is not where emails are sent from. If you do a
“Whois” look up on the IP address it reveals that the IP address comes
from the University of California Los Angeles. So it appears as though this
email was sent from an IP address belonging to UCLA. The likelihood in
this case is that UCLA’s server has been hacked and is being used to send
spam and phishing attacks.
16
Cyber Security Awareness for CEOs and Management

This next image is a screenshot of the Whois lookup of the IP
address. Again, you can find the IP address by looking at the proper-
ties of the email. If you use Outlook for email, merely open the email
message, click on file and go to properties. Look for the IP address
which was, like I said, 169.232.46.189. The fact that the UCLA server
came up is not unusual simply because a lot of universities are brea-
ched due to limited security and since they keep their networks rela-
tively open to allow students access to email and servers for studying
and such.
Since we are discussing scams there is one you should know about
that is costing companies a lot of money. The FBI continuously warns
about this scam. Hackers somehow determine the email address of the
CEO or other executive of a company. They also determine who in the
company is responsible for money transfers and the types of transfers
the company typically engages in. The hackers then send an email that
appears to come from the CEO or other executive of a company to
someone who handles money transfers. The email, as stated above, is
worded to instill a sense of urgency in the recipient. The email
demands that a certain amount be transferred to a specific account
overseas quickly. Unfortunately many companies are falling for this
scam. One method of defeating this is to put processes in place
requiring confirmation and/or double checks prior to any transfer. At
a minimum the recipient of the email should phone or text the CEO or
executive to verify the legitimacy of the request. Emailing may be a
concern since the hackers may have access to or co-opted the company
email server and any email sent to the CEO could be going directly to
the hackers. This is why an alternate means of communication should
be chosen. Some of these scams are very sophisticated. The hackers
were able to collect intelligence about the CEO, knowing when the
CEO is out of town, they know the company email scheme, and they
know the company’s procedures for conducting money transfers. A lot
of this data is available via social media, but other social engineering
techniques were likely used.
17
How Is Data Stolen?

Yet another bank email. This one appears to have come from
Capital One. The real point here, like many others is that the scam-
mers want you to click the link. As mentioned above, if you have to
type it in or do a right-click copy, then do so to see what it is. Unless
you are an expert with IP address and URL schemes, you likely do
not know what MindSpring is in the URL, neither do you know what
all those numbers are in the URL, or all those other characters. Also,
the link towernet.capitalone does not sound legitimate.
18
Cyber Security Awareness for CEOs and Management

Finally an email appearing to come from Bank of America, with a
definite sense of urgency. It requests that the account be verified within
48 hours, and asks you to click the link. Certainly if you never opened
an account or you don’t even bank with Bank of America you
shouldn’t be clicking on this.
Finally, I recently received an email that stated that the money
transfer had been completed for $12,000. I did not recognize the sender
and it provided no information other than the statement above, a
transfer number, and stated that in order to see more details I should
open the attached Word document. As you might imagine, I did not
open the attachment and deleted the email. No one gratuitously sends
me money.
Let’s take a quick look at how hackers obtain a lot of their intelli-
gence about their targets, us. Most people are active on more than one
social media site. We post things and get constant updates and requests
to connect. And so we want to click, click, click, and post, post, post.
“Nearly every day consumers willingly provide their personal information to
organizations online with no hesitation, neglecting to realize how that infor-
mation can be exposed due to employee negligence, insider maliciousness,
system glitches or attacks by cyber criminals.”1
This is from an Experian data breach and Ponemon Institute study.
But in addition to what is stated here, most of us constantly put a lot of
data out on Facebook and other social media. A great example from
many years ago, is the guy from Massachusetts who bought a big screen
TV and then took a picture of it. Most phone cameras at that time, and
some still today, would embed the latitude and longitude, e.g. location, of
where the picture was taken on the photo. In this case hackers were able
to determine where the guy lived. This genius then posted that he was
going on a vacation to the Bahamas and would be gone for a week.
While he was on vacation, hackers or burglars who saw his Facebook
posts, went to his house and stole his TV. The lesson learned is that we
put way too much information out there and it makes it easy for hackers
to use social engineering and cyber intelligence to figure out who we are
and how best to target us.
1“Is Your Company Ready for a Big Data Breach? The Second Annual Study on Data Breach
Preparedness,” Ponemon Institute, Sponsored by Experian Data Breach Research (2014).
19
How Is Data Stolen?

Again, never, never ever click on links and emails. If you have a
LinkedIn account likely have received many connection requests, or
friend requests from Facebook. Rather than clicking the link, go to the
site. Type in www.LinkedIn.com and then login or type in the URL
for Facebook. The problem with clicking the link is that it could be
false. I’ve received connection requests from LinkedIn and when I
logged into LinkedIn that request was not there. Similar to the scam
or phishing emails the hackers are hoping you will click the link in the
request believing you are logging into the actual LinkedIn site. As we
discussed above, the same applies to your bank. You should always
type the bank name into the browser and then log in. This is very
important, don’t click the link in the email for your bank.
Another good tip is you should try and avoid banking on smart-
phones and mobile devices. It’s just not that secure right now. Use
your computer or laptop, but even with this be careful. If you’re going
to your bank online with a computer or laptop, close everything, all
windows. Close your email and all other browsers. Don’t have
Facebook other social media, various searches open, etc. as well as
your email. Close everything and then open a browser and type in the
URL for the bank. This is a more secure way of banking. It’s not the
most secure way, but it is a more secure way.
If you go to krebsonsecurity.com, Brian offers a post wherein he
explains how to set up a bootable CD or a thumb drive that will allow
you to be even more secure when banking or working with financial
transactions. Additionally, if your bank and any other service that
requires a login offers two factor authentication you should take advan-
tage of it. Two factor authentication consists of a username and pass-
word, which is one factor, and then usually a one-time pin, typically sent
via text message. This, for the most part, ensures that if a hacker is able
to guess or determine your username and password, he will not be able
to access your account unless he has access to your text or sms messages.
Finally, ensure you keep all your systems up to date with security
updates. First, you will never get a security update through your email.
These updates pop up or appear on your computer automatically if
you have this function enabled to load automatically. Do not click on
links that pretend to be security updates. Also, if you’re surfing the
20
Cyber Security Awareness for CEOs and Management

Internet and a window pops reading “You’ve been compromised.
Click here to clean your computer,” don’t do it.
Here’s another problem. We all enjoy the convenience of technology.
We want to be connected 24/7. In this quest for convenience we reject
long, complicated passwords that have to be changed every so often.
This leads to easy passwords that we can remember and then use the
same on all accounts. If a hacker steals or guesses your password,
and like many people, you use that same password for multiple logins,
that hacker now has access to all of those accounts, banking, social
media, email, etc.
The Tools/Toys/Communication
Let’s talk about mobility or mobile devices. Here are some of the
devices we use, some are a little outdated. Many of us feel discon-
nected without all of these devices, yet, we lay them down, leave them
in airports, in hotels, and multiple other places. How often have you
heard someone say or you said yourself, “I can’t find my phone?” I
have found many phones in airports on chairs, at gates, and places like
that. None of these devices were password protected. I was at the air-
port one day and sitting on a chair at the gate and saw a mobile phone
that someone had left. While asking who might have lost it, someone
said, “Oh well just look at the last number called.” Lo and behold it
wasn’t password protected. When I opened it the first number that
came up said, “My wife.” So I gave the phone to the gate agents.
21
How Is Data Stolen?

A recent Trend Micro report states that 41% of all breaches are due
to lost mobile devices. As stated above, we leave devices everywhere
and they are not password protected.2 My hope is by the end of this
book all of your mobile devices should be password protected.
Certainly if they are company devices, and absolutely if they are per-
sonal devices, protect, protect, protect.
The Castle Walls
have Fallen!
www.dreamatico.com
Let’s address the next problem or issue. In the past we could protect
all sensitive data and equipment by keeping it behind walls, secure it,
lock it down, and put locks on it. Unfortunately the castle walls have
fallen primarily due to all of the mobile devices just shown. What we
have now is a massive amount of connected devices and networks
where data flows instantaneously around the world. Think about all of
your current connections. Not just who you communicate with on a
daily basis, but all of the support behind those communications, like
the ISP, those companies running the servers for your email, texts,
social media, as well as who maintains your networks, who has access
to your data, etc. Consider the IT support, cloud providers, and many
other connections and access.
2“Follow the Data: Dissecting Data Breaches and Debunking Myths Trend Micro Analysis of
Privacy Rights Clearinghouse 2005–2015 Data Breach Records,” Trend Micro (2015)
22
Cyber Security Awareness for CEOs and Management

Who are You Connected 
To?
You
Cloud
Provider
Customer
Attorney/
CPA
ISP
IT Support
You may believe your connections look like this, and maybe even
larger than this. Our data is everywhere so we have to take a concerted
effort to determine, “Where is that data and how am I best protecting
it?” Rather than just taking technology for granted and assuming there
is nothing to worry about, we have to be very careful about this infor-
mation and how we’re securing and what we do with it.
23
How Is Data Stolen?

This image is likely a better representation of what most of our con-
nections look like. The data is everywhere, so we must be more diligent
about how we are managing and securing this information.
24
Cyber Security Awareness for CEOs and Management

CHAPTER 33
Who Are the Hackers?
Let’s discuss who the hackers are. This is important because if you
understand who’s coming after you or who’s trying to attack you or
steal your data then you have a better chance of trying to protect it.
So who are the hackers? What are they looking for? I’ll tell you
right now, they’re looking for everything. I hear a lot of businesses
say, “Oh I don’t worry about it. I’m too small. They wouldn’t want
anything I have. I don’t have anything the hackers want.” Trust me.
They want everything: email addresses, phone numbers, names, sensi-
tive information, trade secrets, everything and anything they can steal.
Certainly the information that you don’t think is of any value has
value for spammers seeking to send out all kinds of spam email ads
such as the Canadian meds or the Viagra email spam many of us get.
Also, what are the hackers’ tools and how do they get in? We’ve spent
some time on how they get in; typically phishing emails, as you click
around on links, social media, and other techniques, but we will cover
a little bit more.
Cyber Security Awareness for CEOs and Management. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-804754-5.00003-9
© 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Who is Attacking/Who are the Hackers?
rt.com
www.welivesecurity.com
donsurber.blogspot.com
www.telegraph.co.uk
gizmodo.com
Who are they? The teenage kid trying to prove himself, sort of the
introvert in the basement, still exists and can cause some headaches. The
next group consists of the numerous hacker groups like Anonymous
that you can see in the picture with the mask. Those are the groups that
are looking to send messages, make a political point and steal money.
Then there is, on the far right, the wise guys, organized crime. Hacking
has gotten so profitable that a lot of organized crime syndicates have
moved away from gambling, drugs and prostitution and moved into
hacking because it’s a lot lower risk and a lot higher profit. Next, you
have the nation states like Russia, China, and others that are going after
military and trade secrets. It appears from articles and reports that from
the west, primarily the Chinese, nation-states are trying to steal secrets,
both company and military. In contrast when you look east nations like
Russia and others, as well as the hackers there, are trying to steal
money. Sure, there is a quest for military and corporate secrets, but
more theft. In the lower middle you see the terrorist groups. The Syrian
Electronic Army (SEA), ISIS and ISIS supporters, Al Qaeda, and other
terrorist groups that are hacking for money, to recruit, to send messages,
steal intelligence, etc. Finally you have the typical criminal seeking
to steal money or send out spam. As we become more and more con-
nected the numbers of hackers increases. When you can hide behind a
26
Cyber Security Awareness for CEOs and Management

keyboard and attack someone or a network from the other side of the
world, the risk appears very low. Compare that to the risk of putting on
a mask, grabbing a gun and running into a bank to rob it.
When you Google the term “hackers” here’s, what pops up. This is a
screenshot of what you’ll find: “hacker for hire,” “hacker for hire
reviews,” “how to hire a hacker,” etc. Now granted, a lot of these ads are
to assist people having online problems who are seeking help. Some of
them though, are real hackers, or should I say computer experts who are
comfortable delving into the gray area of the law and beyond. I know
people who are actual hackers that you can hire. They will go after some-
one else causing you problems online. Some of these hackers are
legitimate requiring you sign a contract explaining what they will and will
27
Who Are the Hackers?

not do, like violate the law. Some of them though, you pay the money
and they’ll do whatever you want. It’s that easy.
For those seeking to be hackers, it is also very easy. There are
numerous books available, and if you don’t have the skill to build
your own tools you can easily get the software online for sale. There is
an entire underground or dark web with hacker sites that offers hack-
ers for hire, hacker tools, malware and viruses for sale, and the use of
or lease of hacker tools. There is even hacker IT help support to set up
and maintain the malicious software. Finally, you can also pay for an
online subscription to keep the software up and running and receive
updates to your hacker software. Very little skill is involved. This is not
to say that all hackers have no skill. There are some extremely talented
hackers out there. That’s what makes this all really scary. On the flip
side, there are some very talented good guys, but the odds are against
the good guys. It is much more difficult to defend than it is to attack.
http://ubuntubook.wordpress.com/2011/06/11/construyendo-un-botnet/
unsuspecting web user’s zombie computers
Command & Control
This above image is an example of one of the schemes hackers use
to infect, attack, exploit vulnerabilities and send spam. This is called a
botnet. Think of a botnet as an inverted pyramid. The hacker is at the
tip. He uses his computer to attack and exploit one computer infecting
and compromising it. He then uses the compromised machine to infect
others. Like the old adage goes, he tells two friends and they tell two
28
Cyber Security Awareness for CEOs and Management

friends and they tell two friends and they tell two friends until you
have this whole web of infected machines that are being controlled by
that one person, the hacker. Some of the largest botnets in the world
are a million or more infected computers and servers. These computers
are your home computer, your business servers, sometimes mobile
devices, etc. Most people whose computer or network are infected
don’t even know it. That’s why I stated earlier I go through life assum-
ing that my electronics have been compromised and I may not know
it, nor is there a lot I can do about it. Chances are you’ve probably
been breached and compromised and don’t even know it either. Also,
just because your computer or server is compromised does not neces-
sarily mean hackers are stealing anything from you. They could be just
using your server or computer to attack other people or infect other
machines, or to store the proceeds of their nefarious activities.
Consider home security as an analogy. If a burglar really wants to
get into your house, do you think he can? Obviously yes. If he were to
sit outside your home or frequently drive through the neighborhood,
he could figure out when you’re home, when you’re not, what type of
alarm system you have, whether you have a dog, whether you have
weapons, whether there are open windows at any given time. He may
even use sites like Zillow to research your home layout, and social
media to learn what type of person you are and maybe how many peo-
ple live there. Is your neighborhood noisy, with lots of traffic, barking
dogs, kids playing, or a secluded enough area that he could just break
a window hidden by shrubbery and get in? There are many factors. If
he wants to sit there and take as much time as he needs to collect intel-
ligence, like a lot of hackers, especially nation-state hackers, he could
learn all he needed.
The true professionals, based on the time they have will usually go
in low and slow, take their time, sometimes months or years, to get in
and then sit quietly and then slowly siphon stuff out. Bottom line, if
the hackers want in, they will get in and there’s not a whole lot you
can do about it.
29
Who Are the Hackers?

CHAPTER 44
How to Protect Your Business
Let’s discuss what you can do to protect your business and yourself.
You a gambling man?
No? Then Protect Yourself!
Okay, if you’re a gambling man then don’t do anything. Don’t pro-
tect yourself. But if not, then you need a plan. You need to protect
yourself.
Here are three steps I provide to business owners: first, determine
the information you collect, process, and store, and how it is secured;
understand where that information is and who has access to it, e.g.,
your IT provider, your cloud provider; is your data in the cloud?, on
mobile devices, and where are those mobile devices, who has control
over them; etc.? Second, draft or have the proper policies drafted and
reviewed, to include a security policy, acceptable use, social media,
incident response, etc. If you are subject to compliance regulations,
like healthcare or financial, then you need to make sure your policies
reflect what you are doing to secure that information and deal with the
privacy issues. Third, training, training, and training. Everybody needs
to be trained on the policies as well as cyber threats. Training, similar
to this book is necessary to explain how information is lost, stolen,
Cyber Security Awareness for CEOs and Management. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-804754-5.00004-0
© 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

who the hackers are, the information they’re looking for, and how to
protect it.
In the next few pages we will discus tips you can use to improve
your security:
First of all, have you turned off default passwords? For instance,
servers and firewalls come with default passwords that are either not
turned on, or the default is in use. Hackers are able to get the default
passwords because at one point in time manufacturers, and possibly
still today, some manufacturers put default passwords on the Internet
to make it easier to access, set up and repair devices. Hackers are still
able to get the passwords and gain access to hardware devices.
Next, are you using antivirus or anti-malware software? Make sure
it’s updated and in use.
Have you hired a IT company to set up your network and make it
secure? If so you hired you are secure, right? Is the IT company you
hired secure? Have you asked them? Ask them if they are secure and
how they keep data secure? Ask them when the last time was, if ever,
they had a security audit? Don't trust your sensitive data to people or
companies unless you know their level of security.
Okay, now let’s talk about some good practices to follow:
 I mentioned earlier that you need to lock all of your mobile
devices. If they are lost or stolen you will have less to worry about.
 Use encryption when you can, which should be in most cases, and
certainly on your servers. Similar to password protection, if the
data is lost or stolen and it is encrypted, then in most cases, you
have little to worry about. Also, if you have compliance require-
ments, under most rules you will not have a reporting requirement
if the data was encrypted.
 Use security tools like secure email and be smart about email and
the Internet, when sending sensitive data, as mentioned earlier.
 Do you really need that app? There are a lot of apps that are seeded
with malware, which is downloaded to your phone when you down-
load the app. Many apps collect a lot of personal data about you
which may then be available to the hackers. Do some research on
apps before you actually download and start using them. And look
32
Cyber Security Awareness for CEOs and Management

at the reviews and try and figure out whether you can trust the
manufacturer.
 Be careful about whose network you’re connecting to. Do you use
public Wi-Fi, for example at coffee shops, airports, hotels, etc.?
Hackers can easily set up a hotspot where public Wi-Fi is offered
that many people will mindlessly connect to. For instance, I could
set up a hotspot labeled “Free Starbucks Wi-Fi” and many people
will connect to it without thinking twice about it. When they do, all
their traffic will then go through my computer and I will be able to
see everything, like emails, bank details, usernames, and passwords
etc. So be very careful with public Wi-Fi and public networks you’re
connecting to. If you need Internet access consider tethering your
phone to your computer either by using the USB charging cable or
creating a password-protected hotspot on your phone that only you
can use. If in a hotel remember to bring an Ethernet cable if you
need to use the hotel Internet access. It does not create absolute
security, but it is safer than the Wi-Fi.
 What data are you processing, collecting, storing? Be wary of what
you have, how it is secured, and whether you need to keep it. If you
don’t need it, get rid of it. Also, hitting the delete key merely moves
a pointer away from the data. It does not wipe or truly delete the
data. In order to truly delete data consider using software, many are
free, that will wipe the data multiple times thus making it more diffi-
cult to recover.
 Don’t respond to unsolicited email, much of it is spam or scams.
One important tip here is that you should not unsubscribe to unso-
licited email right away because it may be the spammers trying to
legitimize your email. When you unsubscribe you confirm that your
email address is legitimate and active. If the email was from spam-
mers you will most certainly end up on the spam list. If you feel the
need unsubscribe, wait until you receive the email five or six times.
After that chances are the email was likely legitimate, annoying, but
legitimate. Another option is to just keep putting it into your junk
folder.
 As we discussed earlier, avoid opening attachments unless you truly
trust the sender. Even then, the sender may be trustworthy, like your
mom, but she may have been duped and is now unknowingly for-
warding the malware or virus to you and her friends. Many anti-
virus programs will allow you to scan attachments before you open
them. But, if the attachment contains a zero day attack (a zero day
33
How to Protect Your Business

vulnerability refers to a hole in software that is unknown to the ven-
dor or malware or virus that is not known to the anti-virus compa-
nies yet), the anti-virus may not recognize it and mark it as clean.
So, be careful, and do your due diligence.
 Do not fill out online forms in emails. As mentioned, compare the
link in the email to the actual web address. We discussed looking at
properties in emails to determine their legitimacy.
 Continuing with email security, as discussed, if you receive a social
media request (LinkedIn, Facebook, other), or banking email, log
directly into the official site. The link in the email and the request
could be fake causing you to compromise your username and pass-
word. For banking, as mentioned, close all other windows on your
computer before logging in since some secure sites could be com-
promised by other open windows. If you need to respond to or
open attachments in an email, as another precaution, contact the
business or individual that appeared to send it, if you are able,
especially if you’re not sure if they actually sent the email. Finally,
if requested to act quickly or there is a sense of urgency, that’s a
good clue that the email might not be legit.
 Keep the location services on phones and mobile devices turned off.
This will prevent the apps on your devices from tracking your loca-
tion, sending you ads and reporting to others your location. In some
circumstances a concern may exist that someone with access to one
of your mobile devices placed an app on it to track you, e.g. a
domestic violence scenario. Turing off location services will help to
prevent this. Turning off location services doesn't affect 911. The
police can still find you in an emergency, but it prevents all those
apps from accessing your location and broadcasting it out.
 Use two-factor authentication. As discussed earlier this involves
inputting a username and password, which is one factor, and then
typically a one-time pin sent via text (sms messaging), to enter, then
providing access. If your bank online, use social media or some
other service and two-factor authentication is offered use it.
 Whether for banking, finances, human resources, or other proces-
sing of sensitive information, use a separate computer when you
can. Try not to use the same computer that you use for email, surf-
ing the Internet and social media, for sensitive and financial
transactions.
 Finally, I recommend that you cover the camera and if you need to,
cover the mic on computers and mobile devices if you are concerned
34
Cyber Security Awareness for CEOs and Management

about what someone might see or hear. Hackers can certainly turn
on your camera and the light won’t necessarily illuminate indicating
that it is on. Laptops and tablets are especially vulnerable simply
because they are so mobile and brought to many locations. So, cover
the camera with a piece of tape.
Passwords are huge issue because no one likes them and most find
them inconvenient. Many people use very simple and easy-to-guess
passwords making it easy for hackers. We have not discussed this
much, but we do not just need to worry about hackers but also insider
threats where we work. With that in mind, many incidents occur at
work because people, in an effort not to have to remember multiple
passwords or passwords changed frequently, write them down and
place them close to their computer. Also, as mentioned, don't use the
same password on multiple sites. If the hacker gets one password he
then has access to multiple accounts. Don't use a word or two as your
password. A dictionary attack will allow a hacker to quickly guess the
password. A good password is at least, 12 or more characters, upper-
case and lowercase letters, numbers and special characters.
Now, let's discuss vendors. Whether it is a cloud or any other ven-
dor, security must be key and paramount. Read the contract, read the
service legal agreement (SLA), and the Privacy statement. Make sure
you know what the agreement says and that your data will be pro-
tected. Also, ask the vendor how they protect your data, if they've had
a recent security audit, and if they're willing to share the results with
you. Finally, ask the vendor if a breach or incident occurs on their net-
work, will they notify you and how soon.
35
How to Protect Your Business

CHAPTER 55
Ethics
These next pages are specifically for CEOs and Management. Let’s look
at your ethical and fiduciary duties, responsibilities, and obligations.
Let’s briefly review the responsibilities of corporate board members
versus CEOs/executives to provide some perspective. In another book I
cover board member responsibilities in more depth, but briefly the Board
has a fiduciary duty to monitor risk and oversee the cyber program of
the company. As CEOs/executives and Management, you are responsible
for identifying risk to the company, creating and implementing the cyber
security program, ensuring that the company meets its regulatory
compliance requirements, as well as maintaining and keeping the Board
informed about cyber security and other related risk in addition to the
efforts taken to mitigate those risks. You are basically responsible for
building, maintaining, and keeping the Board informed as to the state of
security and actions taken.
CEOs/Executives/Management, you don’t have the luxury of
ignoring the cyber risk anymore and claiming, “Well, that is an IT
issue. I don’t have to worry about it; or, I’m not a technical person.”
This is your issue. Recently many corporate executives have resigned
or lost their jobs over a massive breach, and it is only getting worse.
This issue should cause you as much concern as the financial status
and risk of the organization, as well as other risks that keep you up
at night. I can’t emphasize this enough, “You can’t ignore it any-
more!” You have a fiduciary and ethical duty to protect the com-
pany. If your company suffers a breach that goes public, the situation
will go south very quickly, especially if you don't have a plan put in
place. It is no longer enough to say you have a firewall, good pass-
words, and one or more policies. You must implement and actively
monitor the processes you have put in place. It is your responsibility
to take an active role and manage security as you would any other
Cyber Security Awareness for CEOs and Management. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-804754-5.00005-2
© 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

process. Security is not a set-and-forget concept. Even if your com-
pany uses an IT company you need to be cognizant of what are they
are doing, how they are securing information, and if something does
happen how quickly you will be informed and you must have a plan
ready to react quickly? Whether an IT company as a vendor or inter-
nal IT and security, as the CEO or an executive you must receive
daily updates on the state of the network and security efforts. We are
truly at war with the hackers and as the general you must have situa-
tional awareness. Your plan should include assignment of roles to
those within the company and you should ensure everyone knows
what to do, who to call and when. This will require exercising the
plan you have put in place. Any plan that merely sits on the shelf is
worthless. This typically occurs if you have a plan written for you and
the attitude among the executives is that you have checked the block.
Remember, security is not a set and forget concept. Make sure the plan
and people are ready to go. After discovering a breach the only
activities required are not merely technical, a forensic investigation to
determine what happened and what was exposed. There are legal issues
to address like breach notification and whether regulatory rules have
been broken; messaging, such as what will be communicated to the
public and by whom when the breach is exposed; proper collection of
evidence; how the company’s reputation will be protected; who will be
in charge of various pieces of the incident response; what outside help
is needed; is there insurance and what coverage is available; and a
myriad of other issues.
Finally, beware of the SEC and the FTC and federal courts because
they are beginning to hold companies responsible. Companies have
been held liable for data breaches due to lack of security programs
even when no damages were revealed or even claimed and no
complaint from a potential victim. One of the best recent examples is
the breach of RT Jones Capital Equities Management. They were
fined by the SEC for having lackadaisical security. They suffered a
breach and lost the personal information of about 100,000 clients. No
potential victim has claimed identity theft as a result, and no lawsuit
has been filed, yet. According to the private firm that did the investiga-
tion, there was no clear-cut evidence that data was actually compro-
mised. Despite all of this, the SEC still fined RT Jones because they
did not have policies in place and they did not have a plan. There were
of security practices that had not been implemented either, most of
38
Cyber Security Awareness for CEOs and Management

which were basic1. On the surface it may appear that some of these
government agencies are being a little heavy-handed, but on the other
hand a lot of companies just aren’t making the effort to do the basics
when it comes to cyber security. I guess they believe they can just
ignore it and not worry about it. At least until they get stung.
As the CEO, you don’t have to be a cyber expert. You need a little
bit of knowledge, surround yourself with experts who work for the
company or outside support, and ask to receive regular reports about
the company and the data security risk. You must be able to show that
you have done your due diligence.
As the data breaches continue the number of class action lawsuit
grows. Executives and management are beginning to be held account-
able. As you recall, earlier we discussed some of the major breaches in
the media. It’s hard to keep up with them all, and it seems as though a
major breach is announced in the news every week. As a result of the
Target breach the CEO either resigned or was fired, as well as some in
management, I believe, the CIO. Leadership is being held responsible
by their companies when a breach occurs, and reputations sullied. For
instance Sony, Target, and Home Depot. The class action lawsuit
complaints are pointing directly at the activities, or lack thereof by
management. In the Wyndham Hotels case, the complaint claimed
that the Board failed to ensure that the company implemented
adequate information security and procedures. In the Heartland
Payment Systems case, shareholders sued directors for failing to
protect the computer network and failing to meet their fiduciary duty.
In the TJX case, shareholders sued claiming that directors did not
meet their fiduciary duties of loyalty, good faith, and due care.
Along the lines of fiduciary duty and corporate judgement we
should quickly review the Business Judgement Rule2. Here in the
United States, this rule protects the decisions of the board of directors
and management against second guessing by the courts as long as the
decisions made are in good faith and are reasonable. If you are ignor-
ing the cyber risk, have not implemented a cyber security program,
1“SEC Charges Investment Adviser with Failing to Adopt Proper Cybersecurity Policies and
Procedures Prior To Breach,” U.S. Security and Exchange Commission Press Release 2015-202,
(Sept. 22, 2015), https://www.sec.gov/news/pressrelease/2015-202.html.
2“Business Judgement Rule,” Legal Information Institute, Cornell University Law School, https://
www.law.cornell.edu/wex/business_judgment_rule.
39
Ethics

and do not have an active plan in place, these are not reasonable
actions and decisions. This rule provides some protection for the deci-
sions made, but they must be reasonable.
Finally, in order to show due care, CEOs must not make decisions
in bad faith and must not fail to act where a known threat or risk
exists i.e., data security risks. Bad faith would involve ignoring the
risk, claiming you’re not technical, or you don’t understand this
“stuff.” If you feel like you need more knowledge to make a decision,
then you better find the experts, get briefed, get you up to speed and
get help with making that decision. If you have to hire outside support,
just get it done, don’t ignore it any longer.
40
Cyber Security Awareness for CEOs and Management

CHAPTER 66
Conclusion
Bottom line, do your due diligence. Understand the data you have,
how it is secured, who has access to it, where it resides, and what you
will do if breached. There is a lot more information out there. This
was just a brief overview so you need to continue to do your research
and figure out what else you can do to keep things more secure.
So do you feel lucky? If so, then don’t worry about it. If not, get
yourself a plan.
Cyber Security Awareness for CEOs and Management. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-804754-5.00006-4
© 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

But please, do not be this guy. Do not bury your head in the sand.
If you suffer a breach and can’t explain how you attempted to secure
information and show that you had a data security plan, the risk, lia-
bility and reputation of the company goes through the roof.
42
Cyber Security Awareness for CEOs and Management

