
CULTS
A Reference Handbook, Second Edition

Other Titles in ABC-CLIO’s
CONTEMPORARY 
WORLD ISSUES
Series
Antisematism, Jerome A. Chanes
Civil Liberties in America, Samuel Walker
Counterterrorism, Graeme C. S. Steven and Rohan Gunaratna
Cybercrime, Bernadette H. Schell and Clemens Martin
Defendant Rights, Hamid R. Kusha
Drug Use, Richard Isralowitz
Global AIDS Crisis, Richard G. Marlink and Alison G. Kotin
Healthcare Reform in America, Jennie Jacobs Kronenfeld and
Michael R. Kronenfeld
Media and American Courts, S. L. Alexander
Nation-Building, Cynthia A. Watson
Profiling and Criminal Justice in America, Jeffrey B. Bumgarner
The USA Patriot Act, Howard Ball
Voting in America, Robert E. DiClerico
World Poverty, Geoffrey Gilbert

Books in the Contemporary World Issues series address vital is-
sues in today’s society such as genetic engineering, pollution,
and biodiversity. Written by professional writers, scholars, and
nonacademic experts, these books are authoritative, clearly
written, up-to-date, and objective. They provide a good starting
point for research by high school and college students, scholars,
and general readers as well as by legislators, businesspeople,
activists, and others.
Each book, carefully organized and easy to use, contains an
overview of the subject, a detailed chronology, biographical
sketches, facts and data and/or documents and other primary-
source material, a directory of organizations and agencies, an-
notated lists of print and nonprint resources, and an index.
Readers of books in the Contemporary World Issues series will
find the information they need in order to have a better under-
standing of the social, political, environmental, and economic is-
sues facing the world today.


CULTS
A Reference Handbook, 
Second Edition
James R. Lewis
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES
Santa Barbara, California 
Denver, Colorado 
Oxford, England

Copyright © 2005 by James R. Lewis
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
except for the inclusion of brief quotations in a review, without prior
permission in writing from the publishers.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Lewis, James R.
Cults : a reference handbook / James R. Lewis.— 2nd ed.
p. cm. —  (Contemporary world issues)
Rev. ed. of: Cults in America. c1998.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 1-85109-618-3 (hardcover : alk. paper) — ISBN 1-85109-623-X
(ebook)
1. Cults—United States.
2. Sects—United States.
3. United States—Religion.
I. Lewis, James R. Cults in America.
II. Title.
III. Series. 
BL2525.L486 2005
200—dc22
2005004574
07
06
05
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
This book is also available on the World Wide Web as an e-book. Visit
http://www.abc-clio.com for details.
ABC-CLIO, Inc.
130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911
Santa Barbara, California 93116-1911
This book is printed on acid-free paper
.
Manufactured in the United States of America
∞

Contents
1
Introduction, 1
New Religions East and West, 1
The Solar Temple, 2
The Anticult Movement: A Response to the 
Antisocial Actions of Extreme Groups, 4
Falun Gong, 6
Religious Libertarianism: A Response to the 
Persecution of Minority Religions, 9
Religious Persecution in the Nineteenth Century, 10
Religious Insanity, 14
Emergence of the Contemporary Cult Controversy 
and the “Brainwashing” Debate, 17
Cultic Mind Control, 17
Apocalypticism, 27
Deprogramming and the Anticult Movement, 31
Stereotypes and Public Perceptions of the 
Cult Issue, 35
Stereotyping Cults, 35
Self-Fulfilling Stereotypes, 40
Cults and the Media, 41
The Appeal of New Religions, 45
Social Influence in Genuinely Dangerous Religions, 40
The Nature of “Cultic” Influence, 49
“Cults” or Bad Religion? 52
Early Warning Signs, 54
New Religions, Violence, and Suicide, 58
Millenarianism, 59
External Provocation and Social Isolation, 61
Di Mambro, Jones, and Applewhite, 63
vii

References, 67
2
Chronology, 75
3
Controversial Groups and Movements, 99
Adidam, 100
Alamo Christian Foundation (Music Square Church), 101
Ananda Cooperative Community, 103
Aumism, 104
AUM Shinrikyo (Aleph), 105
Black Judaism, 107
Black Muslims and the Nation of Islam, 109
Branch Davidians, 110
Chen Tao, 112
Christian Identity, 113
Christian Science (First Church of Christ, Scientist), 115
Church of the First Born of the Fullness of Times; 
Church of the First Born; Church of the 
Lamb of God, 116
Church Universal and Triumphant (Summit 
Lighthouse), 118
Eckankar, 120
Elan Vital (Divine Light Mission), 121
Erhard Seminars Training (est)/The Forum, 123
Falun Gong, 124
The Family International (Children of God), 126
Hare Krishna Movement and the International Society 
for Krishna Consciousness, 124
Heaven’s Gate, 129
The I AM Religious Activity, 131
Impersonal Enlightenment Foundation (Moksha
Foundation), 132
International Church of Christ (Boston 
Church of Christ), 134
Jesus People USA, 136
Kashi Church Foundation, 137
The Local Church, 138
Maranatha Christian Churches, 140
Movement for the Restoration of the Ten 
Commandments of God, 141
The Movement of Spiritual Inner Awareness, 143
Peoples Temple, 144
viii
Contents

The Raelian Movement International, 146
Rajneesh Foundation International (Osho 
Commune International), 147
Rama Seminars, 148
Ramtha’s School of Enlightenment, 149
Rastafarianism, 151
Santeria, 153
Satanism and the Church of Satan, 154
Scientology, Church of, 156
Shambhala International (Vajradhatu), 157
Siddha Yoga Dham Associates, 159
Sikh Dharma (Healthy, Happy, Holy Organization), 160
Soka Gakkai International, 161
Solar Temple, 163
Sukyo Mahikari, 165
The Synanon Church, 166
Transcendental Meditation and the World Plan 
Executive Council, 167
The Twelve Tribes Messianic Communities (Northeast
Kingdom Community Church), 169
Unification Movement (Unification Church), 171
Voodoo, 172
The Way International, Inc., 174
Witchcraft (Wicca), 176
4
Court Decisions, Legislation, and 
Governmental Actions, 179
Relevant Court Decisions Not Directly Involving
Contemporary New Religions, 181
Mormon Ploygamy Cases, 181
Jehovah’s Witnesses Cases, 184
The Sherbert-Yoder Test, 185
Earliest Cases Involving Contemporary New Religions, 187
The Ballard Decision, 187
Founding Church of Scientology v. United States, 189
Deprogramming in Court, 190
Legislative Efforts and Conservatorship Cases, 193
Attempting to Legislate against Cults, 193
Efforts to Amend Conservatorship Laws, 194
The Faithful Five–Faithless Four Case, 195
Ex-Member Lawsuits against Minority Religions, 197
Molko and Leal v. Unification Church, 199
Contents
ix

The Mull Case, 200
Child Abuse and Government Intervention in 
Nontraditional Religions, 201
Child Abuse, 201
Child Custody Cases, 206
Tax Cases, 209
Church Universal and Triumphant, 209
The Reverend Sun Myung Moon’s Income Tax 
Evasion Case, 211
Zoning, Solicitation, and the Like , 212
Church Universal and Triumphant, 213
The Movement for Spiritual Inner Awareness, 213
Libel Cases, 215
The Local Church Libel Case, 215
Cynthia Kisser v. the Church of Scientology, 216
The Defeat of Anticultism in the Courts, 217
The Fishman Decision, 218
The Scott Case and the Demise of the Cult 
Awareness Network, 219
The Rebirth of the Cult Controversy on the 
International Scene, 220
An Overview of the European Situation, 221
Some European Case Studies, 224
The Japanese Situation, 230
China, 235
5
Documents and Data, 239
Statistics, 239
World Membership in Alternative Religions, 240
New Zealand National Census Data, 242
Australian National Census Data, 245
United Kingdom National Census Data, 247
Canadian National Census Data, 249
Religion Survey Data for the United States, 250
Growth and Distribution of Alternative Religions 
in the United States, 252
New Religions in Europe, 253
Religious Backgrounds of Members of New Religions, 254
Postinvolvement Attitudes of Ex-Members, 255
Documents, 257
To All Those Who Can Still Understand the Voice of
Wisdom . . . We Address This Last Message, 258
x
Contents

Exit Press Release—To Be Issued to the News 
Media 3-22-97, 260
People’s Republic of China Legislative Resolution
Banning Cults, October 30, 1999, 263
“Law to Reinforce the Prevention and Repression 
of Groups with a Sectarian Character” (the 
About-Picard Law), Paris, France, May 30, 2001, 264
References, 268
6
Biographical Sketches, 271
Anthony, Dick, 271
Applewhite, Marshall Herff, 272
Asahara, Shoko, 274
Barker, Eileen, 275
Berg, David Brandt, 276
Bromley, David G., 277
Clark, John Gordon, MD, 278
Di Mambro, Joseph, 279
Gardner, Gerald Brousseau, 280
Hubbard, L. Ron, 282
Introvigne, Massimo, 283
Jones, James (Jim) Warren, 284
Koresh, David, 285
Maharaji, 286
Melton, J. Gordon, 287
Moon, Sun Myung, 288
Patrick, Theodore, 289
Prabhupada, Abhay Charan De Bhaktivedanta, 290
Richardson, James T., 291
Singer, Margaret Thaler, 292
West, Louis Jolyon, 293
7
Organizations and Web Sites, 295
Academic Organizations, 295
Cult Information Organizations and Web Sites, 297
8
Resources, 305
Mainstream Scholarship, 305
Reference Books, 305
Textbooks and General Surveys, 307
Specialized Studies, 310
Books on Specific Groups or Movements, 312
Contents
xi

Anticult Scholarship, 316
Popular Books, 318
Nonprint Resources, 319
Index, 325
About the Author, 341
xii
Contents

1
Introduction
New Religions East and West
The controversy over new religions is a complex social issue that
has engendered an emotional and often mean-spirited debate. At
the center of this debate is a wide variety of diverse groups that
often have little in common. Most embrace belief systems at odds
with mainstream religion, though some are quite orthodox. Also,
though they are usually relatively small, new organizations al-
most always have roots in older, larger traditions. The one trait
these groups share is that they have been controversial at one
point or another in their existence. Decades of social conflict have
left their impression on the term cult, which, to the general pub-
lic, indicates a religious group that is false, dangerous, or other-
wise bad.
The sharpness of this controversy has tended to polarize
participants into extreme positions, making it difficult to find a
middle ground from which to approach the issue. Hence, rather
than tackling the problem directly, it might well repay our efforts
to work our way into the debate indirectly, through the stories of
two contrasting religious groups that will serve to highlight some
of the dilemmas associated with the cult controversy.
In the following sections, the story of the Solar Temple, the
group involved in a series of murder-suicides in 1994, 1995, and
1997, will be used to exemplify the concerns that “anticultists”
bring to the controversy. Falun Gong, the physical culture group
that has been heavily persecuted in China since 1999, will, on
the other hand, be used to exemplify the concerns of religious
libertarians.
1

The Solar Temple
In October 1994, fifty-three members of the Solar Temple in
Switzerland and in Quebec were murdered or committed sui-
cide. On October 4, a fire in Morin Heights, Canada, destroyed
the villa of Joseph Di Mambro, the group’s primary leader. Police
found five charred bodies in the ruins. Three had been stabbed to
death before the fire. At one o’clock on the morning of October 5,
a fire started in Ferme des Rochettes, near Cheiry, in the Canton
of Fribourg, one of the centers of the Solar Temple in Switzerland.
Police found twenty-three bodies in a room that had been con-
verted into a temple. Some had been shot; many others were
found with their heads inside plastic bags. Two hours later, three
chalets inhabited by members of the Solar Temple caught fire al-
most simultaneously at Les Granges sur Salvan, in the Valais
Canton. Police found twenty-five bodies, along with the remains
of the devices that had initiated the fires and the pistol used to
shoot the people near Cheiry.
For many months prior to the initial spate of murder-suicides,
rumors of financial mismanagement had been circulating among
Solar Temple members. A few days before their dramatic final
“transit,” a three-month-old infant had been killed at their Cana-
dian site by driving a wooden stake through its heart. Surviving
members explained that Di Mambro had ordered the killing be-
cause the baby was the Anti-Christ. Several days later, Di Mambro
and twelve followers convened a ritual Last Supper together. The
suicide-murders took place a few days following this meeting. Fif-
teen members of the inner circle—referred to as the “awakened”—
took poison. Thirty others—the “immortals”—were shot or
smothered to death. Eight others—termed “traitors”—were also
murdered.
Subsequently, sixteen members of the Solar Temple died in
France in December 1995 and five more in Quebec in March 1997.
On December 16, 1995, sixteen of the remaining European mem-
bers disappeared from their homes in France and Switzerland.
Four left notes hinting at a second mass suicide. Thirteen adults
and three children were later found dead in a remote forest in
southeastern France. Investigators concluded that at least four of
the sixteen did not die willingly. Most had been drugged. Two of
the sixteen shot the others, poured gasoline over their bodies, set
them on fire, and then shot themselves so that they would also
fall into the flames.
2
Introduction

Finally, five additional adult members and three teenage chil-
dren apparently tried to commit suicide on the spring equinox of
March 20, 1997, in Quebec. The attempt failed due to faulty equip-
ment. The teenage sons and daughter of one of the couples con-
vinced their parents that they wanted to live. They were allowed
to leave, and the adults subsequently succeeded in burning down
their house with themselves in it. Four of the bodies were
arranged to form a cross. The teens were found drugged and dis-
oriented, but otherwise safe, in a nearby building. A note was
found that described the group belief that death on earth leads to
a transit to a new planet where their lives would continue.
Di Mambro had been fascinated with esotericism from a
young age. He joined the Ancient and Mystical Order Rosae Cru-
cis in 1956 and was a member until at least 1968. In the 1960s, he
came into contact with several persons who would later play a
role in Solar Temple history, including Jacques Breyer, who had
initiated a “Templar resurgence” in France in 1952. Several
groups, including Di Mambro’s, trace part of their roots to
Breyer’s work. Templar in this context refers to the Knights Tem-
plars, the medieval order to which groups in the neo-Templar
tradition ultimately trace their lineage. (This claimed lineage is
almost certainly spurious; instead, neo-Templar groups are eso-
teric organizations loosely in the larger Theosophical tradition.)
Several major points of doctrine, as well as an initial group of fol-
lowers, began to come together in the 1960s. In 1971, after deal-
ing with some legal problems in Nîmes, France, connected with
a number of petty crimes such as writing bad checks, Di Mambro
established himself in Annemasse, near the Swiss border. In 1978,
he founded the Golden Way Foundation in Geneva, the prede-
cessor of the Solar Temple.
Recognizing Luc Jouret as a man of intelligence and
charisma, Di Mambro brought him in to become the public face
of his organization. Jouret was trained as a medical doctor and
was an accomplished practitioner of homeopathy. He also lec-
tured on naturopathy and ecological topics and was active in the
wider circuit of the French-speaking New Age movement. He
spoke in New Age bookstores and to eclectic esoteric groups in
France, Switzerland, Belgium, and Canada.
The International Chivalric Order Solar Tradition (Solar
Temple) was founded in 1984. It absorbed the Golden Way Foun-
dation. Jouret claimed that he had been a member of the four-
teenth-century Christian Order  of the Knights Templar during a
New Religions East and West
3

previous incarnation, that his daughter Emmanuelle was “the
cosmic child,” and that after death he would lead the group to a
planet that revolves around the star Sirius. Jouret also believed
himself to be Christ. Solar Temple groups were organized in Que-
bec, as well as in Australia, Switzerland, France, and other coun-
tries. The leadership saw themselves as playing a pivotal role on
the world stage. Partially as a consequence of this view, they be-
lieved that the Solar Temple was being persecuted by the various
governments with which they had problems.
Temple teachings emphasized apocalyptic themes drawn
from certain elements of extremist survivalist thinking, from the
New Age notion of an imminent end of the world due to an en-
vironmental catastrophe and other sources. The group believed
that they were to play a major role in this collapse. It seems that
in the years 1986 to 1993, Jouret received a series of revelations
until it was revealed to him that between the end of 1993 and the
beginning of 1994 the earth would be forsaken by its last
“guardians.”
On March 8, 1993, two Canadian members were arrested
while attempting to buy three semiautomatic guns with silencers
(illegal in Canada). Although committed to trial, they were freed
on bail the next day. Because Jouret had prompted them to buy
the weapons, he was also committed to trial (he was in Europe at
the time), and a warrant was issued for his arrest. This seems to
have been the critical event precipitating the leadership’s deci-
sion to make their final dramatic “transit.”
The Anticult Movement: A Response to the
Antisocial Actions of Extreme Groups
The deaths of Solar Temple members were part of a series of dra-
matic incidents involving members of nontraditional religions.
Other incidents include the Jonestown murder-suicides (1978),
the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms (ATF) and Federal
Bureau of Investigation (FBI) raid on the Branch Davidian com-
munity (1993), the Tokyo subway poison-gas attack (1995), the
Heaven’s Gate suicides (1997), and the deaths of members of the
Movement for the Restoration of the Ten Commandments of God
(2000). In the wake of these events, the mass media sought a va-
4
Introduction

riety of “cult experts” in an effort to make sense of seemingly ir-
rational behavior. Most of these experts offered the public an ex-
planation in terms of the notion of cultic mind control, colloqui-
ally known as “brainwashing.” The seemingly crazy actions of
“cult” members were not difficult to explain, this group of ex-
perts claimed, as long as one understands that megalomaniacal
cult leaders are able to control the thought processes of their fol-
lowers: under the influence of mind control, members of such
groups are capable of anything because they have given up their
will to the leader.
According to spokespeople for “cult watchdog” groups, our
society is populated by hundreds—perhaps even thousands—of
cult groups, many of which are capable of extreme actions. Be-
yond mind control and the imputation of sinister motives to the
leader, standard accusations leveled against minority religions
unfortunate enough to be labeled cults include: deceptive re-
cruiting practices, financial and sexual exploitation, food and
sleep deprivation of members, various forms of illegal activities,
child abuse, ritual abuse, and so forth. Because of the interest the
mass media have taken in this issue, this stereotype has become
widely accepted in contemporary society.
Putting aside the problematic notion of “cultic brainwash-
ing” for the moment, there are or have been groups for which
some of these accusations are or were appropriate. In particular,
children have been abused within a few religious communities.
Members of certain organizations have been financially or sexu-
ally exploited or both by the leadership. A handful of minority re-
ligions have taken the law into their own hands. And at least one
group consciously deceived potential recruits by systematically
hiding their identity until after workshop attendees had become
de facto members.
There are, however, obvious dangers in unreflectively ap-
plying the cult stereotype to every religious group that strikes
one as strange or different. The situation is not unlike that of
viewing a race or an ethnicity in terms of a generalization de-
rived from the minority group’s least-reputable members. The
types of problems that can be generated by jumping to the con-
clusion that all unusual religious communities must be guilty of
misdeeds simply because extreme accusations are leveled against
them are well exemplified in the campaign against Falun Gong
that is being carried out by the People’s Republic of China.
The Anticult Movement
5

Falun Gong
In 1999, the Chinese regime launched a new campaign against
spiritual and religious groups. Falun Gong was one of the groups
targeted as superstitious and reactionary by a press campaign.
Unlike other targets of this campaign, 10,000 members of Falun
Gong, which is a Qi Gong physical-culture movement, reacted
by staging a peaceful demonstration on April 25, 1999, outside
Beijing’s Zhongnanhai, the residence of China’s top leaders. This
was the largest such demonstration in recent Chinese history.
The regime seemed to be especially frightened by the failure of
its intelligence service to prevent the demonstration and by
membership in Falun Gong of some midlevel political and mili-
tary leaders.
In subsequent months, practitioners were harassed in vari-
ous areas of the country. Some were told that their phones were
being monitored and that, if they continued participation in the
group, their retirement pensions would be terminated. Police
and other officials began breaking into practitioners’ homes and
confiscating Falun Gong material. Some followers were arrested
and disappeared. Thousands of members demonstrated peace-
fully in about thirty Chinese cities to protest these actions.
Qi Gong is the generic name of a complex of techniques
aimed at attaining physical and spiritual well-being, with a tra-
dition in China predating the Christian era. It is often referred to
as Chinese yoga. Although spiritual and religious activities in
general are viewed with suspicion in Communist China, Qi Gong
has been tolerated as a traditional set of physical exercises. The
semiofficial National Qi Gong Federation has never been seri-
ously disturbed by the regime. The situation is different, how-
ever, with respect to Qi Gong groups that strongly claim the pri-
macy of the spiritual element and recognize a charismatic living
leader.
The largest (but by no means the only) such Qi Gong group
is Falun Gong. Its founder, Li Hongzi, established his peculiar
brand of Qi Gong in 1992, after having left the semiofficial feder-
ation. In 1998, Li moved permanently to New York City, from
which he oversees the expansion of Falun Gong internationally.
Small groups exist in the main metropolitan areas of the United
States, Canada, and some thirty other countries.
Although the persecution has scared many followers and
driven them underground, millions remain in China and several
6
Introduction

thousand abroad. Exactly how many members Falun Gong has is
a matter of dispute (the government uses a figure of 2 million; Li
claims 100 million), and “membership” may not be an entirely
applicable concept. In fact, although the movement recommends
a nine-day introduction course and frequent contact with local
centers, it also states that everybody can simply start practicing
Falun Gong by following the instructions from one of the many
books, cassettes, and Web sites (the principal of the latter being
http://www.falundafa.org) readily available in a variety of lan-
guages. The possibility of such a self-initiation, without a master
and lengthy discipline, is at the core of the criticism by other Qi
Gong groups against Li and his movement.
The group was officially outlawed on July 22, 1999. The Chi-
nese government accused it of “spreading fallacies, hoodwinking
people, inciting and creating disturbances, and jeopardizing so-
cial stability” (Associated Press 1999). On July 29, Chinese au-
thorities issued an arrest warrant for Master Li. The government
arrested hundreds of Falun Gong practitioners and proceeded
with show trials. Some were sent directly to labor camps without
trials. A spokesperson for Falun Gong Practitioners in North
America asserted: “Lawyers in China have already been told not
to defend these innocent civilians unless they agree with the gov-
ernment propaganda. Also, no legal representation on behalf of
them from the concerned international community is allowed to
be present at the trial” (Robinson 1999).
The U.S. House and Senate unanimously passed resolutions
on November 18–19, 1999, that criticized the Chinese govern-
ment for its crackdown on Falun Gong. Chinese foreign ministry
spokesman Sun Yuxi responded by asserting that Falun Gong is
not a religious organization, nor is it simply a Qi Gong group.
Rather, it is a destructive cult that harms Chinese society and its
people. In describing Falun Gong as a dangerous “cult,” the Chi-
nese government drew heavily on the cult stereotype that had
been circulating in Western countries for the prior three decades.
For example, authorities accused the group of:
• Brainwashing its members
• Worshiping Li
• Turning Communist officials into cult members in order
to learn state secrets
• Suggesting that its followers not take any medication
• Suffering from paranoia and hallucinations
The Anticult Movement
7

Ignoring international pressure, authorities responded with
an unprecedented public campaign against the movement, prop-
agating anti–Falun Gong propaganda via the media of tracts and
comics. China also asked the United States to arrest and extradite
Li, a request the United States quickly turned down, inviting the
Chinese instead to stop what the outside world perceived as an
obvious instance of religious persecution.
The Chinese government’s campaign against the group is
the most serious government crackdown since the demonstra-
tions at Tiananmen Square, which took place more than a decade
prior. Falun Gong has received global political attention as other
nations specify this incident of China’s religious intolerance as
grounds for limiting trade and normal relations. The prolifera-
tion of Falun Gong Web sites and information on the Internet
quickly expanded international awareness. Also, the free access
to Li Hongzi’s teachings via the Internet have aided the spread of
the practice, promoting a global movement.
Several scholars have advanced hypotheses to explain China
and Falun Gong’s turbulent interactions. In The Mystery of China’s
Falun Gong: Its Rise and Its Sociological Implications, National Uni-
versity of Singapore sociologists John Wong and William T. Liu hy-
pothesize that China’s fear of Falun Gong reflects its anxieties over
the power of the Internet. The authors forecast the group’s survival
in- and outside of China, concluding that the Chinese govern-
ment’s crackdown has been ineffective. Wong and Liu investigated
the movement’s tremendous popularity, identifying China’s grow-
ing elderly and retired population seeking cheaper health-care al-
ternatives to the state system as a factor in its growth.
Authorities may perceive the Falun Gong as a political threat
for several reasons. The Chinese government had become con-
cerned about the size of the movement. Though the exact number
of practitioners is unknown, the movement probably did outnum-
ber members of the Communist Party. Furthermore, a not incon-
siderable number of Communist Party members and military offi-
cials were also practitioners. Another concern was undoubtedly
Falun Gong’s large international membership, a cause for concern
for the historically isolationist Chinese government.
Authorities were almost certainly reacting to the sheer num-
bers of the initial mass demonstrations. Some observers have
pointed to China’s long history of religious rebellion as a factor
in the government’s concern (see Robinson 1999). For example,
the Taiping rebellion during the Ming dynasty began a major re-
8
Introduction

ligious rebellion. Another scholar, Michael Lestz, argues that
rather than feeling the historical pressures of regime-toppling re-
ligious rebellion, the Chinese government is acting out its stan-
dard knee-jerk response to any perceived target, threat, or antag-
onism (1999). Lestz also points to the international makeup of the
Falun Gong as a point of concern for the government. He con-
cludes that instead of religious intolerance, the government’s
crackdown is motivated by a need to save face, preserve pre-
dictability, and reestablish state control and order.
Religious Libertarianism: A Response to 
the Persecution of Minority Religions
It is the concern generated by such activities as the persecution of
Falun Gong on the flimsy pretext of its imputed status as a dan-
gerous cult that has led to the emergence of an alternative school
of opinion opposed to the “anticult” perspective. This opposing
group comprises a diverse assortment of religions, religious lib-
erty organizations, and scholars of minority religions. Although
not seeking to defend organizations like the Solar Temple, this
school of thought asserts that the extreme actions of a few groups
should not be taken as representative of all minority religions,
any more than that the criminal tendencies of a handful of mem-
bers of certain racial minorities should be imputed to the race as
a whole. Individuals associated with this opposition group see
themselves as defending religious liberty.
Because the word cult has acquired negative connotations,
the people and organizations who defend minority religions do
not call themselves the “procult movement” and, further, would
not accept the label “cult apologists” with which anticultists seek
to stigmatize them. In fact, this opposition group would reject the
use of the term cult altogether, instead referring to such organi-
zations as new religious movements (the preferred term among
academics), alternative religions, nontraditional religions, or mi-
nority religions. Recognizing the term’s problematic status, cult
will be avoided when referring to a specific religion throughout
this book. It is, nevertheless, still useful to talk about the cult con-
troversy, and, where appropriate, cult will be utilized when dis-
cussing the stereotype associated with minority religions more
generally.
Religious Libertarianism
9

At the broadest level, the anticult movement can be subdi-
vided into two wings, consisting of secular anticultists and con-
servative Christian anticultists. Although these two wings share
certain traits and in the past have occasionally cooperated with
each other, the target of much Christian anticultism is a minority
religion’s deviation from traditional doctrine—a concern most sec-
ular anticultists do not share. Also, Christian anticultists tend not
to be involved in the controversial practice of deprogramming—
one of the hallmarks of the secular anticult movement. When dis-
cussing the anticult movement, the present book will be referring
to the secular wing of this movement, unless otherwise noted.
As with other social conflicts, opponents in the cult contro-
versy have become polarized into extreme positions. Many anti-
cultists have come to adopt an attitude of suspicion toward a
broad spectrum of religions, ready to portray almost any unusual
group as a potential Heaven’s Gate and almost any charismatic re-
ligious leader as a potential David Koresh. Defenders of the rights
of minority religions, on the other hand, have tended to downplay
all issues except the theme of religious liberty. The result of this po-
larization is an ongoing and frequently bitter debate that periodi-
cally finds expression in books, articles, court cases, and, in recent
years, official reports issued by European governments.
Though the contemporary controversy has certain unique as-
pects, it is, in many ways, an extension of historically earlier reli-
gious conflicts. As a way of providing a background for our dis-
cussion of the cult controversy, we will look briefly at the
anti-Catholic and anti-Mormon movements of the nineteenth cen-
tury and at the quaint nineteenth-century notion of “religious 
insanity.”
Religious Persecution in 
the Nineteenth Century
A phenomenon that can often be observed in the wake of a dy-
namic social movement is the emergence of a countermovement
that comes into being for the sole purpose of opposing the origi-
nal movement. Of particular interest for students of the contem-
porary cult controversy who would like to set this phenomenon
in historical perspective are the anti-Catholic and anti-Mormon
movements that emerged during the nineteenth century. Both of
10
Introduction

these movements produced extensive bodies of literature that
show distinct parallels with anticult literature, particularly if one
focuses on the genre of apostate stories.
Contemporary themes of the “psychological kidnapping”
and exploitation of young people by sinister cults are paralleled
in anti-Catholic literature by the themes of the “captivity”
(Slotkin 1973, 444) and abuse of young females in nunneries. This
Protestant fantasy led to the production of numerous apostate
tales authored by “escaped” nuns. These women were some-
times genuine ex-nuns who presented highly embellished ac-
counts of their experiences (for example, Reed 1835) or fake ex-
nuns who fabricated their stories from whole cloth (for example,
Monk 1836 [1977]).
For nuns to escape, however, they first had to be in a state of
bondage, and this condition required a certain amount of expla-
nation because Catholics did not bodily carry off their “prison-
ers.” The initial “capture” was explained in terms of flattery and
in terms of devious indoctrination designed to influence impres-
sionable young ladies to take the veil. Once inside the convent,
the means of retaining captives varied from one author to an-
other. In cruder narratives, “inmates” were physically impris-
oned in the institution and controlled by threat of corporal pun-
ishment, and especially reluctant nuns were locked up in
subterranean dungeons. In more nuanced accounts, inmates
were controlled by subtler psychological means, such as fear of
hell and the belief that any doubts were inspired by Satan. “[The
Bishop] said the Devil would assail me, as he did Saint Teresa,
and make me think I ought to go back to the world; and make me
offers of worldly pleasures, and promise me happiness. In order
to prevent this, I must watch and pray all the time, and banish
entirely worldly thoughts from my mind” (Reed 1835, 89).
These tales typically consisted of the recounting of one atroc-
ity after another, held together by a thin strand of narrative. In
the more extreme stories, these atrocities ranged from sexual
abuse to murder. Maria Monk, for example, claimed that infants
born to nuns (a supposedly frequent event because of regular
sexual intercourse with priests) were murdered. Monk recounted
observing two infants who, after being baptized, “were then
taken, one after another, by one of the old nuns, in the presence
of us all. She pressed her hand upon the mouth and nose of the
first so tight that it could not breathe, and in a few minutes, when
the hand was removed, it was dead. She then took the other and
Religious Persecution in the Nineteenth Century
11

treated it in the same way. No sound was heard, and both chil-
dren were corpses. The greatest indifference was shown by all
present during this operation; for all, as I well knew, were long
accustomed to such scenes” (1977, 155–156).
Apostate tales were designed to evoke and to legitimate pub-
lic reaction, and they often succeeded in this purpose. For exam-
ple, very soon after ex-nun Rebecca Reed began to tell her story, a
Protestant mob burned her former convent to the ground. These
narratives usually also contained calls for governmental action.
At the conclusion of one ex-nun’s story, for example, she pleaded
that “the Legislature . . . enact laws for the inspection of Con-
vents . . . Let the prison doors of monasteries and Convents be
thrown open to their deluded inmates” (O’Gorman ca. 1881, 131).
In anti-Mormon literature, polygamous wives played essen-
tially the same role that nuns played in anti-Catholic literature,
and apostate (and pseudoapostate) Mormon females composed
similar captivity narratives. However, a conceptual problem
emerged in Mormon apostate stories: How could one make the
case for a state of bondage in a situation where the alleged cap-
tive was apparently free to walk out at any time? Nunneries
could be portrayed as prisons, but Mormon women were obvi-
ously not so confined. Thus, in addition to the deluded follower
theme used to characterize Catholic bondage, one finds the first
theory of “hypnotic mind control” in anti-Mormon literature. For
example, in the totally fabricated apostate tale Female Life among
the Mormons, Maria Ward describes her entrapment in terms of
mesmerism (the original term for hypnosis):
At the time I was wholly unacquainted with the doc-
trine of magnetic influence; but I soon became aware of
some unaccountable power exercised over me by my
fellow traveler. His presence seemed an irresistible fas-
cination. His glittering eyes were fixed on mine; his
breath fanned my cheek; I felt bewildered and intoxi-
cated, and partially lost the sense of consciousness, and
the power of motion. . . . I became immediately sensible
of some unaccountable influence drawing my sympa-
thies toward him. In vain I struggled to break the spell.
I was like a fluttering bird before the gaze of a serpent-
charmer. (1855, 12)
Via such pseudoscientific notions—precursors to more re-
cent theories of cult “mind control”—the captivity motif could be
12
Introduction

extended to situations where it would normally have been inap-
propriate except as a metaphor.
The Mormon apostate tales, like the Catholic apostate sto-
ries, were loosely connected accounts of one sensationalistic
atrocity after another, containing many crudely crafted descrip-
tions of violence and the same kinds of sexual allusions found in
convent tales. The violence in anti-Mormon tales was often quite
vivid. For example, in the totally fictional apostate tale Boadicea:
The Mormon Wife, Alfreda Eva Bell describes the following cold-
hearted murder: “‘Will you go with me?’ asked he. ‘No,’ an-
swered the dying woman. ‘Then you are done for,’ said Yale; and
deliberately, before my very eyes, in spite of my wild screams for
his mercy, he fired at her and scattered her brains over the floor”
(1855, 55).
Lurid descriptions of violence against women can also be
used to suggest sexual assault. In Ward’s account, for instance, a
female who dared raise her voice in dissent against the Mormon
hierarchy was “gagged, carried a mile into the woods, stripped
nude, tied to a tree, and scourged till the blood ran from her
wounds to the ground” (1855, 429).
As already noted with respect to Catholic captivities, this
kind of sensationalism was mixed with propagandistic themes
calling for the repression of Mormonism. Even in some of the fic-
tional tales, this theme was overtly set forth, as, for instance, to-
ward the end of Bell’s story: “I prayed that I might be permitted
to reach the States, and, by my pen, put forth the horrors I had
witnessed, in order to swell the outcry for the speedy destruction
of such a hell of vice as the Mormon colony, and do my ‘little all’
towards arresting further horrors” (1855, 69).
The portrayal of mesmeric captures was supplemented by
the accusation that Mormons bodily carried off Gentile women to
fill their “harems,” and this particular accusation was one of the
more scandalous themes in anti-Mormon propaganda. The kid-
napping accusation seemed, to the minds of some of the authors
of anti-Mormon tales, to legitimate the physical extermination of
all Mormons. For example, one of the heroes of The Prophets; or,
Mormonism Unveiled, after rescuing his wife from the clutches of
Joseph Smith, vows to kill every Mormon in Nauvoo, Illinois: “I
swear by the heaven above me, I will shoulder my rifle, and never
lay it down until Nauvoo is razed to the ground. It makes me feel
like a demon to think they should dare raise their polluted
thoughts to my wife; but they shall rue the deed, for devastation
Religious Persecution in the Nineteenth Century
13

shall follow them until there shall not be one left in a week’s travel
from Nauvoo” (Belisle 1855, 312).
Like sensationalistic anti-Catholic stories, anti-Mormon tales
were capable of evoking violent, vigilante-style activity, as is ev-
ident in such events as the murder of Joseph Smith, and govern-
mental intervention, as witnessed by such actions as the 1857 in-
vasion of Utah by federal troops.
Contemporary anticult literature replicates this same struc-
ture, but here the metaphor of captivity is even more strained:
nuns were behind walls and Mormons were at least geographi-
cally isolated, but the stereotypical cult member is out on the
streets every day hustling strangers and is thereby fully immersed
in the noncult world. Contemporary anticult proponents are thus
forced to rely on pseudoscientific theories of “brainwashing” and
“cultic mind control”—notions of mental enslavement that we
saw in embryo in anti-Catholic and anti-Mormon literature. The
link with notions from earlier eras is quite evident, especially in
more popular tales. For example, compare the following passage
from Chris Edwards’s Crazy for God with the description of Mor-
mon mesmerism cited earlier: “She took my hand and looked me
straight in the eyes. As her wide eyes gazed into mine, I felt my-
self rapidly losing control, being drawn to her by a strange and
frightening force. I had never felt such mysterious power radiate
from a human being before . . . touching something within me
that undermined thought itself” (1979, 60).
Although the stage settings are different, the plot has not
changed. Former “cult” members recount the same stories of de-
ception and exploitation, which in turn evoke vigilante-style vio-
lence in the form of kidnappings of current members of contro-
versial religions (Patrick with Dulack 1976) and, in some
instances, attacks upon “cult” facilities (Terry and Manegold
1984). Success in stimulating governmental intervention eluded
the anticult movement during the height of the cult scare, with
the exception of a few isolated incidents such as the Branch Da-
vidian fiasco.
Religious Insanity
By the mid-1840s, the asylum movement had expanded to the
point where specialists in the field of mental disorders could
begin to publish their own journal, the American Journal of Insan-
14
Introduction

ity. The very first volume of this new publication, in an article
called “The Importance of Early Treatment in Preventing Sui-
cide” (1845), contained six brief case studies, three of which doc-
umented cases of individuals afflicted with “religious insanity.”
The first case, a woman driven “insane from continued religious
excitement, in connection with the doctrine of Miller” (referring
to the Millerite movement, which later developed into the Ad-
ventist tradition), had become quite melancholy. Although other-
wise not disordered (as indicated by such remarks as “she con-
versed intelligently on many subjects”), her husband, “becoming
alarmed at her condition, brought her to the Asylum.” After a
short course of treatment, consisting primarily of morphine “in
sufficient doses to procure sleep,” she was pronounced “cured”
and allowed to return home.
The second case was that of a middle-aged man who had be-
come “much disturbed in mind while attending a protracted reli-
gious meeting.” Although the only symptom of his “disturbed
mind” was melancholia—the usual state of mind one experiences
immediately prior to being “born again”—his friends became
fearful that he might commit suicide and had him committed.
After three months of medicines, laxatives, and warm baths, he
“left the Asylum in perfect health.”
The final case was a young woman who, from “much atten-
tion to religion during a revival, became nervous and sleepless.”
As in the other cases mentioned, her friends “became apprehen-
sive” and “brought her to the Asylum.” Following a physiologi-
cal course of treatment similar to the ones that were administered
to the above individuals, she “regained her health” and was able
to leave in about two months.
The article used these cases to illustrate the more general
point that when a person becomes melancholy and loses interest
in family and business affairs, “immediate action in his behalf
may be necessary.” The unnamed author of this piece was bold
enough to assert further that people who exhibit such symptoms
“are insane” and “need restraint” and went on to observe that,
“in all, there was but little mental derangement, but sufficient to
alarm their friends, who by adopting the course they did, pre-
vented, we apprehend, dangerous results.”
The conceptualization of mental illness had gone through cer-
tain changes over the course of the nineteenth century, but the gen-
erally accepted theory was firmly physiological, hence the basi-
cally physiological treatments administered to victims of religious
Religious Insanity
15

insanity. Although acknowledging certain predisposing factors
such as heredity, the actual initiating cause was portrayed as some
kind of “shock” to the system, either directly physical, as in the
case of a blow to the head, or through what nineteenth-century
alienists (the older term for psychiatrists) referred to as “moral”
causes—bereavement, loss of employment, and so forth (Cardno
1968). Within this schema, religious enthusiasm was viewed as a
moral factor that, when taken to extremes, could result in physio-
logical damage; in the words of Amariah Brigham, one early-nine-
teenth-century theorist of religious insanity: “All long continued
or violent excitement of the mind is dangerous, because it is likely
to injure the brain and nervous system. Religious excitement,
therefore, like all mental excitement, by affecting the brain, may
cause insanity or other diseases” (1835, 284–285).
Revivals were the paradigmatic context in which this “vio-
lent excitement of mind” was experienced. For instance, William
Sweetser, another nineteenth-century psychiatrist, observes:
At the field-meetings that are annually held among us I
have been witness to the most frightful nervous affec-
tions, as convulsions, epilepsy, hysteria, distressing
spasms, violent contortions of the body, not only in fe-
males in whom, from their more sensitive and sympa-
thetic temperament, such affections are most readily ex-
cited, but also in the more hardy and robust of our own
sex. Even spectators, such as attend for the purpose of
amusement or merriment, will oftentimes be overtaken
by the same nervous disorders. (1850, 196) 
To clinical observers, it was clear that disordered environ-
ments, such as could be found at revivals, produced disordered
minds.
This etiology was, however, only superficially physiological;
de facto, the criterion for determining mental illness was verbal
and behavioral expression. The obvious problem with such a cri-
terion was that any unusual expression of belief or behavior that
appeared to “exceed the common deviations of human belief and
conduct” could be labeled crazy and result in the incarceration of
a nonconforming individual (Arnold 1806, 219). This seems to
have particularly been the case with the majority of religious en-
thusiasts committed to asylums; the “high reported cure rate for
religious insanity” as contrasted with other forms of insanity in-
dicates that in most cases, incarceration was probably being
16
Introduction

“used by families to punish deviant members” and bring them
back into line with accepted norms (Bainbridge 1984, 235). This is
not to say that either families or physicians cynically deployed
medical labels that they knew were spurious, but rather to say
that a medical explanation was seized upon because it “made
sense,” that is, it seemed to substantiate popular prejudice as
well as to legitimate a vigorous response. This kind of “medical-
ization of deviance” (Conrad and Schneider 1980) perspective
seems especially likely when we consider some of the more un-
usual “causes of insanity” mentioned in the psychiatric literature
of the nineteenth century: masturbation, intemperance, novel
reading, “effeminate education,” tobacco use, the onset of pu-
berty, and dealing in lottery tickets.
From the standpoint of the early twenty-first century, it is
easy to be amused by the perceptions and formulations of our
predecessors. Our amusement should be tempered, however, by
the realization that the notion of religious insanity was devised
and promulgated by some of the more thoughtful and liberal
minds of the age. We moderns are certainly not immune to the
propensity to label ideas with which we disagree, or behaviors of
which we disapprove, as sick or crazy. This seems to be particu-
larly true of the attitude of certain members of the mental health
profession toward “cults.” When, for example, one prominent
anticult psychiatrist can seriously assert that the question moti-
vating his work is “What kind of nutty people get into these
crazy groups?” (cited in Bromley and Richardson 1983, 5) and
commit patients he has never examined to medical institutions
on the basis of their membership in alternative religions, we
should suspect that contemporary “cultic mind control” is a close
relative of nineteenth-century “religious insanity.”
Emergence of the Contemporary 
Cult Controversy and the 
“Brainwashing” Debate
Cultic Mind Control
Shifting our attention back to the present period, the origins of
the contemporary cult controversy can be traced to the early
1970s. In that period, many new religions were arising out of the
Emergence of the Contemporary Cult Controversy
17

ashes of the counterculture to become successor movements to
the youth movement of the 1960s. Unable to comprehend the ap-
peal of these religions, observers concluded that the founders or
leaders of such groups had discovered a special form of social
control that enabled them to recruit their followers in nonordi-
nary ways and, more particularly, to short-circuit their rational,
questioning minds by keeping them locked in special trance
states. A handful of professionals, mostly psychologists and psy-
chiatrists associated with the anticult movement, attempted to
provide scientific grounding for this notion of cultic brainwash-
ing, or mind control.
No serious observer would disagree that there are genuine
issues of abuse, exploitation, and undue influence associated
with at least some minority religions. Serious discussions and
analyses of such abuses were, however, overshadowed almost
from the very beginning when the debate over new religions
came to focus on the notion of cultic mind control. Rather than
viewing the social pressures found in minority religions as ex-
tensions of garden-variety forms of social influence, anticult pro-
fessionals argued for the existence of a unique form of influence
confined to “cult” subcultures. Viewing this argument as a form
of special pleading with potentially grave implications for reli-
gious liberty, other professionals—particularly sociologists of re-
ligion—focused their scholarly responses to the cult controversy
on a critique of cultic mind control. By the mid-seventies, battle
lines had been drawn, and the debate would rage back and forth
over the same ground for the next several decades and beyond.
Since the beginning of the debate, mainstream scholars have
been steadily churning out studies directly relevant to the cult
controversy. Because of the nature of this conflict, mainstream
academic researchers have been forced to work in a highly politi-
cized atmosphere. Articles on controversial religious groups pub-
lished in specialized academic journals can directly impact peo-
ple’s lives, particularly when cited in legal briefs and judicial
decisions. Thus, in contrast to academics, who study things like
the mating habits of field mice or the impact of black holes on
space and time, new religion specialists regularly find them-
selves the subjects of scrutiny and criticism.
Because mainstream scholars of nontraditional religions have
generally been critical of the cult stereotype—particularly the no-
tion of cultic mind control—they have, in turn, been criticized by
those interested in perpetuating this stereotype. One counterstrat-
18
Introduction

egy commonly utilized by such interest groups is to refer to acad-
emicians whose research tends to undermine anticult ideology as
“cult apologists,” implying that they are in a conspiracy with—
perhaps even covertly accepting money from—malevolent reli-
gious groups. The cult-apologist accusation is a handy ideological
tool because, in the hands of most anticultists, it is wielded as a
tautology, immune to empirical disconfirmation. In other words,
if a cult apologist is defined as any researcher producing scholar-
ship critical of the cult stereotype, then anyone whose scholarship
is critical of the cult stereotype is ipso facto a cult apologist. An-
ticultists adhering to this rhetorical strategy sometimes make it
appear that sinister pseudoreligious organizations regularly seek
out scholars to legitimate their groups and to attack their critics.
This strategy allows anticultists to reject any scholarship with
which they disagree a priori, saving them from the awkward ne-
cessity of taking it seriously.
The following discussion of mainstream scholarship on the
cultic mind control notion will draw heavily on the analysis
found in Dick Anthony and Thomas Robbins’s survey of research
on this issue (2003). This research and related theorizing have
disproportionately focused on the claim that joining a “cult” is
essentially involuntary because powerful techniques of “brain-
washing” or “mind control” have psychologically coerced the
convert’s conversion and subsequent commitment (Clark 1976,
1979; Ofshe and Singer 1986; Singer and Lalich 1995; Verdier,
1980). Although the existence of such an exotic psychotechnology
has been advocated by a variety of different “cult experts,” most
scholars who have actually researched this topic disagree with
the brainwashing thesis (Anthony and Robbins 1994; Barker
1984; Lewis 1989; Richardson 1993).
In a survey article on conversion, sociologists David Snow
and Robert Machalek note: “The ‘brainwashing’ or ‘coercive per-
suasion’ model is the most popular explanation of conversion
outside of sociological circles. The basic thesis is that conversion
is the product of devious and specifiable forces acting upon un-
suspecting and therefore vulnerable individuals” (1984, 178–179).
The brainwashing model for joining nontraditional religions “has
gained considerable currency among the public,” in part because
“it provides a convenient and ‘sensible’ account for those who are
otherwise at a loss to explain why individuals are attracted to ‘de-
viant’ and ‘menacing’ groups” (179). One prominent anticultist
psychologist asserts: “Today’s [cultic] thought reform programs
Emergence of the Contemporary Cult Controversy
19

are sophisticated, subtle and insidious, creating a psychological
bond that in many ways is far more powerful than gun-at-the-
head methods of influence” (Singer 1994, 3–4).
Brainwashing notions of recruitment and commitment entail
an overwhelming preponderance of extrinsic alien forces—in
contrast to intrinsic self-related forces—that compel religious
choices. Such religious “choices” are irrational, in the sense of
being based on emotion and debilitation rather than on reason
and conscious deliberation. Anticult theorists frequently invoke
the notion of a false self that emerges as a result of cultic mind
control and that mind control techniques supposedly superim-
pose on the “real” selves of recruits. One psychiatrist, for in-
stance, draws a distinction between the “original” behavioral
and cognitive patterns of converts and the “imposed” patterns
artificially induced by intensive cult regimens (Clark 1976, 2–3).
From the viewpoint of anticultists, true autonomy and indi-
viduality cannot be grounded in transcendental experiences, ecsta-
tic or mystical states of consciousness, or intense religious emo-
tions. In anticult literature, such experiences are portrayed as
hypnotic trances, dangerous dissociative states, pathological re-
gression, and manipulated emotions said to undermine individual
autonomy and superimpose an artificial identity on the convert. To
the extent that the mind control hypothesis can be tested, it has
tended to be disconfirmed by empirical research (for example,
Barker 1984, 1986; Lewis 1986, 1989; and Richardson 1993). And in
the absence of such empirical support, what is left is a pseudosci-
entific ideology legitimating society’s bias against minority reli-
gions. Furthermore, if the anticult portrayal of conversion and
commitment to minority religions is unable to stand up to critical
and empirical examination, then it is clear that the conflict between
alternative religions and anticultists is more of a value dispute, out-
side the power of the courts or the state to regulate.
To conceal the pseudoscientific status of the brainwashing
notion, anticultists have deployed two interrelated rhetorical
strategies. As Robert Shapiro (1983) notes, advocates of depro-
gramming tend to imply that cult members—not infrequently
characterized as “zombies” or “robots”—do not really possess a
self. Instead, they are “depersonalized,” “dissociated,” “regressed
to psychological infancy,” and the like (Clark 1976). This portrayal
is often more implicit than explicit. At present, it has become
rather outmoded, having been associated with the kind of violent
20
Introduction

deprogramming from which most anticultists have distanced
themselves. The more modest—and, in the long run, more signif-
icant and influential—model of brainwashing proposes that re-
cruits’ new spiritual selves were coercively imposed through in-
sidious mind control techniques that obviated their capacity to
exercise free will.
The second strategy has been to assert that cultic mind control
theory is firmly grounded in early research on Maoist thought re-
form. During the cold war, the original idea of communist brain-
washing was developed and popularized by Edward Hunter, a
journalist and Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) publicist (1951,
1960). Hunter portrayed brainwashing as a potent manipulative
technology that could mold people into zombies: “The intent is to
change a mind radically so that its owner becomes a living pup-
pet—a human robot—without the atrocity being visible . . . with
new beliefs and new thought processes inserted into a captive
body” (1960, 309). This insidious psychotechnology utilizes “hyp-
notism, drugs and cunning pressures that plague the body and do
not necessarily require marked violence” (1951, 11). Physical in-
timidation is sometimes part of the process but is not essential to
Hunter’s notion of brainwashing. The “brain-changers” have the
power to plant false beliefs and memories (1951, 10–11). Other the-
orists have portrayed communist brainwashing as inducing sug-
gestible trance states in which the victim can literally be “pro-
grammed” via scientific conditioning methods (Farber, Harlow,
and West 1957).
Although this model of brainwashing has been criticized as
inapplicable to alternative religious groups, it has often been as-
sumed that it paints an accurate picture of the process applied to
Korean War prisoners of war (POWs). However, an important
1956 article that examined the data from POWs came to the con-
clusion that the prisoners who adopted the views of their over-
seers had already been inclined toward those views (Hinkle and
Wolff 1956).
In many 1980s “cult” cases, anticult experts testifying against
minority religious groups referred to such researchers as Robert
Lifton (1961) and Edgar Schein (1961) as the authoritative bases for
their testimony. A important opinion delivered by the California
Supreme Court in 1988 even noted that “brainwashing exists and
is remarkably effective” (Mosk, Stanley, et al. 1988, 52), although a
federal court in 1990 cast doubt on the authority of Lifton’s and
Emergence of the Contemporary Cult Controversy
21

Schein’s works. In the review essay on conversion referred to ear-
lier, Snow and Machalek (1984) indicate Schein and Lifton as
sources of the brainwashing model.
Schein’s and Lifton’s formulations were, however, signifi-
cantly more nuanced and sophisticated than the ideologically
motivated model of brainwashing presented by popular writers
like Edward Hunter. Although the process they describe is highly
manipulative, they actually do not portray brainwashing as so
powerfully effective that it is able to override an individual’s per-
sonality patterns and predispositions so as to obliterate her or his
free will.
In terms of the resources allocated, Schein judges the Com-
munist Chinese thought-reform program directed at prisoners to
be largely ineffective (1961; Anthony 1990). Furthermore, in con-
trast to anticult theorists, Schein sees imprisonment as so central
to the process that he makes it part of the very definition of “co-
ercive persuasion.” Although debilitated, prisoners subjected to
communist indoctrination were otherwise alert and rational and
did not exhibit defective thought patterns (1961, 202–203,
238–239). Furthermore, he notes that the popular notion of “brain-
washing” as involving “extensive self-delusion and excessive dis-
tortion is a false one” (239; Anthony 1990, 312). Schein downplays
the role of dissociative states and hypnotic trances because coer-
cive persuasion is intended “to produce ideological and behav-
ioral changes in a fully conscious, intact individual” (1959; An-
thony 1990, 316). It should finally be noted that Schein rejects the
term brainwashing (1961, 18).
In his book Chinese Thought Reform and the Psychology of Total-
ism, Robert Lifton elaborates a “complex set of psychological
themes” that include “Milieu Control,” “Mystical Manipulation,”
“Demand for Purity,” “Sacred Science,” “Loading the Language,”
“Doctrine Over Person,” and “The Dispensing of Existence” (1961,
419–437). In Lifton’s formulation, an individual’s conversion and
commitment to what he refers to as “totalism” involve an interac-
tive process between personal inclinations and ideology. His cen-
tral term, ideological totalism, is intended “to suggest the coming
together of an immoderate ideology with equally immoderate
character traits—an extremist meeting ground of people and
ideas” (419). The various psychoideological components of total-
ism “mobilize certain individual emotional tendencies, mostly of
a polarizing nature.” Additionally, “psychological theme, philo-
sophical rationale and polarized individual tendencies are inter-
22
Introduction

dependent; they require, rather than directly cause, each other”
(422). Furthermore, Lifton states:
The degree of totalism depends greatly upon factors in
our personal history: early lack of trust, extreme envi-
ronmental chaos, total domination by a parent or par-
ent-representative, intolerable burdens of guilt and se-
vere crises of identity . . . an early sense of confusion
and dislocation, or an early experience of extremely in-
tense family milieu control can produce later a complete
intolerance for dislocation and confusion, and a longing
for the reinstatement of milieu control. (436)
In contrast to anticult literature in which converts are pic-
tured as being disoriented, dissociated, and deluded before they
are willing to participate in a totalistic “cult,” Lifton observes that
“ideological totalism itself may offer a man an intense peak ex-
perience: a sense of transcending all that is ordinary and prosaic,
of freeing himself from the encumbrances of human ambiva-
lence, of entering a sphere of truth, reality, trust and sincerity be-
yond any he had ever known or imagined” (435).
The overwhelming majority of Westerners who went
through communist thought reform did no more than respond
with behavioral compliance as a direct result of physical harass-
ment and threats. In Lifton’s words, Chinese thought reform re-
sulted in “the extraction of an incriminating personal confession
because it made this confession a requirement for survival” (150).
Only a very small minority actually changed their ideas in the di-
rection of their captors’ ideology. Lifton’s extensive analysis of
the conversion of these individuals examines their personalities,
past histories, emotional strains, and identity problems, which
are viewed as indispensable to understanding their response.
In addition to appealing to the apparent authority of cold
war brainwashing notions, anticultists also legitimated the cultic
mind control notion via a rhetoric of hypnosis, trances, and dis-
sociative states, particularly during the first several decades of
the cult controversy (see Singer and Ofshe 1990). In the words of
one psychiatrist, “A naïve or deceived subject who is passing
through or has been caused to enter a susceptible state of mind”
is exposed to “highly programmed behavioral control tech-
niques, in a controlled environment” until “the subject’s atten-
tion is narrowed and focused to the point of becoming a trance.”
This trance “is maintained during several sleep periods until it
Emergence of the Contemporary Cult Controversy
23

becomes an independent structure.” As a result, a “continued
state of dissociation” is maintained in which her or his personal-
ity is dramatically altered (Clark 1976, 280).
Similarly, a prominent anticult sociologist maintains in a
court document that “at the heart” of the Church of Scientology’s
“auditing procedure is the use of hypnosis,” which “is important
because it is used within Scientology to deceive clients and cause
them to believe that they are able to accomplish para-normal feats
and regain memories of past life experiences. . . . The fantasies
that are induced through hypnosis have the quality of seeming
more real than most memories” (Ofshe 1989, 7). A notion drawn
from the Manchurian Candidate emerges in the remarks of another
clinician who asserts that in alternative religions, “Many individ-
uals are hypnotized. Many individuals are objects of hypnosis
and autohypnosis where certain phrases and words will trigger a
certain kind of thought pattern within the individual” (Benson
1977, 234). Cult recruiters have also been portrayed as actively uti-
lizing techniques of formal hypnotism (Miller 1986).
The idea of “hypnotic rituals” as a key component of cultic
brainwashing is ubiquitous in anticult theorizing (Abgrall 1990;
see also Anthony 1990, 1999; Martin 1993; Singer 1983; and Singer
and Lalich 1995). However, as Dick Anthony has pointed out, the
scientific consensus is that “hypnosis is not an effective technique
for causing people to engage involuntarily in behavior that is im-
moral, illegal, or against their own self-interest” (1999, 444; see
also Barber 1961; Conn 1982; Fromm and Shor 1979, 6–12; Orne
1961, 1962; and Spanos 1996). Anthony continues:
This is one of the most well-researched questions in the
history of hypnosis research, and it is the consensus of
informed scientific opinion that hypnosis cannot be used
effectively for overwhelming free will or for substituting
the will of the hypnotist for the will of the hypno-
tized. . . . [T]he idea that hypnosis could be used to im-
pose a false personality on another and establish long-
lasting control over their whole lifestyle is so far fetched
that it [is] found only in popular science fiction on the
topic of brainwashing such as the book The Manchurian
Candidate (Condon, 1958). Indeed the idea that partici-
pating in a new religion changes one’s basic personality
is itself unsupported by empirical research. (1999, 444;
Paloutzian, Richardson, and Rambo 1999)
24
Introduction

Additionally, one significant line of research on hypnosis
suggests that it is not possible to determine in a definitive man-
ner whether an individual is “hypnotized” (Anthony 1999; Bar-
ber 1969; Gauld 1992; Kirsch 1995). In this view, a “hypnotic
trance” is actually a myth, and there are no empirical criteria for
distinguishing a hypnotic state of consciousness from normal
consciousness. Thus, the claim that certain psychotechnologies
of social influence are based on the technique of hypnosis is 
unprovable.
Given the bankruptcy of appeals to earlier formulations of
communist brainwashing and to notions of hypnotic trances,
cultic mind control appears to be little more than garden-variety
social influence. Shorn of its pseudoscientific patina, how does
one distinguish cultic brainwashing from other forms of social
influence, such as advertising, military training, or even the nor-
mal socialization routines of the public schools? Anticult mind
control theories explicitly or implicitly assert that the ability of
cult members to process certain kinds of information has
“snapped.”
The problem with these and similar theories is that if cultic
influences actually overrode the brain’s ability to logically
process information, then individuals suffering from cultic influ-
ences should perform poorly on IQ tests or, at the very least,
manifest pathological symptoms when they take standardized
tests of mental health—and when tested, they do not. If anything,
such empirical studies indicate that members of new religious
movements are actually smarter and healthier than the average
member of mainstream society (for example, Sowards, Walser,
and Hoyle 1994).
Other kinds of studies also fail to support the view that new
religions rely on nonordinary forms of social influence to gain
and retain members. For example, if new religions possessed
powerful techniques of mind control that effectively overrode a
potential convert’s free will, then everyone—or at least a large
percentage—of attendees at recruiting seminars should be un-
able to avoid conversion. However, sociologist Eileen Barker, in
her important study The Making of a Moonie: Brainwashing or
Choice? (1984), found that only a small percentage of the people
attending seminars sponsored by the Unification Church (UC)—
an organization that many people regard as the evil cult par ex-
cellence—eventually joined. Furthermore, of those who joined,
more than half dropped out within the first year of their mem-
Emergence of the Contemporary Cult Controversy
25

bership. In another important study, Canadian psychiatrist Saul
Levine (1984) found that, out of a sample of more than 800 peo-
ple who had joined controversial religious groups, more than 80
percent dropped out within two years of membership. These are
not the kind of statistics one would anticipate in groups wielding
powerful techniques of mind control.
In the face of these and other empirical studies, social scien-
tists have asked these further questions: Given the lack of empir-
ical support, where does the brainwashing notion originate?
What is the real nature of the conflict that the “cult” stereotype
obfuscates? The general conclusion of sociologists (as analyzed,
for example, in David Bromley and Anson D. Shupe Jr.’s book-
length study Strange Gods: The Great American Cult Scare [1981]) is
that the principal source of the controversy is a parent-child con-
flict in which parents fail to understand the choices of their adult
children and attempt to reassert parental control by marshaling
the forces of public opinion against the religious bodies to which
their offspring have converted.
This core conflict is then exacerbated by mass media that are
less interested in truth than in printing exciting stories about
weird cults that trap their members and keep them in psycho-
logical bondage with exotic techniques of “mind control.” Also,
once an industry is established that generates enormous profits
through the “rescue” of entrapped “cult” members (that is, de-
programming), special-interest groups are created that have a
vested interest in promoting the most negative stereotypes of al-
ternative religions. These special-interest groups add further
fuel to the parent-child conflict by scaring parents with horrific
stories of what will happen to their adult child if they fail to
have her or him deprogrammed. In this manner, many other-
wise reasonable and well-meaning parents are recruited into the
controversy.
In civil suits brought against minority religions, “cult ex-
perts” have appealed to the notion of cultic mind control as the
basis for their claim that former “cult” members (in other words,
the plaintiffs) had been recruited to a religion against their will.
As a consequence, they were owed damages because of alleged
psychological damages resulting from the period of their invol-
untary membership. From the mid-seventies to the mid-nineties,
these kinds of lawsuits frequently succeeded. The affected new
religions had to pay large compensatory and punitive damages,
sometimes forcing a particular religion into bankruptcy and even
26
Introduction

dissolution. Perhaps ironically, however, the concern raised by
such cases eventually brought about the decisive demise of the
cultic mind control notion:
Largely because of concern over the effects upon the
civil liberties of new religions caused by testimony
based upon the cultic brainwashing concept, substantial
research that evaluated the coercive conversion idea
was conducted by scholars of new religions. Most of
this research tended to disconfirm the cultic brainwash-
ing idea. Professional associations (the American Psy-
chology Association, the American Sociological Associ-
ation and the Society for the Scientific Study of
Religion) submitted a series of Amicus Curiae briefs in
the appeals of legal decisions based upon cultic brain-
washing testimony, which argued that such testimony
should not have been admitted because of the body of
disconfirming research and because of the conflicts with
constitutional and scientific standards of admissibility.
At present, cultic brainwashing theory and the legal
cases built upon it have been generally discredited and
marginalized in the American context in which it origi-
nated. (Anthony and Robbins 2003)
Apocalypticism
Charges of cultic mind control have served to make individual
involvement in controversial religions a matter of public concern.
Typically, these religions are otherwise harmless. In contrast, the
violence associated with a tiny handful of alternative religious
groups has aroused a very different kind of concern. Even
though brainwashing seems to explain how individual “cult”
members could be prompted to commit acts of murder and sui-
cide, it fails to explain why certain religions but not others be-
come violent. One characteristic shared by most of the latter sub-
set of religious groups—and, furthermore, embodies violent
imagery—is apocalypticism.
The Solar Temple, the group examined at the beginning of the
chapter, was strongly apocalyptic. Most of the other groups that
have been either responsible for or else engulfed in violence—
Heaven’s Gate, the Branch Davidians, AUM Shinrikyo, and the
Movement for the Restoration of the Ten Commandments of
Emergence of the Contemporary Cult Controversy
27

God—were also apocalyptic. The People’s Temple, the group that
committed mass suicide in Guyana in 1978, is a notable exception
to this apparent pattern.
In Western religions, the apocalypse notion originated in
Zoroastrianism. The religion of Zoroaster is best known for its
dualism. The god of light and his angels are locked in a cosmic
struggle with the god of darkness and his demons. At the end of
time, after a great final battle between good and evil—referred to
as Armageddon—there will be a Final Judgment in which every-
one will be put through an ordeal of fire and good individuals
will have their dross burned away and evil people will be con-
sumed. The souls of the blessed will be resurrected in physical
bodies, which Ahura Mazda will make both immortal and eter-
nally youthful.
Many of the components of this vision of the end times—a
final battle between good and evil, judgment of the wicked, res-
urrection of the dead, and so on—were adopted by Jewish apoc-
alyptic thinkers. From texts composed by these apocalypticists,
such notions were adopted in Christianity and Islam. Although
seemingly a dreadful day, many believers throughout the cen-
turies have looked forward to the Final Judgment as the day on
which their suffering for the faith will be vindicated and their
persecutors and ridiculers punished.
Early Jewish apocalypses can be roughly divided into two
principal groups. The first subgenre is what might be called his-
torical apocalypses. These compositions, the most familiar of
which is the book of Daniel (the only apocalypse to be incorpo-
rated into the canonical scriptures of Judaism), were extended
prophecies presented in the form of allegorical visions (the book
of Revelation is clearly in this tradition). The other subgenre is
constituted by narratives of otherworldly journeys, focused es-
pecially on ascent through a series of heavens, culminating in a
vision of the throne of God.
The contemporary period has seen a heightened interest in
popular belief about the possible end of the world, and most por-
trayals of the end time picture an apocalyptic scenario. Although
there has been a steady production of predictions that the world
is coming to an end over the past several centuries, their number
has slowly increased in recent decades.
Apocalypticism, which may initially strike one as a com-
pletely negative concept, is attractive because of the millenarian-
ism that often accompanies it. Millenarianism is derived from
28
Introduction

Christian theology and refers to the paradisiacal thousand-year
period—the millennium—in which, according to the book of
Revelation, history and the world as we know it will terminate.
During the millennium, Satan would be chained and not allowed
to pursue his evil work on earth. The expression “millenarian
movement” is applied to groups that expect the imminent emer-
gence of the millennium and whose religious life is saturated by
this expectation. The arrival of the millennium has been a major
theme in Christian thought, though the notions of a millennium
and its accompanying apocalypticism are not confined to the
Judeo-Christian-Islamic religious complex. By extension, other
non-Christian religious movements that are characterized by
such an expectation can be referred to as millenarian. Other
terms for these types of groups are crisis cult and messianic move-
ment. Some researchers have argued that all religions with his-
torically specifiable origins began as millenarian movements—
movements that, after they became established, lost much or all
of their millennial enthusiasm.
Millenarian movements in the so-called Third World often,
though certainly not invariably, arise in situations of contact be-
tween very different kinds of cultures, as when a Western nation
intrudes into a geographical area in which traditional peoples re-
side and disrupts the patterns of life to which such peoples are
accustomed. The response to this crisis is frequently a religious
one in which the disrupted culture attempts to apply traditional
understandings to a radically new contact situation. More often
than not, this creative response will be articulated by a single in-
dividual (a prophet or a messiah) who receives a millenarian vi-
sion. In some cases, the vision will be a hostile one in which the
community is counseled to resist the intruders and to adhere to
the tradition of earlier generations (this subcategory is usually
termed a nativistic movement). In other cases, the vision is a syn-
cretistic response in which elements of both cultures are wedded
into a new spiritual synthesis. Also, in some visions millenarians
are advised to wait patiently for redemptive, supernatural inter-
vention, while in others the community or group is encouraged
to help bring about the millennium by some type of religious
practice.
A useful example of a millennial movement outside the
Judeo-Christian-Islamic complex of religions is the Ghost Dance,
which arose out of the activities of the Paiute prophet Wovoka.
Wovoka received a revelation of a millennium in which the earth
Emergence of the Contemporary Cult Controversy
29

would be renewed and the spirits of the dead return. This mil-
lennium would be preceded by a general catastrophe that would
destroy Euramericans and their material culture. This event
would be a cosmic rather than a military-political catastrophe.
Specifically, righteous Native Americans would be lifted off the
planet and a new earth rolled down across the surface, burying
Euramericans and unrighteous Indians. Consequently, Native
Americans were instructed to keep the peace and wait.
Beyond remaining at peace and following Wovoka’s ethical
injunctions, American Indians were periodically to perform what
Euramericans came to call the Ghost Dance. Participants would
dance in a circle until some fell down in a trance during which
they received revelations, usually from departed relatives. Per-
forming the dance would hasten the advent of the new age.
Wovoka’s revelation spoke powerfully to his contempo-
raries, and the dance was taken up by a wide variety of different
tribes, such as the Shoshone, Arapaho, Crow, Cheyenne, Pawnee,
Kiowa, Comanche, and Sioux. Relatively stable tribal groups that
had adjusted successfully to changed conditions were least in-
clined to accept the new teaching. The widespread excitement
generated by Wovoka’s vision declined rapidly after the U.S.
Army massacred a group of peaceful Ghost Dancers at Wounded
Knee, South Dakota, on December 29, 1890.
Despite the seeming connection between violent religious
groups and apocalyptic theologies, there is a significant problem
with using this trait as a criterion for distinguishing dangerous
from nondangerous groups. The problem is that almost every re-
ligion in the larger Judeo-Christian-Islamic tradition has an apoc-
alyptic theology, even the traditional peaceful churches that for-
bid members from participating in the military. Thus, contrary to
the assertions of some contemporary critics of religion, having an
apocalyptic theology does not, in itself, raise a red flag. This is be-
cause in most apocalyptic scenarios it is God and his angels who
fight the final battle, not flesh-and-blood human beings. The
human role is spiritual, and the “saved” fight a spiritual war, not
a literal, physical war.
An apocalyptic theology is dangerous only when individual
followers believe they are going to be called upon to be foot sol-
diers in God’s army and prepare themselves by stocking up on
weapons and ammunition. Groups that come to mind here are
some of the Identity Christian churches who see themselves as
preparing to fight a literal war against God’s enemies. On the
30
Introduction

other hand, a community’s possession of firearms—in the ab-
sence of such a theology of physical confrontation—is probably
not dangerous, if no other danger signs are present. If the simple
possession of firearms by members was a significant danger sign,
then the Southern Baptist Convention would be the most dan-
gerous “cult” in the United States.
Deprogramming and the Anticult Movement
The contemporary anticult movement emerged, as noted earlier,
in the early 1970s, shortly after the rash of new religions that arose
in the wake of the collapse of the counterculture of the 1960s. Op-
position to minority religions was initially organized around de-
programmers—individuals who forcibly abducted individuals
from nontraditional religions. In the heyday of deprogramming,
“cult” members were snatched off the street and locked up in
houses or motel rooms. Relatives and deprogrammers then at-
tempted to demonstrate the falseness of the individual’s new-
found religion in an effort to convince her or him to defect.
Deprogramming began more or less accidentally when a son
and a nephew of Theodore (Ted) Patrick Jr. considered joining the
Children of God (COG), a “Jesus freak” organization. In 1971,
Patrick was then governor Ronald Reagan’s special representa-
tive for community relations in southern California, working as
a kind of ombudsman. On the Fourth of July, he and his family
were staying at a hotel on Mission Beach in San Diego. When his
son Michael and a nephew failed to return from a fireworks dis-
play, he decided to call the police. They showed up as he was di-
aling, but he was struck by what seemed to be a strange look on
Michael’s face. The boys then related an encounter with the Chil-
dren of God. Alarmed at first, Patrick and his family gradually
forgot about the incident.
In his job as ombudsman, however, he began to hear other
complaints about the Children of God. One person of particular
importance at this early stage of development was William Ram-
bur of Chula Vista, California. His daughter dropped out of
school in order to move to a COG ranch in Thurber, Texas. Un-
able to persuade her to leave the group, he began a personal cru-
sade to warn other parents about the danger of COG. Eventually,
he linked up with Ted Patrick, and together they formed the first
anticult organization. The name of this group, the Parent’s Com-
mittee to Free Our Children from the Children of God, was later
Emergence of the Contemporary Cult Controversy
31

shortened to Free the Children of God and popularly referred to
as FREECOG.
Increasingly frustrated by the authorities’ refusal to do any-
thing about COG, Patrick began to consider more desperate ap-
proaches. As he studied the matter, he found that kidnapping
charges would be difficult if not impossible to make stick if par-
ents were involved at every stage of such an operation. In coop-
eration with distraught parents, he then commenced to experi-
ment with the tactic of abducting “cult” members bodily, locking
them up, questioning their religious choices, and trying to con-
vince them that they had been brainwashed and manipulated by
their “cult.” In 50 percent or more of the cases, they abandoned
their new faith. Thus, the practice of “deprogramming” was born.
Initially, Patrick did not pursue deprogramming for per-
sonal enrichment. Gradually, however, he found the demand
high enough that he turned his attention to kidnapping “cult”
members on a full-time basis. The father of a new profession, he
began to require compensation for his time. In response to critics,
Patrick has soft-pedaled deprogramming by asserting that “all he
does is talk to people.” But in his popular book Let Our Children
Go! it is described as follows: “Deprogramming is the term, and
it may be said to involve kidnapping at the very least, quite often
assault and battery, almost invariably conspiracy to commit a
crime, and illegal restraint” (Patrick 1976, 63). Even though
Patrick has often denied or downplayed the brutality of his work,
in the same book he provides an interesting statement that con-
tradicts his benign picture of deprogramming: “I believe firmly
that the Lord helps those who help themselves—and a few little
things like karate, Mace, and handcuffs can come in handy from
time to time” (Patrick 1976, 70).
Other anticult organizations began springing up, with the
Citizen’s Freedom Foundation (CFF, later renamed the Cult
Awareness Network [CAN]) becoming the national umbrella
group. The support of deprogramming by anticult organizations
evoked some of the most severe criticisms. As early as 1974, for
example, the National Council of Churches passed a strong reso-
lution against the practice. Deprogrammers also made the mis-
take of diversifying their kidnapping activities to include Evan-
gelical Christians. This move provoked the wrath of Christian
anticultists who, by the late seventies and early eighties, were
withdrawing from their alliance with secular anticultists. For ex-
32
Introduction

ample, Walter Martin, the most prominent Christian anticultist,
writing in 1980, asserted: “I cannot stand behind such practices.
It is true that cultists have been blinded by the ‘god of this age,’
but it is also true that they have the right to make up their own
minds, and we should not stoop to unChristian tactics to accom-
plish God’s ends” (cited in Melton 1992, 349).
These and other criticisms influenced the secular anticult
movement to rethink their stance on deprogramming. In 1981,
for example, the Citizen’s Freedom Foundation issued a state-
ment that read, in part: “CFF does not support, condone, or rec-
ommend kidnapping or holding a person against his will.” CFF
did, however, continue to voice support for voluntary depro-
gramming (that is, counseling situations in which “cult” mem-
bers were free to break off the conversation and leave at any time,
usually referred to as “exit counseling”).
The vast majority of deprogrammers have little or no back-
ground in psychological counseling. Often their only qualifica-
tion is that they are themselves deprogrammed former cult mem-
bers. Although advocates claim that deprogramming does
nothing more than reawaken cult members’ capacity for rational
thought, an examination of the actual process reveals that the
core technique of deprogramming involves directly assaulting a
person’s belief system. The deprogramming process consists of
the following:
1. A breakdown in insulation from the outside world, ac-
complished by physically removing the member from
her or his group.
2. A highlighting of the inconsistencies between group
ideals and the actions of leaders, as well as internal in-
consistencies within the group’s belief system.
3. The pull of family ties. Deprogrammings are almost in-
variably paid for by other family members who then
participate in the faith-breaking sessions.
4. The presentation of an alternative belief system. Depro-
grammers often attempt to convert deprogrammees to
conventional religion or, more often, to some variety of
secular humanism.
5. Offering an alternative explanation for the individual’s
recruitment and membership—the familiar deception
and mind-control ideology.
Emergence of the Contemporary Cult Controversy
33

These five factors effectively disrupt the plausibility of the
deprogrammee’s religious beliefs. Success is not, however, guar-
anteed, as the high failure rate of deprogramming—between
one-third to one-half return to their respective movements—
demonstrates.
Deprogrammed former members of minority religions pro-
vide one of the keys to understanding the contemporary cult con-
troversy. Groups opposed to such religions base much if not all
of their attack on the testimony of former members who relate
tale after tale of manipulation and abuse. Ex-members who have
“actually been there,” and who have supposedly witnessed all of
the horrors about which outsiders can only fantasize, provide the
cult stereotype with its most important source of empirical evi-
dence. These narratives, anticultists would have the public be-
lieve, give us insights into the real nature and purpose of “cults,”
belying the beneficent image minority religions project to the
world.
However, empirical studies contrasting the attitudes of for-
mer members who left their movements voluntarily with former
members who had been deprogrammed reveal a systematic dif-
ference that calls the objectivity of such testimony into question.
It was found that most voluntary defectors were ambivalent or
even positive about their former religion, often characterizing
their membership period as a beneficial learning experience. In
sharp contrast, people who had been involuntarily removed de-
scribed their membership and their former religion in terms of
the popular negative stereotype of “cults.” The conclusion to be
drawn from these findings is that deprogramming is not the ther-
apeutic intervention it has been portrayed, but is, rather, an in-
tensive indoctrination process in which the abductee’s religious
faith is systematically destroyed and replaced with anticult ide-
ology. Although this does not mean that there is nothing to be
criticized in certain minority religions, a careful consideration of
this finding should cause any thinking person to hesitate before
accepting the more extreme accusations proffered by anticultists.
Thus, the ex-members who tell their tales of woe before the
public have been carefully selected by the anticult movement.
Even though few if any apostates are ever completely objective
about their former religion, ex-members who have been inten-
sively “counseled” by anticultists—especially those who have
been kidnapped out of their religion—should be especially sus-
pect as being less than neutral witnesses. By relying upon this
34
Introduction

subset of ex-members, the anticult movement involves itself in a
hermeneutic circle. In other words, rather than forming general-
izations based on a broad range of data, the anticult movement
generates its own data by imposing its brainwashing ideology on
a select number of individual cases (the deprogrammees) and
then “discovers” evidence for its ideology in the testimony of
these same individuals. Anticultists depend upon this subset of
former members for the ultimate proof of their accusations.
In addition to shaping public opinion by recounting stereo-
typical atrocity tales, deprogrammees feed into the cult contro-
versy in a number of other ways: In a variety of different court
battles, ex-members recruited by anticultists provided negative
testimony against their former movements, such as in child cus-
tody cases in which one of the parents is a “cult” member and in
cases where governmental agencies need evidence for “cult” vi-
olations of various governmental regulations. The testimony of a
deprogrammed Branch Davidian was, for example, part of the
evidence used to obtain a search warrant before the assault on
the Davidian community. And finally, at the level of basic re-
search, these former members are interviewed in pseudoscien-
tific surveys designed to substantiate claims such as that brain-
washing techniques induce mental illness in their members and
that child abuse is widespread in alternative religious groups.
Stereotypes and Public 
Perceptions of the Cult Issue
Stereotyping Cults
Several decades ago, sociologist Tom Robbins observed that if
someone at a previously unknown vegetarian community died
from being squashed by a giant cabbage, tomorrow’s headline
news story—splashed sensationally across the front page—
would be a report on an act of “cult” violence. The incident
would also immediately become fodder for the propaganda mill
of anticult organizations and be used as an example of “what
these awful groups are capable of.” This hypothetical commu-
nity, which, prior to the death, had never been considered “cul-
tic,” would then be mentioned in all future discussions of evil
cults.
Stereotypes and Public Perceptions of the Cult Issue
35

Robbins’s observation seemed particularly appropriate in
the wake of the Mount Carmel fiasco. Prior to the ATF attack, the
Branch Davidians had been a little-noticed group on the outskirts
of Waco. Although some of the people familiar with the commu-
nity had found it somewhat eccentric, it was rarely mentioned in
the same breath as Moonies, Hare Krishna, and so forth. In the
wake of the tragedy, however, the Branch Davidians were trans-
formed overnight into the paradigmatic evil cult.
The “reasoning” at work here is the same illogic of stereo-
typing from which many minorities have suffered:
• A black man raped a woman? Therefore, all black men
are rapists.
• A Jew cheated a neighbor? Therefore, all Jews are
cheaters.
• A homosexual molested a little boy? Therefore, all ho-
mosexuals are pedophiles.
• A nontraditional religious group in the boondocks of
Texas shot four lawmen? Therefore, all nontraditional
religions are violent cults.
And so on and so forth. We immediately recognize these bi-
ased stereotypes for what they are when applied to racial, ethnic,
and sexual lifestyle minorities but fail to recognize similarly de-
meaning stereotypes when applied to nontraditional religions.
What is a stereotype? Stereotypes are generalizations about
other groups of people, but they are a peculiar type of general-
ization. Stereotypes portray certain, most often derogatory, traits
as being characteristic of a whole group of people and then ex-
plain or excuse social problems in light of these traits. Stereo-
types are also usually held rigidly, in that we tend to ignore or to
dismiss evidence that flies in the face of our generalization. Such
rigidity indicates that our stereotype in some way protects our
self-esteem or shields us from facing some unpleasant fact.
Thus, the stereotype of certain races as “lazy,” for example, si-
multaneously boasts the self-esteem of society’s dominant racial
group as well as blinds one to the inequalities of existing social
arrangements. It is relatively easy to perceive that most general-
izations about “cults” are little more than negative stereotypes,
but what are the social forces that make such stereotypes about
nontraditional religions peculiarly attractive to contemporary
society?
36
Introduction

One of the more widely accepted dictums of sociology is that
societies need enemies, particularly societies that are going
through a disturbing period of change. External threats provide
motivation for people to overcome internal divisiveness in order
to work together as a unit. Having an enemy one can portray as
evil and perverse also provides support for the normative values
and institutions of one’s society: “They” are communists; “we”
are capitalists. “They” are totalitarian; “we” are democratic. And
so on and so forth.
One of the more interesting corollaries of this general line of
thinking is that in situations where external enemies no longer
threaten, a society will find groups or individuals within itself
that it can construe as threatening and evil. Such enemies become
particularly important to communities passing through a crisis in
which fundamental values are being called into question. In the
words of Albert Bergesen, from his important study The Sacred and
the Subversive, “a community will commence to ritually persecute
imaginary enemies—conduct a witchhunt—to manufacture
moral deviants as a means of ritually reaffirming the group’s
problematical values and collective purposes” (1984, vii). This no-
tion has been effectively supported by certain sociohistorical
studies. For example, in an interesting and creative study of New
England witchcraft, Entertaining Satan (1982), John Demos
demonstrates that the persecution and execution of “witches”—
usually unsocial, crabby little old ladies—abated during periods
of war and reappeared after peace had returned. This sheds light
on our current social situation.
Unless there are groups that are consciously antisocial or
criminal like the Mafia or gangs, the deviations from the norm
that a community chooses to perceive as threatening are some-
what arbitrary. The people that our culture have traditionally
construed as “deviants” have been racial (that is, blacks), ethnic
(Jews), and sexual (homosexuals) minorities. In recent years,
however, it has become socially unacceptable to persecute these
traditional groups, at least in the overt manner in which they
were attacked in the past. This leaves few groups of any signifi-
cant size to persecute. One of the few minorities that liberals have
been slow to defend is nontraditional religions. This is due to a
number of different factors, including the resistance of tradition-
ally conservative religions to liberal change.
Groups of people experienced as threatening frequently be-
come screens onto which a society projects its anxieties. If, for
Stereotypes and Public Perceptions of the Cult Issue
37

example, a culture is troubled by sexual issues (as is often the
case), then its enemies are perceived as perverse, sexually de-
viant, and so on. Racial minorities, who have often been viewed
as “loose” and sexually aggressive, have suffered from this pro-
jection. This was also a dominant theme in nineteenth-century
anti-Catholic and anti-Mormon literature. Contemporary
“cults,” of course, suffer from the same projection.
In the classic formulation of psychological projection, Freud,
who was especially concerned with sex and violence, viewed
projection as a defense mechanism against unacceptable inner
urges. Thus, in a society with strict sexual mores, an individual
constantly keeping a lid on his desires might perceive ordinary
dancing, let us say, as sexually suggestive. Becoming enraged at
such “loose” behavior, he might then attempt to lead a move-
ment to have all of the dance halls in town closed down. It should
be clear that this hypothetical individual’s inner struggle is being
“projected” outward to provide a script for an outer struggle (that
is, he is internally repressing his desires while symbolically bat-
tling the same desires in the outer world). The same process is at
work in the collective mind of society, perceiving marginal
groups as sexually deviant. For instance, the stereotype of the
sexually abusive “cult” leader, routinely forcing devotees to sat-
isfy his or her sexual whims, perfectly captures the fantasy of
many members of our society who desire to sexually control any
person they wish.
The same kind of thing happens with repressed aggressive
urges. We live in a society with strict sanctions against overt vio-
lence; simultaneously, violence is glorified in the entertainment
media. This sets up a cultural contradiction that is projected onto
enemies and deviant groups, with the result that minorities are
often perceived as violent and belligerent. This accusation is also
regularly projected onto nontraditional religions. In particular,
the radical actions of a tiny handful of alternative religions are
mistakenly taken to indicate a widespread tendency among all
such groups.
We can generalize beyond Freudian psychology’s emphasis
on sex and aggression to see that many other cultural anxieties
and contradictions are projected onto minority groups. For in-
stance, our society gives us contradictory messages about the rel-
ative importance of money and possessions. On the one hand, we
are taught that economic pursuits are supposed to be secondary
to social and spiritual activities. On the other, we receive many
38
Introduction

messages from the surrounding society that the single-minded
pursuit of wealth is the be-all and end-all of life. This self-contra-
diction is projected onto alternative religions, as represented in
the stereotype of the money-hungry “cult” leader who demands
that her or his followers lead lives of poverty while the leader
wallows in riches.
Similarly, the child abuse accusation and contemporary soci-
ety’s seeming obsession with child abuse flow out of another cul-
tural contradiction. Our cultural heritage as well as many mod-
ern psychologists hold out the ideal of a child who is constantly
under the wing of a loving parent, usually the mother. Current
economic conditions, however, often require both parents to
work full time, which usually entails leaving young children in
the care of strangers. This results in a good deal of guilt, which is
easily displaced onto such “deviant” groups as nontraditional re-
ligions. Like the accusation of violence, the radical actions of a
tiny handful of alternative religions that have abused children
are mistakenly taken to indicate a widespread tendency among
all such groups. Despite the outcry against the Branch Davidians,
for example, our best current information is that, though strict,
the Davidians did not abuse their children. However, the readi-
ness of people to buy into the stereotype of child-abusing cultists
convicted David Koresh and sentenced him to death before he
was able to receive a fair hearing.
One of the more important cultural contradictions that is
projected onto alternative religions is tied up in the brainwash-
ing, or mind control, notion that is the core accusation leveled
against such groups. Discourse that glorifies mainstream society
usually does so in terms of a rhetoric of liberty and freedom.
However, while holding liberty as an ideal, we experience a so-
cial environment that is often quite restrictive. Most citizens
work as employees in highly disciplined jobs where the only real
freedom is the freedom to quit. Also, we are bombarded by ad-
vertising designed to influence our decisions and even to create
new needs. Our frustration with these forms of influence and
control is easily displaced and projected onto the separated soci-
eties of alternative religions in which the seemingly restricted
flow of information offers a distorted reflection of the situation
we experience as members of the dominant society.
The components of the “cult” stereotype that have been
enumerated, and others, explain certain themes in anticult dis-
course as well as why this stereotype is attractive to members of
Stereotypes and Public Perceptions of the Cult Issue
39

present-day society. Without this preexisting disposition to con-
strue nontraditional religions negatively, the anticult movement
would have little or no social influence. However, whereas the
anticult movement has relatively little direct social power, the
stereotype it has helped to shape has taken on a life of its own,
independent of organized anticultism.
Self-Fulfilling Stereotypes
Once a stereotype is in place, a variety of different kinds of stud-
ies have shown that it becomes self-fulfilling and self-reinforcing.
Thus, in a study by Mark Snyder and Seymour Uranowitz, as re-
ported in Paula Rothenberg’s book Racism and Sexism, students
were asked to read a short biography about Betty K., a fictitious
woman. Her life story was constructed so that it would fulfill cer-
tain stereotypes of both heterosexuals and lesbians. In the words
of Snyder and Uranowitz: “Betty, we wrote, never had a steady
boyfriend in high school, but did go out on dates. And although
we gave her a steady boyfriend in college, we specified that he
was more of a close friend than anything else” (Snyder and Ura-
nowitz 1988). A week later, they told some of the students that
Betty was currently living with her husband and another group
of students that she was living with another woman in a lesbian
relationship. When subsequently requested to answer a series of
questions about Betty, they found a marked tendency on the part
of students to reconstruct her biography so as to conform to
stereotypes about either heterosexuality or homosexuality, de-
pending on the information they had received. “Those who be-
lieved that Betty was a lesbian remembered that Betty had never
had a steady boyfriend in high school, but tended to neglect the
fact that she had gone out on many dates in college. Those who
believed that Betty was now a heterosexual, tended to remember
that she had formed a steady relationship with a man in college,
but tended to ignore the fact that this relationship was more of a
friendship than a romance” (Snyder and Uranowitz 1988).
More directly relevant to the case at hand is an important ar-
ticle by Jeffrey E. Pfeifer, “The Psychological Framing of Cults:
Schematic Representations and Cult Evaluations,” reporting the
results of a similar study that compared responses to a biography
in which a fictitious student, Bill, dropped out of college to enter
a Catholic seminary, join the marines, or join the Moonies. The
short biography incorporated elements of indoctrination often
40
Introduction

attributed to “cults”: “While at the facility, Bill is not allowed
very much contact with his friends or family and he notices that
he is seldom left alone. He also notices that he never seems to be
able to talk to the other four people who signed up for the pro-
gram and that he is continually surrounded by [Moonies,
marines, or priests] who make him feel guilty if he questions any
of their actions or beliefs” (Pfeifer 1992 ).
When given a choice of describing Bill’s indoctrination ex-
perience, subjects who thought Bill had joined the Catholic
priesthood most often labeled his indoctrination “resocializa-
tion,” those who were told that he had joined the marines most
frequently labeled the process “conversion,” and those who were
under the impression that he had become a Moonie applied the
label “brainwashing.” On various other questions regarding the
desirability and fairness of the indoctrination process, subjects
who were told that Bill had joined the Moonies consistently eval-
uated his experience more negatively than subjects who were
under the impression that Bill had joined either the marines or a
priestly order.
The implications of this research for the cult controversy are
that the minority religions lose their chance for a fair hearing as
soon as the label “cult” is applied. After that, the mass media se-
lectively seek out and present information about the group that
fits the stereotype. In the Branch Davidian case, it was only a
matter of time before the media had completely “demonized”
Koresh and his followers.
Cults and the Media
Less than a week after the ATF attack on the Branch Davidian
community, the Reverend Mike Evans, who in 1986 had pub-
lished a popular book about the end of the world, publicly pro-
nounced that David Koresh was demon-possessed. The Waco
confrontation had already begun to settle into the routine of an
uneventful standoff, and the media were searching around for
colorful news—hence the decision to feature a story on the Texas
evangelist. “Satan is alive and well on planet earth,” claimed
Evans in the words of a popular book title. “The spirit that is in
Koresh and his followers needs to be exorcised.” He offered his
services to the authorities: “If it would save innocent lives, I
would be willing to go in there one on one with him and cast that
demon out.” Although he said that he “would prefer going in
Stereotypes and Public Perceptions of the Cult Issue
41

there and laying hands on him and rebuking the demons in
him,” Brother Evans also noted that the next best thing to a per-
sonal exorcism would be to repeat a prayer through a loud-
speaker, “rebuking the demon spirits in Koresh and command-
ing them to come out in the name of Jesus. Turn it up so loud that
Koresh will not have a moment of rest 24 hours a day.”
Perhaps taking their cue from Pastor Evans, it was not long
afterward that the FBI initiated a harassment campaign against
Mount Carmel. However, rather than attempting to exorcise Ko-
resh, the FBI seemed intent on feeding his demon. Instead of
prayers, authorities broadcast, among other sound tracks, Nancy
Sinatra music, the sound of a dentist’s drill, and the cries of rab-
bits being tortured to death. (One wonders what kind of tape li-
brary stocks rabbit murder sounds—or were the fuzzy cottontails
slain at the behest of the FBI and custom-taped for the occasion?)
It is difficult to understand what this audio assault and the ac-
companying light show could have accomplished, except to in-
crease the level of paranoia among the Davidians.
The fact that the media saw fit to give sideshows like Evans
that sprang up around the Davidian siege as much coverage as
the siege itself reflects a salient characteristic of the contemporary
news media, which is that—because of the intense competition
among different news agencies—the media seek to entertain con-
sumers of news, sometimes at the cost of informing them. The
same drive to increase viewer or reader ratings is evident in the
media portrayal of the Branch Davidians. Although Evans had
recommended casting out demons, and though the FBI tried to
provoke Koresh’s inner devils, the media took a somewhat dif-
ferent approach and proceeded to demonize the Davidian leader.
In addition to the usual generic accusations about evil cult lead-
ers and ad nauseam comparisons with Jim Jones, reporters duti-
fully repeated every slanderous remark made about Koresh and
the Davidians, whatever the source. Clearly, the intention was to
appeal to readers and viewers with sensationalism rather than to
produce a balanced picture of the Branch Davidians.
More generally, the journalistic penchant for sensationalism
has been a decisive factor in promoting the stereotype of “evil
cults” to the larger society. The mass media are not, of course,
motivated primarily by the quest for truth, although some re-
porters have more integrity than others. Instead, the mainstream
media are driven by market forces and by the necessity of com-
peting with other newspapers, TV news shows, and so forth.
42
Introduction

This is not to say that reporters necessarily lie or fabricate their
stories. Rather, in the case of new religious movements (NRMs),
newspeople tend to accentuate those facets of “cults” that seem
to be strange, exploitative, dangerous, totalitarian, sensational,
and the like because such portrayals titillate consumers of news.
This kind of reporting contributes to the perpetuation of the cult
stereotype. In the words of British sociologist James Beckford,
Journalists need no other reason for writing about any
particular NRM except that it is counted as a cult. This
categorization is sufficient to justify a story, especially if
the story illustrates many of the other components
which conventionally make up the “cult” category. This
puts pressure on journalists to find more and more evi-
dence which conforms with the categorical image of
cults and therefore confirms the idea that a NRM is
newsworthy to the extent that it does match the cate-
gory. It is no part of conventional journalistic practice to
look for stories about NRMs which do not conform to
the category of cult. (Beckford 1994, 146)
Another important factor is the marked tendency of the mass
media to report on a phenomenon only when it results in conflicts
and problems. To again cite from Beckford’s important paper “The
Media and New Religious Movements,” “NRMs are only news-
worthy when a problem occurs. Scandals, atrocities, spectacular
failures, ‘tug-of-love’ stories, defections, exposés, outrageous con-
duct—these are the main criteria of NRMs’ newsworthiness. . . .
And, of course, the unspectacular, nonsensational NRMs are per-
manently invisible in journalists’ accounts” (Beckford 1994,
144–145).
The different media vary somewhat in their tendency to
produce imbalanced reports. “TV tabloids” such as 20/20 and
Hard Copy that have to compete with prime-time TV program-
ming tend to be the most imbalanced. Rather than attempting to
produce programs that examine the complex ramifications of is-
sues, news shows usually present melodramas in which guys in
white hats are shown locked in conflict with other guys in black
hats. On the opposite extreme are the major newspapers, such as
the Los Angeles Times and the Washington Post, which tend to do
the best job of attempting to present balanced articles on contro-
versial subjects. Such “balance,” however, usually only means
finding the space for opposing views. The journalist appears to
Stereotypes and Public Perceptions of the Cult Issue
43

be objective when her or his story is two-sided rather than one-
sided. The news magazines such as Time and Newsweek tend to
fall somewhere in between.
One of the more unusual aspects of the Waco standoff was
the decision by NBC to create a “docudrama” about the Branch
Davidians and the events leading up to the original ATF assault
before the siege ended. The title of this made-for-TV movie, Am-
bush in Waco, seemed to evoke images from the quasi-mythical
past of frontier Texas, when sinister savages ambushed noble
lawmen. Television, as we have already mentioned, is the least
suitable medium for coming to grips with complex moral issues.
In the case of Ambush in Waco, the ATF agents were dressed in
white hats and David Koresh in a black hat. It was, as might be
expected, a shallow, rambling production built around a discon-
nected framework of the most slanderous accusations leveled
against Koresh. The ATF was completely whitewashed as a
group of noble-minded public servants—not a single question
was raised about the propriety of the ATF’s actions. The filming
of Ambush in Waco was still in process when the FBI attacked
Mount Carmel. Appealing to the public hunger for sensational-
ism and violence, the docudrama was a smashing success.
The collapse of the distinction between dramatic time and
real time in this and other productions represents a disturbing
trend. One can well imagine the creation of a “quickie” docu-
drama on a sensationalistic murder in which the murderer sus-
pect is convicted on TV—but who later turns out to be innocent.
It has become increasingly clear that something like this was the
case with the Davidians (that is, a TV conviction), but the “evi-
dence”—as presented in Ambush in Waco—has helped to blind
the public to the possibility that Koresh and company could have
been innocent. Instead, Ambush in Waco merely reinforced the
news media’s demonization of the Branch Davidians and helped
to make the final holocaust at Mount Carmel more acceptable.
In an important article on the docudrama trend, “From
Headline to Prime Time” (published in TV Guide), David Shaw
observes that “fact based movies are suddenly the Hula-Hoop,
the skateboard, the nintendo of the ’90s” (Shaw 1993). He further
points out that most such movies are based on disasters and that
“the instant dramatization of real tragedy has become a kind of
video fast food, drama McNuggets” (Shaw 1993). Shaw’s conclu-
sion is worth citing at length:
44
Introduction

Using the powerful and intimate medium of television
to pander to the viewer’s base instincts is not new, but
this rush to do so is the latest step down a very danger-
ous road. Where will it all end? Will the next David Ko-
resh be able to sit in his compound and watch his own
dramatized death on television—and maybe figure out
how to kill the cops instead? . . . Will producers decide
that, rather than risk waiting until dramatic events ac-
tually take place before they begin costly bidding wars
for the dramatic rights of the players, they should open
negotiations with soldiers of fortune, jilted lovers, and
putative terrorists before they do their dastardly
deeds . . . perhaps even suggesting a traumatic twist or
two in the ultimate execution to jack up the asking
price? (Shaw 1993)
The Appeal of New Religions
Up to this point, the discussion has been focused on the cult con-
troversy and on how that controversy has been misperceived and
misrepresented. I now want to turn your attention to under-
standing the sources of spiritual innovation as well as under-
standing the appeal of new religions. In successive sections, I will
examine the real issues—and, in some cases, the real dangers—
associated with certain minority religious groups.
There have been a variety of historical periods during which
religious innovation has flourished. The most general observa-
tion we can make is that periods of renewed spiritual activity
occur in the wake of disruptive social and economic changes: the
established vision of “how things work” no longer seems to
apply, and people begin searching for new visions. In previous
cycles of Western—especially U.S.—religious experimentation,
innovative forms of Protestantism often formed the basis for
these new visions. As revivalist fervor died down, new or rein-
vigorated Protestant denominations became the pillars of a new
cultural hegemony.
The most recent period of religious innovation occurred in the
decades following the demise of the 1960s counterculture. How-
ever, unlike previous cycles of revival, the religious explosion that
occurred in the 1970s and 1980s has not provided a basis for a new
The Appeal of New Religions
45

spiritual and cultural synthesis. Even though there has been a
growth in conservative Protestant denominations during this pe-
riod (a growth parallel to the pattern of earlier awakenings), there
has also been a marked growth in “metaphysical” religion. The
most visible manifestation of this latter strand of spirituality has
been the New Age movement, which offers a vision of the world
fundamentally different from that of traditional Christianity. Thus,
during this most recent cycle of religious enthusiasm, Protes-
tantism has failed to reestablish its traditional hegemony.
Other factors inhibiting the formation of a new cultural syn-
thesis have been the growing power of secularization and the in-
flux of new immigrants from non-Protestant (and even non-
Christian) countries. In the West’s new pluralistic society,
Hindus, Buddhists, Muslims, and so forth represent a growing
segment of the culture—a segment for whom neither Protes-
tantism nor the New Age exercises much appeal. Also, a trend to-
ward secularization that was set in motion in the preceding cen-
tury has shaped yet another important segment of contemporary
society, one alienated from religion altogether.
Lacking the power to generate a new basis for cultural syn-
thesis, the current proliferation of new religious movements cannot
help but strike the casual observer as a negative phase of contem-
porary life—a factor contributing to the disintegration of modern
life. However, it is the very disconnectedness of the contemporary
experience that contributes to the attraction of nonmainstream re-
ligions. This “something” is that many alternative religions hold
out the possibility of life-transforming experiences—experiences
that, to a greater or lesser extent, help one to drop the burden of the
past and be reborn into a new and more whole life.
The mainstream Protestant denominations—Methodists,
Baptists, and Presbyterians—once offered the seeker life-trans-
forming experiences in the context of revivals and camp meet-
ings. But as these religious bodies settled down into comfortable
accommodation with the surrounding (largely secular) society,
they lost their intensity. One result of this accommodation was
that revivals and camp meetings—and the accompanying intense
religious experiences—were relegated to a quaint and mildly
embarrassing chapter in denominational histories.
Those of us who are happily adjusted to the social-cultural
mainstream often have a difficult time understanding intense re-
ligiosity. Academics have not been exempt from this tendency.
An earlier generation of sociologists of religion, seemingly ob-
46
Introduction

sessed with the issue of conversion to nonmainstream “sect”
groups, gave excessive attention to explaining why individuals
became involved in such bizarre churches.
If, however, rather than dwelling on strange externals, we
change our point of focus and attempt to really look at what
might attract someone to an alternative religion, such involve-
ment is not really difficult to understand. Is the attraction of
transformational experiences, for example, really so hard to com-
prehend? What if we actually could let go of the burden of our
past and be reborn as new people? Such transformation may or
may not be attainable, but the attractiveness of the possibility is
certainly understandable. Many nonmainstream religions—con-
servative Christian sects included—hold out the promise of such
life-changing experiences.
Many people become involved in a religious group in the
wake of a spiritual experience. This factor was particularly em-
phasized in older academic literature about religious conversion.
In this body of literature, the suddenness of the experience is
stressed. The implicit or explicit paradigm is the Damascus Road
experience, in which the apostle Paul was knocked off his horse
by a bolt out of the blue, confronted by Jesus, and converted on
the spot. Contemporary studies have found, however, that it
rarely works that way. Rather, in most cases, individuals just
gradually “drift” into a religious group until they cross a barely
perceptible line between outsider and insider, undergoing a se-
ries of “miniconversions” en route.
Religious experience is, however, only one aspect of the spir-
itual life and only one of the factors that attract individuals to
deeper religious involvement. Among the many approaches to
religious studies, one of the older, yet still useful, scholarly analy-
ses was articulated by the influential historian of religion
Joachim Wach (1944). The primary core of religion, according to
Wach, is religious experience. Religious experience, in turn, is ex-
pressed in at least three ways:
• In a community (church, ashram, and so on)
• In a doctrine (theology, worldview, or ideology)
• In a “cultus” (ritual, ceremony, or gathering)
Wach’s analysis should give us a basic feel for the funda-
mental constituents of religion. In outline form, these con-
stituents are:
The Appeal of New Religions
47

• Spiritual experience
• Community
• Doctrine or idea system
• Gatherings or rites
Each of these four components sheds light on how individu-
als become involved in religious groups. I have already dis-
cussed the role of spiritual experiences. Often, it is the commu-
nity dimension of any religious group that is the key element in
initially attracting new members. We live in a society that would
have been an alien world to our ancestors. Surrounded by masses
of people, we rarely know the names of our closest neighbors. In
traditional societies, by way of contrast, everyone in a particular
village knew everyone else and took care of everyone else. If, for
instance, you saw someone have an accident, you did not call
911; instead, you ran over and helped out as best you could.
Some churches and most alternative religions re-create this kind
of community—a community comparable to an extended family.
The family metaphor is particularly apt. In modern society,
our families are not the close emotional units they were in tradi-
tional societies. A small religious group many times re-creates the
sense of belonging to a family. If one has never experienced 
the closeness of a traditional family, it is easy to understand 
how the sense of belonging to a family unit would be attractive,
and even healing.
Something similar can be said about worldviews. In a tradi-
tional society, beliefs about the ultimate nature of the universe
are largely taken for granted. In contemporary society, by way of
contrast, nothing can be taken for granted except death and
taxes. We are taught to be “nice” by our school system, but this
moral teaching is not grounded in an ultimate source of value.
We are also instructed in the basic skills necessary to operate in
society, but public school teachers are quiet about the greater
questions of death, purpose, and the meaning of life.
We may place a positive or a negative evaluation on this rel-
ativistic education, but in any case we have to acknowledge that
our culture’s ambiguous approach to socialization departs radi-
cally from the socialization strategies of earlier societies. Our
choices are always varying shades of gray, rather than black and
white or good and bad. The results of this ambiguity may be lib-
erating to some people, but to others it is confusing. Without
some kind of ultimate grounding, this is necessarily the case.
48
Introduction

Nontraditional religions are often criticized for offering their
followers the “easy” answers that come with black-and-white
thinking. However, to many of the people who belong to such re-
ligions, the seeming narrowness of such thinking can be a liber-
ating experience: once one has stable criteria for what is good
and true, this clarity and stability can then free one to go about
the business of working, loving, and living life without debilitat-
ing anxieties about transcendent meaning and value. This is not,
of course, to advocate a rigid belief system, but rather to point
out why such a system is attractive without depreciating adher-
ents as being somehow weak or defective.
In summary, we may say that people join alternate religions
for the same sorts of reasons one would join any other religion,
namely, fellowship, a satisfying belief system, and so forth. When
these needs are no longer being fulfilled in an acceptable manner,
people leave, much as one would leave an unsatisfying marriage.
Social Influence in Genuinely 
Dangerous Religions
The Nature of “Cultic” Influence
Even though we can dismiss the notion of a unique form of in-
fluence exerted by minority religions over their followers, it is
nevertheless still clear that the members of any group—particu-
larly a tightly knit spiritual community—experience various
forms of social influence. Social pressure, conformity, and atti-
tude change are bread-and-butter issues for social psychology,
and small-group dynamics are ideal situations in which to study
such processes. However, the “garden variety” group influences
examined by social psychologists rarely find their way into the
“cult” debate. On the one hand, they do not serve the purposes
of anticultists who are intent on making the case for “cultic mind
control.” On the other hand, defenders of religious liberty are so
focused on demonstrating the presence of free will among mem-
bers of controversial religions that they tend to gloss over the
question of the other less noble social dynamics found within
such groups.
In approaching these dynamics, it should initially be noted
that somewhat different factors are involved in recruitment as
Social Influence in Genuinely Dangerous Religions
49

opposed to the ongoing maintenance of commitment to a group
of any type. Proponents of the brainwashing theory have tended
to ignore this particular distinction. At an earlier stage of the cult
controversy, anticultists, particularly deprogrammers, tended to
portray recruitment as a kind of “spot hypnosis” that was able
to override the will of the recruit. This perspective ignored the
obvious, which was that not everyone was susceptible to prose-
lytizers—indicating that factors other than an irresistible hypno-
sis technique were at work in the recruiting situation. In partic-
ular, more objective observers noted that the great majority of
individuals who joined high-demand religions were unattached
young people—people with few responsibilities and who were
thus relatively free to experiment with an alternative lifestyle.
Another point infrequently emphasized in anticult literature
is that comparatively few nontraditional religions are as demand-
ing as the Moonies or the Hare Krishna movement. In fact, the
great majority of religions stigmatized as “cults” are more like
mainstream churches and synagogues in that they do not require
members to leave their families or their jobs and move into an iso-
lated communal facility. Recruitment to such groups thus tends to
take place quite differently—through family, friend, and employ-
ment networks—and more gradually than the “Pied Piper” syn-
drome that is a cornerstone of the stereotype of cult recruitment.
As has already been indicated in previous sections, it does
not require a great leap of the imagination to understand the ini-
tial attraction of becoming a member of such communities. In-
tensive religious groups provide participants with a ready-made
fellowship, a stable worldview, and clear ethical guidelines that
sharply contrast with the ambivalence and ambiguity of life in
contemporary mass society.
Once one joins a religious group, the ordinary forces of so-
cial conformity come into play to further socialize the recruit into
the mores of her or his new community. In a classic study of the
sociology of knowledge, The Social Construction of Reality (1966),
Peter L. Berger make the case that the plausibility of any given
idea is dependent upon the people one is in conversation with on
a day-to-day basis. Thus, if all of one’s acquaintances are Repub-
licans, even someone who had previously been a Democrat tends
to “convert” to Republicanism, and vice versa. Similarly, the no-
tion that the Reverend Sun Myung Moon might be the new mes-
siah seems silly to non-Moonies. But if one was to live in a com-
munity in which all of one’s conversation partners held this
50
Introduction

belief, it would not be long before one would begin to entertain
the idea as a plausible option.
The motives in such situations are the natural human desire
to be accepted and the socially learned value of not wanting to
disagree with others. These motives can actually alter the manner
in which we perceive the world, as demonstrated in a classic ex-
periment designed by social psychologist Solomon Asch. In the
Asch experiment, a subject was asked to judge which of three
sample lines a given line was closest to in length. Unknown to
the subject, however, the other seven people in the room were
only pretending to be experimental subjects. Instead, they had
been instructed to falsely identify a different line—one that was
obviously unequal in length. When it came the subject’s turn—
who was always the last person to speak—he or she was thus
faced with the dilemma of listening to his own senses or to the
group judgment. A full 80 percent of the subjects in Asch’s origi-
nal experiment were influenced by the group to go against the
evidence of their senses at least some of the time.
If the social forces influencing people to conform can have
this high success rate with a group of strangers, imagine how
such forces must be amplified within a group of friends—or, to
take the case at hand, within a close-knit religious fellowship. It
should not be too difficult to perceive how the desire to conform,
in combination with the ongoing conversation that gives a belief
system much of its plausibility, influences group members to be-
come convinced of ideas that seem odd or nutty to outsiders.
Clearly, it is unnecessary to posit a special form of social influ-
ence conforming to the popular notion of “cultic brainwashing”
in order to explain such behavior.
In most cases, the results of these forces of social influence
are benign. There are, however, situations in which the very same
forces can be put to socially undesirable ends. In a different series
of experiments, psychologist Stanley Milgram demonstrated
that, in the right circumstances, ordinary individuals could be
manipulated into obeying orders to torture and even kill other
human beings. (No one was actually harmed; instead, experi-
mental subjects were tricked into believing they had murdered
someone.) Although the implications of these experiments are
frightening, at the same time they shed light on such apparently
crazy acts as the Jonestown and Heaven’s Gate suicides: under
the right circumstances, people can be led to undertake extreme
actions—even mass suicide. Once again, it should be noted that
Social Influence in Genuinely Dangerous Religions
51

it is unnecessary to invoke ad hoc notions of cultic mind control
to explain such events.
If, however, the forms of social influence at work within mi-
nority religions are not distinctive enough to allow one to distin-
guish a dangerous group from a healthy group on the basis of so-
cialization routines, then how can we distinguish the Solar
Temples, Jonestowns, and Heaven’s Gates from benign religious
organizations? Although any simple criterion for making such a
distinction is likely impossible, there are, nevertheless, a few
guidelines that could function as “early warning signs” for a re-
ligion that has gone or is going “bad.”
“Cults” or Bad Religion?
Although the majority of minority religions are innocuous, many
have been involved in social conflicts. A handful of these con-
flicts have made national and even international headlines, from
the siege of the Branch Davidian community to the group suicide
of Heaven’s Gate members. One consequence of these highly
publicized incidents is that they have served to reinforce unre-
flective stereotypes about “cults” and “cult leaders” that are ap-
propriate for some—but certainly not the majority of—minority
religions. Unfortunately, such stereotyped information is often
the only “data” readily available to the media and law enforce-
ment at the onset of such conflicts.
Putting aside the technical discourse of sociologists, in ordi-
nary language people talk as if there is an objective category of
groups called “cults” that can be distinguished from genuine re-
ligions. In this commonly accepted view, cults are by definition
socially dangerous false religions, led by cynical cult leaders who
exploit followers for their own gain.
This stereotype is, however, deeply flawed, and for more
than one reason. In the first place, as we have already seen, “cult”
is a socially negotiated label that often means little more than a
religion one dislikes for some reason. To certain conservative
Christians, for example, a “cult” is any religion that departs from
a certain traditional interpretation of Scripture. Alternately, ultra-
conservative Christians who take a strictly fundamentalist ap-
proach to Scripture often appear “cultlike” to many mainline
Christians. In other words, one person’s cult is another person’s
religion.
52
Introduction

In the second place, the founders of new groups are—
despite whatever personal flaws some might have—almost al-
ways sincerely religious. Part of the problem here is that most peo-
ple unreflectively assume that religion is always something
“good.” If, therefore, a given religious body does something
“bad,” then ipso facto it must not be a “real” religion. Instead, it
must be a false religion, created for no other reason than the
founder or leader’s personal gain. This attitude is, however, naive.
The ancient Aztecs, to take an extreme example, regularly tortured
and sacrificed other human beings as part of their religious rites.
These practices were, in fact, a central aspect of the Aztec religion.
But however much we might be able to explain and even to un-
derstand why the Aztecs engaged in such practices, no contempo-
rary person would defend these rites as “good.”
The proper question to ask, then, is not whether some par-
ticular group is a cult (in the sense of a “false religion”) but,
rather, whether the social-psychological dynamics within a par-
ticular religion are potentially dangerous to its members or to the
larger society or both. Unfortunately, once we get beyond such
actions as torturing and murdering other human beings, the cri-
teria for what one regards as harmful can be quite subjective. It
has been seriously asserted, for example, that requiring “cult”
members to be celibate and to follow vegetarian diets are harm-
ful practices. Similarly, requiring followers to engage in several
hours of meditation per day plus discouraging the questioning of
“cult” doctrine have often been portrayed as parts of a group’s
“brainwashing” regime designed to damage one’s ability to rea-
son properly.
Once again, the problem with such criteria is that they are
naive. If celibacy was harmful, for example, then how does one ex-
plain the lack of more-than-ordinary pathology among monks and
nuns? Also, if certain mental practices actually damaged the brain,
then why do members of intensive religious groups perform so
well on IQ tests and other measures of individual reasoning abil-
ity? Such critical criteria also reflect an abysmal ignorance of tradi-
tional religious practices: many traditional religions have pro-
moted celibacy, restricted diets, prescribed lengthy prayers and
meditations, discouraged the questioning of group ideology, and
so forth. Clearly, if one wants to delineate serious criteria for de-
termining “bad religion,” then one must avoid focusing on traits
that embody more than the observer’s ethnocentric attitudes.
Social Influence in Genuinely Dangerous Religions
53

To begin, making a radical lifestyle change as part of joining
a religious group should not, in itself, be taken to indicate that the
individual has therefore become involved in something harmful.
Friends and family members may feel that an individual is mak-
ing a mistake to quit a job or to drop out of school—actions that,
by the way, very few contemporary new religions would actively
encourage—but a free society means nothing if one is not also free
to make mistakes.
If one wishes to develop objective criteria for distinguishing
harmful or potentially harmful religious organizations from
harmless religions, one needs to place oneself in the position of a
public policy maker. From this perspective, religions that should
raise the most concern are those groups that tangibly, physically
harm members or nonmembers or both or that engage in other
antisocial or illegal acts. However, a public policy maker might
well respond that this post facto criterion is too little too late and
that what is needed are criteria that could act as early warning
signs—criteria indicating that a previously innocuous group is
potentially “going bad.” In the following discussion, I will make
a stab at developing such criteria, with the caveat that the pres-
ence of the less serious factors listed below in any given group
does not automatically mean they are on the verge of becoming
the next Heaven’s Gate.
Early Warning Signs
As part of this discussion, I shall be referring to a few false crite-
ria for distinguishing a healthy from an unhealthy religion. In the
first place, the mere fact that a group is headed by a charismatic
leader does not automatically raise a red flag. This is because
new religions are much like new businesses: new businesses are
almost always the manifestation of the vision and work of a sin-
gle entrepreneur. In contrast, few if any successful businesses are
the outgrowth of the work of a committee. Also, to found a reli-
gion, a leader usually makes some sort of claim to a special in-
sight or to a special revelation that legitimates both the new reli-
gion and the leader’s right to lead. The founder may even claim
to be a prophet, messiah, or avatar. Although many critics of al-
ternative religions have asserted that the assumption of such au-
thority is in itself a danger sign, too many objectively harmless
groups have come into being with the leader asserting divine au-
thority for such claims to be meaningful danger signs.
54
Introduction

Far more important than one’s claim to authority is what one
does with the authority once he or she attracts followers who
choose to recognize it. A minister or guru who focuses her or his
pronouncements on the interpretation of Scripture or on other
matters having to do with religion proper is far less problematic
than a leader who takes it upon her- or himself to make decisions
in the personal lives of individual parishioners, such as dictating
(as opposed to suggesting) who and when one will marry. The
line between advising and ordering others with respect to their per-
sonal lives can, however, be quite thin. A useful criterion for de-
termining whether this line has been crossed is to examine what
happens when one acts against the guru’s advice in such matters:
if one can respectfully disagree without suffering negative conse-
quences as a result, then the leadership dynamics within the
group are healthy with respect to authority issues.
One of the clearest signs that leaders are overstepping their
proper sphere of authority is when they articulate certain ethical
guidelines that everyone must follow except for the guru or min-
ister. This is especially the case with a differential sexual ethic
that restricts the sexual activity of followers but allows leaders to
initiate liaisons with whomever they choose.
Perhaps the most serious danger sign is when a religious
group places itself above the law, although there are some nu-
ances that make this point trickier than it might first appear. All
of us, in some sphere of life, place ourselves above the law, if only
when we go a few miles per hour over the speed limit or fudge a
few figures on our income tax returns. Also, when push comes to
shove, almost every religion in the world would be willing to as-
sert that divine law takes precedence over human law—should
they ever come into conflict. Hence, a group that, for example,
solicits donations in an area where soliciting is forbidden should
not, on that basis alone, be viewed as a danger to society. Excep-
tions should also be made for groups or individuals who make a
very public protest against certain laws judged as immoral, as
when a conscientious objector goes to jail rather than be drafted
into the military.
On the other hand, it should be clear that a group leader who
consistently violates serious laws has developed a rationale that
could easily be used to legitimate more serious antisocial acts.
Examples that come readily to mind are Marshall Applewhite,
the founder and leader of Heaven’s Gate, who regularly ducked
out on motel bills and was once even arrested for stealing a rental
Social Influence in Genuinely Dangerous Religions
55

car, and Swami Kirtananda, founder of the New Vrindavan com-
munity, who was caught authorizing the stealing of computer
software before being arrested for ordering the murder of a com-
munity critic. Documentable child abuse and other illegalities
committed within the organization are also covered by this 
criterion.
Another misconceived criterion is perceiving groups as dan-
gerous because of apocalyptic theologies. As discussed earlier, al-
most every religion in the larger Judeo-Christian-Islamic tradi-
tion has an apocalyptic theology. The fact that a given group has
an apocalyptic theology is not, in itself, dangerous because in
most apocalyptic scenarios it is God and his angels who fight the
final battle. The human role is spiritual, and the “saved” fight a
spiritual war, not a literal, physical war. An apocalyptic theology
is dangerous only when individual followers believe they are
going to be called upon to be foot soldiers in God’s army and pre-
pare themselves by stocking up on weapons and ammunition.
However, a community’s possession of firearms—in the absence
of such a theology of physical confrontation—is probably not
dangerous, if no other danger signs are present.
Another false, yet frequently voiced, criterion is that reli-
gious groups are dangerous when they see only themselves as
saved and the rest of the world as damned. Like apocalypticism,
this trait is far too widespread among traditional religions to con-
stitute an authentic danger sign. A more meaningful characteris-
tic should be how a religion actually treats nonmembers.
Another criterion is a group’s relative isolation. This trait is
somewhat more complex than the others we have examined. On
the one hand, there are abundant examples of traditional religions
establishing communities or monastic centers apart from the
larger society that have posed no danger to anyone. On the other
hand, some of the worst abuses have taken place in the segregated
(usually communal) subsocieties of certain minority religions.
From the suicidal violence of the People’s Temple to the externally
directed violence of certain Identity Christian groups, it was the
social dynamics found in an isolated or semi-isolated community
that allowed such extreme actions to be contemplated.
In order to flag this characteristic while simultaneously
avoiding stigmatizing every religion that sets up a segregated so-
ciety as being potentially dangerous, it might be best to invert
this trait and state it as a counterindicator. In other words, rather
than asserting that any religion with a partially isolated commu-
56
Introduction

nity is potentially dangerous, let us instead assert that the rela-
tive lack of such boundaries indicates that the group in question
is almost certainly not dangerous.
A final early warning sign is a group’s readiness to deceive
outsiders (and, to a lesser extent, the systematic deception of in-
siders). Some critics have said that a recruiter who invites a po-
tential convert to a dinner without mentioning that the event is
being sponsored by such-and-such church is deceptive. Others
have criticized religions possessing a hierarchical system of
knowledge to which only initiates are privy. These kinds of criti-
cisms are silly. When a guru publicly asserts that his organization
does not own any guns and police later find a small arsenal in his
basement, that is deception.
To summarize, the traits designated above as “early warning
signs of ‘bad religion’” are:
1. The organization is willing to place itself above the law.
With the exceptions noted earlier, this is probably the
most important characteristic.
2. The leadership dictates (rather than suggests) important
personal (as opposed to spiritual) details of followers’
lives, such as whom to marry, what to study in college,
and so on.
3. The leader sets forth ethical guidelines members must
follow but from which the leader is exempt.
4. The group is preparing to fight a literal, physical Ar-
mageddon against other human beings.
5. The leader regularly makes public assertions that he or
she knows is false or the group has a policy of routinely
deceiving outsiders or both.
6. Finally, whereas many benign religions constitute semi-
segregated communities, socially dangerous religions
are almost always isolated or partially isolated from the
larger society.
These six traits are about as close as one can get to legitimate,
objective criteria for judging whether a given religious organiza-
tion is going—or has gone—“bad.” With the exception of placing
the group’s actions above the law, none of these characteristics,
taken by themselves, is necessarily cause for alarm. On the other
hand, a group possessing more than one or two of the above
traits might well bear closer scrutiny. As a corollary to this line of
Social Influence in Genuinely Dangerous Religions
57

analysis, minority religions possessing none of the above traits
are, from a public policy standpoint, almost certainly harmless.
New Religions, Violence, and Suicide
Of all of the negative traits attributed to nontraditional religions,
the most troubling is that of violence—particularly their sup-
posed proneness to suicide. Although violent incidents in new
religions are actually quite rare (especially in contrast to the
much greater violence associated with “mainstream” religions),
they have attracted significant popular and scholarly attention.
Two major monographs that appeared in 2000—John R.
Hall, Philip D. Schuyler, and Sylvaine Trinh’s Apocalypse Observed
and Catherine Wessinger’s How the Millennium Comes Violently—
developed analyses of NRM-related violence that included thick
descriptions of some of the more controversial groups, including
the People’s Temple, Branch Davidians, Solar Temple, AUM
Shinrikyo, and Heaven’s Gate. Many other observers have taken
similar approaches. As reflected in such titles as Millennialism,
Persecution, and Violence and Millennium, Messiahs, and Mayhem
and in numerous scholarly articles, millenarianism has been cen-
tral to these discussions—though it should immediately be noted
that contemporary analysts of NRMs and violence are generally
careful to “eschew single-factor explanations” (Bromley 2004,
154). Other factors usually considered in attempts to construct a
general model of NRM-associated violence are high-demand or-
ganization (meaning that participants do not have the option of
being casual, part-time members), charismatic leadership, isola-
tion from the surrounding society, and the threatening role
played by external forces such as hostile apostates and intrusive
governmental authorities. (For a comprehensive discussion, refer
to Cults, Religion, and Violence [2002], edited by David G. Bromley
and J. Gordon Melton.)
At present, the relatively mature state of this body of litera-
ture makes it possible to ask different sorts of questions. Specifi-
cally, rather than a straightforward comparison of the five prin-
cipal groups, what if one focused instead on the three groups that
imploded in group suicides—People’s Temple, Solar Temple, and
Heaven’s Gate? Although it is true that both the People’s Temple
and the Solar Temple also engaged in acts of murder, it could be
argued that these violent acts were aspects of the suicide event. It
58
Introduction

is thus possible to distinguish such suicide-related murders from
the otherwise comparable violence initiated by the leadership of
AUM Shinrikyo and other groups.
It is often more illuminating to “complexify” rather than to
simplify certain phenomena, but for my purposes I will focus on
distilling the details of these three groups down to a common
core of shared traits. Though this approach is open to criticism—
and would certainly never do for a comprehensive explanation—
it nevertheless bears fruit as an analytical strategy.
As a preliminary move, it should be noted that neither
Shoko Asahara (the leader of AUM Shinrikyo) nor David Koresh
(the leader of the Branch Davidians) seriously contemplated sui-
cide. When authorities finally located Asahara in a secret room at
AUM Shinrikyo’s Mount Fuji center, they also found him with an
abundant stash of money that he planned to use to support him-
self into the foreseeable future. And though Koresh seems to
have been willing to die a martyr’s death, it also appears he was
ready to embrace martyrdom only if all other options (or, per-
haps more accurately, all other reasonable options within the
horizon of his religious ideology) were closed. The fact that dur-
ing the siege at Mount Carmel Koresh retained a literary attorney
to handle his story should be enough to indicate that he envi-
sioned himself living into the postsiege future—not to mention
his explicit assertion to FBI negotiators a few days before the final
assault that “I never intended to die in here.”
Millenarianism
To turn our attention to the People’s Temple, the Solar Temple,
and Heaven’s Gate, what happens when we ruthlessly cut away
everything except the bare-bones structure shared by the three
“suicide cults”? Surprisingly, the first trait to drop out is mil-
lenarianism. Though it is quite possible to argue that Jim Jones
was a millenarian, in point of fact he had no theology in the
proper sense, much less a developed eschatology. Well before the
establishment of Jonestown, he had become little more than a sec-
ular socialist in religious garb. Even as people lined up to drink a
mixture of cyanide and Kool-Aid during the final drama, Jones
exhorted his followers with the assertion that “this is a revolu-
tionary suicide; this is not a self-destructive suicide,” rather than
consoling them with visions of the afterlife—though, as Jonathan
Z. Smith notes, one can also point to portions of the audiotape
New Religions, Violence, and Suicide
59

made during the event that intimate they would be reunited in a
postmortem state (1982, 117). I am aware that this assertion flies in
the face of almost all other scholarly approaches to the Jonestown
suicides. The point being made here thus calls for more discussion.
Millennial movements in the proper sense, to cite Norman
Cohn’s classic study, always picture the millennium as some-
thing “that is to be accomplished by, or with the help of, super-
natural agencies” (1970, 15). Even current definitions of millenar-
ianism typically mention such agencies. However, as in the
following excerpt from an encyclopedia of NRMs, the People’s
Temple is included as a example of a millenarian group, despite
Jim Jones’s nonbelief in divinities of any sort:
The terms “millenarianism” and “millennialism” are
usually applied to the study of apocalyptic beliefs. They
refer to the expectation of imminent world transforma-
tion, collective salvation, and the establishment of a per-
fect, new world of harmony and justice to be brought
about by otherworldly beings acting in accordance with
a divine or superhuman plan. . . . Millenarian ideas asso-
ciated with new religions often include the belief that the
transformation of the present world will be cataclysmic;
the worldview (referred to variously as catastrophic mil-
lennialism, apocalypticism or premillennialism) ex-
presses a pessimistic view of humanity, maintaining that
the world is fatally flawed and unredeemable by human
effort, and that only a divinely ordained world cataclysm
can usher in a millennial age of peace and prosperity.
Groups such as the Branch Davidians, AUM Shinrikyo
and the People’s Temple exemplify catastrophic mil-
lenarian views. (Wojcik 2004, 388)
One can, of course, redefine religion to encompass secular
visions or redefine millenarianism to include secular phenomena
(as the editors and some of the contributors do in Thomas Rob-
bins and Susan J. Palmer’s 1997 book, Millennium, Messiahs, and
Mayhem). The problem with such approaches is that as soon as
one expands millenarianism to include nonreligious phenomena,
then one can legitimately ask: Why stop with survivalism, femi-
nism, and radical environmentalism (three groups examined in
the Robbins and Palmer collection)? Almost any group of people
that looks forward to a better tomorrow—including educators
and mainstream political parties—could conceivably be viewed
60
Introduction

as millenarian. At this level of generality, however, millenarian-
ism becomes almost meaningless as a category of analysis.
We should also note that millenarianism in the primary
sense described by Norman Cohn involves a salvation that is
“terrestrial, in the sense that it is to be realized on this earth and
not in some other-worldly heaven” (1970, 15). At the time of their
dramatic “exits,” however, not one of the three suicide groups ex-
amined here envisioned returning to a paradisiacal era that
would be established on this planet.
In spite of the line of argument I have been pursuing in the
preceding paragraphs, I am not necessarily opposed to redefin-
ing millenarianism to encompass either secular phenomena or
extraterrestrial millennia. Rather, my purpose here is simply to
call into question the axiomatic assumption of most analysts that
millennial ideology is a core characteristic of contemporary vio-
lent groups, essential for understanding their violence. And
though readers may be hesitant to restrict the scope of millenari-
anism, the issues raised in the present discussion should never-
theless cast doubt on the adequacy of this concept as a primary
category for interpreting NRM-related violence—especially if we
are able to find other more compelling factors that can explain
group suicides.
External Provocation and Social Isolation
Shifting our attention from the People’s Temple to Heaven’s
Gate, we encounter another surprise when we subject Marshall
Applewhite and company’s dramatic exit to the same kind of
analysis, namely, pressing external threats, whether real or imag-
ined, are not the essential factors necessary for a group suicide.
In all four of the other new religions to be engulfed by violence,
hostile outsiders were a major factor precipitating each tragedy—
though none was quite as dramatic as the military assault on
Mount Carmel. The press criticism and governmental scrutiny
directed against the Solar Temple and the People’s Temple were
mild by comparison.
In the case of Heaven’s Gate, the group suicide was set in mo-
tion by the seemingly innocuous speculation of UFO buffs that a
large UFO was approaching Earth in the wake of the Hale-Bopp
comet. It seems that Applewhite had already decided some years
prior that he and his followers would make their exit via a group
suicide. Thus, he was predisposed to interpret any indication that
New Religions, Violence, and Suicide
61

the “space brothers” were coming as a sign that it was time to
leave. Although “the Two” (as Applewhite and his partner, Bon-
nie Lu Nettles, often referred to themselves) had received hostile
media coverage in their early years and even feared assassina-
tion—at one point, they purchased weapons for fear of being at-
tacked—these were not factors in March 1997 when Applewhite
decided they would exit the planet. This is not, of course, to
downplay the important role hostile external forces play in the
precipitation of most NRM-related violence, only to make the
point that this kind of intrusion by the outside world is not es-
sential to all such violence.
To finally shift our attention to the Solar Temple, yet another
trait seemingly shared by all of the new religions involved in vi-
olence drops out—namely, the group’s social isolation. It is the
social dynamics of the segregated (usually communal) worlds of
certain alternative religions that allow extreme actions to be con-
templated, whether the internally directed violence of Heaven’s
Gate or the externally directed violence of AUM Shinrikyo. The
Solar Temple, in contrast, was only semisegregated from the
larger society. Although Joseph Di Mambro established his early
Pyramid group as a communal organization, the Solar Temple
tended to be only partially communal. Thus, for instance, when
the Solar Temple was establishing a “survival farm” in Canada,
only a half-dozen members actually lived in the group’s head-
quarters. The rest lived outside the house and took their meals
there. Yet other members scattered about Quebec traveled to the
house once a month for a meeting that took place on the full
moon. Perhaps more important, many Solar Temple members
were wealthy and socially established—belonging to “the elite of
the Francophone west” (Daniels 1999, 147)—people who could
have been only partially separated from the larger society with-
out arousing suspicion.
Nevertheless, one could argue that the leader’s distance
from the voices of all but his closest followers was an essential
factor contributing to his radical actions. In fact, Di Mambro
tended to stay behind the scenes surrounded by a core of staunch
loyalists, even bringing Luc Jouret into the Solar Temple for the
purpose of interacting with outsiders. This finally brings us to a
core trait of suicide cults, namely, a charismatic leader who sur-
rounds himself with absolutely loyal followers and does not per-
mit any overt disagreement with the group’s ideology.
62
Introduction

Here the analysis begins to sound rather like a cult stereo-
type. Focusing on the personality of the leader—usually por-
trayed, as we have seen, as a warped megalomaniac—is a staple
in anticult discussions of NRMs. In contrast, mainstream scholars
tend to include an analysis of the leadership as but one factor
among others, such as a given group’s social dynamics, ideology,
and other less personal factors. Of course, the leadership must in-
teract with the membership in order to have any kind of organi-
zation at all. But in the NRMs we have been discussing, the
leader is clearly the epicenter. And the quest for commonalities
among suicide groups has boiled down to commonalities among
their leaders. So though I am not unmindful of group dynamics,
and would never downplay the importance of external factors,
for the sake of simplifying this analysis I will focus narrowly on
the leadership.
Di Mambro, Jones, and Applewhite
What can we say about Jim Jones, Joseph Di Mambro, and Mar-
shall Applewhite? If we again try to eliminate everything except
shared traits, Applewhite undermines the stereotypical image of
the cult leader because he neither demanded to live a better
lifestyle than his followers nor attempted to seduce any of them
(even before he was castrated). It also seems that Applewhite did
not feel particularly bitter toward the people who left Heaven’s
Gate. And he apparently did not cultivate a distance between
himself and his followers. In all of these particulars, he was quite
different from Jones and especially from Di Mambro.
What all of these men did share was (1) an intolerance of any
perspective other than their own, (2) a need for total commit-
ment—if not absolute obedience—from their followers (all three
seem to have been “control freaks” to a greater or lesser extent),
and (3) a greater or lesser paranoia about external forces threaten-
ing them or their group. And although, as we saw with the Solar
Temple, it is not essential that the entire group be segregated from
the larger society, self-destructive leaders typically surround
themselves with loyalists who effectively isolate them from exter-
nal input. At this point, however, we are faced with the problem
of finding what makes these men different from other NRM lead-
ers. Although, unlike the three suicide group leaders, David Ko-
resh seems to have regularly interacted with people outside of his
New Religions, Violence, and Suicide
63

community, Shoko Asahara was every bit as isolated from exter-
nal reality as Di Mambro, Applewhite, and Jones. Furthermore,
Asahara demanded total obedience, was extremely intolerant of
other views, and was paranoid about real and imagined enemies.
Yet Asahara apparently never contemplated suicide.
So where does that leave us? Though we have managed to
identify some essential common traits via comparison and con-
trast, a factor that sets the Solar Temple, the People’s Temple, and
Heaven’s Gate apart from AUM Shinrikyo and the Branch Da-
vidians seems to have eluded us. Discovering this additional fac-
tor requires that we shift our focus away from the traits of NRMs
frequently discussed in the literature and toward less commonly
discussed characteristics. What did Di Mambro, Applewhite, and
Jones share that distinguished them from Koresh and Asahara?
Some years ago while researching Heaven’s Gate for an
analysis of the strategies by which Marshall Applewhite legiti-
mated suicide, I came across several sources that mentioned his
health was failing (for example, Perkins and Jackson 1997, 81).
Also, Catherine Wessinger points out that Applewhite never con-
sidered the option of appointing a successor who could lead the
group after his passing, which likely made the group suicide op-
tion more attractive (2000, 81). At the time, these seemed like
minor factors in explaining the Heaven’s Gate tragedy.
In the context of the current discussion, however, these be-
come major factors because they are precisely the traits that set
the suicide groups apart from the others. In terms of health, Di
Mambro was “suffering from kidney failure and incontinence as
well as severe diabetes, and he believed he had cancer”
(Wessinger 2000, 221). And Jones—either because he was sedat-
ing a genuine physical problem or because he had become a self-
destructive addict—was gradually destroying himself with ex-
cessive prescription tranquilizers. Thomas Robbins emphasized
the importance of a charismatic leader’s health in a personal
communication to John Hall when the latter was researching and
writing Apocalypse Observed with Philip Schuyler and Sylvaine
Trinh, though Hall quickly passed over the subject after men-
tioning Robbins’s communication in the latter part of his book
(2000, 193). It is easy to understand how Hall, focused as he was
on other aspects of NRMs, would have failed to perceive the
health of the charismatic leader as a major explanatory factor. In
the context of the current discussion, however, the observation
64
Introduction

that Applewhite, Di Mambro, and Jones were in failing health,
whereas Koresh and Asahara were not, makes this factor sud-
denly stand out as important: if the three suicide leaders all per-
ceived themselves as dying, then the notion of bringing the
whole group along on their postmortem journeys might strike
them as attractive.
In addition to their physical deaths, all three men knew that
their respective groups not only had stopped growing but were
also likely to decline precipitously in the future, particularly after
they died. Neither Applewhite (as noted) nor Jones (apparently)
had given serious thought to grooming a successor. Di Mambro,
on the other hand, seems for many years to have thought his
daughter Emmanuelle would inherit his mantle. By twelve years
of age, however, she was already rebelling against the script her
father had imagined her fulfilling, effectively frustrating what-
ever desire he might have had for a legacy. By the time of the
“transit,” he had also come to nurse an exaggerated hatred for
the “barbarian, incompetent and aberrant” Jouret, an obvious
person to take over should Di Mambro pass from the scene (In-
trovigne and Mayer 2002, 177). 
To summarize the above discussion into a list of traits, we
can say that, based on an analysis of the People’s Temple, the
Solar Temple, and Heaven’s Gate, the essential characteristics of
a suicide group are:
1. Absolute intolerance of dissenting views
2. Members must be totally committed
3. Exaggerated paranoia about external threats
4. Leader isolates him- or herself or the entire group from
the nonbelieving world
5. Leader’s health is failing—in a major way, not just a
transitory sickness
6. There is no successor and no steps are being taken to
provide a successor, or, alternatively, succession plans
have been frustrated
7. The group is either stagnant or declining, with no realis-
tic hopes for future expansion
As noted earlier, there are numerous points of overlap with
AUM Shinrikyo and the Branch Davidians. However, despite
major areas of overlap, both of these groups lack several essential
New Religions, Violence, and Suicide
65

traits. Specifically, David Koresh did not segregate himself from
unbelievers and was in good health immediately prior to the ATF
raid on Mount Carmel. Koresh had also fathered a number of
children he believed would eventually rule the earth—in effect,
his successors. Asahara seems to have been in reasonably good
health as well, plus he had already indicated to followers that his
children would be his spiritual successors (though it should be
noted that this successorship was rather vague at the time of the
subway attack and clarified only later). Finally, though neither
AUM Shinrikyo in 1995 nor the Branch Davidians in 1993 was ex-
periencing rapid growth, they were also not stagnant; both could
have reasonably anticipated future growth. In other words, the
Davidians lacked traits 4, 5, 6, and 7, whereas AUM Shinrikyo
lacked 5, 6, and 7.
One final point that needs to be addressed before concluding
is the problem raised by the suicides of other Solar Temple mem-
bers in the years following the original murder-suicides. As Mas-
simo Introvigne and Jean-François Mayer argue, “After the sec-
ond and third tragedies of 1995 and 1997, it became even more
apparent that Di Mambro’s manipulative behavior could not
have been the only explanation for the OTS process of self-
destruction” (2002, 178). There were also several Heaven’s Gate
members who took their own lives in the years following the
mass suicide of that group.
These later suicides could be marshaled to support a posi-
tion that the role of the leadership is less central for interpreting
the original group suicides than I have been arguing here. How-
ever, this hypothetical position ignores the fact that a number of
new influences came into play that are more important for under-
standing the actions of members who survived the initial suicide
event. Perhaps most important, participants who had been
deeply involved in the Solar Temple or Heaven’s Gate would
have believed a vital part of their lives had been lost in the wake
of the departure of the group. They would also have had to en-
dure the ridicule heaped on their religion by the mass media. Fi-
nally, in the exit videos left behind by Heaven’s Gate and in the
“testaments” left behind by the Solar Temple, survivors were ex-
plicitly invited to follow the group into the beyond. In other
words, surviving members were acting under a new constella-
tion of influences that make their suicides highly problematic as
a basis for interpreting the original suicides.
66
Introduction

References
Abgrall, Jean-Marie. Rapport sur l’Eglise de scientology: Les techniques de la
scientology, la doctrine dianetique de la, leurs consequences medico-legals. Sub-
mitted in Criminal Prosecution for Fraud, case no. 90: 6119074, Higher
Court of Marseilles. 1990.
An Account of the Conflagration of the Ursuline Convent. Boston: “Printed
for the Publisher,” 1834.
Anthony, Dick. “Religious Movements and Brainwashing Litigation:
Evaluating Key Testimony.” In In Gods We Trust, edited by T. Robbins
and D. Anthony. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction, 1990.
———. “Pseudoscience and Minority Religions: An Evaluation of the
Brainwashing Theories of J. M. Abgrall.” Social Justice Research 12, no. 4
(December 1999): 421–456.
Anthony, Dick, and Thomas Robbins. “Brainwashing and Totalitarian
Influence.” In Encyclopedia of Human Behavior, edited by V. S. Ramchan-
dran. San Diego: Academic Press, 1994.
———. “Conversion and ‘Brainwashing’ in New Religious Move-
ments.” In The Oxford Handbook of New Religious Movements, edited by
James R. Lewis. New York: Oxford University Press, 2003: 243–297.
Anthony, Dick, Thomas Robbins, and Jim McCarthy. “Legitimating Re-
pression.” Society 17, no. 3 (March–April 1980).
Arnold, Thomas. Observations on the Nature, Kinds, Causes, and Prevention
of Insanity. London: Richard Phillips, 1806.
Arrington, Leonard J., and David Bitton. The Mormon Experience. New
York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1979.
Arrington, Leonard J., and John Haupt. “Intolerable Zion: The Image of
Mormonism in Nineteenth Century American Literature.” Western Hu-
manities Review 22, no. 3 (Summer 1968): 243–260.
Asch, Solomon E. “Studies of Independence and Conformity: A Minor-
ity of One against a Unanimous Majority.” Psychological Monographs
(1956).
Associated Press. “Banned Sect Joins Long Chinese History of Religious
Repression.” July 22, 1999.
Bainbridge, William Sims. “Religious Insanity in America: The Official
Nineteenth-Century Theory.” Sociological Analysis 45, no. 3 (Fall 1984).
Barber, T. X. “Antisocial and Criminal Acts Induced by Hypnosis: A Re-
view of Experimental and Clinical Findings.” Archives of General Psychi-
atry 5 (1961): 301–312.
References
67

———. Hypnosis: A Scientific Approach. New York: Litton, 1969.
Barker, Eileen. The Making of a Moonie: Brainwashing or Choice? Oxford:
Basil Blackwell, 1984.
———. “Religious Movements: Cult and Anticult since Jonestown.” An-
nual Review of Sociology, 12 (1986): 329–346.
Beckford, James. “The Media and New Religious Movements.” In From
the Ashes: Making Sense of Waco, edited by James R. Lewis. Lanham, MD:
Rowman and Littlefield, 1994.
Beecher, Lyman. Plea for the West. Cincinnati, OH: Truman and Smith, 1835.
Belisle, Orvilla A. The Prophets; or, Mormonism Unveiled. Philadelphia, PA:
W. M. White Smith, 1855.
Bell, Alfreda Eva. Boadicea: The Mormon Wife. Baltimore, MD: Arthur R.
Orton, 1855.
Benson, Dr. Samuel. “Testimony of Dr. Samuel Benson.” Katz v. Superior
Court, 73 Cal. App. 3d 952141, Cal. Rptr. 234 (1977).
Berger, Peter L. The Social Construction of Reality. Garden City, NY: Dou-
bleday, 1966.
Bergesen, Albert. The Sacred and the Subversive. Storrs, CT: SSSR Mono-
graph Series, 1984.
Brigham, Amariah. Observations on the Influence of Religion upon the Health
and Physical Welfare of Mankind. Boston: March, Capen, and Lyon, 1835.
Bromley, David G. “Violence and New Religions.” In The Oxford Hand-
book of New Religious Movements, edited by James R. Lewis. New York:
Oxford University Press, 2004.
Bromley, David G., and J. Gordon Melton, eds. Cults, Religion and Vio-
lence. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2002.
Bromley, David G., and James T. Richardson. The Brainwashing/Depro-
gramming Controversy. New York: Edwin Mellen, 1983.
Bromley, David G., and Anson D. Shupe Jr. Strange Gods: The Great Amer-
ican Cult Scare. Boston: Beacon Press, 1981.
Bromley, David, Anson Shupe Jr., and J. C. Ventimiglia. “Atrocity Tales,
the Unification Church, and the Social Construction of Evil.” Journal of
Communication 29, no. 3 (1979): 42–53.
Bunker, Gary L., and David Bitton. “Mesmerism and Mormonism.” BYU
Studies 15, no. 2 (Winter 1975): 146–170.
———. The Mormon Graphic Image, 1834–1914: Cartoons, Caricatures and
Illustrations. Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press, 1983.
Cardno, J. A. “The Aetiology of Insanity: Some Early American Views.”
Journal of the History of the Behavioral Sciences 4, no. 2 (April 1968).
68
Introduction

“Cases of Insanity—Illustrating the Importance of Early Treatment in
Preventing Suicide.” American Journal of Insanity (January 1845).
The Charlestown Convent: Its Destruction by a Mob on the Night of August
11, 1834. Boston: Patrick Donahoe, 1870.
Clark, John. “Investigating the Effects of Some Religious Cults on the
Health and Welfare of Their Converts.” Testimony to the Special Inves-
tigating Committee of the Vermont Senate. 1976.
———. “Cults.” Journal of the American Medical Association 242, no. 3 (1979).
Clark, John G., Jr., Michael D. Langone, Robert E. Schecter, and Roger C.
G. Daily. Destructive Cult Conversion: Theory, Research and Treatment. We-
ston, MA: American Family Foundation, 1981.
Cohn, Norman. The Pursuit of the Millennium. 1957. Reprint, London: Ox-
ford University Press, 1970.
———. Cosmos, Chaos and the World to Come: The Ancient Roots of Apoca-
lyptic Faith. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1993.
Condon, Richard. The Manchurian Candidate. New York: McGraw-Hill,
1958.
Conn, J. “The Myth of Coercion under Hypnosis.” In Eriksonian Ap-
proaches to Hypnosis and Psychotherapy, edited by J. Zeig. New York: Brun-
ner-Mazel, 1982.
Conrad, Peter, and Joseph W. Schneider. Deviance and Medicalization:
From Badness to Sickness. St. Louis, MO: C. V. Mosby, 1980.
Conway, Flo, and Jim Siegelman. Snapping: America’s Epidemic of Sudden
Personality Change. New York: Lippincott, 1978.
———. “Information Disease: Have Cults Created a New Mental Ill-
ness?” Science Digest 90, no. 1 (1982).
Daniels, Ted, ed. A Doomsday Reader: Prophets, Predictors, and Hucksters of
Salvation. New York: New York University Press, 1999.
Davis, David Brion. “Some Themes of Counter-Subversion: An Analysis
of Anti-Masonic, Anti-Catholic, and Anti-Mormon Literature.” Missis-
sippi Valley Historical Review 47, no. 2 (September 1960).
Demos, John Putnam. Entertaining Satan. New York: Oxford University
Press, 1982.
Edwards, Chris. Crazy for God. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1979.
Eliade, Mircea, ed. Encyclopedia of Religion. New York: Macmillan, 1987.
Farber, I. E., H. F. Harlow, and L. J. West. “Brainwashing, Conditioning
and the DDD Syndrome.” Sociometry 29 (1957): 271–285.
Fromm, E., and R. Shor. Hypnosis: Developments in Research and New Per-
spectives. New York: Aldine, 1979.
References
69

Frothingham, Charles W. The Convent’s Doom: A Tale of Charleston in 1834.
Boston: Graves and Weston, 1854.
Gauld, A. A History of Hypnotism. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1992.
Hall, John R., with Philip D. Schuyler and Sylvaine Trinh. Apocalypse Ob-
served: Religious Movements and Violence in North America, Europe, and
Japan. London: Routledge, 2000.
Hinkle, Lawrence, and Harold Wolff. “Communist Interrogation and the
Indoctrination of ‘Enemies of the State.’” AMA Archives of Neurological
Psychology 76 (1956): 117–127.
Hunter, Edward. Brainwashing in Red China. New York: Vanguard, 1951.
———. Brainwashing: From Pavlov to Powers. New York: Bookmaster,
1960.
Introvigne, Massimo. “Falun Gong.” In Odd Gods: New Religions and the
Cult Controversy, edited by James R. Lewis. Amherst, NY: Prometheus
Books, 2001.
Introvigne, Massimo, and Jean-François Mayer. “Occult Masters and the
Temple of Doom: The Fiery End of the Solar Temple.” In Cults, Religion
and Violence, edited by David G. Bromley and J. Gordon Melton. New
York: Cambridge University Press, 2002: 170–188.
Kehoe, Alice Beck. The Ghost Dance: Ethnohistory and Revitalization. New
York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, 1989.
Kirsch, I. Foreword to Hypnosis: A Scientific Approach, by T. X. Barber.
New York: Jason Aronson, 1995.
Lanternari, Vittorio. The Religions of the Oppressed: A Study of Modern Mes-
sianic Cults. New York: Mentor, 1956.
Lestz, Michael. “Why Smash the Falun Gong?” Religion in the News 2, no.
3 (1999).
Levine, Saul. Radical Departures: Desperate Detours to Growing Up. New
York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1984.
Lewis, James R. “Reconstructing the ‘Cult’ Experience: Post-involve-
ment Attitudes as a Function of Mode of Exit and Post-involvement So-
cialization.” Sociological Analysis 42, no. 2 (Summer 1986): 151–159.
———. “Apostates and the Legitimation of Repression: Some Historical
and Empirical Perspectives on the Cult Controversy.” Sociological Analy-
sis 49, no. 4 (Winter 1989): 386–396.
Lewis, James R., and David G. Bromley. “The Cult Withdrawal Syn-
drome: A Case of Misattribution of Cause?” Journal for the Scientific Study
of Religion 26, no. 4 (December 1987): 508–522.
70
Introduction

Lewis, James R., ed. From the Ashes: Making Sense of Waco. Lanham, MD:
Rowman and Littlefield, 1994.
———. The Gods Have Landed: New Religions from Other Worlds. Albany:
State University of New York Press, 1995.
Lifton, Robert. Chinese Thought Reform and the Psychology of Totalism. New
York: Norton, 1961.
Martin, Paul. “Post-cult Recovery: Assessment and Rehabilitation.” In
Recovery from Cults, edited by Michael Langone. New York: Norton,
1993.
Martin, Walter. The New Cults. Santa Ana, CA: Vision House, 1980.
Melton, J. Gordon. The Encyclopedic Handbook of Cults in America. 2d ed.
New York: Garland, 1992.
Milgram, Stanley. Obedience to Authority. New York: Harper and Row,
1974.
Miller, Jesse. “The Utilization of Hypnotic Techniques in Religious Con-
versions.” Cultic Studies Journal 3 (1986): 243–250.
Monk, Maria. Awful Disclosures of the Hotel Dieu Nunnery of Montreal.
1836. Reprint, New York: Arno Press, 1977.
Mooney, James. The Ghost-Dance Religion and the Sioux Outbreak of 1890.
Abridged ed. 1896. Reprint, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1965.
Mosk, Stanley, et al., David Molko and Tracy Leal v. the Holy Spirit for the
Unification of World Christianity, 762 P. 2d 46 (Cal. 1988).
Ofshe, Richard. “Report Regarding Mr. Steven Fishman.” Submitted for
the Court case U.S. v. Fishman, 743 F. Supp. (N.D. Cal.90) (1989).
Ofshe, Richard, and Margaret Singer. “Attacks on Peripheral vs. Central
Elements of the Self and the Impact of Thought Reform Techniques.”
Cultic Studies Journal 3 (1986): 2–24. 
O’Gorman, Edith. Convent Life Unveiled. Ca. 1871. Reprint, London: Lile
and Fawcett, ca. 1881.
Orne, Martin. “The Potential Uses of Hypnosis in Interrogation.” In The
Manipulation of Human Behavior, edited by A. Biderman and H. Zimmer.
New York: Wiley, 1961.
———. “Antisocial Behavior and Hypnosis.” In Hypnosis: Current Prob-
lems, edited by G. Estabrooks. New York: Harper and Row, 1962.
OTS. “To All Those Who Can Still Understand the Voice of Wisdom . . .
We Address This Last Message.” Gnosis, no. 34 (Winter 1995).
Paloutzian, R., J. Richardson, and L. Rambo. “Religious Conversion and
Personality Change.” Journal of Personality 67 (1999): 1047–1049. 
References
71

Patrick, Ted, with Tom Dulack. Let Our Children Go! New York: E. P. Dut-
ton, 1976.
Perkins, Rodney, and Forrest Jackson. Cosmic Suicide: The Tragedy and
Transcendence of Heaven’s Gate. Dallas, TX: Pentaradial Press, 1997.
Pfeifer, Jeffrey E. “The Psychological Framing of Cults: Schematic Rep-
resentations and Cult Evaluations.” Journal of Applied Social Psychology 22
(1992): 531–544.
Reed, Rebecca Theresa. Six Months in a Convent. Boston: Russel, Odiorne,
and Metcalf, 1835.
Richardson, James. “A Social Psychological Critique of ‘Brainwashing’
Claims about Recruitment to New Religions.” In The Handbook of Sects
and Cults in America, Religion and the Social Order 3B, edited by D. Brom-
ley and J. Hadden. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press, (1993): 98.
Robbins, Thomas, and Dick Anthony. “Sects and Violence.” In Armaged-
don in Waco, edited by Stuart Wright. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1995.
Robbins, Thomas, and Susan J. Palmer, eds. Millennium, Messiahs, and
Mayhem: Contemporary Apocalyptic Movements. New York: Routledge, 1997.
Robertson, George. “Island Pond Raid Begins New Pattern.” In Sex,
Slander and Salvation, edited by James R. Lewis and J. Gordon Melton.
Stanford, CA: Center for Academic Publishing, 1994.
Robinson, Bruce. “Falun Gong and Falun Dafa.” 1999. http://www.reli-
gioustolerance.org/falungong.htm. 
Rothenberg, Paula. “The Prison of Race and Gender: Stereotypes, Ideol-
ogy, Language, and Social Control.” In Racism and Sexism, edited by
Paula Rothenberg. New York: St. Martins, 1988.
Schein, Edgar. “The Chinese Indoctrination Program for Prisoners of
War: A Study of Attempted ‘Brainwashing.’” In Readings in Social Psy-
chology, edited by E. Maccoby et al. New York: Holt, 1958.
———. “Brainwashing and the Totalitarianization of Modern Societies.”
World Politics 2 (1959): 430–441.
———. Coercive Persuasion. New York: Norton, 1961.
Shapiro, Robert. “Of Robots, Persons and the Protection of Religious Be-
liefs.” So. Cal. Law Review 6 (1983): 1277–1308.
Shaw, David. “From Headline to Prime Time.” TV Guide, 1993.
Singer, Margaret. Testimony in Robin and Maria George v. Int. Society for
Krishna Consciousness of Cal. et al. Orange County Superior Court, 1983.
———. “Thought Reform Exists: Organized, Programmatic Influence.”
Cult Observer 17, no. 4 (1994): 3–4.
72
Introduction

Singer, Margaret, and Janja Lalich. Cults in Our Midst: The Hidden Men-
ace in Our Everyday Lives. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1995.
Singer, Margaret, and Richard Ofshe. “Thought Reform Programs and
the Production of Psychiatric Casualties.” Psychiatric Annuals 20, no. 4
(1990): 188–193.
Slotkin, Richard. Regeneration through Violence: The Mythology of the Amer-
ican Frontier, 1600—1860. Middletown, CT: Wesleyan, 1973.
Smith, Jonathan Z. Imagining Religion: From Babylon to Jonestown.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1982.
Snow, David, and Robert Machalek. “The Sociology of Conversion.” An-
nual Review of Sociology 10 (1984): 167–190.
Sowards, Bruce A., Michael J. Walser, and Rick H. Hoyle. “Personality
and Intelligence Measurement of the Church Universal and Tri-
umphant.” In Church Universal and Triumphant in Scholarly Perspective,
edited by James R. Lewis and J. Gordon Melton. Stanford, CA: Center for
Academic Publishing, 1994. 
Spanos, Nikos. Multiple Identities and False Memories: A Sociocognitive Per-
spective. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association, 1996.
Sweetser, William. Mental Hygiene; or, an Examination of the Intellect and
Passions. New York: George P. Putnam, 1850.
Terry, Robert J., and Catherine Manegold. “Krishna Complex Bombed.”
Philadelphia Inquirer, June 18, 1984.
Turner, Alice K. The History of Hell. New York: Harcourt Brace, 1993.
Verdier, Paul. Brainwashing and the Cults. North Hollywood, CA: Wilshire,
1980.
Wach, Joachim. Sociology of Religion. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1944.
Ward, Maria. Female Life among the Mormons. New York: J. C. Derby, 1855.
Wessinger, Catherine. How the Millennium Comes Violently: From Jones-
town to Heaven’s Gate. Chappaqua, NY: Seven Bridges Press, 2000.
Whitney, Louise Goddard. The Burning of the Convent. 1877. Reprint,
New York: Arno Press, 1969.
Wojcik, Daniel. “Apocalypticism and Millenarianism.” In Encyclopedia of
New Religions: New Religious Movements, Sects, and Alternative Spirituali-
ties, edited by Christopher Partridge. Oxford: Lion Publishing, 2004:
388–395.
Wong, John, and William T. Liu. The Mystery of China’s Falun Gong: Its
Rise and Its Sociological Implications. Singapore: World Scientific Publish-
ing and Singapore University Press, 1999. 
References
73


2
Chronology
The contemporary cult controversy did not get under way until
the early 1970s. However, in spite of certain unique themes—
such as the emphasis on brainwashing—there are clear links be-
tween the current debate and earlier periods of religious contro-
versy. Even the portrayal of Catholics and Mormons in the
nineteenth century bears certain strong parallels to the manner in
which minority religions are viewed in the present period. The
following chronology takes account of these parallels by noting
the beginnings of some important religious movements and key
events in the persecution of minority religions prior to the 1970s.
1830
Founding of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
Saints (LDS)—popularly known as the Mormon Church—
in Palmyra, New York.
1831
William Miller begins preaching. Millerism becomes a
wildly popular movement that soon evokes harsh criti-
cism from the established churches. Although the move-
ment comes to an end in 1844 with the Great Disap-
pointment, remaining members of the movement found
the Adventist Church.
1834
The Ursuline Convent in Charleston, outside of Boston,
is attacked and burned to the ground by a Protestant
mob.
1838
The governor of Missouri declares, “The Mormons must
be treated as enemies, and must be exterminated or driven
75

from the State if necessary, for the public peace.” The state
militia raids Haun’s Mill, a small Mormon settlement, im-
mediately killing seventeen men, women, and children.
Some of the wounded die later.
1844
Joseph Smith is assassinated while in protective custody
at the county jail in Carthage, Illinois. Mormon residents
of Illinois subsequently abandon their homes and flee
westward to territories unknown under the leadership of
Brigham Young.
Violent anti-Catholic riots overturn civil order in
Philadelphia. The riots leave several dozen people dead
and a number of Catholic churches in the city burned to
the ground.
1848
The Hydesville rappings at the home of the Fox sisters
out of which modern spiritualism originates.
1853
Brigham Young announces the doctrine of plural mar-
riage, a tenet that scandalizes the rest of the nation and
sets the stage for further persecution of the LDS Church.
1858
The so-called Utah War of 1858. Federal troops are sent
to Utah to establish non-Mormon rule over Mormons.
1860
Ellen White founds the Seventh-Day Adventist (SDA)
Church, bringing together various groups that had
formed in the wake of the Great Disappointment.
1875
The Theosophical Society is founded in New York City.
1878
Reynolds v. United States case reaches the U.S. Supreme
Court. The Court decides against polygamy, asserting
that although Congress cannot prescribe laws against
what one may believe, it may legislate against actions.
1879
Christian Science is founded in Lynn, Massachusetts, by
Mary Baker Eddy. Christian Science was controversial al-
most from the very beginning. The church’s stance
against medical treatment brought it into the spotlight
76
Chronology
1838
cont.

again in the 1980s in a series of child-endangerment
cases.
1880
The Oneida Community, a highly successful religious
communal experiment that had lasted for more than
three decades, dissolves. The community had survived
fierce external criticism because of its controversial prac-
tice of complex marriage, but it could not survive the dis-
belief of its second generation.
1882
Henry M. Teller, secretary of the interior, orders that all
“heathenish dances” and ceremonies be ended because
of their “great hindrance to civilization.” With the fol-
lowing years, this order—which basically forbids the
practice of traditional Native American religions—is
gradually implemented.
1887
Congress disincorporates the LDS Church in Utah, ap-
propriating all church property not used for liturgical
purposes. The church sued but lost at the Supreme Court
level in 1889, in Mormon Church v. United States and Rom-
ney v. United States.
Founding of the American Protective Association, the
largest and most active anti-Catholic organization of the
late nineteenth century.
1888
Founding of the Order of the Golden Dawn, an important
ceremonial magical group that influences all subsequent
magical groups and, indirectly, neopagan witchcraft.
1890
More than 300 peaceful Sioux Ghost Dancers—men,
women, and children—are massacred at Wounded Knee
by the U.S. military.
The LDS Church suspends its controversial policy of
polygamy under intense pressure from the U.S. govern-
ment.
1893
The World’s Parliament of Religions takes place in
Chicago. This event is remarkable for giving Asian 
Chronology
77

religions a foothold in North America, particularly Bud-
dhist and neo-Hindu groups.
1894
The Vedanta Society, the oldest Hindu group in the
United States, is established in New York.
1906
The Azusa Street Revival, out of which Pentecostalism
emerges, takes place.
1909
Birth of snake-handling movement under the leadership
of George W. Hensley.
1913
Noble Drew Ali founds the Moorish Science Temple in
Newark, New Jersey.
1918
Incorporation of the Native American Church, the first
formal organization representing a much earlier pan-
Indian religion that, among other things, utilized peyote
to enhance religious experiences.
1920
Paramahansa Yogananda, founder of the Self-Realization
Fellowship and one of the first Hindu teachers to come
to the West, arrives in the United States.
1923
The Arcane School, an important form of Theosophy that
influences the New Age movement, is founded by Alice
Bailey.
1930
Master Fard Muhammad (W. D. Fard), to whom the Na-
tion of Islam traces its origins, teaches in Detroit.
1931
Edgar Cayce founds the Association for Research and
Enlightenment.
1932
Franklin D. Roosevelt appoints John Collier as commis-
sioner of Indian affairs. Collier lifts prohibitions against
traditional Native American religious practices.
1934
Elijah Muhammad becomes leader of the Nation of Islam,
a Black Muslim group, originally established in Detroit in
1930, that will later become famous with the emergence
of Malcolm X as a public spokesperson.
78
Chronology
1893
cont.

Guy and Edna Ballard begin the public teaching of what
will become the I AM Activity.
1935
Victor T. Houteff founds the Shepherd’s Rod colony,
which will become the Davidian Seventh-Day Adven-
tists, outside Waco, Texas.
1937
Makiguchi Tsunesaburo founds Soka Kyoiku Gakkai,
which later becomes Soka Gakkai International.
1938
The first important Supreme Court victory for the Jeho-
vah’s Witnesses, in the case of Lovell v. City of Griffin, gives
Witnesses permission to distribute literature despite an
ordinance requiring a permit for such distributions.
1939
In England, Gerald B. Gardner establishes the kernel of
what will become the modern neopagan movement.
1940
A significant Supreme Court victory for the Jehovah’s
Witnesses in Cantwell v. Connecticut, a case that extended
the freedom of religion clause to state governments and
further served to call into the question the 1887 Reynolds
decision giving government the power to regulate reli-
gious actions.
1942
The Way International, a Pentecostal, ultradispensational
Christian group, is founded by Victor Paul Wierwille, a
minister in the Evangelical and Reformed Church, as a
radio ministry under the name of “Vesper Chimes.” It as-
sumed its present name in 1974. The Way remained rela-
tively small until the “Jesus movement” of the early sev-
enties.
1943
In this year four cases involving the right of Jehovah’s
Witnesses to canvass door to door reach the High Court.
Three are decided in favor of the Witnesses (Jones v. Op-
lika, Murdock v. Pennsylvania, and Martin v. Struthers). The
fourth case (Douglas v. Jeannette) is decided against the
Witnesses, but on technical grounds.
Another case involving the refusal of Witnesses to salute
the flag, West Virginia State Board of Education v. Barnette,
Chronology
79

is decided the same year. Barnette is decided in favor of
the Jehovah’s Witnesses, overturning a related Supreme
Court decision, Minersville School District v. Gobitis, made
against the Witnesses in 1940.
1944
An important Supreme Court case involving the charge
of mail fraud—based on the supposedly “ridiculous” na-
ture of the group’s religious beliefs—United States v. Bal-
lard, was decided in favor of the I AM Activity. 
1947
The modern UFO era begins when Kenneth Arnold
sights nine objects in the sky near Mount Rainier, Wash-
ington. The story of Arnold’s sighting is reported in
newspaper articles almost immediately. The term flying
saucers is first coined by headline writers for this story.
Religious significance is almost immediately attributed
to UFOs, particularly in the wake of claims by George
Adamski to have received communications from—and
even ridden with—the “space brothers.”
1949
Paramahansa Yogananda’s Autobiography of a Yogi is pub-
lished.
In Bunn v. North Carolina, the court rules that public
safety outweighs the concern for the free exercise of reli-
gion involving the handling of poisonous snakes. The
U.S. Supreme Court dismisses the appeal.
1950
Publication of L. Ron Hubbard’s Dianetics: The Modern
Science of Mental Health.
1951
Journalist Edward Hunter formulates the “brainwash-
ing” model to explain Communist Chinese influence
over American POWs during the Korean War in his pop-
ular book Brainwashing in Red China.
1954
Gerald Gardner’s Witchcraft Today is published, marking
the emergence of Wicca as a public movement.
1955
The Church of Scientology begins operation in Washing-
ton, D.C. Next to the Jehovah’s Witnesses, Scientology
80
Chronology
1943
cont.

has been involved in more religious liberty litigation
than any other minority religion in the twentieth century.
Jim Jones founds the Wings of Deliverance, which will
later become the People’s Temple, in Indianapolis, Indiana.
Publication of the influential Urantia Book, which some
groups later adopted as scripture. 
1956
George King founds the Aetherius Society.
1958
Two former members of the Wisdom, Faith, Love, and
Knowledge Foundation show up at the group’s main
building, confront the leader, Krishna Venta, and blow
up the building, killing themselves, Venta, and seven
others.
Mark L. Prophet, who had been active in two I AM splin-
ter groups, founds the Summit Lighthouse, in Washing-
ton, D.C. Elizabeth Clare Prophet becomes the messen-
ger after Mark’s passing in 1973, and Summit Lighthouse
eventually expands to become the Church Universal and
Triumphant (CUT).
1959
Muhammad Subuh, popularly known as Bapak, brings
Subud to the United States.
Transcendental meditation is introduced in the West by
Maharishi Mahesh Yogi.
A failed uprising in Tibet against Chinese rulers pro-
vokes a campaign of repression that causes religious
leaders to flee the country. The exiles introduce Tibetan
Buddhism to the West.
1960
Beginnings of neo-Pentecostalism under the leadership
of Episcopal priest Dennis Barrett.
1961
In Braunfeld v. Brown, a leading “Sunday law” case, the
Supreme Court decides against Orthodox Jewish mer-
chants protesting Pennsylvania’s Sunday closing laws.
Chronology
81

1963
Sherbert v. Verner, a key case for what would become
known as the “Sherbert-Yoder Test” for deciding free ex-
ercise of religion cases. In this case, the Supreme Court
decides in favor of a Seventh-Day Adventist who was
denied unemployment benefits because she had not
been able to accept employment requiring work on 
Saturday.
Robert de Grimston founds the Process Church of the
Final Judgment.
Beginnings of what becomes the channeling movement
when Jane Roberts begins to receive messages from the
disembodied entity Seth.
1965
President Johnson rescinds the Asian Exclusion Act, a
law that had prevented the large-scale immigration of
Asians into the United States. The door allowing Asian
spiritual teachers to enter the United States is thus
thrown wide open.
A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami, founder of the Hare Krishna
movement, journeys to the United States at the behest of
his guru to establish Krishna consciousness in the West.
Malcolm X is assassinated.
1966
Anton LaVey announces the formation of the Church of
Satan. Highly theatrical but not actually dangerous, the
existence of the Church of Satan provides a concrete tar-
get for conservative Christians with vague fears about
the machinations of the Prince of Darkness.
1967
Catholic charismatic movement begins among students
at Duquesne University in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
The Jesus movement begins among counterculturists in
California.
1968
The Church of All Worlds, organized by Oberon Zell, is
incorporated and in 1971 becomes the first neopagan
82
Chronology

group to win federal tax-exempt status, the state ruling
against it being overturned as unconstitutional.
David Berg, better known as Father David, initiates a cof-
feehouse ministry in Huntington Beach, California, that
eventually becomes the Children of God, later called the
Family.
Yogi Bhajan moves to Toronto and then to Los Angeles.
The next year, 1969, he founds an ashram and the
Healthy, Happy, Holy Organization (3HO) to teach kun-
dalini yoga. Corporately, 3HO is later supplanted by Sikh
Dharma.
1969
Benchmark U.S. Court of Appeals decision, Founding
Church of Scientology v. United States, recognizes Scientol-
ogy as a bona fide religion. This case marks the high
point in a conflict with the Food and Drug Administra-
tion (FDA) that had begun dramatically in 1963 with an
armed FDA raid during which Church of Scientology “E-
Meters” and literature were seized. In 1971, the Court or-
ders the FDA to return the seized materials.
Manson family murders take place, though Charles
Manson is not arrested until 1971. The early anticult
movement will point to the actions of the Manson family
as the most dramatic example of what cults are capable
of, despite the fact that Manson and his followers are not
a religion and present a very different sociological profile
from the groups later stigmatized as “cults.”
Paul Erdmann, who adopts the name Love Israel, founds
the Church of Armageddon in the state of Washington.
Aumism is founded in France by Gilbert Bourdin, who
adopts the name Lord Hamsah Manarah.
1970
The cult controversy proper did not get under way until
after the collapse of the sixties counterculture. Rather
than reengaging with mainstream society, many former
counterculturists continued their quest for an alternative
Chronology
83

lifestyle in a wide variety of religions. Hence, the mem-
bership of many unusual religious groups that had ex-
isted quietly on the margins of U.S. society experiences
sudden surges in numbers, laying the groundwork for
the emergence of the cult issue.
Chogyam Trungpa Rimpoche, a Tibetan lama, begins to
establish meditation centers in the United States.
First visit to the United States by Swami Muktananda.
His followers are later organized as the Siddha Yoga
Dham.
Sun Bear begins to organize what becomes the Bear Tribe.
1971
Ted Patrick begins the practice of deprogramming,
which, along with the formation of the first anticult or-
ganization the next year, marks the emergence of the
modern cult controversy.
Erhard Seminars Training, more commonly known as est,
is begun by Werner Erhard. Although not a church or reli-
gion, est will often be accused of being a “psychotherapy
cult.”
The Reverend Sun Myung Moon arrives in the United
States. Although missionaries had been in the country
since the 1950s, it was only with the arrival of Moon that
the Unification Church begins to grow dramatically.
Guru Maharaj Ji, the youthful leader of the Divine Light
Mission, arrives in the United States.
Stephen Gaskin founds the Farm in Summertown, Ten-
nessee.
Oscar Ichazo founds the Arica Institute.
1972
William Rambur and his wife, together with Ted Patrick
and other concerned parents, establish the Parent’s Com-
mittee to Free Our Children from the Children of God
84
Chronology
1970
cont.

Organization (later shortened to FREECOG), the first
modern anticult organization.
Richard Alpert (aka Baba Ram Das) publishes Be Here
Now, regarded by some observers as signaling the begin-
ning of the New Age movement.
Ervil LeBaron, founder of the polygamy-practicing
Church of the Lamb of God, orders the murder of his
brother Joel LeBaron, founder and leader of the Church of
the First Born of the Fullness of Times. More violence fol-
lows. In 1979, Ervil is arrested and convicted of murder.
Wisconsin v. Yoder, a key case for what would become
known as the “Sherbert-Yoder Test” for deciding free ex-
ercise of religion cases. In this case, the Supreme Court
decides that a state law mandating high school educa-
tion is an excessive burden on the Amish religion.
Marshall Applewhite and his partner, the founders of
what eventually becomes Heaven’s Gate, first attract na-
tional attention when thirty people pick up and leave
with them after a lecture in Waldport, Oregon.
Franklin Jones, currently known as Avatar Adi Da Sam-
raj, opens a small ashram in Los Angeles that becomes
the starting point for Adidam.
Bob Weiner organizes the Maranatha movement.
Jesus People USA (JPUSA) is founded in Chicago, Illinois.
1973
The Divine Light Mission, a rapidly expanding religious
group from India that had attracted considerable nega-
tive media attention, holds its disastrous Millennium ’73
gathering at the Houston Astrodome. Too few people
show up, and the mission goes into debt. Although the
movement continues, it never recovers its momentum.
Claude Vorilhon, who later adopts the name Rael,
founds what becomes the Raelian movement.
Chronology
85

1974
“Flirty fishing,” the controversial practice of witnessing
that could involve sexual relations, is introduced by the
Children of God. This practice is eventually abandoned,
but not before it attracts extensive negative media 
attention.
Establishment of Citizen’s Freedom Foundation (CFF), a
West Coast anticult organization, by William Rambur (one
of the founders of FREECOG). CFF, which later changed
its name to the Cult Awareness Network, grew to become
the umbrella organization for anticult activity in the
United States.
The National Council of Churches issues a resolution on
deprogramming that is highly critical of the practice.
The Symbionese Liberation Army kidnaps newspaper
heiress Patricia Hearst, who is later forced to participate
in a bank robbery. She surrenders to authorities the fol-
lowing year, claiming she was a victim of brainwashing.
1975
The Covenant of the Goddess is established as a Califor-
nia nonprofit corporation on Halloween with the inten-
tion that it will serve the neopagan movement nationally
as a legal church. It is the largest organization serving
this purpose.
Michael Aquino founds the Temple of Set as a schism
from the Church of Satan.
Claude Rex Nowell establishes Summum, a neo-Egyptian
group.
1976
Responding to a petition from his constituents, Senator
Bob Dole holds hearings on the Unification Church. The
meeting was not a formal congressional hearing and led
to no governmental action.
Publication of Ted Patrick’s Let Our Children Go!—the
first and only significant book on deprogramming.
86
Chronology

1977
The FBI raids the Washington, D.C., and Los Angeles
branches of the Church of Scientology, seizing many
files. The raid is declared illegal, but the documents re-
main in government possession, where they are open to
public scrutiny.
Katz v. Superior Court, also called the “Faithful Five–
Faithless Four” case (the principal cult conservatorship
case), is decided in favor of parents seeking conservator-
ships for their five adult offspring who are members of
the Unification Church—only to have the appeals court
overturn the decision almost immediately. Four out of the
five individuals leave the church.
JZ Knight, the most popular—as well as the most con-
troversial—channel during the heyday of the New Age
movement in the late 1980s, encounters Ramtha, a spiri-
tual entity believed to have lived on earth approximately
35,000 years ago. Knight first publicly operates as a chan-
nel the next year.
1978
Jim Jones, leader of the People’s Temple, orchestrates a
“revolutionary suicide” at the communal agricultural set-
tlement called Jonestown in the South American country
of Guyana. More than 900 people—mostly black, some
white—die from drinking a deadly poison. Almost
overnight, the People’s Temple replaces the Manson fam-
ily as the primary example of what all “cults” are capable
of doing.
Louis Farrakhan leaves the American Muslim Mission
with several thousand followers and reestablishes the
Nation of Islam as instituted by Elijah Muhammad.
An attorney suing the Synanon Church is bitten by a rat-
tlesnake that had been placed in his mailbox by Synanon
members.
The Parent-Teacher Association officially adopts an “an-
ticult” stance by issuing a “Resolution on Pseudo-Reli-
gious Cults” during its national convention.
Chronology
87

Publication of Flo Conway and Jim Siegelman’s Snapping,
a popular book presenting anecdotal evident for “infor-
mation disease,” a unique mental illness supposedly
caused by cultic mind control techniques.
Enactment of the American Indian Religious Freedom
Act, a legislative measure intended to affirm traditional
Native American religiosity. It is subsequently judged a
failure.
1979
A second unofficial hearing on the dangers of cults is
sponsored by Senator Bob Dole. The testimony at this
hearing is more extensive and volatile, but, in the end, it
has no more effect than the first hearing.
Publication of first edition of Starhawk’s Spiral Dance and
Margo Adler’s Drawing Down the Moon, books that si-
multaneously document and further stimulate the ex-
pansion of the neopagan movement.
The Boston Church of Christ is founded by Kip McKean.
1980
A new concern about the possible presence of Satanism
in the United States centered on the sexual abuse of chil-
dren in Satanic rituals is initiated by the publication of
Michelle Remembers.
1981
Thomas v. Review Board, a U.S. Supreme Court decision.
In this case, a Jehovah’s Witness who had quit his job
rather than work in an armaments factory had been de-
nied unemployment benefits. The court decided in favor
of the Jehovah’s Witnesses.
Heffron v. International Society for Krishna Consciousness.
This is a Supreme Court decision supporting the state’s
right to require solicitors to be confined to a booth rather
than to wander about at the state fair.
Range purchased in Antelope, Oregon, by followers of
Bhagwan Shree Rajneesh (who later adopts the name
Osho) that becomes Rajneeshpuram.
88
Chronology
1978
cont.

1982
The Reverend Sun Myung Moon is convicted and subse-
quently incarcerated on tax evasion charges. The Unifi-
cation Church decries the case as religious persecution.
Larson v. Valente Supreme Court case is decided in favor
of the Unification Church against a solicitation law that
targeted new religious groups.
1983
An insurgent group of racial separatists, mostly Identity
believers, known as the Order, or the Silent Brotherhood,
begins a wave of crimes preparatory to the launching of
attacks on the federal government. Between 1984 and
1986, the members of the Order were captured and tried,
and its leader, Robert Matthews, was killed in a shoot-
out with the FBI.
Confrontations between law enforcement authorities
and a North Dakota Posse Comitatus leader and Identity
believer, Gordon Kahl, result in the deaths of two federal
marshals.
A young boy in the House of Judah, a black Hebrew
group, is beaten to death, attracting national media at-
tention. The mother of the boy is eventually sentenced to
prison for manslaughter.
The American Family Foundation (AFF) begins publica-
tion of the Cultic Studies Journal, an academic journal
publishing research supporting the notion of cultic
brainwashing. AFF, a latecomer anticult organization
that came into being in the late 1970s, quickly establishes
itself as the scholarly wing of the anticult movement.
1984
The Island Pond raid occurs, in which the community’s
children are taken from the Northeast Kingdom in Ver-
mont. They are almost immediately released.
1985
After years of controversial activity at Rajneeshpuram,
his Oregon commune, Bhagwan Rajneesh (Osho) is
charged with immigration fraud and deported back to
India.
Chronology
89

Federal law enforcement authorities besiege and capture
the commune of a heavily armed paramilitary Identity
group in Arkansas, the Covenant, Sword, and Arm of the
Lord, with no loss of life.
The Way International’s tax-exempt status is revoked fol-
lowing allegations of partisan political involvement and
certain business activities at its New Knoxville headquar-
ters. The ruling is reversed by the Supreme Court in 1990.
The Local Church wins a libel case against authors who
had accused the church of being a “destructive cult.” The
Spiritual Counterfeits Project, a Christian anticult group
that published one of the books, was driven to bank-
ruptcy in the face of an $11 million judgment.
MOVE, a black communal group in urban Philadelphia,
is fire-bombed by the city and destroyed. MOVE is sub-
sequently labeled a “political cult.”
1986
Molko and Leal v. Unification Church is decided in favor of
the Unification Church. This was one of the most impor-
tant cases involving lawsuits leveled against controver-
sial religions by ex-members. The Court decides in favor
of the Unification Church and against notions of coercive
persuasion cited by the plaintiffs. However, three years
later after a number of appeals, the case was on the verge
of being tried by the California Supreme Court. Rather
than go through a new trial, the church finally settled out
of court in November 1989.
The Vatican issues the Vatican Report on Sects and New Re-
ligious Movements. The World Council of Churches
(WCC)/Lutheran World Federation issues a parallel re-
port, Summary Statements and Recommendations.
John Wimber organizes the Association of Vineyard
Churches in the Los Angeles area.
1987
The city of Hialeah, Florida, enacts a ban against “animal
sacrifice” directly aimed at the growing Santeria com-
munity of the city. One Santeria house challenges the
90
Chronology
1985
cont.

ban, and in 1993 the Supreme Court unanimously de-
clares the Hialeah ordinance unconstitutional in Church
of Lukumi Bablu Aye v. City of Hialeah.
This is a benchmark year for media awareness of the New
Age movement. Early in the year, Shirley MacLaine’s
miniseries Out on a Limb airs. In August, the media report
on the Harmonic Convergence gatherings. In the fall,
Time publishes an influential issue featuring a cover story
on the New Age movement.
The American Psychological Association (APA) rejects the
report of the task force on “deceptive and indirect meth-
ods of persuasion and control,” a group of professionals
with anticult leanings who had initiated the task force in
an effort to win official support for the notion of cultic
mind control. This effort later backfires when the APA re-
jection of the report is cited in the Fishman decision.
1989
In an attempt to avoid negative publicity, two members of
Church Universal and Triumphant attempt to acquire oth-
erwise legal weapons in a nonpublic, illegal manner. They
are arrested, and the result is a public relations disaster.
Bodies discovered on the grounds of a ranch near Mata-
moros, Mexico, not far from the Texas border, make head-
lines. The murders, which are associated with a drug-
smuggling operation, are immediately linked to Satanic
worship.
The Aquarian Concepts Community is founded by
Gabriel of Sedona (Tony Delevin) in Sedona, Arizona.
1990
Members of Church Universal and Triumphant from
around the world gather in Montana because of the pre-
dicted possibility of an atomic holocaust. Montana is
flooded by reporters from around the world eager for
sensationalist stories on a “doomsday cult.”
The Supreme Court rules against the right of Native
American Church members to use peyote in Employment
Division v. Smith.
Chronology
91

After a detailed review of their “coercive persuasion”
ideas, the U.S. District Court, in United States v. Fishman,
rejects Dr. Margaret Singer and Professor Richard Ofshe
as expert witnesses on mind control. This is a benchmark
case that is subsequently used to disqualify Singer and
Ofshe from testifying in other cult cases.
1991
Time publishes a front-page story attacking the Church of
Scientology. The next year, the church files a major law-
suit against Time after discovering that the maker of
Prozac—a psychiatric drug that Scientology had been ac-
tive in opposing—had ultimately been responsible for
the Time article.
Tony Alamo, cofounder of the Alamo Christian Founda-
tion (Music Square Church), is arrested.
Emergence of Soka Gakkai as an independent organiza-
tion following a formal split with Nichiren Shoshu.
1992
Church Universal and Triumphant’s federal tax-exempt
status is revoked on the basis of a minor item from an
earlier lawsuit that the church had lost to an ex-member.
This status is restored two years later.
The FBI arrests deprogrammer Galen Kelly in connection
with a conspiracy to abduct Lewis DuPont Smith, heir to
the DuPont fortune. The arrest represents an important re-
versal of the longtime policy of law enforcement officials to
turn a blind eye to deprogramming as a “family matter.”
The FBI releases Kenneth V. Lanning’s influential report
Investigator’s Guide to Allegations of “Ritual” Child Abuse.
This report, which dismisses the reality of Satanic ritual
abuse, has been described as the most influential docu-
ment on the subject ever written.
Li Hongzi establishes Falun Gong as an independent 
organization.
1993
A force of seventy-six agents of the ATF raid the Branch
Davidian community. The resulting standoff turns into a
92
Chronology
1990
cont.

fifty-one-day siege that ends when FBI agents launch a
new attack on the Davidian complex. A fire ignites in the
buildings, and more than eighty members die.
The Family (aka the Children of God) are subjected to a
new wave of intensive negative media attention follow-
ing raids on their homes in France and Argentina on
trumped-up charges of child abuse.
In a landmark decision, the Internal Revenue Service
ceases all litigation and recognizes the Church of Scien-
tology as a legitimate religious organization.
Margaret Singer and Richard Ofshe file a lawsuit in federal
court against the American Psychological Association, the
American Sociological Association, and a group of indi-
vidual scholars for conspiring to discredit them as expert
witnesses. Their suit is thrown out of court on August 9.
Reacting to the Supreme Court’s decision in Employment
Division v. Smith, a broad coalition of religious groups
support the Religious Freedom Restoration Act (RFRA),
a legislative measure explicitly intended to reestablish
pre-Smith standards for the free exercise of religion.
1994
Fifty-three people, members of the Order of the Solar
Temple, are murdered or commit suicide in Switzerland
and Canada.
The Movement of Spiritual Inner Awareness (MSIA) at-
tracts the attention of the media after it is discovered that
the wife of Michael Huffington—who at the time was
running for senator—had been active in MSIA. In the
same year, Peter McWilliams drops out of the movement
and authors a bitter anti-MSIA book, LIFE 102: What to
Do When Your Guru Sues You.
Start of the Toronto Blessing when the Reverend Rodney
Howard Browne preaches at the Toronto airport Vine-
yard Church.
A long-standing libel case brought by Cynthia Kisser,
Chronology
93

then leader of the Cult Awareness Network, against the
Church of Scientology and its international president is
dismissed in federal court. The case is similarly dis-
missed upon appeal in 1997.
After failing to make their case in federal court, Margaret
Singer and Richard Ofshe refile their lawsuit against the
American Psychological Association and others in Cali-
fornia state court. The case is dismissed with prejudice.
1995
Poison-gas attack occurs in a Tokyo subway, killing
twelve people and injuring many others. Within a few
days of the attack, AUM Shinrikyo, a controversial Japa-
nese religious group, is considered the most likely 
suspect.
When Cynthia Kisser, then director of the Cult Aware-
ness Network, sued the Church of Scientology and its in-
ternational president for libel in federal court, she simul-
taneously filed a libel case in Illinois state court. The state
case is dismissed with prejudice in 1995.
The siege of an antigovernment group, the Montana
Freemen, draws widespread media attention and com-
parisons with Waco but ends peaceably.
A small remnant of the Order of the Solar Temple com-
mits suicide in France.
Report of the Commission of Inquiry on Sects—usually re-
ferred to as the French Report—is issued.
1996
Following a declaration of bankruptcy in the wake of los-
ing a deprogramming-related lawsuit, the Cult Aware-
ness Network name, mailing address, and phone num-
ber are purchased by the Church of Scientology.
The Liberal Democratic Party (LDP), the principal part-
ner in Japan’s ruling coalition, exploits fears generated
by AUM Shinrikyo, attacks its chief rival—the New
Frontier Party (NFP) that is associated with Soka Gakkai,
94
Chronology
1994
cont.

Japan’s largest new religion—and scores big in the na-
tional election.
1997
The bodies of thirty-nine members of Heaven’s Gate are
found in a posh mansion outside San Diego, all victims
of a mass suicide.
Responding to the Solar Temple murder-suicides that
took place in Switzerland in 1994, the Swiss Report is re-
leased in February by the Canton of Geneva. Though
more moderate in tone, its substantive proposals are
more threatening than the French Report.
Additional members of the Order of the Solar Temple
commit suicide in Quebec.
The International (“Boston”) Church of Christ wins an
important case against a newspaper in Singapore, where
it is illegal to refer to a religious group as a “cult.”
The Belgian parliamentary commission on cults issues its
official report. The Belgium Report is even more extreme
than the French Report, naming five mainline Catholic
groups, the YWCA, Quakers, Hasidic Jews, and almost
all Buddhists as dangerous cults.
1998
Death of the founder of Aumism, Gilbert Bourdin, better
known as Lord Hamsah Manarah.
Chen Dao, a Taiwanese UFO group that expects God to
manifest in Garland, Texas, attracts intense media atten-
tion as the press anticipates another Heaven’s Gate–style
mass suicide.
The Enquete Commission issues its final report, New Re-
ligious and Ideological Communities and Psychogroups in the
Federal Republic of Germany.
The Ananda Church of Self-Realization files bankruptcy
after years of fighting a copyright lawsuit with the Self-
Realization Fellowship and lawsuits by disillusioned for-
mer members.
Chronology
95

1999
Evidence emerges that, counter to earlier claims to the
contrary, the FBI did use pyrotechnic military rounds on
the day the Branch Davidian community caught fire.
China begins a crackdown on religious groups. Falun
Gong responds by staging a peaceful demonstration and
subsequently becomes the target of harsh repression. The
Chinese legislature passes a resolution banning “cults.”
Concerned Christians, a small doomsday group who be-
lieved the world would end in December 1999, is ac-
cused of being a suicide group and deported from Israel.
2000
The Movement for the Restoration of the Ten Command-
ments of God, a doomsday religious sect in Uganda,
makes headlines in the wake of what was initially
thought to be a mass suicide but was later determined to
be a mass murder.
2001
Members of Al-Qaida, an extremist Muslim group, run
airplanes into the World Trade Center Towers and the
Pentagon. Some observers interpret this event as another
example of cultic violence.
The About-Picard Law, a draconian piece of legislation
giving the government full power to repress unpopular
religious groups, is signed into law in France after in-
tense debate.
A giant statue of Gilbert Bourdin, founder of Aumism, is
destroyed by French officials.
In a clearly staged-for-television incident, Falun Gong
followers supposedly attempt to commit suicide by set-
ting themselves on fire in Tiananmen Square.
Rael, founder-leader of the Raelian movement, testifies
in favor of human cloning at a U.S. Congress hearing.
2002
Neo-Phare, also known as the New Lighthouse Move-
ment, founded by Arnaud Mussy, predicts the end of the
world and is subsequently surrounded by police in
96
Chronology

Nantes, France, who fear the group may commit mass
suicide.
Two leaders of Portos, a utopian community near Lu-
bertsy, southeast of Moscow, are convicted for carrying
firearms and beating disobedient teenage members.
2003
Brigette Boisselier, head of a cloning business inspired by
Rael, announces that Clonaid has successfully cloned the
first human being.
Elizabeth Smart, a fifteen-year-old Mormon teenager
kidnapped from her Salt Lake City home in 2002, is
found. Her kidnapper, self-proclaimed prophet Brian
Mitchell, is accused of having brainwashed Smart.
Herbert L. Rosedale, Esq., leader of the anticult move-
ment in the United States, passes away from cancer.
Psychologist  Margaret Singer, one of the primary archi-
tects of the notion of cultic brainwashing, dies after a
long illness.
2004
Russia bans the activities of Jehovah’s Witnesses and
moves to liquidate them as a legal entity.
Shoko Asahara, founder of AUM Shinrikyo, is sentenced
to death for directing the poison-gas attack on the Tokyo
subway system in 1995.
Malachi York, leader-founder of the United Nuwaubian
Nation of Moors is sentenced to 135 years in prison on
charges of child molestation.
An anti-“brainwashing” law is proposed in Italy.
The Local Church’s libel suit against John Ankerberg, his
coauthor, and the publisher of the Encyclopedia of Cults
and New Religions proceeds to trial.
Chronology
97


3
Controversial Groups 
and Movements
Groups that have been labeled cults constitute a highly diverse
set, both organizationally and doctrinally. The only feature that
unites them is that they have in some way been involved in a
public controversy. In fact, many small and otherwise innocuous
minority religions have been drawn into the cult wars as the re-
sult of specific conflicts that have no intrinsic relationship with
the wider anticult crusade.
For individuals or groups involved in certain kinds of strug-
gles with members of minority religions, the cult stereotype rep-
resents a potent ideological resource that—if they are successful
in making the label stick—marshals public opinion against their
opponent, potentially tipping the balance of power in their favor.
Situations in which this strategy can work are not restricted to
the kinds of conflicts that are picked up by the news media. For
example, the stigma of the cult stereotype has been effectively de-
ployed in child custody cases, in which one parent’s membership
in a minority religion is portrayed as indicative of her or his un-
worthiness as a parent.
Relevant social-psychological research also indicates that
once a stereotype has been accepted, it structures our perceptions
so that we tend to notice information that conforms to our image
of the stereotyped group and to neglect or forget other kinds of
information. What this means for any given confrontation is that
as soon as the label “cult” has been successfully applied (that is,
accepted as appropriate by outsiders not directly involved in the
conflict), the information that the public gathers is selectively ap-
99

propriated so that almost every item of data conforms to the
stereotype about cults, thus effectively marshaling moral support
for the person or group locked in conflict with a minority reli-
gion.
In ordinary language, people talk as if there is an objective
category of groups called “cults” that can be distinguished from
genuine religions. In this commonly accepted view, cults are by
definition socially dangerous false religions, led by cynical cult
leaders who exploit followers for their own gain. This portrayal
is, however, deeply flawed, as has already been indicated in the
introductory essay. Although a handful of religious groups may
fit the stereotype, “cult” is best understood as a socially negoti-
ated label that frequently means little more than a religion one
personally dislikes. For this reason, the inclusion of a particular
religious organization in this reference book should not be taken
as implying that it is thereby legitimate to refer to it as a “cult,”
as this term is popularly understood.
The following pages contain information on controversial
groups and movements that run the gamut from tiny churches
with fewer than 100 members to organizations like the Soka
Gakkai that number into the millions. Also included are entries
on broader, less centrally organized phenomena such as Santeria
and the Identity Christian Movement.
Adidam
Adidam—referred to less formally as the “Way of the Heart” by
followers—was founded by avatar Adi Da Samraj, born Franklin
Jones on Long Island, New York, in 1939. In his autobiography,
he says that he was born in a state of perfect freedom and aware-
ness of ultimate reality but sacrificed that reality at the age of two
in order to completely identify with human limitations. Jones
spent his college and subsequent years pursuing spiritual truth,
which eventually led him to Swami Muktananda and other
gurus in that lineage. Jones says that he reawakened to his true
state in 1970.
One of the central teachings of the Way of the Heart is that
no form of seeking happiness is ever permanently successful, be-
cause the means of becoming happy are always transitory. In fact,
Adi Da points out that seeking means constant activity, and that
activity prevents the conscious realization of perfect happiness.
100
Controversial Groups and Movements

He further asserts that he has realized this most perfect happi-
ness—God, truth, or reality—and has the power to transmit that
divine self-realization to others. The Way of the Heart, then, con-
sists of a devotional relationship with Adi Da, who his devotees
assert is the source of divine self-realization. All the traditional
means of religious life are employed as a means of “radical” un-
derstanding and devotional communion with Adi Da—medita-
tion, study, ceremonial worship, community living, moral and
ethical observances, and disciplines related to diet, health, sexu-
ality, money, and so on.
Adi Da began to teach this “radical” understanding—a com-
bination of discriminative self-observation and guru devotion—
in 1972, opening a small ashram in Los Angeles. His method of
working with his students was initially simple and traditional.
Over time, however, it became clear that a different approach
was necessary, and he switched to a “Crazy-Wise” teaching style.
In 1979, he took the name Da Free John. In 1986, he changed his
name to Swami Da Love-Ananda. He again changed his name in
the late 1980s to Da Avabhasa (the Bright). Finally, in 1995, he be-
came Adi Da.
Adidam became the subject of media attention for a time in
the mid-1980s following the filing of a lawsuit by a disaffected
former member who alleged that she had been mistreated in var-
ious ways while a member. In response to media interest, several
other disaffected former members then publicly expressed their
own complaints and questions about Adi Da and his way of
teaching during the early years of Adidam. Members of Adidam
responded by saying that the disaffected former members had
simply misunderstood Adi Da’s Crazy-Wise way of teaching.
The media soon lost interest in the story, Adidam settled its dif-
ferences with the former members, and the legal conflict was re-
solved.
The group’s Web site is http://www.adidam.org.
Alamo Christian Foundation 
(Music Square Church)
The Alamo Christian Foundation, a Pentecostal church with doc-
trine similar to the Assemblies of God, was opened in 1969 in
Hollywood, California, by Tony and Susan Alamo. It drew its
Alamo Christian Foundation
101

early strength from the Jesus People movement. The foundation
accepts the authority of the King James Version of the Bible and
adheres to a strict moral code, condemning drugs, homosexual-
ity, adultery, and abortions.
In the early 1970s, the Alamo Christian Foundation became
controversial and was heavily criticized because of what was
viewed as heavy-handed proselytizing. Church members
worked the streets of Hollywood, inviting potential converts to
evening services. The mostly young recruits were taken by bus to
the foundation’s rural community in Saugus for an evangelistic
meeting and meal. Many of those who converted remained in
Saugus to be taught the Bible and become lay ministers.
In 1976, the church moved its headquarters to Alma,
Arkansas, where Susan Alamo had grown up. There it developed
a community of several hundred members and established print-
ing facilities, a school, and a large tabernacle. As the organization
expanded further, churches were opened in other cities.
The church developed as an ordered community of people
dedicated to evangelism. Converts who wish to receive the
church’s training and participate in its ministry take a vow of
poverty, agreeing to turn over all real property to the church. In
return, the church provides the necessities of life. Periodically,
members are sent out on evangelistic tours around the United
States, frequently using the established church centers as bases of
operation. Services are held daily at each of the church centers,
and free meals are generally served.
The church publishes a variety of evangelistic tracts that are
passed out in the street and mailed. The church also distributes
numerous tapes of sermons by Susan and Tony Alamo. Members
include a number of talented musicians, and the church has pro-
duced a set of records and tapes featuring Tony Alamo and other
members. A national television ministry was begun in the 1970s
but has been largely discontinued. In 1981, Music Square Church
was incorporated. It superseded the foundation in 1982.
To support itself and as part of its rehabilitation program,
the church developed several businesses in which members,
many of whom were former drug addicts, could begin a process
of reintegration into society. A number of former members who
later aligned themselves with the anticult movement complained
that they should have been paid at least minimum wage for their
work hours while members. These complaints led to a series of
102
Controversial Groups and Movements

lawsuits. In 1985, the IRS stripped the Music Square Church of its
tax-exempt status. The church went to court to fight this decision.
In 1988, Tony Alamo was accused of beating the eleven-year-
old son of a member. Charges were filed and Alamo disappeared.
During the next three years, while a fugitive from justice, Alamo
moved about the country, frequently making calls to talk shows
and even dropping into public offices for visits. Meanwhile, the
church’s property in Arkansas was seized to pay off court judg-
ments against the organization. Tony Alamo was arrested in July
1991. The current status of the church, whose membership as of
1988 was approximately 400, is problematic.
The group’s Web site is http://www.alamoministries.com.
Ananda Cooperative Community
The Ananda Cooperative Community, also known as the Ananda
World Brotherhood Village, was founded in 1968 by Swami
Kriyananda (J. Donald Walters) in Nevada City, California. Walters
was born of American parents in Romania in 1926. He was edu-
cated in Romania, Switzerland, England, and the United States. At
the age of twenty-two, he became a disciple of Paramahansa Yo-
gananda and received the monastic name Kriyananda. He lived
with Yogananda until the master’s death in 1952. Kriyananda
served as a minister, director of center activities, and vice president
of the organization that Yogananda founded, the Self-Realization
Fellowship. In 1962, he separated from the Self-Realization Fel-
lowship to write, teach, and lecture on the implications of Yo-
gananda’s message for active yoga students and laypersons.
In 1968, Kriyananda founded Ananda Village near Nevada
City, California, in response to Yogananda’s directive to “cover
the earth with world brotherhood colonies, demonstrating that
simplicity of living plus high thinking lead to the greatest happi-
ness.” Ananda Village is situated at 2,600-feet elevation on 750
acres of wood- and meadowland in the Sierra Nevada foothills of
northern California. Members support themselves through a va-
riety of businesses, some of which are privately owned and some
of which are owned and operated by the community. The com-
munity includes 600 people from many cultural, ethnic, and
racial backgrounds. About twenty-five nationalities are repre-
sented. A village council is elected annually by Ananda members.
Ananda Cooperative Community
103

Ananda operates a guest facility called the Expanding Light,
which is open year-round for personal retreats, training courses,
special events, and holiday programs. Ananda members practice
daily meditation using the techniques of kriya yoga as taught by
Paramahansa Yogananda. Resident members are all disciples of
Yogananda. The group is directly involved in a worldwide out-
reach to those interested in the teachings of Paramahansa Yo-
gananda and his line of gurus.
Ananda has five branch residential communities and fifty
centers and meditation groups throughout the world. Ananda’s
church congregation was established in 1990 and has 1,600 mem-
bers. The church is open for membership to those who follow the
teachings of Paramahansa Yogananda. The goal of the church is to
provide fellowship and inspiration for those who want to find God
through the practice of ancient raja yoga techniques that were
brought to the West by Yogananda. In recent years, Ananda’s
church has been engaged in an ongoing legal conflict with the Self-
Realization Fellowship, the U.S. organization founded by Yo-
gananda and with which Kriyananda was formerly affiliated.
The group’s Web site is http://www.ananda.org.
Aumism
Founded in 1969 by his holiness Lord Hamsah Manarah, Au-
mism is considered a religion of unity, representing a synthesis of
all religions and spiritual movements. Its headquarters is located
in the Holy City of Mandarom Shambhasalem in the Alps of
Haute-Provence in France.
Born in a French family practicing traditional Catholicism,
Hamsah Manarah was early attracted by mysticism and occult
sciences. He later studied law, philosophy, economy, and medi-
cine, while he dedicated his nights to esoteric research. In India,
he stayed at Swami Sivananda’s ashram, who transmitted the
initiation of “Sannyasin” at Rishikesh in the Himalayas. At that
time, he gave the name Hamsananda Sarasvati to Manarah. Dur-
ing his numerous trips, Lord Hamsah Manarah was initiated into
Jainism; Sufism; different branches of Hinduism; Theravada, Ma-
hayana, and Vajrayana Buddhism; Japanese Shingon; and certain
African religions.
It was after this long initiatory journey, which led him to all
the holy places of the earth, that Hamsah Manarah, known then
104
Controversial Groups and Movements

under the name of Shri Mahacharya Hamsananda Sarasvati, set-
tled on a deserted mountain overlooking the small village of
Castellane in the Alps of Haute-Provence. Soon many curious
people arrived. Gradually, what began as a simple camp was
transformed into an ashram (spiritual center) and, eventually,
into the Holy City of Mandarom Shambhasalem. Temples and
statues from every religion were erected there. In 1990, Hamsah
Manarah announced to the world that he was the cosmoplane-
tary messiah, that is, a messiah whom all the traditions wait for.
Aumism promotes love among humanity and peace in the
world and believes in reincarnation according to the Law of the
Evolution of the Souls. A vegetarian diet is recommended for a
better spiritual journey, although it is not imposed. Aumism is
opposed to drugs, suicide, and what it views as sexual deviations
(polygamy and homosexuality). The Aumist religion has its
headquarters at the Holy City of Mandarom Shambhasalem.
About 50 monks and nuns live there permanently. Aumism is
organized into a church, with priests and priestesses (in the hun-
dreds) and bishops (108). Anyone who receives baptism or the
transmission of the sound OM is regarded as an Aumist.
Controversy began in 1990 when Lord Hamsah Manarah re-
vealed himself to the world as the cosmoplanetary messiah. The
international media, which gathered together for the occasion,
spread the news all over the world. The first attacks began at this
time. Since then, the police, the government, ecologists, and an-
ticultists have focused attention on Lord Hamsah Manarah, the
Holy City of Mandarom Shambhasalem, and Aumism. Slander-
ous articles and reports, as well as fiscal controls and perquisi-
tions, were issued each month to discourage the Aumists. The
pyramidal temple that was supposed to attract the pilgrims from
all over the world was never built; the building permit that had
already been obtained was withdrawn before the beginning of
the work. Today the Aumists are harassed at their jobs, and some
of them have lost their employment.
The group’s Web site is http://www.aumisme.org.gb.
AUM Shinrikyo (Aleph)
On March 20, 1995, a poison gas attack occurred on a Tokyo sub-
way that killed twelve people and injured many others. Within a
few days of the attack, AUM Shinrikyo, a controversial Japanese
AUM Shinrikyo
105

religious group, was fingered as the most likely suspect. The lead-
ership was eventually arrested and the organization disbanded.
AUM Shinrikyo was founded by Master Shoko Asahara in
Tokyo in 1987. A form of Tantric Buddhism, AUM Shinrikyo’s
teachings emphasized yoga practices and spiritual experiences.
Master Asahara, whose original name was Chizuo Matsumoto
(b. 1955), had traveled to India seeking enlightenment. Before re-
turning to Japan, he sought out the Dalai Lama and received
what he believed was a commission to revive true Buddhism in
the land of his birth. By the time of the subway incident, AUM
Shinrikyo had acquired a large communal facility near Mount
Fuji and a following of approximately 10,000 members in Japan.
In addition to the usual teachings that go hand in hand with
mainline Buddhism, Master Asahara was also fascinated with the
future. His preoccupation with divination may have grown out
of the weakness of his physical senses, as he was born blind in
one eye, with only partial use of the other. Before undertaking
yoga and meditation practices, Asahara pursued the study of
such divinatory practices as astrology. Like many other Japanese
spiritualists, he was fascinated by Western biblical prophecies as
well as by the prophecies of Nostradamus. Perhaps influenced by
the apocalyptic flavor of these predictions, Asahara himself
began preaching an apocalyptic message to his followers. In par-
ticular, he prophesied a confrontation between Japan and the
United States before the end of the century that would in all like-
lihood destroy his home country.
Asahara was, in fact, so certain about an impending conflict
between Japan and the United States that he actually began prepar-
ing to wage war. Unable to match the conventional military might
of the United States, AUM scientists investigated unconventional
weapons, from biological agents to poison gas. This research is re-
flected in Asahara’s last book, Disaster Approaches the Land of the Ris-
ing Sun, which contains page after page reflecting a very un-Bud-
dhist interest in various forms of poison gas, including sarin.
In retrospect, it is clear that certain highly placed AUM
members carried out the subway attack. The attack was moti-
vated by increased police scrutiny of AUM Shinrikyo, with the
idea of distracting police attention away from the movement.
There had also been smaller-scale acts of violence carried out
against the enemies of the group—in one case, poison gas was re-
leased near their Mount Fuji center in an attack on local critics. It
106
Controversial Groups and Movements

was this latter assault that led the police to begin investigating
AUM Shinrikyo in the first place.
In the end, it was Asahara’s own pronouncements that drew
police attention to AUM Shinrikyo. In particular, Master Asahara
had predicted that gas attacks by terrorists would occur in the
not too distant future. This made him an obvious target of suspi-
cion. Hence the subway attack, far from diverting attention away
from AUM Shinrikyo, actually had the opposite effect.
No active Web site is available for the group.
Black Judaism
Many African Americans have rejected the Christianity they as-
sociate with whites in favor of religions with more distinctively
black identities. For centuries, a legend existed that black Jews,
descendants of the queen of Sheba, had lived in Ethiopia but had
long ago disappeared. The rediscovery in the late nineteenth cen-
tury of the Falashas, the black Jews of Ethiopia, by French ex-
plorer Joseph Halevy, spurred some black people to elect Ju-
daism as an alternative to Christianity.
The first African American Jewish denomination was started
by William Saunders Crowdy, who preached that Africans were
the descendants of the lost tribes of Israel and thus the true sur-
viving Jews. By 1899, Crowdy had founded churches in twenty-
nine Kansas towns. He called his denomination the Church of
God and Saints of Christ, which, despite its Christian-sounding
name, had from the start identified with Judaism. The Christ of
the church’s name refers to the awaited Messiah. As it evolved,
the doctrine of the Church of God and Saints of Christ became a
mixture of Jewish, Christian, and black nationalist precepts.
In 1915, Prophet F. S. Cherry established the Church of God
in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Cherry was influenced by both
the Church of God and Saints of Christ and the Temple of the
Gospel of the Kingdom (another early black Jewish group).
Cherry taught that God, who is black, originally created black
humans, who were the descendants of Jacob. The first white per-
son, Gehazi, became that way as the result of a curse. The church
teaches that Jesus was a black man.
Arnold Josiah Ford was a self-proclaimed Ethiopian Jew and
the choirmaster for Marcus Garvey, founder of the Universal
Black Judaism
107

Negro Improvement Association. Ford later founded the Beth
B’nai Abraham congregation, which suffered financial problems
and collapsed in 1930. Ford then turned the membership over to
Rabbi Wentworth Matthew. Arthur Wentworth Matthew had
been a minister in the Church of the Living God, the Pillar and
Ground of Truth, a black Pentecostal church that had endorsed
the Universal Negro Improvement Association. In 1919, Matthew
and eight other men organized the Commandment Keepers:
Holy Church of the Living God. In Harlem, he had met white
Jews for the first time and in the 1920s came to know Arnold
Josiah Ford. Matthew began to study Orthodox Judaism, to learn
Hebrew, and to acquire ritual materials from Ford. Ford and
Matthew learned of the Falashas, the black Jews of Ethiopia, and
began to identify with them. When Ford’s congregation ran into
financial trouble in 1930, the membership was put into
Matthew’s care and Ford moved to Ethiopia.
The Original Hebrew Israelite Nation, or Black Israelites,
emerged in Chicago in the 1960s around Ben Ammi Carter (born
G. Parker) and Shaleah Ben-Israel. Carter and Ben-Israel were
proponents of Black Zionism whose purpose was a return to the
Holy Land. Beginning in the late 1960s, they made attempts to
migrate to Africa and then to Israel. More than 300 members of
the group had migrated to Israel by 1971, when strict immigra-
tion restrictions were imposed. Other members of the group con-
tinued to arrive using tourist visas.
The Nation of Yahweh, also called the Hebrew Israelites or
the Followers of Yahweh, was founded in the 1970s by Yahweh
ben Yahweh, who was born Hulon Mitchell Jr. Yahweh ben Yah-
weh was the son of a Pentecostal minister and at one point joined
the Nation of Islam. Yahweh ben Yahweh teaches that there is one
God whose name is Yahweh and who is black. Yahweh ben Yah-
weh says that he is the son of God, who has been sent to save and
deliver the black people of the United States. Black people are
considered to be the true lost tribe of Judah. In 1991, Yahweh ben
Yahweh and fifteen of his followers were arrested on a variety of
charges, including racketeering and conspiracy to commit mur-
der. At a trial in the spring of 1992, Yahweh ben Yahweh and
seven of his codefendants were convicted of the conspiracy
charges but were not convicted of racketeering.
The group’s Web site is http://www.yahwehbenyahweh.
com. 
108
Controversial Groups and Movements

Black Muslims and the 
Nation of Islam
For many African Americans, Islam has provided an alternative
to Christianity, which failed to establish a truly racially inclusive
society. The growth of Islam among African Americans is related
to the idea that Islam is a religious faith that affirms their African
heritage. Most nonimmigrant Muslims in the United States are
African American converts.
The Black Muslim movement began when Timothy Drew,
who became known as Noble Drew Ali, founded the Moorish
Science Temple in Newark, New Jersey, in 1913. Ali was exposed
to black nationalist leader Marcus Garvey’s ideas after 1917, and
they became central to the movement’s ideology. The Moorish
Science Temple came to real prominence in Chicago in the 1920s.
Temple members wore bright red fezzes and converted their
slave names into new ones by adding the suffixes el or bey to
them. After Garvey was deported in 1927, the Moorish American
Science Temple wooed, and to a great extent won over, Garvey’s
followers.
The original Nation of Islam arose in Detroit in 1930. In that
year Wali Farrad Muhammad (also called W. D. Fard) appeared
and eventually established a temple in Detroit. Fard disappeared
in 1934, and his top lieutenant, Elijah Muhammad, became the
leader of the movement.
Under the leadership of Elijah Muhammad, the Nation of
Islam grew into a strong, cohesive unit. Muhammad moved the
headquarters to Chicago and opened temples, mosques, schools,
housing projects, stores, restaurants, and farms. Many themes
taught in the Nation of Islam reflected traditional Islamic teach-
ings: submission to Allah and repudiation of alcohol, sex outside
of marriage, the eating of pork, and gambling. Others ran counter
to traditional Islam: the white man as devil, the identification of
W. D. Fard as Allah and Elijah Muhammad as a prophet, and the
quasi-scientific theory of human history and purpose. Muham-
mad taught that blacks were the original humans, but a rebel-
lious scientist produced and released genetically weakened pale
stock.
In the mid-1950s a former nightclub singer named Louis Eu-
gene Wolcott joined the Nation of Islam. He dropped his last
Black Muslims and the Nation of Islam
109

name and became known as Minister Louis X. His oratorical and
musical skills carried him to a position in charge of the Boston
mosque. Malcolm X, the most famous member of the Nation of
Islam, was the charismatic leader of the New York temple. He
was eventually expelled and shortly thereafter murdered.
When Nation of Islam leader Elijah Muhammad died in
1975, many members thought that Louis X, who was by then
known by the name Abdul Haleem Farrakhan, would become
the new leader of the Nation of Islam. However, Elijah Muham-
mad’s son, Wallace, was chosen instead. During his first three
years as the leader of the Nation of Islam, Wallace Muhammad
brought the organization into mainstream Islam and away from
the racial and black nationalist policies of his father. The organi-
zation went through a series of name changes and was eventu-
ally disbanded as an organization distinct from mainstream
Islam.
The abandonment by Wallace Muhammad of his father’s
program was not accepted by all members. At least four splinter
groups left Wallace Muhammad’s group and formed their own
congregations that adhered to Elijah Muhammad’s original doc-
trines. The best known of them is headed by Louis Farrakhan,
who, with several thousand followers, left in 1978 and reestab-
lished the Nation of Islam as instituted by Elijah Muhammad.
The group’s Web site is http://www.noi.org.
Branch Davidians
In 1979, Vernon Howell, later David Koresh, began participating
in study sessions at a Seventh-Day Adventist church in Tyler,
Texas, that his mother attended. There was a succession of inci-
dents in which he preached his own version of SDA theology to
other church members and took over the pulpit to propound his
own theological views. Howell learned of the Branch Davidi-
ans—a small group that had splintered from the SDA in the
1930s—and began working as a handyman at their Mount
Carmel center in 1981. He became a favorite of the leader, Lois
Roden, who eventually named him as her successor.
Vernon Howell enunciated his controversial “New Light”
doctrine in 1989. He asserted that as a messiah, he became the
perfect mate of all the female adherents. Part of his mission was
to create a new lineage of God’s children from his own seed.
110
Controversial Groups and Movements

These children would ultimately rule the world. The New Light
doctrine made all female Branch Davidians spiritual wives of Ko-
resh. The doctrine had the effect of annulling the spousal sexual
exclusivity of all marriages within the church.
In 1990, Vernon Howell legally adopted the name David Ko-
resh. The word Koresh is Hebrew for Cyrus, the Persian king who
defeated the Babylonians 500 years before the birth of Jesus. In
biblical language, Koresh is a (not the) messiah, one appointed to
carry out a special mission for God. By taking the first name
David, he asserted his spiritual descent from the biblical King
David. By 1992, Koresh had concluded that the apocalypse
would occur in the United States rather than Israel, and the
group began adopting a survivalist outlook, stockpiling large
amounts of food, weapons, ammunition, and fuel. Koresh re-
named the Mount Carmel community “Ranch Apocalypse.”
The Branch Davidians retained a biblical base for their teach-
ings, but the Bible was supplemented, and in certain respects
supplanted, by revelations of the living prophet. They observed
a Saturday Sabbath and eschewed meat, alcohol, caffeine, and to-
bacco. They rejected ostentatious dress and grooming, birthday
celebrations, and television viewing. In contrast to Christ, who
was sinless and therefore an impossible role model, Koresh was
a “sinful messiah.” Koresh taught that human sinfulness does
not prevent humans from attaining salvation. He informed his
followers that Armageddon would begin in the United States
with an attack on the Branch Davidians.
Accusations of misbehavior on the part of Koresh and some
other residents of the Branch Davidian headquarters began to cir-
culate among anticultists and others. The accusations were those
frequently used against many unconventional religions by their
opponents: child abuse and possession of firearms. Local author-
ities investigated the child abuse allegations and found them
groundless. The federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and
Firearms (ATF) of the Department of the Treasury obtained
search and arrest warrants on the weapons charges.
On February 28, 1993, a force of seventy-six agents of the
ATF raided the Branch Davidian compound. The raid turned into
a shoot-out between federal agents and Branch Davidians, who
chose to defend themselves. The resulting standoff turned into a
fifty-one-day siege that ended on April 19 when federal agents
launched a new attack on the Davidian complex. Agents of the
federal government used military equipment to batter holes in
Branch Davidians
111

buildings through which they injected noxious gas in an attempt
to force the Davidians outside. A fire ignited in the buildings, and
more than eighty members died.
The group’s Web site is http://www.sevenseals.com.
Chen Tao
The Taiwanese religious movement known as Chen Tao was
briefly in the news when its leader announced that God would
appear on television on March 25, 1998, and then in person on
March 31, 1998. In Chinese, chen (zhen) means “right” or “true,”
and tao (dao) means “way.”
The history of Chen Tao goes back roughly four decades to a
spiritual self-improvement association based in urban southern
Taiwan, called the Association for Research on Soul Light. The
group sought to locate, quantify, and cultivate spiritual light en-
ergy using technological devices and traditional Chinese prac-
tices like Qi Gong; its mixture of Buddhist-Taoism and high tech-
nology attracted a good number of students, academics, and
white-collar professionals—several thousand by one account.
Among them was sociology professor Hon-ming Chen, who
joined the association in the early 1990s. In it he found an expla-
nation for his reportedly lifelong visions of spheres of golden
light. Through these golden spheres God the Heavenly Father
wished to communicate several things to him: first, that he had a
special role to play as spiritual teacher and critic of degraded
popular religion, and second, that he was to deliver messages
about the end of the world and the return of Christ.
Chen succeeded to prophetic leadership of the group in
1995, refashioning Chen Tao’s steady-state cosmology by cou-
pling the Buddhist conception of reincarnation according to
merit with a cyclical model of history, bringing in a biblical apoc-
alypse as an exclamation point. According to Chen, the end time
is brought about by the collective negative karma of all living be-
ings. God, as a loving father, creates and re-creates the cosmos
and sends Christ and Buddha, first to teach us, and then, at the
end of each cycle, to save those who have followed the Right Way
and attempted to rebalance their karmic books. But God also
grants his children complete free will, allowing souls to take on
bodies, to be seduced by the lusts of corporeality, and thus to cre-
ate negative karma for themselves, to injure other living beings,
112
Controversial Groups and Movements

and ultimately to propel the material cosmos to repeated de-
structions. Evidence provided by the damage to our natural en-
vironment and the degradation of our civilization is cited by
Chen to bolster his claim that ours are the last days and Christ
will soon arrive in God’s space aircrafts.
He proclaimed that the Kingdom of God descended first on
the group’s headquarters in Taiwan in 1995 and then on the
North American continent. One site in particular—Garland,
Texas—was singled out by Chen as the location of the repeated
creations and salvations of humanity. Chen moved to this Dallas
suburb in the spring of 1997 and was followed by up to 160 Chen
Tao members that fall. In Garland, Chen made public his prophe-
cies concerning the two televised theophanies, statements that
for several weeks in the spring of 1998 earned his group head-
lines around the world. The news media of their own accord, but
also at Chen’s earnest invitation, came in droves, hyping Chen
Tao as the next Heaven’s Gate.
When events failed to take place exactly as predicted on
March 25, Chen held a press conference at his Garland home at
which he stated that the news media and audience worldwide
could consider the prophecy nonsense. However, he and his fol-
lowers hung on until God’s appearance on March 31. When the
Heavenly Father once again did not appear as promised, press
interest dissolved almost entirely, and many followers returned
to Taiwan. A small remnant of the group moved to upstate New
York in April 1998.
No active Web site is available for the group.
Christian Identity
The Christian Identity movement is a U.S. offshoot of an older re-
ligious movement, “British-Israelism” (also known as “Anglo-
Israelism”). In an 1840 set of lectures, John Wilson argued that the
British peoples were actually the descendants of the migrating
ten lost tribes who had forgotten their true “identity.” As devel-
oped by subsequent writers, British-Israelism posited a revision-
ist history of Britain and the ancient world and identified En-
gland as a divine instrument for the fulfillment of God’s
purposes.
By the late 1920s, the U.S. branch of British-Israelism had
passed into the hands of a Massachusetts lawyer and organizer,
Christian Identity
113

Howard Rand. Rand brought American British-Israelites under
the umbrella of a new organization, the Anglo-Saxon Federation
of America. His colleague in this enterprise was Henry Ford’s
publicist, William J. Cameron. Together, they linked the Anglo-
Saxon Federation with explicitly right-wing political agendas.
With the end of the Second World War, the stage was set for
the emergence of Christian Identity doctrine in southern Califor-
nia. Southern California had absorbed a number of British-Israel
influences during earlier decades. The key figures in the emer-
gence of Christian Identity—Bertrand Comparet, William Potter
Gale, and, preeminently, Wesley Swift—were all associates of
Gerald L. K. Smith. Based in Los Angeles, Smith was the most
widely known anti-Semitic agitator of the 1940s and served as
the center of an informal national network of those on the ex-
treme right.
Christian Identity millenarian theology rejects the concept of
a “rapture,” in which the saved will be lifted off the earth before
the period of violence (the “tribulation”) that climaxes in Ar-
mageddon. Instead, Identity followers believe they must survive
a period of violence and persecution under the Anti-Christ, a
time they often characterize in terms of a race war.
Identity’s most distinctive theological hallmark is its view of
Jewish origins. Christian Identity asserts that Jews are the direct,
biological descendants of Satan. They advance a myth of the Fall
in which original sin consists of a sexual coupling between Eve
and Satan or his humanoid instrument, begetting Cain, whom
they call the first Jew. Hence, in addition to more traditional anti-
Semitic motifs, Christian Identity adds a link with primal evil.
By defining the world in racial terms, Identity creates a uni-
verse in which the chosen few battle the evil world that sur-
rounds them. In political terms, this vision of cosmic combat
leads many Identity believers to identify state and national gov-
ernments with the Jewish conspiracy and the forces of Anti-
Christ. Although the expression of this antipathy is most often
limited to the written and spoken word, it has sometimes
erupted into acts of open defiance.
In 1983, confrontations between law enforcement authorities
and a North Dakota Posse Comitatus leader and Identity be-
liever, Gordon Kahl, resulted in the deaths of two federal mar-
shals. In 1985, federal law enforcement authorities besieged and
captured the commune of a heavily armed paramilitary Identity
group in Arkansas, the Covenant, Sword, and Arm of the Lord,
114
Controversial Groups and Movements

with no loss of life. In 1983–1984, an insurgent group of racial
separatists known as the Order or the Silent Brotherhood en-
gaged in a wave of crimes, mostly in the West, preparatory to the
launching of attacks on the federal government. Half of its forty
members were Identity believers. Between 1984 and 1986, the
members of the Order were captured and tried (its leader, Robert
Matthews, was killed in a shoot-out with the FBI), and with the
organization’s demise, the level of Identity-related violence
dropped substantially. Nonetheless, because the movement is
fragmented, the possibility of violent episodes in the future can-
not be ruled out.
The group’s Web site is http://www.aryan-nations.org.
Christian Science 
(First Church of Christ, Scientist)
Christian Science was founded in Lynn, Massachusetts, in 1879
by Mary Baker Eddy (1821–1910). Eddy had always been trou-
bled with poor health, which worsened during the 1860s. She
tried a number of different alternative treatments, until finally
she placed herself under the care of Dr. Phineas Parkhurst
Quimby, a mental healer in Portland, Maine. She soon experi-
enced some relief and became his student. However, after his
death in 1866, she was periodically disturbed by the return of her
illness and the conflicts between his ideas and those she found in
the Bible.
The “biblical truth” was imparted while she was slowly and
painfully recuperating from an injury that occurred when she
slipped on an icy pavement in 1866. Her health was immediately
restored, marking the beginning of Christian Science. She
claimed that there was no healing agent, either magnetic force or
mind, other than God and that God was the only life, which was
the only reality of being. In the next few years, she began teach-
ing and writing her first book, The Science of Man, and the pre-
sentation of her teaching, titled Science and Health with Key to the
Scriptures.
Christian Science departs from orthodox Christianity in that
it believes in what it terms the “allness of God” and hence the un-
reality of disease, sin, and death. It is believed that Christ does not
defeat evil but demonstrates its lack of reality beyond our belief in
Christian Science
115

it. The impersonal aspect of God as principle, mind, life, truth,
and love is emphasized by Christian Science, which also distin-
guishes between the man Jesus and the eternal spiritual selfhood
Christ, the Son of God, which the church regards as having been
expressed by men and women throughout the centuries.
Christian Science has been attacked since the beginning of
the movement. The major challenges to Christian Science came
from a medical profession that, at the time of the founding of the
church, was just consolidating its position as the normative au-
thority on the treatment of illness in the United States. Numerous
court cases were fought over the rights of Christian Scientists to
refrain from the use of doctors and the rights of Christian Science
practitioners to care for the sick.
During the 1980s, the issue of medical care for children was
revived in a series of court cases across the United States, as
Christian Science parents were accused of homicide, child abuse,
and negligence. Cases of this kind forced judge and jury to con-
sider as possibly criminal the behavior of loving parents who
held deep religious beliefs against medical treatment. These
cases had mixed results. For instance, a case from California led
to the Supreme Court turning back a challenge to the prosecu-
tion of parents on the basis of religious freedom, whereas in
Florida, a couple was convicted of third-degree murder, but after
a long probation they were ordered to give their other children
regular medical treatment. David and Ginger Twitchell were
convicted of manslaughter in Massachusetts, another couple in
California was convicted of child endangerment, while two
other parents were acquitted in a similar case. Other cases filed
against Christian Science were dismissed in Michigan and Min-
nesota and left inconclusive the status of parents who rely on
Christian Science.
The group’s Web site is http://www.tfccs.com.
Church of the First Born of the 
Fullness of Times; Church of the First 
Born; Church of the Lamb of God
The Church of the First Born of the Fullness of Times was incor-
porated in 1955 by brothers Joel, Ross Wesley, and Floren
116
Controversial Groups and Movements

LeBaron. The Church of the First Born was founded by Ross Wes-
ley LeBaron after he left his brothers’ church. The Church of the
Lamb of God was founded by another LeBaron brother, Ervil,
after he was dismissed from the Church of the First Born of the
Fullness of Times.
The LeBaron family and its patriarch, Alma Dayer LeBaron,
were members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.
In 1934, one of Alma’s sons, Benjamin LeBaron, claimed to be the
One Mighty and Strong, the prophetic figure mentioned in Mor-
mon writings, and several family members substantiated his
claims as a prophet. In 1944, the LeBaron family was excommu-
nicated from the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The
family then associated with the “fundamentalist” Mormon
colony in Mexico directed by Rulon C. Allred, leader of the Apos-
tolic United Brethren.
In 1955, the LeBarons left Allred’s Mexican colony. Ben-
jamin’s brothers Joel, Ross Wesley, and Floren established the
Church of the First Born of the Fullness of Times. Joel claimed to
have the patriarchal priesthood and had a revelation directing
Rulon C. Allred to become his councilor. Both Allred and Joel’s
brother Benjamin rejected Joel’s claims.
Also rejecting Joel LeBaron’s claim to patriarchal priesthood
was his brother, and cofounder of the Church of the First Born of
the Fullness of Times, Ross Wesley LeBaron. Ross Wesley left his
brother’s church and formed the Church of the First Born. The
doctrine of the Church of the First Born states that the church was
first established by Adam and restored in Joseph. It believes in
One Mighty and Strong to come as presented in the doctrine and
covenants. Ross Wesley LeBaron disincorporated the church in
the early 1980s. Joel’s claim to the patriarchal priesthood fol-
lowed a line of succession through his father, Alma, to Alma’s
grandfather Benjamin F. Johnson, who was secretly ordained by
founder Joseph Smith.
In 1970, the Church of the First Born of the Fullness of Times
dismissed Ervil LeBaron, its second-highest-ranking officer and
the brother of its leader, Joel LeBaron. Ervil formed the Church of
the Lamb of God and claimed full authority over all of the
polygamy-practicing groups, even going so far as to claim an au-
thority to execute anyone who would refuse to accept him as the
representative of God. Beginning with the establishment of the
Church of the Lamb of God, a series of murders and assaults on
polygamy-practicing Mormons began.
Church of the First Born of the Fullness of Times
117

On August 20, 1972, Joel LeBaron, leader of the Church of
the First Born of the Fullness of Times, was shot to death in En-
senada, Mexico. On June 16, 1975, Dean Vest, an associate of Joel
LeBaron, was killed near San Diego, California. On May 10, 1977,
Dr. Rulon C. Allred, leader of the Apostolic United Brethren, was
murdered in his chiropractic office in Salt Lake City while at-
tending patients. On May 14, 1977, an attempt was made on the
life of Merlin Kingston, another polygamy leader. Thirteen other
polygamy-practicing Mormons were killed before Ervil LeBaron
was arrested for the murder of Rulon Allred. Ervil LeBaron was
tried, convicted, and sentenced to prison in 1980. He died in
prison of natural causes in 1981.
Joel LeBaron headed the Church of the First Born of the Full-
ness of Times from 1955 until he was murdered in 1972. He was
succeeded by his brother Verlan, who led the church until his
death in 1981. The current leader of the church is Siegfried Wid-
mar. The Church of the First Born of the Fullness of Times has
several hundred members, most of whom live in Mexico.
No active Web sites are available for any of the groups.
Church Universal and Triumphant 
(Summit Lighthouse)
The Church Universal and Triumphant (CUT) is a Montana-
based New Age church led by Elizabeth Clare Prophet. In terms
of negative media coverage, by the late 1980s it had become the
most controversial new religion in North America.
Mark L. Prophet, who had been active in two I AM splinter
groups, eventually founded his own group, the Summit Light-
house, in Washington, D.C., in 1958. The orientation of the
prophet’s new group was the publication and dissemination of
the masters’ teachings. In the theosophical tradition, the spiritual
evolution of the planet is conceived of as being in the hands of a
group of divinely illumined beings (the ascended masters). In
the tradition of earlier theosophical leaders, Mark Prophet
viewed himself as serving as the mouthpiece for these ascended
masters.
Elizabeth Clare Wulf joined the group in 1961, eventually
marrying Mark Prophet. Over the course of their marriage, Eliz-
abeth Prophet also became a messenger. After Mark’s death in
118
Controversial Groups and Movements

1973, Elizabeth took over his role as the primary mouthpiece for
the masters, as well as leadership of the organization.
The headquarters of Summit Lighthouse moved to Colorado
Springs, Colorado, in 1966. In 1974, Church Universal and Tri-
umphant was incorporated, taking over ministerial and liturgical
activities, while Summit Lighthouse remained the publishing wing
of the organization. After several moves within southern Califor-
nia, the church’s headquarters was finally established on the Royal
Teton Ranch, in Montana, just north of Yellowstone Park, in 1986.
When “cults” became a public issue in the mid-1970s, Church
Universal and Triumphant was not particularly prominent. While
still in southern California, several members were kidnapped and
deprogrammed. One major lawsuit, brought against the church
by ex-member Gregory Mull, cost CUT several million dollars.
Despite these struggles and some media attacks, the group re-
mained a relatively minor player in the cult wars until it moved
its headquarters to Montana.
Much of the church’s negative media attention derives from
incidents clustered around its extensive fallout shelters and its
preparations for the possibility of a nuclear attack against the
United States. At one point in the construction, for instance, fuel
stored in several underground tanks (which were sold to the
church in defective condition) ruptured and spilled gas and
diesel oil into the water table. In 1990, members from around the
world gathered in Montana because of the predicted possibility
of an atomic holocaust—a gathering that would have gone all but
unnoticed had not a local paper painted it in sinister colors and
broadcast the news through the Associated Press (AP) wire ser-
vice to the world.
Also, in 1989, two high-level church members attempted to
acquire otherwise legal weapons in a nonpublic, illegal manner
(to be stored in the underground shelters). The motivation was to
avoid the negative media exposure that would have resulted if
members had purchased guns in Montana. The plan backfired
and resulted in a public relations disaster. This series of incidents,
particularly the gun purchase fiasco, was the basis for subse-
quent accusations that the Church Universal and Triumphant
was a potential Waco.
In more recent years, Elizabeth Prophet has stepped down as
the church’s leader due to illness. The group is now run by a
board of directors. The church has also reactivated its old name,
the Summit Lighthouse, as the public face of the organization.
Church Universal and Triumphant
119

The group’s Web sites are http://www.tsl.org and http://
www.summitlighthouse.org.
Eckankar
Eckankar is a new religious movement founded by Paul Twitchell
in California in 1965. It is currently an international organization
headquartered in Minneapolis, Minnesota, with tens of thousands
of members. Eckankar began with Paul Twitchell, who claimed
that in 1956 he experienced God-realization when he was initiated
by a group of spiritual masters known as the “Order of the Vairagi
Masters” who live and work on a spiritual plane linked to the
mystic East. Twitchell claimed that he was assigned the role of
971st living Eck master by these higher spiritual beings.
Twitchell officially organized and incorporated Eckankar in
1965, soon afterward moving its headquarters to Las Vegas,
Nevada. For the next few years, he wrote and published several
key books of Eckankar theology. Paul Twitchell died unexpect-
edly in 1971. His wife, Gail, together with the board of Eckankar,
chose his successor as 972nd living Eck master—Darwin Gross.
Gross and Gail married shortly afterward. Under their leader-
ship, Eckankar grew and flourished. Its new headquarters was
established at Menlo Park, California. Then there was a struggle
for leadership in which Gross was deposed and succeeded as
973rd living Eck master by Harold Klemp.
A vision led Klemp and his right-hand man, Peter Skelskey,
to move the headquarters of Eckankar to a suburb of Minneapo-
lis, where the multimillion-dollar world Temple of Eck was built
in the late 1980s. Under Klemp and Skelskey, Eckankar has con-
tinued to grow and change.
Eckankar is “the ancient science of soul travel” and “the re-
ligion of the light and sound of God.” Its basic cosmology is sim-
ilar to that of the venerable Radhasoami tradition of India, which
teaches initiates to hear divine sounds, see divine lights, and
taste divine tastes. These basic techniques have been blended
with Rosicrucian and Theosophical tendencies as well. The over-
all result is that Eckankar is one of the most eclectic new religions
in the United States.
Eckankar teaches that God is Sugmad—an impersonal
source of all being. Everything that exists is an emanation of this
divine spirit. Eck is “soul,” a spiritual energy and life force in all
120
Controversial Groups and Movements

things that emanates from Sugmad. It has various levels and on
these levels takes different forms, including various intelligences.
Eck can be sensed through chanting the mantra “HU,” a special
name for God in Eckankar. Chanting “HU” is one of Eckankar’s
central practices and is said to bring one spiritual self-realization
or God-realization and to burn off karmic debt.
Eckankar has studiously avoided controversy in the media.
The only time conflict happened was during the initial phase of
moving its headquarters and building its Temple of Eck in Min-
nesota. Some citizens of the city of Chanhassen attempted to pre-
vent the city council from permitting it. Articles were written
about this controversy in the Twin Cities press, and this was the
first time most people outside California had heard of Eckankar.
Within Eckankar there was controversy when Twitchell died
and was succeeded by Gross and again when Gross was replaced
by Klemp. There was lengthy and complicated litigation between
Gross and Eckankar over use of the term itself as well as other re-
lated terms used by the organization that it had copyrighted.
The group’s Web site is http://www.eckankar.org.
Elan Vital (Divine Light Mission)
Elan Vital grew out of Sant Mat (literally, “the way of the saints”),
a nineteenth-century spiritual tradition that developed in north-
ern India. One of the goals of the movement was the instruction
of the world in a type of yogic meditation technique that was said
to connect the devotee to the universal primordial Force through
meditation on the Holy Name (Word) and on the Divine Light
that pervades everything.
The Divine Light Mission was founded by Shri Hans Ma-
haraj Ji. When Hans Maharaj Ji died (1966), he was succeeded by
his youngest son, Prem Pal Singh Rawat, who was initiated at the
age of six and who, two years later, was recognized as the new
“perfect master,” an embodiment of God on earth and hence an
object of worship and veneration, assuming the title of Maharaj
Ji. When his father died, he was commissioned as the one to take
the knowledge to the world. Although he became officially the
autocratic leader of the mission, his whole family shared the au-
thority because of his young age.
In 1971, Maharaj Ji made his first visit to the West, after hav-
ing been invited by some Americans who became initiates while
Elan Vital
121

in India searching for spiritual guidance. Against his mother’s
wishes, he went to Colorado, where a large crowd heard his first
set of discourses given in the United States. A considerable num-
ber of people were initiated, and the U.S. headquarters of the
mission was established in Denver. By the end of 1973, several
hundred centers as well as more than twenty ashrams had
emerged, and two periodicals, And It Is Divine and Divine Times,
were begun. However, in November 1973, the Divine Light Mis-
sion suffered a major reverse because of the failure of “Millen-
nium ’73,” an event organized to celebrate the birthday of Ma-
haraj Ji’s father and the beginning of a thousand years of peace
and prosperity. The event had been scheduled to take place at the
Houston Astrodome, and all of the movement’s resources were
invested in the event. When the anticipated large crowds of peo-
ple failed to manifest, the movement fell into deep debt, which
effectively crippled it.
After the Millennium ’73 fiasco, the Divine Light Mission
gradually withdrew from the public scene. Many followers left
the movement, and many ashrams were discontinued. A number
of ex-members became critics of the movement, attacking it with
charges of brainwashing and mind control. Maharaj Ji himself
was described by the anticultists as immature and unfit to be a re-
ligious leader, and his teachings were condemned as lacking in
substance.
The movement also suffered from problems within Maharaj
Ji’s family. Mataji, Maharaj Ji’s mother, disapproved of his
lifestyle and of his marriage to his secretary, Marolyn Johnson,
whom he declared to be the incarnation of the goddess Durga.
After accusing her son of breaking his spiritual disciplines, she
took control of the mission in India by replacing him with his
oldest brother. In 1975, Maharaj Ji took his family to court. He re-
ceived control of the movement everywhere but in India, where
his brother remained the leader. By the end of the 1970s, an esti-
mated 80 percent of the followers had left the mission. In the
early 1980s, Maharaj Ji ordered that all of the ashrams be dis-
banded and that he was no longer to be venerated as God.
When the Divine Light Mission was disbanded, the organi-
zation Elan Vital was created in order to relate Maharaj Ji to his
students on a one-to-one basis and to support his travels in
thirty-four countries worldwide.
The group’s Web site is http://www.maharaji.org.
122
Controversial Groups and Movements

Erhard Seminars Training (est)/The Forum
Erhard Seminars Training, more commonly known as est, was
begun in 1971 by Werner Erhard. Although not a church or reli-
gion, est is included here because it has often been accused of
being a cult.
In November 1970, Werner Erhard (born John Paul “Jack”
Rosenberg) enrolled in a two-weekend course called Mind Dy-
namics. Mind Dynamics featured demonstrations and training in
memory feats, enhancement of psychic powers, ESP, precogni-
tion, psychic diagnosis, and healing. Erhard was so impressed
with Mind Dynamics that he immediately signed up to take in-
structor training. After a short time, he began to feel restricted by
the confines of the Mind Dynamics program, and set up a pro-
gram of his own. Est was incorporated as a profit-making educa-
tional corporation. The training was aimed at the broad public
with the fee initially set at $150 for a two-weekend course. Within
three years, he had sold $3.4 million of est training sessions.
Est was known for its intensive two-weekend workshops
that promoted communication skills and self-empowerment. The
purpose of est was to transform one’s ability to experience living
so that the situations one had been trying to change or had been
putting up with cleared up in the process of life itself. The first
two hours of est training were devoted to the rules: No one could
move from his seat unless told to do so. No smoking, eating, or
drinking were allowed in the room. One meal break was sched-
uled during the day. Students were commonly called “assholes”
during the training.
Along with its success, est generated inevitable controversy.
In 1977, two articles appeared in the American Journal of Psychia-
try that described five patients who had developed psychotic
symptoms, including paranoia, uncontrollable mood swings,
and delusions, in the wake of taking the est training. Claiming
psychological damage, several suits were filed against est by
trainees and their families.
In 1978, Erhard vowed to end hunger in two decades and
started the Hunger Project. The project was accused by Mother
Jones magazine of collecting several million dollars and donating
only a few thousand dollars to a San Francisco church that oper-
ated a soup kitchen at Christmas and to OXFAM, a prominent
Erhard Seminars Training/The Forum
123

hunger organization. The author of the article concluded that Er-
hard was using the Hunger Project for self-aggrandizement and
for promoting est, a profit-making corporation. In late 1990, Er-
hard formally broke all ties to the Hunger Project.
The name of the movement was changed to The Forum in
1985. The Forum runs self-awareness seminars, advanced courses,
a program for those interested in becoming Forum leaders them-
selves, a sales course, and the More Time Workshop. In January
1991, Erhard sold the assets of Werner Erhard and Associates to his
brother Harry Rosenberg and some other loyal employees.
On March 3, 1991, CBS aired a segment of 60 Minutes that ac-
cused Erhard of beating his wife and children and raping his
daughters. Erhard subsequently filed a lawsuit against CBS, claim-
ing that the broadcast contained false, misleading, and defamatory
statements. The lawsuit was dropped before a court decision was
reached. Erhard left the United States in 1991, beginning a self-
imposed exile. Meanwhile, The Forum, under the new name Land-
mark Education, has once again bounced back to become one of
the most successful programs of its kind.
The group’s Web site is http://www.landmarkeducation.
com.
Falun Gong
Qi Gong is the generic name of a complex of techniques for phys-
ical and spiritual well-being, with a tradition in China predating
the Christian era. It is often referred to as Chinese yoga. Although
spiritual and religious activities in general are viewed with sus-
picion in Communist China, Qi Gong has been tolerated as a tra-
ditional set of physical exercises.
The largest (but by no means the only) such Qi Gong group
is Falun Gong. Its founder, Li Hongzi, established his peculiar
brand of Qi Gong in 1992. In 1998, Li moved permanently to New
York City, where he oversees the expansion of Falun Gong inter-
nationally. Small groups exist in the main metropolitan areas of
the United States and Canada, and in some thirty other countries.
In 1999, the Chinese regime launched a campaign against
spiritual and religious groups, and Falun Gong was targeted as a
superstitious and reactionary group by a press campaign. Unlike
other groups, Falun Gong reacted with a demonstration of more
than 10,000 followers outside Beijing’s Zhongnanhai, the resi-
124
Controversial Groups and Movements

dence of China’s top leaders, the largest such demonstration in
recent Chinese history.
The regime was taken off guard by the failure of its intelli-
gence service to prevent the demonstration and by membership
in Falun Gong of a number of medium-level political and military
leaders. The authorities reacted with an unprecedented public
campaign against the movement. Hundreds of local leaders and
members were arrested. China also asked the United States to ar-
rest and extradite Li, a request the United States quickly declined.
Although the persecution scared many followers and drove
them underground, millions remain in China and several thou-
sand abroad. Exactly how many members Falun Gong has is a
matter of dispute—the government uses a figure of 2 million; Li
claims 100 million. “Membership” may not be an entirely applic-
able concept. Everybody can simply start practicing Falun Gong
by following the instructions from one of the many books, cas-
settes, and Web sites readily available in a variety of languages.
Falun Gong is, basically, a form of Qi Gong. Its main differ-
ences with other Qi Gong groups are the unique authority of
Master Li as the only living person authorized to define exactly
what techniques are to be used and the claim that all previously
secret teachings should now be disclosed. It also emphasizes,
contrary to what groups tolerated by the Chinese regime claim,
that it is essential to add to the practice of the exercises (the Xiu
Lian), a spiritual discipline called “cultivation of the Xinxing.”
This is a simple path based on Buddhism and Confucianism and
aimed at promoting the three key values of zhen (truthfulness),
shan (benevolence), and rhen (forbearance), both at the individual
and the societal level. Falun Gong also teaches the law of karma
and reincarnation, the need for “tribulations” in order to test the
disciple and to pay off karmic debts, and the existence of both be-
nign deities and demonic forces. The aim of Xiu Lian is to
awaken the universal energy of the Falun, so that it may flow
harmoniously through the body, thus guaranteeing well-being.
Although Falun Gong does not reject all forms of modern
medicine, it teaches that many ailments may be cured through its
techniques. There are five key exercises involving movements of
the hands and the legs, in ways reminiscent of tai chi practices.
While the Chinese regime may be able to eradicate, or at least
drive underground, any Falun Gong “organization,” Falun Gong
as a diffuse and unorganized practice will probably remain pop-
ular despite opposition from the government.
Falun Gong
125

The group’s Web site is http://www.falundafa.org.
The Family International (Children of God)
The Family International is the successor organization to the Chil-
dren of God, a Christian group founded by David Brandt Berg
(known to followers as Father David). Berg was a former minister
in the Christian and Missionary Alliance Church, a conservative
holiness denomination in which his mother was an evangelist. In
1967, Berg was informed by his mother about the increasing num-
ber of hippies in Huntington Beach, California. He moved there,
taking over work previously begun by Teen Challenge, a youth
Pentecostal ministry, which centered on the Light Club Mission, a
coffeehouse near the Huntington Beach pier.
Berg’s critical attitudes toward many establishment struc-
tures, including the organized church, and his messages oriented
toward total commitment to a Jesus revolution, attracted the at-
tention of a number of street people, many of whom gave up
drugs and began to live communally, calling themselves Teens
for Christ. In 1969, after Berg received revelation that the group
should leave California, which was threatened by an earthquake,
he and his followers moved to Tucson, Arizona.
Berg began to be referred to as Moses, after one of the mem-
bers claimed to have had a revelation, and by February 1970 the
members of the group started to call themselves “Moses and the
Children of God.” They moved to a ranch near Thurber, Texas.
While they were staying there, William Rambur, a parent of a
member of the group, organized other angry parents into the
Parents’ Committee to Free Our Children from the Children of
God. Accusing the group of keeping their children under drug-
induced and hypnotic control, these parents, with the help of
Theodore Patrick, initiated the practice of deprogramming, phys-
ically kidnapping members of the group, and forcing them to re-
nounce their fidelity to it.
By the middle of the decade, most of the Children had emi-
grated, spurred in part by Berg’s warning of the destructive po-
tential of the comet Kohoutek. Berg continued to exercise his
leadership through a series of “Mo Letters,” which guided the
evolving organization and doctrine of the group. They were
often sold on the street in order to spread the group’s message.
Others were internal documents.
126
Controversial Groups and Movements

Berg continued to exercise the role of a prophet, whose
prophecies, which were increasingly seen as coming from spirit
entities, assumed a fundamental role in supporting the ideas of
the group. To the radical ideas about sexual freedom was added
the most controversial practice of the group, “flirty fishing.” This
practice was introduced by Berg through a Mo Letter in the be-
ginning of 1974, in which he ordered the women of the group to
use their natural sexual appeal and talents to gain new members,
to become Christ’s fish bait—“hookers for Jesus.” This practice
was eventually abandoned, but not before it had attracted exten-
sive negative media attention.
The image of the Children of God eventually became ex-
tremely negative. Berg decided to change the organization of the
group and adopted the use of a family model, asking the follow-
ers to call him “Dad” and giving the Children of God the name
Family of Love. World Services, which functions as a de facto
headquarters, at least for the dispensing of literature, is located in
Switzerland. Berg passed on in 1994.
The Family International, as the organization is now known,
counts about 7,000–10,000 members widely dispersed around the
world. For most of the past several decades, only a few hundred
members resided in the United States, where they were occa-
sionally seen on the streets distributing literature. This situation
began to change in the early 1990s, when members began return-
ing to the United States in large numbers. They were subjected to
a new wave of intensive negative media attention in the summer
of 1993, following raids on their homes in France and Argentina
on trumped-up charges of child abuse. Although eventually ex-
onerated of all charges, the “sex cult” image created by decades
of negative media coverage remains largely unchallenged in the
public consciousness.
The group’s Web site is http://www.thefamily.org.
Hare Krishna Movement and the 
International Society for 
Krishna Consciousness
The International Society for Krishna Consciousness (ISKCON),
better known as the Hare Krishna movement, is a transplanted
Hare Krishna Movement
127

form of conservative Hinduism, representing one of the most
conspicuous religious groups in the West since the late 1960s. Its
followers practice ecstatic worship; those dedicated to monastic
life live a close-knit communalism and are usually noticeable for
wearing orange or white robes. The past dozen or so years has
seen a dramatic increase in the lay community, chiefly composed
of married devotees who raise children, pursue outside profes-
sions, and contribute funds and expertise to the mission.
A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, born Abhay Charan
De (1896–1977), was the founder of the International Society for
Krishna Consciousness. Swami Prabhupada was born in Calcutta,
where he graduated in 1920 with majors in English, philosophy,
and economics. Asked by his guru to write about Krishna Con-
sciousness in English, he authored a commentary on the Bhagavad
Gita, and in 1933 was formally initiated into the Gaudiya Mission.
His guru also gave him a charge to carry Krishna Consciousness to
the West, a charge that he did not take seriously until he retired in
1950.
In 1965, at the age of seventy, he left for the United States. He
began his missionary work in New York City on the Lower East
Side, where he was chosen by a few hippies as their guru. Within
a short time, a center had been opened, and the movement
started to grow. Another center was opened in San Francisco in
1967.
Meanwhile, Swami Prabhupada continued to write and
translate, working on the Srimad-Bhagavatam and the Caitanya-
Caritamrta. In 1968, a copy of his translation of the Bhagavad Gita,
As It Is, appeared. By 1972, more than sixty 400-page volumes of
his work had been published by the Bhaktivedanta Book Trust.
When Swami Prabhupada died in 1977, the twenty-two-person
Governing Board Commission, which included eleven people
empowered to initiate new disciples, began to lead the interna-
tional movement. Many senior disciples of Shrila Prabhupada
were dissatisfied with the new leadership, particularly when the
eleven initiators declared themselves gurus. By the mid-eighties,
this internal dissatisfaction had evoked a reform movement,
which, eventually, overturned the “guru system,” resulting in the
decentralization of spiritual authority within ISKCON.
Although the movement has maintained a high profile in the
past, it was frequently attacked for threatening common family
patterns, with its ascetic, communal, and separatist lifestyle. At
present, the majority of its current membership lives outside
128
Controversial Groups and Movements

communal temples, which has decreased its tension with main-
stream Western society. Members of the movement were early
the target of deprogramming, such as the one of Ed Shapiro by
Ted Patrick in the early 1970s. Other anticult activities included
arousing public opinion against the group, imposing some re-
strictions on the group’s public soliciting at the airports, efforts to
require building permits for the establishment of Krishna tem-
ples, and requiring parade permits.
Despite attacks from anticult groups and the media, the so-
ciety received a favorable welcome from religious scholars, such
as J. Stillson Judah, Harvey Cox, Larry Shinn, and Thomas Hop-
kins, who praised Swami Prabhupada’s translations and de-
fended the group against distorted media images and anticult
misrepresentations. The American Academy of Religion also
welcomed various members of the society.
The movement maintains that the Vedas, the Bhagavad Gita,
and the canonical lives of Krishna are literally true and that 
Krishna is the supreme personal Lord and lives in a paradisiacal
world. It also believes that the souls of all individuals are eternal
and are trapped in a series of material bodies (reincarnation)
owing to ignorance and sensory illusion. The soul overcomes this
identification with the temporary body and lives outside of
karma, by love for Krishna.
The movement’s primary magazine, Back to Godhead, ceased
publication in the mid-1980s, but was revived in 1991, and is cur-
rently published in Alachua, Florida. The movement, which
founded more than 50 centers in the United States, and more
than 175 centers throughout Canada, the British Isles, Europe,
and on other continents, claims 3,000 initiated members and
500,000 lay members who regularly visit a temple at least once a
month.
The group’s Web site is http://www.iskcon.com.
Heaven’s Gate
Marshall Herff Applewhite (aka “Bo” or “Do”) and Bonnie Lu
Nettles (“Peep” or “Ti”) founded one of the most unusual flying
saucer religions ever to emerge out of the occult-metaphysical sub-
culture. “The Two,” as they were sometimes called, met in 1972. In
1973, they had an experience that convinced them that they were
the two witnesses mentioned in Revelation 11. Preaching an 
Heaven’s Gate
129

unusual synthesis of occult spirituality and UFO soteriology, they
began recruiting in New Age circles in the spring of 1975. Follow-
ers were required to abandon friends and family, detach them-
selves completely from human emotions as well as material pos-
sessions, and focus exclusively on perfecting themselves in
preparation for a physical transition (that is, beaming up) to the
next kingdom (in the form of a flying saucer)—a metamorphosis
that would be facilitated by ufonauts.
In the early phase of their movement, Applewhite and Net-
tles taught that the goal of the process they were teaching their
followers was to prepare them to be physically taken aboard the
spacecraft where they would enter a cocoonlike state, eventually
being reborn in a transformed physical body. The notion of res-
urrection is central to Chapter 11 of the book of Revelation, the
biblical passage Applewhite and Nettles came to view as de-
scribing their particular ministry. In the early phase of their
movement, Applewhite and Nettles prophesied that they would
soon be assassinated. They further predicted that they would be
resurrected three and a half days later and taken up in a flying
saucer. The Two asserted that this event—which they termed
“the Demonstration”—would prove the truth of their teachings.
As for their followers, they taught that heaven was the literal,
physical heavens, and those few people chosen to depart with
the Two would, after their physical transformation, become crew
members aboard UFOs.
For followers of the Two, the focus of day-to-day existence
was to follow a disciplined regime referred to as the overcoming
process or, simply, the process. The purpose of this process was
to overcome human weaknesses—which was not dissimilar to
the goal of certain spiritual practices followed by more main-
stream monastic communities. For Applewhite, however, it ap-
pears that stamping out one’s sexuality was the core issue.
Details about how the group came to attach apocalyptic sig-
nificance to the Hale-Bopp comet are tantalizingly scanty. Some-
one outside the group had come to the conclusion that a giant
UFO was coming to earth, “hidden” in the wake of Hale-Bopp.
This individual then placed his opinion on the Internet. When
Heaven’s Gate retrieved this information, Applewhite took it as
an indication that the long-awaited pickup of his group by aliens
was finally about to take place. The decision that the time had
come to make their final exit could not have been made more
than a few weeks before the mass suicide.
130
Controversial Groups and Movements

The idea that the group might depart via suicide had
emerged in Applewhite’s thinking only within the past few
years. The earlier idea—an idea that had set Heaven’s Gate apart
from everyone else—was that a group of individuals selected to
move to the next level would bodily ascend to the saucers in a
kind of “technological rapture.” Applewhite may have begun to
rethink his theology after his beloved partner died because, in
order to be reunited with Nettles, her spirit would have to ac-
quire a new body aboard the spacecraft. Although the death of
Nettles may or may not have been the decisive influence, Apple-
white later adopted the view that Heaven’s Gate would ascend
together spiritually rather than physically.
The group’s mirror Web site is http://www.trancenet.org/
heavensgate/index.html.
The I AM Religious Activity
The I AM Religious Activity is a popularized form of Theosophy,
reformulated to appeal to a broader audience than earlier Theo-
sophical organizations. The founder of the movement was Guy
Ballard (1878–1939), who was born in Kansas. He had long been
interested in occultism and had studied Theosophical teachings.
He married Edna Wheeler (1886–1971) in 1916, and three years
later their son, Donald, was born.
The I AM Activity believes that humanity began in America,
and that this is the seventh and last cycle of history, under the
Lord of the Seventh Ray, Saint Germain. The history of this epoch
will also end in America, which will be the vessel of light to bring
the world into new and paradisiacal times.
These revelations were spread during the lectures of the
three Ballards, who traveled in the 1930s as “accredited messen-
gers” of the masters. Further messages from the ascended mas-
ters, especially from Saint Germain and the master Jesus, were
sometimes produced in public or private. The main teaching is
that the “mighty I AM presence” is God-in-action, which is im-
mediately available. It is also said that one’s “individualized
presence” is a pure reservoir of energy, from which power can be
drawn at will.
Saint Germain and Jesus are considered the mediators be-
tween the “I AM presence” and humans. The ascended masters
were at one time all human beings who became able to transcend
The I AM Religious Activity
131

the physical world through purification of their lives. The goal of
human life is represented by ascension.
The I AM Activity worked publicly from 1937 to 1940 to es-
tablish a group of devoted followers numbering more than 1 mil-
lion. With the death of Guy Ballard on December 29, 1939, the
movement began to decline. Edna Ballard claimed that her hus-
band had become an ascended master. However, the fact that
Guy Ballard had experienced a physical death rather than bodily
ascension threatened the movement’s credibility. The following
year, a sensational trial of the leaders of the movement took
place, after some members of the Ballards’ personal staff accused
the Ballards of obtaining money under fraudulent pretenses. The
indictment was voided in 1944 by the Supreme Court with a
landmark decision on religious liberty. The case was finally dis-
missed after Justice Douglas, in stating the prevailing opinion,
asserted, “Men may believe what they cannot prove. They may
not be put to the proof of their religious doctrines or beliefs.”
The I AM Activity experienced new growth in the 1980s and
is still alive today in a number of cities, where it has temples,
reading rooms, and radio programs. The I AM Activity was di-
rected by Edna Ballard until her death in 1971. The current board
of directors is formed by Mr. and Mrs. Gerald Craig, who are the
“appointed messengers,” and Mount Shasta is a major center.
Every summer, in an amphitheater on the spotless grounds of the
Saint Germain Foundation, the I AM Activity of the Saint Ger-
main Foundation stages a pageant on the life of the “beloved
master, Jesus.” In this version, the crucifixion is left out, whereas
the ascension is what is believed to be important.
The group’s Web site is http://www.saintgermainfoundation.
org.
Impersonal Enlightenment Foundation 
(Moksha Foundation)
The Impersonal Enlightenment Foundation (formerly the Mok-
sha Foundation) is a spiritual group founded by Andrew Cohen.
Cohen has been a teacher of Enlightenment since the mid-1980s.
He was born in New York City in 1955, where he spent his child-
hood and early adolescence, traveling abroad to complete his ed-
132
Controversial Groups and Movements

ucation before returning again in his early twenties. Unable to
forget a spontaneous spiritual experience that occurred when he
was sixteen, Cohen decided to abandon all other aspirations and
at the age of twenty-two became a serious spiritual seeker. His
meeting with Swami Hariharananda Giri led him to the practice
of martial arts and Zen meditation. After pursing many different
spiritual teachers and paths, his seeking led him to India where
in 1986 he met a little-known spiritual teacher named H. W. L.
Poonja. This meeting was a catalyst for a spiritual awakening
that completely transformed Cohen’s life.
Cohen began teaching in India and then in England, the
Netherlands, and Israel. In addition to giving numerous public
talks each year, he holds lengthy retreats and many shorter in-
tensives. In 1988, he returned to the United Sates and established
a group in Cambridge, Massachusetts. A year later, he moved to
Marin County, California, to join a communal group founded by
some of his followers. In the mid-1990s, the group moved its
headquarters once again, this time to the town of Lenox, in west-
ern Massachusetts. Communities of students dedicated to living
his teachings have also formed in New York, Boston, Europe, and
Australia. During his teaching activity, Cohen developed a dif-
ferent point of view from that of his original master, Poonja, and
believed that individuals can express the enlightenment in their
lives. He concluded that his teachings had surpassed his master’s
and has since followed his own beliefs.
Cohen has initiated meetings with teachers, scholars, and
leaders in many different fields of inquiry in order to explore and
elucidate the fundamental truths at the heart of human life. He is
also the founder and editor of What Is Enlightenment? a biannual
publication devoted solely to the purpose of conducting and pro-
moting significant spiritual inquiry. Cohen is the author of a
number of books, including An Unconditional Relationship to Life,
Autobiography of an Awakening, My Master Is My Self, and Enlight-
enment Is a Secret.
After years of quiet development, Cohen found himself in the
public spotlight in the late 1990s. For many years, he had asserted
that people in the spiritual subculture should not turn a blind eye
to the moral and other failings of spiritual teachers, as if a high
state of spiritual development exempted them from ordinary
morality. This critical stance did not earn him any friends. Thus,
when Cohen’s mother turned on her son and wrote a negative
Impersonal Enlightenment Foundation
133

book accusing Cohen of being an egotistical guru who controlled
his students, many people affected by his critique were willing to
accept these accusations at face value.
The group’s Web site is http://www.andrewcohen.org.
International Church of Christ 
(Boston Church of Christ)
The Boston Church of Christ began with a single congregation of
the larger Church of Christ denomination. It has also been re-
ferred to as the Crossroads Movement (actually a distinct move-
ment from which the Boston Movement developed), Multiplying
Ministries, the Disciplining Movement, and the International
Church of Christ.
The Crossroads Movement was begun by Charles H. Lucas,
who came to Gainesville, Florida, in 1967 to serve as campus
minister at the University of Florida. Campus Advance, as the
new campus ministry was called, grew quickly. Two practices
were characteristic of the ministry: “soul talks” and “prayer part-
ners.” Soul talks were evangelistic group Bible studies with
prayer and sharing held in student residences. Prayer partners
was the practice of pairing up a new Christian with a more ma-
ture Christian so that the new Christian could be given one-on-
one direction. Both practices emphasized in-depth involvement
of members in one another’s lives.
In 1972, a freshman at the University of Florida, Kip McKean,
was converted through Campus Advance. McKean trained at
Lucas’s new Crossroads Church of Christ while finishing his ed-
ucation. He left Crossroads and served as campus minister at
other mainline Churches of Christ. In 1979, he accepted an invita-
tion to take over the pulpit and campus ministry of a struggling
thirty-member church in a Boston suburb, the Lexington Church
of Christ. The church was soon renamed the Boston Church of
Christ. Within two years, the thirty-member church had grown to
a membership of 300.
Kip McKean had a vision to establish churches in key met-
ropolitan centers of the world that could in turn evangelize the
cities around them. By 1993, the movement had grown to 42,855
members in 130 congregations worldwide. The church believes
134
Controversial Groups and Movements

that it is unscriptural to have more than one congregation per
city. Usually a church affiliated with the Boston Movement will
take the name of the city as its name, such as the Los Angeles
Church of Christ or the Chicago Church of Christ.
Discipleship is very important to the Boston Movement. In
the movement, a disciple is one who is faithfully following Christ
and has taken on the lifestyle and purpose of making disciples of
all nations. The movement is very exclusive, believing that it is
virtually impossible to be among the elect outside the ranks of
the Boston Movement.
Whereas the Crossroads members chose their own prayer
partners, in the Boston Church of Christ, the leaders of the con-
gregation arrange for older, stronger Christians to give direction
to each of the younger, weaker ones. These partners are always of
the same sex and are to have daily contact and weekly meetings.
These partnerships are not considered optional. “Soul talks” as
started in the Crossroads Movement became “Bible talks” in the
Boston Movement. They are held weekly at regular times and
places and are attended by an average of six to ten members. The
Crossroads Church of Christ and the Boston Church of Christ
have severed all ties with each other. The mainline Churches of
Christ disavowed the Boston Movement in the mid-1980s and are
now ardent opponents of it.
The Boston Church of Christ—which has since changed its
name to the International Church of Christ—has become the sub-
ject of considerable controversy, centering on the level of com-
mitment expected of church members and the authority the
church exercises in members’ lives. Members are expected to put
the church above all else, including job, friends, and family. Each
week, the average member attends at least four or five meetings
for worship and Bible study. Numerous universities around the
country either restrict or bar the movement’s activities on their
campuses. The movement has experienced some cases of forcible
deprogramming of members. A few ex-members have portrayed
the movement in a negative light to the media, and two have pro-
duced books denouncing their former church. The leadership of
the movement has recognized that abuses of authority have oc-
curred and retracted some of its earlier teachings on authority
and submission. Despite the controversy, more people have come
into the movement than leave it.
No active Web site is available for the group.
International Church of Christ
135

Jesus People USA
Jesus People USA (also known as JPUSA, pronounced je-POO-sa)
is an evangelical Christian communitarian group centered in
Chicago. Originating within the Jesus Movement of the early
1970s, the group has continued to play a dynamic role in Christ-
ian youth and alternative or underground cultures through its
music, magazine, Jesus festivals, and lifestyle; the group also
maintains a sizable inner-city ministry.
Jesus People USA began as part of Jesus People Milwaukee,
a communal Jesus People group founded by Jim Palosaari in
1971. The following year, this original group temporarily divided
into three subministries: Jesus People Europe, led by Palosaari,
which traveled to Europe to do youth ministry abroad; Jesus Peo-
ple USA, led by John and Dawn Herrin, which traveled the
United States; and the original Milwaukee commune. The pro-
posed reunion never occurred, however; the Milwaukee com-
mune disbanded, and Jesus People Europe returned to the
United States to form the basis for the Highway Missionaries
and, later, the Servant Community (both now defunct).
The U.S. branch, after traveling to Florida and back, eventu-
ally settled in Chicago, where they continued carrying out youth
revivals, sponsoring a Christian rock group called the Rez Band,
doing street theater and mime work, and publishing a well-pro-
duced street paper, Cornerstone. During the mid-1970s, the com-
munity went through a number of changes; several business ven-
tures were started, including moving, painting, contracting,
roofing, music recording, and graphics. Founder John Herrin
was ejected from the group, and plurality of leadership was in-
stituted in the form of a council of elders assisted by Dawn Her-
rin, the ex-wife of the former leader. In addition, the community
merged with a communal African American Bible-study group,
resulting in an interracial presence often lacking in other Jesus
People groups.
JPUSA affirms the existence and practice of the supernatural
“gifts of the spirit,” such as healing and speaking in tongues,
though within the group these gifts tend to be employed pri-
vately rather than publicly. In spite of seemingly exclusivist the-
ological beliefs, the group admits a certain latitude by affirming
the spiritual unity of all true believers in Christ; Christian hu-
manist strains are also present due to the community’s encour-
136
Controversial Groups and Movements

agement of both individual and collective forms of musical, liter-
ary, and visual artistic expression.
Former members of the community have begun to hold an-
nual reunions; some of these individuals do not recall their time
in the community or their departure with favor. Some have ac-
cused the group’s leaders of excessive control of individuals,
mismanagement, and nepotism. Others have complained that
longtime members who choose to leave should be financially
compensated for their time and effort spent on behalf of the com-
munity. Many of these complaints were publicized in Recovering
from Churches That Abuse. The Jesus People USA community has
responded by opening their community to even greater public
scrutiny, including making public the correspondence dealing
with the allegations; the community also dedicated a double
issue of its magazine to examining the book’s claims.
The group’s Web site is http://www.jpusa.org.
Kashi Church Foundation
The Kashi Church Foundation began in 1976 with the establish-
ment of the Kashi Ashram, located near Sebastian, Florida, by a
group of people that had emerged around a young spiritual
teacher, Jaya Sati Bhagavati Ma. Ma, born Joyce Green, was for-
merly a housewife in Brooklyn, New York. Her life began to
change radically, however, in December 1972 when she had a vi-
sion of someone she, though Jewish, recognized as Jesus Christ.
He would reappear three more times. She turned for guidance to
residents of a nearby Jesuit seminary who offered her both sym-
pathy and understanding. Then in the spring of 1973, she had a
second set of apparitions, this time of a person who called him-
self Nityananda. He appeared to her almost daily for a year and
taught her.
At the time Nityananda appeared, Ma had no knowledge
that such a person had actually lived in India, had begun a move-
ment then headed by Swami Muktananda, and had a disciple
named Swami Rudrananda who initially brought his teachings
to the United States. Nityananda, as he appeared to her, taught
her about what he termed chidakash, the state in which love and
awareness are one. He gave her a new name, Jaya (Sanskrit for
“victory” or “glory”), and mentioned a woman named Hilda.
Green, who began to call herself Joya Santanya, soon found
Kashi Church Foundation
137

Swami Rudrananda and a short time later was led to Hilda
Charlton, an independent spiritual teacher in Manhattan who en-
couraged her to become a teacher.
Through the mid-1970s, Joya Santanya’s teaching activity
led to the founding of some thirteen small communities where
people lived cooperatively and gathered for daily satsang for
meditation. In July 1976, she moved to Florida where land was
purchased and Kashi Ashram was established.
Kashi is an eclectic community tied together by the resi-
dents’ acceptance of Ma as their guru. The dominant teaching is
a form of Adavaita Vedanta, a monistic worldview derived from
the Vedas and the Upanishads, popular Hindu scripture. Resi-
dents at Kashi come from very different backgrounds and have
varying attachments to the religions in which they grew up. The
individual’s devotion to a particular religion is both recognized
and nurtured at Kashi, and shrines have been built to honor the
major religions.
Through the 1990s, Ma became best known for her ministry
to HIV-positive people, especially those who had been unable to
find basic support from their family or help from governmental
and church-related facilities. Beginning with a small ministry in
Los Angeles and southern Florida, the AIDS-related work has be-
come a major aspect of life at Kashi Ashram.
The community is organized on a semicommunal basis.
Each adult member is responsible for an equal share of the bud-
get that is adopted by community consensus. That money covers
the residents’ room and board, the operation of the school, and
the upkeep of the ashram grounds. Thus, all of the members, ex-
cept for the few who work at the ashram, have outside jobs. The
diet is vegetarian with small quantities of fish and milk. No nar-
cotics, alcohol, or tobacco is to be consumed. Chastity is practiced
except for married couples trying to have a child.
The group’s Web site is http://www.kashi.org.
The Local Church
The Local Church, which is also known as the Little Flock, and the
Assembly Hall Movement, was the target of one of the most in-
tense battles in the cult controversy of the early 1980s. The
polemics originated from differences of theological language and
138
Controversial Groups and Movements

particular practices unique to the Local Church, although it
claimed to be an orthodox evangelical Christian body of believers.
The Local Church was founded in the 1920s in China by Ni
Shutsu (1903–1972), who is popularly known by the English
translation of his name, Watchman Nee. Nee’s movement, which
had a modest beginning in Fuzhou, spread through China, with
the foundation of congregations based upon the idea that there
should be only one local church in each city as the basic expres-
sion of the unity of Christianity. Nee was the author of more than
fifty books, which were mostly about Christian life and church
life. The most important of them are The Normal Christian Church
Life and The Spiritual Man, in which he explained his conception
of the tripartite nature of human beings as body, soul, and spirit.
Nee was accused by the new People’s Republic of China of
being a spy for the U.S. and the nationalist governments and was
then exiled from Shanghai and imprisoned in 1952. He died in
prison in 1972. During the 1930s, Nee was joined by Witness Lee,
a former Protestant minister, who became within a few years one
of Nee’s most valuable assistants. He was sent by Nee to Taiwan,
where the church was to flourish and spread around the Pacific
basin.
The movement was brought to the West Coast by members
migrating to the United States. Lee himself moved to the United
States in 1962, where he founded the Living Stream Ministry. Lee
has been a source for innovation in the movement through his in-
troduction of many theological emphases and his initiation of a
number of practices such as “pray reading,” a devotional practice
that uses the words of Scripture as the words of prayer and “call-
ing upon the name of the Lord,” an invocation of God by the rep-
etition of phrases such as “O Lord Jesus.” These practices have
become the subject of controversy.
Much of the controversy between the Local Church and the
Evangelical Christians who perceived Lee’s theological innova-
tions as departing from acceptable Evangelical thought, began in
the early 1970s, when the church in Berkeley was housed in a
building across the street from the World Christian Liberation
Front (WCLF), with which the church had several emotionally
charged encounters. The controversy resulted in the split of the
WCLF into two groups, each of which published a book charging
Lee with heresy and suggesting that Lee denied the traditional
doctrine of the Trinity. Both books also associated the Local
The Local Church
139

Church with a variety of cultic practices, and one of them ac-
cused Lee of mismanagement of church funds and of being the
source of psychological damage to members. Lee and many of
the congregations filed lawsuits against the publishers of the two
books, who apologized to the church.
In 1999, Harvest House, an Evangelical publishing house,
published John Ankerberg and John Weldon’s Encyclopedia of
Cults and New Religions. The Local Church regarded the entry on
themselves to be libelous and eventually filed suit. The case is
proceeding to trial as the present book goes to press.
The group’s Web site is http://www.lsm.org.
Maranatha Christian Churches
Maranatha Christian Churches began in 1972 as a campus min-
istry under the direction of Bob Weiner, formerly a youth pastor
for the Assemblies of God, and his wife, Rose Weiner. Bob Weiner
dropped out of the Evangelical Free Church’s Trinity College at
Deerfield, Illinois, and joined the U.S. Air Force. While in the U.S.
Air Force he encountered Albie Pearson, a former baseball player
turned evangelist-pastor, and received the baptism of the Holy
Spirit. Following his discharge from the military, Weiner joined
with Bob Cording to form Sound Mind, Inc., to evangelize youth.
In 1971, he began to tour college campuses as an evangelist. As a
campus minister, Weiner sought to convert students and train
them in the fundamentals of the Christian faith.
In 1972, Weiner moved to Paducah, Kentucky, where his
wife’s father was minister in the United Methodist Church, and
began a campus ministry at Murray State University. While fo-
cusing on Murray State, he continued to travel as an evangelist
and develop other ministries. By 1980, Weiner had established
thirty Maranatha Campus Ministries. As members graduated
from college, Maranatha Campus Ministries became part of the
larger work, which was named Maranatha Christian Churches. In
Maranatha’s early years, each center had a dorm in which con-
verts could live while attending college, but this is no longer the
case. Maranatha’s work is still focused in the campus ministry,
and all of the congregations are adjacent to a college or university.
During the early 1980s, a variety of accusations were made
against Maranatha Campus Ministries concerning their intense
program for training new members. Many of these accusations
140
Controversial Groups and Movements

proved unfounded. In other cases, program adjustments were
made that have ended any controversies. A program of parent-
student contact was broadly implemented that reduced the prob-
lems that had arisen because of lack of knowledge by parents of
Maranatha and the life shared by its new student members.
General meetings of the fellowship are held weekly, and
most members also participate in small group fellowships.
Maranatha Christian Churches are Pentecostal in doctrine.
Prophecy is an important practice and is seen as ongoing confir-
mation of God’s present activity in the church. Bob and Rose
Weiner have written a series of books published by Maranatha
Publications that are used as textbooks in the discipleship train-
ing work.
Maranatha Leadership Institute in Gainesville, Florida, of-
fered more advanced training for people on a national basis. It
often featured a variety of charismatic leaders not otherwise as-
sociated with Maranatha. A world leadership conference was
held every two years. In 1985, Maranatha began a satellite TV
network show as a televised prayer meeting in which sixty
churches participated in the broadcast, praying for specific re-
quests phoned in by viewers. In 1990, Maranatha disbanded as
an association of churches, though the movement continues.
No active Web site is available for the group.
The Movement for the Restoration 
of the Ten Commandments of God
The Movement for the Restoration of the Ten Commandments of
God was a doomsday religious sect in Uganda that made head-
lines in the wake of what was initially thought to be a mass suicide
in March 2000. The number of bodies increased daily until it ex-
ceeded 1,000. About 530 died in an intentionally set fire that gut-
ted their church in Kanungu, Uganda, on Friday, March 17, 2000.
In the days following the tragedy, police discovered innumerable
other bodies at different sites. All had been murdered prior to the
group holocaust, apparently at the behest of the leadership.
Most of the deaths occurred in Kanungu, a small trading
center, about 217 miles southwest of Kampala, the capital of
Uganda. Though some may still believe that the parishioners had
committed suicide, the consensus opinion is that the group
The Movement for the Restoration of the Ten Commandments
141

leader, Joseph Kibweteere, murdered the members by luring
them inside the church and then setting it on fire. The church’s
windows had been boarded up; its doors were nailed shut with
the members inside. They sang for a few hours. Some witnesses
reported the smell of gasoline at the scene, an explosion that pre-
ceded the fire, and some screams from inside the building.
Before the tragedy, Kibweteere allegedly had said that he
overheard a conversation between Jesus Christ and the Virgin
Mary. Mary had stated that the world would come to an end un-
less humans started to follow the Ten Commandments closely.
The group initially believed that the end of the world would occur
on December 31, 1999. During 1999, members had sold their pos-
sessions, presumably in preparation for the end times when they
would be transported to heaven. They slaughtered cattle and had
a weeklong feast. When the end did not come, Kibweteere
changed the date to December 31, 2000. Later, he taught that the
Virgin Mary would appear on March 17 and take the faithful to
heaven. Devastation would then descend upon the world, and the
remaining 6 billion people in the world would be exterminated.
The movement was founded by excommunicated Roman
Catholic priests: Joseph Kibweteere, Joseph Kasapurari, John Ka-
magara, and Dominic Kataribabo; two excommunicated Roman
Catholic nuns; and Credonia Mwerinde, an ex-prostitute. Most of
the group’s members were originally Roman Catholic. The group
taught that the Catholic Church was an enemy, badly in need of
reform. There own rules came from the Virgin Mary, as chan-
neled through Mwerinde. The leaders taught that the Ten Com-
mandments needed to be restored to their original importance.
The membership appears to have anticipated being taken to
heaven by the Virgin Mary on March 17, 2000. They expected the
end of the world to occur at that time. They slaughtered some
cattle and ordered seventy crates of soda for a feast on March 16.
They said good-bye to friends and relatives beforehand.
There was one initial report, never confirmed, that the mem-
bers had applied gasoline and paraffin to their skin before the ex-
plosion and fire. However, it is difficult to see how the observer
could have witnessed these preparations if the windows and
doors of the church were nailed shut. It is now almost certain that
the tragedy was a mass murder, not a mass suicide: the fact that the
doors of the church were nailed shut seems to indicate that 
the leadership wanted to confine the full membership within the
church in order to murder the entire group. The discovery of 
142
Controversial Groups and Movements

additional bodies that had been murdered and buried in latrines
near the church gives weight to the mass-murder theory. The dis-
coveries of many hundreds of murder victims at other locations
also point toward mass murder.
The murders may have been precipitated by a failed
prophecy. When the end of the world did not occur on December
31, 1999, some members of the sect demanded their money and
possessions back. This, in turn, may have triggered the mass
murders.
No active Web site is available for the group.
The Movement of 
Spiritual Inner Awareness
The Movement of Spiritual Inner Awareness (MSIA) is a contem-
porary religious movement that was founded by John-Roger
Hinkins in 1971. Though MSIA has often been characterized as
“New Age” and it participates in the larger metaphysical subcul-
ture, MSIA’s core spiritual practices lie squarely in the Sant Mat
(Radhasoami) tradition. In 1963, while undergoing surgery for a
kidney stone, Roger Hinkins fell into a nine-day coma. Upon
awakening, he found himself aware of a new spiritual personal-
ity—“John”—who had superseded or merged with his old per-
sonality. After the operation, Hinkins began to refer to himself as
“John-Roger,” in recognition of his transformed self.
In common with Sant Mat groups, MSIA pictures the cosmos
as composed of many different levels or “planes.” At the point of
creation, these levels sequentially emerged from God along a vi-
bratory “stream” until creation reached its terminus in the phys-
ical plane. The Sant Mat tradition teaches that individuals can be
linked to God’s creative energy and that this stream of energy
will carry their consciousness back to God. The Mystical Traveler
Consciousness—which formerly manifested through John-Roger
(it has since been anchored in John Morton, his spiritual succes-
sor)—accomplished this linkup during initiation, although the
individual still had to appropriate and utilize the link through
the practice of special meditation techniques (referred to as spir-
itual exercises), particularly meditation on the mantra “Hu.”
As a low-intensity group that does not make excessive de-
mands upon either the time or the resources of most members,
The Movement of Spiritual Inner Awareness
143

MSIA largely escaped the attention of the anticult movement
until the late eighties. In 1988, the Los Angeles Times published a
highly critical article on MSIA. A similar article appeared in Peo-
ple. Both pieces dwelt on charges by ex-staff members that Hink-
ins had sexually exploited them. Depending significantly upon
the testimony of disgruntled ex-members and drawing heavily
on the “cult” stereotype, MSIA was portrayed as an organization
that was created for no other purpose than to serve the financial,
sexual, and egotistic needs of John-Roger Hinkins. After a brief
moment in the spotlight, reporters turned their attention to other
stories, and MSIA disappeared from the pages of the mass media.
Two events occurred in 1994 that once again brought MSIA to
the attention of the media circus. First was Michael Huffington’s
campaign to become a California senator. Arianna Huffington,
Michael Huffington’s wife, is a member of MSIA. When someone
in the media discovered this fact, the link became a focus of a
number of sensationalistic articles in which all of the earlier accu-
sations against John-Roger Hinkins and MSIA were dragged out
and uncritically repeated. In the same year as the campaign, Peter
McWilliams, an MSIA minister who had coauthored a series of
popular books with Hinkins, dropped out of the movement and
authored a bitter anti-MSIA book, LIFE 102: What to Do When Your
Guru Sues You, which attracted some media attention.
The group’s Web site is http://www.msia.org.
People’s Temple
Born in east-central Indiana on May 13, 1931, James Warren Jones
married Marceline Baldwin in 1949, moved to Indianapolis in
1951, and soon became a self-taught preacher who promoted
racial integration and a veiled communist philosophy within a
Pentecostal framework that emphasized faith healing.
Organizationally, People’s Temple began as a small church.
Jones increasingly modeled the temple after the Peace Mission of
American black preacher Father M. J. Divine. Combining the
Pentecostalist ethic of a caring community with the social gospel
of liberal denominations, the People’s Temple established care
homes for the elderly, ran a free restaurant to feed the hungry,
and maintained a social service center for the down-and-out. In
1960, the unconventional congregation became affiliated with the
144
Controversial Groups and Movements

Christian Church (Disciples of Christ), which long had been com-
mitted to a social ministry.
In 1964, tired of racial intolerance and citing fears of nuclear
holocaust, the People’s Temple moved to the quiet northern Cal-
ifornia town of Ukiah. By the early 1970s, the temple was operat-
ing churches in San Francisco and Los Angeles. In comparison to
both conventional churches and retreatist countercultural com-
munal groups of its day, the People’s Temple was an anomaly—
a relatively disciplined religiously and politically radical collec-
tive. By 1975, the People’s Temple was a formidable force in the
left-liberal political surge in San Francisco and began to reap po-
litical rewards.
During 1972 and 1973, Jones used internal defections and
small incidents of external “persecution” as the warrant to estab-
lish the People’s Temple’s “Promised Land”—an “agricultural
mission” eventually called Jonestown—in a remote corner of
Guyana, an ethnically diverse, socialist-governed South Ameri-
can country bordering the Caribbean. In the summer of 1977,
Jones finally ordered the collective migration for which the Peo-
ple’s Temple had begun preparing four years earlier. At the time,
it was widely believed that they left California because of press
exposés, in which opponents raised the key issue of custody over
children in the People’s Temple.
In November 1978, California Congressman Leo Ryan and a
group of concerned relatives and journalists flew to the capital of
Guyana, Georgetown. At Jonestown, on the evening of Novem-
ber 17, 1978, Jonestown offered the visitors an orchestrated wel-
come. But during the festivities, a note was passed to a reporter
by community members who wanted to leave. The next day, at
the Port Kaituma airstrip, as the travelers started loading two
planes, a Jonestown man posing as a defector pulled out a pistol
in the smaller plane and started shooting. Simultaneously, a trac-
tor came up pulling a flatbed; from it, the Jonestown sharpshoot-
ers shot toward the other plane. Left dead were Congressman
Leo Ryan, three newsmen, and defector Patricia Parks.
At Jonestown, Jim Jones told the assembled community that
they would no longer be able to survive as a community. With a
tape recorder running, Jones argued, “If we can’t live in peace,
then let’s die in peace.” One woman spoke against the plan, but
others argued in favor. Amid low wails, sobbing, and the shrieks
of children, people walked up to take the “potion” laced with
People’s Temple
145

cyanide, then moved out of the pavilion to huddle with their
families and die.
No active Web site is available for the group.
The Raelian Movement International
The Raelian Movement International was founded in 1973 by a
French race-car driver and journalist, Claude Vorilhon (Rael to
his followers), born in 1946 in Vichy, France. The movement
began with Rael’s encounter with extraterrestrials during a walk-
ing tour of the Clermont-Ferrand volcanic mountains in France.
These beings, whom Rael describes in his book Space Aliens Took
Me to Their Planet, entrusted him with a message for humanity.
This message concerns our true identity: we were “implanted”
on earth by a team of extraterrestrial scientists, the “Elohim,”
who created us from their own DNA in laboratories. Rael’s mis-
sion is to warn humankind that since 1945 and Hiroshima, we
have entered the “age of apocalypse” in which we have the
choice of destroying ourselves with nuclear weapons or making
the leap into planetary consciousness.
Denying the existence of God and the soul, Rael presents as
the only hope of immortality a regeneration through science, and
to this end members participate in four annual festivals so that the
Elohim can fly overhead and register the Raelians’ DNA codes on
their machines. This initiation ritual, called “the transmission of
the cellular plan,” promises a kind of immortality through
cloning. New initiates sign a contract that permits a mortician to
cut out a piece of bone in their forehead (the “third eye”) and mail
it packed in ice to Rael, who in turn relays it to the Elohim.
The movement currently claims around 30,000 members
worldwide, distributed mainly in French-speaking Europe, Japan,
and Quebec. Members are encouraged through summer courses to
achieve worldly success in their careers, to have better health
through avoiding all recreational drugs and stimulants, and to en-
large their capacity to experience pleasure, which, Rael claims, will
strengthen their immune system and enhance their intelligence
and telepathic abilities. Rael advises Raelians not to marry or ex-
acerbate the planetary overpopulation problem, but to commune
with the wonder of the universe by exploring their sexuality. To
this end, Raelians participate annually in the Sensual Meditation
Seminar in a rural setting, which features fasting, nudity, sensory
146
Controversial Groups and Movements

deprivation and awareness exercises, and sexual experimentation,
the ultimate goal being to experience “cosmic orgasm.”
The Raelians have always captured the interest of journal-
ists, who have tended to portray them as delightful, harmless
nuts until comparatively recently. The Raelians aroused some
controversy in 1992 by distributing free condoms in the play-
ground of the major high schools of Quebec in protest of the
Catholic Schoolboard’s decision not to have condom machines
installed. Anticult organizations have portrayed Rael as a sexual
libertine enjoying a luxurious life at the expense of his followers.
Raelians have been portrayed in the media in France as Satanists,
child sex abusers, and anti-Semites. Lawsuits have been
launched by relatives excluded from the wills of deceased
Raelians. More recently, the Raelians have been in the headlines
as a result of their claim to have successfully cloned human be-
ings.
The group’s Web site is http://www.rael.org.
Rajneesh Foundation International 
(Osho Commune International)
Bhagwan Rajneesh (1931–1990), founder of the Rajneesh Foun-
dation International and the Osho Commune International, was
born Rajneesh Chandra Mohan in Kuchwada, India. On March
21, 1953, during his early college days, he announced an experi-
ence of samadhi, or enlightenment. He went on to receive his MA
in philosophy in 1957 and took a professorship at Jabalpur Uni-
versity. Over the following years, the tensions between his work
as scholar and his position as unorthodox spiritual teacher be-
came too great, and he resigned from the university in 1966.
In 1970, Rajneesh founded a congregation in Bombay and
the next year adopted the title “Bhagwan,” or “God.” He in-
tended this to signify his method of direct, soul-to-soul teaching,
rather than an intellectualized experience. In 1974, his following
had grown sufficiently to support the purchase of six acres in
Pune, which became his headquarters. Drawing from sources as
diverse as humanistic psychology and Sufism, he believed that
releasing emotions and developing self-expression in freedom
were key elements in the process toward enlightenment. He
taught “dynamic meditation,” which activated the body through
Rajneesh Foundation International
147

various means, including regulated breathing, chanting, and
screaming. He encouraged indulgence in sex as liberating and
consciousness raising. Initiates took vows, not to renounce life,
but to embrace it with abandon.
Rajneesh’s following became almost entirely European and
American, as Indians abandoned his teachings as immoral. Seek-
ing a more conducive environment, Rajneesh moved to a 64,000-
acre ranch near Antelope, Oregon, in 1981. As his unusual teach-
ings and lavish lifestyle (he had ninety-three Rolls-Royces)
became known in the area, and particularly after he proposed
building a communal village to be called Rajneeshpuram, oppo-
sition became as intense there as in India. In 1985, he was charged
with immigration fraud and deported back to India, where he re-
activated the Pune compound.
In 1988, Rajneesh dropped “Bhagwan” from his name in
favor of “Osho,” meaning “one upon whom the heavens shower
flowers,” and the organization was renamed Osho Commune In-
ternational. On January 19, 1990, he died suddenly without hav-
ing appointed a successor. The organization continues under the
leadership of some of his close disciples.
The group’s Web site is http://www.osho.com.
Rama Seminars
Rama (b. 1950), sometimes called Zen Master Rama, founder of
the Rama Seminars, was born Frederick Lenz in San Diego, Cali-
fornia. When Lenz was two, the family moved to Stamford, Con-
necticut, where his father eventually became mayor. Lenz re-
ceived a BA from the University of Connecticut, then a PhD in
1979 from the State University of New York. While working on
his graduate degrees he was a lecturer in English at the New
School for Social Research.
Meanwhile, beginning at age eighteen, Lenz studied yoga
under Sri Chinmoy, who gave him the name Atmananda. As At-
mananda, he taught yoga classes in New York. In 1979, after fin-
ishing his degree, he moved to San Diego, California, and opened
a Chinmoy meditation center. The following year, he closed the
center, moved to Los Angeles, and founded Lakshmi, after the
Hindu goddess. He quickly gained a large following after stu-
dents reported that during meditation sessions he could levitate,
disappear, or exude beams of light.
148
Controversial Groups and Movements

At first teaching under his own name, he began to empha-
size his previous incarnations as a Zen master. He taught what he
called Tantric Zen. In 1983, he announced his new name of Rama,
to indicate his status as the ninth incarnation of the Hindu god
Vishnu. Humanity is at the end of a cycle, in this case a dark age
immediately preceding an incarnation of Vishnu. Rama is one of
the names given a prior incarnation of Vishnu. Although Rama
does not claim to be the same as that prior incarnation, he does
claim to be an embodiment of a portion of that prior incarnation.
By 1985, Rama had about 800 full-time disciples in four cen-
ters—San Diego, Los Angeles, San Francisco, and Boston. To ac-
commodate the new growth, he dismantled Lakshmi and rein-
corporated as Rama Seminars. Rama Seminars then took up the
task of enlightening those individuals who began with Lakshmi.
The teachings of the seminar are styled by Rama as Tantric Zen,
a formless Zen that incorporates Chan, Vajrayana Buddhism,
Taoism, and jnana yoga.
Rama has been the center of a series of controversies, many
involving former women devotees who claim abuse and sexual
exploitation. Some parents of current and former members
formed an anticult group directed specifically at Rama, called
Lenz Watch, and a number of followers have been kidnapped
and assaulted by deprogrammers. Rama eventually concluded
that at least some such followers were engaged in a prolonged re-
volt against their parents—a conflict they exacerbated by being
his followers. As a consequence they were ejected from the orga-
nization, and the controversy around Rama died down.
In 1995, Rama closed down his teaching activities, dissolved
his organization, and turned his full attention to the highly suc-
cessful businesses in which he was engaged with some of his stu-
dents. He authored several spiritual novels, including Surfing the
Himalayas. Rama died unexpectedly in a drowning accident near
his home in 1998.
No active Web site is available for the group.
Ramtha’s School of Enlightenment
A Gnostic esoteric organization founded and headed by JZ
Knight who channels Ramtha, a spiritual entity believed to have
lived on earth approximately 35,000 years ago. Knight was born
Judith Darlene Hampton in Roswell, New Mexico, on March 16,
Ramtha’s School of Enlightenment
149

1946. In Tacoma, Washington, in 1977, Knight had her first en-
counter with Ramtha one Sunday afternoon. She and her hus-
band had been playing with pyramids, then a rage within the
New Age community, when, without prior warning, Ramtha ap-
peared to the startled housewife as she was alone working in her
kitchen. Ramtha began to speak through her, and over the next
few years she emerged as a channel. During her channeling, she
is in a full trance and Ramtha operates as a second complete per-
sonality. Upon awakening, Knight has no memory of what has
been said.
Knight first publicly operated as a channel in November
1978 to a small group in Tacoma and found an immediate public
response. In 1979, she began to travel to gatherings in different
parts of the country and allowed Ramtha to speak through her.
The number of these events, termed “Dialogues,” increased dra-
matically in 1980, and through the early 1980s she expanded the
amount of time she could stay in trance. By the mid-1980s, she
was regularly holding two-day weekend Dialogues drawing
3,000 to 7,000 people.
Knight became the most prominent New Age channeler, and
books, cassettes, and videotapes drawn from Ramtha’s teachings
could be found in metaphysical bookstores across North America.
Several celebrities found their way to Ramtha’s door, and the size
of his audiences jumped after author Jess Stern included a chap-
ter on him in his book Soul Mates (1984) and Shirley MacLaine
spoken glowingly of Ramtha in her book Dancing in the Light
(1985).
In 1988, Knight began withdrawing from public appear-
ances and made a significant change in direction in the found-
ing of Ramtha’s School of Enlightenment. The school, formally
initiated in May 1988, would become the place of the students’
learning and practice of the spiritual disciplines required if they
were to leave behind their limited existence and assume the es-
sential godlike mastery that was their real goal and purpose in
life.
During the late 1980s and early 1990s, Knight went through
a period of intense criticism. Also in the 1980s, Knight’s love of
horses led her to begin a business of raising and selling Arabian
horses. While the business prospered for several years, at one
point in the mid-1980s the bottom fell out of the Arabian horse
market, her business went bankrupt, and Knight was plunged
150
Controversial Groups and Movements

into debt. At the same time, a number of students who had in-
vested in the business lost their shirts. Many had done so with an
understanding that Ramtha had approved and sanctioned their
investment.
As Knight recovered financially, she offered to pay back all
of the students (as well as the other investors) any money they
had lost. Though some refused her offer, she eventually returned
the investment to all who accepted it. From 1988 to 1995,
Ramtha’s School of Enlightenment issued no publications for cir-
culation to the general public but early in 1996 began issuing a
broad range of new books and tapes.
The group’s Web site is http://www.ramtha.com.
Rastafarianism
The Rastafarian movement originated on the island of Jamaica.
After the emancipation of the slaves in 1833, many joined the
mission societies. However, when their material position did not
improve, they founded or joined movements that had Afro-reli-
gious elements in their approach. Mayalism, which included as-
pects of the black Jamaican religions in its belief system, experi-
enced a revival. Its followers, known as “Angelic People,”
maintained that the world would come to an end and that Christ
was coming, sent by Jah. Jah was their word for God—a word
used later by the Rastafarians. The so-called mial people (from a
syncretistic belief system called Obeah-myal) were the first to en-
visage a transformed social cosmos.
Marcus Garvey came to the fore in the 1920s with his slogan
“Africa for the Africans.” It appealed to many blacks, both within
and without Africa, and his message was nowhere as influential
as on the island of Jamaica where he lived. He said in one of his
speeches that the blacks should look to Africa, that when a black
king was born the time of their liberation would be near.
Africa represents a spiritual homeland for the Rastafarians.
The first Rastafarians appeared in Jamaica in 1930 during the
crowning of Haile Selassie as emperor of Ethiopia, seen as the
king of kings, lord of lords, conquering lion of the tribe of Judah.
The book of Revelation was seen in a new light, especially the
words, “And I saw a strong angel proclaiming with a loud voice,
‘who is worthy to open the scroll and break its seals?’” (5:2).
Rastafarianism
151

“Then one of the elders said to me, ‘Weep not lo, the Lion of the
tribe of Judah, the Root of David, has conquered, so that he can
open the scroll and its seven seals!’” (5).
Since then, the Rastafarian movement has become an impor-
tant subculture of Jamaica. It is a religion, an ideology, a cultural
movement—but not a political innovation. Culturally, it has
many African and Jamaican facets, with some Anglo-Spanish
contents added. Politically, there was some connection with
forces of the black liberation movement that rebelled against Ja-
maica’s neocolonialism. The movement has much to do with de-
prived economic circumstances.
Leipold Howell was the most influential person in spread-
ing the Rastafarian doctrine. He stated that blacks were the true
descendants of Israel but that they were enslaved by the whites,
the agents of Babylon. Ras Tafari, he believed, would soon end
the rule of the white man and would send ships to return the
children of Africa to Ethiopia. Between 1963 and 1978, the politi-
cal issues were liberation and revolution. The movement moved
out of the religious context into the political arena. With this
politicizing stance, themes that emphasized the destruction of
Babylon became central to their songs.
Conspicuous were their “dreadlocks,” long locks of hair that
are an essential part of the natural man (Lev. 19:27, 21:5; Num.
6:5). These dreadlocks are symbols of their blackness, dignity,
and honor. Because black people are like sheep, calm and unag-
gressive, they have wool on their heads, whereas the whites have
hair. Blacks who debase themselves by becoming like goats and
using a comb, scissors, and a razor are responsible for the world’s
sin.
Many saw the Rastafarian or the Rasta-man type as a men-
tally retarded drug addict who would have a degrading effect on
the moral order if not checked. In Jamaica, the middle-class
white and black Jamaican, as well as the Americans, generally
avoided the Rastafarians since they considered the “cult” mem-
bers to be not only mentally deranged or psychopaths but also
criminals of the most dangerous type because some of their lead-
ers concealed weapons and explosives. As indicated earlier, how-
ever, attitudes toward the Rastafarians changed in Jamaica dur-
ing the latter part of the seventies with growing appreciation of
their cultural contributions.
The group’s Web site is http://www.rastafarian.net.
152
Controversial Groups and Movements

Santeria
Santeria is a magical religion that has its origins among the
Yoruba people of West Africa. In the early nineteenth century, the
Yoruba were enslaved in great numbers and taken to Cuba and
Brazil, where they were able to form Yoruba-speaking communi-
ties. Yoruba priests and priestesses created new lineages of initi-
ates dedicated to the Yoruba spirits called orishas, which was
translated into Spanish as santos (literally, “saints”). This led to
the people calling the Yoruba traditions in Cuba Santeria, “the
way of the saints.” Since the Cuban revolution of 1959, more than
1 million Cubans have come to the United States, some of them
priests and priestesses of Santeria.
Santeria recognizes a remote and almighty supreme being
who is best understood as a personification of fate or destiny. In
Santeria, God is invoked by the Yoruba title Olodumare, the
owner of all destinies. Individuals are given their own destinies
by Olodumare. In order to fulfill these destinies with grace and
power, an individual requires guidance from a variety of spirits
called orishas. Trained priests and priestesses consult oracles to
determine the sacrificial foods and actions necessary to secure
the power and presence of an orisha. One particular orisha will
begin to assert itself as an individual devotee’s patron.
When Santeria first came to the United States with Cuban
immigrants, the appeal of the religion was primarily to fellow
immigrants. In the United States, the houses of the spirits offered
services for cultural survival, mutual aid, and spiritual fulfill-
ment. The houses have also offered spiritual opportunities to a
variety of outsiders who have come in contact with the traditions
for the first time in the United States. Teaching within Santeria
has been done orally in the face-to-face context of initiation. The
teachings are secret and available only to those who have been
chosen by elders to receive them.
The most controversial element of Santeria in the eyes of out-
siders is the slaughter of animals as part of feasts for the orishas.
Most of the more important ceremonies require a feast to be pre-
pared for the spirits and to be enjoyed by the assembled commu-
nity. In order to fix the meal to the spirit’s specifications, the foods
must be prepared and cooked according to strict recipes and
properly consecrated with certain prayers and rhythms. Animals
Santeria
153

for the feast must be slaughtered by a priest or priestess initiated
specially to this task in the presence of the community and to the
accompaniment of the correct chants. This insistence on animal
slaughter has caused a number of problems in the urban centers
of the United States, particularly in the crowded neighborhoods
of New York and Miami. Problems with the storage of the animals
before the ceremony and the disposal of the remains afterward
have spurred concerns on the part of municipal authorities.
In 1987, the city of Hialeah, Florida, enacted a ban against
“animal sacrifice” directly aimed at the growing Santeria com-
munity of the city. One Santeria house decided to challenge the
ban and brought the case before the Supreme Court in 1992. In
June 1993, the Supreme Court unanimously declared the Hialeah
ordinances unconstitutional.
The group’s Web site is http://www.church-of-the-lukumi.
org.
Satanism and the Church of Satan
Organized Satanist groups were quite rare prior to the 1960s. A
new form of Satanism was initiated with the founding of the
Church of Satan by Anton LaVey on April 30, 1966, proclaimed
the beginning of the Satanic era. Modern Satanism continued to
develop in various directions by the several groups that later
split off from this organization. The Church of Satan originated
from an attempt to reorganize modern occult and magical teach-
ings around a Satanic motif. The church advocates a philosophy
of individual pragmatism and hedonism, rather than emphasiz-
ing the worship of Satan.
Many of LaVey’s teachings focused on self-assertion and the
gratification of an individual’s physical and mental nature. He
considered Satan a Promethean figure representing indulgence,
vital existence, undefiled wisdom, kindness to the deserving, and
vengeance. The church also taught responsibility to the responsi-
ble, the notion that the human being is just another animal, and
so-called sins lead to physical or mental gratification. According
to LaVey, Satan is a symbol representing these values.
The Church of Satan is based on a philosophy that views
each person as living according to his own rules, although illegal
acts and drugs are opposed by the church. Sex is considered the
strongest instinct and natural. Three principal holidays are cele-
154
Controversial Groups and Movements

brated by the church. The first one is the individual’s birthday.
Halloween and Walpurgisnacht—the latter a supposedly Satanic
holiday—are the other two major days. Rituals are regarded as
psychodramas and as magical acts focusing upon psychokinetic
force.
In 1967, the church received the attention of the media when
LaVey performed both the first Satanic wedding and a Satanic fu-
neral for a sailor. Membership grew rapidly, though the active
membership was rarely more than 1,000. In 1969, LaVey pub-
lished the first of three books, The Satanic Bible, containing the
basic philosophy of the Church of Satan. It was followed by The
Compleat Witch (1970) and The Satanic Rituals (1972). By the 1970s,
the Church of Satan had a national membership and groups in
many cities around the United States. The Cloven Hoof, edited ini-
tially by LaVey and later by others, was the newsletter of the
church.
The Church of Satan was a rich source of short-lived splinter
groups. In 1973, the Church of Satanic Brotherhood was formed
by group leaders in Michigan, Ohio, and Florida. Other members
of the Church of Satan in Kentucky and Indiana left to form the
Ordo Templi Satanis. As more schisms occurred, LaVey dis-
banded the remaining grottos, the local units of the Church of
Satan, in 1975, effectively dismantling his organization as a func-
tioning church.
The headquarters of the church are located in San Francisco,
California, where it was founded. LaVey died in 1997, and the
leadership passed to his live-in secretary, Blanche Barton, who is
also the mother of his son. Peter Gilmore is the current high priest.
There have been hot disputes between the original Church of
Satan and new Satanist groups since the seventies; this conflict—
especially on the Internet—has increased since LaVey’s death.
The great majority of contemporary Satanists do not belong
to any formal Satanic organizations. Instead, most participate in
a loose, decentralized Satanic movement that coheres as a dis-
tinct religious community largely by virtue of adherence to cer-
tain themes in the thought of Anton LaVey, especially as ex-
pressed in The Satanic Bible. The Internet has been a major factor
facilitating this movement.
It should finally be mentioned that organized Satanism was
associated with the ritual-abuse hoax of the late 1980s and early
1990s. During these years, the reality of a vast underground net-
work of evil Satanists abusing children and others was accepted
Satanism and the Church of Satan
155

by significant segments of the law enforcement community as
well as by numerous therapists. Less responsible members of the
mass media, attracted by the sensationalism of these claims,
avidly promoted the idea. The ritual-abuse scare began a sharp
decline after about 1992. By the mid-nineties, public opinion had
shifted, and the reality of this secret network had been rejected by
almost everyone except certain groups of conservative Christians.
The group’s Web site is http://www.churchofsatan.com.
Scientology, Church of
The Church of Scientology, one of the genuinely new religions to
originate in the United States in the twentieth century, was
founded by L. Ron Hubbard (1911–1986). Hubbard grew up
mostly in Montana, but as a teenager he traveled throughout
Asia and the East. In 1929, he enrolled in George Washington
University, studying mathematics, engineering, and nuclear
physics. He subsequently took up a literary career, publishing
numerous stories and screenplays in various genres, including
adventure, mystery, and science fiction. Hubbard served in the
U.S. Navy during World War II.
By 1950, Hubbard had completed enough of his research to
write Dianetics: The Modern Science of Mental Health. This book de-
scribed techniques designed to rid the mind of irrational fears
and psychosomatic illnesses. Dianetics quickly became a best-
seller, and groups were soon formed so that individuals could as-
sist each other in the application of Hubbard’s “auditing” tech-
niques. He lectured extensively and wrote more books. In 1951,
he announced that the “applied religious philosophy” of Scien-
tology had been born. It was described as a subject separate from
dianetics, as it dealt not only with the mind of an individual but
also with one’s nature as a spiritual being.
In 1954, the first Church of Scientology was established in
Los Angeles, California. In 1959, Hubbard moved to Saint Hill
Manor, in Sussex, England, and the worldwide headquarters of
Scientology was relocated there. In 1966, Hubbard resigned his
position as executive director of the church and formed the “Sea
Organization,” a group of dedicated members of the church who
originally lived aboard a fleet of ships. In 1975, these activities
outgrew the ships and were moved onto land in Clearwater,
Florida. From this time on until his death in 1986, Hubbard con-
156
Controversial Groups and Movements

tinuously wrote and published materials on the subjects of dia-
netics and Scientology, as well as a number of works of science
fiction.
The Church of Scientology has been involved in a consider-
able number of controversial episodes since 1958, such as battles
concerning tax issues, a ten-year battle with the Food and Drug
Administration regarding the Electro-meters used to assist audit-
ing, and a conflict with the Australian government. The most no-
torious series of events in the church began in July 1977, when the
FBI conducted a raid on the Washington, D.C., and Los Angeles
churches and seized many files. The raid was declared illegal, but
the documents remained in government possession and were
open to public scrutiny. According to these documents, the church
was keeping files on people it considered unfriendly, and there
had been various attempts to infiltrate anticult organizations.
After the raid, the church sent a number of top officials
incognito to selected government agencies that were collecting
data on the church. However, several members were indicted
and convicted for theft of government documents. The convicted
members were released from their offices in the church, which
began a reorganization and closing of the office responsible for
initiating the illegal activities.
Problems with the IRS continued through the 1980s and
1990s. L. Ron Hubbard was charged with criminal tax evasion, and
the IRS often moved against the church in ways that questioned its
tax-exempt status. These problems terminated in a landmark deci-
sion in 1993, when the IRS ceased all litigation and recognized the
Church of Scientology as a legitimate religious organization. The
church has also been extensively attacked in Europe.
The group’s Web site is http://www.scientology.org.
Shambhala International
Shambhala International, originally known as Vajradhatu, has
been responsible for stimulating the growth of Tibetan Buddhism
in the United States. It was found by Chogyam Trungpa Rimpoche
(1939–1987), who emphasized Buddhism as a practice to awaken
the mind through three aspects: (1) meditation, the state of being
in the present moment, which consists of training the mind to exist
in the here and now; (2) study, which sharpens the understanding
of the experience of meditation and the communication of the 
Shambhala International
157

experience to others; and (3) work, which allows the meditator to
share what has been learned with others.
Trungpa was born in the village of Geje in northeast Tibet
and was identified as the tenth incarnation of Trungpa Tulku
(one of the Tibetan lineages where the same person is supposed
in incarnate over and over, like the Dalai Lama) by the monks of
the Buddhist sect known as Karmapa Kargyupa. He was trained
at Dudtsi-til Monastery and received his degrees when he was a
teenager. He became a monk and, after the invasion of Tibet by
China in 1959, went to India where he learned English. He was
then allowed to go to the West, and in 1963 he went to Oxford,
where he studied art, psychology, and comparative religion.
During his stay in Oxford, Trungpa discovered the Buddhist
contemplative center Johnstone House in Scotland. After a severe
injury in 1969, he decided to become a layman in order to better
communicate to Western people the complicated and sophisti-
cated Tibetan tradition. Cutting through Spiritual Materialism is the
title of one of Trungpa’s early books as well as a major theme of
his teaching, according to which the primary mistake of Western
followers of a spiritual discipline is their conversion of what they
learned to egoistic uses.
After marrying Diana Judith Pybus in 1970, Trungpa immi-
grated to the United States. In Vermont, some of his followers
built the Tail of the Tiger Monastery. He gave several lectures
around the country and established many centers, such as the
Rocky Mountain Dharma Center at Fort Collins, Colorado, a
small facility used primarily for meditative retreats and other
short-term programs. In 1973, he established Vajradhatu.
In 1974, Trungpa held the first seminar that led to the for-
mation of the Naropa Institute, which has received the support of
Buddhist leaders and scholars throughout North America. Dur-
ing the same year, he received a visit from Gyalwa Karmapa, the
international leader of the Kargyupa Buddhists, who performed
the famous black hat ceremony and recognized Trungpa as a vaj-
racarya, that is, a spiritual master.
In 1976, Trungpa named Thomas Rich, an American disciple,
as his dharma successor. Rich, who took the name Osel Tendzin, as-
sumed administrative leadership of the community when Trungpa
died. In 1989, the Los Angeles Times broke the story that Tendzin had
AIDS. It was also reported that for three years he had known of his
infection and had continued to have sexual relations with others
without telling them of the risk. He was then asked by the organi-
158
Controversial Groups and Movements

zation’s board to take a permanent leave of absence. Tendzin died
in 1990. Trungpa’s son, Sawang Osel Rangdrol Mukpo, succeeded
him, returning some stability to the organization.
Since its formation, Shambhala International has grown con-
sistently, although it was early the center of controversy because
of Trungpa’s unmonklike personal habits, such as eating meat
and using both alcohol and tobacco. One controversial episode
occurred in the fall of 1975, when a pacifist student attending the
classes for advanced students at the Naropa Institute was dis-
turbed by the bloody images in some of the Tibetan material used
during the sessions. The same student, who was an outstanding
poet, was stripped of his clothes after being ordered by Trungpa
to return to a Halloween party at Naropa that he had left earlier
in the evening with a friend. The incident became the subject of
articles in a national magazine and a book.
The group’s Web site is http://www.shambhala.org.
Siddha Yoga Dham Associates
The Siddha Yoga Dham was founded in 1975 by the siddha master
Swami Muktananda Paramahansa (1908–1982), also known as
Baba. He left home at the age of fifteen and began wandering
throughout India, studying philosophy and practicing the various
branches of yoga. In 1947, he received shaktipat initiation, which is
the awakening of the spiritual energy known as kundalini,
through the grace of the guru, in this case Bhagawan Nityananda.
The practice includes meditation, chanting, service, and devotion
to the guru. After nine years of intense spiritual practice, he at-
tained full self-realization. He succeeded Nityananda in the siddha
lineage, and established an ashram, Gurudev Siddha Peeth, near
the town of Ganeshpuri, where the first American seekers began
to arrive in the 1960s.
In 1970, Baba was invited to undertake his first world tour,
which lasted three months and included stops in Europe, New
York, Dallas, Los Angeles, and Australia. Shortly after his visit,
the first centers were established in the United States. Large cen-
ters were established in South Fallsburg, New York, and Oak-
land, California, and several hundred smaller centers were
founded throughout the world.
Among the visitors to Ganeshpuri was Werner Erhard,
founder of Erhard Seminars Training, who invited Baba to return
Siddha Yoga Dham Associates
159

to the West for two years. His final journey, lasting three years,
was made in 1978. Baba spent the last years of his life in Ganesh-
puri. Swami Chidvilasananda, known as Gurumayi, succeeded
Baba at his death. She is now the head of the siddha lineage and
travels the world, giving initiation and teaching.
The Siddha Yoga Dham was involved in two major scandals
during the 1980s. After Baba’s death, he was accused by some of
his associates of taking sexual liberties with female disciples. In
addition, in 1986 the Illustrated Weekly of India published two sto-
ries concerning charges made by Swami Nityananda against his
sister Swami Chidvilasananda. However, a defamation case was
filed against the magazine, which in 1987 published a full retrac-
tion and apology.
The group’s Web site is http://www.siddhayoga.org.
Sikh Dharma (Healthy, Happy, 
Holy Organization)
Yogi Bhajan (b. 1929), a well-educated Sikh from Delhi, India,
moved to Toronto in 1968. From Toronto he moved to Los Ange-
les in December 1968, and in 1969 he founded an ashram and the
Healthy, Happy, Holy Organization (3HO) to teach kundalini
yoga. Corporately, 3HO was later supplanted by Sikh Dharma,
but 3HO was retained as Sikh Dharma’s educational wing.
The Sikh religion was founded by Guru Nanak (1439–1538),
the first of ten gurus to be recognized by Sikhs. Nanak asserted
that there was one God, the Creator, and that he transcended the
barriers of race, caste, and creed. His followers were taught to
earn an honest living by the sweat of their brow and to share
their possessions with those in need. His writings and those of
his successors, compiled into the Siri Guru Granth Sahib, became
the guru for the movement following the death of the tenth guru,
Guru Gobind Singh. 
3HO Sikhs are vegetarian, usually preferring natural foods.
Fish, meat, alcohol, and drugs are prohibited. Several members
have opened vegetarian restaurants and groceries. They also pre-
fer natural methods of healing. The traditional holidays of
Sikhism are observed by 3HO Sikhs, such as Balsakhi Day, the
birthday of Khalsa (April), the martyrdom days of Guru Tegh 
160
Controversial Groups and Movements

Bahadur (November) and Guru Arjun Dev (May), and the birth-
days of the ten gurus.
The first controversy involving the Sikh Dharma regarded
its relationship to the older Punjabi Sikh community. American
Sikhs criticized Punjabi Sikhs for becoming lax in their discipline.
An attack followed on Yogi Bhajan by Dr. Narinder Singh Ka-
pany, editor of the Sikh Sangar, the magazine of the Sikh Founda-
tion, who condemned Bhajan’s emphasis on yoga and diet. Other
Sikh leaders echoed Kapany’s criticisms in the United States, as
well as in India. Although these issues were never resolved, Bha-
jan’s emphasis on orthodoxy was supported by the headquarters
of Sikh authority in Amritsar.
Sikh Dharma has received relatively little attention from the
anticult movement. Few deprogramming attempts took place. In
the early 1980s, militant Sikhs announced a policy of actively op-
posing any attempts by deprogrammers to attack their organiza-
tion. No further attempts were reported.
Yogi Bhajan was accused by one ex-member of sexual in-
volvement with several of his staff members, but there was no
verification of the charges. In 1984, a number of high-ranking
leaders in the Sikh Dharma left the organization, complaining of
the intense discipline and being cut off from the Sikh community
as a whole and middle-American culture.
Controversy has mainly been focused in other issues, such
as members’ dress, especially the turban, as in the case of
Thomas Costello who, in 1971, faced a military court-martial for
refusing to either cut his hair or remove his turban.
Although this case led to a change in army regulations grant-
ing permission for Sikhs to wear turbans, in 1983 Gurusant Singh
Khalsa was not allowed to enlist in the army because he was a
Sikh. In 1984, Karta Kaur Khalsa was threatened with losing her
teaching certificate because she refused to take off her turban dur-
ing classes, but in 1985 the Oregon Court of Appeals declared the
law under which she was suspended to be unconstitutional.
The group’s Web site is http://www.3ho.org.
Soka Gakkai International
Soka Gakkai International is a Japanese Buddhist group with a
comparatively large following in the United States and other
Soka Gakkai International
161

Western countries. Founded in the 1930s, Soka Gakkai has grown
to become Japan’s largest and most controversial new religion.
Although classified as a new religion, Soka Gakkai Interna-
tional’s roots lie in thirteenth-century Japan.
Like most other Japanese Buddhist groups, Soka Gakkai In-
ternational belongs to the Mahayana school. One characteristic of
many Mahayana Buddhist texts is that they extol the merit
gained by reading, copying, and otherwise propagating that par-
ticular scripture. Reading these claims, later generations of Bud-
dhists were led to ask which text was the most potent. This ques-
tion was the subject of debate in thirteenth-century Japan, when
the Buddhist reformer Nichiren concluded that the Saddharma-
pundarika (the Lotus of the True Law), better known simply as the
Lotus Sutra, was the most important of all Buddhist sutras.
Nichiren believed that the message contained in the Lotus Sutra
was so profound that all one had to do was chant “Nam-myoho-
renge-kyo ”(which can be translated in various ways, including
“I dedicate myself to the Lotus Sutra”) to develop wisdom and
attain enlightenment as described in its pages.
Nichiren and his teachings gave rise to a monastic move-
ment that eventually splintered into different sects. Soka Gakkai
began as a movement of lay practitioners attached to the
Nichiren Shoshu (the Orthodox Nichiren Sect). The founder,
Tsunesaburo Makiguchi (1871–1944), was an educator who was
arrested as a “thought criminal” in the prewar period for reject-
ing the compulsory worship of the emperor and State Shinto as
well as criticizing the Japanese militarist regime. He died in 1944,
still imprisoned, having refused to compromise his ideals. After
the war, Josei Toda (1900–1958) took over as president and built
Soka Gakkai into a major religion. This period of rapid growth
was accompanied by negative media attention. The group ma-
tured under the presidency of Daisaku Ikeda, who became the
third president of Soka Gakkai after the passing of Toda.
Soka Gakkai also spread to the United States, where it at-
tracted attention as a consequence of the intensive proselytizing
activities that characterized the organization’s early years. Al-
though never as controversial as groups like the Hare Krishna
movement or the Unification Church, Soka Gakkai (which in the
United States went under the name Nichiren Shoshu of America
until recently) was not infrequently stereotyped as a brainwash-
ing cult, particularly by anticult authors.
162
Controversial Groups and Movements

Soka Gakkai has been attacked in Japan because of its sup-
port of political activity that challenges the ruling coalition. Ex-
ploiting the negative public reaction to AUM Shinrikyo—the
Japanese religious group responsible for the 1995 poison-gas at-
tack in the Tokyo subway system—the Liberal Democratic Party,
which has always been the dominant party in the ruling coali-
tion) attempted to weaken its principal political rival, the New
Frontier Party, which Soka Gakkai supported. In particular, the
LDP engaged in a campaign to portray Soka Gakkai as being in-
compatible with the principles of democracy. In 1999, however,
the LDP did an abrupt about-face and allied itself with the New
Komeito Party (the successor to the New Frontier Party), the
party supported by Soka Gakkai. Unsurprisingly, the media as-
sault on Soka Gakkai subsequently evaporated.
The group’s Web site is http://www.sgi.org.
Solar Temple
Joseph Di Mambro, the founder of the Solar Temple, had been
fascinated with esotericism from a young age. He joined the An-
cient and Mystical Order Rosae Crucis in 1956 and was a mem-
ber until at least 1968. In the 1960s, he came into contact with sev-
eral persons who would later play a role in Solar Temple history,
including Jacques Breyer, who initiated a “Templar resurgence”
in France in 1952. Several groups, including Di Mambro’s, trace
part of their roots to Breyer’s work. Templar in this context refers
to the Knights Templar, the medieval order to which groups in
the neo-Templar tradition claim to trace their lineage. Several
major points of doctrine, as well as an initial group of followers,
began to come together in the 1960s. In 1971, after dealing with
some legal problems in Nîmes connected with a number of petty
crimes such as writing bad checks, Di Mambro established him-
self in Annemasse, near the Swiss border. In 1978, he founded the
Golden Way Foundation in Geneva, which would constitute the
foundation of the Solar Temple.
Recognizing Luc Jouret’s intelligence and charisma, Di
Mambro brought him in to become the public face of his organi-
zation. Jouret was trained as a medical doctor and was an ac-
complished practitioner of homeopathy. He also lectured on
naturopathy and ecological topics and was active in the wider
Solar Temple
163

circuit of the French-speaking New Age movement. He spoke in
New Age bookstores and to eclectic esoteric groups in France,
Switzerland, Belgium, and Canada. About 1981, he established
the Amenta Club, an organization managing his conferences.
The Amenta Club was the outer shell of an esoteric organi-
zation. Those who most faithfully attended Jouret’s homeopathic
practices and conferences were given the invitation to join a more
confidential, although not entirely secret, “inner circle”: the
Archédia Clubs, established in 1984, in which one could already
find a definite ritual and an actual initiation ceremony, with a set
of symbols taken from Masonic-Templar teachings. The Archédia
Clubs were not yet the truly inner part of the organization. Their
most trusted members were invited to join an even more “inner”
circle, this one truly a secret organization: the International Order
of Chivalry Solar Tradition, Solar Tradition for short, later to be
called the Order of the Solar Temple.
The temple’s teachings stressed occult-apocalyptic themes,
bringing together three traditions on the end of the world: (1) the
idea found in some (but by no means all) New Age groups of an
impending ecological catastrophe; (2) some neo-Templar move-
ments’ theory of a cosmic “renovation” revealed by the ascended
masters of the Grand Lodge of Agartha; and (3) the political ideas
of a final international bagarre propagated by survivalist groups
both on the extreme right and on the extreme left of the political
spectrum.
On March 8, 1993, a crucial episode in the history of the Solar
Temple occurred in Canada. Two temple members, Jean Pierre
Vinet, fifty-four, an engineer and project manager for Hydro-
Quebéc, and Herman Delorme, forty-five, an insurance broker,
were arrested as they were attempting to buy three semiauto-
matic guns with silencers, illegal weapons in Canada. Daniel
Tougas, a police officer of Cowansville and a Temple member,
was temporarily suspended from office on charges of having
helped the two. On March 9, Judge François Doyon of Montreal
committed them to trial, freeing them on parole. Luc Jouret—
who according to police reports asked the two to buy the
weapons—was also committed to trial, and an arrest warrant
was issued against him. (The temple leader could not be found,
as he was in Europe at the time.) The event drew the attention of
the Canadian press on what newspapers called “the cult of the
end of the world.”
164
Controversial Groups and Movements

On October 4, a fire destroyed Joseph Di Mambro’s villa in
Morin Heights, Canada. Among the ruins, the police found five
charred bodies, one of which was a child’s. At least three of these
people seemed to have been stabbed to death before the fire. On
October 5, at one in the morning, a fire started in one of the cen-
ters of the Solar Temple in Switzerland, the Ferme des Rochettes,
near Cheiry, in the Canton of Fribourg. The police found twenty-
three bodies, one of which was a child’s, in a room converted into
a temple. Some of the victims were killed by gunshots, while
many others were found with their heads inside plastic bags. The
same morning, at three o’clock, three chalets inhabited by mem-
bers of the Solar Temple caught fire almost simultaneously at Les
Granges sur Salvan, in the Valais Canton. In the charred remains
were found twenty-five bodies, along with remainders of devices
programmed to start the fires and the pistol used to shoot the
people in Cheiry.
No active Web site is available for the group.
Sukyo Mahikari
Mahikari is the Japanese word for “divine true light,” believed to
be a spiritual and purifying energy. Sukyo Mahikari began in
1959 when Kotama Okada (1901–1974) received a revelation from
God concerning how the use of the divine light of the Creator
could produce health, harmony, and prosperity. Mahikari is
viewed as a cleansing energy sent by SUSHIN, the Creator of
heaven and earth that both spiritually awakens and tunes the
soul to its divine purpose. In 1963, Okada organized what be-
came known as the Sekai Mahikari Bunmei Kyodan (Church of
World True Light Civilization). Okada soon became known as
sukuinushisama (master of salvation).
God also revealed to Okada the existence of a divine plan.
According to his teachings, all of the phenomena of the universe
have been controlled by the plan of the Creator. Under this plan,
human souls are dispatched to the earth for the specific purpose
of learning to utilize its material resources in order to establish a
highly evolved civilization governed by spiritual wisdom. These
revelations and teachings are to be found in Goseigen (The holy
words), the Mahikari scriptures, an English-language edition of
which was published in 1982.
Sukyo Mahikari
165

Okada dedicated his life to teaching the art of the divine
light to anyone desiring to be of service to the Creator. Today it is
taught in a three-day session at which attendees may learn to ra-
diate the light through the palm of the hand, a process known as
Mahikari no Waza. At the time of initiation, new members receive
an omitama, a pendant used to focus the light.
In 1974, following a divine revelation just prior to his death,
Okada passed the mission to his daughter, Seishu Okada, the
present leader. In 1978, subsequent to another revelation, Seishu
Okada changed the name of the organization to Sukyo Mahikari
(Sukyo means universal laws). Under her guidance, a new inter-
national headquarters was established in Takayama, Japan. In
1984, she completed the mission to construct a world main shrine
(suza) in Takayama.
It is said that there are approximately 800,000 members
worldwide and 5,000 members in the North American region
(the United States, Puerto Rico, and Canada). There are sixteen
centers in the United States, two centers in Puerto Rico, and two
centers in Canada. There are associated centers in more than sev-
enty-five countries. As with any large organization, Mahikari has
experienced some problems in Japan. Despite a comparatively
modest presence in Europe, the group is beginning to be attacked
as a dangerous sect. In Belgium, for instance, there have been
moves by authorities to force Mahikari to disband.
The group’s Web site is http://www.mahikari.org.
The Synanon Church
The Synanon Church was begun in 1958 by Charles E. Dederich
in Ocean Park, California, as Synanon Foundation, Inc., a thera-
peutic group for alcoholics and drug addicts. The group, which
within a year grew and moved to Santa Monica, gained a con-
siderable reputation for reeducating drug addicts. During the
1960s, Synanon communities began to appear along the West
Coast, as well as in the East, Midwest, and Puerto Rico. In 1968,
Dederich settled in Marin County, where three rural Synanon
communities were established near the town of Marshall.
Although its religious nature had been tacitly recognized
since the beginning of its existence, Synanon was never formally
called a religion because many of the people assisted by it had re-
jected organized religion, while many others outside Synanon re-
166
Controversial Groups and Movements

garded it as a therapeutic community. However, as its commu-
nity life developed, Synanon’s religious nature could no longer
be denied. The articles of incorporation signed in January 1975
designated the Synanon Foundation as the organization through
which the Synanon religion and church are manifest, and in No-
vember 1980 the name Synanon Church was formally adopted.
Synanon’s theological perspective derives from Buddhism
and Taoism, as well as from such Western mystics as Ralph
Waldo Emerson and Aldous Huxley. Members of the Synanon
community seek to manifest the basic principles of oneness in
themselves and in their relations with each other. The “Synanon
Game” represents the group’s central sacrament and the princi-
pal means for the search for unity. It is “played” by a small group
of members who meet together as equals in a circle to share in an
intense and emotionally expressive context. The outcome of a
successful game consists of mutual confession, repentance, and
absolution, while offering complete pastoral care.
Synanon members follow the golden rule and help each
other, believing that the most effective way to redeem humanity
from alienation is to form religious communities based on the be-
liefs and practices of the Synanon religion and church.
Synanon has been subject of controversy since its inception,
and during the past several years more than forty people associ-
ated with it have been indicted on various charges by grand ju-
ries. In December 1961, Dederich went to jail on a zoning-code vi-
olation. Synanon’s practices and techniques have been attacked
by the San Francisco Examiner, against which Synanon filed a libel
suit that ended with a large settlement. However, the most con-
troversial event occurred in 1978 when an attorney suing
Synanon was bitten by a rattlesnake. In the following year, Ded-
erich suffered three strokes, and as the trial date approached, he
found himself unable to pursue the defense of the case. Thus,
those charged settled the case by pleading no contest.
The group’s Web site is http://www.synanon.net.
Transcendental Meditation and 
the World Plan Executive Council
The Transcendental Meditation (TM) movement, at one time a
widespread fad, is now institutionalized in the World Plan 
Transcendental Meditation and the World Plan Executive Council
167

Executive Council, founded by Maharishi Mehesh Yogi. TM con-
sists primarily of a simple system of daily meditation through the
use of a mantra, a word that is repeated over and over again as
one sits in otherwise silence.
This type of meditation derives from an old and honored
Hindu technique. Maharishi advocated the use of a single
mantra, given to each student at the time of their taking the basic
TM course. Each mantra is supposed to suit the nature and way
of life of the particular individual. These mantras are given out
only at puja ceremonies, that is to say, at simple Hindu devotional
services venerating the lineage of gurus. Maharishi claimed his
authority from these gurus.
The World Plan Executive Council has asserted that the
practice of TM has extraordinary effects, the validity of which
has been tested by scientists who were among the individuals
who took the basic TM course. Among the claims made by the
council is that the regular practice of TM can produce changes in
the body, leading to increased intelligence, improved academic
performance, higher job productivity, improved resistance to dis-
ease, and better psychological health. TM is generally claimed to
transform a person’s life.
In 1967, the Beatles, the popular rock group, became follow-
ers of Maharishi. In particular, George Harrison, who was later
connected with the Hare Krishna movement, after having taken
lessons from Indian musician Ravi Shankar and having learned
of Maharishi’s presence in London, persuaded the other Beatles
to attend Maharishi’s meetings. In January 1968, they went to
Maharishi’s center in India with actress Mia Farrow, becoming
the first of a number of celebrities who became meditators and
who helped make Maharishi become a celebrity among older
teens and young adults.
During the early 1970s, the movement experienced consid-
erable growth in Europe and the United States, and by the end of
the decade almost 1 million people had taken the basic TM
course. However, the World Plan Executive Council suffered sev-
eral major reverses in the mid-1970s, and around 1976 the num-
ber of new people taking the basic TM course in North America
dropped drastically. As a response to the decline, the council an-
nounced an advanced siddha program, which included the teach-
ing of levitation to meditators.
Maharishi and the World Plan Executive Council, besides
their success, have often been the target of criticism and contro-
168
Controversial Groups and Movements

versy centering mainly on three issues. TM’s claims to scientific
verification have often been challenged, particularly those re-
lated to the physical effects of TM that, according to the psychol-
ogists studying yoga and meditation, could be produced from a
wider variety of practices. Also, other scientists pointed out that
positive results could be obtained only from special samples of
meditators.
Critics interested in the separation of church and state, sup-
ported by evangelical Christians who opposed TM, challenged
the use of state funds to spread the practice, arguing that the
World Plan Executive Council was in fact a Hindu religious or-
ganization and TM a practice essentially religious in nature. TM
critics have also charged the movement with an element of de-
ception, claiming that Maharishi, in his effort to bring TM to the
United States, created a new image, in part based on the early sci-
entific papers, denying the religious elements and arguing that
the practice of TM led to reduced dependence on drugs. In 1978,
a federal ruling, asserting that TM was a religious practice, de-
nied access to public funds with which teachers were supported.
During the 1970s, TM was attacked by Bob Kropinski, who
took the organization to court, charging fraud and psychological
damage from the practice of the siddha program. According to
Kropinski, while the advertisements promised to teach students
the ability to levitate, in fact they taught only a form of hopping
while sitting in a cross-legged position. The organization has yet
to produce generally verifiable evidence of the siddha program
involving the ability to levitate, walk through walls, or become
invisible.
The group’s Web site is http://www.tm.org.
The Twelve Tribes Messianic Communities
(Northeast Kingdom Community Church)
The Twelve Tribes Messianic Communities, also known as the
Northeast Kingdom Community Church, is a communal, utopian
society that emerged from the Jesus People revival in 1972 under
the leadership of Elbert Eugene (“Gene”) Spriggs, whom the com-
munity members consider an apostle, and his wife, Marsha, in
Chattanooga, Tennessee. Members adopt Hebrew names and con-
sider themselves as part of the Commonwealth of Israel forming in
The Twelve Tribes Messianic Communities
169

the last days, bound by the new covenant in the Messiah’s blood,
as mentioned in Ephesians 2:12. The communities have evolved
into a distinct culture emphasizing craftsmanship and handiwork;
they have evolved their own devotional music and dance forms
and unique, neoconservative patterns of marriage and child rear-
ing. The group condemns abortion and homosexuality and up-
holds monogamy, premarital chastity, and home schooling.
The belief system is compatible with Evangelical Protes-
tantism but contains certain theological innovations in their
views on communal living, marriage, and eschatology. Ongoing
collective revelations continue to unveil the community’s unique
role in their postmillenarian vision of the last days, their rela-
tionship to Yahshua—that is, Jesus—and levels of salvation after
the Final Judgment. The communities define themselves as the
lost and scattered tribes of the ancient Jews undergoing restora-
tion in preparation for eternal life. They believe their community
is undergoing a process of purification as the “pure and spotless
bride” awaiting her bridegroom and that it will probably take
three generations to be ready for the Second Coming. By increas-
ing their ranks through conversions and childbearing, they are
“raising up a people” in preparation for the jubilee horn that her-
alds the return of Yahshua.
Church members have been the target of deprogrammers
ever since the founding of communes in Chattanooga, but the
most severe and widely publicized conflicts with secular author-
ities have involved child-beating allegations and child-custody
disputes. In 1984, the Vermont State Police, armed with a court
order and accompanied by fifty social services workers, raided
the Island Pond community homes and took 112 children into
custody. District Court judge Frank Mahady ruled that the search
warrant issued by the state was unconstitutional, and all the chil-
dren were returned to their parents without undergoing exami-
nations. Child-custody disputes and investigations by social ser-
vices continue, partly due to the influence of the anticult
movement and disillusioned apostates. The group’s commitment
to their biblically based disciplinary practices is the primary
focus of concern. Parents are instructed to discipline children
who do not obey upon “first command” with a thin, flexible
“reedlike” rod (as mentioned in Proverbs 23:13) so as to inflict
pain but not injury.
Since their “deliverance” from the raid, the group has em-
phasized cooperation with state authorities and has reached out
170
Controversial Groups and Movements

to neighbors in trying to foster a better understanding. In August
1993, the Island Pond members joined search parties to find a
missing pilot whose plane had crashed in Essex County. On June
25, 1994, the church held a ten-year anniversary celebration “to
commemorate [our] deliverance from the 1984 Island Pond
Raid.” Many of those 112 children, now in their teens and twen-
ties, shared their traumatic memories of the raid, denied allega-
tions of abuse, and declared their allegiance to their parents and
their community.
The group’s Web site is http://www.twelvetribes.com.
Unification Movement 
(Unification Church)
The Unification Church, formally the Holy Spirit Association for
the Unification of World Christianity, refers to an international
messianic religious movement led by the Reverend Sun Myung
Moon (b. 1920). It also is the core of a complex network of media,
industrial, commercial, cultural, and educational enterprises
worldwide. Derided in the West as “the Moonies,” the UC’s
emergence has been accompanied by intense and sustained
global reaction.
Core beliefs of the Unification Church are contained in its
primary doctrinal and theological text, Divine Principle (1973), it-
self derived from two earlier Korean texts, Woli Kang-ron (1966)
and Woli Hae-sul (1955). These texts express aspects of the “new
truth” or “principle” revealed through Sun Myung Moon. Utiliz-
ing familiar categories of Christian theology, key chapter topics
include the Creation, the Fall, Resurrection, predestination,
Christology, and history. While polemical opponents have iden-
tified departures from orthodoxy, the major novelty is the explic-
itness with which the text identifies the present as the time of
Christ’s Second Advent.
An oral tradition consisting mainly of Moon’s speeches exists
alongside the official doctrinal texts. Many of these speeches are
more forthcoming about the Second Advent having arrived in the
persons of Reverend and Mrs. Moon. UC members believe them to
be the “true parents” of humankind, ushering in the “completed
Testament age.” Since 1992, when this age is regarded to have
begun, pronouncements of this nature have become increasingly
Unification Movement
171

public. Widespread and enhanced spiritual sensibility, the libera-
tion of oppressed peoples, the emergence of global culture, and ad-
vanced technological development are all associated by the move-
ment with the Second Advent and completed Testament age. So
too are ever greater numbers of couples participating in the joint
weddings or “blessings” presided over by the “true parents.”
The UC has not been subject to the apocalyptic conflagra-
tions associated with such movements as the People’s Temple,
Branch Davidians, and AUM Shinrikyo. Nevertheless, the scope
and duration of reactions accompanying its emergence have ren-
dered it quite possibly the most controversial new religious
movement of the latter twentieth century. 
Negative reaction was apparent from the UC’s Korean mid-
1950s origins. There was an intense reaction to UC proselytiza-
tion efforts on Seoul university campuses, especially Ehwa
Women’s University, which led to Moon’s imprisonment and al-
legations that the UC was a “sex cult.” Although the UC gained
a degree of credibility with the Korean military government after
1961, relations were tenuous and successive regimes have been
embarrassed by UC “initiatives,” the most recent being the Rev-
erend Sun Myung Moon’s unauthorized visit to North Korea and
Kim Il Sung in late 1991 that was repudiated by Seoul. Korea’s
Christian population has continually rejected the UC as heretical.
In the United States, the UC has faced widespread suspicion,
hostility, and negative press. Kidnapping and deprogrammings
were common in the mid-1970s, and a 1977 Gallup survey found
that Sun Myung Moon “elicited one of the most overwhelmingly
negative responses ever reported by a major poll.” During the
1980s, the UC culled some favor under conservative Republican
administrations. However, during this period, Moon was con-
victed and jailed on tax evasion charges regarded by the UC as
being motivated by bias. Similar patterns of response have been
prevalent elsewhere in the world, notably Europe, the Common-
wealth of Independent States, Southeast Asia, and Latin America.
The group’s Web site is http://www.unification.net.
Voodoo
Voodoo is a magical religion that originated in Haiti in the late
1700s. The precursor of voodoo was the religion of the Fon peo-
ple of West Africa who were brought as slaves to Haiti. Voodoo (or
172
Controversial Groups and Movements

vodou) means “spirit” in the Fon language. In Haiti, the Fon sys-
tems of veneration of the spirits came in contact with other
African religious traditions and French Catholicism to produce
what we call voodoo. It has spread via emigration to New Or-
leans and major cities in the United States.
The central religious activity of voodoo involves possession
of devotees by a number of African deities. In ceremonies led by
a priest, each possessed individual enacts a highly specific ritual
performance involving dance, song, and speech appropriate to
the particular possessing deity. Possession is directed toward
healing, warding off evil, and bringing good or evil fortune.
Voodoo recognizes a remote and almighty supreme being
who is the personification of fate or destiny. In voodoo, this god
is called Bondye. Individuals are given their own destinies by
Bondye. In order to fulfill these destinies with grace and power,
an individual requires guidance from a variety of spirits called
lwa. The religion of voodoo is a system of actions toward the de-
velopment of closer relationships with the lwa. Human beings
and spirits interact through divination and sacrifice. Trained
priests and priestesses consult oracles to determine the sacrificial
foods and actions necessary to secure the power and presence of
lwa. One particular lwa will begin to assert itself as an individual
devotee’s patron. When the spirit wills it, the individual will un-
dergo an initiation into the mysteries of his or her patron spirit.
This initiation will mark the member’s entry into the priesthood
of voodoo and give him or her the authority to found his or her
own house and consecrate other priests and priestesses. The
spirit will identify with the devotee’s inner self, and this intimate
relationship will offer the devotee health, success, and wisdom.
Voodoo first came to the United States with Haitian immi-
grants. In more recent years, white Americans as well as black
Americans have been finding their way to voodoo houses.
Though there are relatively few white initiates, it is likely that
there will be more as the religion becomes better known and
spreads further beyond its immigrant roots.
The most controversial element of voodoo in the eyes of out-
siders is the slaughter of animals as part of feasts for the lwa.
Most of the important ceremonies require a feast to be prepared
for the spirits and to be enjoyed by the assembled community. In
order to fix the meal to the spirit’s specifications, the foods must
not only be prepared and cooked according to strict recipes but
also be properly consecrated with certain prayers and rhythms.
Voodoo
173

Animals for the feast (fowl, goats, and sheep) must be slaugh-
tered by a priest or priestess initiated specially to this task, in the
presence of the community and to the accompaniment of the cor-
rect chants. Particularly in the crowded neighborhoods of New
York and Miami, animal slaughter as part of voodoo ceremonies
has caused some problems, including storage of the animals be-
fore the ceremony and the disposal of the remains afterward.
Healing is a high priority of Vodoun and includes psychic
and psychological counseling and the dispensing of folk reme-
dies such as rattlesnake oil. Worship is held on the evening of the
new moon and consists of ecstatic dance accompanied by flute
and drum and led by the priest and priestess. As they dance,
members enter trances and often receive revelations and mes-
sages from the spirits. Spirituals are also sung. Vodoun teaches
the virtues of faith, love, and joy.
No active Web site is available for the group.
The Way International, Inc.
The Way International, Inc., a Pentecostal, ultradispensational
Christian group, was founded in 1942 by Victor Paul Wierwille
(1916–1985), a minister in the Evangelical and Reformed Church,
as a radio ministry under the name of “Vesper Chimes.” It as-
sumed its present name in 1974, after being named the Chimes
Hour in 1944, and the Chimes Hour Youth Caravan in 1947. Wier-
wille earned his BD at Mission House Seminary in Minnesota
and did graduate work at the University of Chicago and Prince-
ton Theological Seminary, earning an MTh in 1941. In 1948, he
was awarded a PhD by the Pikes Peak Bible College and Semi-
nary in Manitou Springs, Colorado.
The first “Power for Abundant Living” (PFAL) class, given
in 1953, contained the initial results of Wierwille’s research on
biblical truth. After one year, he began to study Aramaic, under
the influence of Dr. George M. Lamsa, translator of the Lamsa
Bible, and began to accept a view of biblical doctrine that was
more and more distinct from that of his church. In 1957, he re-
signed his ministry from the Evangelical and Reformed Church
in order to devote himself full-time to his work. He led his min-
istry, which was chartered as the Way, Inc., in 1955, and then
changed to the Way International in 1975, until 1983, when he re-
174
Controversial Groups and Movements

tired. The headquarters of the Way was established in the family
farm outside New Knoxville, Ohio.
The Way grew steadily during the 1950s through the initia-
tion of the PFAL classes and the Way Magazine (1954). After ex-
periencing a slow growth in the 1960s, the Way underwent a pe-
riod of rapid growth in the 1970s, as the ministry suddenly
burgeoned at the time of the national Jesus People revival across
the United States. The Way expanded its facilities at New
Knoxville, which hosted the first national Rock of Ages Festival,
an annual gathering of Way members, in 1971.
An eleven-point statement summarizes the beliefs of the
Way, which can be considered both Arian and Pentecostal, in that
it rejects the Trinitarian orthodoxy of most Western Christianity
and denies the divinity of Jesus, as emphasized in Wierwille’s
Jesus Christ Is Not God (1975). The Way believes that Jesus is the
Son of God but not God the Son.
The Way International is one of the largest groups to be la-
beled a “cult.” It has also been the target of many deprogram-
mings, particularly in the early 1980s. It has often been accused
by anticult groups of brainwashing and mind control. Addition-
ally, there have been two serious charges that have often been re-
peated in anti-Way literature: The first charge, in the 1970s, was
that the Way was training members in the use of deadly weapons
for possible future use against enemies of the organization. These
accusations originated from the adoption at the College at Em-
poria of a Kansas program in gun safety, which was primarily di-
rected to hunters. The second charge came to the fore in the
1980s, as Christian anticultists attacked The Way for its radical
departure from orthodox Christianity, its adoption of Arianism,
and the denial of the divinity of Jesus and the Trinity.
The Way experienced a period of turmoil after Wierwille’s
death. Charges of improprieties by Wierwille and many of his
close friends resulted in the defection of several leaders, a few of
whom established rival groups. As a result, The Way consider-
ably lost support, although it recovered by 1990, when the atten-
dance to the annual Rock of Ages Festival began to return to its
former level. The Internal Revenue Service questioned The Way’s
alleged partisan political involvement and its business activities
at New Knoxville. Although its tax-exempt status was revoked in
1985, that ruling was reversed by the Supreme Court in 1990.
The group’s Web site is http://theway.com.
The Way International, Inc.
175

Witchcraft (Wicca)
There have been a great many descriptions of Wicca, also referred
to as the “Craft,” published by now. For the sake of simplicity, we
can say that Wicca has the following characteristics:
1. Worship is polytheistic and always includes an exalted
concept of a goddess as being close to the ultimate level
of divinity.
2. Worship occurs in a small group known as a coven
(which may consist of anywhere from three to around
twenty members), according to the phases of the moon.
These monthly meetings for worship (and the working
of practical magic) are referred to as esbats. Worship also
occurs in larger groups, which may be two covens meet-
ing together or several hundred people, some coming
from long distances, for the sabbats, of which there are
eight in each year.
3. In addition to worship, coven activity focuses on the
working of magic, which is highly psychologized, eclec-
tic, and variegated, since the magical training proce-
dures used in any one coven will depend on what train-
ing in magic, psychic abilities, psychology, or other
disciplines the coven’s leaders have had in academia,
New Age groups, or other occult groups.
4. Despite the anarchism of neopagan witches, they are
just as clear as members of other religions about which
individuals and groups belong to their religion and
which do not.
The publication of Margaret Murray’s Witch-Cult in Western
Europe (1921) set off a burst of interest in paganism, since Murray
proposed that the witch hunters of medieval and early modern
times were actually finding the remnants of the pagan religions
of northern Europe. The idea of re-creating the kind of witch cult
described by Murray was discussed by English occultists during
the 1920s and 1930s. However, the first successful attempt to re-
create Murray’s witch cult was apparently actually carried out by
Gerald B. Gardner, a retired British civil servant, and his col-
leagues among the New Forest occultists, under the leadership of
176
Controversial Groups and Movements

one Dorothy Clutterbuck, a locally prominent homeowner and
socialite, during World War II.
In 1953, Gardner initiated Doreen Valiente, who soon be-
came the high priestess of the central coven and rewrote the
coven’s Book of Shadows (liturgical manual) into the form in which
it is still used in the movement. The Book of Shadows contains rit-
uals for the coven’s full moon esbats; for the eight sabbats at the
solstices, equinoxes, and cross-quarter days; and for various rites
of passage, as well as some basic magical techniques. The central
coven fissured in two in 1957, with Gardner and Valiente each
taking a half, but Gardner soon went off on his own again, initi-
ating new priestesses and founding new covens at a fairly rapid
pace until his death in 1964, and these have carried on the Craft
enthusiastically.
Raymond Buckland, after a long correspondence with Gard-
ner, was initiated in 1963 in Perth, Scotland, by Lady Olwen
(Monique Wilson). Buckland then brought the Craft back to the
United States and, with his wife, Rosemary, as high priestess,
founded the New York coven in Bayside, Long Island, which be-
came the center of the Gardnerian movement and the neopagan
movement in the United States for the next twenty years.
The group’s Web site is http://www.witchvox.com.
Witchcraft
177


4
Court Decisions, Legislation, 
and Governmental Actions
Beyond the limited-domain struggles that have taken place
around deprogrammings, the principal arenas within which the
controversy over new religions has been fought are the courts
and the media. Perhaps paradoxically, the anticult movement has
suffered defeat in the courts but been victorious in the media.
The current state of affairs is comparable to the situation the civil
rights movement found itself in during its heyday: although
going from victory to victory in the courts, in popular opinion
blacks were still viewed as second-class citizens, particularly in
the Deep South.
One of the principal reasons minority religions have had
such success in the legal arena is that the courts have been com-
pelled to treat such groups seriously as religions, entitled to all of
the rights and privileges normally accorded mainstream denom-
inations. Critics of new religions would like to draw a sharp line
between religions and cults and treat cults as pseudoreligious or-
ganizations. The courts, however, are unable to approach such
groups differently as long as group members manifest sincerity
in their religious beliefs.
This situation explains why none of the legislative efforts to
regulate new religious movements have been successful. For ex-
ample, the New York state legislature once tried to enact a law
that would have made starting a pseudoreligion a felony, but it
failed to pass because—among other factors—it lacked an objec-
tive criterion for distinguishing false from true religions. Without
a truly neutral standard, any such law violates the establishment
179

clause of the First Amendment. It is, in fact, the separation of
church and state mandated by the First Amendment that has dis-
couraged legislation in this area. This has left the courts to bear
the burden of adjudicating the controversy, making an overview
of the relevant legal activity far more lengthy and involved than
with most other public issues.
Because cases involving contemporary minority religions
are often argued in terms of religious liberty issues, earlier reli-
gious liberty decisions are directly relevant to the present contro-
versy. Although anticultists have accused cults of “hiding behind
the First Amendment,” they have been largely unsuccessful at
persuading the legal system to set aside First Amendment con-
cerns when dealing with controversial minority religions. The
necessity of taking cults seriously as “real” religions explains
why it is necessary to refer back to earlier legal decisions involv-
ing Mormons, Jehovah’s Witnesses, and others.
The following discussion begins with an overview of court
cases and legislation not dealing explicitly with contemporary
“cult” groups but nevertheless relevant to the controversy be-
cause of the religious liberty issue. This will be followed by an ex-
amination of the first important “new religion” cases prior to the
emergence of the cult controversy as an important public issue.
In addition to the initial efforts of governmental bodies to regu-
late minority religions by passing new laws, deprogrammers and
their clients began using conservatorship laws to legitimate their
kidnapping activities. Although initially experiencing some lim-
ited success, in the long run this strategy was defeated in the
courts.
Following the demise of the conservatorship tactic, torts by
ex-members claiming damage at the hands of their former reli-
gions became the chief strategy by which to weaken controver-
sial minority religions. Once again, this tactic initially had a few
notable successes, only to be ultimately frustrated by the defeat
of coercive persuasion or ”brainwashing” theory in the courts. Of
the other legal arenas in which the cult controversy has been
fought, perhaps the most important have been the sensitive is-
sues of child abuse and child custody. Other areas have been zon-
ing, solicitation, and taxation issues.
For a long time, it seemed that the new religions and their
enemies were more or less evenly matched in the courts, al-
though the balance of power would periodically swing one way
or the other. This situation changed dramatically in the mid- to
180
Court Decisions, Legislation, and Governmental Actions

late nineties with the decisive defeat of the “brainwashing” no-
tion in the courts and with the declaration of bankruptcy by the
largest anticult organization in the United States.
However, just when it seemed that the anticult movement
had suffered final defeat in U.S. courts, a new wave of anticult ac-
tivity swept across western Europe, Japan, and, later, China. This
resurgence of anticultism in Europe was more or less the result of
the Solar Temple suicides that took place in Switzerland (as well
as Canada) in 1994 and in France in 1995. Correspondingly, Japan
reacted to the AUM Shinrikyo’s poison-gas attack on the Tokyo
subway system in 1995. And in China, the government reacted
severely to the peaceable protests of Falun Gong practitioners n
1999, initiating a crackdown on any religious group that did not
enjoy official sanctions.
Relevant Court Decisions Not Directly
Involving Contemporary New Religions
Mormon Polygamy Cases
Religious beliefs are fully protected under the First Amendment
to the Constitution. However, it has become a well-recognized
principle of constitutional law that religious conduct may be cir-
cumscribed. In Cantwell v. Connecticut (discussed below), for in-
stance, the United States Supreme Court acknowledged that reli-
gious conduct “remains subject to regulation for the protection of
society.”
According to the Court, religious practices may be regulated
even at the expense of religious freedom. This view dates back to
the time of Thomas Jefferson, who proposed legislation in the
Virginia House of Delegates recognizing that government may
“interfere when [religious] principles break out into overt acts
against peace and good order” (quoted in the Reynolds v. United
States decision). This governmental interference includes allow-
ing for recovery to those who suffer harm as a result of tortious
conduct by another. Religious organizations are not exempt from
liability for tortious conduct.
Because of the First Amendment, religious liberty cases are al-
most by definition Supreme Court cases. The first Supreme Court
decision having a direct bearing on the contemporary debate over
Relevant Court Decisions
181

cults was the 1878 case Reynolds v. United States. Lurid stories about
the plural-wife practices of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-
day Saints had titillated other Americans for more than three
decades—stories implying that Mormon polygamy was a thinly
veiled excuse for sexual indulgence. As a consequence, Congress
legislated against plural marriage as a form of bigamy in the Re-
vised Statutes of the United States, sect. 5352: “Every person having
a husband or wife living, who marries another, whether married
or single, in a Territory, or other place over which the United States
have exclusive jurisdiction, is guilty of bigamy, and shall be pun-
ished by a fine of not more than $500, and by imprisonment for a
term of not more than five years.”
George Reynolds was a member of the LDS Church con-
victed under this statute. Reynolds asserted that, because plural
marriage was prescribed by his religion, his conviction was a vi-
olation of the free exercise of religion provision of the First
Amendment.
In 1878, this case was considered by the Supreme Court.
When Chief Justice Morrison Waite wrote the Court’s decision,
he was aware that history was being made: this was the first ju-
dicial effort to interpret the meaning of the “free exercise of reli-
gion.” Justice Waite’s decision cited, among other things, con-
temporaneous scholarly opinion that polygamy was detrimental
to a free society and concluded that in the First Amendment:
“Congress was deprived of all legislative power over mere opin-
ion, but was left free to reach actions which were in violation of
social duties or subversive of good order.” In other words, al-
though Congress cannot prescribe laws against what one may be-
lieve (“opinion”), it may legislate against actions harmful to soci-
ety—such as the plural-wife system was judged to be.
This decision was amplified in a second LDS case, Davis v.
Beason, decided by the Supreme Court in 1889. Samuel D. Davis
had had his voter registration in Idaho rescinded merely for be-
longing to the Mormon Church. Davis argued his case, like
Reynolds, on the free exercise provision of the First Amendment.
Associate Justice Stephen Field wrote the Court’s decision, as-
serting, like Waite had before him, that not every action pre-
scribed by a religion can be protected by the First Amendment:
“History discloses the fact that the necessity of human sacrifices,
upon special occasions, had been a tenet of many sects. Should a
sect of [this kind] ever find its way into this country, swift pun-
ishment would follow the carrying into effect of its doctrines, and
182
Court Decisions, Legislation, and Governmental Actions

no heed would be given to the pretence that, as religious beliefs,
their supporters could be protected in their exercise by the Con-
stitution of the United States.”
Finally, in the decision of two other LDS cases, Justice Joseph
Bradley responded to the free exercise of religion argument by
noting that, “No doubt the Thugs of India imagined that their be-
lief in the right of assassination was a religious belief.” (Bradley
wrote a joint decision for the Supreme Court in Mormon Church v.
United States and Romney v. United States.)
Following Reynolds and the other LDS decisions, the stan-
dards for measuring the harmfulness of religious conduct were
based on socially accepted, traditional notions of religious prac-
tice. Because the practice of polygamy was offensive to the no-
tions of traditional religious institutions and because the Court in
Reynolds assumed that there were innocent victims who suffered
harm from such conduct, the religious practice was not allowed
to continue.
In Reynolds, the Court relied on various excerpts of writings
by Thomas Jefferson, one of the proponents of the free exercise
clause. Jefferson believed that “religion is a matter which lies
solely between man and his God; . . . that the legislative powers
of the government reach actions only, and not opinions”; and that
government may not opine on the validity of a religion but may
only regulate actions that are in violation of social duties or sub-
versive of good order.
The Court in Reynolds deferred to contemporary social norms
and opinions concerning polygamy and found that it was an odi-
ous practice and void under the common law. The Supreme Court
upheld the trial court’s jury instructions, which reminded the jury
of the evil consequences that were supposed to flow from plural
marriages. Those “evil consequences” were the subject of numer-
ous books and articles published by anti-Mormons during the
second half of the nineteenth century as well as congressional tes-
timony. Thus, the Reynolds decision reflects the willingness of the
highest court to adopt a standard consistent with majoritarian so-
cial norms to the detriment of minority religious practices.
Together, Reynolds, Davis, and others, involving the most de-
spised “new religion” of the day, all asserted the absolute right of
the government to regulate religious activity. Although, in hind-
sight, these specific decisions may appear contrary to the spirit of
the free exercise clause, at the same time they articulate the obvi-
ous point that not every activity deserves the protection of the
Relevant Court Decisions
183

First Amendment merely because it has a religious basis. In the
context of the contemporary cult controversy, anticult spokesper-
sons have sometimes referred back to the belief-action di-
chotomy laid out in Reynolds v. United States. The Reynolds deci-
sion was not, however, the final word on the meaning of the free
exercise provision.
Jehovah’s Witnesses Cases
The Jehovah’s Witnesses were the most controversial new religion
of the mid-twentieth century. Like the LDS, the Witnesses remain
the focus of much contemporary Christian anticultism because of
perceived doctrinal deviations from the Evangelical mainstream.
The group’s aggressive proselytizing in combination with mem-
bers’ refusal to participate in such nationalistic activities as salut-
ing the flag led to persecution and arrests. In response, the Wit-
nesses formed a legal wing for the express purpose of challenging
these arrests on First Amendment grounds.
The first important Supreme Court victory for the Jehovah’s
Witnesses was the 1938 case of Lovell v. City of Griffin. The
Supreme Court’s decision in this case overturned the conviction
of a Witness for distributing literature without a permit. The per-
mit ordinance, however, left too much to the discretion of the rel-
evant city official, making it unconstitutional on the basis of the
free speech (as opposed to the freedom of religion) provision of the
First Amendment.
The freedom of religion clause was brought into play two
years later in another significant Supreme Court victory for the
Witnesses, Cantwell v. Connecticut—a case that extended the free-
dom of religion provision of the federal constitution to the states
and served to call into question the 1887 Reynolds decision giving
government the power to regulate religious actions. Cantwell’s
departure from the LDS cases is reflected in the decision com-
posed by Associate Justice Owen Roberts:
The Amendment embraces two concepts—freedom to
believe and freedom to act. The first is absolute but, in
the nature of things, the second cannot be. Conduct re-
mains subject to regulation for the protection of society.
The freedom to act must have appropriate definition to
preserve the enforcement of that protection. In every
case the power to regulate must be so exercised as not,
184
Court Decisions, Legislation, and Governmental Actions

in attaining a permissible end, unduly to infringe the
protected freedom.
The Cantwell decision was reinforced by further cases de-
cided three years later. In 1943, four cases involving the right of
Jehovah’s Witnesses to canvass door-to-door reached the high
court. Three were decided in favor of the Witnesses (Jones v. Op-
lika, Murdock v. Pennsylvania, and Martin v. Struthers). The fourth
case (Douglas v. Jeannette) was decided against the Witnesses, but
on technical grounds. Associate Justice William O. Douglas wrote
the Court’s decisions in Jones and Murdock, referring to the tradi-
tion of itinerant evangelism as support for the argument that the
solicitation activity of Witnesses was a religious activity, and thus
protected by the First Amendment.
Another case involving the refusal of Witnesses to salute the
flag, West Virginia State Board of Education v. Barnette, was decided
the same year. Barnette was decided in favor of the Jehovah’s Wit-
nesses, overturning a related Supreme Court decision, Minersville
School District v. Gobitis, made against the Witnesses in 1940. The
decision in Barnette was made on free exercise of religion rather
than free speech grounds.
The Sherbert-Yoder Test
In 1963, the high court decided Sherbert v. Verner, a key case for
what would become known as the “Sherbert-Yoder Test” for de-
ciding free exercise of religion cases. In this case, the Supreme
Court decided in favor of a Seventh-Day Adventist who had
been denied unemployment benefits because she had not been
able to accept employment requiring work on Saturday. Wiscon-
sin v. Yoder, decided six years later, concluded that a state law
mandating high school education was an excessive burden on
the Amish religion.
Without going into all of the details of these cases, the re-
sulting Sherbert-Yoder Test sets forth criteria for adjudicating
conflicts between the interest of the state and the dictates of a re-
ligion. These criteria have been summarized by William C. Shep-
herd (1985) as follows:
1. Are the religious beliefs in question sincerely held?
2. Are the religious practices under review germane to the
religious belief system?
Relevant Court Decisions
185

3. Would carrying out the state’s wishes constitute a sub-
stantial infringement on the religious practice?
4. Is the interest of the state compelling? Does the religious
practice perpetuate some grave abuse of a statutory pro-
vision or obligation?
5. Are there alternative means of regulation by which the
state’s interest is served but the free exercise of religion
is less burdened?
The Sherbert-Yoder test has become the definitive standard
for deciding cases involving the free exercise of religion. It would
be the crucial criterion for determining the outcome of later cases
involving new religious movements.
To get a sense of the importance of the Sherbert-Yoder Test, we
might look briefly at a few of decisions made prior to and after
Sherbert. In 1949 in Bunn v. North Carolina, for example, a lower
court ruled that public safety outweighed the concern for the free
exercise of religion involving the handling of poisonous snakes.
The U.S. Supreme Court dismissed the appeal without comment.
Only two years before Sherbert, in Braunfeld v. Brown, the Supreme
Court decided against Orthodox Jewish merchants protesting
Pennsylvania laws requiring them to close their stores on Sunday.
In 1981, the Supreme Court ruled on Thomas v. Review Board.
In this case, a Witness who had quit his job rather than work in an
armaments factory had been denied unemployment benefits. The
court decided in favor of the Jehovah’s Witnesses, echoing the de-
cision in Sherbert. This case is important as the first major case
after Yoder to be decided according to the Sherbert-Yoder Test. In
1993, the Court overturned a Hialeah, Florida, ban against “ani-
mal sacrifice” aimed at the growing Santeria community of the
city as unconstitutional in Church of Lukumi Bablu Aye v. City of
Hialeah.
The Sherbert-Yoder Test was the standard until the 1990 case
of Employment Division v. Smith. In this decision, the Supreme
Court ruled against the right of Native American Church mem-
bers to use peyote. The case evoked outrage from church-state
scholars and others, who characterized the decision as supplant-
ing religious sincerity with the values of the majority as the stan-
dard for determining which religious acts merit the protection of
the free exercise clause of the First Amendment.
Reacting to the Supreme Court’s decision in Employment Di-
186
Court Decisions, Legislation, and Governmental Actions

vision v. Smith, a broad coalition of religious groups supported
and pushed through the Religious Freedom Restoration Act
(RFRA), a legislative measure intended to reestablish Sherbert-
Yoder standards for the free exercise of religion. RFRA was over-
whelmingly endorsed by both houses of Congress.
Earliest Cases Involving 
Contemporary New Religions
The Ballard Decision
Prior to the emergence of the modern cult controversy and even
prior to the formulation of Sherbert v. Verner, there was one ex-
tremely important Supreme Court case involving a contempo-
rary new religion. This 1944 case, United States v. Ballard, focused
on the belief system of I AM Activity, a neo-Theosophical group
from which a whole family of other groups—including Church
Universal and Triumphant—trace their roots. The case was built
around the charge of mail fraud, based on the “ridiculous” na-
ture of the group’s beliefs. In the words of Justice Jackson who
wrote the dissenting opinion in United States v. Ballard:
Scores of sects flourish in this country by teaching what
to me are queer notions. It is plain that there is wide va-
riety in American religious taste. The Ballards are not
alone in catering to it with a pretty dubious product.
The chief wrong which false prophets do to their fol-
lowing is not financial. The collections aggregate a
tempting total, but individual payments are not ru-
inous. I doubt if the vigilance of the law is equal to mak-
ing money stick by overcredulous people. But the real
harm is on the mental and spiritual plane. There are
those who hunger and thirst after higher values which
they feel wanting in their humdrum lives. They live in
mental confusion or moral anarchy and seek vaguely
for truth and beauty and moral support. When they are
deluded and then disillusioned, cynicism and confusion
follow. The wrong of these things, as I see it, is not in the
money the victims part with half so much as in the men-
tal and spiritual poison they get.
Earliest Cases Involving Contemporary New Religions
187

The founder of the movement, Guy Ballard, had long been
interested in occultism and Theosophy. He married Edna
Wheeler in 1916, and together they founded the I AM Activity in
the 1930s. Ballard’s revelations from Saint Germain were spread
during the lectures of the Ballards, who traveled in the 1930s as
“accredited messengers” of the masters. Further messages from
the ascended masters, especially from Saint Germain and the
master Jesus, were sometimes produced in public or private.
Saint Germain and Jesus were considered the mediators be-
tween the “I AM presence” and humans. The ascended masters
were at one time all human beings who were able to transcend
the physical world through the purification of their lives. The
goal of human life is represented by ascension. In 1938, the I AM
Activity was said to have been given a dispensation according to
which persons who had devoted themselves so much to the
movement that they had not given all they might to personal pu-
rification could upon normal death ascend from the after-earth
state without reembodiment.
The I AM Activity worked publicly from 1937 to 1940 to es-
tablish a group of devoted followers numbering more than 1 mil-
lion. With the death of Guy Ballard on December 29, 1939, the
movement began to decline. Edna Ballard claimed that her hus-
band had become an ascended master. However, the fact that
Guy Ballard had experienced a physical death rather than bodily
ascension threatened the movement’s credibility. The following
year, a sensational trial of the leaders of the movement took
place, after some members of the Ballards’ personal staff accused
the Ballards of obtaining money under fraudulent pretenses.
The indictment was voided in 1944 by the Supreme Court
with a landmark decision on religious liberty. The case was fi-
nally dismissed. Justice Douglas, in stating the prevailing opin-
ion, wrote:
Heresy trials are foreign to our Constitution. Men may
believe what they cannot prove. They may not be put to
the proof of their religious doctrines or beliefs. Religious
experiences which are as real as life to some may be in-
comprehensible to others. Yet the fact that they may be
beyond the ken of mortals does not mean that they can
be made suspect before the law. . . . If one could be sent
to jail because a jury in a hostile environment found
one’s teachings false, little indeed would be left of reli-
188
Court Decisions, Legislation, and Governmental Actions

gious freedom. . . . The religious views espoused by re-
spondents might seem incredible, if not preposterous, to
most people. But if those doctrines are subject to trial
before a jury charged with finding their truth or falsity,
then the same can be done with the religious beliefs of
any sect. When the triers of fact undertake that task,
they enter a forbidden domain.
Founding Church of 
Scientology v. United States
What the Jehovah’s Witnesses were to the mid-twentieth century,
the Church of Scientology became to the latter part of the century.
Like the Witnesses, Scientology early set up a strong legal wing
that litigated for religious rights as well as for human rights more
generally. One of the first new religions to be embroiled in con-
troversy, Scientology would prevail in most of its legal suits and
eventually play a major role in eviscerating the Cult Awareness
Network, the most important anticult group in the United States.
The Church of Scientology was one of the genuinely new re-
ligions to originate in the United States in the twentieth century.
The church was founded by L. Ron Hubbard, a talented writer
and adventurer with a consuming interest in the human mind.
By 1950, Hubbard had completed enough of his research to write
Dianetics: The Modern Science of Mental Health, which quickly be-
came a best-seller. In 1951, he announced that the “applied reli-
gious philosophy” of Scientology had been born.
Auditing, Scientology’s core technique, consists of guiding
someone through various mental processes in order to first free
the individual of the effects of the “reactive mind” and then to
fully realize the spiritual nature of the person. Electrical devices
called E-Meters, which rely upon the same basic technology as lie
detectors, are used to help the auditor discover emotionally
loaded memories. When the individual is freed from the effects
of the reactive mind, she or he is said to have achieved the state
of “clear.”
Somewhat naively, Hubbard contacted the medical and the
psychiatric associations, explaining the significance of his dis-
coveries for mental and physical health and asking that the
American Medical Association and the American Psychology As-
sociation investigate his new technique. Instead of taking this
Earliest Cases Involving Contemporary New Religions
189

offer seriously, these associations responded by attacking him.
The subsequent popular success of Dianetics did nothing to im-
prove the image of Hubbard in the minds of the medical-psychi-
atric establishment and was likely instrumental in prompting the
FDA raid against the church.
On January 4, 1963, the Founding Church of Scientology in
Washington, D.C., was raided by U.S. marshals and deputized
longshoremen with drawn guns, acting in behalf of the Food and
Drug Administration. Five thousand volumes of church scrip-
tures, 20,000 booklets, and 100 E-Meters were seized. It took eight
years of litigation to finally obtain the return of the materials. Fi-
nally, in 1971, the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia
issued the Founding Church of Scientology v. United States decision.
The Food and Drug Administration was ordered to return the
books and E-Meters that had been taken in the 1963 raid. In its
decision, the court recognized the church’s constitutional right to
protection from the government’s excessive entanglement with
religion.
Deprogramming in Court
The cult controversy proper did not get under way until after the
collapse of the sixties counterculture. Rather than reengaging
with mainstream society, many former counterculturists contin-
ued their quest for an alternative lifestyle in a wide variety of re-
ligions. Hence, the membership of many unusual religious
groups that had existed quietly on the margins of U.S. society
suddenly exploded into public view.
In many cases, friends and family of cult members found it
difficult to believe that, without coercion and brainwashing,
loved ones would choose to embrace something that they found
offensive. They saw “deprogramming” as the natural antidote to
this mental programming or brainwashing. By attempting to de-
program the church member, friends and family believed they
were helping the member recognize the wrongfulness of his or
her choices.
When a person is targeted for deprogramming, he or she is
enticed away from the organization or is actually kidnapped and
taken to a remote place. While at the remote location, the person
is subjected to intensive discussions in which he or she is pre-
sented with the “truth” about the religious organization, its tenets
190
Court Decisions, Legislation, and Governmental Actions

and leaders. The process is intense and stressful. Numerous “an-
ticult” organizations promoted kidnapping and deprogramming
of church members who had been “deprived of their free will.”
These deprogramming activities invade the civil rights of
members and deprive the members of choice in their affiliations.
Deprogramming also exploits family ties and may further the de-
struction of family relations. Family members are often the insti-
gators of the kidnapping and deprogramming, and the depro-
grammers are the facilitators. In addition to deprogrammers,
bodyguards are sometimes hired to prevent the member from es-
caping. The fact that family members are generally involved
makes prosecution of the perpetrators difficult. The state has
been reluctant to prosecute a family member for kidnapping. If
family members are not prosecuted, judges and juries appear re-
luctant to convict others who become involved at the request of
the family members, the instigators. Further, family members
often refuse to testify against the perpetrators, making it virtually
impossible to convict.
In deprogramming cases, there is generally testimony by
former members. This testimony is filled with a high level of hos-
tility, which increases the prejudice of the judge and jury. The tes-
timony of former members also tends to confuse the legal issues
with religious questions. This entanglement of legal and religious
issues often confuses the judge and jury and results in placing the
religious practices of the church on trial.
In the case of LaVerne Collins (now LaVerne Macchio), a
member of Church Universal and Triumphant, LaVerne’s mother
and sister decided to “rescue” LaVerne from the church because
they believed the church was seriously damaging LaVerne and
her family. Family members hired deprogrammers and body-
guards to kidnap and deprogram her. At the time of her abduc-
tion, LaVerne was thirty-nine years old and the mother and pri-
mary caretaker of four children ranging in age from three to
fourteen. She was a part-time schoolteacher and had resided in
the same house in Ada County, Idaho, for fifteen years. LaVerne
was missing for several days, and there was concern in the com-
munity for her safety.
After LaVerne’s escape from the deprogrammers, charges
were filed against LaVerne’s mother and sister, the deprogram-
mers, and the bodyguards for kidnapping and false imprison-
ment. Later, at LaVerne’s request, all charges against family
members were dropped. As a result, the deprogrammers were
Deprogramming in Court
191

acquitted. The bodyguards, who were to be tried separately,
reached an unusual plea bargain with prosecutors: they would
enter guilty pleas on either a felony kidnapping charge or a mis-
demeanor false-imprisonment charge, depending on the out-
come of an appeal challenging the judge’s ruling to allow the de-
programmers the use of the “necessity defense” at their trial.
When authorities have attempted to resist efforts to kidnap
and deprogram members of religious groups by prosecuting
those involved, defendants have often been able to assert suc-
cessfully the defenses of necessity and “choice of evils.” The ne-
cessity defense has been a major factor in the acquittal of the de-
programmers. The jury appeared to accept the contention that
the illegal actions of the defendants were necessary to protect the
victim from her own choices and that the church was the greater
evil—a view reflecting traditional prejudices.
One element that must be proved under the necessity de-
fense is that there was imminent danger requiring the kidnap-
ping. The standards for determining the nature of the danger and
its imminence are colored by the fear and mistrust many have of
nontraditional religions. The courts have had difficulty establish-
ing an objective standard by which to measure the danger or
threat to the deprogramee. When the “choice of evils” defense is
raised, courts have often allowed the jury to consider evidence
concerning the supposed evils associated with the church’s reli-
gious practices.
There is a long line of cases in the area of deprogramming.
People v. Brandyberry, for example, involved a member of the Uni-
fication Church who was kidnapped and held in captivity for
several days in an attempt to deprogram her. The trial court bal-
anced the “method of cult indoctrination” and of “coercive per-
suasion” against the evils of abduction and of forced deprogram-
ming to justify kidnapping; however, the court of appeals
evaluated only the imminence of grave injury to the victim. The
court of appeals acknowledged that to proceed in the manner
permitted by the trial court would invite the jury to “consider the
morality and desirability of church doctrine and practices rather
than whether in fact the victim was threatened by the prospect of
a grave or imminent injury.”
The trial judge in Brandyberry relied on a decision from the
Minnesota Supreme Court, Peterson v. Sorlien. The Sorlien court
allowed parents to deprogram their child without fear of civil li-
ability when the parents reasonably believed that the child was
192
Court Decisions, Legislation, and Governmental Actions

being unduly influenced by the religion and that the child had
lost his or her capacity to reason.
Another common issue raised in deprogramming cases is
that of involuntary treatment. Deprogrammers have sought or-
ders requiring involuntary treatment for those who have been
deprived of their free will and coercively persuaded to join a new
religion. They argue that these individuals must be subject to in-
voluntary treatment because they have lost their capacity to rea-
son by virtue of the controlled environment and brainwashing to
which they have been subjected. The control of the environment
includes control over eating, sleeping, and other basics of life.
Most courts have been reluctant to order such involuntary treat-
ment. However, when courts permit the necessity or “choice of
evils” defense, an individual’s rights under the free exercise
clause and right to be free from compulsory medical treatment
are often abused.
Victims of deprogramming have also brought civil actions
against kidnappers and deprogrammers. These actions have in-
cluded claims of violations of civil rights, intentional infliction of
emotional distress, conspiracy, and false imprisonment. These ac-
tions have had mixed results, but generally the cause of action
has been allowed. In fact, one appeals court recognized that de-
programmers practice patterns of coercion similar to those al-
leged against the church (just as many anticult organizations
have all of the essential characteristics of the “cults” they attack).
However, in most cases, when civil claims are brought against
deprogrammers or family members, the defendants try to make
the religious practices of the church the focus of the trial. The de-
fenses of necessity and “choice of evils” allow the trier of fact to
review the religious organization’s practices, and the degree to
which those practices comport with the trier of fact’s values may
affect the outcome of the case.
Legislative Efforts and 
Conservatorship Cases
Attempting to Legislate against Cults
In the early years of the cult controversy, parents concerned
about the religious choices of their adult children lobbied various
Legislative Efforts and Conservatorship Cases
193

legislatures. A number of states established committees and hear-
ings to investigate the cult menace. Some resolutions were
passed, but legislative bodies were ultimately unable to act
against minority religions because of the church-state separation
issue. The strongest effort ever made by a U.S. legislature was
New York State Assembly Bill AB9566-A, which would have
made “promoting a pseudoreligious cult” a felony, introduced by
Robert C. Wertz on October 5, 1977:
A person is guilty of promoting a pseudoreligious cult
when he knowingly organizes or maintains an organi-
zation into which other persons are induced to join or
participate in through the use of mind control methods,
hypnosis, brainwashing techniques or other systematic
forms of indoctrination in which the members or partic-
ipants of such organization engage in soliciting funds
primarily for the benefit of such organization or its
leaders and are not permitted to travel or communicate
with anyone outside such organization unless another
member or participant of such organization is present.
A number of different groups, including the American Civil
Liberties Union, lobbied heavily against the bill and it was ulti-
mately defeated.
Efforts to Amend Conservatorship Laws
Failing to win the support of legislatures, some parents of cult
members turned to more desperate measures in the form of the
vigilante actions of deprogrammers. To protect themselves, it
was sometimes possible to use existing conservatorship laws to
legitimate their kidnapping activities. Conservatorships were
originally designed to protect very elderly or very disturbed peo-
ple from being unfairly taken advantage of. Such individuals are
reduced to the legal status of children, unable to do such things
as independently enter into contracts.
In some early cult conservatorship cases, psychiatrists sym-
pathetic to the plight of concerned parents signed conservator-
ship orders without ever meeting the adult child—feeling that
mere membership in a group like the Hare Krishna movement or
the Unification Church was sufficient evidence for declaring her
or him incompetent. After this practice was challenged, anti-
cultists pushed for amended conservatorship laws that would de
194
Court Decisions, Legislation, and Governmental Actions

facto legitimate deprogramming. Once again, such an amend-
ment almost succeeded in the state of New York, where it was de-
feated only because the governor vetoed it. This measure was in-
troduced on March 25, 1980, as 11122-A. The flavor of this
proposed amendment is captured in its first section, “Persons for
Who a Temporary Conservator May Be Appointed”:
The supreme court and the county courts outside the
city of New York, shall have the power to appoint one
or more temporary conservators of the persons and the
property of any person over fifteen years of age, upon
showing that such person for whom the temporary con-
servator is to be appointed have become closely and
regularly associated with a group which practices the
use of deception in the recruitment of members and
which engages in systematic food or sleep deprivation
or isolation from family or unusually long work sched-
ules and that such person for whom the temporary con-
servator is to be appointed has undergone a sudden and
radical change in behavior, lifestyle, habits and atti-
tudes, and has become unable to care for his welfare
and that his judgment has become impaired to the ex-
tent that he is unable to understand the need for such
care.
The Faithful Five–Faithless Four Case
The primary conservatorship decision involving a stigmatized
minority religion was Katz v. Superior Court, also referred to as the
“Faithful Five–Faithless Four” case. Katz was initially decided in
favor of parents seeking conservatorships for their five adult off-
spring who were members of the Unification Church—only to
have the appeals court overturn the decision almost immediately.
Four out of five of these individuals left the church anyway,
hence the unusual nickname for this case.
Katz was set in motion when the parents approached a Cali-
fornia superior court for thirty-day conservatorships for their adult
children. The goal was to forcibly incarcerate the five “Moonies” in
the Freedom Ranch Rehabilitation Center, a deprogramming facil-
ity run by the Freedom of Thought Foundation of Tucson, Arizona.
The parents contended that conservatorships were necessary be-
cause of their offsprings’ “mental illness or weakness and unsound
Legislative Efforts and Conservatorship Cases
195

mind” and propensity “to be deceived by artful and designing per-
sons.” The parents’ counsel further argued that the five had been
victims of “psychological kidnapping.”
One expert witness in the case, psychiatrist Samuel Benson,
described the putative victims as suffering from a wide variety of
pathological symptoms, including “memory impairment,”
“short attention spans and a decreased ability to concentrate,”
“limited ability toward abstractions,” “defensive attitudes to-
ward id urges,” and “various degrees of regression and childlike
attitudes.” Benson further contended that these symptoms were
the direct result of “coercive persuasion”—that is, “brainwash-
ing”—techniques, as reflected in literature on former Korean War
and Vietnam War POWs.
Despite countertestimony by the five Unificationists and
their own psychological or psychiatric consultants, and despite
the obvious constitutional issues that should have been taken
into account, the judge decided for the parents, declaring: “We’re
talking about the very essence of life here, mother, father and
children. There’s nothing closer in our civilization. This is the
essence of civilization.”
When some of the conservatees petitioned the order, a Cali-
fornia appellate court heard their appeal. The court of appeals
found the conservatorship statute unconstitutionally vague: “In
the field of beliefs, and particularly religious tenets, it is difficult,
if not impossible, to establish a universal truth against which de-
ceit and imposition can be measured.” The appellate court also
pointed out that there had been no demonstrated emergency that
the conservatorship law required. In the absence of demonstrable
physical deprivation, the equal protection and due process of law
forbid involuntary confinement: “If there is coercive persuasion
or brainwashing which requires treatment, the existence of such
a mental disability and the necessity of legal control over the
mentally disabled person for the purpose of treatment should be
ascertained after compliance with the protection of civil liberties
provided by the Welfare and Institutions Code. To do less is to li-
cense kidnapping for the purpose of thought control.”
Finally and perhaps most important, the court of appeals
held that the conservatorship orders had violated the Unifica-
tionists’ rights to freedom of association and freedom of religion.
The beliefs and behaviors used as criteria to determine the patho-
logical state of the alleged victims (and to become the targets of
the “treatment” to be administered at the Freedom Ranch Reha-
196
Court Decisions, Legislation, and Governmental Actions

bilitation Center) were those that stemmed from religious con-
viction—precisely the arena into which the court system was for-
bidden to inquire. Hence, “in the absence of such actions as ren-
der the adult believer himself gravely disabled,” state processes
“cannot be used to deprive the believer of his freedom of action
and to subject him to involuntary treatment.”
The Katz decision did not immediately stop other parents
from applying for temporary conservatorships for their adult
children. There were also ongoing efforts to amend conservator-
ship laws so as to target members of minority religions. Retro-
spectively, however, it is evident that Katz marked an important
watershed, after which the conservatorship tactic went into a
gradual decline and eventually died out.
Ex-Member Lawsuits 
against Minority Religions
The issue of conservatorships for members of controversial reli-
gions was eventually completely eclipsed by tort cases brought
by ex-members against their former religious group. Because the
Constitution does not protect all religiously motivated conduct,
courts have come to award damages to individuals who claim to
have incurred personal injury because of their religious affilia-
tion. Underlying the rationale for such decisions is the traditional
notion that religion should benefit and improve one’s life and
well-being. When religious beliefs and practices do not fulfill
these expectations but instead subject a person to personal harm,
those beliefs and practices become suspect and generally open to
scrutiny by the courts.
Unfortunately, the willingness of courts to examine nontra-
ditional religious practices in light of mainstream traditions often
leads to religion bashing in the judicial forum. Nontraditional be-
liefs are often found offensive only because of fear and misinfor-
mation. Since the emergence of the cult controversy, many mi-
nority religious groups have been accused of brainwashing or
coercive persuasion. It is claimed that these religious practices
subject the individual to a controlled environment in which indi-
viduals lose their capacity to reason and think for themselves.
In the early nineties, a judge considered religious practices
when sentencing an individual who had pled guilty to charges of
Ex-Member Lawsuits against Minority Religions
197

murder for hire and conspiracy to tamper with a federal witness.
The court sentenced Richard LeBaron to five years for killing a
man and his daughter at point-blank range because he had been
“brainwashed” by a church to which he had belonged since he
was a child. The court believed that because of this brainwash-
ing, LeBaron had lost his capacity to reason and think for himself
while committing the crimes, that his thoughts were coerced and
not his own, and that he was not totally responsible for his
choices and actions.
Religious practices that are assumed to extinguish the indi-
vidual’s capacity to reason and consent foster suspicion and leave
the religious organization open to harassment and liability. The
courts may, and often do, consider the religious beliefs and prac-
tices of nontraditional churches in the context of civil and crimi-
nal litigation. Since religious freedom is not absolute, as long as
the courts are convinced that certain religious practices cause
harm to society or individual church members, all religions will
be subject to scrutiny and regulation by the courts and govern-
ment. When children are involved, the scrutiny is even more ex-
acting. Although the First Amendment was meant to protect indi-
vidual rights, courts’ willingness to delve into religious beliefs
and practices affecting a variety of areas has at times resulted in
inflaming juries against nontraditional religious practices, which
can ultimately tip the scales of justice against the interests of the
church. This has particularly been the case in civil suits.
Religious groups, both traditional and nontraditional, have
been named in suits for intentional infliction of emotional dis-
tress and liability for “outrageous conduct” through spiritual
counseling. When counseling by clergy goes awry, the minister
or pastor becomes subject to litigation for intentional infliction of
emotional distress. The emotional distress arises from berate-
ment for sinful conduct and the member’s perception that the
pastor’s counseling is malicious and intended to demean. A vari-
ety of different minority religions have been besieged with law-
suits by ex-members for personal injury claims ranging from
fraud to intentional infliction of emotional distress.
In his book Understanding New Religious Movements (2003),
John Saliba points out that contemporary minority religions have
been taken to court for a wide variety of reasons:
1. The mental distress and psychological damage they
have caused
198
Court Decisions, Legislation, and Governmental Actions

2. Kidnapping and brainwashing young adults, thus forc-
ing them to become members
3. The corruption of minors
4. Sexual servitude
5. Defamation
6. Alienation of affections
7. Wanton misconduct and outrageous acts
8. Harassment
9. Wrongful death
Decisions in such cases have varied so widely that general
conclusions are difficult to draw. All of the better-known and
many of the lesser-known new religions have been involved in
such cases. The Molko-Leal case will be examined in the present
section because of its significance for later developments in the
cult controversy. The Mull case will be examined partially be-
cause of its influence on a later tax case, and partially because I
have more direct familiarity with Church Universal and Tri-
umphant than I do with certain other religious movements.
Molko and Leal v. Unification Church
David Molko and Tracey Leal had been members of the Unifica-
tion Church for approximately six months when they were kid-
napped and deprogrammed. Not long after forsaking their new
religion, they sued the Unification Church for fraud, intentional
infliction of emotional distress, and false imprisonment. They
also sought the return of $6,000 worth of donations and payment
for the work they did while members. The Unification Church
countercharged that the psychological harm Molko and Leal had
experienced was caused by deprogramming procedures rather
than by church-related activities.
This case dragged on for years. In the first round, charges
against the Unification Church were dismissed in 1986. Three
years later, after a number of appeals, the case was finally cleared
for trial by the California Supreme Court. For a number of differ-
ent reasons, this case was finally settled out of court in Novem-
ber 1989.
This case is particularly important because of an amicus cu-
riae brief initially filed on behalf of the Unification Church by the
American Psychological Association and a number of individual
scholars. Margaret Singer, one of the expert witnesses in this case,
Ex-Member Lawsuits against Minority Religions
199

and Richard Ofshe would later sue the APA and others, citing
this amicus curiae brief as the basis for an accusation of a con-
spiracy against them.
The Mull Case
In one prominent case, Gregory Mull, a San Francisco building
designer, became a member of Church Universal and Tri-
umphant in 1974 at the age of fifty-seven. He relocated to the Los
Angeles area in 1979 and became employed at the church’s Mal-
ibu headquarters doing design work.
The church loaned Mull a total of $37,000 during the time he
was relocating, for which Mull signed two promissory notes. His
tenure on church staff lasted about eight months; then he re-
signed from the organization over a dispute involving repay-
ment of the notes. The church filed an action against Mull in 1981
for repayment of the $37,000; Mull counterclaimed for fraud,
duress, undue influence, involuntary servitude, assault, extor-
tion, intentional infliction of emotional distress, and quantum
merit, seeking total damages of $253 million. The case was tried
in 1986 in Los Angeles Superior Court.
Mull claimed at trial that he was a victim of church mind
control and that when he signed the notes, he lacked the legal ca-
pacity to do so. He also claimed, in the alternative, that church of-
ficials unduly pressured him through psychological and emo-
tional manipulation to sign the notes.
Mull asserted that while he was on staff he was physically
debilitated by decreeing (a form of church prayer), a vegetarian
diet, and various health practices, such as fasting and enemas.
Mull also claimed that, subsequent to his resignation, he had
been assaulted at a Church Universal and Triumphant event and
that church officials had publicly disclosed private facts, causing
him personal suffering. Finally, he claimed that he should be
compensated $2 million for his design services while he served
on staff.
At the four-week jury trial, the judge allocated one day to ev-
idence involving the promissory notes and the remainder to tes-
timony on a variety of church practices and beliefs. The testi-
mony by numerous expert witnesses, appearing for both sides,
and by both present and ex-church members covered reincarna-
tion, the ascended masters, and the church founder’s role as a
prophet of God, with each side alternately supporting and ridi-
200
Court Decisions, Legislation, and Governmental Actions

culing same. The claims of involuntary servitude and extortion
were dismissed before trial. The jury gave a general verdict on all
of the remaining claims, finding against the church and its leader,
Elizabeth Clare Prophet, for $1.5 million in compensatory and
punitive damages.
The results in Mull are not particularly surprising, given the
plaintiff’s emotionally charged claims and the willingness of the
court to allow evidence that was not relevant to his claims but
that the appeals court also ruled was not prejudicial. Given this
atmosphere, it was unwise, in hindsight, for the church to have
initiated the action to collect the value of the promissory notes
from Mull. The case has probably made the church more willing
to compromise subsequent claims.
Not all such cases have been decided in favor of plaintiffs.
William Purcell, another ex-member of Church Universal and
Triumphant, also brought an action against the church and its
leaders, claiming fraud, clerical malpractice, psychological mal-
practice, cancellation of written instruments, involuntary servi-
tude, intentional infliction of emotional distress, and seeking the
imposition of a constructive trust. When Purcell filed his suit in
1984, he sought the return of contributions that he had made,
claiming that he had made the contributions based on false rep-
resentations by the defendants. The action was dismissed in 1986
on summary judgment in favor of the church and its leaders.
Child Abuse and Government Intervention 
in Nontraditional Religions
Child Abuse
On the morning of Sunday, July 26, 1953, a force of 120 Arizona
peace officers, together with 100 news reporters, drove across
unpaved roads to the Mormon fundamentalist community of
Short Creek, Arizona, to arrest 36 men and 86 women and pick
up 263 children. It was a sneak attack and was compared by one
Associated Press reporter to “a military assault on an enemy po-
sition.” Sect members were clearly outnumbered, as there were
two officers for every home in the community. Although the ele-
ment of surprise was not completely successful, the officers ar-
rested most of the targeted men and women and the Arizona
Child Abuse and Government Intervention
201

governor announced on the radio that the purpose of the raid
was “to protect the lives and futures of two hundred sixty-three
children” and that the religious community was “the foulest con-
spiracy you could imagine” that was “dedicated to the produc-
tion of white slaves.” Apparently, some officials in the Mormon
Church (which had only abandoned polygamy itself fifty years
earlier) not only applauded the raid but may also have provided
relevant information to the police and other civil authorities.
Shortly after the raid, the mothers and children were bused
to Phoenix where they were initially kept in a crowded rest home
and were told they would remain there for up to a month before
being placed in permanent foster homes. Eventually, juvenile
hearings were held in Arizona state courts that resulted in the
placement of most of the children in foster homes around Ari-
zona, often accompanied by their mothers. Then in March 1955,
an Arizona Superior Court judge ordered that all of the children
be restored to their families, which brought an end to Arizona’s
efforts to segregate children from fundamentalist parents.
One of the primary reasons the “raid” on plural-marriage
communities and the subsequent efforts of Arizona and Utah of-
ficials to separate parents from their children failed was that state
officials eventually recognized that polygamist family ties were
so strong that all attempts to punish the practice of polygamous
marriage, perpetuated by the parents, through their children,
would be counterproductive. They also realized it would not be
in the best interests of the children to be separated from their par-
ents, since there was no evidence of child molestation or deviant
sexual activities involving the children.
The Short Creek raid bears certain strong parallels with the
Northeast Kingdom raid described in the opening sections of this
book. In both cases, governmental authorities intervened directly
in the affairs of stigmatized religious communities from the high
moral ground of protecting children from abuse, only to discover
that no such abuse was occurring—except in the imaginations of
community critics. Much the same thing happened at Waco, but
with far more tragic circumstances.
Although child abuse is technically the jurisdiction of the
state rather than the federal government, concern that the Branch
Davidian children were being abused was one of the principal
reasons cited by authorities as justification for both the initial
ATF attack and the concluding FBI assault. On April 21, 1993,
202
Court Decisions, Legislation, and Governmental Actions

White House spokesperson George Stephanopoulos, defending
the holocaust, asserted that there “is absolutely no question that
there’s overwhelming evidence of child abuse in the Waco com-
pound.” This was a very odd line of defense, as if the assertion
that the Davidians practiced such abuse justified gassing and in-
cinerating the entire community.
However, on the very day of Stephanopoulos’s remarks, the
Justice Department publicly acknowledged that it had no solid
evidence of child abuse—only speculation by mental health pro-
fessions who had been studying Koresh from a distance. Also on
the same day, 1,100 pages of unsealed documents relevant to the
case were released. These included only two allegations of child
abuse by disgruntled former members. Otherwise, nothing else
was reported, certainly nothing like credible evidence.
Certainly during the siege itself, the FBI showed little regard
for the children. The weird light and sound show, which in-
cluded recordings of dentists’ drills and dying rabbits, would
hardly have promoted any child’s sense of well-being. Deterio-
rating sanitary conditions, caused by decaying bodies and the
buildup of sewage, were also given as a justification for attacking
Mount Carmel on April 19. The attorney general told Larry King
on national television that she feared that “if I delayed, without
sanitation or toilets there . . . I could go in there in two months
and find children dead from any number of things.”
The Texas Department of Human Services had investigated
Mount Carmel on child abuse allegations on at least three differ-
ent occasions. No credible evidence for such accusations was
found. The same can be said for the twenty-one children released
from Mount Carmel between the ATF raid and the FBI assault—
no hard evidence of child abuse. On March 5, Janice Caldwell, di-
rector of the Texas Department of Protective and Regulatory Ser-
vices, stated: “They’re in remarkably good shape considering
what they have been through. No signs of physical abuse have
been found.” The March 6 edition of the Houston Post noted that
“all the youths appear to be in good condition psychologically
and physically.” In the same article, a social worker asserted that
“the children are remarkably well-educated.”
The lack of any solid evidence for Branch Davidian child
abuse probably explains the reason the attorney general and the
FBI dropped this explanation as soon as reporters began to raise
questions about specific evidence for abuse. Retrospectively, it is
Child Abuse and Government Intervention
203

clear that the charge of child abuse leveled against the Davidians
was little more than a pretext that legitimated the drastic actions
of April 19, 1993.
Child abuse is one of those issues like AIDS and the plight of
the homeless that has been uppermost in the public conscious-
ness since the 1990s. As a consequence, accusations of child abuse
are more effective at attracting attention than other kinds of
charges, particularly if the media can be persuaded to pick up the
story. Although one of the principles of our legal system is that a
person is innocent until proved guilty, the mass media present
their information so that merely reporting sensationalistic accu-
sations is often sufficient to convict the accused in the mind of the
general public.
What this means for nontraditional religions accused of
child abuse is that such groups lose their chance for a fair hear-
ing as soon as the media labels them “cults.” Cults are, by defin-
ition, abusive, so that to attempt to assert that such-and-such
“cult group” is nonabusive sounds like a contradiction in terms.
Thus, simply succeeding in getting the cult label to stick to any
given religious community—whether the community be the
Branch Davidians, the Northeast Kingdom Community, or the
Short Creek polygamists—is to succeed in convicting the group
in the popular imagination.
One of the earliest cases involving children in a religious set-
ting was Prince v. Massachusetts (1944). Ms. Prince, a Jehovah’s
Witness, was the custodian of her nine-year-old niece. She was
convicted of violating state child-labor laws for taking her niece
with her to sell religious literature. The United States Supreme
Court upheld her conviction. It stated that “the family itself is not
beyond regulation in the public interest, as against a claim of re-
ligious liberty. . . . [N]either rights of religion nor rights of par-
enthood are beyond limitation.”
The state has an interest in protecting juveniles under its tra-
ditional role as parens patriae (literally, “parent of the country,” re-
ferring to the state’s sovereign role as guardian of persons under
legal disability). The state’s interest is in restricting any conduct
that is harmful to the child. “[T]he state has a wide range of
power for limiting parental freedom and authority in things af-
fecting the child’s welfare; . . . this includes, to some extent, mat-
ters of conscience and religious conviction.” The court indicated
that parents could become martyrs if they wanted to, but they
204
Court Decisions, Legislation, and Governmental Actions

did not have the right to make martyrs of their children and sub-
ject them to emotional, psychological, or physical injury. The
Court left no doubt that if a judge perceives that a religious prac-
tice or religious belief may be harmful to a child, the Court can
and will restrict the religious conduct.
Although the accusation of child abuse has often been used
to stigmatize unpopular religious groups, there are other situa-
tions of child endangerment where the concern of the state to
protect children is more legitimate. Courts have even, at times,
restricted the religious practices and beliefs of parents when it is
believed that those practices and beliefs harm the child.
In a California case, Walker v. Superior Court, a court allowed
the prosecution of a mother on charges of involuntary man-
slaughter and felony child endangerment because she had not
sought medical treatment for her daughter when the daughter
was dying of acute meningitis. Although certain statutes al-
lowed parents to seek spiritual treatment for children, when the
life of the child was seriously threatened, “the right of a parent
to rely exclusively on prayer must yield.” The court had little
tolerance for religious practices and beliefs when the parent en-
dangered the child’s life by pursuing his or her own religious in-
terests and not placing the general welfare of the child para-
mount. Prayer treatment was accommodated only as long as
there was no serious risk of harm or danger to the child’s life.
When a child’s life is threatened, religious beliefs take a second
seat. The California court quoted the United States Supreme
Court in Prince v. Massachusetts: “The right to practice religion
freely does not include liberty to expose the community or child
to communicable disease or the latter to ill health or death.”
When the religious beliefs and practices of parents interfere with
the general welfare of a child, the courts show no reluctance to
interfere.
In another example of this pattern, a jury in Minneapolis re-
viewed the religious practices of the Christian Scientists. An
eleven-year-old boy with diabetes died because his mother
would not seek treatment because of her religious beliefs. After
the child died, the father brought suit and obtained a $14.2 mil-
lion jury verdict against the church and his ex-wife. The trend in
society today is to protect children. When the life of a child is
weighed in the balance against the religious freedom of a parent,
society tips the scales in favor of the child.
Child Abuse and Government Intervention
205

Child Custody Cases
Religious practices and beliefs have also become the subject of
child custody cases where nonmembers attempt to highlight
nontraditional aspects of a spouse’s or ex-spouse’s religion to ob-
tain custody of a minor child. Nonmembers seek to show that the
religion deviates from social normalcy and, therefore, adversely
affects the child’s behavior. It is argued that the church’s influ-
ence is mentally, physically, and emotionally detrimental to the
child’s well-being. Nonmembers have been successful when the
court determines that the practices complained of are not merely
religious but detrimental to the child.
In a Kentucky custody case, Melanie Pleasant-Topel was al-
lowed to retain custody of her minor son, Sean Pleasant, but was
given strict guidelines by the court as to the religious practices of
the Church Universal and Triumphant to which she could expose
her son. For example, she was required to follow what U.S. soci-
ety dictates as a normal and appropriate diet, rather than a veg-
etarian or nontraditional diet (which the church does not require
in any event). She was also required to send him to the school he
had been attending rather than to a church school. However, to
the extent the custodial member parent raised the child within
the framework the court determined normal, the court did not in-
terfere with the custody.
In another case in which a member of Church Universal and
Triumphant was involved, the church and its practices were cen-
tral to the action. The mother, Charlene Viau, had been a member
of Church Universal and Triumphant for approximately eleven
years. Although the father contended the church was an “armed
camp” and raised serious concerns that the church environment
would be harmful to the child, the court awarded custody of the
minor child to the mother, finding that there was no reasonable
likelihood of future impairment to the minor child.
Another child custody action involving this church occurred
in Indiana. The court found that the influence of Church Univer-
sal and Triumphant would be harmful and detrimental to the
children and that the mother’s association with the church
demonstrated her poor judgment and inability to properly raise
the children. Custody of the children was given to the father.
Although these results seem contradictory, individual facts
and circumstances often dictate results. Unfortunately, all the rel-
evant circumstances are not always apparent from court records.
206
Court Decisions, Legislation, and Governmental Actions

In other cases, decisions are often result oriented, and their stated
rationale may be misleading. Nevertheless, certain basic princi-
ples are almost universally recognized in these types of cases.
In New Mexico, a father who was a devout Sikh in Yogi Bha-
jan’s Sikh Dharma organization sought to change the custody of
his children. Until their divorce, both parents had actively prac-
ticed the Sikh religion as brought to this country by Yogi Bhajan
and involved their children in the religion. Following her remar-
riage, the custodial mother withdrew from the Sikh religion and
discouraged her children from participating in it. The father
wanted his children raised in the Sikh religion and sought to
modify the custody order to give him custody of the children so
that he could control their religious upbringing. The court noted
that the paramount concern was the general welfare of the chil-
dren. The court also recognized that religious restrictions on vis-
itation “have been upheld where evidence of physical or emo-
tional harm to the child has been substantial.” The courts have
not hesitated to interfere when it is shown that the child suffers
anxiety and other emotional distress because of the religious dif-
ferences of his parents.
In an action in Tennessee to modify visitation, the court
noted that the general trend in custody cases is to not allow reli-
gious beliefs to be controlling. “The law tolerates and even en-
courages, up to a point, the child’s exposure to the religious in-
fluences of both parents even if they are divided in their faiths.”
Courts will generally not interfere with the religious training a
noncustodial parent gives his or her children absent “a clear and
affirmative showing that these activities and expressions of belief
are harmful to the child.” However, courts will not allow con-
flicting beliefs of parents to cause the children emotional harm;
the paramount interest of the court is the general welfare of the
child.
Many child custody cases exemplify how the cult stereotype
may be used as an ideological resource in specific social conflicts.
There is enough ambiguity in the “cult” label to make its appli-
cation in particular cases a matter of negotiation. Occasions for
such negotiation arise in the context of social conflicts. For indi-
viduals or groups locked in certain kinds of struggles with mem-
bers of minority religions, the “cult” stereotype represents a po-
tent ideological resource that—if they are successful in making
the label stick—marshals public opinion against their opponent,
potentially tipping the balance of power in their favor.
Child Abuse and Government Intervention
207

The stigma of the “cult” stereotype has been particularly ef-
fective in more than a few child custody cases, in which one par-
ent’s membership in a minority religion is portrayed as indica-
tive of her or his unworthiness as a parent. For such “limited
domain” legal conflicts, it is difficult to deploy the stereotype un-
less there is some larger, earlier conflict that led to press coverage
in which the particular minority religion in question was labeled
a “cult.” Lacking earlier “bad press,” the cult label can still some-
times be made to stick on the basis of testimony by disgruntled
former members.
For the most part, individuals involved in such relatively
limited conflicts do not become full-time “anticult” crusaders.
Although they may enter into a relationship with the anticult
movement, they normally drift away from this involvement
within a short time after the termination of their particular strug-
gle. Also, if anticult rhetoric fails to accomplish their end but
some other tool works in their particular conflict, they are usu-
ally quite ready to dispose of the cult stereotype and adopt an en-
tirely different angle of attack.
One case in which the employment of the cult stereotype
was clearly opportunistic involved the mother’s association with
the Movement of Spiritual Inner Awareness. Her affiliation was
effectively used against her by her ex-husband in a dispute in-
volving their mutual offspring. In this particular case, a divorced
mother petitioned the court to permit her to relocate in order to
take a position in an MSIA-inspired organization offering
human-potential seminars. The ex-husband argued that he did
not want his son involved in a “cult” and dragged up old rumors
about MSIA and MSIA’s founder in an effort to prevent his ex-
wife from leaving the state. Perceiving that not only would she
have a difficult time winning her case but also that her husband
might undertake further actions that could result in her son being
taken from her, she dropped the case.
What is especially ironic about this case is that for several
decades the father has been deeply involved in est—a human-
potential group that has very frequently (far more frequently
than MSIA) been labeled a “cult.” As someone whose participa-
tion in est has likely sensitized him to the cult controversy, the ex-
husband’s utilization of the stereotype is clearly little more than
a tactic intended to win support for his side of the case rather
than a reflection of deeply held views about the dangers of sinis-
ter “cults.” The chances of this gentleman becoming a full-time
208
Court Decisions, Legislation, and Governmental Actions

anticult crusader are nil. Here it is clear that the cult stereotype is
an ideological resource, deployed without a deep investment in
the stereotype per se.
Tax Cases
Churches act as fiduciaries, enter into contracts, purchase prop-
erty, and otherwise conduct business within the communities
where they are located. Churches expose themselves to tax liabil-
ity when their conduct is not purely religious. Scrutiny becomes
particularly focused on churches when they are the recipients of
gifts, devises or other transfers of property, or are otherwise ben-
efited. There have been a number of IRS cases involving minor-
ity religions in which the Internal Revenue Service has revoked
the tax-exempt status of controversial new religions, often at the
prompting of enemies of the particular religion involved.
In 1985, for example, the Way International’s tax-exempt sta-
tus was revoked following allegations of partisan political in-
volvement and certain business activities at its New Knoxville
headquarters. The ruling was reversed by the Supreme Court in
1990. Most recently, in 1993, the IRS ceased all litigation and rec-
ognized the Church of Scientology as a legitimate religious orga-
nization. This followed years of contentious litigation between
the agency and the church.
Church Universal and Triumphant
I have already had occasion to refer to the Church Universal and
Triumphant in earlier sections. CUT is a Montana-based New
Age church led by Elizabeth Clare Prophet. An indirect spin-off
of the I AM Religious Activity that grew quietly in its early years,
by the late 1980s it had become the most controversial new reli-
gion in North America in terms of negative media coverage.
The church was founded as the Summit Lighthouse by Mark
L. Prophet in 1958, and Elizabeth took over his role as the pri-
mary mouthpiece for the masters after Mark’s death in 1973. The
group moved to Montana in 1986. Much of the church’s negative
media derived from incidents clustered around its extensive fall-
out shelters and its preparations for the possibility of a nuclear
attack against the United States. At one point in the construction,
for instance, fuel stored in several underground tanks (which
Tax Cases
209

were sold to the church in defective condition) ruptured and
spilled gas and diesel oil into the water table. In 1990, members
from around the world gathered in Montana because of the pre-
dicted possibility of an atomic holocaust—a gathering that
would have gone all but unnoticed had not a local paper painted
it in sinister colors and broadcast the news through the AP wire
service to the world.
On the heals of this extensive publicity, the Church Universal
and Triumphant’s tax-exempt status was revoked in October 1992.
The revocation followed an inquiry that began in 1989 under the
Church Audit Procedures Act. Three reasons were given for the re-
vocation: the church was alleged to be involved to an excessive de-
gree in nonexempt commercial activities, it had made an allegedly
improper payment on behalf of a church official as part of a court
judgment (in the Mull case, mentioned in a previous section), and
it had allegedly been involved at an official level in a scheme by
two church employees to illegally purchase weapons. The IRS
claimed Church Universal and Triumphant owed back taxes on
business income, employment taxes, and excise taxes.
The church strongly disputed all three reasons given for the
revocation, filing a declaratory judgment action to reverse the
IRS decision. The church and the IRS entered into extensive set-
tlement negotiations, and the court extended various pretrial
hearing dates to accommodate the negotiations. In taking its ac-
tion against the church, the IRS was clearly influenced by nega-
tive publicity, including coverage from the Gregory Mull case, in-
vestigative articles in the Bozeman Daily Chronicle discussing
Church Universal and Triumphant operations, an ex-member’s
claim that the Church Universal and Triumphant supported in-
ternational rebel groups, the appearance of Elizabeth Clare
Prophet’s daughter on the Oprah Winfrey show and discussions
of alleged church money given to another daughter, a Montana
newspaper article about gun ownership by Church Universal
and Triumphant members, and the guilty pleas of Vernon Hamil-
ton and Edward Francis to charges that they had illegally pur-
chased weapons.
Initially, the focus of the IRS investigation appeared to be
limited to the church’s potential liability for unrelated business
income tax; the church’s tax-exempt status was secondary. How-
ever, the information gleaned from newspapers, particularly the
illegal gun purchases by Hamilton and Francis, changed the
focus to the tax-exempt status of the church. There were, how-
210
Court Decisions, Legislation, and Governmental Actions

ever, irregularities in the agency’s investigation that led to a com-
promise agreement in mid-1994—a compromise that included
restoring the church’s status as a charitable organization.
The Reverend Sun Myung 
Moon’s Income Tax–Evasion Case
The Unification Church, formally the Holy Spirit Association for
the Unification of World Christianity, was one of the most con-
troversial new religions in late-twentieth-century North America.
We have already noted a number of cases above in which the UC
has been involved. Derided in the West as “the Moonies,” the UC
is an international messianic religious movement led by the Rev-
erend Sun Myung Moon, a Korean national. Although polemical
opponents have identified any number of departures from Chris-
tian orthodoxy, the major novelty is the explicitness with which
the present is identified as the time of Christ’s Second Advent.
After the departure of the Children of God (later known as
the Family) from the United States in the mid-1970s, the Unifica-
tion Church became the most controversial religion on the Amer-
ican scene. This was in part due to the activities of the UC itself,
which attracted attention by staging major rallies across the na-
tion in 1976. The California branch of the church was also in-
volved in a deceptive recruiting operation that made the cult
stereotype seem particularly applicable. Perhaps most important,
however, the leadership of the anticult movement made a con-
scious choice to focus attention on the Unification Church. The
strategy was that, if the government could be moved to act
against the UC, this would establish a precedent that could then
be turned against other minority religions. However, as we have
noted, anticultists were largely unsuccessful in evoking govern-
mental action.
One of the few areas in which the assault on this religion was
successful was in a tax case involving the founder, Rev. Sun
Myung Moon. In 1982, Moon was convicted and jailed on tax eva-
sion charges for failure to pay a purported tax liability of $7,300
over a three-year period. This liability came about as a result of a
church checking account that had been opened in Moon’s name
by early missionaries in New York rather than as a result of an in-
tentional action on his part. It should also be noted that having a
church account in the name of the pastor is a common practice in
Tax Cases
211

such denominations as the Baptist Church. This case was re-
garded by most jurists, civil libertarians, and religious leaders as
biased and an intrusion on essential religious freedoms, and the
Unification Church decried the case as religious persecution.
The case briefly made headlines, and the anticult movement
congratulated itself on finally having achieved a victory in the
area of evoking a governmental response. In the long run, how-
ever, the results of the case were ambivalent. Clergymen from a
wide variety of different congregations came to Rev. Sun Myung
Moon’s defense, including such national figures as Jerry Falwell.
The UC thus acquired contacts and allies it could never have
hoped to have made without the case.
Like many other Christian denominations, the Unification
Church embraced a theology of redemptive suffering that could
speak directly to the conviction and incarceration of the church’s
founder. Accepting this turn of events as divinely ordained,
Moon also stood up well under the conditions of his imprison-
ment, which were certainly more tolerable than the persecution
he had suffered under the North Koreans in the fifties. In the end,
the UC probably emerged stronger than it had been prior to the
case.
Zoning, Solicitation, and the Like
Minority religions have also encountered less momentous prob-
lems with local ordinances governing zoning, solicitation, and so
forth. These cases have had ambivalent results. To cite just a few
solicitation cases that made it all the way to the Supreme Court,
in 1981 in Heffron v. International Society for Krishna Consciousness,
the high court supported the state’s right to require solicitors—
including members of the Hare Krishna movement—to be con-
fined to a booth rather than to wander about at the state fair.
However, the very next year in Larson v. Valente, the Supreme
Court decided in favor of the Unification Church against a solic-
itation law that, it was clear, targeted new religious groups.
Zoning has also been an arena in which minority religions
have had to contend with prejudice against “cults.” Residents
generally resent any “invasion” into their neighborhood that dis-
turbs in any way the status quo. People purchase homes in cer-
tain neighborhoods specifically relying on the zoning codes and
the general tenor of the neighborhood and are suspicious of new
212
Court Decisions, Legislation, and Governmental Actions

groups using property in the neighborhood for other nontradi-
tional purposes.
Church Universal and Triumphant
The Church Universal and Triumphant has encountered several
zoning problems over the years. One high-profile case involved
its purchase of a large mansion in Minneapolis in an area that
was zoned for single-family residential dwellings but that also al-
lowed for usage by churches and religious organizations. The
property and building purchased by the church had previously
been used as a duplex. Church Universal and Triumphant pro-
posed to use the building for worship services and as a religious
community residence and teaching center.
As soon as the church purchase was completed, the home-
owners in the area expressed concern about the church being lo-
cated in the area. The residents did not understand the religion,
particularly since the church and its tenets did not fit into the tra-
ditional religious mold. The residents encouraged and then joined
a suit by the City of Minneapolis to stop the church from using the
property, claiming it offered insufficient parking and the church’s
religious community and center did not constitute a valid acces-
sory use. In Minnesota, a church sanctuary as well as a monastery
and rectory can be situated in a single-family residential zoning
area. The court found that the Teaching Center qualified as a
church monastery or rectory and that the church was in “sub-
stantial compliance” with the zoning code’s parking require-
ments. The Minnesota Supreme Court affirmed this decision.
The hostility encountered by Church Universal and Tri-
umphant in Minneapolis is not unique. When the Church of
Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints tried to purchase property in
Seattle and Portland to construct temples for worship by its
members, strong sentiments were expressed in opposition. A
comparable situation has generated a long-running conflict with
respect to a retreat facility established by the Movement of Spiri-
tual Inner Awareness.
The Movement for Spiritual Inner Awareness
In the mountains overlooking Santa Barbara, California, the Foun-
dation for the Institute of Individual and World Peace (IIWP) (an
organization founded by John-Roger Hinkins, founder-leader of
Zoning, Solicitation, and the Like
213

the Movement for Spiritual Inner Awareness) purchased some
property—later named Windermere—for the purpose of building
a peace retreat facility. Bordered on one side by a national forest,
the property is also directly adjacent to a semirural neighborhood
populated by individuals who moved away from the city for the
purpose of enjoying country living. Some of these people view
their new neighbor with concern. When they heard about plans to
build a facility that, they imagined, would attract large numbers of
outsiders from the Los Angeles area who, they imagined, would
disturb their peaceful rural setting, some were upset. Eventually,
some neighbors organized the Cielo Preservation Organization
(named after the main road in the area) to oppose the construction
of the retreat—construction that cannot proceed without approval
from the county.
Not long after a negative article about MSIA appeared in the
Los Angeles Times, almost everyone in the neighborhood received
a copy. This slanted article immediately became a centerpiece in
some of the neighbors’ opposition to MSIA’s retreat plans. By
1994, the Times report had been superseded by the considerable
publicity Arianna Huffington’s MSIA connections were generat-
ing in the southern California media. Thus, in a December 1994
article in the local Santa Barbara paper on the conflict between
Windermere and the neighborhood, Huffington and her “cult”
connections were brought up and discussed near the beginning
of the article: “[John-Roger’s] teachings drew national attention
during this year’s California Senate race between incumbent
Diane Feinstein and Rep. Michael Huffington because the Mon-
tecito congressman’s wife, Arianna, had ties to the John-Roger
organization, which some critics claim is a cult. Arianna Huffing-
ton has said it is not a cult, and described her past connection
with MSIA as a casual one.” Despite the cautious wording of this
passage, the net effect of mentioning such accusations is that oth-
erwise uninformed readers may conclude that the “cult” label is
probably appropriate for MSIA, thus influencing them to side
with the retreat’s opponents.
This labeling enterprise has been highly successful in gener-
ating anti-IIWP and anti-MSIA sentiment in Santa Barbara
County. The point here, however, is that the Cielo Preservation
Organization is less concerned about the ranch owners’ religious
persuasion than about preventing, in the words of a local orga-
nizer, hordes of “L.A. cowboys” from invading the area, thus
spoiling their rural privacy. The claim that the Windermere
214
Court Decisions, Legislation, and Governmental Actions

Ranch is populated by “weird cultists” is simply one among
many accusations hurled at IIWP in an all-out effort to short-cir-
cuit their retreat plans rather than representing a deep commit-
ment to the anticult position.
Libel Cases
Considering the often highly charged remarks that have been
hurled back and forth in the cult controversy, it is surprising that
there have been so few libel cases. These few cases have, however,
been significant. Overseas, there was a long-running libel case in
England that the Unification Church had brought against the
Daily Mail. This case was eventually decided in favor of the news-
paper. Perhaps the most significant “cult” libel case in the United
States was in 1985 when the Local Church won a libel case against
authors who had accused the church of being a “destructive cult.”
The Local Church Libel Case
The Local Church, also known as the Little Flock, was founded in
the 1920s in China by Ni Shutsu, popularly known as Watchman
Nee. Accused of being a spy for the U.S. and Nationalist govern-
ments, he was sent to prison in 1952, where he died twenty years
later. Among Nee’s followers was Witness Lee, founder and elder
of the church at Yantai. The movement spread around the Pacific
basin and was brought to the West Coast of the United States by
migrating members. Lee himself moved to the United States,
where he founded the Living Stream Ministry and has led the
spread of the Local Church.
Although highly orthodox in doctrine, Lee brought innova-
tion to the church by introducing a number of theological em-
phases as well as new practices such as “pray reading” and “call-
ing upon the name of the Lord.” “Pray reading” is a devotional
practice using the words of Scripture as the words of prayer. Dur-
ing this practice, which is supposed to allow the Scripture to im-
part an experience of the presence of God in the person praying,
people repeat words and phrases from the Scripture over and
over, often interjecting words of praise and thanksgiving. “Call-
ing upon the name of the Lord,” on the other hand, represents an
invocation of God by the repetition of phrases such as “O Lord
Jesus.” Both these practices have been subjects of controversy.
Libel Cases
215

A controversy emerged in the 1970s between the Local
Church and some members of the larger Evangelical Christian
community who regarded the innovations of Lee as departing
from acceptable Evangelical thought. This controversy culmi-
nated in a series of legal actions in the mid-1980s. A number of
anticult writers accused the Local Church of heresy and attacked
its unique forms of Christian piety. The lawsuits instituted by the
Local Church brought retractions and apologies from all organi-
zations except the Spiritual Counterfeits Project, a Christian an-
ticult group that had published the book The God-Men, attacking
the church. This case went to trial, and in 1985 a financial settle-
ment was ordered against the Spiritual Counterfeits Project,
which was driven to bankruptcy in the face of an $11 million
judgment.
The Local Church case sent a chill through the ranks of peo-
ple who regularly wrote on the cult controversy. Subsequently,
writers moved away from referring to a wide variety of minority
religions by name and instead shifted to writing about “cults” in
general—the only groups it was safe to name were religions that
had been decimated or eliminated by violence, such as the Peo-
ple’s Temple.
Cynthia Kisser v. the Church of Scientology
In 1990, Michael Rokos, then president of the Cult Awareness
Network, resigned when it was discovered that he had been ar-
rested several years earlier for propositioning a young policeman
who had been posing as an teenager. After Cynthia Kisser, CAN’s
executive director, took over the day-to-day running of the orga-
nization, members of some of the groups attacked by CAN began
investigating her background in hopes of finding a similar skele-
ton in the closet. Eventually, they discovered that Kisser had
worked briefly as a topless dancer in the 1970s.
Even though topless dancing is nowhere near as serious of an
act (many people would not even consider it immoral) as propo-
sitioning underage boys, critics—including Heber Jentzsch, pres-
ident of the Church of Scientology, International—seized upon
this item of information and hurled it at CAN in an effort to dis-
credit the organization. Kisser responded by suing Jentzsch and
the Church of Scientology for defamation of character in 1992. She
filed two suits, one in federal court and one in state court. Both
216
Court Decisions, Legislation, and Governmental Actions

were dismissed, the first in 1994, the second in 1995. Kisser’s ap-
peal met a similar fate.
In dismissing her federal case, U.S. District Judge James B.
Zagel remarked:
Statements charging Kisser with exposing her breasts in
public for remuneration could affect the public’s assess-
ment of her as a critic of religious cults. Some might re-
gard such activity as the symptom of a character so
deeply flawed that they could expect other symptoms,
such as untruthfulness. Some who regard topless danc-
ing as base, immoral or sinful . . . might consider a for-
mer topless dancer less likely to understand, appreciate
or fairly judge the motives and practices of organiza-
tions claiming spiritual inspiration and purpose, or
their members’ lifestyles.
Zagel further noted that Kisser did not “offer any clear and
convincing evidence showing a reckless disregard for the truth,”
as required by law. Not long after the federal case had been de-
cided, her state case was dismissed with prejudice. Kisser’s ap-
peal of the federal decision was finally dismissed in 1997. These
defeats took place around the same time that the Cult Awareness
Network itself was being dismantled in the courts, in what must
stand as the worst losing streak in the anticult movement’s short
history.
The Defeat of Anticultism in the Courts
For many years the legal struggle between minority religions
and their critics went back and forth in the courts, so that,
throughout the 1980s, it appeared to longtime observers as
though the conflict had reached a kind of stasis. It was thus
somewhat surprising when, in the 1990s, the scale tipped deci-
sively in favor of the new religious movements. The defeat of an-
ticultism in the courts took place in two distinct arenas: In the
first place, mind control, coercive persuasion,  and brainwashing
were rejected as a theory that could have a bearing on the out-
come of any legal case. In the second place, the Cult Awareness
Network was sued out of existence in the wake of a depro-
gramming-related lawsuit. Subsequently, the Cult Awareness
The Defeat of Anticultism in the Courts
217

Network name, mailing address, and phone number were pur-
chased by the Church of Scientology.
The Fishman Decision
For many years, Dr. Margaret Singer, a clinical psychologist, had
been the most weighty expert witness in court cases involving
the notion of coercive persuasion, popularly known as “brain-
washing.” Part of her legitimacy as an expert derived from her
association with other psychological researchers who had exam-
ined U.S. soldiers released from POW camps following the Ko-
rean War. Singer had testified in such prominent cases as Katz,
Mull, and Molko-Leal, to name just a few.
Her demise as an expert witness began, ironically, with an
effort by Singer and some of her colleagues to legitimate the an-
ticult position on mind control within the psychological profes-
sion. This group had formed a task force on “deceptive and indi-
rect methods of persuasion and control” within the American
Psychological Association. This task force submitted its report to
the Board of Social and Ethical Responsibility for Psychology of
the APA. The report was rejected by the board in May 1987, with
the statement that, “in general, the report lacks the scientific rigor
and evenhanded critical approach needed for APA imprimatur.”
Task force members were explicitly warned not to imply that the
APA in any way supported the position the report put forward.
The other document that would be brought forward to dis-
credit Singer was an amicus curiae brief filed by the APA and
twenty-three  scholars in support of the Unification Church in the
Molko-Leal case. Singer had already testified in this case, and the
foreword to the amicus curiae brief cast a harshly critical com-
ment in Singer’s direction: “APA believes that this commitment
to advancing the appropriate use of psychological testimony in
the courts carries with it a concomitant duty to be vigilant against
those who would use purportedly expert testimony lacking sci-
entific and methodological rigor.” The wording at the end of this
statement clearly echoes the decision of the APA board to reject
the task force report, although this brief had been filed before the
report had been rejected.
These two rejections subsequently led to the rejection of
Singer as an expert witness in a series of cases, culminating in
United States v. Fishman in 1990. Stephen Fishman had argued
that his criminal behavior, mail fraud, had been caused by the
218
Court Decisions, Legislation, and Governmental Actions

Church of Scientology’s mind-control and thought-reform tech-
niques to which he had been subjected. U.S. District Court judge
D. Lowell Jensen reviewed the scientific status of Singer’s theo-
ries—as well as the related ideas of sociologist Richard Ofshe,
whom the defense had also called as an expert witness—in some
detail. Ofshe was rejected out of hand as an expert witness.
Singer, on the other hand, could testify as a mental health pro-
fessional, on the condition that she not “support her opinion with
testimony that involves thought reform, because the Court finds
that her views on thought reform, like Dr. Ofshe’s, are not gener-
ally accepted within the scientific community.” This turned out
to be a benchmark decision, which was subsequently used to dis-
qualify Singer and Ofshe from testifying in other cult cases.
Singer and Ofshe then sued the APA and the American Soci-
ological Association (ASA), alleging that these two organizations
had conspired with twelve individual scholars to discredit them.
On August 9, 1993, a federal judge threw their suit out of court.
They refiled an almost identical suit in state court in California,
but this new suit was thrown out in June 1994. Upon appeal, the
case was dismissed with prejudice. With this last dismissal, “cul-
tic mind control” was finally demolished in the courts.
The Scott Case and the Demise 
of the Cult Awareness Network
For many years, the Church of Scientology had invested its legal
resources in fighting various governmental agencies—most re-
cently, a host of cases involving the Internal Revenue Service. In
1993, the IRS halted all Scientology-related litigation and ex-
tended unqualified recognition to the church and its various af-
filiated organizations. This action had many different spin-off ef-
fects, including the freeing of Scientology’s legal resources to
fight other enemies. It was thus almost inevitable that the church
would turn its big guns on the Cult Awareness Network.
Despite public statements to the contrary, CAN regularly re-
ferred worried parents to vigilante deprogrammers. It was in this
practice that the Church of Scientology found the weak point that
eventually brought the organization down. In a criminal case in
the state of Washington, deprogrammer Rick Ross and his asso-
ciates had been referred to the mother of Jason Scott by the Cult
Awareness Network. Scott, a member of a Pentecostal church,
The Defeat of Anticultism in the Courts
219

had been handcuffed, silenced with duct tape across his mouth,
abducted, and forcibly held against his will for days in a failed at-
tempt to destroy his beliefs. The Church of Scientology sup-
ported this case in a number of ways, such as by supplying wit-
nesses against Ross and CAN.
When the criminal case failed to convict Ross, the church
helped Scott file a civil suit against his kidnappers and the Cult
Awareness Network. The jury in this new case found the conduct
of some of the defendants “so outrageous in character and so ex-
treme in degree as to go beyond all possible bounds of de-
cency . . . atrocious and utterly intolerable in a civilized commu-
nity” and approved a $4.875 million verdict against Ross and
CAN. When the defendants moved to have the verdict set aside
as “unreasonable,” U.S. District judge John Coughenour denied
the motion, stating: “The court notes each of the defendants’
seeming incapability of appreciating the maliciousness of their
conduct towards Mr. Scott . . . Thus, the large award given by the
jury against both CAN and Mr. Ross seems reasonably necessary
to enforce the jury’s determination on the oppressiveness of the
defendants’ actions and deter similar conduct in the future.”
The Cult Awareness Network initially filed for bankruptcy
under Chapter 11, hoping to continue its operations. However,
CAN was finally forced to file Chapter 7 bankruptcy in June
1996. When CAN’s resources were auctioned to raise money for
the settlement, the Church of Scientology purchased the Cult
Awareness Network name, phone number, and post office box
address.
The Rebirth of the Cult Controversy 
on the International Scene
Ironically, just when it seemed that the anticult movement had
suffered final defeat in U.S. courts, a new wave of anticult activ-
ity swept across western Europe, Japan, and, later, China. Al-
though Europe and Japan had been active in the cult controversy
of the preceding three decades, two incidents served to escalate
the conflict in these two areas. In Japan, the extreme antisocial
acts of AUM Shinrikyo, which culminated in the release of poi-
son gas in the Tokyo subway system in 1995, created widespread
fear and distrust in the Japanese populace. Similarly, the Solar
220
Court Decisions, Legislation, and Governmental Actions

Temple’s dramatic murder-suicides in Switzerland in 1994 and in
France in 1995 demonstrated that the United States was not the
only country in the world that could give birth to dangerous mi-
nority religious groups. In both areas of the world, the balance of
power was tipped in favor of the forces in Europe and Japan that
viewed new religious movements as a purely negative influence
in society.
The balance of the present chapter covers this rebirth of the
cult controversy on the international scene. The initial material
on recent European developments is adapted, with permission,
from a paper by Dr. Massimo Introvigne, director of the Center
for Studies on New Religions (CESNUR), “Religious Liberty in
Europe,” which was presented at a press conference held in
Washington, D.C., at the National Press Club on December 1,
1997.
An Overview of the European Situation
In the United States, the Jonestown tragedy of 1978 was the cata-
lyst for an increase of anticult activity. The anticult worldview
was strengthened, but the activities of the anticult movement
were ultimately kept in check by the reactions of academe, main-
line churches, and some of the religious minorities themselves. In
Europe, as mentioned above, the suicides-homicides of the Order
of the Solar Temple, repeated twice in the 1994 and 1995 (and a
third time in 1997—but only in Quebec), played a similar role to
that played by Jonestown in the United States. The anticult
movement was energized, and authorities began considering
cults more seriously. Discredited theories such as mind control
surfaced again. Parliamentary commissions with a mandate to
study the “danger of cults” were established in a number of
countries. Although not attempting to examine all of this activity,
we will survey some relevant examples.
France
On January 10, 1996, a parliamentary commission in France,
composed entirely of members of Parliament (without consulting
a single scholar), issued a report titled Cults in France after a num-
ber of secret hearings. It included a laundry list of 172 “danger-
ous cults.” Although not recommending any new legislation, it
suggested a number of administrative actions and the establish-
ment of a national cult observatory (in fact established in 1996).
The Rebirth of the Cult Controversy on the International Scene
221

Although not technically a source of law, the report was
quoted in court decisions and led to discrimination against a
number of groups. Teachers were fired from public schools after
years of honorable service only because they were members of
the Jehovah’s Witnesses, one of the most dangerous “cults,” ac-
cording to the report. A Roman Catholic theatrical group, the Of-
fice Culturel de Cluny, included in the report as a dangerous cult
despite letters of protest from a number of French Catholic bish-
ops, was nearly bankrupted due to the refusal of public theaters
to air its shows. The City of Lyons decided not to allow the use of
public facilities to any group listed in the report as a “cult.” Each
French Department had a “Mr. Cult” employed by the Ministry
of Youth and Sport (often well connected with the French antic-
ult group ADFI) to inform the cultural and sport organizations
about the evils of cults.
In 2001, the About-Picard Law, a draconian piece of legisla-
tion giving the government full power to repress unpopular reli-
gious groups, was signed into law in France after intense debate.
In 2004, extending its attacks on religious freedom to non-“cult”
groups, the French legislature enacted a public school ban on the
wearing of religious symbols, from Jewish yarmulkes to large
crucifixes. Its main purpose, however, was to prevent Muslim
schoolgirls from wearing the hijab, the head scarves prescribed
for women in the Islamic tradition.
Switzerland
Following an intensive anticult campaign in the wake of the Solar
Temple and the French Report, the Canton of Geneva released a
report in February 1997 written by four lawyers, after interview-
ing a number of individuals. Although in some chapters the re-
port was written in a more moderate style than the French one,
the substantial proposals advocated legislation against “mind
control” and against hiring members of “dangerous cults” as
government officers.
Belgium
The Belgian parliamentary commission on cults released its re-
port on April 28, 1997. This document was more extreme than the
French report, including bizarre allegations against many
groups, including five mainline Catholic groups, Quakers, the
YWCA, Hasidic Jews, and almost all Buddhists. It also proposed
legislation making “mind control” a crime.
222
Court Decisions, Legislation, and Governmental Actions

Reactions by scholars and mainline churches produced some
turmoil in the Belgian Parliament, and in the end it adopted the
report itself but not the list of 189 groups included as an appen-
dix. This was a symbolic victory for scholars, but most of what
was disturbing was in the main body of the report.
Following the report, legal actions were taken against a Ti-
betan Buddhist group and a Catholic religious congregation
called the Work (a Belgian group now headquartered in Rome,
not to be confused with Opus Dei, also mentioned in the re-
port)—notwithstanding vigorous protests by the Vatican and by
Belgian bishops. An action was also initiated to force the dissolu-
tion of Sukyo Mahikari, a Japanese Shinto-based religious mi-
nority whose branches in countries such as Italy and the United
States have existed for decades without any trouble for the pub-
lic order. Based on the testimony of hostile ex-members of some
organizations, extreme allegations were made against a dozen
groups.
Germany
A parliamentary commission was established including mem-
bers of Parliament and experts appointed by the different politi-
cal parties. Hearings were conducted with scholars, anticultists,
and members of a number of religious movements. An interim
report was released in June 1997. In the meantime, without con-
sulting the parliamentary commission, the government placed
the Church of Scientology under the supervision of the Secret
Service. Even groups antagonistic to Scientology criticized the
decision as a dangerous precedent. Meanwhile, German anti-
cultists named the Jehovah’s Witnesses as the second group that
should be watched by the Secret Service. Police raids instigated
by the same anticultists took place against small independent
Pentecostal churches.
Eastern Europe
In Eastern European countries where legal protections or tradi-
tions of religious freedom are nonexistent or weak, minority reli-
gions are often less able to defend themselves. In some former
Soviet Union countries, churches that formerly enjoyed the status
of being state sanctioned are engaged in an effort to reestablish
their pre-Soviet positions. Alternative religious groups have
sometimes suffered from these efforts, especially where the for-
merly established churches have been able to strike alliances
The Rebirth of the Cult Controversy on the International Scene
223

with politicians. In Russia, for instance, laws have been passed
that limit religious freedom for religious minorities. In March
2004, the District Court of Moscow banned the activities of Jeho-
vah’s Witnesses and moved to liquidate them as a legal entity.
Similar efforts to promote former dominant churches at the ex-
pense of other religions are also under way in other former So-
viet countries as well.
The European Parliament
The European Parliament has entrusted the Committee on Civil
Liberties and Internal Affairs with the task of preparing a report.
Following criticism of the French and Belgian reports by scholars,
the committee initially produced a draft with a number of positive
features (such as questioning the usefulness of preparing lists of
“cults”). However, caving in to anticult pressure, members intro-
duced amendments during the final debate within the committee,
and further amendments may be introduced during the plenary
discussion of the European Parliament. Thus, anticult ideas, ini-
tially rejected by the committee, may reenter the document.
The European Parliament should not be confused with the
Council of Europe, an institution including more European coun-
tries but less authoritative and well known in Western Europe.
Members of the Council of Europe, unlike those of the European
Parliament, are not elected directly by the people. The Commit-
tee on Legal Affairs and Human Rights of the Parliamentary As-
sembly of the Council of Europe also investigated the “cult”
problem. The minutes of its meeting held on April 8, 1997, in
Paris, with “experts”—including some of the most extreme
French anticultists—showed a degree of anticult extremism rare
even in the current heated European discussion. The Council of
Europe’s Report on Sects and Cults, which was issued on June 22,
1999, adopted a more moderate tone but still took a hostile stance
against minority religious groups.
Some European Case Studies
There are literally hundreds of religious minorities discriminated
against in western Europe. They belong to all possible religious
and spiritual persuasions. The following case studies involve two
comparatively small French groups not well known outside
France. They could hardly be more different from each other.
224
Court Decisions, Legislation, and Governmental Actions

The Evangelical Pentecostal Church of Besançon is an exam-
ple of how a group whose theology is clearly in the mainstream
(and which would be regarded as mainline in most Western
countries) is marginalized after an encounter with the anticult
movement. As mentioned earlier, a number of Catholic, Protes-
tant, and Jewish groups have suffered the same fate.
The second example—the Aumist Religion (not to be con-
fused with the Japanese group AUM Shinrikyo), headquartered
at the Mandarom, in southern France—could hardly be less
mainstream. Its theological ideas are at the very fringe of the
French religious scene. It is not difficult to understand why the
Mandarom has been unpopular. However, constitutional guar-
antees are aimed, precisely, at protecting unpopular minorities.
And even the most unpopular defendant should be guaranteed
due process and a fair trial.
The Evangelical Pentecostal Church of Besançon
The Protestant scene in western Europe is slowly becoming as
diversified as the one in the United States. Large liberal denomi-
nations, members of the World Council of Churches, no longer
represent the majority of Protestants in a number of European
countries. Literally hundreds of Evangelical and Pentecostal
churches are flourishing. The large number of new churches may
easily confuse authorities, and anticultists propose simple solu-
tions. In France, the Center against the Mental Manipulations
(CCMM), the second largest anticult group after ADFI, explicitly
claims that all groups not belonging to the WCC, or to its corre-
sponding French organization, the French Protestant Federation,
are suspicious and may be “cults.”
The Belgian parliamentary report took the anticult recom-
mendation to target every Christian group not endorsed by the
WCC quite literally. Its list included Seventh-Day Adventists, the
Amish, the Assemblies of God, Calvary Christian Center, Ply-
mouth Brethren, the Charismatic Renewal in general, and a num-
ber of small independent Pentecostal churches.
The French report limited itself, among hundreds of inde-
pendent churches, to a dozen. Curiously enough, the French re-
port mentioned the Evangelical Pentecostal Church of Besançon
(EEPB) and ignored the Evangelical Missionary Federation
(FEM), founded on the basis of the success of the Besançon
church and now including more than thirty churches. In fact, not
The Rebirth of the Cult Controversy on the International Scene
225

unlike other groups, the EEPB seems to have been included in the
report for one simple reason. Based on a family conflict between
a pastor and his father-in-law, the EEPB has been targeted as a
“cult” by the anticult movement, particularly after 1994. Due to
the peculiar status of the anticult movement in France, the accu-
sations have been spread by the press (in previous years, quite fa-
vorable to EEPB) and up to the parliamentary commission.
Among hundreds of independent churches with very similar the-
ologies, only those specifically targeted (often for very local or
personal reasons) by the anticult movement have ended up being
included in the report.
In fact, the EEPB is just another Evangelical Pentecostal
church. Its founder, pastor Rene Kennel, studied at Nogent-sur-
Marne’s Institut Biblique and started his career in 1950 as a part-
time Mennonite preacher. Soon afterward, he welcomed the Pen-
tecostal Gypsy Movement of Pastor Le Cossec (a member of the
mainline French Protestant Federation) to his family farm. Im-
pressed by the gypsies’ enthusiasm, Kennel started a Pentecostal
ministry and in 1967 became a full-time pastor. In 1975, Kennel
joined with other pastors to establish the Evangelical Free Pente-
costal Federation (FELP). In 1977, he became the pastor of a Pen-
tecostal independent church in Besançon, the present-day EEPB.
In 1986, Kennel abandoned his position as president of FELP in
order to oversee the planting of daughter churches of EEPB in the
region. These churches are the basis of the Evangelical Mission-
ary Federation, incorporated under French law in 1989. The doc-
trinal statements of the EEPB are quite typical of hundreds of
Evangelical Pentecostal churches.
The accusations leveled by the CCMM and the media influ-
enced by it—literal belief in the existence of the devil, in miracles,
speaking in tongues—could be easily used against countless Pen-
tecostal or Evangelical churches. It is possible that church lead-
ers, unfamiliar with legal matters, made some mistakes when
preparing their bylaws and articles of incorporation, thus expos-
ing the church to potential problems with French tax authorities.
On the other hand, it is a fact that the French Revenue Service
only took action after anticultists had started targeting EEPB as a
“cult.” When, in July 1994, a visibly drunk ex-member damaged
the furniture of the church belonging to the Evangelical Mission-
ary Federation in Langres, anticultists (and a part of the press)
quickly took the side of the apostate, presented as just another
“victim” of a “cult.” Paradoxically, before and after being labeled
226
Court Decisions, Legislation, and Governmental Actions

a “cult” by the parliamentary commission, the EEPB has always
been able to maintain its pastors, for health and retirement in-
surance purposes, in the lists of CAMAC-CAMAVIC, the social
fund for pastors in France that is largely controlled by the Roman
Catholic Church and includes ministers of all mainline Christian
churches.
In the meantime, however, the fact of being on the parlia-
mentary list of “dangerous cults” threatens the very existence of
the EEPB and of the whole FEM. Not only did media pressure
against the “cult” continue but—following administrative in-
structions enacted in the wake of the parliamentary report—the
federation’s churches were denied use of public meeting halls by
local authorities, and the French Revenue Service continuously
harassed this struggling minority. The saga of the EEPB confirms
that in the present French scenario it is not enough to preach a
mainline Christian theology in order to avoid the label of a
“cult.” A minor incident is enough to result in being blacklisted
by the anticult movement. And, unfortunately, the black lists of
anticult organizations easily become the black lists of the media
and the government.
The French Aumist Religion (the Mandarom)
The French Aumist religion, whose legal structure is called the
Association of the Triumphant Vajra, headquartered in its holy
city of Mandarom—hence the popular nickname “the Man-
darom”—is regarded by anticultists and by a sizable part of the
French media not only as a cult but as the cult, particularly in
southern France. This is in itself an interesting phenomenon, tak-
ing into account that the Aumist religion is not a very large
group, with less than 1,000 members in France and smaller con-
stituencies in Italy, Quebec, Belgium, Switzerland, and Africa.
The holy city of the Mandarom—described as the very epitome
of the “danger of the cults,” as if it was a base threatening a
whole country—does not include more than fifty resident
monks.
The Aumist religion (the name comes from the sacred East-
ern sound AUM, the only common element with the Japanese
group AUM Shinrikyo) was founded by Gilbert Bourdin, a native
of French Martinique. In 1961, he was initiated by the Indian
master Sivananda in Rishikesh (later, he received other initia-
tions; for example, from the sixteenth Karmapa of Tibetan Bud-
dhism) and started gathering followers as an ascetic practicing
The Rebirth of the Cult Controversy on the International Scene
227

austerities in southern France. He also became quite well known
as a yoga teacher and the author of some twenty-two books
(some of them translated in several languages). In 1967, he estab-
lished the Association of the Knights of the Golden Lotus (re-
placed in 1995 by the current Association of the Triumphant
Vajra) and in 1969 founded the holy city of the Mandarom. Grad-
ually, Bourdin revealed himself to be the messiah: the Lord Ham-
sah Manarah. In 1990, he was publicly crowned as the messiah at
the Mandarom; some of the ceremonies were open to the media.
At that time, the movement hoped to crown the existing con-
structions at the Mandarom (temples representing all the great
religions of the world and huge statues) with a larger temple-
pyramid, a building of great spiritual and cosmic significance for
the Aumists.
The public ceremonies of 1990 were interpreted as an arro-
gant challenge by the anticult movement and the media. The
Mandarom with its huge construction project was, simply, too
visible. Two TV networks, Antenne 2 and TF1, started a cam-
paign to expose the Mandarom as a “cultic concentration camp.”
The militant psychiatrist Jean-Marie Abgrall was among the an-
ticult activists involved in this activity. He went on record on TV
commenting, about Aumism, that “notwithstanding what they
claim, cults are not religious movements, but rather criminal
movements organized by gurus who use brainwashing to ma-
nipulate their victims,” a capsule summary of anticult ideology.
The campaign against the Mandarom was largely organized by
ADFI, and from 1992 on it was joined by an ad hoc ecological
group lead by Robert Ferrato. The latter claimed that the Man-
darom was an offense to the ecological equilibrium of the moun-
tain where it was built and called for its destruction. As men-
tioned earlier, anticult activists are taken more seriously in
France than in other countries, and even an extreme character
such as Abgrall managed to become one of the two “experts” in
the national Observatory of Cults established in 1996.
The Mandarom was raided repeatedly in military-style raids
between 1992 and 1995 by tax and police officers. ADFI, Ferrato,
and a reporter for the TV network TF1, Bernard Nicolas, played
a key role in making an apostate, Florence Roncaglia (whose
mother is still with the Mandarom), “remember” that she had
been molested and raped by Bourdin in the 1980s. A complaint
was filed in 1994. Later, other female apostates also “remem-
228
Court Decisions, Legislation, and Governmental Actions

bered.” Based on Roncaglia’s complaint, the Mandarom was
raided again on June 12, 1995, and Bourdin was arrested. Coinci-
dentally, on the same date the French Council of State should
have rendered its final decision on the question of building per-
mission of the temple-pyramid. The decision was finally unfa-
vorable to the Aumist religion. On June 30, 1995, Bourdin was re-
leased; he passed away in 1998.
Though the Pyramid Temple of Unity was a topic of consid-
erable dispute, the destruction of the Statue of the Cosmoplane-
tary Messiah was a greater harbinger of conflict. Consecrated on
August 22, 1990, this thirty-three-meter-high monument erected
in the Mandarom was considered to be the receptacle of the en-
ergies of the return of God into matter. The statue became the
focus of a heated public dispute, which ended when it was de-
stroyed by a controlled implosion during an intervention by se-
curity forces on September 6, 2001.
The case of the Mandarom raises important questions. There
is little doubt that the claims the Aumists make for their founder
are extreme. Generally speaking, claiming to be the messiah does
not make any religious leader particularly popular. The Aumist
literature combines Eastern themes and Western esotericism, and
it is difficult to distinguish between actual and symbolic claims.
In short, Bourdin was an unpopular religious leader and Au-
mism an unpopular minority. This circumstance makes Aumism
an excellent case to test religious liberty in France. When a group
is protected by its own popularity, there is no need for constitu-
tional or international guarantees.
Scholars are often asked whether there is a risk that groups
such as the Mandarom may become involved in violent con-
frontations with the authorities or commit mass suicides like the
Solar Temple. They normally answer that the Aumist doctrine is
firmly against violence and suicides. This is, however, only part
of the story. Writing on the situation at the Mandarom, Italian
scholar Luigi Berzano (a professor of sociology at the University
of Turin and a Roman Catholic priest) mentioned the sociological
theories of deviance amplification. According to these theories,
hostile official responses to a movement regarded as deviant may
in fact amplify its deviance. In a sense, the movement is “de-
formed” by official and anticult harassment. Excessive reaction
against a movement, thus, becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy and
may cause the very evil it is supposed to avoid.
The Rebirth of the Cult Controversy on the International Scene
229

The Japanese Situation
Japan is presently facing a grave crisis that will determine the fu-
ture of religious liberty in that country. Unlike the United States,
Japan does not have a tradition of religious liberty. To tradition-
alists anxious about what they perceive as the fractured state of
modern Japan, religions (particularly new religions) represent
threats to social unity. At the same time, many individuals in po-
sitions of authority view new religions as alternate sources of
power and legitimation—alternate centers of authority that po-
tentially challenge the authority of the state.
Similar concerns were responsible for the severe persecution
of religion that took place in the decades leading up to the Sec-
ond World War. The persecution of religion in prewar Japan is an
unpleasant chapter of national history that many Japanese citi-
zens would rather forget. The most prominent religious body to
be persecuted by the militarists was Omoto-kyo, one of Japan’s
earliest new religions. Accused of plotting to supplant the Impe-
rial government, Omoto leaders were arrested in 1921 but re-
leased five years later without judgment. In 1935, however,
Omoto leaders were again arrested, and the government under-
took to systematically destroy the religion, razing the group’s
buildings and torturing members. It was not unusual for people
to be beaten to within an inch of their lives and then sent home
so that they would not die in the custody of the police. Other re-
ligions, such as the Jehovah’s Witnesses, were treated similarly.
Both the first and the second leaders of Soka Gakkai were also
imprisoned during this period. Their founder died in jail.
The Role of the Liberal Democratic Party
The current crisis in religious liberty in Japan was precipitated by
two groups whose divergent interests come together in the per-
secution of religions, namely, the Liberal Democratic Party
(LDP)—the largest party in the ruling coalition—and an alliance
of Communist lawyers. The LDP played an active role in culti-
vating the atmosphere of distrust that has come to surround reli-
gion in the wake of the poison-gas attack on the Tokyo subway
system that was attributed to AUM Shinrikyo. This activity has
had the further effect of tacitly encouraging antireligious lawyers
to expand their attacks on religion.
The LDP’s attacks on religion were part of a overall strategy
to weaken its principal political rival, the New Frontier Party.
230
Court Decisions, Legislation, and Governmental Actions

The NFP is supported by Soka Gakkai, Japan’s largest new reli-
gion. Building on public reaction to the AUM Shinrikyo incident,
the LDP was able to push through changes to the Religious Cor-
poration Law (RCL) that give the government more power to di-
rectly regulate religion.
The LDP further engaged in a campaign to portray religion
in general—and Soka Gakkai in particular—as being incompati-
ble with the principles of democracy. Many examples of this cam-
paign can be cited. For instance, at a press conference held on
September 3, 1995, Koichi Kato, secretary-general of the LDP,
boldly asserted: “Religion is based on principles taught by a sin-
gle founder and, because of this essential nature, is irreconcilable
with parliamentary democracy.” Such a statement reflects either
an ignorance of the history of democracy or an irresponsible de-
ployment of rhetoric without concern for accuracy. Later, in
March 1996, Kato told the Los Angeles Times: “We will not stop
our campaign until we get Ikeda [Soka Gakkai’s leader] to testify
in parliament. He wants to control our country.”
Other indications of the ruling party’s assault on Soka
Gakkai included a televised statement made by Shizuka Kamei
on October 22, 1995, in which he flatly stated: “The purpose of re-
vising the Religious Corporation Law is to take measures against
Soka Gakkai.” Also, when Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayama
resigned in January 1996, he told the Asahi Evening News: “When
I think of the nature of Soka Gakkai, I feel threatened. We need to
protect Japan’s democracy. To do that, we can’t allow leadership
to fall to the New Frontier Party.” An LDP policy paper released
two weeks later added: “The next general election will be a bat-
tle to protect the people from religious dictatorship. This will be
a race that we cannot lose.”
The Liberal Democratic Party’s readiness to exploit fears
generated by AUM Shinrikyo for short-term political gain was
reflected in the title of a negative campaign flyer distributed by
the LDP titled “An Emergency Report: More Dangerous Than
AUM, Soka Gakkai in NFP’s Clothing.” On October 2, 1996,
Shizuka Kamei, speaking on behalf of an LDP candidate, stated:
“There are only two religious groups which tried to control the
nation; one is AUM Shinrikyo and the other is Soka Gakkai.
AUM used sarin gas and automatic rifles to do so, and Soka
Gakkai controls politics using elections. It is indeed a serious
problem to undertake election campaign activities in the name of
religious practice.”
The Rebirth of the Cult Controversy on the International Scene
231

From these statements, it is clear that the LDP was more than
willing to sacrifice religious liberty on the alter of political expe-
diency. In 1999, there was an abrupt reversal of the conflict be-
tween the LDP and Soka Gakkai when the New Komeito Party
(the successor to the New Frontier Party) allied itself with the rul-
ing coalition.
The Religious Corporation Law, the Religion 
Basic Law, and the New NPO Law
In addition to its deployment of highly charged campaign
rhetoric, the Liberal Democratic Party sought to exert increased
control over religion via legislation, from revisions to the Reli-
gious Corporation Law to new legislation such as the Religion
Basic Law (RBL).
Revisions to the RCL were enacted. The revisions placed re-
ligions under the direct supervision of the Ministry of Education
and required religious corporations to submit detailed records of
their financial activities. If authorities suspect a group of ex-
pending money on nonreligious activities, they are empowered
to question its representatives. Perceived misuse of funds (which
would be open to the personal interpretation of authorities)
could prompt officials to revoke a religion’s corporate status.
One of the most drastic attempts to curtail religious activity
was the Religion Basic Law. Although defeated, the mere fact that
the ruling party attempted to push through draconian legislation
in its efforts to control religious groups is an indicator of the level
of hysteria generated by the AUM Shinrikyo incident.
The RBL began by presuming to define religion as “an inter-
nal affair of individuals,” a definition that would have given au-
thorities wide scope for restricting all sorts of organized religious
activities. The RBL than went on to drive a wedge between poli-
tics and religion in such as way as to eviscerate Soka Gakkai’s
ability to support the New Frontier Party. (Although not men-
tioned by name, it was clear that the RBL was directly assaulting
Soka Gakkai in those passages.)
The RBL would also have forbidden religious groups from
striking back at critics—particularly the press—via boycotts and
other means. One of the provisions of the law was that it forbade
religious groups from attempting to “solicit the uninitiated with
groundless explanations, in particular those pertaining to an in-
dividual’s destiny, happiness or unhappiness in the future.”
Needless to say, the explanations that the RBL characterizes as
232
Court Decisions, Legislation, and Governmental Actions

“groundless” are at the core of every religion. Furthermore,
“Should the solicited person refuse membership, the religious or-
ganization is barred from further contact with the intention of
further solicitation with that individual.” In other words, if a re-
ligion approached a potential convert more than once, the prose-
lytizer—as well as, presumably, the entire religion—could have
been charged with engaging in a criminal act.
The Situation of Academics in Japan
In a free society, there are several institutions that should serve as
checks on the power of government. One of these institutions is
the press. In Japan, however, the mass media are uncritical ser-
vants of the government. Another institution that should serve a
critical function in society is academe. In the United States, peo-
ple rarely listen to what scholars say. Nevertheless, academe is so
protected by the tenure system that scholars may say pretty
much what they want without fear of losing their positions.
In Japan, by way of contrast, the general public has great re-
spect for academe. However, despite the facade of academic free-
dom, scholars are directly or indirectly pressured into muting
criticisms of the system. During the AUM Shinrikyo incident, for
example, a number of academics were told to keep quiet about
such events as the ongoing harassment of rank-and-file members
of AUM.
One of the most spectacular assaults on the principle of aca-
demic freedom occurred when Professor Shimada was fired. The
pretext for this action was Shimada’s supposed liaison with a fe-
male student. It was clear to everyone involved, however, that
the firing was a response to Shimada’s very public defense of
AUM Shinrikyo members against undue government harass-
ment. Shimada’s dismissal had a severe dampening effect on the
willingness of Japanese scholars to voice criticisms of any gov-
ernment or police action.
Deprogramming and the United Christian Churches of Japan
Although deprogramming disappeared from the public spotlight
in the United States in the late seventies, it continued to exist as
a cottage industry until the recent demise of the Cult Awareness
Network. The practice was imported into Japan after it had al-
ready begun its retreat into obscurity in the West. Unlike the U.S.
situation, deprogramming has continued to prosper in Japan be-
cause deprogrammers have been wise enough to confine their
The Rebirth of the Cult Controversy on the International Scene
233

practice to such highly stigmatized groups as the Unification
Church and AUM Shinrikyo. In contrast to the U.S. situation, it is
not unusual for deprogramming victims in Japan to be locked up
for years at a time. In many cases, the deprogrammees are bru-
talized, and in some cases victims have even been raped.
One of the most unusual aspects of the religious liberty situ-
ation in Japan is the participation of the United Christian
Churches of Japan (UCCJ) in anticult activity. The UCCJ is, for ex-
ample, one of the chief participants in Japanese deprogramming
activities. Unknown to most of its rank-and-file members, the
UCCJ was taken over by violent elements (for example, ministers
adhering to liberation theology and other left-leaning theologies)
in the late sixties. This takeover is the basis for the current align-
ment of the UCCJ with the Communist lawyers’ group—an al-
liance that otherwise is incomprehensible.
One of the issues where this alliance is most functional is in
both groups’ opposition to the Unification Church. From the
viewpoint of the UCCJ, the UC represents a heretical variant of
Christianity. Simultaneously, the UC is emphatically anticommu-
nist and has been a thorn in the side of the Japanese Communist
Party (JCP) for many years. It may even be that the JCP is ulti-
mately responsible for influencing the UCCJ to take a strong
stand against the UC.
Whatever the ultimate cause, the UCCJ annually sponsors
hundreds of deprogrammings of UC members. The majority of
“successfully” deprogrammed ex-UC members become mem-
bers of UCCJ churches. In addition to new members, one reason
the UCCJ continues to sponsor deprogramming is that it pro-
vides the organization with much needed income. Fifteen years
ago, the UCCJ’s anti-UC committee was bringing approximately
$10 million a year into the organization’s coffers.
Via its connection with JCP lawyers, the UCCJ is able to pro-
vide plaintiffs (that is, deprogrammed ex-members) for a series
of civil suits against the UC, thus generating income for anti-UC
lawyers. The insidious connection between antireligious Com-
munists and Christians thus comes full circle to bring both
groups into a moneymaking venture that rivals the actions of the
most exploitative capitalists.
Spiritual Sales
Members of the various lawyer bar associations have been band-
ing together and seeking hundreds of ex-members of religions to
234
Court Decisions, Legislation, and Governmental Actions

claim financial compensation from the religions. Compensation
has been for time spent as a volunteer helper, for donations
made, and so on. The purpose of the activity seems to be not
merely to extract money but also to persecute religions and bring
them to their knees.
At present, the primary point of attack for the antireligion
lawyers’ group is so-called spiritual sales. The spiritual sales
issue affects religions as diverse as the Unification Church,
Tenchi-seikyo, Hona-Hana, Hongkakuji, and Myokakuji. Al-
though most current cases involve the purchase of particular
items, in principle almost any exchange of funds between a
church and its parishioners could be construed as a “spiritual
sale” and thus open to attack by disgruntled former congregants
acting under the direction of unscrupulous lawyers.
These cases all have one very important point in common,
namely, that the court assumes it is competent to judge whether
a given practice is genuinely religious or a facade for making
money. This is clearly a dangerous breakdown in the separation
of church and state. Most alarmingly, the larger, more established
religions in Japan have not recognized the danger in these legal
cases, failing to consider that, once precedents are established,
the same attack can be made upon any religion.
Spiritual sales are such a key issue that one of the organiza-
tions under which antireligious lawyers have gathered is the Na-
tional Lawyers Association for Measuring Spiritual Sales (origi-
nally the Lawyers Association to Measure Religious Sales). The
group has thirty-nine branch lawyers’ offices around the nation
that represent the national office. The lawyers use the various
consumer bodies they have set up to advance their cause, in-
cluding the consumer protection center, the Consumer Law
News, and the Small Research Committee for Consumer Prob-
lems on Religions.
China
Falun Gong was founded in 1992 by Li Hongzi. Falun Gong was
part of a boom in the practice of Qi Gong, a traditional health and
personal cultivation practice built around a set of physical exer-
cises that superficially resemble tai chi. At its peak in the eighties
and nineties, the boom grew to some 200 million followers. Falun
Gong grew rapidly as part of the Qi Gong movement, eventually
claiming tens of millions of practitioners.
The Rebirth of the Cult Controversy on the International Scene
235

Falun Gong first made international headlines in April 1999
when approximately 10,000 followers staged a nonviolent protest
outside the Communist Party headquarters at Zhongnanhai, in
Beijing. This was the largest protest in China since the student-
led democracy movement that took place in Tiananmen Square
in 1989. The protest came about as a consequence of frequent
misportrayals of the movement in the media—misrepresenta-
tions that were themselves a result of a semiofficial campaign
against Falun Gong. The response to the protest was swift and se-
vere repression: the movement was outlawed, thousands of prac-
titioners followers were imprisoned and tortured, and hundreds
were killed.
Chinese authorities outlawed Falun Gong as a “heterodox
sect” in laws hurriedly put into place in the summer and fall of
1999. A national propaganda campaign was also undertaken
against the movement. Falun Gong books, cassettes, and other ma-
terial were destroyed. On several occasions, bulldozers crushed
movement material—scenes that were replayed repeatedly on na-
tional television. Despite demands from the Chinese government,
U.S. authorities and Interpol refused to extradite Li Hongzi. Jour-
nalists and academicians were required to denounce Falun Gong
and other superstitious “sects” in the name of science and mod-
ernization. Official sources portrayed Li Hongzi as exploiting his
followers, and articles were published that focused on the deaths
supposedly caused by followers not seeking regular medicine
when sick and on the many followers who supposedly went crazy
from Falun Gong.
Most practitioners simply did not accept what they read in
official publications. The majority of followers apparently be-
lieved that authorities were reacting on the basis of misinforma-
tion. As a move to educate the government, small groups of prac-
titioners went to Beijing in hopes of making an appeal to central
government authorities (a right granted by China’s constitution).
When this strategy failed, followers tried other tactics, including
peaceful demonstrations in Tiananmen Square by small groups
and individuals. Some of these early protests made international
news, and authorities thought they had lost face, both in China
and internationally. The government soon increased security
around Tiananmen Square, as well as around major train and bus
stations. Arrested Falun Gong protesters were also sent home to
be dealt with by local authorities. Under direction from above,
these authorities became more vigilant and brutal.
236
Court Decisions, Legislation, and Governmental Actions

Human rights groups began reporting an increase in torture
and imprisonment from 1999 onward. Also, practitioners living in
other countries began to appeal to the governments of the coun-
tries where they resided on behalf of Falun Gong members in
China. The majority of the foreign practitioners were Chinese
who had left the country—frequently to study overseas—in the
1980s and 1990s. Especially in North America, practitioners were
able to evoke significant sympathy for the Falun Gong members
in China. Both the Canadian and the U.S. governments repeatedly
asked Chinese authorities to cease its campaign of persecution.
On January 23, 2001, some individuals portrayed as Falun
Gong members were filmed setting fire to themselves in Tianan-
men. This clearly staged-for-TV incident left five people dead.
Although this pseudoincident did not leave a lasting negative
impression of the movement outside of China, it succeeded in
convincing a significant portion of the Chinese public that Falun
Gong was truly dangerous. Despite the heavy persecution, for-
eign members, taking advantage of the extra protection provided
to them as foreign nationals, began traveling to Tiananmen to
stage protests as a way of continuing to promote their cause in
the international media.
The Rebirth of the Cult Controversy on the International Scene
237


5
Documents and Data
Statistics
General estimates of the extent of the new religions phenomenon
vary considerably. The two basic quantitative questions in this
area are: How many groups? And how many people? These
questions are not as simple as they might at first appear. A more
fundamental question involves classification: Where does one
draw the line between alternative and nonalternative religions?
What one finds when one actually tries to determine where to
draw such a line is that the difference between “mainstream” and
“alternative” is a matter of degree rather than a sharply defined
distinction.
The indeterminacy of this dividing line allows anticultists
like the late Margaret Singer to assert, without fear of direct con-
tradiction, that as many as 20 million people have been involved
in 3,000 to 5,000 thousand cults in the United States (Singer and
Lalich 1995). In contrast, Gordon Melton estimates 500 to 600 al-
ternative religions in the United States (1992). Similarly, Peter
Clarke estimates 400 to 500 new religions in the United Kingdom
(1984). The situation is rather different in Japan, where new reli-
gions have been thriving since the end of World War II. Japanese
sociologists estimate anywhere from 800 to several thousand
such groups (Arweck 2002). And finally, Eileen Barker puts for-
ward a figure of 2,000 or more new religions in the West and a
figure in the lower tens of thousands worldwide (1999).
An important though neglected source of information bear-
ing on the question of numbers of adherents to alternative reli-
gions is national census data. In 2001, the censuses of four En-
239

glish-speaking countries—New Zealand, Australia, Canada, and
the United Kingdom—collected information on religious mem-
bership that included select new religions. There was also an im-
portant religion survey conducted in the United States in the
same year, the American Religious Identification Survey (ARIS).
Though a few scholars of new religions have referred to one
or more of these censuses, no one has attempted a general survey.
Following an examination of one estimate of world religious ad-
herents, the first part of this chapter discusses census data and in-
formation from the ARIS survey that shed light on participation
rates in alternative religions. Select studies that measure other di-
mensions of the new religions phenomenon will also be examined.
The second part of the chapter reproduces four documents
that will provide a more tangible sense of the controversy. Two
are documents left in the wake of the suicides of the Order of the
Solar Temple and of Heaven’s Gate. The other two are texts of
legislation enacted against controversial religions, one from
China and the other from France.
World Membership in 
Alternative Religions
An example of how the ambiguity between what is and what is
not a new religion can produce incongruous results can be found
in David Barrett and Todd Johnson’s “Statistical Approach to the
World’s Religious Adherents” (2002). In terms of worldwide mem-
bership, these statistics appear to be the best figures available.
Barrett and Johnson divide the world’s religions into nine-
teen categories, with three subcategories for Christianity: Christ-
ian (Catholic, Protestant, independent), Muslim, Baha’i, Hindu,
Sikh, Jain, Buddhist, Zoroastrian, Jewish, Confucian, Taoist, Chi-
nese folk religion, Shinto, spiritist, ethnoreligionist, atheist, non-
religious, neoreligionist, and other. They describe the neoreli-
gionist (new religionist) as “twentieth-century new religions,
new religious movements, radical new crisis religions, and non-
Christian syncretistic mass religions, all founded since 1800 and
most since 1945, mostly Asian in origin and membership but in-
creasingly with worldwide followings.” The “other” category is
described as “a handful of smaller religions, quasi-religions,
pseudo religions, parareligions, religious or mystic systems, reli-
240
Documents and Data

gious and semireligious brotherhoods of numerous varieties.”
Though I sharply question the designation “pseudo religion,” it
otherwise appears that most of the religions classified as “other”
are also new religions. Finally, they neglect to define the spiritism
category. However, because, according to their statistics,
12,039,000 of the world’s 12,334,000 spiritists are located in Latin
America and the Caribbean, it is clear that this category is meant
primarily to encompass Afro-Caribbean and Afro-Brazilian new
religions like Santeria and Umbanda.
Out of a total world population of 6,055,049,000 people, Bar-
rett and Johnson find that 102,356,000 are members of new reli-
gions, 12,334,000 are spiritists and 1,067,000 are in the “other”
category, meaning about 1.9 percent of the world population be-
longs to alternative religions. This figure does not sound unrea-
sonable, until one discovers that almost all of the people in new
religions—100,639,000 members—are Asian. In order to analyze
and critique their statistics, it will be useful to lay out all of Bar-
rett and Johnson’s relevant figures for the year 2000, continent by
continent, as shown in Table 1.
Their figure for Asian new religions immediately strikes one
as suspect. Even after being adjusted for population difference,
the data still seem to indicate more than ten times as many mem-
bers of new religions in Asia as in North America. This is proba-
bly the result of using different criteria for these two areas of the
world. Barrett and Johnson almost certainly classified certain
large groups like Soka Gakkai (which has 9 million members) as
new religions rather than as Buddhists. In contrast, they almost
World Membership in Alternative Religions
241
TABLE 1
Numbers of Members in New Religions Worldwide
New Religions
Spiritism
Other
Total Population
Africa
28,400
2,500
65,700
784,445,000
Asia
100,639,000
1,900
62,100
3,682,550,000
Europe
158,000
133,000
236,000
728,887,000
Latin America
622,000
12,039,000
98,000
519,138,000
North America
845,000
151,000
597,000
309,631,000
Australia (& Oceania)
66,500
7,000
9,400
30,393,000
Source: Barrett, David B., and Todd M. Johnson. “A Statistical Approach to the World’s Religious Adherents.” In Reli-
gions of the World: A Comprehensive Encyclopedia of Beliefs and Practices, edited by J. Gordon Melton and Martin
Baumann, xxvii–xxxviii. Santa Barbara: ABC-CLIO, 2002.

certainly classified the many new Protestant sects that are con-
stantly coming into being in the United States as Christian rather
than as new religions.
Given the large number of new religions in sub-Saharan
Africa, their low figure for African new religions is clearly off
base. Because African new religions tend to draw heavily on tra-
ditional ethnoreligions, Christianity, or both, Barrett and Johnson
must have classified most of these religious groups as either eth-
noreligious or Christian.
The European figure also seems quite low. Because of the
concern over alternative religions in Europe since the first Solar
Temple tragedy in 1994, there have been a number of official gov-
ernment surveys, though results have been less satisfactory than
one might have hoped. For example, in 1998, the German Parlia-
ment’s Enquete Commission reported the results of a national
survey that indicated that 8 to 9 million people considered them-
selves members of nontraditional religious groups. In contrast,
the Swedish government report of 1998 put forward a national
figure of 50,000–60,000 (about 0.15 percent of the population), ex-
clusive of New Age groups—a considerably lower proportion
than the German figure.
As for North America, using only the new religions figure
gives us slightly less than 0.3 percent. Alternatively, adding all of
the data from the new religions, spiritism, and “other” categories
results in slightly more than 0.5 percent. As it turns out, the 0.3
percent–0.5 percent range receives support from the national cen-
sus statistics of other English-speaking countries.
New Zealand National Census Data
A number of countries have begun to include religious affiliation
as part of their national censuses. One of the most useful is the
2001 New Zealand census because of the large number of distinct
groups enumerated, as shown in Table 2.
The total of 17,436 members represents 0.46 percent of the
3,737,277 people who responded to the 2001 census, which com-
pares favorably with the 0.3 percent to 0.5 percent participation
rate for North America derived from the Barrett and Johnson
data. This is being cautious. One could also make a reasonable ar-
gument for including Vineyard Christian Fellowship (sometimes
called a “cult,” with 774 members in the census), some of the 1,107
242
Documents and Data

people who self-identified as Taoist, and some of the 4,641 people
whom the census classified as simply “other religion.” This
would bring the participation rate up to 0.5 percent. However, the
New Zealand census allowed people to report more than one af-
filiation, and as a consequence the census collected 3,841,932 re-
sponses from a total of 3,737,277 people, or 104,655 extra re-
sponses. Though not all of these extra responses could have been
supplied by individuals self-identifying as members of new reli-
gions, it is reasonable to infer that there were enough double or
even triple responses by participants in alternative religions to
New Zealand National Census Data
243
TABLE 2
Alternative Religion Statistics from the 2001 New Zealand Census
Religion
Number of Members
Zen Buddhism*
126
Sukyo Mahikari
111
Tenrikyo
12
Yoga
414
Hare Krishna
363
Animism**
213
Pantheism**
342
Nature and Earth-based Religions
2,961
Wiccan
2,196
Druidism
150
Satanism
891
Other New Age Religion
1,485
Rastafarianism
1,296
Sufi***
195
Scientology
282
Spiritualism
5,853
Liberal Catholic Church
135
Unification Church
153
Christian Science
258
Total
17,436
* Like the Hare Krishna movement, Zen Buddhism is considered a New Religion when Westerners become involved.
** Both the New Zealand and the Australian Census identify Animism and Pantheism as Neo-Pagan religions for sta-
tistical purposes (e.g., in Table 3, the 2001 figure for the Nature and Earth Based category represents the sum of the
Animism, Pantheism, Nature and Earth-based Religions, Wiccan and Druidism figures in Table 2). The religions of in-
digenous peoples were represented by other categories.
*** Few contemporary Muslims would self-identify as Sufis, indicating that all or most of the members of the Sufi cat-
egory are members of one of several Sufi groups appealing primarily to Westerners. Like Western Zen Buddhism,
Western Sufi groups are considered New Religions.
Source: Statistics New Zealand.

undermine the solidity of the 0.46 percent figure. So to be cau-
tious, one might want to reduce this percentage to 0.4 percent or
even 0.3 percent.
There is, however, at least one more consideration to take
into account. Though almost all major alternative religions have
an outpost in New Zealand, few were explicitly included in the
census. In particular, there are numerous Buddhist groups that
appeal primarily if not exclusively to Westerners. If one goes to
the New Zealand Buddhist Directory (http://www.bud-
dhanet.net/nzealand.htm), one will find groups like Soka
Gakkai, Shambhala Center, plus a wide variety of Vipassana
meditation and Tibetan Buddhist organizations. These groups
are usually classified in the alternative religions category in gen-
eral survey books on new religions (for example, Chryssides
1999; Ellwood and Partin 1998; and Lewis 2001a). Participants in
these groups were not distinguished from the other Buddhists
constituting the 41,469 Buddhists reported in the 2001 census.
One way of getting a handle on the number of people in-
volved in Western-oriented Buddhist groups (groups usually con-
sidered new religions in the West, despite their lineage) is to study
the ethnic backgrounds of participants. Because the Web site for
the 2001 New Zealand census includes a table correlating ethnic-
ity and religion, this information is readily available. The Ethnic
Group and Sex by Religious Affiliation table records that 10,890
New Zealand Buddhists are of European heritage. Assuming that
some of these European Buddhists are converts because of mar-
riage and other factors, it is reasonable to infer that at least half—
or 5,445—are involved in Western-oriented Buddhist groups.
There are also Swedenborgian and Unity School of Chris-
tianity churches in New Zealand, the members of which were
lumped in with the 192,165 generic Christians recorded in the
census. Unfortunately, estimating participation in alternative
Christian groups cannot be addressed via ethnicity. Additionally,
there are followers of Satya Sai Baba, Maharaji, and a wide vari-
ety of other South Asian groups who may have been lumped in
with the 38,769 Hindus noted in the census. The census reported
4,329 ethnic Europeans who self-identified as Hindus. Using the
same cautious percentage (50 percent) we applied to European
Buddhists, this would mean 2,164 people were involved in West-
ern-oriented Hindu groups. Finally, one wonders what hap-
pened to members of other groups like the Raelians, Eckankar,
Falun Gong, and Theosophy, all of which have a presence in New
244
Documents and Data

Zealand. When all of these organizations are considered, raising
the estimated participation rate to 0.5 percent is quite legitimate.
New Zealand also collected less detailed information about
religious membership in censuses prior to 2001. The data in Table
3 reflect an interesting pattern of growth.
As can be seen, the overall pattern reflects a tripling of total
numbers in a decade. The fastest-growing segment is paganism
(“Nature and Earth Based Religions”). Only Satanism fell off be-
tween 1996 and 2001. The decline of the latter may be due, in
part, to the uninspired leadership that assumed control of the
Church of Satan following the death of Anton LaVey in 1997.
Australian National Census Data
The Australian census contains information similar to the New
Zealand census. One more category for alternative religious
groups is provided, and all of the data from 2001 are arranged
into a straightforward comparison with the 1996 census, as de-
lineated in Table 4.
The rise from 30,501 members to 45,829 members represents
slightly more than a 50-percent increase in five years. (Religions
in the neopagan categories experienced the most rapid rate of
growth—an average 250-percent increase.) With respect to num-
ber of census respondents in 1996 (17,750,000) and 2001
(18,767,000), this represents a rise from 0.17 percent to 0.24 per-
cent. This rate of participation is considerably less than New
Zealand. Unlike New Zealand, the Australian census seems not
to have allowed people to respond to more than one item. Like
New Zealand, Australia has an abundance of alternative religion
Australian National Census Data
245
TABLE 3
Growth in Alternative Religions from 1999 to 2001 in New Zealand
1991
1996
2001
Nature and Earth Based Religions
318
1,722
5,862
Spiritualist
3,333
5,100
5,853
New Age Religions
696
1,839
3,210
Satanism
645
909
894
Scientology
207
219
282
Totals
5,196
9,786
16,062
Source: Statistics New Zealand.

groups that “slipped through the cracks” of the above categories
because they were recorded as generic Christians, Buddhists, and
Hindus. Unfortunately, an Australian census table correlating re-
ligious membership with ethnicity is unavailable without paying
a fee, so I was unable to obtain the same kind of figures for West-
ern participation in Asian religions as I did for New Zealand. We
can say that, because of the many new religions missed by the
census, a 0.3 percent–0.4 percent participation rate for 2001
would be a reasonable but still conservative estimate.
One problem with this estimate is that it contrasts so signif-
icantly from the corresponding 0.5-percent estimate for New
Zealand. Is there really such a marked difference in participation
rates between these two sister countries? In terms of numbers of
people responding to their respective national censuses, there
were five times as many Australians as New Zealanders in 2001.
Of the comparable religions in the two censuses, only Christian
246
Documents and Data
TABLE 4
New Religion Statistics from the 1996–2001 Australian Census
Religion
1996 Members
2001 Members
Animism
727
763
Caodaism
964
819
Christian Science
1,494
1,666
Druidism
554
697
Eckankar
829
747
Gnostic Christian
559
723
Liberal Catholic Church
596
498
Nature Religions*
1,734
2,225
New Churches (Swedenborgian)
504
427
Paganism
4,353
10,632
Pantheism
835
1,085
Rastafarianism
1,023
1,066
Religious Science
634
417
Satanism
2,091
1,798
Scientology
1,488
2,032
Spiritualism
8,140
9,279
Sukyo Mahikari
668
513
Tenrikyo
46
60
Theosophy
1,423
1,627
Wiccan/Witchcraft
1,849
8,755
Total
30,501
45,829
*I infer that “Nature Religions” refers to Neopaganism.
Source: Australian Bureau of Statistics.

Science had more than five times as many members in Australia
than in New Zealand. Australian Mahikari and Tenrikyo mem-
bers were almost five times as numerous as corresponding New
Zealand members. But all of the other groups fell well below the
one-to-five relationship. In the case of Rastafarianism, there were
actually more total members in New Zealand than in Australia.
So it seems there is a genuine difference in participation rates be-
tween these two countries.
It could be counterargued that there are probably more al-
ternative religions in Australia than in New Zealand and thus
more Australian participants who missed the census net. And it
could be further argued that, being a larger country, there are a
greater number of religious “species” in Australia that draw
away some of the people who would have joined other groups,
thus explaining why the one-to-five ratio does not hold for most
of the religions found in both censuses. However, even if a
greater variety in religious fauna between the two countries is a
factor to consider, it seems highly unlikely that it would be
enough to account for the comparatively large difference be-
tween the two participation rates.
If we restate the data from “Down Under” as 0.3 percent–0.5
percent, then we have a statistic comparable to the Barrett and
Johnson data for North America. Adding together their new reli-
gions, spiritism, and “other” data, Barrett and Johnson’s partici-
pation rate for Australia and New Zealand works out to 0.34 per-
cent, which is in the same range.
United Kingdom National Census Data
The United Kingdom also conducted a census in 2001. The cen-
sus recorded a reasonably good spread of different groups. Re-
gretfully, religious participation was not measured in previous
censuses. The figures for the England and Wales part of the cen-
sus are shown in Table 5.
With respect to a population of 52,041,916, a total of 87,189
members represents a participation rate of less than 0.17 percent.
The larger number of categories means that somewhat fewer re-
spondents were absorbed into the statistics for their parent tradi-
tions, though these categories are still far from comprehensive.
Although a handful of Hindu-related groups are included, Bud-
dhist new religions are noticeably absent. New thought groups
United Kingdom National Census Data
247

like Unity and Religious Science are also not represented as sep-
arate categories, as well as many other groups that have a pres-
ence in Great Britain.
An important factor influencing the outcome of the religion
aspect of the census was that someone decided it would be a fine
bit of humor to encourage people to write “Jedi Knight” in the re-
ligion category. As a consequence, 390,127 people in England and
Wales responded that they belonged to the Jedi Knight religion.
248
Documents and Data
TABLE 5
New Religion Statistics for England and Wales from the 2001 British Census*
Group
Members
Spiritualist
32,404 
Pagan
30,569 
Wicca
7,227 
Rastafarian
4,692 
Scientology
1,781 
Druidism
1,657 
Pantheism
1,603 
Satanism
1,525 
Christian Spiritualist Church
1,461 
New Age
906 
Hare Krishna
640 
Christian Scientist
578 
Celtic Pagan
508 
Eckankar
426 
Animism
401
Brahma Kumari
331
Heathen**
278
Raja Yoga
261 
Unification Church
252
Vodun
123 
Occult
99 
Asatru
93 
Sant Mat
53 
Divine Light mission
21 
Santeria
21
Total
87,189
* Crown copyright material is reproduced with the permission of the controller of HMSO.
** This is a term of self-reference used by certain Neopagans.
Source: Census 2001. Crown Copyright 2004.

Although this is quite amusing, I would guess that proportionally
more of these self-designated Jedis were involved in some form of
alternative spirituality than the general population, though how
much more is difficult to determine. Minus the Jedi factor, I esti-
mate that 0.17 percent would rise to at least 0.2 percent.
Like the New Zealand census, the UK census provides in-
formation on ethnicity and religion. In England and Wales, 0.12
percent of the 47,520,866 white population is Buddhist and .02
percent Hindu. Taking these percentages and then dropping the
resulting figures by 50 percent gives 28,512 Western Buddhists
and 4,752 Western Hindus. There are also Christian new religions
that have slipped through the census categories. When the
minus-the-Jedi consideration is combined with the estimate for
the various new religions found in the Buddhist and Hindu
folds, plus a conservative guess for the number of people in
Christian new religions, a cautious estimate would place the par-
ticipation rate in the UK in the 0.25 percent–0.3 percent range.
Canadian National Census Data
Although the religion categories for the 2001 Canadian census
are even less satisfactory than the categories used in the Aus-
tralian, New Zealand, and British censuses, they are nonetheless
useful for comparative purposes. In a country with a population
of 28,000,000, the census recorded 38,000 members of alternative
religions, or a participation rate of less than 0.14 percent, as seen
in Table 6.
Similar to the New Zealand and Australian censuses, Bud-
dhist and Hindu groups regarded as new religions were not sep-
arated for statistical purposes. And unlike New Zealand and
Australia, even nontraditional Christian groups like Christian
Science were apparently collapsed into Christianity. The addition
of the classifications “Gnostic” and “New Age” appears to have
been for the purpose of including alternative religious groups
that did not fall handily into other categories. The New Age as a
more general spiritual influence escapes straightforward efforts
at measurement, as will be discussed below. I think it would be
quite reasonable to estimate much higher participation rates for
Canada than indicated by these truncated census figures, more in
the 0.25 percent–0.3 percent range at least.
Canadian National Census Data
249

Religion Survey Data for the United States
Unfortunately, the U.S. census does not collect religion member-
ship data. However, in 1990, the Graduate Center of the City Uni-
versity of New York conducted the National Survey of Religious
Identification (NSRI) via randomly dialed phone numbers
(113,723 people were surveyed). Eleven years later, in 2001, the
same center carried out the American Religious Identification
Survey (ARIS) in the same manner (more than 50,000 people re-
sponded), though callers probed for more information than the
earlier NSRI. Categories were developed post facto. The results
were quite interesting, as can be seen in Table 7.
Although it would have been much more useful had the re-
searchers broken down their data into more subcategories, their
results are nevertheless striking. In a period of eleven years, the
overall participation rate in alternative religions increased seven-
fold. Once again, however, we are plagued by the collapsing of
important new religions into their parent traditions. Had the var-
ious Christian alternative religions been separately categorized,
the results would likely have been much different.
For the Buddhist and Hindu traditions, we can obtain a
rough estimate of participation in new religions by separating
ethnic Buddhists and Hindus from Western converts. Although
the NSRI did not record ethnicity, the ARIS did. Out of an esti-
mated 766,000 Hindus, 2 percent were white. Out of an estimated
250
Documents and Data
TABLE 6
New Religion Statistics from the 2001 Canadian Census
Religion
Number of Members
Gnostic
1,165
New Age
1,525
Paganism
21,085
Rastafarian
1,135
Satanism
850
Scientology
1,525
Spiritualist
3,295
Swedenborg
1,015
Unity/New Thought
4,000
Vineyard Christian Fellowship
2,600
Total
38,215
Adapted from: Statistics Canada’s Internet site, http://www.statcan.ca/. Extracted April 23, 2004.

1,082,000 Buddhists, 28.5 percent were white. Taking these per-
centages and then halving the resulting figures gives 7,660 Euro-
American Hindus and 154,185 Euro-American Buddhists. Adding
these numbers to the 583,000 figure and dividing the sum by a
U.S. population estimate of 207,980,000 gives a participation rate
of 0.35 percent. 
Had all alternative religions—including the Christian, Bud-
dhist, and Hindu groups missed by the two surveys—been con-
sidered together, the sevenfold growth rate would likely have
been less spectacular. Like the Australian and New Zealand cen-
sus data, the NSRI-ARIS data have been sharply affected by the
meteoric growth of neopaganism (represented in Table 7 by the
Wicca-Druid-Pagan figures) in recent years. Also, if Christian al-
ternative religions had been distinguished so that they could have
been included in the final total, the 0.35-percent participation rate
derived from the ARIS data would have been higher. How high
this rate would rise if we had more complete data again depends
on where one decides to draw the line between what is and what
is not an “alternative” religion. If we take a conservative ap-
proach, a 0.5-percent participation rate represents a reasonable es-
timate. Of course, if we adopted looser criteria for what consti-
tutes a new religion, much higher estimates would be possible.
Religion Survey Data for the United States
251
TABLE 7
New Religion Data from NSRI and ARIS
1990
2001
Scientologist
45,000*
55,000
New Age
20,000
68,000
Eckankar
18,000
26,000
Rastafarian
14,000
11,000
Wicca
8,000
134,000
Druid**
33,000
Santeria**
22,000
Pagan**
140,000
Spiritualist**
116,000
Totals
79,000
583,000
*Numbers have been rounded off to the nearest 1,000. Unlike a census, which attempts to reach the entire popula-
tion, these figures represent statistical extrapolations.
**The final four categories did not emerge as significant in the 1990 NSRI survey.
Source: B. A. Kosmin and A. Keysar, Religion in the Marketplace (Ithaca, NY: Paramount Books, 2004). Adapted table
used with permission.

Generalizing from the data presented in the prior sections
brings us to the conclusion that participation in alternative reli-
gions is quite low. In the Anglophone world, the participation
rate is 0.3 percent–0.5 percent. And though certain countries
might have a rate lower than 0.3 percent, I would speculate that
the participation rate in western Europe as a whole probably falls
into the same range. The statistical picture of new religions re-
flected in this data is that of a small-scale phenomenon involving
a fraction of a percentage of the population.
Growth and Distribution of Alternative
Religions in the United States
Figure 1 indicates the growth in the number of new religious
bodies to come into existence between 1900 and 1990. The deci-
252
Documents and Data
FIGURE 1
Growth of New Religions in the United States in the Twentieth Century
Source: Updated graph based on J. Gordon Melton, A Directory of Religious Bodies in the United States (New York:
Garland, 1977).

sive upswing in the rate of expansion occurs between the mid-
1950s and the mid-1960s, reflecting both an increase in religious
experimentation corresponding with the social-cultural revolu-
tion of the 1960s and a sharp upswing in the number of Asian re-
ligions as a result of the lowering of immigration barriers in 1965.
Figure 2 examines the distribution of new religions in terms
of where they are headquartered in the United States. As one
would anticipate, most such groups are centered in the Pacific
Coast states, especially California. The southeastern part of the
country would have been the region with the least new religious
activity had it not been for Florida—a state that is culturally more
diverse than the rest of the South.
New Religions in Europe
Table 8 is derived from a 1993 article by Rodney Stark. According
to Stark’s figures, more than three times as many alternative reli-
New Religions in Europe
253
FIGURE 2
New Religions in 1990 in the Continental United States per Million Residents
Source: J. Gordon Melton, “Modern Alternative Religions in the West,” in John R. Hinnels, ed., A New Handbook of
Living Religions (London: Blackwell, 1997).

gions are headquartered in Europe as in the United States. These
data contradict the conventional wisdom, which says that the
United States is the source of most new religions in Europe. It also
flies in the face of Barrett and Johnson’s data, which indicate that
Europe is relatively impoverished in the area of new religions.
Religious Backgrounds of 
Members of New Religions
Table 9 is taken from a series of different studies that collected
data on the religious backgrounds of people who had joined new
254
Documents and Data
TABLE 8
New Religions in Europe and the United States in the Early 1990s*
Country
Cult Movements per Million
Number of Cult Movements
Switzerland
16.7
108
Iceland
12.0
3
United Kingdom
10.7
604
Austria
7.9
60
Sweden
6.8
57
Denmark
4.5
23
Netherlands
4.4
64
Ireland
3.9
14
Germany
2.5
155
Belgium
2.4
24
Norway
1.9
8
Greece
1.5
15
Italy
1.2
66
Portugal
1.0
10
France
0.9
52
Finland
0.8
4
Spain
0.7
29
Poland
0.5
17
Europe**
3.4
1,313
United States
1.7
425
*In a personal communication to me, Stark noted growing evidence that his figures were significantly undercounted.
Thus, for example, he put Italy’s total at 66. In contrast, Massimo Introvigne was able to locate 353 new religions for
his Encyclopedia of Religion in Italy.
** Total based only on nations listed in this table.
Source: Rodney Stark, “Europe’s Receptivity to New Religious Movements,” Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion
31 (1993): 389–397. Reprinted with permission of Rodney Stark.

religions. These data respond to a number of hypotheses ob-
servers have held about alternative religions, especially the per-
ception that individuals from Jewish homes are disproportion-
ately represented in such groups. Although the data support this
informal observation (particularly for some of the Asian-inspired
groups), none of these organizations is overwhelmingly Jewish,
as some have suggested.
Another casual observation is that neopagans are predomi-
nately from Catholic backgrounds, presumably because of their
felt need for a “ritualistic” religion. This hypothesis is decisively
disconfirmed by the data, which indicate that the percentage of
ex-Catholics in neopagan groups is actually less than participants
raised in other faiths. The same observation is sometimes made
about Satanists; once again, this is disconfirmed.
Postinvolvement Attitudes 
of Ex-Members
Table 10 reports the results of a 1984 survey of 154 ex-members of
controversial religious groups. Respondents were divided into
Postinvolvement Attitudes of Ex-Members
255
TABLE 9
Religious Backgrounds of Participants in New Religions (in Percentages)
Protestant
Catholic
Jewish
Other
Unification Church
47.1
35.8
05.3
11.8
Soka Gakkai
30.0
30.0
06.0
34.0
Neopagan
42.7
25.8
06.2
25.3
Hare Krishna
35.5
18.0
14.5
32.0
Zen Center of Los Angeles
52.0
12.0
28.0
08.0
Church Universal and Triumphant
43.7
35.7
03.0
17.7
Movement for Spiritual Inner Awareness
51.2
27.0
14.2
07.6
Ramtha School of Enlightenment
41.3
34.1
02.4
22.1
Satanism
55.0
28.0
01.4
15.6
Sources: Constance Jones, “Church Universal and Triumphant: A Demographic Profile,” in Church Universal and Tri-
umphant in Scholarly Perspective, edited by James R. Lewis and J. Gordon Melton (Stanford, CA: Center for Academic
Publishing, 1994); Constance Jones, “Students in Ramtha’s School of Enlightenment: A Profile from Demographic Sur-
vey, Narrative, and Interview” (unpublished, 1994); J. Stillson Judah, Hare Krishna and the Counter Culture (New
York: Wiley, 1974); McCloy Layman, Buddhism in America (Chicago: Nelson Hall, 1976); James R. Lewis, Satanism
Today (Santa Barbara: ABC-CLIO 2001); James R. Lewis, Seeking the Light (Los Angeles: Mandeville Press, 1997); J.
Gordon Melton, “The Neo-Pagans of America: An Alternative Religion,” paper presented to the American Academy of
Religion, 1970.

three “treatment groups”: no exit counseling (dropped out of
group without intervention of anticultists), voluntary exit coun-
seling (left group voluntarily but experienced intervention of an-
ticult “counselors”), and involuntary exit counseling (kidnapped
and deprogrammed).
The questionnaire contained eight items that indicated how
ex-members evaluated their former movement. Four of these
measured cult-stereotypical attitudes, asking respondents: (1) if
they thought they had been recruited deceptively, (2) if they be-
lieved they had been brainwashed, (3) if they thought that their
ex-leader was insincere, and (4) to what extent they believed the
worldview and beliefs of their ex-religion were false.
The other four items measured positive-negative attitudes in
a less stereotypical manner. Respondents were asked (1) if they
would discourage others from joining their former groups, (2) if
they would repeat their membership (with few or many
changes), (3) if they considered their membership a learning ex-
perience, and (4) if they believed they had grown as a result of
their participation in their ex-religion. All eight items were highly
correlated with the exit mode, as reported in Table 10.
What these figures show is that the tendency of ex-members
of controversial religions to portray their membership period in
negative terms is highly correlated with the extent of their con-
tact with the anticult movement. In other words, people who
256
Documents and Data
TABLE 10
Relationship of Post-Involvement Attitudes to Anticult Socialization
Questionnaire Item
Pearson Correlation
Deception
.392
Brainwashing
.587
Leader
.407
Worldview
.551
Discourage Joining
.522
Repeat Membership
.465
Learning Experience
.320
Growth Experience
.503
All values significant at the .001 level (two-tailed tests).
Source: James R. Lewis, “Reconstructing the ‘Cult’ Experience: Post-involvement Attitudes as a Function of Mode of
Exit and Post-involvement Socialization,” Sociological Analysis 47 (Summer 1986): 151-159, © Association for the
Sociology of Religion, Inc. Other findings from this same research project are reported in James R. Lewis, Legitimat-
ing New Religions (New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 2003).

were deprogrammed or otherwise counseled by anticultists are
far more likely to accuse their former religion of having recruited
them deceptively, brainwashing them, and the like. (Refer to
Chapter 1 for further discussion of the role of ex-member testi-
mony in the cult controversy.)
Documents
Beyond the court decisions that have already been reviewed,
there are few definitive documents in this controversy. The four
documents reproduced here are intended to give the reader a
more concrete sense of the controversy through contact with pri-
mary materials. Two are documents left in the wake of group sui-
cides; two are legislation enacted against “cults.”
The first document is one of the four letters, or “testaments,”
that leaders of the Solar Temple mailed to sixty journalists, schol-
ars, and government officials on the day of their “transits,” as
they referred to their group suicide. “To All Those Who Can Still
Understand the Voice of Wisdom” issued a call for other Solar
Temple members and sympathizers to follow their example. This
invitation to join them found a receptive audience: on December
16, 1995, sixteen of the remaining European members committed
a second mass suicide. Thirteen adults and three children were
later found dead in a remote forest in southeast France, and an-
other five additional members committed suicide on March 20,
1997, in Quebec, Canada.
The second document is the press release left by Heaven’s
Gate at the time of their group suicide. The overall thrust of
“Heaven’s Gate ‘Away Team’ Returns to Level Above Human in
Distant Space” is comparable with the message of the Solar Temple
testament, namely, to explain their exit and to invite others to fol-
low them. In the case of Heaven’s Gate, several members who did
not leave with the original “away team” later committed suicide.
The third document, the complete text of the “Legislative
Resolution Banning Cults,” was enacted to retroactively legiti-
mate the Chinese government’s suppression of Falun Gong. As a
way of giving their actions the patina of legitimacy and deflect-
ing potential Western criticism, the resolution was couched in
terms of Western anticult discourse. Unmoderated by counter-
vailing voices within the People’s Republic of China, the resolu-
tion strikes a strident tone.
Documents
257

The final document consists of excerpts from the French
“Law to Reinforce the Prevention and Repression of Groups with
a Sectarian Character”—also known as the About-Picard Law
after French National Assembly member Catherine Picard, who
coauthored the bill with Senator Nicolas About. Though more
moderate in tone than the Chinese resolution, it is one of the most
repressive laws passed by any western European democracy
since the 1940s.
To All Those Who Can Still 
Understand the Voice of Wisdom . . . 
We Address This Last Message
The current chaos leads man inescapably to face the failure of his
Destiny.
In the course of time, the cycles have followed one another
in accordance with precise rhythms and laws. Different civiliza-
tions disappeared in the course of cataclysms that were destruc-
tive but regenerative; nonetheless none of these reached a level of
decadence such as ours.
Subjected to the devastating effects of individual and collec-
tive egocentricity, marked by a total ignorance of the Laws of the
Spirit and Life, this civilization will no longer escape sudden self-
destruction.
From time immemorial, philosophers, prophets and misfor-
tunes have followed one another to help man to take his place as
a creator. Man’s refusal to See and to Hear each time has diverted
the Plans foreseen by Cosmic Evolution.
We, the servants of the Rose+Croix, possessors of an authen-
tic and ancestral Wisdom, affirm that we have worked through-
out time for the Evolution of Consciousness. Philosophies, sci-
ences, holy sites and temples remain as living testimonies of this.
The plan of action of these Beings was collected and pro-
grammed within the crypts or the sanctuaries, according to pre-
cise parameters, hidden from the secular world, but recognized
by the initiated.
We, the Servants of the Rose+Croix, declare that throughout
all eternity, the Solar and Universal Temple manifests itself
amongst men according to cycles of activity and dormancy. After
having solemnly opened their Doors on March 21, 1981, in
258
Documents and Data

Geneva, in a Secret Lodge, the ancient domain of the Malta
Order, its final esoteric action lasted eleven years.
During this cycle, the Grail, Excalibur, the Candelabra of the
Seven Branches and the Ark of the Covenant were revealed to the
living witnesses, the final and faithful Servants of the Eternal
Rose+Croix. Following which, false slanders and every kind of
treason and scandal, judiciously orchestrated by different exist-
ing powers, sounded the knell for a last attempt to regenerate the
Plans of Conscience.
Those who have breached our Code of Honor are considered
traitors. They have suffered and will suffer the punishment they
deserve for the ages of the ages.
All is accomplished according to the mandates of Immanent
Justice. We hereby affirm that we are in truth, the judges ap-
pointed by a Superior Order.
In view of the present irreversible situation, We, the Servants
of the Rose+Croix, strongly reaffirm that we are not a part of this
world and that we are perfectly aware of the coordinates of our
Origins and our Future.
We proclaim, without desiring to create vain polemics, that:
• The Great White Lodge of Sirius has decreed the Call of
the last authentic Bearers of an Ancestral Wisdom;
• Justice and Sentence will be applied according to the pa-
rameters of a Superior Universal Order with the rigor
imposed by the Law;
• The Seven Entities of the Great Pyramid of Gizeh left
the Secret Chamber during the night of March 31, 1993,
taking with them the capital Energy-Conscience of the
seven fundamental planets of our solar system;
• The last Elder Brothers of the Rose+Croix have planned
their transit in accordance with criteria known only to
themselves. After having transmitted to their Servants
the means of completing the Work, they left this world
on January 6, 1994, at 12:04 a.m. in Sydney, for a new
cycle of Creation.
We, the Servants of the Rose+Croix, considering the urgency
of the present situation, affirm:
• that we refuse to participate in systems set up by this
decadent humanity;
Documents
259

• that we have planned, in a full state of consciousness,
without any fanaticism, our transit which has nothing to
do with suicide in the human sense of the term;
• that according to a decree emanating from the Great
White Lodge of Sirius, we have closed and voluntarily
blown up all the sanctuaries of the Secret Lodges so that
they will not be desecrated by impostors or by the igno-
rant;
• that, from the Planes where we will work from now on
and by a just law of magnetism, we will be in the posi-
tion of calling back the last Servants capable of hearing
this last message.
Every slander, lie or falsehood about our deed could only be
translated, once more, as the refusal to understand and fathom
the Mystery of Life and Death.
Space is short, time is ending. It is with an unfathomable
Love, ineffable joy, and without any regret that we leave this
world.
Men, cry not over our fate, but rather cry for your own. Ours
is more enviable than yours.
To you who are receptive to this last message, may our Love
and our Peace accompany you during the terrible tests of the
Apocalypse that await you. Know that from where we will be,
we will always hold our arms open to receive those who are wor-
thy of joining us.
Exit Press Release—To Be Issued 
to the News Media 3-22-97 
By the time you read this, we suspect that the human bodies we
were wearing have been found and that a flurry of fragmented
reports have begun to hit the wire services. For those who want
to know the facts, the following statement has been issued.
HEAVEN’S GATE “Away Team” Returns to Level Above
Human in Distant Space.
RANCHO SANTO FE, CA—By the time you receive this,
we’ll be gone—several dozen of us. We came from the Level
Above Human in distant space and we have now exited the bod-
ies that we were wearing for our earthly task, to return to the
world from whence we came—task completed. The distant space
260
Documents and Data

we refer to is what your religious literature would call the King-
dom of Heaven or the Kingdom of God.
We came for the purpose of offering a doorway to the King-
dom of God at the end of this civilization, the end of this age, the
end of this millennium. We came from that Level, that time, that
space, and entered this one. And in so doing, we had to enter
human bodies—which we did, for the most part, in the mid-sev-
enties. Now it was time for us to leave those bodies (vehicles)—
bodies that we borrowed for the time we were here (by previous
arrangement) for this specific task. The task was not only to bring
in information about that Evolutionary Kingdom Level Above
Human, but to give us the experience of working against the
forces of what the human evolutionary level, at this time, has be-
come. And while it was a good learning experience for us, it also
gave all who ever received knowledge from that Kingdom an op-
portunity to recognize us and this information, and to even move
out of the human level and into the Next Level or the Next Evo-
lutionary Level, the “Kingdom of Heaven,” the Kingdom of God.
The Kingdom of God, the Level Above Human, is a physical
world, where they inhabit physical bodies. However, those bod-
ies are merely containers, suits of clothes—the true identity (of
the individual) is the soul or mind/spirit residing in that “vehi-
cle.” The body is merely a tool for that individual’s use—when it
wears out, he is issued a new one.
No one can enter the Kingdom of Heaven by trying to live a
good life in this world, and then, thinking that when this world’s
life takes your body, you get to “go to heaven.” The only time
that Next Kingdom can be entered is when there is a Member or
Members of that Kingdom who have come into the human king-
dom, incarnated as we have, offering clarification of that infor-
mation. To get into a discarnate condition just by disconnecting
from your body doesn’t mean that you are going to go anywhere,
whether that loss of body is “premature” or not. When we step
out of our “vehicle,” we have to know where and who our “tour
guide” (our Shepherd) is—for what’s next. We have to know we
can connect with a Shepherd whom we trust, and that we have
decided, “If that Shepherd will have me, I want to continue to be
a sheep—and I will do everything I can to please that Shepherd.”
Periodically, that Next Level sends in a Representative—a
Shepherd—and offers a graduation class, offers life, out of this
evolutionary level into that Next Evolutionary Level, and we are
at the end of one of those times. TI and DO were the names used
Documents
261

by the Representatives of that Next Level, the Kingdom of God,
sent to the “surface” of this planet to serve as our Teachers/
“Midwives” at this time.
During a brief window of time, some may wish to follow us.
If they do, it will not be easy. The requirement is to not only be-
lieve who the Representatives are, but, to do as they and we did.
You must leave everything of your humanness behind. This in-
cludes the ultimate sacrifice and demonstration of faith—that is,
the shedding of your human body. If you should choose to do
this, logistically it is preferred that you make this exit somewhere
in the area of the West or Southwest of the United States—but if
this is not possible—it is not required. You must call on the name
of TI and DO to assist you. In so doing, you will engage a com-
munication of sorts, alerting a spacecraft to your location where
you will be picked up after shedding your vehicle, and taken to
another world—by members of the Kingdom of Heaven.
Only a Member of the Next Level can give you Life—can take
you out of “Death”—but it requires that you disconnect, separate,
from the last element holding you to the human kingdom.
We know what we’re saying—we know it requires a “leap of
faith.” But it’s deliberate—designed for those who would rather
take that leap than stay in this world.
We suggest that anyone serious about considering this go
into their most quiet place and ask, scream, with all of their
being, directing their asking to the Highest Source they can imag-
ine (beyond Earth’s atmosphere), to give them guidance. Only
those “chosen” by that Next Kingdom will know that this is right
for them, and will be given the courage required to act.
SOME RELEVANT SCRIPTURES 
Therefore doth my Father love me, because I lay down my
life, that I might take it again. No man taketh it from me, but I lay
it down of myself. I have power to lay it down, and I have power
to take it again. This commandment have I received of my Father.
JOHN 10:15–18 He that believeth on me, the works that I do shall
he do also. JOHN 14:12
And except that the Lord shorten those days, none shall be
saved: but for the elect’s sake, whom He has chosen, He hath
shortened the days. MARK 13:20
He who loves his life will lose it, and he who hates his life in
this world will keep it for eternal life. JOHN 12:25
Blessed are the dead who die in the Lord. REVELATION 14:13
262
Documents and Data

People’s Republic of China Legislative
Resolution Banning Cults, October 30, 1999
To maintain social stability, protect the interests of the people,
safeguard reform and opening up and the construction of a mod-
ern socialist country, it is necessary to ban heretic cult organiza-
tions and prevent and punish cult activities.
Based on the constitution and other related laws, the follow-
ing decision is hereby made:
Heretic cult organizations shall be resolutely banned ac-
cording to law and all of their criminal activities shall be
dealt with severely.
Heretic cults, operating under the guise of religion, Qigong
or other illicit forms, which disturb social order and
jeopardize people’s life and property, must be banned
according to law and punished resolutely.
People’s courts, people’s procuratorates, public security, na-
tional security and judicial administrative agencies shall
fulfill their duties in carrying out these tasks.
To be severely dealt with according to law are those who
manipulate members of cult organizations to violate na-
tional laws and administrative regulations, organize
mass gatherings to disrupt social order and fool others,
cause deaths, rape women, swindle people out their
money and property or commit other crimes with su-
perstition and heresy.
The principle of combining education with punishment
should be followed in order to unify and instruct the
majority of the deceived public and to mete out severe
punishment to the handful of criminals.
During the course of handling cult groups according to law,
people who joined cult organizations but were unaware
of the lies being spread by the group shall be differenti-
ated from criminal elements who organize and take ad-
vantage of cult groups for illegal activities and/or to in-
tentionally destroy social stability.
The majority of the deceived members shall not be prose-
cuted, while those organizers, leaders and core members
who committed crimes shall be investigated for criminal
conduct; those who surrender to the authorities or 
Documents
263

contribute to the investigations shall be given lesser
punishments in accordance with the law or be exempt
from punishment.
Long-term, comprehensive instruction on the constitution
and the law should be carried out among all citizens,
knowledge of science and technology should be popu-
larized and the national literacy level raised.
Banning cult organizations and punishing cult activities ac-
cording to law goes hand in hand with protecting nor-
mal religious activities and people’s freedom of reli-
gious belief.
The public should be exposed to the inhumane and anti-
social nature of heretic cults, so they can knowingly re-
sist influences of cult organizations, enhance their
awareness of the law and abide by it.
All corners of society shall be mobilized in preventing and
fighting against cult activities, and a comprehensive
management system should be put in place.
People’s governments and judicial bodies at all levels
should be held responsible for guarding against the cre-
ation and spread of cult organizations and combating
cult activities. 
This is an important, long-term task that will ensure social
stability.
“Law to Reinforce the Prevention 
and Repression of Groups with a 
Sectarian Character” (the About-Picard 
Law), Paris, France, May 30, 2001
A bill directed to the reinforcement of prevention and repression
of cultic movements which undermine human rights and funda-
mental freedoms.
CHAPTER I
Civil dissolution of certain legal entities
Section 1
The dissolution can be pronounced, according to the provi-
sions of the present Section, of any legal entity, whatever its legal
form or object, pursuing activities which have as their purpose or
264
Documents and Data

effect to create, maintain or exploit the psychological or physical
subjection of persons taking part in these activities, when final
criminal sentences have been pronounced against the legal entity
itself or its legitimate or de facto leaders, for one or the other of
the offences mentioned hereafter:
1E Offences of intentional or unintentional prejudice to the
life or the physical or psychological integrity of the person, en-
dangerment of the person, prejudice to the person’s freedoms,
prejudice to the dignity of the person, prejudice to the personal-
ity, imperiling minors or prejudicing property provided for by
Sections 221-1 to 221-6, 222-1 to 222-40, 223-1 to 223-15, 223-15-2,
224-1 to 224-4, 225-5 to 225-15, 225-17 to 225-18, 226-1 to 226-23,
227-1 to 227-27, 311-1 to 311-13, 312-1 to 312-12, 313-1 to 313-3,
314-1 to 314-3 and 324-1 to 324-6 of the Criminal Code;
2E Offences of illegal medical or pharmaceutical practice pro-
vided for by Sections L. 4161-5 and L. 4223-1 of the Public Health
Code;
3E Offences of deceptive advertising, frauds and falsifica-
tions provided for by Sections L. 121-6 and L. 213-1 to L. 213-4 of
the Consumer Code.
The dissolution procedure is filed before the Court of First
Instance by the Public Prosecutor, acting on its own accord or at
the request of any interested party.
The request is formulated, examined and judged in confor-
mity with the fast-track (fixed date) procedure. The time limit for
appeal is fifteen days. The President of the Court to whom the
case is entrusted will fix a short time limit for the hearing to
which the case will be summoned. At the indicated day, the pro-
ceedings are conducted according to Sections 760 to 762 of the
New Code of Civil Procedure.
The overt or disguised maintaining or re-forming of a legal
entity disbanded in application of the clauses of the present Sec-
tion is an offence provided for by the second paragraph of Sec-
tion 434-43 of the Criminal Code.
The Court of First Instance may pronounce in the course of
the same procedure the dissolution of several different legal en-
tities mentioned in the first paragraph, when these legal entities
pursue the same purpose and are united by a community of in-
terests and when at least one final criminal sentence for one of
the offences mentioned in 1E to 3E has been pronounced against
each of them or their legitimate or de facto leaders. These differ-
ent legal entities must be parties to the procedure.
Documents
265

CHAPTER II
Extension of the criminal responsibility of legal entities to
certain offences
Section 2
I.—After the words “is sentenced,” the end of the first para-
graph of Section L. 4161-5 of the Public Health Code the follow-
ing words shall be included: “to one year in prison and a 100,000
Francs fine.”
II.—After Section L. 4161-5 of the Public Health Code, a Sec-
tion L. 4161-6 is inserted, reading as follows:
“Sect. L. 4161-6.—Legal entities may be declared criminally
responsible in the conditions established by Section 121-2 of the
Criminal Code for offences provided for by Section L. 4161-5.”
The penalties incurred by the legal entities are:
“1E Fine, according to the provisions of Section 131-38 of the
Criminal Code;
“2E The penalties mentioned in Paragraphs 2nd to 9th of
Section 131-39 of the Criminal Code. The interdiction mentioned
in the 2nd Paragraph of Section 131-39 of the Criminal Code con-
cerns the activity in the exercise of which or at the occasion of
which the offence was committed.”
III.—In Section L. 4223-1 of the same Code, the words: “to a
30,000 Francs fine and, in the event of a subsequent offence, to six
months in prison and a 60,000 Francs fine” are replaced by the
words: “to one year in prison and a 100,000 Francs fine.”
. . .
CHAPTER IV
Clauses restricting the advertisement of cult movements
[Sections 6 and 7 Deleted]
Section 8
The fact of distributing, by whatever means, messages in-
tended for youth and promoting a legal entity, whatever its legal
form or object, which is pursuing activities with the purpose or
effect to create, maintain or exploit the psychological or physical
subjection of persons taking part in these activities, when final
criminal sentences have been pronounced several times, against
the legal entity itself or its legitimate or de facto leaders, for one
or the other of the offences mentioned hereafter, is sentenced to a
50,000 Francs fine:
1E Offences of intentional or unintentional prejudice to the
life or the physical or psychological integrity of the person, en-
dangerment of the person, prejudice to the person’s freedoms,
266
Documents and Data

prejudice to the dignity of the person, prejudice to the personal-
ity, placing minors in danger or prejudicing property provided
for by Sections 221-1 to 221-6, 222-1 to 222-40, 223-1 to 223-15,
223-15-2, 224-1 to 224-4, 225-5 to 225-15, 225-17 to 225-18, 226-1 to
226-23, 227-1 to 227-27, 311-1 to 311-13, 312-1 to 312-12, 313-1 to
313-3, 314-1 to 314-3 and 324-1 to 324-6 of the Criminal Code;
2E Offences of illegal medical or pharmaceutical practice
provided for by Sections L. 4161-5 and L. 4223-1 of the Public
Health Code;
3E Offences of deceptive advertising, frauds and falsifica-
tions provided for by Sections L. 121-6 and L. 213-1 to L. 213-4 of
the Consumer Code.
The same sanctions are applicable when the messages re-
ferred to in the first paragraph of this Section are an invitation to
join such a legal entity.
The legal entities may be declared penally responsible in
conditions provided for by Section 121-2 of the Criminal Code of
offences defined in this Section. The sanction incurred by legal
entities is a fine, according to the provisions of Section 131-38 of
the Criminal Code.
CHAPTER V
Clauses connected with the fraudulent abuse of the state of
ignorance or weakness
Section 9
After Section 223-15 of the Criminal Code, a section 6 bis is
created, reading as follows:
“Section 6 bis
Regarding the fraudulent abuse of the state of ignorance or
weakness.
“Sect. 223-15-2.—The fraudulent abuse of the state of igno-
rance or the condition of weakness of either a minor or a person
whose specific vulnerability, due to his age, an illness, a disabil-
ity, a physical or psychological deficiency or pregnancy, is appar-
ent and known to its author, or of a person in a state of psycho-
logical or physical subjection resulting from serious pressures
exercised or repeated or from techniques likely to alter his judg-
ment, leading this minor or this person to an act or an abstention
which are seriously harmful to him, is sentenced to three years in
prison and a 2,500,000 Francs fine.
“When the offence is committed by the legitimate or de facto
leader of a group which is pursuing activities with the purpose or
effect to create, maintain or exploit the psychological or physical
Documents
267

subjection of persons taking part in these activities, the sentences
are extended to five years in prison and a 5,000,000 Francs fine.
“Sect. 223-15-3.—Individuals guilty of the offence provided
for in this section also incur the following supplementary sen-
tences:
“1E Deprivation of political, civil and family rights, accord-
ing to the provisions of Section 131-26;
“2E Deprivation, according to provisions of Section 131-27,
of the exercise of a civil service or the exercise of the professional
or social activity in the exercise of which or at the occasion of the
exercise of which the offence was committed, for a length of five
years at most;
“3E Closing, for a length of five years at most, of the estab-
lishments or of one or several establishments of the corporation
having served to commit the incriminated facts;
“4E Seizure of the thing which served or was intended to
commit the offence or the thing which is its product, with the ex-
ception of objects susceptible of restitution;
“5E Prohibition to stay in France or in certain French de-
partments, according to the provisions of Section 131-31;
“6E Interdiction, for a length of five years at most, the draw-
ing of checks other than those which enable the withdrawal of
funds by the drawer from the drawee or of certified ones;
“7E Posting of the bill or circulating the pronounced deci-
sion, in conditions provided for by Section 131-35.
“Art. 223-15-4.—Legal entities may be declared criminally
responsible, in conditions provided for by Section 121-2, of the
offence defined in this section.”
. . .
References
Arweck, Elisabeth. “New Religious Movements.” In Religions in the Mod-
ern World, edited by Linda Woodhead, Paul Fletcher, Jiroko Kawanami,
and David Smith, 264–288. London: Routledge, 2002.
Australian National Census 96: Religion. http://www.aph.gov.au/
library/pubs/rn/1997-98/98rn27.htm.
Barker, Eileen. “New Religious Movements: Their Incidence and Signif-
icance.” In New Religious Movements: Challenge and Response, edited by
Bryan Wilson and Jamie Cresswell, 15–31. London: Routledge, 1999.
268
Documents and Data

Barrett, David B., and Todd M. Johnson. “A Statistical Approach to the
World’s Religious Adherents.” In Religions of the World: A Comprehensive
Encyclopedia of Beliefs and Practices, edited by J. Gordon Melton and Mar-
tin Baumann, xxvii–xxxviii. Santa Barbara: ABC-Clio, 2002.
Canadian National Census 2001. http://www.statcan.ca.
Chryssides, George D. Exploring New Religions. London: Cassell, 1999.
Clarke, Peter B. “New Paths to Salvation.” Religion Today 1, no. 1 (1984):
1–3.
Ellwood, Robert S., and Harry B. Partin. Religious and Spiritual Groups in
Modern America. 2d ed. Essex, UK: Pearson Education, 1998. 
Gallup, George, Jr., and D. Michael Lindsay. Surveying the Religious Land-
scape. Harrisburg, PA: Morehouse, 1999.
Jones, Constance. “Church Universal and Triumphant: A Demographic
Profile.” In Church Universal and Triumphant in Scholarly Perspective,
edited by James R. Lewis and J. Gordon Melton. Stanford, CA: Center for
Academic Publishing, 1994.
———. “Students in Ramtha’s School of Enlightenment: A Profile from
Demographic Survey, Narrative, and Interview.” Unpublished paper,
1994.
Judah, J. Stillson. Hare Krishna and the Counter Culture. New York: Wiley,
1974.
Kosmin, Barry A., and Ariela Keysar. Religion in the Marketplace. Ithaca,
NY: Paramount Books, 2004.
Layman, McCloy. Buddhism in America. Chicago: Nelson Hall, 1976.
Lewis, James R. “Reconstructing the ‘Cult’ Experience: Post-involve-
ment Attitudes as a Function of Mode of Exit and Post-involvement So-
cialization.” Sociological Analysis 47 (Summer 1986): 151–159.
———. Seeking the Light. Los Angeles: Mandeville Press, 1997.
———. Odd Gods: New Religions and the Cult Controversy. Amherst, NY:
Prometheus Books, 2001.
———. Satanism Today. Santa Barbara: ABC-Clio, 2001.
———. The Astrology Book. Detroit: Visible Ink, 2003.
———. Legitimating New Religions. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers Univer-
sity Press, 2003.
Melton, J. Gordon. “The Neo-Pagans of America: An Alternative Reli-
gion.” Paper presented to the American Academy of Religion, 1970.
———. A Directory of Religious Bodies in the United States. New York: Gar-
land, 1977. 
References
269

———. The Encyclopedic Handbook of Cults in America. 2d ed. New York:
Garland, 1992. 
———. “Modern Alternative Religions in the West.” In A New Handbook
of Living Religions, edited by John R. Hinnels. London: Blackwell, 1997. 
Rabinovitch, Shelley, and James R. Lewis. The Encyclopedia of Modern
Witchcraft and Neo-Paganism. New York: Citadel, 2002. 
Singer, Margaret Thaler, with Janja Lalich. Cults in Our Midst: The Hidden
Menace in Our Everyday Lives. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1995.
Stark, Rodney. “Europe’s Receptivity to New Religious Movements.”
Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion 31 (1993): 389–397.
270
Documents and Data

6
Biographical Sketches
This chapter provides biographical sketches of some of the most
important people involved in the cult controversy. Approxi-
mately half of the individuals profiled are founders of the reli-
gious movements that have been the most controversial. The bal-
ance are mostly scholars and professionals who have taken a
stand on one side or the other of the controversy.
Dick Anthony (b. 1939)
Dick Anthony is a research and forensic psychologist. He did
graduate work in clinical psychology at Duke University and fin-
ished his PhD in an interdisciplinary psychology and religion
program at the Graduate Theological Union in Berkeley. As a re-
search associate of the University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill Department of Psychiatry and later as the research director
of the Center for the Study of New Religions at the Graduate
Theological Union, he directed a series of research programs on
the social and psychological precursors and effects of new reli-
gious movements and alternative therapies. These research pro-
grams were funded by U.S. government agencies (the National
Institute of Mental Health, the National Institute of Drug Abuse,
and the National Endowment for the Humanities) and by major
philanthropic foundations. He has published the results of his re-
search in numerous professional articles and book chapters.
Many of his publications evaluate beneficial versus harmful
effects of membership in different types of new religions and
provide an alternative to the cultic brainwashing approach to
271

addressing the issue of coercion in such groups. His publications
also summarize the scientific and legal basis for viewing cultic
brainwashing theories and testimony as unscientific or unconsti-
tutional or both and argue that courts should disallow such tes-
timony because of its prejudicial character. His approach has
been a primary basis for amicus curiae briefs by several profes-
sional associations, including the American Psychological Asso-
ciation, which were submitted in cases involving allegations of
cultic brainwashing.
As a result of his publications and consulting activities, he
has since 1985 served as a trial consultant and expert witness in
numerous cases in the United States and Europe involving alle-
gations of coercive religious influence. His critique of the scien-
tific and civil liberties problems associated with the legal use of
cultic brainwashing formulations has become the most fre-
quently used legal and scientific basis for repudiating cultic
brainwashing testimony in such cases.
Marshall Herff Applewhite (1931–1997)
Marshall Applewhite was the cofounder of Heaven’s Gate, the
UFO religion that committed group suicide in 1997. He was born
in Spur, Texas. The son of a Presbyterian minister, he was active
in church and sang in the church choir. After receiving an under-
graduate degree from Austin College, he completed a master’s
degree in music from the University of Colorado at Boulder. He
joined the faculty of St. Thomas University in 1964. He directed
the university choir and eventually became chair of the Music
Department.
Despite the outward success of Applewhite’s early academic
and musical career, he was deeply troubled. Married and the fa-
ther of two children, he secretly carried on a double life as a ho-
mosexual. Guilty and confused, he is said to have longed for a
platonic relationship within which he could develop his full po-
tential without being troubled by his sexual urges. He eventually
divorced his wife and, in 1970, was terminated by St. Thomas
University. Devastated, Applewhite became bitter and depressed.
He met his platonic partner, Bonnie Lu Nettles, at a hospital
where he was seeking help for his sexual and psychological prob-
lems. Nettles and Applewhite quickly became inseparable. For a
short while, they together operated a metaphysical center. After
272
Biographical Sketches

the center folded, they continued holding classes in a house they
called Knowplace. In 1973, they began traveling in search of a
higher purpose. They eventually camped out in an isolated spot
near the Oregon coast and, after six weeks, came to the realiza-
tion that they were the two witnesses prophesied in Revelation
11 who would be martyred and then resurrected three and a half
days later—an event they later referred to as the Demonstration.
Preaching an unusual synthesis of occult spirituality and UFO
soteriology, they began recruiting in New Age circles in the
spring of 1975.
In the spring of 1975, they recruited their first followers, be-
ginning with a metaphysical teacher named Clarence Klug and
twenty-three of his students. As the first step in the transforma-
tional process taught by the Two, their followers abandoned
everything that tied them to their everyday lives, including their
jobs, families, and most of their possessions except for cars and
camping supplies (necessary for leading a quasi-nomadic
lifestyle). Mirroring their own process, the Two placed males and
females together in nonsexual partnerships in which each was in-
structed to assist his or her partner in the overcoming process.
They also attempted to tune in to the next level, again reflecting
the process that Applewhite and Nettles had experienced during
their six-week retreat. A central part of the teaching was that
members would physically ascend and become members of the
crews of “next level” spacecraft.
Heaven’s Gate, originally known as Human Individual
Metamorphosis, first made headlines in September 1975 when,
following a public lecture in Waldport, Oregon, more than thirty
people vanished overnight. This disappearance became a media
event. For the next several months, reporters generated story
after story about brainwashed cult groupies abandoning their
everyday lives to follow the strange couple who alternately re-
ferred to themselves as “Bo and Peep,” “the Two,” “Do and Ti,”
and other bizarre names. Applewhite continued to lead the
group by himself after Nettles died of cancer in 1985.
Details about how Applewhite came to attach apocalyptic
significance to the Hale-Bopp comet are scanty. Someone outside
the group had come to the conclusion that a giant UFO was com-
ing to Earth, “hidden” in the wake of the Hale-Bopp comet.
When Heaven’s Gate heard this information, Applewhite took it
as an indication that the long awaited pickup of his group by
aliens was finally about to take place. The decision that the time
Marshall Herff Applewhite
273

had come to make their final exit could not have been made more
than a few weeks before the mass suicide. Applewhite had
rethought his theology after his beloved partner died because, in
order to be reunited with Nettles, her spirit would have to ac-
quire a new body aboard the spacecraft. The death of Nettles
seems to have been the decisive influence leading him to later
adopt the view that the group would ascend together spiritually
rather than physically.
Shoko Asahara (b. 1955)
Shoko Asahara was the founder-leader of AUM Shinrikyo. His
birth name was Chizuo Matsumoto. Almost blind, he attended a
special school and graduated in 1977. Failing to get accepted to a
university, Matsumoto pursued a career in Chinese medicine be-
fore turning to spirituality. Following a pilgrimage to the Hi-
malayas in 1987, he changed his name to Shoko Asahara.
Asahara founded AUM Shinrikyo in Tokyo following his re-
turn from India. Asahara made international headlines in the
wake of a poison-gas attack that occurred on March 20, 1995, in
the crowded Tokyo subway system. Twelve people died, and
many others were injured. Within a few days of the attack, AUM
Shinrikyo was fingered as the most likely suspect. The leadership
was eventually arrested and the organization disbanded.
A form of Tantric Buddhism, AUM Shinrikyo’s teachings
emphasized yoga practices and spiritual experiences. Asahara
had traveled to India seeking enlightenment. Before returning to
Japan, he sought out the Dalai Lama and received what he be-
lieved was a commission to revive true Buddhism in the land of
his birth. By the time of the subway incident, Asahara had ac-
quired a large communal facility near Mount Fuji and a follow-
ing of approximately 10,000 members in Japan (with an esti-
mated 30,000 followers in Russia).
In addition to the usual teachings that go hand in hand with
mainline Buddhism, Asahara was also fascinated with seeing
into the future. His preoccupation with divination may have
grown out of the weakness of his physical senses. Before under-
taking yoga and meditation practices, he pursued the study of
such divinatory practices as astrology. Like many other Japanese
spiritualists, he was fascinated by Western biblical prophecies as
well as by the prophecies of Nostradamus. Perhaps influenced by
274
Biographical Sketches

the apocalyptic flavor of these predictions, Asahara himself
began preaching an apocalyptic message to his followers. In par-
ticular, he prophesied a confrontation between Japan and the
United States before the end of the century that would in all like-
lihood destroy his home country.
Asahara was, in fact, so certain about an impending conflict
between Japan and the United States that he actually began
preparing to wage war. Unable to match the conventional mili-
tary might of the United States, AUM scientists investigated un-
conventional weapons, from biological agents to poison gas. The
Tokyo gas attack was motivated by increased police scrutiny of
AUM Shinrikyo, with the idea of distracting police attention
away from the movement.
In the end, it was Asahara’s own pronouncements that led
the police to the door of AUM Shinrikyo. In particular, Master
Asahara had predicted that gas attacks by terrorists would occur
in the not too distant future. This made him an obvious target of
suspicion. Hence, the subway attack, far from diverting attention
away from AUM Shinrikyo, actually had the opposite effect. He
was found hiding in the group’s headquarters near Mount Fuji,
arrested, and eventually convicted of murder.
Eileen Barker (b. 1938)
Eileen Barker received her BSc from the London School of Eco-
nomics (1970) and her PhD in sociology from the University of
London. In 1998, she was elected to Fellowship of the British
Academy. And in 2000, she was appointed as an officer of the
Order of the British Empire. She is an emeritus professor of soci-
ology with special reference to the study of religion at the Lon-
don School of Economics. Her main research interests are “cults,”
“sects,” and new religious movements and the social reactions to
which they give rise; since 1989, she has also been investigating
changes in the religious situation in postcommunist countries.
Barker has more than 200 publications, including 9 books (7
edited) and numerous articles in journals and chapters in books, to
her name. Her New Religious Movements: A Practical Introduction
(1989) is presently in its fifth impression and has been translated
into Italian, Dutch, Bulgarian, Russian, and Polish, with a second
edition being translated into several other languages. Other publi-
cations have been translated into a total of twenty-four languages.
Eileen Barker
275

Her award-winning book The Making of a Moonie: Brainwashing or
Choice? although not written as a textbook, is used as such in both
sociology of religion and methods courses in several universities
in the United States, Europe, and Australia.
In the late 1980s, with the support of the British government
and mainstream churches, Barker founded INFORM, a charity
based at the London School of Economics, which provides infor-
mation about new religions that is as accurate, objective, and up-
to-date as possible. She is a frequent adviser to governments,
other official bodies, and law enforcement agencies around the
world and is the only non-American to have been elected presi-
dent of the Society for the Scientific Study of Religion.
David Brandt Berg (1919–1994)
David Brandt Berg, known to his followers as Father David, was
the founder of the nontraditional Christian missionary move-
ment known as the Family (formerly the Children of God). Berg’s
parents were active pastors, and he spent his first years traveling
with his parents during their evangelical mission.
In 1944, Berg met and married Jane Miller, an active member
of the Alliance Church in Sherman Oaks, California. In late 1948,
he began ministering at a small Christian and Missionary Al-
liance church in rural Arizona but resigned in early 1951. For the
next fifteen years, Berg taught secondary school, held a number
of other secular jobs, attended several secular and Christian col-
leges, opened and ran a small center for missionaries, and trav-
eled the United States booking an evangelical program on radio
and television. He eventually became more convinced of the in-
effectiveness of organized, traditional “Churchianity” and its
emphasis on ceremonialism and lavish buildings, as well as its
general lack of interest in evangelical outreach.
In the mid-1960s, Berg began traveling with his four children
in evangelistic outreach, and in early 1968 he and his family jour-
neyed to Huntington Beach, California, a beach town that had
become a gathering place for thousands of hippies. He began
ministering to the youth in a small Christian coffeehouse, the
Light Club. Hundreds of young people became Christians and
stopped taking drugs. Berg’s new ministry to the hippies marked
his total rupture with mainstream Christian denominations. Dur-
ing this period, Berg also met his second wife, Maria, who re-
276
Biographical Sketches

mained Berg’s constant companion for twenty-five years, from
the spring of 1969 until his passing in 1994.
In 1970, the “Teens for Christ” were likened by a newspaper
reporter to “Moses and the Children of God”; these designations
stuck, as Berg became known as Moses Berg and his followers as
the Children of God. At the heart of his teaching was the convic-
tion that the love of God, as manifested in the Bible and the per-
son of Jesus, was the solution to every human need and that the
Christian’s primary responsibility is to dedicate time, energy, and
resources to sharing the Gospel with others.
Among Berg’s most controversial beliefs was his adherence to
the principle that he called the Law of Love, which he applied
most shockingly to matters of sex. In 1976, he also proposed to his
followers that in certain circumstances, it would be acceptable for
a Christian to have sexual relations with someone in an effort to
give them a tangible manifestation of God’s love, thereby helping
them to come to a saving knowledge of Jesus Christ. This doctrine,
which became known as “flirty fishing,” was practiced by some
Family members until 1987, when it was officially discontinued.
David G. Bromley (b. 1941)
David G. Bromley received his BA from Colby College in 1963
and his MA (1966) and PhD (1971) degrees from Duke University.
He has served on the faculties of the University of Virginia, Uni-
versity of Texas at Arlington, University of Hartford, and Vir-
ginia Commonwealth University. He joined the sociology faculty
at Virginia Commonwealth University as department chair in
1984 and is currently a professor and director of graduate studies
in the Department of Sociology with an affiliate appointment in
the Department of Religious Studies.
Bromley has worked in a variety of areas throughout his aca-
demic career, including urban sociology, sociology of religion, so-
cial movements, deviance, and political sociology. His primary in-
terest is in new religious movements. One line of work on new
religions adopted an organizational perspective on these move-
ments. His book with Anson D. Shupe Jr. Moonies in America (1979)
adopted a resource-mobilization approach, whereas his book with
Phillip Hammond, The Future of New Religious Movements (1987),
explored structural factors associated with movement success or
failure. A second line of work involved the conflict dynamics 
David G. Bromley
277

between movements and countermovements. This line of work is
represented by another book with Shupe, The New Vigilantes
(1980).
Bromley has written on a number of key issues involving
new religious groups, including sociocultural sources of new
movements, movement organization and development, conver-
sion and defection, and conflicts and controversies. More recently,
he has connected the 1980s Satanism scare to the 1970s cult scare
in his book with James Richardson and Joel Best, The Satanism
Scare (1991). He has written or edited seventeen books on reli-
gious movements. His most recent books are The Politics of Reli-
gious Apostasy (1998), Cults, Religion and Violence (2001), Toward Re-
flexive Ethnography: Participating, Observing, Narrating (2001), and
Defining Religion: Critical Approaches to Drawing Boundaries between
Sacred and Secular (2003). He is former president of the Association
for the Sociology of Religion; founding editor of the annual series
Religion and the Social Order, sponsored by the Association for
the Sociology of Religion; and past editor of the Journal for the Sci-
entific Study of Religion, published by the Society for the Scientific
Study of Religion.
John Gordon Clark, MD (1926–1999)
John G. Clark was a psychiatrist and the founder of the American
Family Foundation, which was the most prominent U.S. anticult
organization after the Cult Awareness Network. He was born in
St. Cloud, Minnesota. He served in the navy, graduated from
Macalester College in St. Paul, and went on to attend Harvard
Medical School. He was a member of the faculty of Harvard
Medical School and the staff of McLean Hospital in Belmont. He
maintained a private practice in Weston, Massachusetts.
Clark was one of the first professionals to turn his attention
to new religions, even before the Jonestown suicide-murders in
1978. In 1979, he authored an influential and oft-cited editorial on
cults for the Journal of the American Medical Association. He was
frequently an expert witness in governmental committees and
hearings investigating alternative religions. As a psychiatrist, the
thrust of Clark’s testimony was that involvement in such groups
induced radical personality changes and was dangerous to par-
ticipants’ mental health. He also asserted that members of non-
traditional religions were being subjected to “an impermissible
278
Biographical Sketches

experiment” of subtle and sophisticated psychological manipula-
tion by the leadership of such groups.
One of the most prominent anticultists of the seventies and
eighties, Clark propagated his views in a variety of venues, from
the courtroom to the news media. He regularly appeared on TV
shows, including a BBC documentary about the Unification
Church. As a consequence, he became embroiled in several legal
battles with the Church of Scientology, which objected to his criti-
cal perspective and accused him of being antireligious. Clark as-
serted that the Church of Scientology orchestrated a harassment
campaign against him. In a 1988 settlement, he received an undis-
closed sum from this organization but at the same time agreed to
never again publicly discuss the Church of Scientology.
In 1985, Clark was awarded the Leo J. Ryan Award, named
after the California congressman murdered in Jonestown,
Guyana. Also, in 1991, the Psychiatric Times named him psychia-
trist of the year. He passed away at a Belmont, Massachusetts,
nursing home. He had been suffering from a long illness and was
seventy-three at the time of his death.
Joseph Di Mambro (1924–1994)
Joseph Di Mambro was the founder of the Order of the Solar
Temple, an esoteric New Age group responsible for a series of
group suicides (the first incident also involved murders) in 1994,
1995, and 1997. From the age of sixteen, Di Mambro was appren-
ticed as a watchmaker and jeweler and seems to have pursued
this profession during the first part of his life. Not much is
known about this period except that from a young age he was
deeply interested in esotericism. Di Mambro had sampled a vari-
ety of different esoteric groups, including the Ancient and Mysti-
cal Order Rosae Crucis, which he joined in 1956 and of which he
was a member until at least 1968. In the 1960s, he came into con-
tact with several persons who would later play a role in Solar
Temple history, including Jacques Breyer who had initiated a
“Templar resurgence” in France in 1952. Several groups, includ-
ing the Order of the Solar Temple, have their roots in Breyer’s
work.
The International Chivalric Order Solar Tradition (Solar
Temple) was founded in 1984. Solar Temple groups were orga-
nized in Quebec, Canada, as well as in Australia, Switzerland,
Joseph Di Mambro
279

France, and other countries. The leadership saw themselves as
playing a pivotal role on the world stage. Partially as a conse-
quence of this view, they believed that the Solar Temple was
being systematically persecuted by the various governments
with which they were having relatively minor problems.
Though his spiritual interests seem to have been sincere, Di
Mambro also had an unsavory side to his character. In 1972, he
was convicted on charges of fraud for impersonating a psychol-
ogist and passing bad checks. A 1979 fire at La Pyramide, an early
communal farm founded by Di Mambro near Geneva, was pos-
sibly an insurance swindle. The insurance money from the fire
enabled Di Mambro to obtain a mansion in Geneva where he
started the Golden Way Foundation. The Golden Way, in turn,
was the immediate predecessor organization to the Solar Temple.
He was also not above tricking his followers into thinking he had
such a close link to the ascended masters that they would deign
to manifest themselves during Temple initiations. These manifes-
tations were accomplished by means of hidden holographic pro-
jections of the masters.
Di Mambro was far from humble and claimed to be the rein-
carnation of Osiris, Akhnaton, Moses, and Cagliostro. He identi-
fied various Solar Temple members as having been such famous
individuals as Bernard de Clairvaux, Joseph of Arimathea, Queen
Hapshetsout, and Rama. He was also regarded by his followers as
the only person having access to the masters. Furthermore, Di
Mambro saw the OTS as producing “cosmic children” who would
shape the future destiny of the planet. Chief among these was his
own daughter Emmanuelle, who was to be the messiah-avatar of
the New Age.
Gerald Brousseau Gardner (1884–1964)
Gerald Gardner, founder of the contemporary Wicca movement,
was born into a Scottish family in Blundellsands, England. Child-
hood asthma prevented him from participating in normal school-
ing, and he gained most of his education through his own read-
ing. He worked on a plantation in Ceylon (today’s Sri Lanka)
from 1900 to 1923, when he became a civil servant.
Over the following years, Gardner became an amateur an-
thropologist, as his various government jobs took him and some-
280
Biographical Sketches

times his wife, Donna (whom he married in 1927), to numerous
Asian countries. In 1936, he published Kris and Other Malay
Weapons, which became the standard work on that topic. He was
particularly interested in magical and religious practices and
sought out local leaders in those areas. For a time he joined a Ma-
sonic lodge in Ceylon.
Just prior to World War II, Gardner retired and returned to
England, where he joined the Corona Fellowship of Rosicrucians.
Through those connections, he was supposedly introduced to
Dorothy Clutterbuck, said to be the priestess of a group of prac-
ticing witches. According to Gardner, she agreed to initiate him
into practices handed down through many generations, though
the practice of witchcraft was unlawful and she swore him to se-
crecy. He did manage to talk about Wiccan practices indirectly
through his 1949 novel, High Magic’s Aid, published under the
pseudonym Scire. He also opened a witchcraft museum near his
home on the Isle of Man.
In 1951, the final British law against witchcraft was struck
down, and in 1954 Gardner published his landmark book Witch-
craft Today, describing the craft and lamenting its apparent immi-
nent demise. The book, however, attracted the attention of a
number of people who came to him and his high priestess, Lady
Olwen (Monique Wilson), for initiation. Gardnerian Wicca made
its way to the United States through initiates Raymond and Rose-
mary Buckland in 1963 and initiate Alexander Sanders several
years later.
After Gardner’s death on an ocean voyage, his papers and
effects were sold to Ripley’s Believe It or Not. They have clearly
shown that Gardner did not learn witchcraft from a living tradi-
tion, as he had claimed during his life, but in fact devised all the
rituals and beliefs himself. He created the witch’s ritual knife, the
athame, from his knowledge of the kris, the Malaysian ceremonial
weapon. He created the major holy days, or sabbats, from the
eight ancient pagan agricultural festivals, and then added the es-
bats, or biweekly meetings. He created the practice of nude (or
“skyclad”) worship from his experience sunbathing after recov-
ering from a leg injury. Other sources included the medieval
book Greater Key of Solomon, Masonic books, Alistair Crowley
books, and elements of Asian cultures. Whatever the sources,
Gardnerian Wicca is the source of the practices of most Wiccan
groups and has become its own living tradition.
Gerald Brousseau Gardner
281

L. Ron Hubbard (1911–1986)
Lafayette Ronald Hubbard, writer and founder of dianetics and
Scientology, was born in Tilden, Nebraska, the son of Ledora May
Waterbury and Harry Ross Hubbard, an officer in the U.S. Navy.
Hubbard spent much of his youth with his maternal grand-
father in Montana due to his father’s service in the navy. In
1923–1924, Hubbard lived in Washington, D.C., and, again, after
1929, graduating from high school there in 1930. In 1927–1928,
Hubbard traveled throughout the Far East. In 1930, he entered
George Washington University but left before graduating. Hub-
bard spent some of the early 1930s as an aviator and aviation cor-
respondent. His major vocation by 1934, however, was as a pro-
lific and increasingly successful fiction writer. His stories of the
1930s and 1940s were predominantly action and adventure, and
included Westerns and science fiction.
Hubbard married three times: in 1933 to Margaret Louise
Grubb, in 1946 to Sara Northrup, and in 1952 to Mary Sue
Whipp. He had six children. During World War II, he was a navy
lieutenant, serving in both the Pacific and the Atlantic, and spent
time in 1943 and 1945 as a patient in a naval hospital for ulcers
and injuries to eyes and hip. In 1950, he published his most fa-
mous book, Dianetics: The Modern Science of Mental Health. This
work, on a new form of therapy Hubbard labeled dianetics, be-
came an instant best-seller, generating numerous articles, discus-
sion groups, and conversations. Dianetics was opposed by the
medical, psychological, and psychiatric professions, with all pub-
lished articles discouraging its use.
In March 1952, Hubbard moved to Phoenix where he an-
nounced the establishment of the Hubbard Association of Scien-
tologists International. In 1954, scientologists and dianetics prac-
titioners in Los Angeles formed the Church of Scientology.
Between 1951 and 1954, Hubbard wrote some twenty Scientology
books.
In 1959, Hubbard moved to England, where he started the
Hubbard College of Saint Hill, in Sussex. In 1966, he resigned all
administrative positions in the church, and the next year set to
sea with a handful of veteran scientologists, called the Sea Orga-
nization. After several more moves, he finally retired to a private
life in San Luis Obispo County, California, devoting the majority
of his time before his death four years later to writing.
282
Biographical Sketches

Massimo Introvigne (b. 1955)
Massimo Introvigne is the founder and director of CESNUR. He
received a BA in philosophy from the Pontifical Gregorian Uni-
versity in Rome and a JD degree from the University of Turin,
with a specialization in philosophy and sociology of law. Since
1980, he has worked in a leading Italian law firm specializing in
intellectual property and international licensing, where he be-
came a partner in 1985.
In 1988, he established CESNUR, the Center for Studies on
New Religions, a professional organization for those specializing
in the academic study of new religious movements, which was
recognized as a public interest nonprofit association by the State
of Piedmont, Italy, in 1996. He has served as managing director
of CESNUR continuously since its foundation. He has lectured
and given seminars in several academic institutions, including
the Queen of the Apostles Athenaeum (later University) in Rome,
University of Turin, El Salvador University in Buenos Aires, Boc-
coni University in Milan, and University of Latvia. In 2001, he
was elected as a member of the group “Religions” of the Italian
Association of Sociology (AIS), whose charter provides that per-
sons other than full-time professors of sociology in Italian uni-
versities (the institutional members of AIS) may be nonetheless
voted in as members on the basis of their production of books
and articles in the field of sociology.
Introvigne is active in politics and was a founding member
of the Christian Democrat Center, now merged into the Christian
Democrat Union, part of present Italy’s governing coalition. He
is a frequent contributor to several Italian daily newspapers and
a member of the Board of Nova Res Publica, the leading Italian
conservative foundation. In recent years, he has written and lec-
tured extensively on religious violence and terrorism and has
served as a consultant to several Italian and international mili-
tary and law enforcement agencies, including the Critical Analy-
sis Response Group of the FBI and UNICRI, the United Nations
branch studying organized crime and terrorism.
He is the author of 40 books and more than 100 articles in
refereed journals. He was the editor in 2001 of the monumental
Enciclopedia delle religioni in Italia (Encyclopedia of Religions in
Italy), which went on to become the most reviewed nonfiction
work of 2001 in Italy. Both the encyclopedia and CESNUR’s Web
Massimo Introvigne
283

site (http://www.cesnur.org), also edited by Introvigne, won
several awards.
James (Jim) Warren Jones (1931–1978)
Jim Jones, founder of the People’s Temple, was born in Lynn, In-
diana. His father was an alcoholic road construction worker. He
married Marceline Baldwin in 1949 and attended college briefly
but left to become minister of the Somerset Methodist Church in
Indianapolis.
Before receiving final elder’s orders, he left the Methodist
Church and founded an independent congregation called Com-
munity Unity. There he put into place his vision of a Pentecostal-
style worship and a social service activism across racial bound-
aries. By the late 1950s, the congregation was renamed the
People’s Temple and began to emulate many of the features of
Father Divine’s Peace Mission. Jones saw Father Divine (d. 1965),
an African American, as a role model; although Jones was white,
most of his followers were black. In 1960, the People’s Temple af-
filiated with the Christian Church (Disciples of Christ), and the
following year Jones received a BS from Butler University in In-
dianapolis.
In 1964, after returning from a two-year travel sabbatical to
diffuse community controversy about the congregation’s activi-
ties, he was ordained as a Christian Church (Disciples of Christ)
minister. Believing that Indianapolis was a dangerous area for a fu-
ture nuclear war, he moved the congregation to Ukiah, California.
The success of his ministry there made him wealthy and influen-
tial, and he added a congregation in Los Angeles. His social work
earned him community awards and praise in church journals.
There were areas of concern, however. He began claiming he
could raise people from the dead. It was rumored he held dicta-
torial control over the personal lives of followers and abused
some children. In 1977, facing media exposure, he moved to a
colony in Guyana, South America, he had founded in 1973, and it
soon swelled to more than 900 inhabitants as “Jonestown.” The
group still faced court charges, and Jones began to speak of the
possibility of group suicide. In November 1978, California Con-
gressman Leo Ryan and others visited Jonestown to investigate.
Ryan and most of his group were shot to death, and almost all the
residents of Jonestown also died via poison or gunshot. The name
284
Biographical Sketches

“Jonestown” has since served for many to stand for and sum up
the dangers of religious “cults,” though some, like author Michael
Meiers, have suggested the CIA had a role in the incident.
David Koresh (1959–1993)
David Koresh, leader of the Branch Davidians, was born Vernon
Howell to a young single mother in Houston, Texas. He lived
with his grandmother during the first five years of his life until
his mother married. Continuous academic problems created by a
learning disability troubled his early school years. Howell
dropped out of high school in 1974 before completing the tenth
grade. His passions as a teenager were playing guitar and study-
ing the Bible. He memorized long sections of the New Testament,
preaching to anyone who would listen. In the years that fol-
lowed, he held a succession of short-term jobs, particularly as a
carpenter.
In 1979, Howell began participating in study sessions at a
Seventh-Day Adventist Church in Tyler, Texas, that his mother
attended. There was a succession of incidents that eventually re-
sulted in his being disfellowshipped. He learned of the Branch
Davidians from an SDA friend and began working as a handy-
man at Mount Carmel in 1981. He became a favorite of sixty-
seven-year-old Lois Roden, who led the Davidians at the time.
Rumors began circulating that Roden and Howell’s close rela-
tionship was not platonic. The relationship raised Howell’s sta-
tus within the group, and Lois Roden acquired an ally. Lois
Roden tried to head off an emerging power struggle between
Howell and her son by designating Howell as her successor. She
arranged for Davidian members to come and listen to his teach-
ings. Howell attracted young adults in part because of his own
youth (prior Davidian leaders had been much older) and his mu-
sical interests and talent. Attracting younger people was some-
thing the Rodens had been unable to do. Converts point to How-
ell’s biblical knowledge more than any other single factor in
explaining their attraction to the Branch Davidians.
In 1984, Howell married fourteen-year-old Rachael Jones,
whose father, Perry Jones, was one of the most senior and re-
spected members of the Davidian community. Over the next five
years, the couple gave birth to a son, Cyrus, and a daughter, Star.
Howell enunciated his controversial “New Light” doctrine in 1989.
David Koresh
285

He asserted that as a messiah, he became the perfect mate of all the
female adherents. Part of his mission was to create a new lineage
of God’s children from his own seed. These children would ulti-
mately rule the world. In 1990, Vernon Howell legally adopted the
name David Koresh. Koresh is Hebrew for “Cyrus,” the Persian
king who defeated the Babylonians 500 years before the birth of
Jesus.
Acting on rumors that the Branch Davidians were illegally
modifying firearms, a force of seventy-six agents of the ATF
raided the Branch Davidian community on February 28, 1993.
The raid turned into a shoot-out between federal agents and
Branch Davidians. The resulting standoff turned into a fifty-one-
day siege that ended on April 19 when federal agents launched a
new attack on the Davidian complex. During the second assault,
a fire ignited in the buildings, and more than eighty members
died, including David Koresh.
Maharaji (b. 1957)
Maharaji, leader of Elan Vital, was born Prem Pal Singh Rawat in
Hardwar, India. His father, Shri Hans Maharaj Ji, was a spiritual
teacher of surat shabda yoga (the yoga of the sound current), using
four distinctive techniques, or kriyas. Shri Hans founded the Di-
vine Light Mission in 1960 and at his death in 1966 was suc-
ceeded as leader by his youngest son, Prem Pal Singh Rawat
(Maharaji), then only eight years old.
Maharaji had already been recognized as spiritually preco-
cious, meditating at the age of two and lecturing at the age of six.
In 1971, he made his first visit to the United States, combining the
work of a spiritual master with such childhood interests as visit-
ing Disneyland. Known at that time as Guru Maharaj Ji, he in-
structed his followers in the four yoga techniques and gave other
kinds of spiritual discourses. He was accepted by followers as an
embodiment of God.
In November 1973, the Divine Light Mission suffered the
first of several setbacks. It failed to fill the Houston Astrodome
for its widely publicized Millennium ’73 program, thus placing it
in financial difficulties. The publicity made it a new target for an-
ticult groups. The following month, Maharaji turned sixteen and
took over the administration of the organization from his mother
and older brother. In May 1974, he married his twenty-four-year-
286
Biographical Sketches

old secretary, Marolyn Johnson, stating that she was the incarna-
tion of the Hindu goddess Durga. His mother decided that this
showed he was unprepared to run the organization and moved
to make his older brother the new leader. A court settlement gave
his mother and brother control of the group in India, and he
gained control of the group outside India.
In the 1980s, Maharaji made many changes. He shortened his
name, began wearing Western clothes, and disbanded the Divine
Light Mission with its ashrams. He has chosen instead to relate to
followers directly through personal appearances, writings, and a
new organization, Elan Vital, based at his residence in Malibu,
California.
J. Gordon Melton (b. 1942)
J. Gordon Melton attended Birmingham Southern College (BA,
1964) and Garrett Theological Seminary (MDiv, 1968). He received
his PhD in the history and literature of religion in 1975 from
Northwestern University. He is also an ordained elder (1968) in
the United Methodist Church (UMC) and pastored churches in
Alabama and Illinois. Following completion of his education, he
became the senior pastor of Emmanuel United Methodist Church.
He remains a member of the Northern Illinois Conference of the
UMC.
In 1968, Melton founded the Institute for the Study of Amer-
ican Religion (ISAR), an educational facility designed to do re-
search on America’s many different religious groups, especially
the smaller religious communities. In order to accomplish its pri-
mary task, it also began to gather an archive of publications by
and about the several thousand different religious groups that
now operate or have operated in North America over the past
several centuries.
In 1980, Melton became the full-time director of ISAR. In
1985, ISAR moved to Santa Barbara, California, at which time the
archive—which included some 50,000 books, filing cabinets of
ephemera, and runs of several thousand periodicals—was given
to the Davidson Library of the University of California at Santa
Barbara where it now exists as the American Religions Collection.
In 1979, Melton completed the first edition of the Encyclope-
dia of American Religions (seventh edition, 2003), which has
emerged as the standard reference book on all of the religious
J. Gordon Melton
287

bodies, including all the new religions, on which ISAR had gath-
ered data. The encyclopedia is one of more than thirty-five books
he has authored or edited on U.S. religion. He coauthored (with
Robert L. Moore) one of the early textbooks on new religions, The
Cult Experience (1990). Later texts have included the Encyclopedic
Handbook of Cults in America (1986, 1992) and Finding Enlighten-
ment: Ramtha’s School of Ancient Wisdom (1998).
In the thirty-seven years of its existence, ISAR has been re-
sponsible for more than 300 scholarly books and monographs.
Many of them have been reference books (bibliographies, ency-
clopedias, and biographical dictionaries), most either directly or
tangentially concerned with minority and new religions. Included
are the Biographical Dictionary of Cult and Sect Leaders (1986), the
New Age Encyclopedia (1990), and the Encyclopedia of African Amer-
ican Religion (1993).
Sun Myung Moon (b. 1920)
Sun Myung Moon, founder of the Unification Church (the Holy
Spirit Association for the Unification of World Christianity), was
born Yong Myung Moon in what is now North Korea. When he
was ten, his family converted to Christianity and joined the Pres-
byterian Church. When he was sixteen, he began receiving heav-
enly visitations indicating he had been chosen to lead God’s
forces on earth. This came during a time when Korean Pente-
costal Christians were popularly predicting a Korean messiah.
After attending Waseka University in Japan, he married and
began to preach. About this time, he changed his name to Sun
Myung Moon, meaning someone who has clarified the Word or
Truth. In 1946, he founded the Broad Sea Church in Pyeong-yang
in today’s North Korea, but his anticommunist activities made
him a target for government authorities, and he was imprisoned
from 1946 until he was expelled from the country in 1950. After
some time in Pusan, he moved to Seoul in today’s South Korea
and in 1954 founded the Holy Spirit Association for the Unifica-
tion of World Christianity.
Moon taught that Jesus’s attempt to restore humanity from
its fallen condition was cut short by his crucifixion. His resurrec-
tion ensured spiritual salvation for believers, but the completion
of heaven on earth requires the messiah to be born again, and
Moon is this messiah. By 1957, a Korean edition of the Divine
288
Biographical Sketches

Principle, the church’s major statement of faith, was in print.
Moon divorced his first wife and in 1960 married Hak Ja Han,
with whom he has had fourteen children.
After brief visits to the United States in 1965 and 1969, Moon
made a permanent move there in December 1971, settling in the
New York area. Most of the converted members were young and
made the church their full-time occupation. Anticult groups ac-
cused the church of brainwashing and deceitful practices, but
Moon’s major setback came from a conviction of tax evasion, for
which he served thirteen months in prison in 1984–1985.
Theodore Patrick (b. 1930)
Ted Patrick, who in the 1970s liked to refer to himself as “Black
Lightning” (Patrick is African American), has the dubious dis-
tinction of being the father of deprogramming. Deprogramming
refers to the practice of kidnapping “cult” members and destroy-
ing their religious faith, though supporters of the practice would
claim that deprogramming is the antidote for “mind control” that
does nothing more than compel “brainwashed” cultists to start
thinking for themselves again. Patrick was a tenth-grade dropout
with a speech impediment who was raised in the red-light dis-
trict of Chattanooga, Tennessee. He had no psychological train-
ing whatsoever and developed his deprogramming techniques
through trial and error.
In 1971, Patrick was working as a community relations rep-
resentative in San Diego for then-governor Ronald Reagan. He
had previously organized two large political clubs while driving
a truck for General Dynamics. On the Fourth of July, he and his
family were staying at a hotel on Mission Beach in San Diego
when his son Michael and a nephew were approached by the
Children of God. The foundation of deprogramming was laid
when Patrick talked Michael and his nephew out of joining COG.
Although initially alarmed, Patrick and his family gradually for-
got about the incident.
However, he began to hear other complaints about the Chil-
dren of God and eventually linked up with concerned parents
who formed the first anticult organization, Free the Children of
God, popularly referred to as FREECOG. Frustrated by the au-
thorities’ refusal to do anything about COG, Patrick began to ex-
periment with the tactic of abducting “cultists,” locking them up,
Theodore Patrick
289

and trying to convince them that they had been brainwashed and
manipulated by their religion. In this way, the practice of depro-
gramming was born. The media, always interested in dramatic
stories, promoted Patrick by covering his exploits.
Although he seems to have started out sincerely enough,
Patrick’s deprogramming activities gradually devolved into a
moneymaking activity (parents paid hefty sums for Patrick’s ex-
pertise) until he was accepting cases that had no cult connections
whatsoever. Thus, in one case, for instance, he attempted to de-
program a woman who had left her parents’ Protestant faith to
become a Catholic nun. In Denver, Patrick kidnapped two young
women who had moved out of their strict Greek parents’ home—
parents who regarded it as their right to regulate their daughters’
lives, including whom they would marry. Patrick was eventually
convicted, though most of his prison time was suspended. He
subsequently continued to kidnap young people at their parents’
behest, but he eventually gathered a stack of convictions for kid-
napping and unlawful detention that caused him to terminate his
career as a hired gun. In addition to felony convictions for his de-
programming activities, Patrick’s criminal record had grown to
include charges of cocaine use and multiple parole violations.
Abhay Charan De Bhaktivedanta 
Prabhupada (1896–1977)
A. C. Bhaktivedanta Prabhupada, founder of the International
Society for Krishna Consciousness, was born Abhay Charan De,
in Calcutta, India. His father, a cloth merchant, took him often to
Hindu worship at the temple across the street from their home.
While in Scottish Churches College, he accepted an arranged
marriage to eleven-year-old Padharani Satta. In 1920, he refused
his college degree in solidarity with Mahatma Gandhi’s call to
avoid British goods.
He found work in a pharmaceutical company and over the
following years became increasingly dissatisfied with family and
work life and correspondingly interested in the religious quest. He
became a disciple of Sri Srimad Bhaktisiddhanta Saraswati
Goswami, the head of an old devotional group called Guadiya
Math. He wrote a number of religious books and became a favorite
290
Biographical Sketches

of his teacher, who in 1936 told him he would soon take the wor-
ship of Krishna to the West.
In 1956, he separated himself from his secular life, took holy
vows, and took the name A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhu-
pada. In 1965, he made the prophesied trip to the United States
and opened a center in New York City, publishing a magazine
called Back to Godhead. He founded the International Society for
Krishna Consciousness in 1966 and opened a center in San Fran-
cisco in 1967. Over the next decade, he attracted several thousand
core (full-time, live-in) members and more than 200,000 lay con-
stituents. Devotees showed devotion to Krishna through chanting
the Hare Krishna mantra, public dancing, and other activities.
Prabhupada weathered a storm of criticism over the move-
ment, which many took to be a cult. He spent much of his time
preparing the organization for the future. He arranged for the or-
derly transition of authority and committed as many of his
thoughts to paper as possible. More than sixty volumes of his
works were published prior to his death, and more have been put
together since then.
James T. Richardson (b. 1941)
James Richardson attended Texas Tech University (BA, 1965; MA,
1965) and received his PhD in sociology from Washington State
University in 1968. He also earned a JD from Old College, Nevada
School of Law (1986). He was a Fulbright Fellow in the Nether-
lands (Nijmegen University) in 1981. He is a professor of sociol-
ogy and judicial studies at the University of Nevada at Reno.
Richardson is currently president of the Association for the
Sociology of Religion. He has served as an officer in several other
professional associations, including the International Society for
the Sociology of Religion. He was a founding member of the In-
ternational Study of Religion in Central and Eastern Europe As-
sociation and is currently its vice president. He was also national
president of the American Association of University Professors
from 1998 to 2000 and served in other capacities within that or-
ganization as well.
Richardson has been involved for years with consulting in
areas of expertise such as religion as well as evidence issues per-
taining to legal cases. He has consulted on a number of legal
James T. Richardson
291

cases in the United States and overseas and has testified as an ex-
pert. He is regularly interviewed by local, national, and interna-
tional media on a number of topics. He has been involved for
several years as one of a small group of scholars working with
the FBI since the Waco tragedy with the Branch Davidians. He
has presented seminars and papers to meetings of law enforce-
ment officials in the United States and Israel, focusing on the
issue of prevention of violence when religious groups interact
with law enforcement.
Richardson is the author of numerous articles and the author
or coeditor of eight books, including Money and Power in the New
Religions (1988), with Joel Best and David Bromley The Satanism
Scare (1991), Regulating Religion: Case Studies from Around the Globe
(2003), and with James Beckford Challenging Religion (2003).
Margaret Thaler Singer (1921–2003)
Margaret Singer was a prominent anticult psychologist. The chief
architect of the theory of “cultic mind control” (which Singer re-
ferred to as the systematic manipulation of social and psycholog-
ical influence), she was eulogized by one of her admirers as “the
foremost authority on brainwashing in the entire world.”
She was born in Denver, where her father was chief operat-
ing engineer at the U.S. Mint and her mother was a secretary to a
federal judge. She played cello in the Denver Civic Symphony
while a student at the University of Denver, where she received
a BA in speech and an MA in speech pathology and special edu-
cation. She obtained a PhD in clinical psychology in 1943 and
worked for eight years in the Department of Psychiatry at the
University of Colorado School of Medicine.
During the 1950s, Singer undertook research in psychoso-
matic medicine and continued to be active in this field for the rest
of her career. She was, for instance, president of the American Psy-
chosomatic Society in 1972–1973. Singer participated in a study of
“communist brainwashing” in the 1950s at the Walter Reed Insti-
tute of Research in Washington, D.C., where she interviewed sol-
diers who had been imprisoned by North Korea during the Ko-
rean War.
She moved to Berkeley in 1958 when her husband, Jerome R.
Singer, was hired by the Physics Department at the University of
292
Biographical Sketches

California at Berkeley. As a faculty spouse, she was able to obtain
adjunct teaching work in the Psychology Department. Although
in later years she would claim the title emeritus (retired) profes-
sor, in point of fact she never became a regular, full-time faculty
member (a precondition for formal emeritus status). After mov-
ing to Berkeley, she became interested in the cult controversy of
the late sixties and seventies.
Her work with Korean War POWs gave Singer credibility as
an expert on brainwashing, and she was able to obtain work as
an expert witness. For example, she testified in the trial of news-
paper heiress Patricia Hearst, who had been kidnapped by the
Symbionese Liberation Army. She was also a prominent expert
witness at an important 1977 hearing for five members of the
Unification Church whose parents were trying to have them “de-
programmed.” She subsequently became a favorite expert in
“cult”-related legal cases.
In 1987, she headed up the task force Deceptive and Indirect
Methods of Persuasion and Control (DIMPAC) for the American
Psychological Association. Her findings were, however, rejected
by the Board of Social and Ethical Responsibility for Psychology
because the report lacked “the scientific rigor and evenhanded
critical approach needed for APA imprimatur.” She subsequently
sued the APA, but eventually lost in 1993. Fallout from the DIM-
PAC rejection and from the Fishman decision (discussed in chap-
ter 4) effectively ended her career as an expert witness.
Singer was the author of numerous articles and coauthor of
Cults in Our Midst (1995; second edition, 2003). She was awarded
the Hofheimer Prize for Research in 1966 from the American Col-
lege of Psychiatrists and the Stanley R. Dean Award for Research
in Schizophrenia in 1976 from the American College of Psychia-
trists. She also held achievement awards from the Mental Health
Association of the United States and the American Family Ther-
apy Association. She was a board member of the American Fam-
ily Foundation.
Louis Jolyon West (1924–1999)
Louis J. West was a prominent anticult psychiatrist. The son of
Russian Jewish immigrants, he was born in Brooklyn and raised
in Madison, Wisconsin. He attended the University of Wisconsin
Louis Jolyon West
293

and received his MD from the University of Minnesota School of
Medicine in 1948. He served a three-year residency in psychiatry
at the Payne Whitney Psychiatric Clinic in Manhattan.
A military doctor for many years, West studied “brainwash-
ing” during the Korean War while he was stationed at Lackland
Air Force Base in Texas. Early in his career, West was involved
with conducting controversial LSD experiments for the Central
Intelligence Agency as part of the CIA’s interest in developing
“mind control” technology. One of these experiments involved
injecting a 7,000-pound elephant with a fatally excessive dose of
LSD. It was partially on the basis of his involvement with the
CIA’s MK-Ultra mind-control project that he claimed to be an ex-
pert on brainwashing.
West regularly served as a court-appointed expert psychia-
trist. He examined, for example, Jack Ruby, the murderer of John
F. Kennedy’s assassin, Lee Harvey Oswald. West’s opinion that
Ruby suffered from mental illness helped to forestall his death
sentence (Ruby later died in prison). He also participated in the
case of Patricia Hearst, who, after her kidnapping by the Sym-
bionese Liberation Army, joined her kidnappers as a bank robber.
West was one of four psychiatrists to examine Hearst before her
1976 trial. Although she was found sane and able to stand trial,
the panel urged to have her treated for mental illness before the
trial—a recommendation ignored by the court. (Jimmy Carter
commuted Hearst’s prison sentence in 1979.)
One of the responses to the urban violence of the late 1960s
and early 1970s was a move to establish the Center for the Study
and Reduction of Violence that West was to have headed. Al-
though funding for the violence center had been approved by
Ronald Reagan, it was withdrawn in response to public protest.
As part of this protest, West was accused of advocating the de-
ployment of radical forms of behavior control against minorities.
West was in charge of the Neuropsychiatric Institute at the
University of California at Los Angeles for twenty years. Be-
tween 1974 and 1989, West received more than $5 million in
grants from the National Institute of Mental Health, which critics
claim was a funding conduit for CIA programs. Other funding
came through the Neuropsychiatric Institute, including more
than $14 million in federal funds in one fiscal year while he was
director. West resigned from the institute in 1989 over charges of
misappropriation of funds.
294
Biographical Sketches

7
Organizations and Web Sites
Academic Organizations
American Academy of Religion
Scholars Press
P.O. Box 15399
Atlanta, GA 30333
Telephone: 404-727-3049
Web site: http://www.aarweb.org
E-mail: aar@aarweb.org
The American Academy of Religion (AAR) is the largest associa-
tion of religion academics in North America. The AAR has a
group devoted to new religious movements, the chairperson of
which varies from year to year. One can reach the chair of this
subsection of the AAR via Scholars Press in Atlanta, which in
turn can refer one to relevant specialists.
CESNUR: The Center for Studies on New Religions
Via Juvarra 20
10152 Torino (Turin), Italy
Telephone: 39 (country code) 11-541950
Web site: http://www.cesnur.org
E-mail: cesnurto@tin.it
CESNUR is the only scholarly association devoted exclusively to
the study of new religions. The group is international in scope
and holds its annual meeting in various parts of the world. Be-
cause it is centered in Italy, it tends to focus on the cult issue in
Europe. CESNUR was established in 1988 by a group of religious
295

scholars from leading universities in Europe and the Americas.
Its managing director is Professor Massimo Introvigne. CES-
NUR’s original aim was to offer a professional association to
scholars specializing in new religious movements.
In the 1990s, CESNUR became more proactive and started
supplying information on a regular basis, opening public centers
and organizing conferences and seminars for the general public
in a variety of countries. Today CESNUR is a network of inde-
pendent but related organizations of scholars in various coun-
tries, devoted to promoting scholarly research in the field of new
religious consciousness, to spreading reliable and responsible in-
formation, and to exposing the very real problems associated
with some movements, while at the same time defending every-
where the principles of religious liberty.
CESNUR’s yearly annual conference is the largest world
gathering of those active in the field of studies on new religions.
Each conference normally features fifty to eighty papers. Confer-
ences have been held at the London School of Economics (1993),
the Federal University of Pernambuco in Recife, Brazil (1994), the
State University of Rome (1995), the University of Montreal
(1996), the Free University of Amsterdam (1997), the Industrial
Union in Turin (1998), the Bryn Athyn College in Pennsylvania
(1999), the University of Latvia in Riga (2000), the University of
Utah and Brigham Young University (2002), the University of Vil-
nius (2003), and Baylor University (2004). CESNUR’s Web site in-
cludes news on future CESNUR activities and a library of se-
lected papers on a wide variety of topics.
Society for the Scientific Study of Religion
Arthur L. Greil, PhD
Alfred University
Division of Social Sciences
Saxon Drive
Alfred, New York 14802
Telephone: 607-871-2215
Fax: 607-871-2085
Web site: http://las.alfred.edu/~soc/SSSR
E-mail: sssr@alfred.edu 
The Society for the Scientific Study of Religion primarily attracts
sociologists of religion. Sociologists were, for the most part, the
first scholars to study new religious movements in North Amer-
296
Organizations and Web Sites

ica. The society’s quarterly journal, the Journal for the Scientific
Study of Religion, regularly publishes articles and reviews books
of interest to scholars of nontraditional religions.
Cult Information Organizations 
and Web Sites
Since the 1970s, many organizations on both sides of the cult con-
troversy have come and gone. A number still exist in name but
have ceased to function actively, often for lack of funds. Because
the present volume is likely to sit on the library shelf for several
decades, the reader should not be surprised to find that many of
the groups listed in this section have disappeared by the time she
or he attempts to contact them.
For many public issues, governmental agencies often pro-
vide information. Because, however, the “cult” issue is perceived
as a religious issue, the doctrine of the separation of church and
state effectively blocks U.S. government bodies from becoming
involved as long as the law is obeyed.
Because of the constant flux in this field, perhaps the best
way to locate information centers on new religious movements is
to search for “cults” or “new religions” on the Internet. This is
also the best way to locate the relevant religious groups them-
selves, which move often enough to make any attempt at a com-
prehensive address list a frustrating enterprise.
Many of the below Web site reviews have been adapted from
the reviews found at Professor Jeff Hadden’s Web site at the Uni-
versity of Virginia.
American Family Foundation
P.O. Box 2265
Bonita Springs, FL 34133
Telephone: 239-514-3081
Web site: http://www.csj.org
For many years, the American Family Foundation, founded in
1979, served the U.S. anticult movement as its academic wing,
leaving the Cult Awareness Network to serve as a day-to-day in-
formation service and as a “cult watchdog organization.” Since
CAN’s demise, it is unclear whether or to what extent AFF will
Cult Information Organizations and Web Sites
297

step in to fill the gap. It should be noted that people holding this
position are generally adverse to the label “anticult,” preferring
alternate designations such as “cult critics” or some other, more
nuanced label.
The American Family Foundation used to publish two print
periodicals, the Cult Observer, a general audience publication,
and Cultic Studies Journal, an academic publication. AFF contin-
ues to publish the latter as both a print and an electronic journal.
The Cult Observer has been replaced by a free e-mail service, AFF
News Briefs. Both are invaluable for individuals interested in
keeping up-to-date with developments in the anticult movement.
The AFF Web site also highlights the various outreach pro-
grams of the group that include education about, study of, and
assistance for those involved in groups determined by AFF to be
cults. They offer information packets about the various groups
by mail for a fee.
Apologetics Index
Web site: http://www.apologeticsindex.org
The Apologetics Index is a Christian countercult Web site. It con-
tains a large quantity of variable quality information. Apparently
anxious about receiving negative feedback, they do not supply
either a street address or an e-mail address. Instead, one must fill
out an online form that gives the Apologetics Index the option of
responding or not responding.
Becket Fund for Religious Liberty
2000 Pennsylvania Avenue, Suite 3200
Washington, DC 20009
Telephone: 800-BECKET5
Web site: http://www.becketfund.org
E-mail: mail@becketfund.org
The Becket Fund for Religious Liberty is a diverse group of
lawyers, professors, and civic leaders dedicated to the defense of
religious liberty. The Web site covers up-to-date breaking news
on religious freedom legal issues including legislation and judi-
cial decisions.
Bible Discernment Ministries
Web site: http://www.rapidnet.com/~jbeard/bdm
298
Organizations and Web Sites

This Christian anticult Web site run by Rick Meisel is bent on ex-
posing “false teachers and their teachings.” The notebook section
of the site offers information about groups and specific group
leaders.
Christian Research Institute
P.O. Box 7000
Rancho Santa Margarita, CA 92688-7000
Telephone: 949-858-6100
Web site: http://www.equip.org
The Christian Research Institute was founded by Walter Martin,
the most successful author of Christian anticult books. Martin’s
Kingdom of the Cults is a guiding light for a substantial subset of
the evangelical anticult movement. The Kingdom of the Cults is for-
matted like a Bible, with cult belief in one column and evangeli-
cal response, or “correction,” of that belief in the other column.
The Web site is difficult to search and primarily serves as an on-
line store that sells the organization’s books and other materials.
Cult Awareness Network
1680 North Vine Street, Suite 415
Los Angeles, CA 90028
Telephone: 800-556-3055
Web site: http://www.cultawarenessnetwork.org
When the Cult Awareness Network name and number were ac-
quired by the Church of Scientology, even the most sympathetic
observers anticipated that CAN would become little more than a
propaganda wing of Scientology. It was thus a pleasant surprise
when the “New CAN” began functioning as a genuine informa-
tion and networking center on nontraditional religions. The New
Cult Awareness Network has established a working relationship
with scholarly specialists and other professionals. When people
in the CAN office are unable to adequately answer queries from
callers, the callers are referred to the appropriate specialist. The
New CAN also publishes a small newsletter.
Cult Information Service
P.O. Box 867
Teaneck, NJ 07666
Telephone: 201-833-1212
Cult Information Organizations and Web Sites
299

Web site: http://cultinformationservice.org
E-mail: cultinformationservice@yahoo.com
The Cult Information Service (CIS) is a new anticult group that
has emerged to fill the vacancy left by the bankruptcy of the
“old” Cult Awareness Network. It appears to have grown out of
the Cult Clinic and hot line of the Jewish Board of Family and
Children’s Services in New York City. In addition to running a
“cult” hot line, CIS has also begun to sponsor conferences.
Ex-Cult Resource Center
Web site: http://ex-cult.org
This site contains little substantive information but links together
significant anticult resources. By no means comprehensive of an-
ticult activity, this is nonetheless the best available resource for
the novice interested in becoming familiar with anticult materials
on the Internet.
Foundation for Religious Freedom
1680 North Vine Street, Suite 415
Los Angeles, CA 90028
Telephone: 800-556-3055
Web site: http://www.cultawarenessnetwork.org
E-mail: inform@cultawarenessnetwork.org
The Foundation for Religious Freedom runs the New Cult
Awareness Network hot line and information service. Formerly a
religious hate group, the New Cult Awareness Network runs an
800 hot line, provides factual information so people can make up
their own minds, has an extensive list of qualified religious ex-
perts who act as professional referrals, and reconciles families
through mediation.
Hadden Site at the University of Virginia
Web site: http://religiousmovements.lib.virginia.edu
E-mail: cowande@umkc.edu
Jeffrey Hadden’s home page is easily the best academic Web site
on new religious movements. Although Hadden passed away in
2003, the site continues to be maintained. The site contains
overviews of many groups as well as a selection of papers on the
cult controversy.
300
Organizations and Web Sites

Info-Cult
5655 Park Avenue, Suite 205
Montreal, Quebec H2V 4H2, Canada
Telephone: 514-274-2333
Web site:http://www.math.mcgill.ca/triples/infocult/
ic-e1.html
Info-Cult (Info-Secte, in French) is the Canadian wing of the U.S.
anticult movement and has functioned much the same as the
Cult Awareness Network. Info-Cult has been less active in the
wake of the demise of the “old” CAN.
Institute for the Study of American Religion
P.O. Box 90709
Santa Barbara, CA 93190-0709
Telephone: 805-967-7721
Web site: http://www.americanreligion.org
Gordon Melton, a prominent academic archivist and cataloger of
alternative religions, founded and directs the Institute for the
Study of American Religion. His extensive collection of primary
materials is housed in the American Religions Collection at the
University of California at Santa Barbara. Melton is often con-
sulted as an expert by the media.
International Association for Religious Freedom
576 Fifth Avenue, Suite 1103
New York, NY 10036
Telephone: 212-843-9493
Web site: http://www.iarf.net
E-mail: hq@iarf.net
The International Association for Religious Freedom (IAFR) was
organized in 1900 to affirm the right to religious freedom. The
IARF welcomes into membership anyone who is committed to
the fundamental right of religious freedom, and includes reli-
gious groups from around the world. The IAFR runs conferences
and undertakes interfaith actions with groups of very diverse
faiths working together for religious freedom. 
International Coalition for Religious Freedom
7777 Leesburg Pike, Suite 307N-A
Cult Information Organizations and Web Sites
301

Falls Church, VA 22043
Telephone: 703-790-1500
Web site: http://www.religiousfreedom.com
E-mail: ICRF@aol.com
The International Coalition for Religious Freedom’s Web site in-
cludes a monthly country by country report on religious freedom
issues around the world, sponsors religious freedom conferences,
and promotes religious freedom.
Mandate Ministries
Web site: http://www.geocities.com//mandateministries
This is an Australian countercult site maintained by Mandate
Ministries, an organization created by Fred and Barbara Grigg
after they and their eight children left the Jehovah’s Witnesses in
1978. Attractively created, this is a good example of a theological
framework that has been geared toward opposition to “cults” as
profane and spiritually and psychologically damaging to adher-
ents. Grigg claims that post-traumatic stress disorder made him
susceptible to Jehovah’s Witness conversion after the Vietnam
War. He converted along with his wife and children but soon re-
alized he was not following the “true God” and moved to get his
family out. He and his wife have now dedicated themselves to
preventing other people from “falling victim” to cult conversion.
Ontario Consultants for Religious Tolerance
P.O. Box 514
Wellesley Island, NY 13640
In Canada:
Box 27026, Frontenac
Kingston, Ontario, Canada K7M 8W5
Web site: http://www.religioustolerance.org
E-mail: ocrt2@religioustolerance.org
Hosted by four individuals of diverse faiths, this Web site has fac-
tual information on many religions and more than 500 essays cov-
ering all sides of many religious issues. It is probably the largest
and most frequently visited religious freedom Web site in exis-
tence and is, quite simply, the most remarkable, comprehensive,
and balanced presentation of information on new religious move-
ments anywhere on the Web. Without a doubt, it is worth visiting.
302
Organizations and Web Sites

ReFOCUS: Recovering Former Cultists’ Support Network
P.O. Box 2180
Flagler Beach, FL 32136-2180
Telephone: 904-439-7541
Website: http://www.refocus.org
E-mail: torefocus@aol.com
ReFOCUS is a network of referral and support for former mem-
bers of “cults.” As the name suggests, the perspective of this group
is distinctly anticult. The group had published a quarterly newslet-
ter, reFOCUS Forum (recent issues are available for free online), but
it appears to have ceased publication as of 2001.
Rick Ross Institute
Web site: http://www.rickross.com
E-mail: info@rickross.com
Rick Ross is a deprogrammer deeply involved in the anticult
movement. Ross was part of the court case that drove CAN into
bankruptcy. He has been featured extensively in the media on pro-
grams like 48 Hours. Ross’s site features a fairly extensive archive
of newspaper articles related to controversial new religions.
Spiritual Counterfeits Project
P.O. Box 4308
Berkeley, CA 94704
Telephone: 510-540-0300
Web site: http://www.scp-inc.org
E-mail: access@scp-inc.org
The Spiritual Counterfeits Project was a product of the student
counterculture in the 1960s. The initial founders were former
members of Eastern mystical religions. Its history is closely linked
to the University of California and the 1960s free speech move-
ment at Berkeley, specifically the “people’s park.” SCP members
adhere to a conservative Christian faith today and seek to uncover
the “deceptions” of new religions that fail to adhere to conserva-
tive Christian ideas. Early successes included a victory in court
against Transcendental Meditation, forcing the removal of TM
ideas from the public schools. Their Web site offers information
about their journal, newsletter, hot line, and other materials of-
fered by the group.
Cult Information Organizations and Web Sites
303

Steve Hassan’s Freedom of Mind Center (aka Freedom of
Mind Resource Center)
P.O. Box 45223
Somerville, MA 02145
Telephone: 617-628-9918
Web site: http://www.freedomofmind.com
E-mail: center@freedomofmind.com
Hassan is an ex-member of the Unification Church who has be-
come a professional former member. Hassan is devoted to saving
the world from “destructive cults” and “abusive mind con-
trollers.” He has created the Resource Center for Freedom of
Mind to further his cause. The Freedom of Mind Center provides
information about “mind control” in cults based on Hassan’s
own writings. It rejects deprogramming in favor of exit counsel-
ing (noncoercive deprogramming).
Thursby Site at the University of Florida
Web site: http://www.clas.ufl.edu/users/gthursby
This Web site is very useful as an analytical site, as it provides
links to academic journals for the study of religions and to other
academic sites for the study of new religions. The site also in-
cludes an extensive bibliography.
Watchman Fellowship, Inc.
Web site: http://www.watchman.org
The Watchman Fellowship, Inc., is a comprehensive Christian an-
ticult site. It includes at least some information on more than
1,100 groups. They present information on many groups that are
not otherwise represented on the Internet. Each group is assessed
from a conservative Christian theological perspective.
304
Organizations and Web Sites

8
Resources
Mainstream Scholarship
There now exist so many good scholarly books on the general
subject of new religious movements that it is difficult to choose
from among those available. The noninclusion of a book should
thus not be taken to indicate that it is of lesser interest or quality
than those mentioned in the following list.
Reference Books
Bromley, David G., ed. Religion and the Social Order. Green-
wich, CT: JAI Press/Elsevier Science.
The Religion and the Social Order series of reference books con-
tains significant collections of articles on new religions and on
topics relevant to new religions. The third book in this series is
the general Handbook on Cults and Sects in America (1993).
Lewis, James R. Peculiar Prophets: A Bibliographic Dictionary
of New Religious Movements. New York: Paragon, 1999.
This is an A-to-Z survey of the leaders and founders of some of
the more important new religions. Almost all of the entries are
short 300–350-word overviews. Unlike comparable volumes, this
book contains many photos of leaders and founders of alterna-
tive religious groups.
Lewis, James R. The Encyclopedia of Cults, Sects and New
Religions. 2d ed. 1998. Reprint, Amherst, NY: Prometheus, 2002.
305

This is the most comprehensive, up-to-date examination of mi-
nority religious groups in North America. Many of the longer en-
tries are written by specialists on specific groups.
Lewis, James R. The Oxford Handbook of New Religious Move-
ments. New York: Oxford University Press, 2004.
This handbook is a state-of-the-art survey of new religions as a
field of study. The majority of contributions are authored by
prominent NRM scholars. Many of the chapters focus on aspects
of the controversy surrounding alternative religious movements.
Lewis, James R., ed. Encyclopedic Sourcebook. 2 vols. Amherst,
NY: Prometheus, 2003 and 2004.
The Encyclopedic Sourcebook series covers particular groups of
new religious movements and contains both primary and sec-
ondary documents. At the time of this writing, two have ap-
peared: The Encyclopedic Sourcebook of UFO Religions (2003) and
The Encyclopedic Sourcebook of New Age Religions (2004).
Melton, J. Gordon. The Encyclopedic Handbook of Cults in
America. 2d ed. New York: Garland, 1992.
This is easily the best short reference book on the topic. It con-
tains an overview of key groups and discusses the controversy.
Melton, a Methodist minister, includes an especially useful dis-
cussion of the distinction between the Evangelical anticult move-
ment and the secular anticult movement. Garland, unfortunately,
recently went out of business, and it is difficult to predict the fu-
ture availability of this book.
Melton, J. Gordon, ed. Cults and New Religions: Sources for the
Study of Nonconventional Religious Groups in Nineteenth- and
Twentieth-Century America. New York: Garland, 1990.
This is an important twenty-two-volume set of original docu-
ments from a wide variety of different religions, from the Theo-
sophical Society to the People’s Temple. Other groups and move-
ments covered are: spiritualism, Rosicrucianism, Jehovah’s
Witnesses, Mormons, Christian Science, Unification Church,
Hare Krishna movement, and neopaganism. Most individual
volumes are out of print. The most likely place to find this series
is major research libraries.
306
Resources

Partridge, Christopher. New Religions: A Guide. New York: Ox-
ford University Press, 2004.
Originally published in the United Kingdom as the Encyclopedia
of New Religions, this is a lavishly illustrated reference book that
is small enough to serve as a basic textbook. Many entries were
written by scholarly specialists.
Textbooks and General Surveys
Barker, Eileen. New Religious Movements: A Practical Intro-
duction. London: Her Majesty’s Stationery Office, 1989.
Barker’s book is a comprehensive overview of new religions by a
leading British sociologist of religion. It is highly readable and, as
one would anticipate, is particularly strong on the British situation.
Beckford, James A. Cult Controversies: The Societal Response to
the New Religious Movements. London: Tavistock, 1985.
This examination of the cult controversy in Europe focuses on the
differences among the responses of England, France, and Ger-
many. Beckford is a prominent British sociologist of religion, and
his analysis of the interests of the various factions involved in the
controversy is particularly strong.
Bromley, David G., and James T. Richardson, eds. The Brain-
washing/Deprogramming Controversy. Lewiston, NY: Edwin
Mellen, 1983.
This anthology of papers by leading scholars is organized ac-
cording to historical, sociological, psychological, and legal per-
spectives. This is one of the few volumes to include papers from
people on both sides of the controversy, although the anticult
perspective is underrepresented.
Bromley, David G., and Anson D. Shupe Jr. Strange Gods: The
Great American Cult Scare. Boston: Beacon Press, 1981.
Strange Gods is an overview of the cult controversy by two sociol-
ogists. Although now dated and out of print, this is still one of the
best surveys of its kind (it was often used as a supplementary
text). While focusing on issues, the volume also draws examples
from six specific groups: the Children of God, Unification Church,
Mainstream Scholarship
307

ISKCON, People’s Temple, Divine Light Mission, and Church of
Scientology.
Dawson, Lorne L. Comprehending Cults: The Sociology of New
Religious Movements. New York: Oxford University Press, 1998.
Dawson’s book is an overview of new religions, the cult contro-
versy, and studies of new religions. It is particularly strong on so-
ciological approaches, making it a particularly useful text for so-
ciology courses.
Dawson, Lorne L. Cults and New Religious Movements: A
Reader. 2d ed. London: Blackwell, 2003.
This reader consists of chapters authored primarily by prominent
NRM scholars. Though it may have been intended to supplement
texts like Dawson’s own Comprehending Cults, Cults and New Re-
ligious Movements would work well as a freestanding textbook.
Ellwood, Robert A., and Harry B. Partin. Religious and Spiritual
Groups in Modern America. 2d ed. Engelwood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice-Hall, 1988.
This is the earliest textbook on modern new religions. Revised in
1988, it is still a good choice for a general survey. While dis-
cussing the larger social situation and the cult controversy, the
core of this book is constituted by a survey of specific groups, in-
cluding brief readings from the literature of each group.
Hexham, Irving, and Karla Powe. Understanding Cults and New
Age Religions. Vancouver, BC: Regent College Publishing, 1998.
This reprint of Hexham and Powe’s Understanding Cults and New
Religions is a textbook and survey of new religions.
Lewis, James R., ed. Odd Gods: New Religions and the Cult Con-
troversy. Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 2001.
Odd Gods is a textbook and general survey of new religions. The
contents are drawn primarily from The Encyclopedia of Cults, Sects
and New Religions, making this book a miniencyclopedia.
Lewis, James R., and Jesper A. Petersen, eds. Controversial New
Religions. New York: Oxford University Press, 2005.
308
Resources

This is a collection of articles on the most controversial new reli-
gions. Originally intended to complement the thematic approach
of The Oxford Handbook of New Religious Movements, this volume
is also a useful textbook.
Miller, Timothy, ed. America’s Alternative Religions. Albany:
State University of New York Press, 1995.
Miller’s work is a compilation of short articles by a wide variety
of scholars on specific religions or traditions. Although initially
offered as a reference book, this title was recently issued in pa-
perback. Though weak on Buddhist traditions, this is one of the
best books of its kind.
Robbins, Thomas, and Dick Anthony, eds. In Gods We Trust:
New Patterns of Religious Pluralism in America. New
Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Books, 1981.
Although not focused exclusively on the cult controversy, there
are a number of important chapters on the issue in this text. Un-
fortunately, some of the better papers dropped out when this vol-
ume went into a second edition. It is often used as a supplemen-
tary textbook.
Saliba, John A. Understanding New Religious Movements. 2d ed.
1995. Reprint, Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield, 2003.
A recent overview designed as a general text, Saliba’s text exam-
ines new religions in terms of a series of perspectives: historical,
psychological, sociological, theological, and legal. For a textbook,
Saliba’s treatment is original and sophisticated. His theological
chapter is particularly useful in a field of study dominated by so-
cial scientists with little theological training.
Wessinger, Catherine. How the Millennium Comes Violently:
From Jonestown to Heaven’s Gate. New York: Chatham House
Publishers, 2000.
Although Wessinger focuses only on the groups involved in vio-
lence, she does so in an accessible way that makes this a useful
supplementary text in courses on new religions or courses on re-
ligion and violence.
Mainstream Scholarship
309

Specialized Studies
Bromley, David G., and J. Gordon Melton, eds. Cults, Religion
and Violence. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2002.
The contributors to this state-of-the-art anthology on new reli-
gions and violence are prominent NRM scholars. This is an ex-
cellent survey containing chapters on general theoretical issues
as well as on specific groups involved in violence.
Hall, John R., with Philip D. Schuyler and Sylvaine Trinh. Apoc-
alypse Observed: Religious Movements and Violence in North
America, Europe, and Japan. London: Routledge, 2000.
This in-depth study looks at the five most prominent alternative
religious groups that have been involved in violence: the Peo-
ple’s Temple, Branch Davidians, Order of the Solar Temple, AUM
Shinrikyo, and Heaven’s Gate.
Jenkins, Philip. Mystics and Messiahs: Cults and New Religions
in American History. New York: Oxford University Press, 2000.
Jenkins’s in-depth survey of alternative religions in U.S. history
places the contemporary controversy in historical perspective.
Jenkins, Philip. The Next Christendom: The Coming of Global
Christianity. New York: Oxford University Press, 2002.
This historical and statistical overview of global Christianity in-
dicates that Christianity is fast becoming the largest “new reli-
gion” in the world.
Levine, Saul. Radical Departures: Desperate Detours to Growing
Up. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1984.
A Canadian psychiatrist, Levine followed the “cult careers” of
hundreds of young converts to new religions, discovering that,
typically, the vast majority dropped out voluntarily within the
first two years of their memberships. This book is written in the
form of a series of vignettes, making it particularly accessible to
the general reader.
Lewis, James R. Legitimating New Religions. New Brunswick,
NJ: Rutgers University Press, 2003.
310
Resources

This study of how emerging religions legitimate themselves
builds on Max Weber’s work on the legitimation of authority. The
second part of the book examines how critics attempt to delegit-
imate such groups.
Lucas, Phillip Charles, and Thomas Robbins, eds. New Religious
Movements in the 21st Century: Legal, Political, and Social
Challenges in Global Perspective. New York: Routledge, 2004.
This text is a comprehensive overview of the situation of con-
temporary new religions in a global context, with particular
focus on social conflict.
Palmer, Susan J. Moon Sisters, Krishna Mothers, Rajneesh
Lovers: Women’s Roles in New Religions. Syracuse, NY:
Syracuse University Press, 1994.
Palmer gives an overview of the roles of women in new religious
movements.
Palmer, Susan J., and Charlotte E. Hardman, eds. Children in
New Religions. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press,
1999.
This anthology of articles is on the theme of children in new reli-
gious movements.
Richardson, Herbert, ed. New Religions and Mental Health: Un-
derstanding the Issues. Lewiston, NY: Edwin Mellen, 1980.
This early, but still useful, anthology was published in response
to the “anticult” laws that were being considered by a variety of
different legislatures. It contains a wide array of material, includ-
ing the texts of proposed anticult legislation and public state-
ments made against such legislation.
Robbins, Thomas. Cults, Converts and Charisma. Newbury Park,
CA: Sage, 1988.
This is a comprehensive overview of new religions from a socio-
logical viewpoint. Robbins is widely recognized as one of the half
dozen or so top sociologists in the field of new religions.
Mainstream Scholarship
311

Shepherd, William C. To Secure the Blessings of Liberty: Ameri-
can Constitutional Law and the New Religious Movements.
New York: Crossroad, 1985.
This text is a comprehensive, well-written overview of the cult
controversy in the courts up through the conservatorship stage of
the legal battle. Shepherd also includes an overview of the his-
tory of religious liberty decisions that bear on the contemporary
cult controversy. The book is dated but still highly useful.
Shupe, Anson D., Jr., and David G. Bromley. The New Vigilantes:
Deprogrammers, Anti-Cultists, and the New Religions. Beverly
Hills, CA: Sage, 1980.
This is a sociological study of the early anticult movement by
mainstream scholars. Shupe and Bromley examine the move-
ment from a resource-mobilization perspective. Though dated,
this book is a “must read” for anyone wishing to acquire a thor-
ough knowledge of the controversy.
Books on Specific Groups or Movements
Barker, Eileen. The Making of a Moonie: Brainwashing or
Choice? Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1984.
A comprehensive overview of one of the most controversial new
religions, Barker’s study of “Moonie” conversion is particularly
important for undermining the notion that the Unification
Church possessed omnipotent techniques of mind control that
could overcome the will of potential recruits.
Carter, Lewis F. Charisma and Control in Rajneeshpuram: The
Role of Shared Values in the Creation of A Community. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990.
A number of interesting, semiacademic books have been written
about Osho (aka Bhagwan Rajneesh) and his group’s Oregon
community. Carter’s book is the most scholarly.
Chancellor, James D. Life in the Family: An Oral History of the
Children of God. Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press, 2000.
There are a number of good books on the Family now. This is one
of the most engaging.
312
Resources

Hall, John R. Gone from the Promised Land: Jonestown in
American Cultural History. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction, 1987.
Of all the books that have been published on Jonestown, this is
still one of the best scholarly analyses of the tragedy.
Lewis, James R., ed. From the Ashes: Making Sense of Waco. Lan-
ham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield, 1994.
This was the first scholarly book on the Branch Davidian conflict
to appear. It contains a potpourri of short essays, commentary,
and original documents by scholars and others. Information
compiled in this volume has been a major resource for all succes-
sive academic books on the topic, as well as for the Oscar-nomi-
nated documentary Waco: The Rules of Engagement.
Lewis, James R., ed. The Gods Have Landed: New Religions from
Other Worlds. Albany, NY: State University of New York Press,
1995.
This is a collection of articles on UFOs and religion. Some chap-
ters deal with specific groups (for example, the Unarius Society
and the Raelian Movement), while others deal with particular as-
pects of the phenomenon (such as the religious dimension of the
abduction experience). The chapter on Heaven’s Gate (“Waiting
for the Ships”) was the definitive piece on the group at the time
of the mass suicide. The book also contains a comprehensive bib-
liography of contactee literature.
Lewis, James R., ed. Magical Religion and Modern Witchcraft.
Albany, NY: State University of New York Press, 1996.
This anthology covers the modern neopagan movement. Many
of the contributors are academically trained neopagans. It in-
cludes essays on the goddess and the Wiccan worldview, the role
of magic and ritual, the history of the movement, neopagan
ethics, and the relationship between Christianity and the neopa-
gan movement. The volume concludes with two complementary
overviews of the literature.
Lewis, James R., and J. Gordon Melton, eds. Perspectives on the
New Age. Albany, NY: State University of New York Press, 1992.
The first serious academic anthology dealing with the New Age
movement, this book contains a series of essays on the historical
Mainstream Scholarship
313

roots of the New Age as well as an interesting section on the in-
ternational impact of the movement. Other essays compare and
contrast the New Age with the neopagan movement, the
women’s spirituality movement, and charismatic Christianity.
Lewis, James R. and J. Gordon Melton, eds. Church Universal
and Triumphant in Scholarly Perspective. Stanford, CA: Center
for Academic Publishing, 1994.
This academic anthology discusses one of the more controversial
yet least-studied new religions. There are chapters on the Church
Universal and Triumphant’s historical background, the contro-
versies in which the church has been involved, psychological and
sociological profiles of members, and the church’s legal battles.
Lewis, James R., and J. Gordon Melton, eds. Sex, Slander and Sal-
vation: Investigating the Family/Children of God. Stanford, CA:
Center for Academic Publishing, 1994.
This text is a comprehensive compilation on one of the most con-
troversial new religions. Unfortunately, this book was published
just before the death of the founder. Subsequently, the movement
experienced a major transformation. At this writing, a second
edition is being considered.
Melton, J. Gordon. The Church of Scientology. Studies in Contem-
porary Religion. Salt Lake City, UT: Signature Books, 2000.
This work is an overview of the Church of Scientology’s history,
beliefs, and practices.
Palmer, Susan J. Aliens Adored: Rael’s UFO Religion. New Bruns-
wick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 2004.
The Raelians—easily the largest UFO-related religion—have been
making headlines for a long time, especially after cloning became
a major public issue. This is the definitive study by a Canadian
scholar who has been researching the movement for many years.
Partridge, Christopher, ed. UFO Religions. London: Routledge,
2003.
An anthology of papers on UFO religions, this work is a more re-
cent and up-to-date collection along the lines of James R. Lewis’s
book The Gods Have Landed.
314
Resources

Reader, Ian. Religious Violence in Contemporary Japan: The Case
of Aum Shinrikyo. Richmond, Surrey: Curzon Press, 2000.
This study of AUM Shinrikyo focuses on the factors leading up
to the sarin-gas attack.
Richardson, James T., Joel Best, and David G. Bromley, eds. The
Satanism Scare. New York: Aldine de Gruyter, 1991.
This series of essays examines the Satanism scare of the late
1980s. The scare is treated sociologically—as a “moral panic,”
rather than a response to an organized Satanic threat. In other
words, the overall thrust of the volume is to debunk the idea that
an organized Satanic conspiracy exists.
Rochford, E. Burke. Hare Krishna in America. New Brunswick,
NJ: Rutgers University Press, 1985.
Of all the books that have been published on the Hare Krishna,
this is still one of the best overviews of the movement.
Shinn, Larry. The Dark Lord. Philadelphia, PA: Westminster,
1986.
This too is a study of the Hare Krishna movement. Shinn is also
interested in the issue of conversion, so parts of his discussion
address the cult controversy.
Tabor, James D., and Eugene V. Gallagher. Why Waco? Cults and
the Battle for Religious Freedom in America. Berkeley and Los
Angeles: University of California Press, 1997.
This is a scholarly monograph on the Branch Davidian tragedy.
Tabor was one of two scholars who attempted to communicate
with David Koresh and bring the Waco standoff to a peaceful
conclusion.
Weightman, Judith Mary. Making Sense of the Jonestown Sui-
cides: A Sociological History of the People’s Temple. New York:
Mellen Press, 1984.
Some twenty books have been written about the Jonestown
tragedy. They vary greatly in quality. This book and John R.
Hall’s essay in In Gods We Trust (discussed earlier) are two of the
better treatments.
Mainstream Scholarship
315

Wilson, Bryan, and Karel Dobbelaere. A Time to Chant: The Soka
Gakkai Buddhist in Britain. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1994.
This is the best book-length study of the most important Japanese
new religion to establish itself in Western countries. This book
was written not long after Soka Gakkai separated itself from the
Nichiren Shoshu sect of Buddhism and thus contains a compre-
hensive analysis of that split.
Wright, Stuart A., ed. Armageddon in Waco: Critical Perspectives
on the Branch Davidian Conflict. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1995.
The essays in this definitive scholarly anthology on the Branch
Davidian holocaust treat the roles of the media, law enforcement,
and so forth, providing insights beyond this specific conflict, and
are thus useful for people more interested in the larger cult con-
troversy than in the Waco tragedy.
Anticult Scholarship
Partially because the scholarship of cult critics tends to focus on
the theme of the manipulation of members of certain groups, it is
easier to lay out a more defined set of publications that the reader
can consult to acquaint her- or himself with this perspective. The
following list (though not the annotations) was provided by Dr.
Michael Langone of the American Family Foundation.
Cialdin, Robert B. Influence: The Psychology of Persuasion. New
York: William Morrow, 1993.
This is an overview of manipulative techniques that bring about
compliance—in advertising, human relations, sales, recruitment
to groups, and other areas. It is useful as a context for more spe-
cific discussions of “cultic” influences.
Enroth, Ronald. Churches That Abuse. Grand Rapids, MI: Zon-
dervan, 1992.
In this examination of churches—doctrinally orthodox as well as
unorthodox—Enroth asserts that abusive behavioral influence is
exercised over at least some members of the congregation. Au-
316
Resources

thored by an Evangelical scholar, this has been a highly contro-
versial book within the Christian community.
Langone, Michael, ed. Recovery from Cults: Help for Victims of
Psychological and Spiritual Abuse. New York: Norton, 1993.
As the title indicates, this is an anthology focused on the problems
experienced by former members of controversial groups. The con-
tributors represent a wide variety of different “experts” in the field.
Lifton, Robert J. Thought Reform and the Psychology of Totalism.
New York: Norton, 1961.
A scholar of Chinese Communist “brainwashing,” Lifton restates
his findings in terms of more general principles. This particular
book was often used by deprogrammers, who saw Lifton’s de-
scriptions of thought reform as parallel to the manipulative in-
fluences exercised over group members by “cults.”
Rudin, Marcia R., ed. Cults on Campus: Continuing Challenge.
Bonita Springs, FL: American Family Foundation, 1996.
Almost from the very beginning of the controversy, “cults” were
accused of targeting idealistic young people for recruitment. This
anthology brings that aspect of the controversy up to date.
Schein, Edgar H., Inge Schneier, and Curtis H. Barker. Coercive
Persuasion: A Socio-psychological Analysis of the “Brainwash-
ing” of American Civilian Prisoners by the Chinese Communists.
New York: Norton, 1961.
Americans were fascinated by Korean War brainwashing, and
this is one of the books to emerge out of that interest. Contempo-
rary critics of “cults” view the influence of leaders over their fol-
lowers as bearing a family resemblance to communist brain-
washing techniques.
Singer, Margaret T., with Janja Lalich. Cults in Our Midst: The
Hidden Menace in Our Everyday Lives. San Francisco: Jossey-
Bass, 1995.
This is a general book on the cult menace by one of the primary
architects of the notion of cultic mind control. Singer discusses
the controversy as if the anticult perspective on “brainwashing”
Anticult Scholarship
317

was the dominant view and portrays mainstream scholars criti-
cal of “cultic mind control” as if they were a marginal group of
cult apologists on the payroll of sinister cults.
Popular Books
Numerous books have been written about the “cult menace.”
Often they are authored by conservative Protestant Christians
and published by Evangelical presses. For many years, one of the
most popular types of cult-related book was the apostate tale—
former members who wrote exposés about the terrible experi-
ences they had when they belonged to such-and-such group. The
demand for the latter appears to have waned.
It should also be noted that every group with more than 100
members usually runs some sort of publishing operation, often
printing high-quality books and other materials related to their
religion. Readers interested in specific minority religions will
usually find abundant information readily available directly
from the group itself. Because of the tendency for organiza-
tions—like individuals—to change addresses every few years,
the reader is advised to consult the Internet for the latest address
and phone number of a particular religious group.
Conway, Flo, and Jim Siegelman. Snapping: America’s Epidemic
of Sudden Personality Change. New York: Lippincott, 1978.
This journalistic account of deprogramming and the cult menace
puts forward the thesis that cultic brainwashing techniques pro-
duce a unique mental illness—information disease. A somewhat
updated edition of this book was issued in 1995.
Patrick, Ted, with Tom Dulack. Let Our Children Go! New York:
E. P. Dutton, 1976.
This is the first and last book exalting the practice of deprogram-
ming by the man who invented it. Written with a view to self-
promotion, Patrick nevertheless describes enough of the violence
associated with the practice to make the reader aware that de-
programming is not “just talking to people.” Though out of print,
this book can often be found in public and university libraries.
318
Resources

Sherwood, Carlton. Inquisition: The Persecution and Prosecu-
tion of the Rev. Sun Myung Moon. Washington, DC: Regnery
Gateway, 1989.
In this fast-moving overview of the inside story behind Moon’s
conviction of tax evasion, the author concludes that, whatever
else one might think of the man and his movement, Moon was
framed by critics of the Unification Church. It is muckraking
journalism at its best.
Underwood, Barbara, and Betty Underwood. Hostage to Heaven.
New York: Clarkson N. Potter, 1979.
One of the many “ex-cultist” apostate tales, Hostage to Heaven
was written jointly by a mother and daughter. This particular
book is of more than usual interest because Barbara Underwood
was one of the members of the Unification Church to be depro-
grammed as part of the Katz (“Faithful Five–Faithless Four”) con-
servatorship case.
Nonprint Resources
Like many of the organizations inspired by the cult controversy,
nonprint media addressing the issue have come and gone. For
videos presenting a position critical of “cults,” the following are
available from the American Family Foundation, P.O. Box 2265,
Bonita Springs, FL 34133; telephone: 941-514-3081.
After the Cult: Recovering Together
In this twenty-five-minute videotape, ten ex-members relate
their personal stories, as well as how they went on to live their
lives after leaving their respective groups.
Cults: Saying NO Under Pressure
A twenty-nine-minute educational videotape designed for high
school and college students and others, hosted and narrated by
Charlton Heston, this video was codeveloped by the Interna-
tional Cult Education Program of AFF and the InService Video
Network of the National Association of Secondary School Princi-
pals. It is available for purchase only.
Nonprint Resources
319

Leaving a Cult: Information about Exiting and Recovery
Dr. Margaret Singer provides advice for current and former
members as well as for their friends and family.
What Is a Cult and How Does It Work?
Dr. Margaret Singer, a prominent anticult psychologist, provides
a general overview of the cult phenomenon.
For Christian anticult material, the following are available from
the Spiritual Counterfeits Project, P.O. Box 4308, Berkeley, CA
94704; telephone: 510-540-0300; Web site: http://www.scpinc.org:
Gods of the New Age
The focus of much recent Christian anticult material is the New
Age movement, as reflected in this video by Jeremiah Films.
The Pagan Invasion
Among various new religions, Christians view neopagan reli-
gions as particularly dangerous. This film is also produced by Je-
remiah Films.
UFOs: The Mystery Resolved
Christians tend to view UFOs in demonological terms. This film
is produced by Reasons to Believe.
For a video critical of the secular anticult movement, refer to:
Deprogramming: Understanding the Issue
This twenty-eight-minute educational videotape is for essentially
the same audience. This video contains some startlingly brutal
footage of actual kidnappings and follows the stories of parents
who had hired deprogrammers, only to regret their decision
later. A wide variety of professionals as well as people who had
been kidnapped offer their comments at various stages of the
presentation. It is available from the Cult Awareness Network,
1680 North Vine Street, Suite 415, Los Angeles, CA 90028; tele-
phone: 800-556-3055.
An award-winning videotape (which was also nominated for an
Academy Award) on Waco that brings up issues relevant to the
controversy is:
320
Resources

Waco: The Rules of Engagement
This highly professional 136-minute overview of events in Waco,
Texas, is a  poignant presentation of the tragedy that left four law
enforcement agents and eighty-six men, women, and children in
the community dead. It calls for the nation to recommit itself to
the basic precepts of tolerance and freedom upon which U.S. so-
ciety is built. Contact Reko (distributors), P.O. Box 4005, Joplin,
MO 61803-4005; telephone: 800-771-2147.
The so-called exit tapes the Heaven’s Gate people made just be-
fore committing suicide are available from Right to Know Enter-
prises in Denver, Colorado:
Tape I
This 88-minute tape presents the founder and leader of Heaven’s
Gate, Marshall Herff Applewhite, offering final instructions to
those who wish to follow him. He also introduces each “student”
who committed suicide with him.
Tape II
This 117-minute tape shows students of Heaven’s Gate express-
ing their thoughts before the “exit.” It was taped a week before
Applewhite and his group of followers committed suicide on
March 28, 1997, in anticipation of going to the “next level,” or
heaven, by spaceship. The members each present a five-minute
exit statement.
One should also note that the majority of individual religious
groups produce audiotapes and videos—some of high quality—
to inform people about their religion. They can be acquired di-
rectly from the relevant group, which can, in turn, usually be
found via the Internet. A partial selection follows:
The relevant productions about the Church of Scientology are
available from Bridge Publications, 4751 Fountain Avenue, Los
Angeles, CA 90029; telephone: 800-722-1733; Web site: http://
www.bridgepub.com.
How to Use Dianetics (a Visual Guidebook to the Human Mind)
Learn the way that the reactive mind causes stress, nightmares,
unhappiness, and negative emotions. Most important, see, step-
by-step, the exact application of the procedures of dianetics with
another person.
Nonprint Resources
321

Introduction to Scientology
This is an exclusive filmed interview with L. Ron Hubbard,
founder of Scientology, in fact the only filmed interview he ever
granted. Hubbard answers the commonly asked questions about
dianetics and Scientology and explains how he made his discov-
eries and breakthroughs regarding the spirit, the mind, and life.
The Hare Krishna Movement (ISKCON) has one of the most pro-
fessional video ministries around, under the name ITV (ISKCON
Television). ITV can be contacted at P.O. Box 556, Topanga, CA
90290; telephone: 800-551-0380. Of more than 100 tapes, the most
general productions are:
A Hare Krishna World
This 120-minute general overview of the Hare Krishna move-
ment worldwide gives viewers a glimpse into the ISKCON
lifestyle.
Your Ever Well Wisher
This is a biographical work about the life of Shrila Prabhupada,
ISKCON’s founder, by filmmaker John Greisser. The 120-minute
film is a very professional production about an amazing man.
The Family, formerly known as the Children of God, produces
a wide variety of videos. The Family can be reached at 2020
Pennsylvania Avenue, Suite 102, Washington, DC 20006-1846;
telephone: 800-FOR-A-FAM.
The Family—Making a Difference
This is a fascinating overview of the Family, focusing on their
social work worldwide. 
Introducing the Family
This film shows that the practice of deprogramming as well as
the first anticult organization were initially focused on this
group.
A Living Faith: Insight into Education in the Family
This documentary takes the viewer inside the communal homes
of the Family for a close look at their home-based approach to
education. 
322
Resources

The Church Universal and Triumphant was the focus of a good
deal of negative media attention in the 1980s and early 1990s. At
the group’s international community located in rural Montana,
the press gave the church a good deal of attention as the “next
Waco” following the siege of the Branch Davidians in Waco,
Texas. The group produces a large number of videos featuring
lectures by Elizabeth Clare Prophet. Contact Royal Teton Ranch,
P.O. Box 5000, Corwin Springs, MT 59030-5000; telephone: 406-
848-7441.
Climb the Highest Mountain
This nineteen-minute profile of the Church Universal and Tri-
umphant is a very upbeat production, focused on the ideals of
the church.
When one sees a news program on TV these days, it is often pos-
sible to purchase a copy of the relevant show. There have also
been some box office movies on the controversy, although they
almost always present minority religions in the worst light pos-
sible. It is usually possible to find Ticket to Heaven or Blinded by
the Light in large video stores. A more recent film in this genre is
Holy Smoke!
Nonprint Resources
323


Abgrall, Jean-Marie, 228
About, Nicolas, 258
About-Picard Law, 96, 222, 258,
264–268
Academics
Introvigne, Massimo, 283–284
Japanese, 233
scholarly study of new religions,
295–297
Adavaita Vedanta, 138
Adi Da Samraj, 100–101
Adidam, 85, 100–101
Aetherius Society, 81
African Americans
Black Judaism, 89, 105–106
Black Muslims and Nation of
Islam, 109–110
Rastafarianism, 151–152
voodoo, 172–174
African religions, 241–242
Al-Qaida, 96
Alamo, Tony and Susan, 92, 101–102
Alamo Christian Foundation, 101–103
Alcohol and drug use and addiction,
166–167, 276
Ali, Noble Drew, 78
All Worlds, Church of, 82–83
Alpert, Richard, 85
Amenta Club, 164
American Academy of Religion, 295
American Family Foundation, 89,
278–279, 297–298
American Indian Religious Freedom
Act, 87
American Journal of Insanity, 14–15
American Protective Association, 77
American Religious Identification
Survey (ARIS), 250–252
Amish people, 85, 185
Ananda Cooperative Community,
103–104
Ancient and Mystical Order Rosea
Crucis, 3, 163, 279
Animal sacrifice, 90–91, 153–154,
173–174, 186
Ankerberg, John, 97
Anthony, Dick, 271–272
Anti-Catholic and anti-Mormon
movements, 10–14. See also
Catholic Church; Mormon
Church
Anticult movement, 4–5
child custody cases, 206–209
China, 235–237
Clark, John Gordon, 278–279
cult information organizations,
297–304
deprogramming, 31–35
European countries, 221–229
Falun Gong, 6–9
Hare Krishna deprogramming, 129
international emergence of, 220–221
Japan, 230–235
libel cases, 215–217
Manson murders, 83
Movement of Spiritual Inner
Awareness, 144
Rama Seminars, 149
religious anticultists, 9–10
secular anticultists, 32–33
zoning ordinances, 212–213
See also Deprogramming
325
Index

Apocalypticism
Concerned Christians group, 96
emergency of, 27–31
healthy and unhealthy religions
and cults, 56
millenarianism, 60
The Movement for the Restoration
of the Ten Commandments of
God, 141–143
Raelian movement, 146–147
See also AUM Shinrikyo; Heaven’s
Gate; Solar Temple
Apologetics Index, 298
Appeal of new religions, 45–49
Applewhite, Marshall Herff, 55–56,
61–66, 85, 129, 272–274
Aquarian Concepts Community,
90–91
Aquino, Michael, 86
Arcane School, 78
Archédia Clubs, 164
Arianism, 174–175
Arica Institute, 84
Armageddon, Church of, 83
Arnold, Kenneth, 80
Asahara, Shoko, 59, 64–66, 97, 106,
274–275
Asch, Solomon, 51
Asian Exclusion Act, 82
Asian religions
census data, 241 (table)
Elan Vital, 121–122
Falun Gong, 124–126
New Zealand, 244
Rama Seminars, 148–149
rescinding Asian Exclusion Act, 82
World Parliament of Religions,
77–78
Assembly Hall Movement, 138–140
Association of the Triumphant Vajra,
227
Asylum movement, 14–17
Atmananda, 148–149
Auditing, 189
AUM Shinrikyo
Asahara biography, 274–275
Asahara verdict in poison gas case,
97
characteristics of suicide groups,
64, 65–66
history of, 105–107
poison gas attack, 94, 105–106
political fallout from poison gas
attack, 94–95, 163
spurring anticult activity, 220
traits of dangerous religions and
cults, 59
Aumism, 83, 104–105, 225, 227–229
Australian National Census data,
245–247
Azusa Street Revival, 78
Baba Ram Das, 85
Bailey, Alice, 78
Baldwin, Marceline, 144
Ballard, Guy and Edna, 79, 131–132,
187–189
Bapak, 81
Barker, Eileen, 25–26, 275–276
Barrett, David, 240–242
Barrett, Dennis, 81
Barton, Blanche, 155
Bear Tribe, 84
Beatles, 168
Becket Fund for Religious Liberty, 298
Beckford, James, 43
Belgium, 222–223, 225–227
Belgium Report, 95, 222–223
Bell, Alfreda Eva, 13
Benson, Samuel, 196
Berg, David Brandt, 83, 126–127,
276–277
Berger, Peter L., 50
Bergesen, Albert, 37
Bhagavad Gita, 128
Bhagwan Shree Rajneesh, 87, 89,
147–148
Bhajan, Yogi, 83, 160–161
Bhaktivedanta. See Prabhupada,
Abhay Charan De
Bhaktivedanta Swami
Bible Discernment Ministries, 298–299
Biblical prophecy
Movement for the Restoration of
the Ten Commandments of God,
141, 142–143
Northeast Kingdom Community
Church, 170
326
Index

Rastafarians, 151–152
Black Judaism, 89, 105–106
Black Lightning. See Patrick, Theodore
(Ted) Jr.
Black Muslims, 78, 109–110
Boadicea: The Mormon Wife (Bell), 13
Boisselier, Brigette, 97
The Book of Shadows, 177
Boston Church of Christ, 95, 134–135
Bourdin, Gilbert, 83, 95, 96, 227–229
Bradley, Joseph, 183
Brainwashing
anti-Catholic movement, 11
APA rejection of task force
findings, 90–91
Chinese thought reform, 21–23, 80,
292–293
cultural contradictions of, 39
deprogramming as, 34–35
ex-member lawsuits, 197–198,
200–201
expert witnesses, 271–272
explaining “irrational” behavior, 5
Italian litigation against, 97
self-fulfilling stereotypes, 40–41
Singer, Margaret, 218–219
Singer, Margaret Thaler, 292–293
West, Louis Jolyon, 294
See also Mind control
Branch Davidians
characteristics of dangerous
religions and cults, 59, 65–66
child abuse allegations, 202–204
evidence of “deprogrammed”
members, 35
FBI raid, 92–93, 96
Koresh, David, 285–286
media coverage of, 41–45
stereotyping cults, 36
Braunfeld v. Brown, 81, 186
Breyer, Jacques, 3, 163, 279
Bromley, David G., 26, 277–278
Browne, Rodney Howard, 93
Buckland, Raymond, 177
Buddhism, 81, 148–149, 274
New Zealand, 244
religious backgrounds of cult
members, 255 (table)
Shambhala International, 157–159
Soka Gakkai International, 161–163
Syanon, 167
United Kingdom, 249
United States, 250
Bunn v. North Carolina, 80, 186
Caldwell, Janice, 203
Campus Advance, 134
Canada
cult information organizations, 301,
302
national census data, 249–250
Cantwell v. Connecticut, 79, 181,
184–185
Catholic Church
American Protective Association,
77
anticult activity in France, 222
charismatic movements, 82
history of persecution, 10–14, 75–76
Movement for the Restoration of
the Ten Commandments of God,
142
religious backgrounds of
participants in new religions,
255 (table)
stereotyping members of, 38
Cayce, Edgar, 78
Census data
Australia, 245–247
Canada, 249–250
New Zealand, 242–245
religions and pseudo religions,
240–242
United Kingdom, 247–249
United States, 250–252
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), 294
CESNUR, 283–284, 295–296
Channeling movement, 82, 87,
149–151
Charismatic leaders, 54–55, 62–66
Charlton, Hilda, 138
Chen Dao, 95
Cherry, F.S., 107
Chidvilasananda, 160
Child abuse allegations
Alamo Church, 103
government interventions, 201–205
Northeast Kingdom Community
Church, 170–171
Satanism, 92
Index
327

Child abuse allegations, cont.
Satanists, 155–156
Solar Temple, 2, 3, 165
United Nuwaubian Nation of
Moors, 97
Werner Erhard, 124
Children
anti-Catholic movement
propaganda, 11–12
child custody cases, 206–209
Island Pond raid, 89, 170
murder of, 89
Satanic rituals, 87
society’s obsession with child
abuse, 39
Children of God (COG), 31, 83, 86, 93,
126–127, 289–290. See also The
Family; The Family
International
China
anticult activities, 235–237
Chinese thought reform, 21–23, 80,
292–293
Falun Gong movement, 6–9
founding of The Local Church, 139
persecution of Falun Gong, 96,
124–125, 257, 264
Chinese Thought Reform and the
Psychology of Totalism (Lifton),
22–23
Chinmoy, 148–149
Chogyam Trungpa Rimpoche, 84,
157–159
Choice of evils defense, 192
Christ pretenders, 4. See also
Messianism
Christian Democrat Union, 283
Christian Research Institute, 299
Christianity and Christian groups
apocalypticism, 28–29
Canada, 249–250
census data, 240
Christian Science, 76–77, 205,
246–247
critics of TM, 169
deprogramming converted
Christians, 32–33
growth of Protestantism, 45–46
New Zealand, 244
Northeast Kingdom Community
Church, 169–171
Watchman Fellowship, Inc., 304
Christology
Unification Church, 171–172
The Way International, 174–175
Church of Christ, 134–135
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day
Saints. See Mormon Church
Church-state separation, 179–180, 194
Church Universal and Triumphant
(CUT)
child custody cases, 206
ex-member lawsuits against,
200–201
litigation over deprogramming,
191–192
origins of, 81
religious backgrounds of members,
255 (table)
tax issues, 209–211
weapons acquisition, 92
zoning ordinances, 213
Churches. See under individual church
names
Cielo Preservation Organization,
214–215
Citizen’s Freedom Foundation (CFF),
32, 33, 86
Clark, John Gordon, 278–279
Clonaid, 97
Cloning, 97, 147
Clutterbuck, Dorothy, 177, 281
Coffeehouse ministry, 83
Cohen, Andrew, 132–134
Collier, John, 78
Collins, LaVerne, 191–192
Communist brainwashing, 21–23, 80,
292–293
Concerned Christians, 96
Condom distribution, 147
Conservatorship laws, 194–197
Cosmoplanetary Messiah, 229
Costello, Thomas, 161
Coughenour, John, 220
Council of Europe, 224
Court decisions, 179–237
Ballard decision, 187–189
child custody, 206–209
328
Index

Church of Scientology, 189–190
defeat of anticultism, 217–220
deprogramming, 190–193
ex-member lawsuits, 197–201
Faithful Five—Faithless Four,
195–197
Japan’s control of spiritual sales,
234–235
Jehovah’s Witnesses cases, 82,
184–187
libel cases, 215–217
Mormon polygamy cases, 181–184,
201–202
Sherbert v. Verner, 185–187
Singer, Margaret Thaler, 293
success of minority religions,
179–181
tax cases, 209–212
zoning and solicitation, 212–215
Covenant of the Goddess, 86
The Craft. See Wicca
Craig, Gerald, 132
Crazy for God (Edwards), 14
Crisis cult, 29
Crossroads Movement, 134–135
Crowdy, William Saunders, 107
Cuba, 153–154
Cult apologists, 19
Cult Awareness Network (CAN)
American Family Foundation and,
297–298
Cynthia Kisser v. Church of
Scientology, 93–94, 94, 216–217
demise of, 217–220
information and web site, 299
origins of, 86
rise of the anticult movement, 32
Cult controversy, 83–84
Cult Information Service, 299–300
Cultic mind control, 17–27, 292–293.
See also Brainwashing; Mind
control
Cultic Studies Journal, 89
Cults in France report, 221–222
Cynthia Kisser v. Church of Scientology,
93–94, 94, 216–217
Damascus Road, 47
Davis, Samuel D., 182
Davis v. Beason, 182
De Grimston, Robert, 82
Deception of outsiders, 57
Deceptive and Indirect Methods of
Persuasion and Control
(DIMPAC), 293
Dederich, Charles E., 166–167
Demonization, 41–42
Demos, John, 37
Deprogramming
brainwashing model for religious
conversion, 20–21
Christian anticultists and, 10
conservatorship laws, 194–195
court decisions regarding, 190–193
criticism of, 86
demise of the Cult Awareness
Network, 219–220
ex-member lawsuits against
minority religions, 197–201
Faithful Five—Faithless Four case,
195–197
Hare Krishna movement, 129
Japan, 233–234
kidnapping and, 92
noncoercive deprogramming, 304
Northeast Kingdom Community
Church, 170
Patrick, Ted, 84, 289–290
postinvolvement attitudes of ex
members, 255–257
Rick Ross Institute, 303
rise of the anticult movement,
31–35
Sikhs’ approach to, 161
Unification Church, 172
The Way International, 175
Di Mambro, Joseph, 2, 3, 62–66,
163–165, 279–280
Dianetics: The Modern Science of Mental
Health (Hubbard), 156, 189–190,
282
Discipleship, 135
Divine, M.J., 144
Divine Light Mission. See Elan Vital
Dole, Bob, 86, 87
Doomsday groups. See
Apocalypticism
Douglas, William O., 132, 185, 188–189
Index
329

Dreadlocks, 152
Drew, Timothy, 109
Drug and alcohol use and addiction,
166–167, 276
Dualism, 28
DuPont family, 92
Eastern Europe, 223–224
Eckankar, 120–121, 244–245
Eddy, Mary Baker, 76–77
Elan Vital, 85, 121–122, 286–287
Employment Division v. Smith, 93,
186–187
Encyclopedia of American Religions
(Melton). See Institute for the
Study of American Religion
Enquete Commission, 95
Entertaining Satan (Demos), 37
Equinox, ritual suicide during, 3
Erdmann, Paul, 83
Erhard, Werner, 84, 123–124, 159–160
Esotericism, 3, 163–165
Est (Erhard Seminars Training), 84,
123–124, 208–209
Ethics, 55
Ethnicity, religion and, 244, 246, 
249
European Parliament, 224
Evangelical Free Pentecostal
Federation (FELP), 226
Evangelical Missionary Federation,
225–226
Evangelical Pentecostal Church of
Besançon, 225–227
Evangelicalism, 225–227
Evangelism, 101–103, 138–141
Evans, Mike, 41–42
Evil cults, stereotyping, 35–40
Ex-Cult Resource Center, 300
Ex-members
Freedom of Mind Resource Center,
304
lawsuits by, 197–201, 210, 234–235
postinvolvement attitudes of,
255–257
support network, 303
Exit counseling, 304
Exorcism, 41–42
Expert witnesses
Anthony, Dick, 272
Clark, John Gordon, 278–279
Richardson, James T., 291–292
Singer, Margaret Thaler, 92–94, 97,
199–200, 218–219, 292–293
West, Louis Jolyon, 294
Extraterrestrialism
Heaven’s Gate, 61–62, 129–131
Raelian movement, 146–147
Solar Temple, 3
Faithful Five—Faithless Four, 87,
195–197
Falashas, 107–108
Falun Gong, 1, 6–9, 92, 96, 124–126,
235–237, 244–245, 257, 264
The Family (formerly Children of
God), 83, 93, 276–277. See also
Children of God
The Family International, 126–127
The Farm, 84
Farrakhan, Louis, 87, 109–110
Father David. See Berg, David Brandt
FBI raids. See Government
intervention
Female Life among the Mormons (Ward),
12
Ferrato, Robert, 228
Field, Stephen, 182
First Amendment rights, 179–181
Fishman, Stephen, 218
Flag saluting, 185
Flirty fishing, 86, 127, 277
Fon people, 172–174
Food and Drug Administration
(FDA), 83, 157, 190
Ford, Arnold Josiah, 107–108
The Forum, 124
Foundation for Religious Freedom,
300
Foundation for the Study of
Individual and World Peace,
213–214
Founding Church of Scientology v.
United States, 189–190
France, 220–222, 258, 264–268
Francis, Edward, 210
Fraud, 280
Free speech, 184–185
FREECOG (Free the Children of God),
31–32, 84–85, 126–127
330
Index

Freedom of Mind Resource Center,
304
Freedom of Thought Foundation,
195–197
French Aumist Religion (the
Mandarom), 227–229
French Report, 94
Freud, Sigmund, 38
“From Headline to Prime Time”
(Shaw), 44–45
Gardner, Gerald Brousseau, 79, 80,
176–177, 280–281
Garvey, Marcus, 109, 151
Gaskin, Stephen, 84
Germain, 188
Germany, 223, 242
Ghost Dance, 29–30, 77
Gilmore, Peter, 155
Gnostic groups, 149–151, 249
Golden Way Foundation, 3, 163, 280
Government intervention, 179–237
anti-Mormon persecution, 75–76
anticult movements’ call for, 13, 14
Branch Davidians, 35–36, 41–42,
92–93, 96, 202–204
child abuse allegations, 201–205
Christian Identity group, 90
Church of Scientology raid,
189–190
Mandarom, 228–229
racial separatists, 89
seizure of Twelve Tribes Messianic
Communities’ children, 170–171
tax cases, 209–212
Green, Joyce, 137–138
Grigg, Fred and Barbara, 302
Gross, Darwin, 120–121
Growth and distribution of alternative
religions, 252–253
Guru systems, 127–129
Gurumayi, 160
Gypsy movement, 226
Hadden, Jeffrey, 300
Hadden Site at the University of
Virginia, 300
Hall, John, 64
Hamilton, Vernon, 210
Hampton, Judith Darlene, 149–150
Hamsah Manarah, 104–105, 228
Hans Maharaj Ji, 121–122
Hare Krishna movement, 82, 127–129,
212, 255 (table), 290–291
Hassan, Steve, 304
Haun’s Mill, 75–76
Healing, 125, 174, 205
Health of charismatic leaders, 64–66
Healthy, Happy, Holy Organization
(3HO), 83, 160–161
Hearst, Patricia, 86, 293, 294
Heaven’s Gate
Applewhite, Marshall, 272–274
characteristics of unhealthy
religions and cults, 55–56
discovery of bodies, 95
early notice of, 85
history of, 129–131
leaders’ testaments, 257, 260–262
leadership characteristics, 63–66
new religions, violence, and
suicide, 58–59
social isolation, 61–62
Heffron v. International Society for
Krishna Consciousness, 87, 212
Hensley, George W., 78
Herrin, John and Dawn, 136
Hindu groups
early U.S. establishment of, 78
Hare Krishna movement, 127–129
Kashi Church Foundation, 137–138
United Kingdom, 249
United States, 250
Hinkins, John-Roger, 143–144
Hippies, 276
HIV/AIDS, 138, 158–159
Hookers for Jesus, 127
House of Judah, 89
Houteff, Victor T., 79
Howell, Leipold, 152
Howell, Vernon. See Koresh, David
Hubbard, L. Ron, 80, 156–157, 189, 282
Huffington, Ariana, 144, 214
Huffington, Michael, 93, 144, 214
Human Individual Metamorphosis,
273
Hunger Project, 123–124
Hunter, Edward, 21, 80
Hypnosis. See Brainwashing; Mind
control
Index
331

Hypnotic rituals, 24–25
I AM Religious Activity, 79, 80, 81,
131–132, 187–189
Ichazo, Oscar, 84
Identity Christian churches, 30
Ideological totalism, 22–23
Ikeda, Daisaku, 162
Immigration, 46, 153–154
Impersonal Enlightenment
Foundation (Moksha
Foundation), 132–134
Info-Cult, 301
INFORM, 276
Information disease, 87
Insanity, 14–17
Institute for the Study of American
Religion (ISAR), 287–288, 301
Internal Revenue Service (IRS), 157
International Association for Religious
Freedom (IAFR), 301
International Chivalric Order Solar
Tradition. See Solar Temple
International Church of Christ,
134–135
International Coalition for Religious
Freedom, 301–302
International Society for Krishna
Consciousness (ISKCON). See
Hare Krishna movement
Introvigne, Massimo, 221, 283–284
Investigator’s Guide to Allegations of
“Ritual” Child Abuse,” 92
Involuntary treatment defense, 193
Islamic groups, 28, 96, 109–110
Island Pond raid, 89, 170–171
Isolation, 56, 61–62
Jackson, Robert H., 187
Jamaica, 151–152
Japan
anticult activities, 230–235
Soka Gakkai International, 161–163
Sukyo Mahikari, 165–166, 223, 247
See also AUM Shinrikyo
Jedi Knight, 248–249
Jehovah’s Witnesses
child-abuse allegations, 204
countercult organization, 302
German anticult activity, 223
Japanese anticult activity, 230
Russian persecution of, 97, 224
Supreme Court decisions, 79–80,
88, 184–185
Jensen, D. Lowell, 219
Jentzsch, Heber, 216–217
Jesus movement
Boston Church of Christ, 134–135
Children of God, 126–127
emergence of, 82
I AM Activity, 131–1332
Jesus People USA, 85, 136–137
Jesus People USA, 136–137, 169–170,
175
Johnson, Marolyn, 287
Johnson, Todd, 240–242
Jones, Franklin, 85, 100–101
Jones, James (Jim) Warren, 59–60,
63–66, 81, 87, 144–146, 284–285
Jones, Rachael, 285–286
Jonestown suicide
history of, 144–146
Jones, Jim, 284–285
leadership characteristics, 63–66
millenarianism and, 59–60
spurring international anticult
activity, 221
Jouret, Luc, 3–4, 62, 65, 163–164
Joya Santanya, 137–138
JPUSA, 136–137
Judaism
apocalypticism, 28
Black Judaism, 89, 105–106
Braunfeld v. Brown case, 186
religious backgrounds of
participants in new religions,
255 (table)
“Sunday law” case, 81
Kahl, Gordon, 89
Kamagara, John, 142
Kamei, Shizuka, 231
Kapany, Narinder Singh, 161
Kasapurari, Joseph, 142
Kashi Church Foundation, 137–138
Kataribabo, Dominic, 142
Kato, Koichi, 231
Katz v. Superior Court, 87, 195–197
Kelly, Galen, 92
Kennel, Rene, 226
332
Index

Kibweteere, Joseph, 142
Kidnapping
anti-Catholic movement, 11
anti-Mormon movement, 12–13,
13–14
demise of the Cult Awareness
Network, 219–220
deprogramming and, 31–33, 92,
191–192, 289–290
Elizabeth Smart, 97
King, George, 81
King, Larry, 203
Kirtananda, 56
Kisser, Cynthia, 93–94, 94, 216–217
Klemp, Harold, 120–121
Knight, JZ, 87, 149–151
Knights Templar, 3, 163, 279
Korea, 171–172
Korean War, 21
Koresh, David, 39, 41, 59, 63–64,
65–66, 285–286
Krishna Venta, 81
Kriyananda, 103–104
Kropinski, Bob, 169
Lakshmi, 148–149
Lamb of God, Church of the, 85
Landmark Education, 124
Larson v. Valente, 89, 212
LaVey, Anton, 154–155
Law of Love, 277
Laws, violating, 55–56
Leadership, 54–55, 62–66
Leal, Tracey, 199–200
LeBaron, Ervil, 85
LeBaron, Richard, 198
Lee, Witness, 139, 215
Legislation, 179–237
attempted anticult legislation,
193–194
conservatorship laws, 194–195
French anticult legislation, 222
Japanese anticult legislation,
232–233
lack of regulation, 179–181
Legitimacy, 54–58
Lenz, Frederick, 148–149
Leo J. Ryan Award, 279
Let Our Children Go! (Patrick), 32
Levine, Saul, 26
Levitation, 168–169
Li Hongzi, 6–8, 92, 124–126
Libel cases, 215–217
Liberal Democratic Party (Japan),
230–232
Lifton, Robert, 21–23
Light Club, 276
Liu, William T., 8
Living Stream Ministry, 139
The Local Church, 90, 97, 138–140,
215–216
Lord Hamsah Manarah, 104–105, 
228
Louis X, 109–110
Love Israel, 83
Lovell v. City of Griffin, 79, 184
Lucas, Charles H., 134
Ma, Jaya Sati Bhagavati, 137–138
MacLaine, Shirley, 90–91, 150
Magic, 153–154, 172–174
Maharaj Ji, Guru, 84
Maharishi Mahesh Yogi, 81, 167–169
Mahayana Buddhism, 161–163
Mail fraud, 80
Majaraji, 286–287
Makiguchi, Tsunesaburo, 162
The Making of a Moonie: Brainwashing
or Choice (Barker), 25–26
Malcolm X, 78, 110
Manchurian Candidate (film), 24
Mandarom, 227–229
Mandate Ministries, 302
Manson, Charles, 83
Maoist thought, 21
Maranatha Christian Churches, 85,
140–141
Martin, Walter, 33
Matsumoto, Chizuo, 274
Matthew, Arthur Wentworth, 108
Matthews, Robert, 89
Mayalism, 151
McKean, Kip, 87, 134
McWilliams, Peter, 93, 144
“The Media and New Religious
Movements” (Beckford), 43
Media coverage
depiction of Children of God, 127
Heaven’s Gate, 61–62
Japan, 233
Index
333

Media coverage, cont.
portraying “entrapped cult
members,” 26
promoting “evil cult” stereotyping,
41–45
Meditation, transcendental, 167–169
Melton, J. Gordon, 287–288, 301
Mental illness, 14–17
Messianism
Aumism, 105
Gilbert Bourdin’s self-
proclamation, 228–229
millenarianism and millennialism,
29
Moon, Sun Myung, 288–289
Northeast Kingdom Community
Church, 169–171
Metaphysical religion, 46
Milgram, Stanley, 51
Military service, 161
Millenarianism, 28–29, 58, 59–60
Millennialism, 60
Millennium, Messiahs, and Mayhem
(Robbins and Palmer), 60
Millennium ‘73, 85, 122, 286
Miller, Jane, 276
Miller, William, 75
Millerism, 75
Mind control
anti-Mormon movement, 12–13
anticult literature, 14
contemporary cult controversy,
17–27
hypnotic rituals, 24–25
information disease, 87
the power of social influence, 51–52
recruitment, 50
See also Brainwashing
Mind Dynamics, 123
Mitchell, Brian, 97
Moksha Foundation, 132–134
Molko, David, 199–200
Molko and Leal v. Unification Church,
199–200, 218
Monk, Maria, 11–12
Montana Freemen, 94
Moon, Sun Myung, 84, 89, 171–172,
211–212, 288–289. See also
Unification Church
Moonies. See Unification Church
Moorish Science Temple, 78
Mormon Church
child abuse allegations and
government intervention,
201–202
Congressional action against, 77
court decisions on polygamy,
181–184
history of persecution, 10–14, 75–76
stereotyping, 38
zoning ordinances, 213
Morton, John, 143
Mount Carmel. See Branch Davidians
The Movement for the Restoration of
the Ten Commandments of God,
96, 141–143
The Movement of Spiritual Inner
Awareness (MSIA)
child custody cases, 208–209
history of, 143–144
media attention, 93
religious backgrounds of members,
255 (table)
zoning ordinances, 213–215
Muhammad, Elijah, 78, 87, 109, 110
Muhammad, Master Fard, 78
Muhammad, Wali Farrad, 109
Muktananda, Swami, 84, 100, 137–138,
159–160
Mull, Gregory, 200–201, 210
Murayama, Tomiichi, 231
Murder
anti-Catholic movement
propaganda, 11–12
anti-Mormon movement, 14
Ervil LeBaron, 85
Joseph Smith, 76
Manson family, 83
The Movement for the Restoration
of the Ten Commandments of
God, 141–143
Solar Temple, 2–4, 93, 165
suicide and, 58–59
Uganda group, 96
Murray, Margaret, 176–177
Music Square Church, 101–103
Mussy, Arnaud, 96–97
Mwerinde, Credonia, 142
334
Index

Mystical Traveler Consciousness, 143
Naropa Institute, 158
Nation of Islam, 78, 87, 109–110
Nation of Yahweh, 108
National Survey of Religious
Identification (NSRI), 250–252
Native American Church, 78, 90–91,
93, 186
Native American traditions, 29–30, 77,
78, 87
Nativistic movement, 29
Necessity defense, 192
Nee, Watchman, 139, 215
Neo-Egyptian groups, 86
Neo-Pentecostalism, 81
Neo-Phare, 96–97
Neopagan movement, 79, 82–83, 86,
87, 176–177, 255 (table)
Nettles, Bonnie Lu, 62, 129, 131,
272–274
New Age movement, 46, 78, 85, 90–91,
143–144, 149–151, 249
New Cult Awareness Network, 300
New Frontier Party, 230–232
New Komeito Party, 232
New Vrindavan community, 56
New Zealand national census data,
242–245
Ni Shutsu, 139
Nichiren, 162–163
Nityananda, 137–138, 159–160
Nonviolent protest, 236
Northeast Kingdom Community
Church, 169–171, 202
Nowell, Claude Rex, 86
Nuns, 11–12
Ofshe, Richard, 92, 93, 94, 199–200,
219
Okada, Kotama, 165–166
Okada, Seishu, 166
Oludumare, 153–154
Omoto-kyo, 230
Oneida Community, 77
Ontario Consultants for Religious
Tolerance, 302
The Order, 89
Order of the Golden Dawn, 77
Orisha (saints), 153–154
Osel Tendzin, 158
Osho Commune International,
147–148
Oswald, Lee Harvey, 294
Paganism, 245
Palmer, Susan J., 60
Palosaari, Jim, 136
Paramahansa Yogananda, 78, 80,
103–104
Parens patriae, 204–205
Parent-Teacher Association, 87
Parent’s Committee to Free Our
Children from the Children of
God, 31–32, 84–85
Parks, Patricia, 145
Patrick, Theodore (Ted) Jr., 31–32,
84–85, 86, 129, 289–290
Pearson, Albie, 140
Pentecostalism
Alamo Christian Foundation,
101–103
Azusa Street revival, 78
Maranatha Christian Churches,
140–141
roots of People’s Temple, 144–145
The Way International, 79, 174–175
People v. Brandyberry, 192
The People’s Temple, 28, 58–60, 81,
144–146, 284–285
Peterson v. Sorlien, 192–193
Peyote groups, 78, 90–91, 186
Pfeifer, Jeffrey E., 40–41
Physical culture. See Falun Gong
Picard, Catherine, 258
Pleasant-Topel, Melanie, 206
Poison gas attack, 94–95, 97, 105–106
Political persecution
Falun Gong, 6–9
Japan’s anticult activity, 230–232
Soka Gakkai International, 163
Polygamy, 12, 76, 77, 85, 181–184,
201–202
Poonja, H.W.L., 133
Portos, 97
Possession, 173
Power for Abundant Living (PFAL),
174–175
Index
335

Prabhupada, Abhay Charan De
Bhaktivedanta Swami, 82, 128,
290–291
Pray reading, 215
Prem Pal Singh Rawat, 121–122,
286–287
Prince v. Massachusetts, 204, 205
Process Church of the Final Judgment,
82
Projection, 37–38
Prophecy, 274–275. See also Biblical
prophecy
Prophet, Elizabeth Clare, 201, 209
Prophet, Mark L., 81, 209
The Prophets; or, Mormonism Unveiled,
13–14
Proselytizing, 185
Protestantism, 45–46, 225–227,
241–242, 255 (table). See also
Christianity and Christian
groups
Psychiatrists and psychologists
Anthony, Dick, 271–272
Barker, Eileen, 275–276
Clark, John Gordon, 278–279
Singer, Margaret Thaler, 292–293
West, Louis Jolyon, 293–294
“The Psychological Framing of Cults:
Schematic Representations and
Cult Evaluations” (Pfeifer),
40–41
Psychotherapy cults, 84
Punjabi Sikhs, 161
Purcell, William, 201
Pybus, Diana Judith, 158
Qi Gong, 6, 124–126
Racial separatism, 89
Racism, 37–38
Racism and Sexism (Rothenberg), 40
Radhasoami tradition, 143
Raelian Movement International, 85,
96, 146–147, 244–245
Raids. See Government intervention
Rajneesh Foundation International
(Osho Commune International),
147–148
Rajneeshpuram, 87, 89
Rama seminars, 148–149
Rambur, William, 31–32, 84–85, 86
Ramtha’s School of Enlightenment,
149–151, 255 (table)
Rastafarianism, 151–152, 247
Recruitment, 49–50, 57
Reed, Rebecca, 12
reFOCUS, 303
Reincarnation, 4, 280
Religion
anti-Catholic and anti-Mormon
movements, 10–14, 75–76, 77
apocalypticism, 28–29
contemporary cult controversy,
17–19
conversion through brainwashing,
19–27
cults versus bad religion, 52–54
Falun Gong, 6–9, 124–125
religious background of cult
members, 254–255
religious experience, 47–48
religious innovation, 45–46
religious insanity, 14–17
religious libertarianism, 9–10
stereotyping racial and religious
minorities, 38
Religion Basic Law (Japan), 232–233
Religious Corporation Law (Japan),
231, 232–233
Religious Freedom Restoration Act,
187
Report on Sects and Cults, 224
Revelations, 165–166, 170
Revivals, 16
Reynolds, George, 182
Reynolds v. United States, 76, 79, 182,
183–184
Rich, Thomas, 158–159Tendzin
Richardson, James T., 291–292
Rick Ross Institute, 303
Ritual-abuse scare, 155–156
Robbins, Thomas, 60, 64
Roberts, Jane, 82
Roberts, Owen, 184–185
Roden, Lois, 285
Rokos, Michael, 216
Roncaglia, Florence, 228–229
Rosea Crucis, Ancient and Mystical
Order, 3, 163, 279
Rosedale, Herbert L., 97
336
Index

Rosenberg, John Paul “Jack,” 123–124
Ross, Rick, 219–220, 303
Rothenberg, Paula, 40
Ruby, Jack, 294
Russian anticult legislation, 224
Ryan, Leo, 145
The Sacred and the Subversive
(Bergesen), 37
Saliba, John, 198–199
Salvation, millenarianism and, 59–61
Sant Mat tradition, 143–144
Santeria, 90–91, 153–154, 186
Satan, Church of, 154–156
Satanism
alleged child abuse, 87, 92
alleged ritual murder, 91
Bromley’s study of, 278
history of, 154–156
New Zealand, 245
religious backgrounds of members,
255 (table)
Temple of Set founding, 86
Sawang Osel Rangdrol Mukpo, 159
Schein, Edgar, 21–22
Scientology, The Church of
alleged use of hypnosis, 24
court decisions, 189–190
Cynthia Kisser v. Church of
Scientology, 93–94, 94, 216–217
defeat of the Cult Awareness
Network, 219–220
friction with John Gordon Clark,
279
Germany’s anticult activity, 223
government raid, 87
history of, 156–157
Hubbard, L. Ron, 282
legal recognition of, 83, 93
libel case, 92, 216–217
Scott, Jason, 219–220
Sea Organization, 156
Secular anticultists. See Anticult
movement
Secularization, 46
Selassie, Haile, 151–152
Self-Realization Fellowship, 78, 95,
103
Seventh-Day Adventist Church, 76,
82, 185–187, 285
Sexual activity and issues
allegations against Mandarom
members, 228–229
allegations against Yogi Bhajan, 161
anti-Mormon movement’s
portrayal of, 13
Applewhite, Marshall, 272
ethical leadership, 55
flirty fishing, 86, 127, 277
MISA’s alleged exploitation of
followers, 144
Raelian movement’s Sensual
Meditation Seminar, 146–147
Rama’s alleged exploitation of
followers, 149
Satanism, 154–155
Siddha Yoga Dham scandal, 160
stereotyping racial minorities, 38
Shambhala International, 157–159, 
244
Shapiro, Ed, 129
Shaw, David, 44–45
Shepherd’s Rod colony, 79
Sherbert v. Verner, 82, 185–187
Sherbert-Yoder Test, 85, 185–187
Short Creek, Arizona, 201–202
Shupe, Anson D., Jr., 26
Siddha, 168–169
Siddha Yoga Dham Associates, 84,
159–160
Sikh Dharma (Healthy, Happy, Holy
Organization), 83, 160–161, 207
Silent Brotherhood, 89
Singer, Margaret Thaler, 92–94, 97,
199–200, 218–219, 292–293
60 Minutes (television program), 124
Skelskey, Peter, 120
Slavery, 151–154
Smart, Elizabeth, 97
Smith, Joseph, 76
Smith, Lewis DuPont, 92
Snake-handling movement, 78, 80, 186
Snapping (Conway and Siegelman), 87
Snyder, Mark, 40
The Social Construction of Reality
(Berger), 50
Social influence
cults versus bad religion, 52–54
determining unhealthy and healthy
religions, 56–57
Index
337

Social influence, cont.
nature of cultic influence, 49–52
social isolation, 61–62
Society for the Scientific Study of
Religion, 296–297
Sociologists
Bromley, David G., 277–278
Richardson, James T., 291–292
Soka Gakkai International, 92, 94–95,
161–163, 230–232, 241–242, 255
(table)
Soka Kyoiku Gakkai, 79
Solar Temple
additional suicides, 94
apocalypticism, 27–28
Di Mambro, Joseph, 279–280
history of, 2–4, 163–165
leaders’ testaments, 257, 258–260
leadership characteristics, 63–66
social isolation, 62
spurring anticult activity, 220–221
traits of dangerous religions and
cults, 58–59
Solicitation, religious, 89, 212–215
Space Aliens Took Me to Their Planet
(Vorilhon), 146
Spiritual Counterfeits Project, 216, 303
Spiritual experience, 47
Spiritual sales, 234–235
Spiritualism, 76
Spriggs, Elbert Eugene and Marsha,
169–171
Statistics. See Census data
Stephanopoulos, George, 203
Stereotypes
cult stereotypes affecting child
custody, 207–209
Falun Gong as cult stereotype, 7–8
“Moonies,” 211–212
self-fulfilling stereotypes, 40–41
social conflict reinforcing, 52–54
stereotyping cults, 35–40
Steve Hassan’s Freedom of Mind
Center, 304
Strange Gods: The Great American Cult
Scare (Bromley and Shupe), 26
Subud, 81
Subuh, Muhammad, 81
Succession of leadership, 64–66
Sugmad, 120–121
Suicides
apocalypticism, 27–28
characteristics of a suicide group,
63–66
Heaven’s Gate, 61–62, 95, 129–131
Jonestown, 59–60, 87
religious insanity, 15
Solar Temple, 2–4, 93, 94, 95
traits of dangerous religions and
cults, 58–61
Uganda group, 96
Sukyo Mahikari, 165–166, 223, 247
Summit Lighthouse, 81, 209
Summum, 86
Sun Bear, 84
Sun Yuxi, 7
Supreme Court, U.S.
Faithful Five—Faithless Four case,
87
Jehovah’s Witnesses cases, 79–80,
184–185, 204
mail fraud and snakehandling
cases, 80
Mormon polygamy cases, 181–184
Sherbert v. Verner, 185–187
solicitation cases, 212
“Sunday law” case, 81
Survivors of suicides, 66
Swiss Report, 95
Switzerland, 220–221, 222
Symbionese Liberation Army, 86, 293,
294
The Synanon Church, 87, 166–167
Tantric Buddhism, 149, 274
Taoism, 167
Tax evasion, 156–157, 209–212
Moon, Sun Myung, 172, 289
Teens for Christ, 277
Teller, Henry M., 77
Temple of Set, 86
Tenrikyo, 247
Theosophical Society, 76, 244–245
Theosophy, 78, 131–132
Thomas v. Review Board, 87, 186
Thursby Site at the University of
Florida, 304
Tibet, 81, 84
Tibetan Buddhism, 157–159
Time magazine, 92
338
Index

Toda, Josei, 162
Toronto Blessing, 93
Transcendental Meditation and the
World Plan Executive Council,
81, 167–169
Transformational experiences, 46–47
Tsunesaburo, Makiguchi, 79
The Twelve Tribes Messianic
Communities, 169–171
Twitchell, Paul, 120–121
UFOs, 61–62, 80
Uganda, 96, 141–143
Understanding New Religious
Movements (Saliba), 198–199
Unification Church
evidence against brainwashing
claims, 25–26
ex-member lawsuits against,
199–200
Faithful Five—Faithless Four case,
87, 195–197
history of, 171–172
libel case, 215
litigation over deprogramming, 192
Molko & Leal case, 90
Moon, Sun Myung, 288–289
religious backgrounds of members,
255 (table)
Senate hearings, 86
Singer’s connection to, 293
tax evasion charges, 89, 211–212
United Christian Churches of
Japan’s opposition to, 234
zoning cases, 212
United Christian Churches of Japan
(UCCJ), 234
United Kingdom national census data,
247–249
United States v. Ballard, 187–189
United States v. Fishman, 92, 218
Uranowitz, Seymour, 40
Urantia Book, 81
Utah War, 76
Vajradhatu, 157
Valiente, Doreen, 177
Vedanta Society, 78
Vesper Chimes, 79, 174
Viau, Charlene, 206
Violence
anti-Mormon movement’s
portrayal of, 13
apocalypticism, 27–28
AUM Shinrikyo’s subway attack,
105–107
deprogramming, 32
healthy and unhealthy religions,
58–61
persecution of Falun Gong, 236–237
the power of social influence, 
51–52
stereotyping racial and religious
minorities, 37–39
suicide bombers, 81
See also Murder; Suicides
Visions, 137–138
Voodoo, 172–174
Vorilhon, Claude, 85, 146
Wach, Joachim, 47
Waite, Morrison, 182
Walker v. Superior Court, 205
Walpurgisnacht, 155
Walters, J. Donald, 103–104
Ward, Maria, 12
Watchman Fellowship, Inc., 304
The Way International, Inc., 79, 90,
174–175, 209
Way of the Heart, 100–101
Weapons
allegations against The Way
International, 175
apocalypticism and, 30–31, 56
AUM Shinrikyo’s acquisition of,
106
Branch Davidian’s alleged
acquisition of, 286
CUT’s acquisition of, 210–211
Heaven’s Gate, 62
Solar Temple’s acquisition of, 164
Weiner, Bob and Rose, 85, 140–141
Wertz, Robert C., 194
West, Louis Jolyon, 293–294
West Virginia State Board of Education v.
Barnette, 79–80
White, Ellen, 76
Wicca, 80, 176–177, 280–281
Wierwille, Victor Paul, 79, 174–175
Wimber, John, 90
Index
339

Windermere, 214–215
Wings of Deliverance, 81
Wisconsin v. Yoder, 85
Witchcraft, 37, 77, 80, 176–177,
280–281
Wolcott, Louis Eugene, 109–110
Women, anti-Catholic and anti-
Mormon portrayal of, 11–12
Wong, John, 8
World Christian Liberation Front
(WCLF), 139–140
World Council of Churches, 225
World Plan Executive Council,
167–169
World Trade Center, 96
Worldviews, 48
Wounded Knee, South Dakota, 29–30,
77
Wovoka, 29–30
Yoga, 159–160
York, Malachi, 97
Yoruba people, 153–154
Youth ministries, 126
Zagel, James B., 217
Zell, Oberon, 82–83
Zen Buddhism, 148–149, 255 (table)
Zoning ordinances, 212–215
Zoroastrianism, 28
340
Index

About the Author
James R. Lewis teaches at the University of Wisconsin–Milwaukee and
the University of Wisconsin–Stevens Point. He is an authority on non-
traditional religious movements and has worked as a media consultant
on cult-related events, including the 1993 crisis at the Branch Davidian
complex in Waco.
341

REVELATION


