 
CULTURE AND 
CUSTOMS OF JORDAN
John A. Shoup
Greenwood Press

 CULTURE AND 
CUSTOMS OF JORDAN 
 

 
 Jordan. Cartography by Bookcomp, Inc. 

 CULTURE AND CUSTOMS
OF JORDAN 
 John A. Shoup 
Culture and Customs of the Middle East
Greenwood Press
Westport, Connecticut • London

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Shoup, John A.
 Culture and customs of Jordan / John A. Shoup.
   p. cm. — (Culture and customs of the Middle East, ISSN 1550–1310)
 Includes bibliographical references and index.
 ISBN 0–313–33671–7 (alk. paper)
 1. Ethnology—Jordan. 2. Jordan—Social life and customs. I. Title. 
 GN635.J6S56 2006
 306.095695—dc22   2006029541
 British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data is available. 
 Copyright © 2007 by John A. Shoup 
 All rights reserved. No portion of this book may be  
reproduced, by any process or technique, without the 
 express written consent of the publisher. 
 Library of Congress Catalog Card Number:  2006029541  
 ISBN-10: 0–313–33671–7 
ISBN-13: 978–0–313–33671–3
 ISSN: 1550–1310 
 First published in 2007 
 Greenwood Press, 88 Post Road West, Westport, CT 06881 
 An imprint of Greenwood Publishing Group, Inc. 
 www.greenwood.com 
 Printed in the United States of America 
   The paper used in this book complies with the  
Permanent Paper Standard issued by the National 
 Information Standards Organization (Z39.48–1984). 
 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 

 Contents 
 Series Foreword 
vii
 Acknowledgments 
ix
 Preface 
xi
 Chronology 
xiii
 1. Land, People, and History of Jordan 
 1
2. Religion and World View 
 29
 3. Literature and Media 
45
 4. Architecture, Art, and Traditional Crafts 
55
 5. Traditional Cuisine and Costume 
71
 6. Gender, Marriage, and Family 
87
 7. Social Customs and Lifestyle 
99
 8. Music and Dance 
109
 Glossary 
117
 Bibliography 
125
 Index 
129


 Series Foreword 
 At last!  Culture and Customs of the Middle East  ﬁ lls a deep void in reference 
literature by providing substantial individual volumes on crucial countries 
in the explosive region. The series is available at a critical juncture, with, 
among other events, the recent war on Iraq, the continued wrangling by U.S. 
interests for control of regional oil resources, the quest for Palestinian inde-
pendence, and the spread of religious fundamentalist violence and repression. 
The authoritative, objective, and engaging cultural overviews complement 
and balance the volley of news bites. 
 As with the other Culture and Customs series, the narrative focus is 
on contemporary culture and life, in a historical context. Each volume 
is written for students and general readers by a country expert. Contents 
include: 
 Chronology 
 Context, including land, people, and brief historical overview 
 Religion and world view 
 Literature 
 Media 
 Cinema 
 Art and architecture/housing 
 Cuisine and dress 
 Gender, marriage, and family 
 Social customs and lifestyle 
 Music and dance 

 Glossary 
 Bibliography 
 Index 
 Photos and country map 
viii 
Series Foreword

 Acknowledgments 
 Any work such as this always includes a large number of people who have 
helped one way or another. I would like to begin by thanking the Bedouin 
families who allowed me to live with them and to come back numerous 
times. I would like to especially express my gratitude to Muhammad Abu 
Shahir al-Faqir, his wife, ‘Allal Umm Shahir, and their whole family for tak-
ing me in and making me one of them. I would also like to make special 
mention of Dakhl Allah Qublan and family, ‘Ali Mutlaq and family, and 
Musa Huwaymil and family. I would also like to thank Elias Muqhar and his 
wife, Kay, Muhammad Fath Allah al-Bukhari and family, ‘Abd al-Muhsin 
and Khalid Dughaythir for not only their help in the ﬁ eld but also for their 
generosity and willingness to share with me their knowledge of the region, its 
history, and culture. I would like to express my thanks to Dr. Philip Ham-
mond who introduced me to the Bedouin in southern Jordan and for his 
constant encouragement. I want to thank Dr. Michael Fuller and his wife, 
Neathery Batsell Fuller, who allowed to assist in the ethnoarcheological work 
at ‘Ayn Quwaylbah (Abilah), which gave me the chance to spend time in 
 villages in northern Jordan. It would be remiss if I didn’t express my thanks to 
Dr. Rebecca Torstrick who recommended my name to Greenwood Press. I 
want to mention both Wendi Schnaufer and Kaitlin Ciarmiello of  Greenwood 
who have been such good working partners, though all via email. Finally, I 
want to thank my parents who have always encouraged all of us to do what 
we want to even if others thought I should get a “real” job. 


 Preface 
 Most people in Europe and North America are not very familiar with Jordan, 
a small country located between its larger, better known neighbors Egypt, 
Syria, Iraq, Israel/Palestine, and Saudi Arabia. If they do know something 
about it, it is often because of T. E. Lawrence, Lawrence of Arabia, whose 
exploits with the Bedouin during World War I have helped perpetuate the 
romantic images of robed Bedouin riding camels and dramatic desert land-
scapes. Others may be aware of Jordan because it has been a frontline Arab 
state in the long struggle between the Palestinians and Israelis. Still others 
may be aware of the country because it is mentioned in both the Old and 
New Testaments. In reality Jordan is all of these images; it is where a number 
of important battles did take place between the Bedouin forces of the Arab 
Revolt led by Lawrence as well as their tribal shaykhs and the Turks during 
World War I; it is one of the major frontline states with Israel starting even 
before Israel declared itself a state in 1948; and it does contain a large number 
of sites associated with both the Old and New Testaments, but it is much 
more. 
 Jordan was created out of the marginal areas of several older historical 
administrative districts after the collapse of the Ottoman Empire at the end 
of World War I. When its borders were drawn up in Cairo in 1920 and 
named the Emirate of the Transjordan, it was a poor, thinly populated coun-
try with settled agriculturalists hugging the better watered western spine and 
the rest was the home of nomadic pastoralists. Since gaining its full indepen-
dence in 1946 the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan has been able to create a 
strong sense of identity based on Bedouin culture among its people. It has 
emerged since the mid 1970s as a major business and banking center for the 

Middle East with one of the best educated populations in the region, if not 
the world. 
 Proud of their Bedouin heritage, Jordanians are hospitable and generous. 
In fact, their hospitality is constantly evoked in the common greeting  ahlayn 
wa sahlayn,  “you are twice welcome.” Jordanians use the phrase not only 
to say “hello,” but also to say “you’re welcome,” “goodbye,” and numerous 
other uses. Also frequently heard is  marhabtayn, which again means “twice 
welcome.” In fact, Jordan is called the Land of  Ahlan wa Sahlan,  the Land of 
Welcome, both by its own people and other Arabs in the Middle East. Jordan 
remains the Land of Welcome where traditional Arab hospitality is always 
given to the stranger with no questions asked as well as an island of peace and 
stability despite the conﬂ icts the rend much of the region. 
xii 
Preface

 Chronology 
NATUFIAN CULTURE
11,000–9,300 B.C.
Proto-Neolithic—beginnings of permanent settle-
ments between 10,000 and 9,000 b.c.—domestica-
tion of plants and animals.
NEOLITHIC PERIOD
8,350–4,000 B.C.
Jericho one of the ﬁ rst places where wheat is known 
to have been domesticated.
8,300–4,500 B.C.
Pre-Pottery Neolithic A and B major sites associated 
with the origin of agriculture are located in Jordan 
including those referred to as “mega-sites” of some 
10 to 15 hectares in size.
7,520–4,000 B.C.
‘Ayn Ghazal—a “mega-site” located near modern 
‘Amman—features include paved streets and a col-
lection of clay statues of humans.
6,800–6,000 B.C.
al-Baydhah—a “mega-site” located in southern 
 Jordan—the site was abandoned when climate 
change made it hard to grow dry land crops of wheat 
and barley.
YARMUKIAN CULTURE
6,000–4,000 B.C.
Climate change caused an economic change from dry 
land farming to raising livestock such as sheep and 
goats—wheat and barely restricted to the better rain-
fed areas of the north and the river valleys.

CHALCOLITHIC PERIOD
4500–3100 B.C.
Use of copper and bronze tools as well as stone.
Bronze Age
3100–1200 B.C.
Concentration of settlements in the regions that 
would eventually give rise to local kingdoms Moab 
and Rabboth Ammon around 1300 b.c. while the 
rest of the south and east is abandoned to pastoral 
nomads who herd sheep and goats.
Iron Age
1200–539 B.C.
Kingdoms of Edom, Moab, Rabboth Ammon, and 
Gilead established.
Arrival of the Hebrews in the early Iron Age—
begin series of wars with local kingdoms both in 
 Transjordan and Cisjordan (Palestine) that will last 
until the Babylonians destroy Judah.
1025–1004 B.C. 
Saul rules Kingdom of Israel—consolidates control 
on both sides of the Jordan River.
1004–965 B.C.
King David—wars with Raboth Ammon, Moab, and 
Edom.
1,000–612 B.C.
Assyrian Empire—numerous campaigns against the 
kingdoms of Syria, Jordan, and Palestine.
965–928 B.C.
King Soloman—height of power and control over 
the other kingdoms.
928 B.C.
Death of Soloman the Kingdom of Israel is divided 
into Israel in the north and Judah to the south—
 continued wars with the Transjordanian kingdoms.
840 B.C.
King Mesha of Moab defeats King Jeroham of Israel 
and gains independence according to the Mesha Stela 
found at Dibon.
853 B.C.
Battle of Qarqar Assyrian King Shalmaneser defeats the 
coalition of Aramean kingdoms and Arab  chieftains 
from the Syrian Desert (including  Jordan).
720 B.C.
Sargon II destroys the Kingdom of Israel.
612 B.C.
Babylonians conquer Assyria and take Nineveh the 
capital city.
605–539 B.C.
Babylonian domination and conquests of Syria, 
 Lebanon, Jordan, and Palestine.
xiv 
Chronology

588 B.C.
Nebuchadnezzar destroys Kingdom of Judah.
Persian Period
539–333 B.C.
Arrival of the Nabateans in the late 7th early 6th 
century b.c. push the Edomites into Palestine where 
they are called Idumeans.
539 B.C.
the Persian King Cyrus the Great conquers the 
area and divides it into 23 administrative districts 
under Persian Satraps or Governors—allows the 
exiled Jews to return to Palestine and rebuild Jeru-
salem.
333 B.C.
Alexander the Great conquers the Persian Empire.
Hellenistic Period 333–64 B.C
323 B.C.
Alexander dies in Babylon and his empire is divided 
among his generals.
312 B.C.
Antigonus I Monophtalmus Greek ruler of Syria 
attempts to plunder the Nabatean capital “Petra” (in 
Greek) but is defeated by the Nabateans.
311 B.C.
Seleucus I Nicator begins Seleucid Dynasty—
 originally given area of Mesopotamia as his share of 
Alexander’s empire.
301 B.C.
Seleucus I Nicator defeats Antigonus I and Syria 
is joined to Mesopotamia—some 50,000 Greek 
 soldiers are settled in the region to Hellenize the 
 culture—soldiers are settled in both older existing 
cities and newly founded Greek colonies called the 
“Ten  Cities” or the Decapolis most of which are in 
Jordan.
Second century 
B.C.
the Nabateans are ﬁ rmly established with Petra as 
their capital city—they dominate the trade between 
southern Arabia and the Mediterranean.
King Aretas III (86–62 b.c.) expands the Nabatean 
Kingdom and occupies Damascus in 85 b.c.
Roman Period 64 B.C.–395 A.D.
64 B.C.
Rome imposes peace on the warring states of the 
eastern Mediterranean making them all subject to 
Roman control though leaving them with their local 
governments.
Chronology 
xv

Period of the greatest Nabatean King, Aretas IV (9 b.c. 
to 40 a.d.)—height of Nabatean power and wealth.
106 A.D.
The Roman Emperor Trajan annexes the Nabatean 
Kingdom as the Province Arabia Petrea.
Second and third 
centuries A.D.
Roman limes or series of forts built to protect the 
eastern frontier and keep Arab Bedouin tribes out of 
Roman territory—rebuilt in fourth and ﬁ fth centu-
ries—by the sixth century they are manned by local 
Arab troops, for example al-Qastal seems to have been 
built by the Ghassanid Harith ibn Jabala (531–571).
313 A.D.
Emperor Constantine gives ofﬁ cial recognition to 
the Christian church and encourages it as the state 
religion.
Byzantine Period
395–636 A.D.
Growing divisions between Christian communities 
over the nature of Christ split the church into numerous 
smaller divisions—the Byzantine Emperor interferes 
and gives support to speciﬁ c interpretations forcing the 
others to abide by state-church council decisions.
Jordan produces a ﬂ owering of early Byzantine cul-
ture especially in church mosaics—for example at 
Madaba, Mount Nebo, Jerash, Umm Risas, and 
Petra.
Movement of the trade routes north to Palmyra 
 (Tadmur) in the third century, several severe  earthquakes 
in the fourth to sixth centuries a.d., and the growing 
tension and war between Rome/ Byzantium and Persia 
causes the economy of the region to decline.
Bedouin Arab tribes allowed inside Byzantine terri-
tory establish themselves in Jordan, Syria, and Iraq.
Early fourth 
 century A.D.
The Bani Ghassan tribe arrives in Syria become a 
 vassal state to the Byzantines and aid them in their 
wars with the Persians.
529
The Ghassanid leader Harith ibn Jabala is appointed 
Phylarch by the Emperor Justinian.
541
Harith leads the Arab units in the army under the 
 Byzantine general Belisarius during his  Mesopotamian 
campaign.
xvi 
Chronology

554
Harith defeats and kills the Lakhmid Arab king 
Mundhir allied to the Persians.
572
Harith’s son Mundhir defeats the Lakhmid king 
Qabus ibn al-Hind.
580
Mundhir ibn Harith is crowned “King of the Arabs” 
by the Byzantine Emperor Tiberias.
611–629
Devastating war between Byzantium and Persia ends 
in Persian defeat after a long Persian occupation of 
Syria, Lebanon, Jordan, and Palestine.
629
The Ghassanid Jabala ibn Ayham appointed “King 
of the Arabs” by the Byzantine Emperor Heraclius.
629–630
The Prophet Muhammad leads an expedition to 
the northern Hijaz and established treaties with 
the Christian leader of al-‘Aqabah and the Jewish 
leaders of Maqna, Udhrah, and al-Jarba in south-
ern Jordan. In addition the Bedouin tribes of Bani 
Udhra and Billi submitted to Islam. The Muslim 
commander Khalid ibn al-Walid captured the oasis 
of Jauf from the Ghassanids and its governor con-
verts to Islam.
632
The Prophet Muhammad dies and Abu Bakr is elected 
Khalifah (Caliph) or Successor to the Prophet.
The Rightly Guided Khalifahs—632–661 A.D.
629
Muslim forces ﬁ rst penetrate into Jordan.
633
Khalifah Abu Bakr consolidated the Muslim state 
defeating rebellious tribes.
634
Battle of Ajnadayn in Palestine Byzantine forces 
defeated.
634
Abu Bakr dies and is succeeded by Umar ibn  
al- Khattab as Khalifah.
635
Damascus surrenders to the Arabs for the ﬁ rst time.
636
Battle of Yarmuk—the Muslims defeat the Byzan-
tines and their Bani Ghassan vassals taking control 
of all of Jordan, Palestine, Syria, and  Lebanon as a 
result.
636
Damascus surrenders for the second and ﬁ nal time 
to the Arabs.
Chronology 
xvii

637
Umar ibn al-Khattab divided the newly conquered 
area into four military districts: Palestine (Filistin), 
Jordan (al-Urdunn), Damascus (Dimashq), and 
Homs (Hims).
639
Year of Ashes—Syria and northern Hijaz are 
 devastated by famine and plague. Among the  victims 
were many of the Companions of the Prophet 
Muhammad—Mu’awiyah ibn Abi Sufyan becomes 
governor of Syria. The Khalifah ‘Umar ibn al-Khat-
tab makes of tour of Syria.
644
‘Umar is assassinated and ‘Uthman ibn ‘Affan is 
elected Khalifah.
656
‘Uthman is assassinated and Ali ibn Abi Talib 
is elected. Mu‘awiyah refuses to agree to ‘Ali as 
 Khalifah and accuses ‘Ali of being party to ‘Uthman’s 
 assassination.
657
Battle of Sifﬁ n ends with both sides agreeing to 
mediation.
658
Both parties meet at Dumat al-Jandal but no 
 agreement is reached. ‘Ali remains Khalifah until his 
assassination in 660. Mu’awiyah begins to use the 
title Khalifah in 660.
Umayyad Period 661–750 A.D.
661
Mu‘awiyyah bin Abi Sufyan establishes the Umayyad 
Dynasty with Damascus as the capital.
Desert Castles of Qusayr ‘Amra, Hallabat, Qasr 
 Kharanah, Hammam al-Sarakh, Qasr Tuba, and 
Mushatta—The Umayyads build numerous pleasure 
and hunting lodges in the Jordanian desert—helped 
to maintain close ties with the Bedouin tribes in the 
Syrian desert—Umayyad princes sent to the desert to 
learn “proper Arabic”—frequent marriages between 
Umayyad princes and daughters of Bedouin shaykhs.
‘Abbasid Period 750–968 A.D.
750–754
al-Saffah—ﬁ rst ‘Abbasid Khalifah—orders the death 
of all members of the Umayyad family.
xviii 
Chronology

750
‘Abbasid Revolution removes the Umayyad Dynasty—
shift in the seat of government from Syria to Iraq.
754–775
al-Mansur Khalifah.
762
Baghdad founded as the new capital.
813
Damascus rebels against the ‘Abbasids.
842
New revolts in Syria—spread of Shi’ism.
902
Qaramitah activities in the Syrian desert convert 
Bedouin tribes to Isma‘ili Shi‘ism.
906–907
Qaramitah revolt in Syria.
964
Qaramitah attack on Palestine defeats the Ikhshidids 
ruling southern Syria and Egypt in the name of the 
‘Abbasids.
969
Fatimids take Egypt from the Ikhshidids and the 
Qaramitah defeat the Ikhsidids in Palestine
Fatimid Period 969–1055 A.D.
969
Fatimids 
conquer 
Egypt 
and 
found 
Cairo  
(al- Qahirah).
948–1076
Fatimids control southern Syria including Jordan 
and Palestine.
Seljuq Period 1055–1128 A.D.
1055
Seljuqs take northern Syria for the ‘Abbasids ending 
decades of autonomous local Arab dynasties.
1070–1072
Alp Arlsan Sultan.
1071
Battle of Manzikert the Seljuqs defeat the Byzantines 
and open up Anatolia to Turkish settlement—secure 
control over all of Syria including brieﬂ y Palestine 
and Jordan.
1072–1092
Malik Shah Seljuq Sultan.
1095
Pope Urban II preaches holy Crusade against the 
Seljuqs.
1099
Jerusalem taken by the First Crusade—a large num-
ber of Muslims seek refuge in Damascus founding 
several of the city’s quarters.
Chronology 
xix

1115
Crusader Kingdom of Jerusalem builds castle called 
Montreal at Showbak in southern Jordan to raid 
Muslim caravans going between Syria, the Hijaz, and 
Egypt—other forts and castles were built or rebuilt in 
southern Jordan and on the Island of Graye or Jazirat 
Far‘un in the Gulf of ‘Aqabah.
1116–1154
Turkish military commander Tughtagin rules Damas-
cus and most of Jordan for the Fatamids of Egypt.
1119
Battle of Sarmada ﬁ rst major defeat for the Crusaders 
by the Seljuqs of Aleppo.
1124–1125
Crusaders try to take Aleppo but fail.
Zengid Period 1128–1174 A.D.
1128–1146
Atabek ‘Imad al-Din al-Zengi regent of Aleppo in 
northern Syria—begins counter-crusade.
1142
Crusaders build a castle called Pierre du Désert at 
Kerak, which was one of the most important in the 
Transjordan-made seat of the Barony of Oultre-
 Jourdain.
1144
‘Imad al-Din al-Zengi takes Edessa from the 
 Crusaders.
1146–1174
Nur al-Din Mahmud al-Zengi rules most of Syria.
1147–1149
Second Crusade attempts to take Damascus and is 
defeated by Nur al-Din.
1154
Nur al-Din returns to Damascus at the invitation 
of its people and includes southern Syria (including 
parts of northern and eastern Jordan) in his state.
1163
Nur al-Din interferes in Fatamid Egypt on behalf of 
the deposed Wazir or Chief Minister Shawar.
1164
Nur al-Din restores Shawar but the rival Wazir seeks 
help from Amalric the Latin King of Jerusalem.
1167–1169
Nur al-Din and Amalric support opposite sides in 
the power struggle in Egypt—Nur al-Din emerges 
victor and his military commander, Salah al-Din 
al-Ayyubi, is appointed the Wazir by the Fatamid 
Khalifah, which, in effect, combines Egypt with Syria 
under Nur al-Din’s rule.
1171
al-‘Adid last Fatamid Khalifah dies leaving Salah al-
Din ruler of Egypt.
xx 
Chronology

1174
Nur al-Din dies and his 11 year old son Isma’il ruler.
1176
Salah al-Din uniﬁ es Syria and Egypt.
Ayyubid Period 1176–1260 A.D.
1176–1193
Salah al-Din al-Ayyubi rules Syria and Egypt.
1183
Salah al-Din orders ‘Izz al-Din Usamah to build the 
fort Qasr or Qala’at al-Rabbadh at Jabal ‘Ajlun to 
threaten Latin held Jordan.
1183
Attempted sea attack on Makkah by Renaud de 
Châtillon Lord of Kerak ends in defeat.
1187
Renaud de Châtillon breaks the truce with Salah al-
Din and provokes war.
1187
Battle of Hattin Crusaders defeated- Jerusalem 
returned to Muslim rule.
1188
Kerak falls to Salah al-Din.
1189
Showbak falls to Salah al-Din—ends Latin occupa-
tion of the Transjordan.
1187–1192
Third Crusade—ends with Crusaders in control of some 
coastal cities—Jerusalem remains in Muslim hands.
1193
Salah al-Din dies and kingdom is divided among 
members of the family—dynastic disputes weaken 
the Ayyubids.
1217–1221
Fifth Crusade ends in failure.
1249
al-Malik al-Salih Najm al-Din dies—his wife Shaja-
rat al-Durr becomes ruler of Egypt.
1250–1259
quick succession of three Mamluk Sultans.
1258–1260
Mongol invasion under Hulegu Khan—Baghdad 
sacked and the ‘Abbasid Khalifah al-Musta’sim is 
executed.
Mamluk Period 1260–1516 A.D.
1260
Battle of ‘Ayn Jalut in Palestine the Mamluks defeat 
the Mongols.
1260–1382
Period of the Bahri Mamluks of mainly Turkish and 
Mongol origin.
1260–1277
al-Zahir Baybars Sultan and Kerak in Jordan becomes 
one of his “capitals” along with Cairo and Damascus.
Chronology 
xxi

1382–1516
Period of the Burji Mamluks of mainly Circassian 
origin.
Ottoman Period 1516–1918 A.D.
1516
Battle of Marj Dabiq the Ottomans are victorious 
and take the Mamluk provinces in Syria and Arabia 
including the area of present day Jordan.
1867
Ottomans reimpose control over the Transjordan.
1878
Ottoman government begins settling Circassian and 
Shishans from the Caucasus Mountains in Jordan.
1900
Construction on the Hejaz Railway linking  Damascus 
with Madinah begins.
1906
Hejaz Railway reaches ‘Amman.
1916–1918
The Arab Revolt—Sharif Husein Hussein of Makkah 
with British backing declares independence from the 
Ottomans and his sons Faysal, ‘Abdallah, and ‘Ali 
command the military.
1918
The Arab Army under Faysal and T. E. Lawrence (Law-
rence of Arabia) takes Damascus from the  Ottomans.
Modern Period 1918 A.D. to present
1920
Faysal declared King of Syria by the Syrian National 
Congress.
Treaty of San Remo establishes the mandate  system—
Iraq, Palestine, and Transjordan are declared British 
while Lebanon and Syria are French.
Battle of Maysalun French troops defeat King  Faysal’s 
army and impose French Mandate over Syria.
‘Abdallah arrives in southern Jordan to support his 
brother King Faisal in Syria.
1921
British recognize ‘Abdallah as Amir of the Transjor-
dan.
British install Faysal as King of Iraq.
1936–1939
Palestinian Revolt.
1945
Arab League established with Jordan as a founding 
member.
1946
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan proclaimed with 
Amir ‘Abdallah becoming King ‘Abdallah.
xxii 
Chronology

1948–1949
First war with Israel—Jordanian army defends the 
West Bank and East Jerusalem.
1950
Act of Uniﬁ cation of the Palestinian West Bank to 
Jordan.
1951
King ‘Abdallah assassinated in Jerusalem and Prince 
Talal proclaimed king.
1952
King Talal abdicates.
1953
Hussein formally becomes King.
1956
Suez Crisis—Egyptian President Gamal Abd al-
Nasser nationalizes the Suez Canal—Britain, France, 
and Israel attack Egypt—U.S. and USSR force them 
to negotiate—President Nasser is seen in the Arab 
world as the champion of Arab nationalism.
1956–1958
Growth of Arab Nationalist—pro-Nasser sentiments 
in the government and among the people of Jordan.
1958–1961
Egypt and Syria form the short lived United Arab 
Republic and Jordan and Iraq form the Arab 
 Federation.
1958
Revolution in Iraq ends Hashemite rule and breaks 
the Arab Federation of Jordan and Iraq.
1964
First Arab Summit creates the Palestine Liberation 
Organization.
1966
Israeli raid into Jordanian territory pushes King 
 Hussein into closer relations with Egypt and Syria.
1967
Jordan signs the Joint Defense Agreement with 
Egypt.
June or Six Day War Israel defeats the Arab armies 
and seizes the West Bank, Golan Heights, and 
Sinai.
1968
Israeli army pushes into the Jordanian side of the 
 Jordan River and is defeated by combined  Palestinian 
and Jordanian forces at Battle of Karamah.
1970
Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine hijack a 
number of international airlines that precipitate the 
clash between the Jordanian army and Palestinian 
ﬁ ghters.
Black September the Jordanian army defeats 
 Palestinian ﬁ ghters and begin their expulsion from 
Jordan.
Chronology 
xxiii

1971
Jordanian army forces last of the armed Palestin-
ians out of the country and most ﬁ nd refuge in 
 Lebanon.
1973
October War—Jordan does not participate directly.
1974
Arab League meeting the Palestine Liberation 
 Organization recognized as the legitimate represen-
tative of the Palestinian people instead of Jordan.
1976
King Hussein meets with Yasir ‘Arafat and begins the 
post-Rabat thaw in relations.
1978
September, Camp David Agreement signed—
November, Arab Summit in Baghdad pledges  massive 
economic assistance for Jordan’s  steadfastness.
1982
Israel invades Lebanon.
1984
Palestine National Council meets in ‘Amman.
1985
Jordan and the Palestinians agree on coordination in 
the peace process.
1987
First Palestinian Intifadah begins.
1988
Jordan withdraws all administrative and legal ties 
with the West Bank.
1989
Jordan begins implementation of the IMF 
 program for readjustment of its economy—Riots 
in Ma‘an—ﬁ rst free and fair elections held and the 
Islamists win.
1990
Iraq invades Kuwait—King Hussein tries to be a 
mediator.
1991
Jordan participates in the Madrid Arab-Israeli 
 summit.
1993
Jordan holds ﬁ rst multi-party election since 1956.
1994
Jordan and Israel sign a formal peace treaty.
1999
January King Hussein changes succession from his 
brother Hasan to his son ‘Abdallah—February King 
Hussein dies, ‘Abdallah becomes ‘Abdallah II and 
Hamzah is declared Crown Prince.
2000
Second Palestinian Intifadah begins.
2003
United States invades Iraq to force a regime change—
continued unrest in Iraq creates an unstable environ-
ment for Jordan and Saudi Arabia—al-Qa‘idah’s 
Jordanian-born operative Abu Mus‘ab al-Zarqawi 
linked to numerous insurgent actions in Iraq.
xxiv 
Chronology

2005
U.S. military ships docked at al-‘Aqabah are ﬁ red 
upon by al-Qa‘idah operatives killing one Jordanian 
soldier. In November Jordan has its own 9/11 as sui-
cide bombers linked to Abu Mus‘ab’s group in Iraq 
attack three hotels in ‘Amman, killing 56 people (of 
which 33 are Jordanians attending wedding parties). 
Among the dead is the Syrian-American ﬁ lm director 
Mustapha Akkad.
2006
Gunman shoots six tourists, killing one and  wounding 
the others, at the Roman Amphitheater in downtown 
‘Amman. Though no motive is known, it seems to be 
connected to the ongoing war in Iraq and the Israeli 
war with Hizballah in southern Lebanon.
 
Chronology 
xxv


 1 
 Land, People, and History of Jordan 
 Jordan is a country that is both old and new. The Hashemite Kingdom of 
Jordan dates to only 1946 when the Emirate of the Transjordan became 
independent; however, the Kingdom includes some of the oldest sites 
where humans ﬁ rst settled into permanent villages. The present borders of 
the  Kingdom were carved out of former provinces of the Ottoman Turkish 
Empire and throughout most of its history, Jordan has been tied closely to 
its neighbors: Palestine, Syria, Arabia, and to a lesser degree Iraq and Egypt. 
Culturally Jordanians have long shared a good deal with Palestinians and 
Syrians and the creation of the modern states in the region in the early 
twentieth century has cut across historical connections. 
 Jordan is part of the Mediterranean even if it has no borders on the 
 Mediterranean Sea. ‘Amman, the capital, is located only 75 miles (112 
 kilometers) from the sea, and on a clear, sunny day it is possible to see the 
sun’s reﬂ ection off of the golden dome of the Dome of the Rock Mosque in 
 Jerusalem, only 40 miles (60 kilometers) away. Breezes from the  Mediterranean 
cool the ‘Ajlun highlands in the summer and bring needed moisture in the 
winter. Like all Mediterranean countries, Jordan has hot, dry summers and 
cold, wet winters. 
 GEOGRAPHY 
 The geography and environment of Jordan have been major factors in the 
settlement patterns and economic systems throughout its history. The avail-
ability or lack of water supply has been and remains today the single most 
important environmental factor, and some 80 percent of the country is desert 

2 
Culture and Customs of Jordan
receiving less than 5 inches (150 millimeters) of rain a year. There are few 
permanent rivers that are found in the northern highlands and, in addition, 
there are a number of seasonal streams throughout the country that usually 
run with water only after a rainstorm. Most of these streams ﬂ ow into the 
Rift Valley while a few run east into the Syrian Desert or Badiyat al-Sham 
where they die. 
 Though the borders of the Kingdom Jordan were drawn by politicians at a 
conference in Cairo following the World War I, they do, to a degree, corre-
spond to some of the important physical features. Part of the northern border 
with Syria follows the short course of the Yarmuk River, the western border 
is deﬁ ned by the Rift Valley, and the south is formed by the Gulf of ‘Aqabah 
and the steep mountains of the Hijaz. Part of Jordan’s eastern border with 
Saudi Arabia is deﬁ ned by the Wadi Sirhan, the second largest valley system 
in Jordan. 
 The most dominant physical feature in Jordan is the Rift Valley system, 
which begins near Ma’arsh in southern Turkey, runs through Syria and the 
entire length of Jordan’s western border, forms the Gulf of ‘Aqabah, the Red 
Sea, and the Lake Region of East Africa, and eventually runs back out into 
the Indian Ocean for a total length of 3,100 miles (5,000 kilometers). In 
Jordan most of the Rift system forms the Jordan River valley, the Dead Sea, 
and Wadi ‘Arabah. Much of the Jordan Valley is below sea level, with its 
lowest point (the bottom of the Dead Sea) being 2,642 feet (800 meters) 
below sea level. The Rift Valley in Jordan is not wide, averaging only 10 
miles (25 kilometers) in width. The whole system remains active and there 
are small earthquakes on nearly a daily basis. Major earthquakes in the past 
were responsible for the eventually abandonment of several ancient sites such 
as Petra in the sixth century  a.d. 
 The Jordan River has a number of major tributary streams that ﬂ ow into 
it from the east. The most important of these are the Yarmuk (shared with 
Syria) and the Zarqa’. The Yarmuk begins in Jabal Druze in southern Syria 
and runs for a total length of only 40 kilometers (slightly longer than 26 
miles), but is an important tributary of the Jordan and source for irrigated 
agriculture for both Syria and Jordan. Its narrow but deep valley serves as a 
natural border separating the Golan (Jawlan) in Syria from Jabal ‘Ajlun in 
Jordan. The Zarqa’ is also a short river starting just to the north of ‘Amman 
and forms the southern limit of the ‘Ajlun district as it ﬂ ows westward into 
the Jordan River. A third river, the Shu’ayb, has been so heavily used for 
irrigated agriculture for so long that it stopped ﬂ owing in the 1970s. The 
Zarqa’ and the Yarmuk are also heavily used for irrigated agriculture and 
have very little water in them most of the year. In addition to the few per-
manent streams, there are a number of seasonal ones, most of which ﬂ ow 

into the Jordan River or directly into the Dead Sea. These include Wadi 
Mujib, Wadi Hasa, and Wadi Zarqa’ Ma’ ‘Ayn, whose steep valleys helped 
form the borders of the ancient kingdoms of Rabboth Ammon, Moab, and 
Edom. 
 Wadi Sirhan is another Rift-like valley, though not as deep or as dramatic 
as the main Rift complex. Wadi Sirhan ﬂ ows to the east and what little water 
there is drains into Saudi Arabia during the wet, winter season. The Wadi is 
dotted with wells serving as important watering places for the herds and ﬂ ocks 
of nomadic Bedouin and for irrigation for the few villages located there. To 
the northwest of Wadi Sirhan is an important oasis of natural pools and small 
lakes called Azraq (Blue in Arabic). The fresh water pools attract a wide range 
of wildlife, especially migratory birds, as well as herds belonging to pastoral 
nomads. The Jordanian government established the Shawmari Wildlife Ref-
uge in the Azraq and organized an integrated usage pattern between Bedouin-
owned herds and rare wildlife, some of them reintroduced into the wild in 
the 1970s. However, since the 1980s Azraq’s water has been tapped to help 
supply the growing demand for drinking water in ‘Amman and the result is 
that many of the pools are now dry. 
 The eastern side of the Rift system in Jordan consists of a series of high-
lands; in the north they are called Jabal ‘Ajlun, in the central area they 
are called Jabal al-Balqa, and in the south they are called Jabal al-Sharat 
or Bilad al-Sharat. These mountains are rough and broken with steep, 
deep valleys carved by both permanent and seasonal streams. The high-
lands are tall enough for some winter moisture to fall as snow, even in 
the southern Jabal al-Sharat. The peaks range in elevation from 3,000 to 
4,000 feet (1,000 to 1,300 meters) in the north to more than 5,400 feet 
(1,800 meters) in the south. While the western slopes are steep and dif-
ﬁ cult to climb, the eastern sides gently slope down to the steppe and desert 
regions. 
 Rainfall, or the lack of it, is an important factor determining settlement 
patterns throughout the history of Jordan. As a whole, the country receives 
little rain with most of it concentrated in the northern highlands. Rain falls 
mainly in the winter season with little to no rain recorded in the months of 
May to November. Most of Jordan, some four-ﬁ fths of the country, receives 
no more than 5 inches (150 millimeters) a year. The lack of rainfall has had 
a major impact on the settlement patterns of the people with the major-
ity concentrated in the north and on the spine of highlands along the Rift 
system where more rain falls. Moving further east and south the amount of 
rainfall drops rapidly from 25 inches (500 millimeters) a year in Jabal ‘Ajlun 
to 1/2 an inch (less than 50 millimeters) a year at al-Mudawwarah near the 
 southeastern border with Saudi Arabia. 
Land, People, and History of Jordan 
3

4 
Culture and Customs of Jordan
 CITIES, TOWNS, VILLAGES, AND TENTS 
 79 percent of Jordan’s 5.7 million people live in the urban communities of 
‘Amman, al-Zarqa’, Irbid, al-Salt, Karak, and the southern port city of al-‘Aqabah. 
While ofﬁ cially the population of ‘Amman is placed at 1.1  million people, if 
the greater ‘Amman area (from al-Zarqa’ and Suwaylah in the north to Yaduda 
in the south and west to Wadi al-Sir) is included nearly one-half of Jordan’s 
people live there. ‘Amman has grown at a rapid pace since it became the capital 
in 1921, but especially after the ﬁ rst Arab-Israeli War in 1948 when it received 
a large number of Palestinian refugees. Whole neighborhoods in ‘Amman are 
actually Palestinian refugee camps. ‘Amman had another growth after the 1967 
War and again after 1975 as a result of the Lebanese Civil War when a number 
of banks and other businesses relocated there from Beirut. 
 Other important urban centers include Irbid, al-Salt, Karak, and al’-Aqabah. 
Many of these are ancient cities with origins stretching back into the Neolithic. 
Some of these smaller urban centers, such as Irbid, have also received numbers 
of Palestinian refugees. Several of these smaller cities and towns, such as Jarash, 
Taﬁ lah, Dhiban, and Madaba, serve as important centers for agricultural mar-
keting. 
 Jordan has a large number of villages, and like the cities and towns, some 
date back to the origins of settled life. The villages are the backbone of 
 Jordan’s agricultural sector, which is still one of the major sources of income. 
The distinction between village, town, and city is becoming more and more 
blurred as urban centers like ‘Amman and Irbid expand into communities 
that were once their own separate entity. 
 Villages make up the majority of Jordan’s rural population, which 
 constitutes only 21 percent of the total population. The northern Jabal 
’Ajlun region is densely populated with villages while in the south and east 
the  numbers become far fewer. As noted above, some 80 percent of the coun-
try is desert. The Bedouin who live in the desert are nomadic pastoralists 
and pastoral products are important to the rural economy. Pastoral products 
such as milk, cheese, yogurt, meat, wool, hair, and leather are sold in towns 
and cities, and many Jordanians still prefer the taste of local meat and milk 
products over those imported from Europe or Australia. 
 PEOPLES 
 Modern Jordan is an Arab country with Arabs making up the vast major-
ity of its people. Arabs began settling in Jordan during antiquity, something 
attested to in inscriptions by the Assyrians, Babylonians, and even in the Old 
Testament. The strong Arab element in the ancient population of Jordan is 
attested to in the names of such tribal peoples as the Kedarites (in the Old 

Land, People, and History of Jordan 
5
 Testament) and the names of tributary or rebellious “kings” and “queens” 
such as Jindibu the Arab, who joined the rebellion against the Assyrian 
 Shalmaneser III (858–824  b.c. ), and Samsi or Shamsi who was Queen of 
the Taymah Oasis at the time of Sargon II (721–705  b.c. ). The Old Testa-
ment’s story of Job is thought to be set in southern Jordan, and Job (Ayyub) 
is an Arab name. During the later periods of antiquity the Arabic speak-
ing  Nabateans established their kingdom in Jordan and just prior to the rise 
of Islam, the Arab Bani Ghassan established a kingdom as a vassal state to 
the Byzantine Emperor. Some of the Christian families from in and around 
Karak claim direct descent from the Bani Ghassan. 
 The Islamic conquest of Jordan, Palestine, and Syria in the seventh century 
 a.d. allowed the movement of Bedouin tribes from the Arabian Peninsula 
into the region. The Umayyad dynasty (660–750  a.d. ) encouraged tribes to 
whom they had blood connections through marriage to use the pastures in 
the Syrian Desert, pushing those already there deeper into Syria, Lebanon, 
and Palestine. At various times the population of Jordan would receive new 
waves of Bedouin tribes from the Peninsula looking for better water and pas-
ture for their livestock. The last of these major movements occurred in the 
eighteenth century, establishing the current Bedouin populations in Syria and 
Jordan. While much of the population is of village or urban backgrounds, the 
Bedouin have set their seal ﬁ rmly on Jordanian identity. The strong Bedouin 
character is evidenced in the spoken dialect of most Jordanians and sets them 
off from those of Palestinian origin. 
 BADU: BEDOUIN TRIBES OF JORDAN 
 Bedouin make up only between 7 percent to 10 percent of the overall 
Jordanian population today and even less if strictly deﬁ ning Bedouin as those 
who raise livestock as their major source of income. Many Bedouin today are 
Bedouin only in the dialect they speak or in their family relations but have 
little or no direct connection to a pastoral nomadic lifestyle. While small 
in numbers, Bedouin have politically and culturally dominated the Syrian 
 Desert for generations. 
 Bedouin are tribal, meaning that their social-political organization is based 
on the concept of tribe. The tribal system is one of ever larger numbers of 
people included as “family” members from the smallest unit of household to 
the largest unit of the entire tribe. Tribal leaders have limited authority and 
lead by example and persuasion rather than force, something states have had 
serious problems dealing with for centuries. Tribal leaders are elected by the 
general membership and can be quickly replaced should the people become 
unhappy with them. 

6 
Culture and Customs of Jordan
 Bedouin divide themselves into three major groups based on the type of 
pastoralism they practice and the livestock they keep. These divisions are: 
the  asil (or noble/great tribes) who raise camels and range widely for pas-
ture; the  shawayah (or small/lesser tribes) who raise sheep and goats, which 
require a short range of pasture and need to remain near water; and the  ru ’ a 
(or herders) who also have sheep and goats, but who also may live part or all 
of the year in permanent villages. The  asil tribes have dominated the other 
Bedouin and settled peoples through a system called  khawah or brotherhood 
tax.  Khawah establishes a bond between the  asil tribes to provide protection 
for smaller, less powerful tribes and settled villagers in exchange for goods, 
services, or money. 
 The most important  asil Bedouin tribes in Jordan are the Ruwallah, 
Sirhan, Bani Khalid, Bani Hassan, ‘Adwan, Bani Sakhr, Bani ‘Atiyya, Hijaya, 
and Huwaytat. These tribes and their allies have played an important role in 
modern history of the region. Several of them have traditional pasture lands 
that take them beyond the borders of Jordan into Syria, Iraq, Saudi Arabia, 
Palestine, and even Egypt. All of these tribes are considered to be  asil or 
noble, traditionally raising camels and if owning agricultural ﬁ elds, they did 
not work the ﬁ elds themselves. 
 The  shawayah tribes, though perhaps not as famous as the  asil tribes, con-
stitute a large number of those who call themselves Bedouin. Restricted by 
the need to water their ﬂ ocks of sheep and goats at least once a day, they have 
limited ranges and are not found in the deeper desert regions except during 
the wet, winter months. The  shawayah are distinguished from the  ru ’ a by 
the fact that they live a nomadic existence all the year, and until recently did 
not live in villages. Since the 1950s more and more of the  shawayah have 
been settled in special Bedouin settlements built for them by the Jordanian 
government or have on their own moved to urban centers such as ‘Amman, 
Irbid, Karak, or Ma’an. In the past the  shawayah often took care of the small 
stock that belonged to Bedouin from  asil tribes or even those that belonged 
to urban families. 
 The  ru ’ a, or herders, are the third division of Bedouin and the term refers 
to those who live at least part of the year in permanent settlements, though 
this does not have to mean villages. The Bidul tribe of Petra, for example, 
lives scattered among the Nabatean tombs. However, deﬁ ned communities 
often correspond to the camping units that herders live in over the sum-
mer. The Bidul do not pay their  shawayah and  asil neighbors  khawah and 
are held to be “allies” of  hilf by the powerful  asil Huwaytat and as well as by 
the  shawayah ‘Ammarin. Like the  shawayah tribes, the  ru ’ a depend on small 
stock—sheep and goats—but also plant ﬁ elds of wheat and barely as well as 
small gardens and orchards of olive, almonds, and pomegranates. Today the 

Land, People, and History of Jordan 
7
distinction between Bedouin is more historical as economic conditions for 
pastoralists have encouraged raising small stock such as sheep and more and 
more  asil Bedouin are no longer keeping herds of camels. 
 In addition to the “Jordanian” Bedouin tribes, there are also Bedouin 
families displaced from Palestine who have tried to maintain a nomadic exis-
tence. They are usually called “Saba‘win” from Bi’r al-Saba‘ (Beersheva) in 
the  Negev Desert in southern Palestine. They are found throughout Jordan 
living in and among the Jordanian tribes. In southern Jordan, where many 
have close blood ties with Jordanian tribes, it is not easy to identify them 
unless their women still wear their distinctive face veils and embroidered 
dresses that separate them from the Jordanian Bedouin women. 
 SETTLED POPULATIONS OR HADAR 
 The majority of Jordan’s population was and is composed of settled 
 peoples, those who live year round in permanent settlements. Social and 
political organization for nearly all Jordanians favored tribalism and thus 
nearly all Jordanians of village origin are part of tribal confederations that 
arose in the period of loose Ottoman rule (late-1500s to mid-1800s). Villagers 
were left with no protection from raids by Bedouin and formed “tribal” enti-
ties to better defend themselves. The result has been a “Bedouinization” of 
the  Jordanian population with many even taking on the speech, mannerisms, 
customs, and behavior of the Bedouin. 
 Palestinians make up a signiﬁ cant part of the Jordan’s population, perhaps 
more than one-half. ‘Amman, Irbid, al-Zarqa’, Jarash, and other cities and 
towns have sizable Palestinian populations. There has been a long histori-
cal connection between the peoples living on both sides of the Jordan River 
going back into ancient times. Several Jordanian and Palestinian towns have 
“sister” connections with members of the same families living in both and 
with long held business partnerships; for example Karak with Hebron and 
al-Salt with Nablus. 
 The Palestinian Jordanians began arriving in numbers in the 1860s after 
the Ottomans reasserted their control over Jabal ‘Ajlun. Around the same 
time the  shaykh s of the Bedouin Bani Sakhr tribe established large farms 
south of the ‘Amman and needed farm labor. Their own tribesmen would 
not work as farm laborers, therefore Palestinian peasants were brought in to 
farm for them. The numbers of Palestinians increased as a result of the grow-
ing frictions between Arab Palestinians and Jews following World War I that 
ﬁ nally erupted into the Palestinian Revolt of 1936 to 1939. Other waves of 
Palestinians came as a result of the hostilities and wars between Israel and its 
Arab neighbors in 1948 and 1967. Palestinians were often better educated 

8 
Culture and Customs of Jordan
and skilled than their Jordanian neighbors and quickly formed an important 
professional class of educators, lawyers, civil servants, and doctors. 
 Non Arab Minorities 
 The Arab character of Jordan’s people has been maintained even though 
non-Arabs have settled there. Other ethnic groups living in Jordan include 
the Armenians, Circassians, Shishans, and Turks. With the notable exception 
of the Christian Armenians, these groups are Sunni Muslims similar to the 
majority of the Arabs living around them. 
 The single largest non-Arab minority in Jordan is the Circassians and 
related Shishans (Chechens). Both the Circassians and Shishans came seek-
ing the protection of the Ottoman Sultan in a number of waves starting soon 
after their region of the Caucasus Mountains was conquered by the Russians 
in 1859. Their arrival coincided with the resurgence of Ottoman control over 
the more remote, fringe areas of the empire, such as the Syrian Desert. With 
government assistance, Circassians and Shishans were settled in villages and 
towns in Syria, Palestine, and Jordan, such as Jarash, al-Zarqa’, Wadi al-Sir, 
Na‘ur, and Suwaylih. The towns formed very important points of stability 
and control in areas once under Bedouin domination. Some towns still have a 
majority of Circassians or Shishans, such as Wadi al-Sir and Jarash, and local 
building styles reﬂ ect the architecture of their Caucasus homelands. 
 Both Circassians and Shishans have “Arabized” within a short period 
of time adopting Arabic as their main language for public use. Their own 
 languages were reserved for use at home, but even there, many began using 
Arabic instead of their own languages. In response to the heavy assimilation 
into the mainstream Arab culture, a Circassian and Shishan cultural revival 
began in the late 1980s in order to record and preserve their unique heritage .
 Jordan’s Turkish minority is composed of several different peoples who 
arrived at different times in history. The few Turkomans who have not been 
fully absorbed into the Arabs came as early as the Mamluk period and into the 
early part of the Ottoman period. Once nomadic pastoralists similar to the Arab 
Bedouin, most are now urban. Some Turkomans were settled in Jordan by the 
Ottomans at the same time as the Circassians and Shishans and served the same 
purpose to control areas once under Bedouin tribal authority. Turkish-speaking 
Uzbeks arrived after the Soviets took control of Central Asia in 1918. Persecu-
tion of Islamic scholars and religious ﬁ gures caused a number of them to ﬂ ee 
Russia and many eventually settled in Saudi Arabia and Jordan. In Jordan most 
Uzbeks live in ‘Amman where they established a market called Suq al-Bukhari-
yyah, the Bukhari Market. Uzbeki Turkish remains the language of the home 
though it is losing ground to Arabic with each generation. 

Land, People, and History of Jordan 
9
 Most of the Armenians in Jordan came seeking refuge in the aftermath 
of the 1915 massacres in Anatolia. Armenians were accused of assisting the 
Russians who were the enemies of the Turkish state, acting as a ﬁ fth column 
behind Turkish lines. An estimated one million died at the hands of angry 
mobs or due to starvation and exposure after being evicted from their homes. 
Those Armenians able to escape the slaughter in eastern Anatolia found ref-
uge in Syria, Lebanon, Jordan, Palestine, and Egypt. The  Armenians are 
Christians belonging to one of the oldest established churches in the world, 
the Armenian Orthodox Church. Their church ofﬁ cials rejected a number of 
the early edicts about the nature of Christ and Mary and do not recognize 
the authority of the Eastern Orthodox Patriarch. They have their own church 
leadership and those in Jordan are under the authority of their leaders in 
Jerusalem. Armenians in Jordan remain small in number but have come to 
dominate certain niches in the economy. 
 Historical Overview 
 Jordan like many countries of the Middle East is both old and new. The 
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan ofﬁ cially dates from 1946 when it became 
independent, yet some of the oldest settlements in human history dating 
back to 8000  b.c. are also found in Jordan. Jordan is part of the ancient 
Fertile Crescent, which stretched from the southern borders of Palestine 
north to the Euphrates River and then down the course of the Euphrates 
and Tigris Rivers to the Persian Gulf. The region saw the rise of the Greek 
city-states called the Decapolis or the Ten Cities, which served to protect 
the eastern frontier during the Roman period. Jordan was the site of much 
of the New Testament and was the ﬁ rst part of the Byzantine Empire to 
become Muslim. The Crusaders built massive castles in Jordan only to lose 
them to Salah al-Din (Saladin) in the course of his re-conquest of Palestine. 
Jordan became a sleepy backwater of interest only to the tribal peoples liv-
ing there until late in the Ottoman period when once again it became a 
place of activity with the expansion of civil rule, the settlement of non-Arab 
Circassians and Shishans, and the opening of the Hijaz Railway. In World 
War I, Arab-Bedouin troops commanded by their  shaykh s and the British 
ofﬁ cer T. E. Lawrence (Lawrence of Arabia) made international news and 
captured Damascus ending centuries of Ottoman rule in the Arab world. 
Jordan became one of the important new states confronting Jewish immi-
gration to Palestine and one of the major confrontation states with Israel 
after 1948. Modern Jordanian history has been dominated by the issue 
of Palestine and over one third of the country’s population is Palestinian 
refugees. 

10 
Culture and Customs of Jordan
 FROM PREHISTORY TO THE ISLAMIC CONQUEST 
 Jordan is part of the Fertile Crescent where man ﬁ rst began to live in 
 permanent settlements and made the change from hunter/gatherer to farmer 
and herdsman. Neolithic (8300 to 4500  b.c. ) settlements dot Jordan’s coun-
tryside and include some of the most important such as Tabqat Fahl (in the 
Jordan Valley), Baydah (north of Petra), ‘Ayn Ghazal (a northern suburb of 
‘Amman), and Jericho (in the Jordan Valley). These settlements are referred 
to as “mega-sites” due to the fact that in sheer size they encompass ten to 
ﬁ fteen hectares, nearly twice as large as other Neolithic settlements. 
 Ancient Jordan was home to four Iron Age states, Edom, Moab, Rabboth 
Ammon, and Bashan. Bashan disappeared with the arrival of the Hebrew 
tribes under the command of Moses and Joshua who established themselves 
on both sides of the Jordan River sometime in the early Iron Age (around 
1200  b.c. ). Once the Hebrew tribes were organized into a state under King 
Saul (around 1025  b.c. ), much of the ancient history of the region is marked 
by the conﬂ icts between Israel and the Jordanian states of Rabboth Ammon, 
Moab, and Edom. Saul’s successor David (1004 to 965  b.c. ) brought them 
under his control, but later kings of Israel and Judah were unable to maintain 
their domination, especially over Moab and Edom. 
 While local history played out between the small kingdoms in Palestine 
and Jordan, the major powers of the day, Egypt and its eastern rivals the 
Hittites, the Assyrians, and later the Babylonians, saw the region as part 
of their spheres of inﬂ uence. Egypt was usually able to keep Palestine and 
Jordan under its general domination as is testiﬁ ed to by numerous inscrip-
tions and letters found in Egypt and Jordan. Egypt lost its domination ﬁ rst 
to the Assyrians who conquered Syria, Lebanon, Palestine, and Jordan in the 
period between 853 and 720  b.c . The Assyrians were unable to bring the 
unruly Bedouin tribes in the Syrian Desert fully under their rule, but were 
able to establish themselves in the major oases along the northern fringe of 
the desert. The Assyrians lost their empire to the Babylonians in 612  b.c. 
who also became major rivals of the Egyptians for control of Palestine and 
Jordan. The Babylonians conquered much of the region and in 588  b.c. 
destroyed the Kingdom of Judah taking many of the local people back to 
Babylon as slaves. 
 Both Egyptian and Babylonian power was broken by that of Persia 
in 539  b.c. when Cyrus the Great took Babylon and then in 530  b.c. his 
son  Cambyses conquered Egypt unifying all of the eastern Mediterranean 
with the Persian heartlands in Iran. The Persians allowed the rebuilding of 
Jerusalem and the Jewish temple, but the Jewish dynasty that was installed 
remained weak and subordinate to the Satrap (or governor) appointed by the 

Land, People, and History of Jordan 
11
Persian King. In Jordan, Bedouin tribes from the Arabian Peninsula such as 
the Nabateans were able to penetrate into settled areas and establish them-
selves at the expense of the older populations such as the Edomites whom 
they pushed out of their lands into southern Palestine. 
 The Persian Empire was conquered in 333  b.c. by Alexander the Great 
who brieﬂ y was able to unify the entire eastern Mediterranean from Greece 
to Egypt and east to the Indus River. Alexander died in Babylon in 323  b.c. 
and the empire was broken up and divided among his generals. The generals 
began to feud amongst themselves, and eventually Syria under the Seleucids, 
and Egypt under the Ptolemys, became the most important with Palestine 
and Jordan once again squeezed between larger rivals. 
 While the Nabateans became fully established in southern Jordan, the 
northern part of the country was settled by some 50,000 Greek soldiers distrib-
uted in ten cities called the Decapolis. This was done in 301  b.c. by  Seleucus 
I Nicator with the expressed purpose of Hellenizing the region. Some of the 
cities in the Decapolis were ancient with their own local  populations such as 
Rabboth Amon renamed Philadelphia while others were newly founded by 
the Greek soldiers such as Abila and Jarash. 
 While Syria and Egypt fought for domination over the region, local states 
arose often siding with one or other of the big powers. On the Palestinian side 
of the Jordan River, the Hasmoneans threw off Syrian control in 142  b.c. 
and remained free with the blessings of Ptolemaic Egypt. The Nabateans on 
the Jordanian side were in a better situation to remain beyond of the control 
of both powers. King Harith or Aretas III (86–62  b.c. ) expanded Nabatean 
power and was able to even conquer the city of Damascus taking advantage 
of the on-going disputes of the greater regional powers. 
 In 64  b.c. Rome became involved in settling the dispute between Syria and 
Egypt forcing them to agree to a peace. While local dynasties were able to keep 
their thrones (at least for awhile), they did so as states bound to Rome with a 
Roman governor overseeing them. The Nabateans were still able to maintain 
their independence, and the rule of King Harith or Aretas IV (9  b.c. to 40 
 a.d .) marks the high point of Nabatean power and wealth. The Nabateans 
had taken control of the trade between Yemen and the  Mediterranean sup-
plying both the camels and their handlers. Nabatean merchants established 
commercial relationships in a wide network and as much as one-quarter of 
Rome’s luxury trade in silks, spices, and incense passed through Nabatean 
hands. 
 The wealth of the Nabateans was their undoing. Rome could not let a 
small, independent kingdom exit both so close to its own borders and in 
control of so much of the luxury goods bound for the empire. The Nabateans 
were weakened as trade routes were encouraged to shift from the Red Sea 

12 
Culture and Customs of Jordan
and eastern Arabia to the Persian Gulf and the across the Syrian Desert to 
Damascus from Iraq. The cities of Hatra in Iraq and Tadmur or Palmyra in 
Syria eventually took much of the trade from Nabatean hands. In 106  a.d. 
the Roman Emperor Trajan annexed the Nabatean kingdom as the province 
Arabia Petrea placing it ﬁ rmly under Roman control. 
 In the second and third centuries  a.d. Rome established a line of fortiﬁ ca-
tions to guard its eastern frontiers against the raids by Arab Bedouin and, 
more importantly, from the Persians after the rise of the vigorous Sassanian 
dynasty in 234. Initially such fortiﬁ cations were manned by regular Roman 
soldiers but, as the empire began to decline local levies were raised to man 
them. By the sixth century those in Jordan were manned by Arab troops 
 commanded by the local Ghassanid kings. 
 Christianity became the religion of the Roman Empire when in 313 
the Emperor Constantine gave it ofﬁ cial recognition. The Bani Ghassan 
became Christians and held the region on behalf of the Roman Emperors in 
 Byzantium. Vassal Arab states such as the Bani Ghassan, allied to Byzantium, 
and the Lakhamids, allied to Persia, served as important buffers between the 
Byzantines and the Sassanids. Both kingdoms formed alliances with other 
Arab tribes bringing much of Arabia into the contest between the Byzantines 
and the Sassanids. Initially the advantage was with the Bani Ghassanids who 
defeated the Lakhamids in a number of small wars, but in 611 the Sassanids 
and their Arab allies launched an invasion of Syria, Lebanon, Palestine, and 
Jordan, which they occupied until 629 when the Byzantines and their Arab 
allies were able to ﬁ nally push them back. As a reward for their help, the 
Byzantine Emperor Heraclius awarded the Bani Ghassan chief, Mundhir ibn 
Harith, the title “King of the Arabs.” In the same year the Prophet Muham-
mad established treaties with the Christian and Jewish leaders of al-Aqabah, 
Maqnah, Udhrah, and al-Jarbah in southern Jordan. A new era in Jordanian 
and Arab history was beginning. 
 RISE OF ISLAM TO THE OTTOMANS 
 Islam came to Jordan during the lifetime of the Prophet Muhammad. 
The Prophet himself led the expedition to the northern Hijaz and south-
ern Jordan between the years 629 and 630. He accepted the submission of 
the Jewish and Christian communities in southern Jordan while his military 
commander, Khalid ibn al-Walid, captured Jauf Oasis from the Ghassanids. 
Another column penetrated as far as the present day town of Mu’tah where 
a Byzantine force met them. The small Muslim force was defeated, but the 
conﬂ ict provided the faith with important martyrs including Ja‘afar ibn Abi 
Talib, the younger brother of ‘Ali and a cousin to the Prophet. 

Land, People, and History of Jordan 
13
 In 634 the Muslim armies returned to Jordan and crossed into Palestine 
where they defeated the Byzantines at Ajnadayn. In 636 the Byzantines made 
a concerted effort to retain their Syrian provinces, but at the Battle of Yarmuk 
the Muslims under Khalid ibn al-Walid inﬂ icted a severe defeat and pushed 
the Byzantines north to Anatolia. The newly conquered territory was divided 
into four major provinces or  jund s, and Jordan was divided between the Jund 
of Filastin (Palestine) and the Jund of al-Urdunn (Jordan). 
 Jordan became embroiled in the disputes over leadership of the  Muslim 
state supporting Mu‘awiyah ibn Abi Sufyan against ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib. 
The dispute ended with the assassination of ‘Ali in 660 leaving Mu’awiyah 
the ruler of the emerging Islamic empire. Mu’awiyah and his descendants, 
the Umayyads, had their base of support in Syria (including much of Jordan) 
among the Bani Kalb Bedouin tribes. Keeping in close contact with them, the 
Umayyad princes spent much of their youth with the Bedouin perfecting their 
Arabic language skills and keeping free of the plagues found in cities such as 
the capital Damascus. Jordan’s deserts have a large number of Umayyad plea-
sure palaces and hunting lodges where the princes were able to host Bedouin 
leaders or enjoy themselves after hunting. 
 The focus of the empire shifted to Iraq with the ‘Abbasids who came to 
power in a bloody revolution in 750. The founder of the ‘Abbasid dynasty, 
al-Saffah, ordered the death of all members of the Umayyad family and only 
a few were able to escape to the further reaches of the west eventually ﬁ nding 
refuge in Muslim Spain. The power base of the ‘Abbasids was in the east, Iraq 
and Iran, and they moved the capital from Damascus to the newly founded 
Baghdad where they could feel more secure. 
 Syria (including Jordan) was no longer a favored province but was instead 
seen as a possible place of revolt and unrest. There were a number of revolts 
against ‘Abbasid rule and each time a revolt was crushed greater anti-‘Abbasid 
sentiment grew among the Syrians. Anti-‘Abbasid feelings were channeled 
into religion and Shi‘ism was often the tool of this expression. In the 900s 
the radical Shi‘ite Qaramitah movement became popular with many of the 
Bedouin and rural people in Syria, Jordan, and the Arabian Peninsula. The 
latter part of the 900s saw a number of Qaramitah attacks on urban centers in 
Syria and in 964 they were able to gain control of Palestine from the ‘Abbasid 
governors of Egypt. 
 The ‘Abbasids were further weakened when in 969 another Shi‘ite move-
ment from North Africa, the Fatimids, took Egypt and established their 
 capital Cairo in 970. Jordan was once again caught between more powerful 
rivals in Egypt and Iraq. The Fatimids expanded into Palestine, Jordan, and 
southern Syria, and though the Saljuq Turks were eventually able to secure 
most of the region again in the name of the ‘Abbasids. Palestine and Jordan 

14 
Culture and Customs of Jordan
remained the frontier with cities such as Jerusalem passing back and forth 
between the Fatimids and the Saljuqs several times. Jordan was of interest 
to these rival powers who wanted to control the major trade and pilgrimage 
routes from Damascus to Madinah and Makkah. The Fatimids were able to 
regain control of most of Palestine just before the First Crusade. 
 In 1095 Pope Urban II preached a holy Crusade to win the sites of 
early Christianity from the Saljuqs. The First Crusade eventually reached 
 Jerusalem in 1099. The fall of Palestine and the whole Mediterranean coast 
of Syria and Lebanon to the Europeans made Jordan important to the 
 Muslims, and as a result, to the Crusaders as well. In the ﬁ rst decades of the 
Latin Kingdom of Jerusalem, the Europeans pushed across the Jordan River 
and began to establish permanent fortiﬁ cations to raid the trade between 
Damascus, the Hijaz, and Egypt. In 1115 a castle at Showbak called Mon-
treal was built. Other, smaller castles were also built in southern Jordan and 
on the Island Graye or Jazirat al-Far‘un in the Gulf of ‘Aqabah to monitor 
and raid Muslim trade. 
 The Muslim response to the Latin states was slow in coming. The 
 Crusaders suffered their ﬁ rst major defeat at the hands of the Saljuqs in 
1119 near the northern Syrian city of Aleppo, but the Muslims did not 
follow up on their victory. The Saljuqs were fragmented into small, often 
bitter rival states with government in the hands of  Atabek s, a combina-
tion of stepfather ﬁ gure and prime minister. In the meantime the Latin 
Kingdom of Jerusalem expanded in Jordan ordering the construction of the 
massive fortress Pierre du Désert at Karak in 1142. The new fort became 
the seat of the Barony of Oultre-Jourdain, who controlled much of central 
and  southern Jordan. Local Muslim and Christian communities were made 
subject to the Baron appointed by the King of Jerusalem. 
 The Kingdom of Jerusalem became an important regional power and entered 
into the political intrigues of the Fatimid court. King Amalric I supported the 
 Wazir (or prime minister) Dirgham while Nur al-Din al-Zangi, the new ruler 
of a uniﬁ ed Syria, supported the deposed  Wazir Shawar. After a long period of 
threats, counter threats, and invasions of Egypt, Nur al-Din and his lieutenant 
Salah al-Din al-Ayyubi (Saladin) were able to secure Egypt, thereby surrounding 
the Kingdom of Jerusalem. The routes in Jordan become more important to 
both the Muslims and the Crusaders as they were the main lines of communication 
between Damascus and Cairo. In order to strengthen Muslim control over the 
northern parts of Jordan that had not fallen under Crusader control, the fort at 
‘Ajlun was built in 1183 on the orders of Salah al-Din, who had succeeded Nur 
al-Din as sole ruler of Syria and Egypt in 1176. 
 Jordan became the scene for confrontation between the Latin Kingdom and 
Salah al-Din. Unfortunately for the Crusaders their King, Baldwin IV, was a 

Land, People, and History of Jordan 
15
leper, and his death left the crown to his sisters and their weak husbands. In 
addition, the Baron of Oultre-Jordain, Renaud de Châtillon, raided Muslim 
caravans including pilgrims on their way to Makkah. A raid on a caravan of 
Muslim pilgrims in 1187 broke the fragile truce with Salah al-Din. Listening 
to poor advice, King Guy of Jerusalem marched to meet the Muslims, and at 
the Horns of Hattin the Crusader army was defeated and nearly destroyed. 
With most of the military force gone, the city of Jerusalem surrendered soon 
afterwards. Salah al-Din proceeded to each of the Crusader forts and forced 
Karak to surrender in 1188 and Showbak in 1189 ending the Latin period 
in Jordanian history. Even though the Latin Kingdom was able to hang on 
for several more generations based in the Palestinian coastal city of Acre, the 
Crusaders never returned to Jordan. 
 When Salah al-Din died in 1193, his kingdom of uniﬁ ed Syria and Egypt 
was broken up among his brothers and sons. Power shifted from Damascus 
to Cairo while Jordan and most of Palestine were more frequently part of 
Egypt than of Syria. Major trade routes still passed through Jordan connect-
ing the Red Sea and the Hijaz with Syria, Palestine, and Lebanon in the east 
and north with Egypt in west. Former Crusader fortiﬁ cations were reused to 
guard the caravans, especially Showbak and Karak. 
 Jordan and Palestine were to become important again at the end of the 
Ayyubid dynasty. In 1249 al-Malik al-Salih Najm al-Din Ayyubi died leaving 
his wife Shajarat al-Durr (Spray of Pearls) as ruler. Shajarat al-Durr was forced 
to marry again and took as her husband one of Najm al-Din’s  Mamluks. 
Shajarat al-Durr was eventually murdered and her death marks the end of 
the Ayyubid dynasty and the beginning of the long period of Mamluk rule 
in Syria and Egypt (Bahri or Mongol/Turkish rulers from 1250 to 1382 and 
Burji or Circassian rulers from 1382 to 1517). 
 The Mamluks were slave soldiers who were purchased as boys and  educated 
in military arts and sciences. Initially many of the boys came from Central 
Asia and were of Mongol or Turkish origins. Upon reaching manhood they 
would be freed yet would remain ﬁ ercely loyal to their former owners and 
commanders. They had come to replace local levies in a standing army around 
the Ayyubid princes and had proven themselves in battle against European 
Crusaders, decisively defeating the army of King Louis IX of France in 1250. 
They again proved their military prowess against the Mongol invasion of the 
Middle East and soundly defeated them in Palestine at the Battle of ‘Ayn 
Jalut in 1260. 
 The ﬁ rst few years of Mamluk rule saw a quick succession of  amir s until 
the rise of the Amir Baybars al-Bunduqdari. Baybars ruled Syria and Egypt 
from 1260 to 1277 from three capitals; Cairo, Damascus, and Karak. He had 
a number of former Crusader forts rebuilt and improved in order to protect 

16 
Culture and Customs of Jordan
trade and his lines of communication between Damascus and Cairo. Baybars 
ruled from horseback, frequently moving from one capital to another and 
spending a fair amount of time in Karak as the middle point between Syria 
and Egypt. When Baybars died, his immediate successor maintained all three 
capitals, but soon as Cairo emerged as the administrative capital, Karak and 
Damascus would both become provincial cities. 
 As long as a European Crusader state, no matter how small and weak, 
remained, the lines of communication and trade between Syria, the Hijaz, 
and Egypt would need to be protected. The ﬁ nal Crusader city of Acre fell in 
1290 to the Mamluk Sultan al-Ashraf Khalil, and in 1301 the Sultan al-Nasir 
Muhammad defeated the Mongols ending the two major threats to security. 
Sultan al-Nasir Muhammad had sought retirement in Jordan and during his 
reign rebuilt Showbak and al-‘Aqabah and built the shrine to Harun (Aaron, 
elder brother of Moses) in the mountains south of Petra. 
 The Black Death and misrule by Bahri sultans helped cause their downfall. 
A six-year-old child was placed on the throne by scheming  amir s amid palace 
revolutions, and eventually the Amir Barquq took the throne and became the 
ﬁ rst of the Burji Sultans. Through the long period of Burji control, Jordan 
was part of Egypt, administered by Cairo. But for the most part, Jordan lost 
its importance except for the yearly pilgrimage to Makkah. The Mamluks 
were in slow decline until al-Ashraf Qansu al-Ghawri took the throne in 
1501. Al-Ghawri was a vigorous ruler but in 1502 the Bedouin tribes in 
 Jordan rose in revolt. By 1505 the Bedouin had pushed across into Palestine 
and attacked Jerusalem. Al-Ghawri was eventually able to raise the Syrian 
 amir s to action and put down the rebellion, however, a new far more dangerous 
threat was rising in the north. 
 In 1516 the Ottoman Sultan Salim Yavuz or the Grim turned his atten-
tions south to the Mamluks. At Marj Dabiq outside of Aleppo he inﬂ icted 
a crippling blow to the Mamluks and the Sultan al-Ghawri died in the 
ﬁ ghting. In 1517 the Ottomans defeated the Mamluks outside of Cairo 
and Egypt, Jordan, and the Hijaz became part of the expanding Ottoman 
Empire. 
 Like the Mamluks before them, the Ottoman’s main interest in Jordan was 
the annual pilgrimage to Makkah and little else. A rebellion in Karak during 
the reign of Sulayman the Magniﬁ cent (1520–66) was successful in establish-
ing the al-Nimr family from Nablus as local lords and they remained outside 
of direct Ottoman control. A rebellion of Bedouin tribes around Showbak at 
the same time ended Turkish rule there for a time. 
 The Ottomans were primarily interested in the pilgrim routes from 
 Damascus and Cairo and Sultan Sulayman had a new route built. Forts were 
built at Ma‘an, al-Qatrani, al-Hasa, and ‘Anayzah manned by small  Turkish 

Land, People, and History of Jordan 
17
units. Sulayman also began the Ottoman policy of paying Bedouin  shaykh s 
cash subsidies in order to ensure the safe passage of the pilgrim caravans. 
 Most of Jordan was ignored, forcing local farming communities to fend for 
themselves against the Bedouin. Local families and lineages grouped them-
selves together in tribe-like organizations encompassing a number of villages 
that became known as the  nahiyah s or districts. Twelve districts emerged 
each administered by a council of elders under the general authority of a 
district leader or  shaykh. The villages were organized to be able to respond to 
a  Bedouin raid by providing men and weapons under the leadership of the 
district  qa ’ id or military commander. The villagers began to take on many 
of the cultural values of the Bedouin, even to adopt aspects of their Arabic 
dialect, setting them off from their settled cousins a short distance away to 
the west in Palestine. 
 Ottoman attention was drawn to Jordan with the occupation of Syria by 
Muhammad ‘Ali, governor of Egypt, from 1830 to 1841. During their brief 
period of rule, the Egyptians tried to establish order and control the Bedouin 
tribes. In 1834 a revolt began in Jordan centered ﬁ rst in Karak. The  Egyptians 
were able to retake Karak, but the revolt continued in other parts of the 
 country. Eventually the revolt was crushed but the Egyptians were forced to 
leave Syria in 1841 due to pressure from the major European powers. 
 RETURN OF OTTOMAN AUTHORITY TO WORLD WAR I 
 The Ottomans returned to Jordan ﬁ rst at the request of the people of the 
Wastiyah Nahiyah, who had asked for help against the Bedouin al-Sa’adi 
tribe in 1840/41. The Turkish governor of Damascus sent troops to conquer 
the Bedouin, and it is said that the Bedouin were destroyed to nearly the 
last man. In 1851 the Turks established a  sanjaq or administrative district in 
Irbid under the  mutasarriﬁ yyah  (a larger administrative region) of Nablus in 
Palestine, which in turn was responsible to the governor in Damascus. The 
Sanjaq of Irbid included most of the ‘Ajlun region south to the Zarqa’ River. 
The Ottomans further strengthened their control over the region by settling 
Circassian and Shishan refuges from the Caucasus, as well as Turkomen in 
places such as Jarash, Suwaylah, Wadi al-Sir, Umm Ruman, and Na’ur. The 
Circassians and Shishans were able to defend themselves and their villages 
from raids by Bedouin and forced the Bedouin further back into the desert. 
 Ottoman authority was eventually invited back to Karak in 1893 by the 
 shaykh of the powerful Majali family. The Turks expanded south and orga-
nized the region into another  sanjaq called the Sanjaq of Karak under the 
governor of Damascus. Only the Port of al-‘Aqabah was not included as it 
fell under the control of the governor of Madinah. In 1900, work began 

18 
Culture and Customs of Jordan
on the Hijaz Railway linking Damascus eventually with Madinah in Arabia. 
Bedouin tribes, who had come to rely on yearly subsidies paid to them by the 
pilgrim caravans or who had gained the right to supply these caravans with 
camels and guides, were opposed to the railway. Other tribes in Jordan were 
also hostile to the railway because it meant Turkish troops could be deployed 
quickly to any place along the route. Work on the construction of the railway 
was slow due to raids by the Bedouin, but by 1906 it had reached ‘Amman, 
and two years later it was completed all the way to Madinah. Southern Jordan 
experienced the last local revolts against the Turks, in 1905 in Showbak and 
1910 in Karak. Both were crushed and the leaders of the 1910 revolt were 
hanged in public, an action that greatly angered the local people and became 
an important cause for their support of the Arab Revolt a few years later. 
Peace did not last long. In 1914 World War I began and the Turks sided with 
Germany and Austria. 
 Discontent with the Turkish government had been growing in the Arab 
provinces of the empire starting in the mid-1800s. Young Arabs sought 
higher education in Europe or went to Christian-mission schools (many of 
which were American) that had been established in Lebanon and Palestine. 
In Europe, Arabs from Syria, Palestine, Lebanon, and Egypt met and formed 
social and political clubs to discuss the affairs in the Turkish Empire. Once 
back in the empire they continued their activities, and in 1909 the most 
inﬂ uential of these clubs, al-Muntada al-Adabi, was founded in Istanbul by 
Arabs working in the Turkish government. The future  Sharif of Makkah, 
Hussein ibn ‘Ali, was among the Arab activists, and even while under “invita-
tion” by the Sultan to live in Istanbul, kept up his contacts with other Arab 
political activists. While educated Arabs were organizing themselves, a simi-
lar movement was happening among the educated Turkish elites called the 
Committee for Union and Progress (CUP)or the Young Turks. In 1908 the 
CUP instigated a military revolt and forced the Sultan ‘Abd al-Hamid II to 
grant a constitution, abolish censorship, and release political prisoners. A year 
later the Sultan tried to regain power, but was defeated and deposed, and a 
distant cousin, Muhammad V Rashad was made the new Sultan. Among the 
ﬁ rst acts of the new government was to appoint Hussein ibn ‘Ali as Sharif of 
Makkah and he and his three sons, Faysal, ‘Ali, and ‘Abdallah left Istanbul 
for Arabia. 
 In 1912 ‘Abdallah was elected to the new parliament and on the way to 
Istanbul stopped in Cairo to confer with the British High Commissioner Sir 
Herbert Kitchener. ‘Abdallah was to sound out British opinion should the 
Arabs rise in revolt against the Turks. The Turkish government was aware 
of ‘Abdallah’s nationalist activities and his visit to Cairo and tried to buy his 
friendship by giving him the governorship of Yemen. However, in 1914, just 

Land, People, and History of Jordan 
19
prior to the outbreak of World War I, he was again in contact with Kitchener 
in Cairo. 
 The British wanted to maintain an open dialogue with the Arab nationalists 
especially after the close relationship grew between Germany and Turks. Kaiser 
Wilhelm II had visited Palestine in 1898, and Germany had offered to build 
the Berlin to Baghdad Railway, which the British opposed. The close relation-
ship between the Germans and Turks continued after the fall of Sultan ‘Abd 
al-Hamid II, and in 1914 the Turks sided with Germany in the war. When the 
war broke out, the Arab citizens of the empire were not strongly sympathetic 
to the Turks, although most assisted the Turkish state as was required of them. 
The British had maintained their own connections with the Arabs through a 
series of letters between Sir Henry MacMahon, British High Commissioner for 
Egypt, and Sharif Hussein in Makkah and, though vaguely worded, the Sharif 
thought that he had British assurances of an Arab state that would embrace all 
of the Arab provinces of the Ottoman Empire. In June 1916 Sharif  Hussein 
launched the Arab Revolt unaware that the British had earlier struck a deal with 
France, the Sykes-Picot Agreement, to divide the Turkish Empire between 
them after the war. 
 The Arab Revolt had initial success in Makkah and Ta’if, but the Turkish 
garrison in Madinah was able to resist the attack. The British sent military 
advisors including the legendary T. E. Lawrence, Lawrence of Arabia, to help 
the Arabs. Turkish garrisons in Arabia were left besieged by armies under 
‘Ali and ‘Abdallah while Faysal and Lawrence took an army north to Jordan 
where the local tribal  shaykh s joined them. With the help of Huwaytat tribe 
under their Shaykh ‘Awdah Abu Tayy, the Turkish fort at al-‘Aqabah was 
taken in 1917. The Arab army pushed on to take Showbak and Taﬁ lah the 
same year. In the meantime, the British had pushed forward taking southern 
Palestine as far north as Jerusalem. The Arab army under Lawrence liberated 
Damascus, and by October 1918 the Arabs and British forces had pushed the 
Turks as far north as Anatolia before an armistice was signed. 
 FOUNDING OF THE AMIRATE TO THE PRESENT DAY 
 Following the victory of the Arab and British armies, the Arabs began 
to organize a government in Damascus with Faysal as King of Syria. The 
French, however, pressed for their share of the empire, which included 
Syria, and at the Peace Conference in Versailles Arab hopes were sacriﬁ ced 
to European interests. Britain and France were awarded most of the Arab 
provinces as Mandates, with France taking Syria and Lebanon and Britain 
taking Palestine (which included the Transjordan) and Iraq. The Arabs were 
left with little other than Hijaz ruled by men loyal to Faysal. Faysal had been 

20 
Culture and Customs of Jordan
declared the King of Syria by the Syrian Parliament and troops were raised 
to defend their new state. In addition, Faysal’s brother ‘Abdallah was raising 
troops in Arabia to assist in the defense. The French invaded in 1920 and 
at Maysalun outside of Damascus defeated the Syrians. Faysal was forced to 
leave Damascus, but meanwhile his brother ‘Abdallah arrived in southern 
Jordan in November of that year with an army to restore Faysal to the  Syrian 
throne. ‘Abdallah moved north through Karak to ‘Amman, where he was 
invited by Winston Churchill to meet with the new British High Commis-
sioner for Palestine, Sir Herbert Samuel. Samuel had tried to set up a num-
ber of small, local governments in Transjordan but they had all collapsed in 
chaos. He proposed to separate the Transjordan from Palestine (the region 
was seen as too tribal to be ruled together with the mainly non-tribal people 
of Palestine) and give it to ‘Abdallah to administer, in lieu of ‘Abdallah’s 
support for his brother’s claim to Syria. The British also proposed to Faysal 
that he take the throne of Iraq and give up his claims to Syria. Both brothers 
agreed; ‘Abdallah gaining the Amirate of the Transjordan and Faysal, the 
Hashemite Kingdom of Iraq. 
 At ﬁ rst ‘Abdallah was still very hostile to the French in Syria, and his new 
capital, ‘Amman, attracted a large number of Syrian nationalists. ‘Abdallah 
allowed them to conduct raids across the border; however, the British could 
not allow this to continue and put pressure on ‘Abdallah and forced him to 
end the raids. ‘Abdallah faced more serious threats to his rule from within 
Jordan, where both settled villagers and Bedouin tribes refused to pay taxes 
or recognize his government. ‘Abdallah had to deal with a number of local 
revolts, but quickly gained the respect and support of the tribes through his 
quick show of force and of forgiveness. He allowed a British ofﬁ cer, Frederick 
Peake, to raise an army from mainly the settled  hadar population called the 
Arab Army (later called the Arab Legion), which he used to put down revolts. 
The Arab Army was well-trained and could respond quickly to any threat. 
 While ‘Abdallah was able to quickly deal with the internal threats to his 
rule, he was faced with a far more dangerous foe across the border in Saudi 
Arabia. ‘Abd al-‘Aziz ibn Sa‘ud had been able to restore his family to power 
by taking their former capital Riyadh from the Shammar al-Rashid governor 
in 1902. Once he had been able to retake the Sa‘udi heartland he embarked 
on a policy of both political and religious expansion conquering the Qasim 
in 1906, Hassa in 1913, and the Hijaz in 1925. At ﬁ rst the British paid little 
attention, but the successes of the ibn Sa‘ud’s  Ikhwan (or Brotherhood) forces 
came to the attention of the India Ofﬁ ce and Britain recognized ibn Sa‘ud’s 
government in 1915. The India Ofﬁ ce supported ibn Sa‘ud while the For-
eign Ofﬁ ce supported the Hashemites in the Hijaz, Iraq, and Jordan. Sa‘udi 
 Ikhwan raids into Jordan took on the appearance of major expeditions and 

Land, People, and History of Jordan 
21
in 1924 they came to within ﬁ ve miles (seven kilometers) of ‘Amman before 
being detected and driven back. 
 Tensions continued between the two countries as Bedouin from both 
sides of the border launched raids and counter raids against each other. The 
 Jordanian tribes suffered the most. In 1925 the Sirhan tribe lost most of 
their camels and in 1930 a section of the Huwaytat lost their tents, ﬂ ocks, 
and herds to Sa‘udi Bedouin forces. In order to protect Jordan’s borders, a 
new unit was organized called the Transjordanian Frontier Force seconded 
from the Palestinian Police Force. Even though the force was mechanized, 
it proved unable to deal with the Bedouin raiders. The British ofﬁ cer John 
Bagot Glubb stationed in Iraq was contacted to recruit a military force from 
the Jordanian Bedouin similar to the Bedouin force he had organized in Iraq. 
Called the Desert Patrol Force, the new unit was able to ﬁ nally bring an end 
to the raids from Saudi Arabia as well as keep the peace between Jordanian 
tribes. King ibn Sa‘ud had become aware the potential threat the  Ikhwan 
posed to his own government and brought a ﬁ nal end to them in 1930. 
 Jewish immigration in Palestine began before World War I, but the num-
bers greatly increased following the war. Tensions between the European 
Jews and the Palestinian Arabs grew with clashes in several Palestinian cities. 
In 1936 the Palestinians rose in revolt and many Jordanians sympathized 
with them. Palestinian agents were sent to the ‘Ajlun to recruit soldiers but 
were they rounded up and sent back by the Arab Legion. ‘Abdallah supported 
the British White Paper of 1939, which called for a mixed Arab and Jewish 
population in Palestine and limited Jewish immigration, but proposed that 
Palestine be placed under him to govern. ‘Abdallah had never given up the 
idea of a uniﬁ ed Syria and kept close contact with supporters in Syria and 
Palestine. However, during the Mandate period, the republicans gained the 
initiative over ‘Abdallah’s supporters in both Syria and Palestine forcing him 
to give up his dream of a uniﬁ ed (Hashemite) Syria. 
 World War II caused a respite in the Palestine problem and Jordan’s 
armed forces participated in several operations in Syria and Iraq along-
side British troops. Once the war ended Jordan, along with Lebanon and 
Syria, became fully independent and Jordan renamed itself the Hashemite 
Kingdom of Jordan in 1946. No sooner was Jordan independent than 
the issue of Palestine was reopened as large numbers of European Jews 
attempted to immigrate. Attempts to ﬁ nd a settlement to the dispute by 
the newly formed United Nations came to nothing and eventually Britain 
as the Mandate power withdrew and Israel declared itself an independent 
state in 1948. In response the Arab states of Egypt, Lebanon, Syria, and 
Jordan invaded to uphold the rights of the Palestinians. The Arabs were 
not adequately prepared for war; their armies were poorly equipped and 

22 
Culture and Customs of Jordan
most of their troops were poorly trained. Only the Jordanians had success 
and held the West Bank and the old city of Jerusalem against determined 
attacks. The Egyptians were able to maintain only the Gaza Strip, and the 
Syrians and Lebanese were pushed out of Palestine. The ﬁ ghting came to 
an end in 1949 and a cease ﬁ re was signed between all parties establish-
ing de facto borders. Thousands of Palestinians from the areas controlled 
by Israel became refugees, ﬁ lling camps set up for them by the United 
Nations in the Gaza Strip, the West Bank, Lebanon, Syria, and Jordan. 
 The failure of the Palestinian leadership before and during the conﬂ ict 
with Israel lost them the respect of not only their own people, but of the 
other Arab leaders. The Palestinian people were in a serious position; they 
had no one to be their recognized spokesman. King ‘Abdallah hoping 
to revive the old dream of a uniﬁ ed Hashemite Syria had the Jordanian 
 parliament pass the Act of Uniﬁ cation in 1950 making the West Bank part 
of the Kingdom. Palestinians from the West Bank became Jordanians with 
full citizenship and passports whether they wanted it or not. For many 
 Palestinians this was not welcomed; they wanted to be Palestinians with 
their own country, not be to made citizens of another country. In addi-
tion, for many Palestinians, Jordanians were rude, backwoods country folk 
lacking in sophistication and education. The cultural gap between the two 
peoples had grown even wider during the Mandate period. Politically, most 
Palestinians did not want a monarchy, but had hoped for a representational 
republican system of their own. In 1951 while in Jerusalem, King ‘Abdallah 
was assassinated by a young Palestinian nationalist. 
 King ‘Abdallah was succeeded by his son Talal, however Talal suffered 
from a mental condition, and there was strong pressure from the British and 
from within the Hashemite family for him to abdicate in favor of his young 
son Hussein. Talal abdicated in 1952 and in 1953 Hussein became King. 
The young king was faced with a number of problems in the wake of the 
1948 war with Israel. The poor showing of especially the Egyptian army had 
been due to inept high ranking ofﬁ cers and serious corruption in the govern-
ment. Attempts by King Faruq’s government to deal with these problems 
were made, but they were too little too late. In 1952 Faruq was deposed 
in a military coup by a group of young ofﬁ cers, including Gamal ‘Abd  
al-Nasir and Anwar al-Saddat. The Arab world was humiliated by the defeat 
in  Palestine, and a new wave of Arab nationalism swept the region embodied 
in men like ‘Abd al-Nasir. 
 Jordan still had British military bases on its soil and the Jordanian army was 
commanded by a British ofﬁ cer, John Bagot Glubb or Glubb Pasha. Despite 
the fact that the Jordanians had done better than the other Arab armies in 
the 1948 war, the presence of British military on Arab soil was a focal point 

Land, People, and History of Jordan 
23
of anger for Arab nationalists. This was all the more so when the British, 
French, and Israelis attacked Egypt in 1956 after ‘Abd al-Nasir nationalized 
the Suez Canal. King Hussein dismissed Glubb and the forced the British to 
close their bases in Jordan. This was not enough for the pro-Nasir nationalists 
in Jordan and between 1956 and 1958 there was a struggle between them and 
King Hussein for control of Jordan. Elections in 1956 swept in a national-
ist parliament with Sulayman Nablusi, head of the National Socialist Party, 
asked to form a new government. In a subsequent test of power the King won 
using the strong support he had from the Bedouin dominated army. The par-
liament was dismissed in 1957 and a subsequent coup attempt was crushed 
by the Bedouin troops. 
 In 1958 Egypt and Syria formed the United Arab Republic as a step 
towards the long-dreamed-for unity for the Arab people. In response the two 
Hashemite Kingdoms, Jordan and Iraq formed the Arab Federation, but it 
was quickly dissolved when the Hashemites in Iraq lost their throne in a 
bloody revolution in the same year. The United Arab Republic collapsed in 
1961 when Syria withdrew over problems of Egyptian abuse of power inside 
Syria. King Hussein had lost the support of his cousins in Iraq and began 
forging other relationships opening up to the Saudis and others who were not 
comfortable with ‘Abd al-Nasir’s popularity with the Arab people. 
 During this time the Palestinian refugees in the camps and had to orga-
nize themselves as best as they could. The old social and political order had 
crumbled in the 1948 war and a new leadership needed to emerge. Taking 
the initiative, the Egyptians pushed for the formation of the Palestine Libera-
tion Organization (PLO)—separate from the Jordanians—at the ﬁ rst Arab 
 Summit in 1964. A tool of the Egyptians, the ﬁ rst PLO had little popular 
support from the Palestinians themselves. Instead, organizations born in the 
refugee camps like al-Fath gained greater respect and support. These organi-
zations launched raids across the Egyptian and Jordanian frontiers to attack 
targets inside Israel. While they were not able to do much damage, they did 
provoke the Israelis into severe cross-border retaliations. In 1966 the  Israelis 
raided into the Jordanian-held West Bank and forced King Hussein into 
closer relations with both Syria and Egypt. In 1967 King Hussein, pledging 
mutual assistance if attacked by Israel, signed the Joint Defense Pact with 
Egypt and Syria. 
 In June of 1967 the confrontation between Egypt and Israel over use of 
the Suez Canal erupted into war and within six days the Egyptians, Syrians, 
and Jordanians were not only defeated but had lost large amounts of terri-
tory. Once again Jordan received Palestinian refugees, some made refugee for 
a second time. While the Jordanian army was defeated and forced to retreat 
to the East Bank of the Jordan River, it had been able to do so in good order 

24 
Culture and Customs of Jordan
and with minimal loss. The Israelis ﬂ ushed with their quick victory over three 
Arab armies, felt they could operate as they pleased and in 1968 crossed the 
Jordan River to destroy the Palestinian guerillas at Karamah in the Jordan 
Valley. They were surprised to ﬁ nd the Palestinian ﬁ ghters did not retreat 
but fought back inﬂ icting losses on the Israelis. Alerted to the attack, the 
Jordanian army responded, using tanks and artillery to force the Israelis to 
withdraw. The defeat of the Israelis encouraged the Palestinian commandos 
who continued to launch raids across the river. In 1968 the al-Fath move-
ment took over control of the PLO, breaking Egypt’s control of the organiza-
tion. The Palestinians were on the way to be their own voice in their conﬂ ict 
with Israel. 
 Jordan was one of the most important confrontation states with both a 
long border with Israel and a large portion of its population Palestinians. 
 Palestinian camps began to operate with their own local government con-
trolled by armed men from groups like al-Fath. Jordanian authority was 
ignored, increasing frictions between Jordanian police and military on one 
hand, and with the Palestinians on the other. The situation came to a head 
in September 1970 when the PFLP (Popular Front for the Liberation of 
 Palastine), which is a different organization from the PLO, hijacked a num-
ber of international airlines and brought them to an abandoned airbase near 
Mafraq in the northern desert. The hijackers eventually released the hostages 
and blew up the planes, but the Jordanian army could take no more from 
the Palestinian ﬁ ghters. The army and the  ﬁ ghters fought a brief but ﬁ erce 
battle to control ‘Amman and in the end the army prevailed in what has come 
to be called Black September. The conﬂ ict was mediated in Cairo by ‘Abd 
al-Nasir and King Hussein and Yasir ‘Arafat agreed to end the ﬁ ghting. The 
Palestinian ﬁ ghters were forced to leave the country and many sought refuge 
in Lebanon. By 1971 the last of the ﬁ ghters had been forced to leave. 
 Following Black September Jordan embarked on a policy to “Jordanian-
ize” the civil service and the army. A glass ceiling was imposed on  promotions 
for Palestinians and many of those who had risen to high ranks were ﬁ red 
or retired. East Bankers were promoted, sometimes over better qualiﬁ ed 
 Palestinian candidates. Sensitive police and military command positions 
went to men of Bedouin or Circassian origins whose loyalty was not in ques-
tion. Police and military checkpoints were set up to control and monitor the 
movements of Palestinians within Jordan, especially to points such as the port 
of al-‘Aqabah and the Jordan Valley. 
 Jordan stayed out of the 1973 war with Israel but offered material support 
to the Syrians. Jordan lost an important diplomatic battle to the PLO headed 
by Yasir ‘Arafat when in 1974 the Arab League recognized them as the sole 
legitimate voice of the Palestinian people. Jordan still remained one of the 

Land, People, and History of Jordan 
25
most important confrontation states with Israel and technically still had 
legitimate sovereignty over the occupied West Bank. In 1976 the Palestinian 
leader Yasir ‘Arafat meet with King Hussein and began to rebuild relations 
destroyed in 1970 and, in the wake of the Camp David Accords between 
Egypt and Israel, the 1978 Baghdad Arab Summit pledged massive economic 
assistance for Jordan’s steadfastness in the struggle with Israel. 
 Since the Act of Uniﬁ cation in 1950 Jordan had administered the West 
Bank paying the salaries of its civil servants, even after the 1967 war. When 
the Arab League recognized the PLO as the legitimate voice of the  Palestinian 
people, the Jordanians began the disengagement process. The parliament rep-
resenting both banks of Jordan was abrogated in 1974. While technically still 
part of Jordan, the West Bank was slowly being cut loose. By 1981 a new 
leadership was emerging on the West Bank of locally elected ofﬁ cers, but 
the Israeli Defense Force, fearing the growth of Palestinian self-government, 
crushed the movement. 
 The decade of the 1980s saw the ﬁ nal withdrawal of the Israelis from 
Egyptian Sinai, the Lebanese civil war plunge into further depths, and two 
Israeli invasions of Lebanon. Jordan was still a major party to the conﬂ ict, 
though it was also able to take advantage of the continued Lebanese civil war 
to emerge as the new ﬁ nancial capital replacing Beirut. Jordan was one of 
the few pro-Western Arab states and had an open market and a stable cur-
rency. In the period of 1981 to 1984 when Israel was introducing free trade 
and liberalization policies, the Jordanian dinar, along with the U.S. dollar, 
was brieﬂ y used instead of the Israeli shekel. ‘Amman became an important 
commercial center for international trade in the Middle East. Jordan’s peo-
ple reached high levels of education, and illiteracy dropped to 15 percent, 
composed of mainly the elderly. Jordanians found work in the Arab Gulf 
states and Saudi Arabia and were preferred over the more politically active 
Palestinians. Jordanian Bedouin were hired by the governments of Kuwait 
and Bahrain to serve as police or in the military. 
 Israel’s invasion of Lebanon in 1982 was supposed to be to bring peace 
to the northern border areas that had been the target of Palestinian attacks. 
Once in Lebanon, the Israeli command thought they would be able to crush 
the PLO and the Palestinians, and they pushed to Beirut, which was subjected 
to intense shelling. The Palestinian ﬁ ghters once more were forced to leave, 
and this time refuge was granted to them in Tunisia. It seemed for awhile that 
the Palestinian dream was even further away from reality, but in 1984 the 
Palestinian National Council met in ‘Amman. In 1985 the Jordanians and 
Palestinians agreed to coordinate peace negotiations. Much to everyone’s sur-
prise, the Palestinian Uprising (or  Intifadah ) began in 1987. No one seemed 
to be in charge yet it continued despite the best efforts by the Israeli Defense 

26 
Culture and Customs of Jordan
Force to crush it. The young men and women who led the grassroots uprising 
did not depend on outside assistance nor did they take orders from the exiled 
Palestinian leadership. Jordan took a ﬁ nal step in its separation from the West 
Bank and in 1988 withdrew all of its administrative and legal ties. The West 
Bank became responsibility of the Palestinians. 
 Despite the fact that Jordan had replaced Beirut as the ﬁ nancial center 
for the Middle East, its economy based on agriculture and phosphates was 
 stumbling. In 1989 Jordan embarked on the International Monetary Fund’s 
program for structural readjustment. The Jordanian dinar fell against the 
U.S. dollar from slightly over three U.S. dollars to the dinar to slightly under 
one U.S. dollar to the dinar. Prices rose as the value of the dinar fell causing 
riots to erupt in the Bedouin-dominated southern town of Ma’an. In the 
same year Jordan allowed the ﬁ rst open, free, and fair elections since 1956, 
and the Islamists won a clear majority throughout the country. 
 Following the confrontation with the Nasirist nationalists in the 1950s, the 
Jordanian government found the Muslim Brotherhood and other Islamic par-
ties to be political allies. The Muslim Brotherhood had no love for ‘Abd al-Nasir 
after he began to arrest and persecute them in Egypt. King  Hussein saw the 
possibilities of an alliance with the Islamists and encouraged them as a foil to 
not only the nationalists but also the leftists among mainly the Palestinians. As a 
result the Islamist parties did not need to worry about  government interference 
and by the end of the 1980s were among the strongest political parties in the 
country. It was no surprise they won the ﬁ rst open and free elections in 1989. 
 Iraq’s invasion of Kuwait in 1990 further complicated an already compli-
cated state of affairs in the Middle East. Kuwait had little sympathy from the 
majority of Arabs. They and other oil-rich Gulf Arabs and Saudis had estab-
lished poor reputations because of their bad behavior abroad and for the poor 
way they treated those Arabs working in their countries. King Hussein initially 
tried to mediate the problem and get Saddam Hussein to withdraw. However, 
Saddam Hussein refused to withdraw his forces, and in 1991 the United States 
and its allies (including Egypt and Syria) launched the counteroffensive and 
pushed the Iraqi forces out of Kuwait and into southern Iraq. King Hussein 
did not seem to take a strong stance against Iraq during the war, therefore the 
Gulf countries and Saudi Arabia decided to punish Jordan for this. Jordani-
ans working in the Gulf and Saudi Arabia were ﬁ red and forced to return to 
Jordan. It was worse for Jordanians and Palestinians in Kuwait where they 
were seen to be collaborators with the Iraqis. The arrival of a large number of 
Jordanians (and Palestinians) added to the economic problems of the country. 
Nearly all of them were well educated but there were no jobs for them. 
 Jordan participated in the Madrid summit and embarked on the road to a 
peace treaty with Israel. This was signed in 1994, formally ending hostilities 

Land, People, and History of Jordan 
27
and opening up full diplomatic relations and an exchange of ambassadors 
between the two countries. The border was open to travel, tourism, and eco-
nomic trade. While peace ofﬁ cially existed between Jordan and Israel, few 
Jordanians embraced it. Israeli tourists increased the need for strong security, 
and popular destinations such as Petra seemed to swarm with Jordanian secu-
rity forces. Israeli tourism began to slow after a few shootings and stopped 
nearly altogether in 2000 when the second Palestinian  Intifadah began. 
 The Oslo talks between the Israelis and Palestinians set the framework for the 
Madrid summit. The United States needed to demonstrate a real desire to settle 
the Palestinian-Israeli conﬂ ict after the Gulf War in 1991. The Palestinian lead-
ership had supported Saddam Hussein in the war, and now had to make up with 
other parties involved. In 1992 Jordan, the Palestinians, and Israel held talks in 
Washington, DC and, as noted above, Jordan signed a peace treaty with Israel in 
1994. Yasir ‘Arafat returned to the Occupied Territories and set up the Palestin-
ian Authority. A provocative visit to the Dome of the Rock and al-Aqsa Mosque 
by Israeli politician Ariel Sharon sparked the second Palestinian  Intifadah and 
the eventual showdown between Yasir ‘Arafat and the Israelis. 
 The troubled relationship between the Palestinians and the Israelis 
dominated the last years of King Hussein’s life. Sick with cancer the King 
remained active as much as possible. In 1999 Hussein had the Jordanian 
constitution changed to allow his son ‘Abdallah (from his second marriage to a 
British woman) to succeed the throne rather than the King’s younger brother 
Hasan. A month later Hussein died after he became chilled during an open-
car parade celebrating his return to Jordan after cancer treatment abroad. His 
son ‘Abdallah succeeded to the throne as King ‘Abdallah II and his younger 
brother Hamzah (from Hussein’s third marriage to a Palestinian woman) 
became the Crown Prince. 
‘ Abdallah II is one of a number of young Arab leaders coming to power in 
recent years. Many of the old guard in the government were retired and a new 
cadre of young technocrats were recruited. Jordan under ‘Abdallah II remains 
a key country in the region. When the United States invaded Iraq in 2003 the 
majority of Jordanians opposed the war fueling strong anti-American feel-
ings. Various claims made by the Bush administration to justify the invasion 
did not convince the Jordanian people, and while the Jordanian government 
did not take an active stand against the invasion, Jordanian television cover-
age was openly hostile. 
 Once the main ﬁ ghting was over, the Jordanian government began efforts to 
repair whatever damage may have been done to their relationship with both the 
United States and Britain as result of the war. Jordan has been a staunch ally 
in the War Against Terror since the September 11th attack in New York City, 
even during the U.S.-led invasion of Iraq, and remains so. There is an active 

28 
Culture and Customs of Jordan
exchange of information between the two countries and when the American 
ships docked at al-‘Aqabah were ﬁ red upon in September 2005 the Jordanians 
responded quickly with arrests within a day of the attack. In November of 2005 
Jordan suffered its own version of September 11th with suicide bombings in 
three hotels. The suicide bombers targeted three hotels where foreigners were 
known to stay, yet 33 of the 56 people killed were Jordanians, and most of 
them were guests at two Jordanian wedding parties. The Jordanian authorities 
arrested a fourth bomber whose device had not gone off, and from her it was 
discovered all four were Iraqis recruited by Abu Musa‘b al-Zarqawi, head of 
the al-Qa‘idah network in Iraq. The suicide attacks left Jordanians stunned; 
however, starting the following night ordinary citizens rallied to support the 
government and to condemn the attacks. 
 CONCLUSION 
 The geography of Jordan inﬂ uenced and still inﬂ uences the culture and 
history of its people. With around 80 percent of the country desert and ﬁ t 
mainly for pastoral nomadism, the Bedouin have come to deﬁ ne much of 
what is “Jordanian”. The narrow band of agricultural lands running along 
the eastern rim of the Rift Valley system has either been under the control of 
larger regional powers such as Egypt, Syria, or Iraq, or have been left to fend 
for themselves with their Bedouin neighbors. 
 Since World War I Jordan has been pulled into the conﬂ ict between 
the Palestinians and Jewish immigrants, and after World War II into the 
wider regional conﬂ ict that erupted with the establishment of Israel in 1948. 
 Jordan has been the country where the largest numbers of Palestinians have 
gone as refugees putting strains on its fragile economy and politics. The 
ripple effect caused by the creation of Israel and the mass movement of 
large numbers of displaced Palestinians has been the root cause for much of 
the instability in the Middle East. The fall of the Shah of Iran in 1979 to a 
populist Islamic revolution destabilized much of the Gulf region leading to 
the destructive and protracted Iran-Iraq War and eventually to the 1990–91 
and 2003 Gulf Wars, which resulted in the eventual fall of Iraqi President 
Saddam Hussein. 
 Despite the reoccurring instability in the region, Jordan, guided by King 
Hussein, was able to remain an island of stability through the volatile period 
of modern Middle Eastern history. Jordan has remained one of the few stable 
countries in the region, being able to weather political and economic storms. 
Much of Jordan’s success was due to the abilities of King Hussein, and now it 
is his son ‘Abdallah II’s turn to demonstrate his ability to do the same. 

 2 
 Religion and World View 
 Over 80 percent of Jordanians are Sunni Muslims and most of the remainder 
are Christians, belonging to a number of different denominations. Since the 
Syrian Revolt of 1925, a small number of Druze live in some of the northern 
towns around Azraq. When Jordan administered the West Bank, it also num-
bered among its people the Samaritans, a Jewish sect that has survived since 
before the time of Christ. Jordan’s different religious communities are found 
in most of the country, though the Christians are more frequently found in 
the larger towns and cities. However, Jordan is one of the few countries of 
the Middle East where there are Christian Bedouin. These Christian Bedouin 
live near Karak and claim to be the direct descendants of the Bani Ghassan 
tribe who ruled the region for the Byzantines prior to the arrival of Islam in 
630. 
 ISLAM IN JORDAN 
 The overwhelming number of Jordanians are Sunni Muslims following the 
Shaﬁ ‘i School or  Madhhab. The division between Sunni and Shi‘i began in 
the early centuries of the religion as a dispute over who should be considered 
the legitimate successor to the Prophet Muhammad and leader of the Mus-
lim community, but has come today to include differences in sources of and 
application of Islamic law or the  Shari ‘ah. Within Sunni Islam there are four 
Schools of Law, each named for the person who founded and began the work 
to codify it. The majority of Jordanians belong to the Shaﬁ ‘i School named 
for the late eighth- to early ninth-century Islamic scholar Muhammad bin 
Idris al-Shaﬁ ‘i (died 820). The Shaﬁ ‘i School is the main one found in most 

30 
Culture and Customs of Jordan
of the Arabic-speaking Middle East from Egypt eastward and is shared with 
the majority of Sunnis in Syria, Lebanon, Iraq, and Egypt. In addition to the 
Shaﬁ ‘i School, Shishan, Circassian, Uzbek, and Turkomen Jordanians belong 
to the Hanaﬁ  School, which is spread mainly among the Turkish-speaking 
areas of Anatolia and Central Asia as well as the Caucasus. Because it was the 
school of the ruling Ottoman Turkish elite, it is also found in the former 
provinces of the Ottoman Empire. The Hanaﬁ  School was founded earlier 
than the Shaﬁ ‘i by the Islamic scholar Abu Hanifa (died 767). 
 The Shaﬁ ‘i School differs from the other three in the importance given to 
the main sources of Islamic law. For al-Shaﬁ ‘i there were four sources for legal 
decisions, the Qur’an, the  Sunnah of the Prophet, which includes  Hadith (or 
sayings attributed to him as well as his actions), analogy (or  qiyas ), and ﬁ nally 
consensus (or  ijma ‘). While most of the Islamic schools of law use the same 
sources, the order of use is not the same and for al-Shaﬁ ‘i any contradiction 
or seeming contradiction between the Qur’an (the word of God) and the 
Sunnah (actions and words of the Prophet of God) were to be seen within 
their own contexts. That is, the Sunnah is to help understand the meaning 
of the Qur’an and if some action or word of the Prophet is found to be in 
contradiction to the revelations of the Qur’an, there would also be another 
action or statement of the Prophet that would support the Qur’an. Al-Shaﬁ ‘i 
helped systematize the use of analogy, and he is thought by many to be the 
ﬁ rst to truly provide a system for Islamic jurisprudence. 
 The Hanaﬁ  School of Law began just prior to the Shaﬁ ‘i and according to 
legend Abu Hanifa died the same day that al-Shaﬁ ‘i was born. Abu Hanifa 
was a leading Islamic scholar in the Iraqi city Kufa and tended to reﬂ ect 
the attitudes of the emerging Islamic society, which combined legal concepts 
from Roman law with that of Arabia. The four major sources of Islamic law 
are the same as those discussed by al-Shaﬁ ‘i, however, the source and its prior-
ity differ in the application to a particular legal case. 
 There is a small number of Druze in Jordan as a result of the 1925 Revolt 
in Syria against the French. Sultan al-Atrash, the leader of the Syrian Druze 
in Jabal Druze, rose in revolt against the French. His revolt was eventually 
crushed, but during the ﬁ ghting a number of Druze families relocated to sev-
eral northern Jordanian towns and villages not far from the Syrian border. 
 Druze are considered to be a heterodox group within Islam, that is, their 
religion is derived from the major principles of Islam, but has greatly deviated 
from them. For many Muslims, the Druze are outside of the faith and not 
considered to be Muslims. The Druze religion was founded during the life-
time of the Fatimid Khalifah al-Hakim bi-Amr Allah (996–1024) who was 
named the  Imam (head of the Muslim community) and the ‘ Aqil (or Cosmic 
Intellect). The religious movement took its name from one of al-Hakim’s 

Religion and World View 
31
most faithful adherents and missionaries, al-Darazi. Al-Hakim was assassi-
nated, some say by his own sister who could no longer tolerate his erratic 
behavior. Al-Hakim’s followers were forced to seek refuge in the mountains 
of Lebanon where they were able to establish a community. For the Druze, 
al-Hakim did not die but went into a state of suspended animation from 
which he will return one day. The Druze community remained mainly in 
the mountains of Lebanon and for a period of time came to rule much of 
Lebanon, part of Syria, Jordan, and Palestine for the Ottoman Sultans. Some 
Druze communities were established in Palestine and in Jawlan (the Golan 
Heights) in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, but the majority of 
Druze in Syria’s Jabal Druze arrived in the mid 1860s after a conﬂ ict between 
them and the Christian Maronites. They came to dominate the region to 
such an extent that the mountains once called Jabal al-‘Arab became the Jabal 
Druze. 
 Little is known about the beliefs of the Druze, who themselves are not 
generally aware of their faith. In order to help protect themselves from 
persecution the Druze have developed a hierarchy based on the amount of 
knowledge the person knows about the religion. Only a small number of the 
faithful will ever have full knowledge. 
 THE FIVE PILLARS OF FAITH 
 All Muslims follow the principles of the religion and adhere to the Five 
Pillars; the pronouncement of  shahadah (or declaration of faith), payment of 
 zakat (or an alms tax ), siyam  (or fasting during the month of Ramadan) , salat 
(or prayer ﬁ ve times a day), and  haj (or a pilgrimage to Makkah once in their 
lifetime, if it is ﬁ nancially and physically possible). 
 Muslims reafﬁ rm their faith by stating the  shahadah or “there is no god but 
God and Muhammad is the Prophet of God” on a daily basis. The  shahadah 
forms the major part of the call to prayer (or  adhan ), which is heard ﬁ ve 
times a day before each of the required prayer times. It is also stated when 
one ﬁ nishes the required ritual ablution or  wudu ‘ prior to prayer and is again 
stated as part of prayer. This strong belief in the unity of God is one of the 
few major doctrinal differences between Muslims and Christians. Muslims 
believe that Jesus was a great prophet and accept his virgin birth, but they do 
not believe that he is the son of God. 
 Prayer is to be done ﬁ ve times a day by all Muslims. Men are encouraged 
to pray in a mosque and foster feelings of community. Women may pray in a 
mosque, but more frequently pray at home. The ﬁ ve times correspond to the 
movement of the sun and are done at dawn or  fajr, mid day or  duhur, mid 
afternoon or  ‘asr, sundown or  maghrib, and in the evening or  ‘ishiyah , which 

32 
Culture and Customs of Jordan
is some two hours after sundown. Many mosques in Jordan offer another 
prayer at midnight, which is not an obligation, but an act of piety. During 
the month of Ramadan Muslims offer what is called  tarawih prayer imme-
diately following the evening prayer. This prayer lasts much longer than the 
normal one and is an act of piety that marks Ramadan. 
 Muslims face towards Makkah during prayer as ordered in the Qur’an. 
Originally Muslims faced towards Jerusalem in recognition of that city’s 
 special history of monotheist religion. However, the Prophet was told in a 
revelation to change the direction to Makkah since it was at Makkah that 
Ibrahim (Abraham of the Old Testament) was ordered to build the ﬁ rst house 
for the worship of the one God. Muslims throughout the world face towards 
Makkah for prayer and ﬁ nding the correct direction for this is the reason 
Muslims advanced the sciences in astronomy, geography, and mapping. 
 Muslims are required to fast during the month of Ramadan from dawn 
to dusk; from  fajr to  maghrib. Fasting means that no food or drink can be 
consumed during the daylight hours nor can anyone smoke. In fact, noth-
ing should pass the lips during the hours of fasting. The purpose is for all 
Muslims to understand the hardships that the poor endure all year round, to 
foster a greater sense of community by everyone being involved in the same 
activity, and to follow the  Sunnah of the Prophet Muhammad. Muhammad 
began a strict regime of fasting before he became the Prophet, and the ﬁ rst 
revelations of the Qur’an came to him while he was fasting during the month 
of Ramadan. 
 Ramadan is a month for reﬂ ection and piety. Arguments and disputes are to 
be avoided, though for those addicted to caffeine and nicotine long days with 
no coffee or cigarettes often cause ill tempers. When the evening call to prayer is 
heard, everyone may eat and drink. Following the Ottoman custom, cities like 
‘Amman use a canon located on the Citadel Hill to announce the fast is over, 
and in the morning to help announce another day of fasting has begun. The 
 Sunnah of the Prophet is to break the fast with dates and milk and then to pray 
the evening prayer before eating a meal. Many Jordanians follow this practice 
but perhaps just as many break their fast with a major meal. Ramadan is a time 
when there are special foods, especially sweets such as  zalabiyah, mushabbak, 
and  qatayif. Zalabiyah  is made of light dough poured into a vat of hot oil. The 
dough is poured into shapes and cooks quickly. When it is taken out of the oil 
it is covered in a thick, rosewater ﬂ avored syrup. When made into rosettes it 
is called  mushabbak (or net-like).  Qatayif is similar to a crepe and is ﬁ lled with 
nuts or Turkish delight or ricotta cheese and re-cooked. Again it is covered with 
thick, rosewater-ﬂ avored syrup before being served. 
 Before the dawn prayer there is another meal called  suhur during Ramadan. 
Neighborhoods may hire someone to come around with a drum or trumpet to 

Religion and World View 
33
help wake everyone up so they can eat before the day’s fast begins. This person 
is called the  masaharti , and in the past children would gather around him to clap 
and sing as he walked along the streets playing his drum. Today this is not done 
as much as in the past and instead of a man with a drum, neighborhood teenag-
ers gather to bang on metal pots and pans to wake people up. A canon sounds to 
note that people should stop eating and another day of fasting has begun. 
 The 27th day of Ramadan is called Laylat al-Qadir or the Night of Power. 
It is believed that the ﬁ rst revelations of the Qur’an were given to Muhammad 
during that night. Laylat al-Qadir is mentioned in the Qur’an and is when the 
angels descend to earth. Prayers offered during Laylat al-Qadir are believed to 
be especially important as a result and most Muslim men spend the entire night 
in the mosque in prayer and contemplation. Jordanian TV covers the night 
and broadcasts special programs including live coverage from the Ka‘abah in 
Makkah. 
 Fasting during Ramadan is directly connected to the next pillar, paying the 
poor tax or  zakat , which is collected from all Muslims who can afford it. In 
many Muslim countries today the poor tax is taken out of monthly salaries 
like any other form of taxation and is administered by a special department 
within ministries of religious affairs.  Zakat is not to be used to make a name 
for the individual donor; it should be donated anonymously and accepted 
anonymously so that neither party can use it for their own personal beneﬁ t. 
In addition, no one should know how much was given or how much was 
received but a standard of 10 percent of a person’s monthly income is usual. 
 The ﬁ fth pillar is a pilgrimage or  haj to Makkah once in a person’s lifetime. 
Pilgrimage is not supposed to cause the person doing it any ﬁ nancial or physical 
difﬁ culties, though many do it whether it will cause them problems or not. For 
Jordanians the yearly pilgrimage is not as difﬁ cult as it is for those traveling long 
distances such as from Morocco or Indonesia. Public transportation is not that 
difﬁ cult to ﬁ nd nor too costly since Jordan shares a border with Saudi Arabia. In 
the past the main dangers were from Bedouin raids or in the summer season lack 
of water. Various Muslim governments organized huge caravans, which passed 
from Damascus through Jordan, following the ancient trade routes or the Kings 
Highway, until the sixteenth century when the Ottoman Sultan Sulayman the 
Magniﬁ cent had a new route mapped out called the Young Girls Road or  Tariq 
al-Bint. In the early twentieth century this route was followed by the Hijaz Rail-
way and today the modern Desert Highway follows the same route. 
 ISLAMIC HOLIDAYS 
 Jordanians celebrate Islamic holidays the most important ones being ‘ Id 
al-Fitr  at the end of Ramadan and ‘ Id al-Adha , which is held in conjunction 

34 
Culture and Customs of Jordan
with the annual pilgrimage to Makkah. The dates for both of these holidays, 
like all Muslim holidays, change every year. The Muslim calendar is based 
on lunar cycles; each month begins with the next new moon meaning that 
any month can be between 28 to 30 days long. With each passing year, the 
Islamic month moves approximately two weeks into the solar calendar so that 
every year the Islamic month starts about two weeks earlier than it did the 
year before. One Islamic month will have traveled through the entire solar 
calendar of months every 30 years. The dependence on close observation of 
the moon is among one of the several ways Islamic societies have contributed 
heavily to the advancement of astronomy. Since the Islamic calendar is not 
ﬁ xed and depends on the monthly phases of the moon, holidays are ofﬁ cially 
announced on television the night before. 
 ‘ Id al-Fitr is also called the ‘ Id al-Saghir (or Small Feast) and, due to the long 
period of Turkish domination in Jordan, some of the older people refer to it 
as  Bayram. The few days before the ‘ Id is a frenzy of shopping for ingredients 
for the holiday meal and for gifts, especially for children. The ‘ Id celebration 
begins with an  ‘Id prayer in the morning usually held in large mosques, or in 
large open areas called  musallah to allow for large numbers of people followed 
by a meal, the ﬁ rst day time meal in a month. The meal usually includes  ka ‘ k , 
which is a shortbread sometimes ﬂ avored with almond ﬂ our made especially 
for this meal. Children are given gifts, which traditionally were new clothes. 
Since the arrival of the ﬁ rst cinemas in the Arab world, the holiday is also 
marked by the release of a new ﬁ lm, often one of the major ﬁ lms for that year. 
The ‘ Id al-Fitr holiday period lasts between two to three days depending on 
whether or not it corresponds to the normal weekend. 
 ‘ Id al-Adha or Feast of the Sacriﬁ ce, also called  al- ‘ Id al-Kabir  or the Big 
Feast, is celebrated the 10th day of the Islamic month Dhu al-Haj and marks 
the conclusion of the  haj. The holiday is a yearly re-enactment of Ibrahim’s 
(Abraham of the Old Testament) act of humility and willingness to obey the 
command of God to sacriﬁ ce his ﬁ rst son Isma’il (Ishmael in the Islamic tra-
dition, but Ishaq or Isaac in the Jewish and Christian traditions). God stayed 
Ibrahim’s hand and substituted a lamb for his son. In the Islamic tradition 
Ibrahim and his son Isma‘il then built the ﬁ rst Ka‘abah as the ﬁ rst house to 
the worship of the one God. The strong connection between Ibrahim, his 
son Isma’l, and his wife Hajar (Hagar) and Makkah is strong. The well of 
Zamzam is the spring of water that appeared to the desperate Hajar as she ran 
back and forth trying to ﬁ nd water for Isma‘il. This act is also re-enacted by 
the pilgrims as part of the requirements to complete the pilgrimage. 
 In Jordan the Turkish name for the holiday  Bayram Qurban is also used 
among the older people. It is expected that every household will buy a sheep, 
and on the morning of the ‘ Id the sheep are slaughtered and butchered. Those 

Religion and World View 
35
who can afford to do so may buy several sheep and have them distributed 
among the poor. Traditionally each family eats part of the lamb on the day of 
the ‘ Id, some is dried to be eaten later, and the rest is given to the poor. Today 
few need to dry the meat and those who do, do so to maintain custom, not 
because they don’t have access to refrigeration. 
 Another major Islamic holiday is the  Mawlid al-Nabi (or the Prophet’s 
Birthday) celebrated on the 12th of the Islamic month Rabi’ al‘-Awwal. The 
celebration of the Prophet’s Birthday is a much newer holiday than ‘ Id al-
Fitr and ‘ Id al-Adha and dates back to the Fatimid dynasty in Egypt. The 
Fatimids were the ﬁ rst to ofﬁ cially celebrate the Prophet’s Birthday and may 
have been inﬂ uenced by the Coptic Christian celebrations for the birth of 
Jesus. The idea of celebrating the Prophet’s Birthday spread from Egypt ﬁ rst 
to those areas under Egyptian political control. In 1588 the Ottoman Sultan 
Murad III declared the  Mawlid an ofﬁ cial holiday. Jordanians take the day 
off, but little else is done to mark the day. 
 ‘Ashurah is the other major Islamic holiday celebrated on the 10th day of 
the Islamic month of Muharram. Some scholars have connected the origin 
of the holiday to the Jewish inﬂ uences on the early Muslim community in 
Madinah and to be related to the Jewish Day of Atonement. It is pointed 
out that at ﬁ rst the day was one of fasting from sunrise to sunset, but later 
the Prophet, after a revelation, changed the Muslim fast to the month of 
Ramadan. ‘ Ashurah corresponds to the death of Imam Hussein, son of ‘Ali 
ibn Abi Talib and grandson of the Prophet Muhammad at Karbala in Iraq in 
680. Among Shi‘i Muslims it is a day of intense mourning and regret over the 
death of Imam Hussein at the hands of the Umayyads. For Sunni Muslims 
the day has become one more for children and is a cross between Halloween’s 
trick or treat and Christmas. Children sing songs and go from house to house 
where they are given candies and/or money. The holiday is rarely celebrated 
in its traditional form today and is not taken as a day off from work and 
school. 
 CHRISTIANITY IN JORDAN 
 Christians make up about 20 percent of Jordan’s population and of those 
the vast majority belongs to the Eastern Orthodox Church. As noted before, 
Christianity is as old as the faith itself in Jordan. One of Christ’s miracles 
recorded in the New Testament took place in the Decapolis city Gadara 
(Umm Qays today) overlooking the Sea of Galilee. John the Baptist was 
brought before King Herod at Makawir located near Madaba. In the early 
years of the religion, Jordan had a ﬂ ourishing Christian civilization attested 
by the brilliant mosaics found in places as diverse as Umm al-Risas, Madaba, 

36 
Culture and Customs of Jordan
and Petra. The Christian families from Karak claim direct descent from the 
Bani Ghassan Arabs who established a kingdom in southern Syria and Jordan 
in the ﬁ fth century. 
 Eastern and western Christianity began a long process of splitting from 
each other in the ﬁ fth century, which culminated in the ﬁ nal split in 1054 
over questions related to the nature of Christ, Mary, and the language of 
the mass. The Crusader period in the Middle East did little to improve the 
relationship between the two major divisions of Christianity as the eastern 
churches suffered under the rule of western rulers and the Byzantine capital, 
Constantinople, was captured and sacked in the 4th Crusade. Control of holy 
sites in Jerusalem, Bethlehem, and other locations were placed under western 
control and were not restored to eastern Christians until the reconquests of 
Salah al-Din and the Mamluks. 
 The Eastern Orthodox Church is also divided into a number of different 
sects though most Jordanians belong to the mainstream branch, which ulti-
mately recognizes the authority of the Patriarch of Constantinople/Istanbul. 
The Jordanian church has a very strong Arab character, and the Arabic lan-
guage is used as the ofﬁ cial language of the Church. In recent decades the 
Jordanian Church has been able to gain a degree of local autonomy separating 
it from control from Jerusalem and having a strong voice in who is selected 
to lead the community and in the selection of priests. All priests and church 
ofﬁ cials must be Arabic speaking. 
 In addition to the Orthodox Christians, there are a number of other 
smaller Christian groups in the country. The Armenians Orthodox Church 
is one with a long established presence in the region. The Armenian king 
converted to Christianity near the end of the third century and Armenia was 
the ﬁ rst country to be Christianized. The Armenian Church split from most 
of the rest of Christianity at the Council of Chalcedon in 451, yet has gener-
ally kept fairly good relations with the rest of the eastern churches, and shares 
many of the same tenants of faith with the Egyptian Copts. Historically, the 
Armenians in Jordan worked as wondering silversmiths in the towns and vil-
lages and were connected to larger communities in cities like Damascus and 
Jerusalem. The majority of Armenians came in 1915 seeking refuge from the 
Turks after over one million were killed or died of extreme exposure as result 
of being accused of giving assistance to the Russian army in World War I. 
 The Catholics are also small in number and most belong to Palestinian 
communities who once were Eastern Orthodox. Over the centuries certain 
groups of Eastern Orthodox Christians agreed to place themselves under the 
Pope, but have been able to keep many of their own practices, including 
using their own languages for the liturgy. 

Religion and World View 
37
 The Protestants are also mainly Palestinians whose ancestors came under 
the inﬂ uence of certain European or American missionaries during the nine-
teenth and early twentieth centuries. Again, most of the Protestants are descen-
dants of people who converted from Eastern Orthodoxy to one of the many 
Protestant churches. Most of the Protestants fall under the general control of 
the Anglican Bishop in ‘Amman. Until the 1980s the Protestant community 
was under the authority of the Anglican Bishop of Jerusalem, but the two 
were divided to better serve their communities thus the Bishop in ‘Amman 
became the head of the Jordanian Protestants. Among Jordan’s small Protes-
tant communities are Lutherans (connected to the German Lutheran Church 
in Jerusalem), Presbyterians, and Baptists. 
 Christian Holidays 
 Eastern churches place far more importance on the cruciﬁ xion of Jesus 
than his birth, and therefore Easter is a far more important holiday than 
Christmas. Easter is preceded by a 40-day Lenten fast called the Great Lent, 
and the day itself is celebrated by lengthy masses. Similar to the Muslim holi-
days, children receive gifts such as new clothes. Following the mass, people 
have large meals including the food items that had been forbidden during the 
Lenten fast, such as meat. 
 The eastern churches have a number of periods of Lenten fasts, and in 
the total number of days have more fast days of one kind or another than 
the Muslims. The Lenten periods include: the Great Lent, which falls 40 
days before Easter; the Dormition Lent (the Falling Asleep of the Virgin 
Mary) which lasts 15 days; The Christmas Lent, which is 40 days before 
Christmas; and 1 day each for the Feast of the Holy Apostles, the day before 
Epiphany, the Feast of the Beheading of John the Baptist, and the Eleva-
tion of the Holy Cross. In addition, Wednesdays and Fridays are Lenten 
days and, as a result, a large variety of meatless dishes have been developed 
by eastern Christians. A typical Lenten meal includes cheeses, high protein 
bean dishes, eggplant, ﬁ sh, and fruit when in season. Meals to celebrate the 
end of one of the many Lenten periods usually include a variety of meat 
and chicken dishes. 
 Eastern Christmas is celebrated January 7th rather than December 25th. 
Christmas is less important in eastern Christianity as it is the cruciﬁ xion 
and resurrection of Christ that are more central to the doctrines of the faith. 
The celebrations for Christmas have become greatly inﬂ uenced by those of 
 western Christianity, especially with the number of Westerners living in cit-
ies like ‘Amman and the major hotels all put up Christmas decorations that 
incorporate Western symbols and images, even Santa Claus and Christmas 

38 
Culture and Customs of Jordan
trees. Western Christmas music, candies, and gifts in colorful wrappings have 
come to be part of many Christian Jordanians’ celebration of the holiday. 
 In recognition of the fact that there are both western and eastern Chris-
tians among its people, Jordan has struck a compromise for public recog-
nition of the holidays. Ofﬁ cially Jordan recognizes western Christmas and 
eastern Easter as holidays, but each community is allowed to celebrate their 
own unofﬁ cial holidays as well. Banks close for December 25, but govern-
ment ofﬁ ces remain open. Christian employees are given their own days off, 
but everyone has their two holidays. In addition to these holidays, Jordanians 
get Christian and Islamic New Years Day off. While not seen as religious 
holidays, all  citizens are able to enjoy them as holidays. 
 RELATION BETWEEN THE RELIGIONS 
 Relation between the different religious communities has generally been 
fairly good in Jordan. The majority of Jordanians became Muslim within 
a short period after the initial conquest. Islam is known to have spread into 
Jordan before the region was under Muslim control, the Ghassanid governor 
of ‘Amman being among the ﬁ rst to convert to Islam. Once the region fell 
under Islamic government, many of the Christian groups were given more 
freedom of worship than they experienced under the Byzantines. Priests were 
no longer required to abide by decisions made by the various councils and 
enforced by the Byzantine state. 
 With the opening up of the Syrian Desert to Bedouin tribes from the 
Peninsula, much of rural Jordan became Muslim. Christianity remained an 
important religion in towns and cities, such as Damascus and Jerusalem, but 
more and more of the rural people turned to Islam. Religious reform move-
ments such as the Shi‘ite Qaramitah found strong support among the rural 
Jordanian population and by the eleventh century, Christians were in the 
minority. 
 The western Crusaders did little to help the position of eastern Christians 
whether under their control or in Muslim lands. The numbers of Christians 
fell in Syria as eastern Christians converted to Islam in order to distance them-
selves from being identiﬁ ed with the Crusaders. Those who remained Chris-
tian asserted their eastern (and Arab) identities. The Mongols who invaded 
the region in the thirteenth century initially favored the eastern Christians 
and some of the Mongol elite converted to Nestorian Christianity, but in the 
end the descendants of the Mongols who settled to rule in the Middle East 
and Central Asia converted to Islam. 
 The Ottomans, building on older means of governing, developed a system 
called the Millet system (from the Arabic word  millah meaning community), 

Religion and World View 
39
whereby each religious community was responsible for itself to the state. 
Certain religious leaders came to represent not only their own community 
but other smaller communities. Most Jordanian Christians were represented 
by the Patriarch of the Eastern Orthodox Church. Latter, when other com-
munities became recognized, other leaders became responsible for them to 
the state, such as the Anglican Bishop of Jerusalem. When Jordan became 
independent, some of these older Ottoman means of dealing with religious 
minorities remained in effect. 
 Hostilities between Muslims and Christians have not been a major feature 
in Jordan’s history. Both communities know a good deal about the other, 
unlike in many other countries where different religious communities remain 
greatly separated. Certain posts in the government are required to go to Mus-
lims, but in general there is little discrimination based on religion. Christians, 
especially Palestinians, were once the most educated and westernized part of 
the population, dominating professions such as medicine and higher educa-
tion. This gradually changed over the decades after independence, though 
perhaps Christians still dominate some professions such as medicine. 
 Recent problems between religious communities in other Middle Eastern 
countries, such as Lebanon, have not affected relations between Jordanians. 
Fighting between various militias connected to speciﬁ c religious communi-
ties in Lebanon did not spill over into Jordan. Incidents have been rare and 
quickly dealt with by the government and by the community leaders. Jordan 
remains an island of calm in the region. 
 Jordan’s Conservative Society and Popular Religion 
 Jordanians, whether Muslim or Christian, are conservative. There are 
social restrictions on the interaction between men and women in the public 
sphere. Men and women do interact, but within the proper boundaries as 
set by society. Many Jordanian women are veiled, which means wearing a 
headscarf, and dressing in clothes that do not reveal much skin. Christians 
are also conservative, and often it is hard to know religion by the clothes 
worn. 
 The conservative nature of the country means that public displays of affec-
tion are not appreciated, and the persons involved may suffer consequences at 
home should the family be made aware. Punishments can be severe, especially 
for the females who, according to Arab tradition, “wear the family’s honor 
on their skirts.” Some Jordanian houses and apartments have been built with 
two entrances, one for the family to use and one for guests. The one for guests 
opens up into a special room reserved to receive guests, and they do not need 
to pass through the part of the house where the family lives. Male guests may 

40 
Culture and Customs of Jordan
or may not see any of the women of the house depending on the closeness of 
relationship to the family. 
 Honor plays an important role in society and is the same for Muslims 
and Christians. Honor is connected with the behavior of individuals and 
the honor of a family can be ruined by the so-called bad behavior of an indi-
vidual. The entire family is judged by the actions of an individual, as the 
actions of the individuals reﬂ ect the general moral level of the whole family. 
While much of this comes from tradition, religion is often used to justify the 
traditions around values such as honor. 
 Popular Islam and popular Christianity do not exist in Jordan to the degree 
that they do in many other Middle Eastern countries. What popular prac-
tices exist are localized rather than generalized. A good example of this is the 
Maqam Shaykh ‘Umar al-Malkawi in Malka located in northern Jordan near 
the Yarmuk River. Shaykh ‘Umar al-Malkawi was a pious man who lived in 
the early sixteenth century. He taught Qur’an and was reputed to be able to 
cure people of mental illnesses. Of his two sons, people only remember the 
name of one of them, Ahmad Abu Saqayn. Both are buried next to him. They 
too were pious men who taught Qur’an and were able to cure people. Ahmad 
gained the nickname Abu Saqayn (or “He of Two Sets of Legs”) because of 
how quickly he could walk between long distances. The tombs are still visited 
by those seeking the  barakah (or “blessings of Shaykh ‘Umar and his sons”), 
but only by those from the nearby villages. 
 There are several important places associated with Islam, such as the tomb 
mosque in Mazar of Ja‘afar al-Tayir, the brother of ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib and 
a cousin of the Prophet, who was killed at the Battle of Mu’tah in southern 
Jordan in 630. A number of other Companions of the Prophet are also 
buried in Jordan; Zayd bin Harithah and ‘Abdallah bin Rawahah who fell 
in the same battle with Ja’afar and are also buried in Mazar, ‘Amir ibn Abi 
Waqqas, and Abi ‘Ubaydah ‘Amir bin al-Jarrah. Local people do come and 
offer prayers, but generally they do not ask them to intercede with God. 
 Jordan has a number of sites connected with both the Old and New Tes-
taments and the Qur’an, such as the tomb of Aaron (Harun) the brother of 
Moses, ‘Ayn Musa (or the Spring of Moses), the tomb of Job (Ayyub) near 
al-Salt, the tomb of Jethro (Shu’ayb) in Wadi Shu’ayb, and those associated 
with the Islamic ﬁ gure known as al-Khidr in Karak, ‘Ajlun, Mahis, and Bayt 
Ras. Again many of these are places where Jordanians come to offer prayers, 
but generally do not ask for intercession. 
 Suﬁ sm or mystical Islam was never widespread among Jordanians and there 
are only a few sites associated with Suﬁ  mystics or Suﬁ  brotherhoods. Suﬁ sm 
played a more important role in places such as Damascus and Cairo rather 
than in Jordan. Those Jordanians attracted to the more mystical dimensions 

Religion and World View 
41
of the religion traditionally have gone to Jerusalem, Damascus, or Cairo to 
study. Those who were Christians did much the same studying in monaster-
ies in Syria and Lebanon. Thus both Islam and Christianity in Jordan have 
tended towards the orthodox expressions of the religions. 
 A practice that is done by both Muslims and Christians is that of mak-
ing a vow or promise taken at the tomb of an important religious ﬁ gure or 
at a religious site. In Greater Syria, which includes Jordan, these are often 
cross-confessional, meaning that in order for the promise to have greater 
weight with God, it is taken at a Muslim site by Christians and a Christian 
site by Muslims. The Eastern Orthodox monastery at Saydniya outside of 
Damascus is one of the Christian sites used by Muslims, while the tomb of 
John the Baptist in the Umayyad Mosque in Damascus is one of the Mus-
lim sites used by Christians. On smaller, local levels, the sites associated 
with the Qur’anic ﬁ gure al-Khidr are used by both Muslims and Christians. 
The person making the vow or promise will owe the ﬁ gure who witnessed it 
whatever was stated while making the vow: giving a gift of money, clothes, 
or food for the poor, or giving the ﬁ rst- or second-born child the name of 
the ﬁ gure. 
 Even though mystical forms of both Islam and Christianity have not 
been popular with Jordanians, it did not negate belief in spirits and magic. 
A number of ancient archeological sites are believed to be haunted or trea-
sure protected by spirits or  jinn (genies). One such belief collected in 1986 
near the ruins of the Decapolis city Abilah says that the treasure from one 
of the city’s churches, including two golden or gold-covered bells, was 
hidden in large jars and buried in one of the olive groves. The treasure is 
protected by a female  jinn who misdirects those trying to ﬁ nd it. It is pos-
sible to be standing on top of the treasure and never see it. Anyone who 
wants to ﬁ nd the treasure must ﬁ rst ﬁ nd out how to please the  jinn , who 
will then reveal the treasure. Local stories collected in the nearby villages 
of Hartha, al-Khuraybah, and Qarakush say that in the early part of the 
twentieth century a treasure hunter from the town of Hubras was able 
to placate the  jinn and took away one of the two golden bells and sold it 
Damascus. 
 Like many others in the Mediterranean region, many Jordanians believe 
in the evil eye, or more correctly, the eye of envy, ‘ ayn al-hasud in Ara-
bic. Admiration of a person, object, or animal will attract the attention 
of malicious forces and cause harm to the person, object, or animal that 
is being admired. It is possible to deﬂ ect the eye of envy by using certain 
charms and by always evoking the name of God. When admiring some-
one or something, one should always say “ Ma Sha ’  Allah ” meaning “What 
God Wills.” This saying is believed to keep away harm. Children are often 

42 
Culture and Customs of Jordan
protected from harm by charms made from blue glass or by wearing a blue 
bead. Blue, the color of the eye of envy, helps prevent harm. Lines from the 
Qur’an, such as the Throne Verse from the second  surah (or chapter), are 
frequently used to help prevent the eye of envy from harming a person or 
object. Jordanian Christians hold the same beliefs and use charms with the 
Virgin Mary as well as blue beads or blue glass to ward off the eye of envy. 
Blue beads or religious verses are frequently suspended from the rearview 
mirrors of cars to help protect against the eye, and trucks may have a doll 
or a baby shoe suspended from the same mirror to help prevent hitting chil-
dren. Valuable animals like horses and camels will have blue beads woven 
into manes, tails, or suspended around their necks. Charms are often hung 
over the doorways of houses and businesses to help protect the place and 
those inside it. Practices such as hanging charms in cars or over doorways 
have become part of tradition, and it does not necessarily mean that the 
person doing it believes in magic or the ability of the charm to protect the 
user from harm. 
 Writing charms or  hijab is still found in Jordan. Some families are known 
to have the ability to write effective charms used to ward off evil or to help 
cure an illness. Those who can write effective charms need to be able to pass 
on their own  barakah or blessing to the recipient. Many of those who have 
this ability claim descent from the family of the Prophet Muhammad, usually 
through his daughter Fatima and her two sons Hasan and Hussein. Among 
Christians, some of those who can write charms are priests, while others are 
ordinary people who have, for one reason or another, been given the ability 
to write effective charms. Christians have no problem in buying charms from 
Muslims nor Muslims buying from Christians. 
 Traditional practices are outside of those accepted by both Islam and 
Christianity though people often ﬁ nd support for tradition in religion. 
Jordanians hold to some of them more out of a loyalty to family tradi-
tion than to strongly held beliefs, yet popular practices may be resorted 
to in times of need or trouble. They are familiar and comfortable and do 
provide mental security when more formal religion may seem too sterile 
or intellectual. 
 CONCLUSION 
 Christian and Muslim Jordanians have a shared history, and culturally 
there is very little to differentiate one from the other. Few Jordanian towns 
and villages have or ever had special sections or quarters for the members of 
any one religion to live, and perhaps this is among the important reasons 
why many Jordanians have a fair knowledge of the other. When other parts 

Religion and World View 
43
of the Middle East have erupted into sectarian violence there has been very 
little spillover into Jordan. For example, following the massacres in 1981 by 
Christian militiamen at the Sabra and Shatilla refugee camps in Lebanon, 
some young Muslim men had wanted to take revenge on Christians, but 
the  Imam s at the mosques spoke against such violence, reminding people of 
the long-time good relations between the communities in Jordan. Jordan is 
a conservative Muslim state, but the non-Muslim minorities are not subject 
to persecution. 


 3 
 Literature and Media 
 Th e literature and media in Jordan are tied to the wider context of the whole 
Arab world, where the Arabic language is spoken, that stretches from the 
 Atlantic coast of North Africa to the Persian Gulf. Jordanians do not  necessarily 
see themselves as having a separate and distinct linguistic or  literary identity, 
but see themselves as part of the history of the development of Arabic language, 
 literature, and media. For example, until 1920 most of Jordan was adminis-
tered from Damascus, the capital of Syria, which has been a major center for 
Arabic literature since the ﬁ rst centuries of Islam. Being a more rural popula-
tion until the early twentieth century, much of the local Jordanian  literature 
has historically been oral, but the fact that it has not been written does not 
mean that it is rustic. Most of the local literature was often in the form of 
poetry, some of it epic in nature, following the same format as those penned 
by famous names of Arabic literature in Damascus, Cairo, or Baghdad. 
 ROLE OF POETRY IN ARAB CULTURE 
 Arabic as a language has a role in Arab culture that goes beyond that played 
by most other languages in their cultures. Arabic and the ability to use the 
Arabic language eﬀ ectively to create powerful images have a long history 
stretching back into the pre-literate and pre-Islamic period in the Arabian 
Peninsula. Th e development of Classical Arabic as a language is rooted in 
the literary tradition of the Arab people, and more speciﬁ cally, the Bedouin, 
whose spoken dialect eventually became a standard for the language. Classi-
cal Arabic is referred to as  Fusha , which comes from the root meaning clear 
speech. 

46 
Culture and Customs of Jordan
 Th e well-rounded man in traditional Arab culture was referred to as an 
 Adib meaning someone who was both well mannered and well educated. 
Being educated meant that he was familiar with literature or  adab, which also 
means manners. Th e idea that the ability to compose literature (both prose 
and poetry) is linked to good manners and knowledge of how to behave, go 
back to the pre-Islamic period. All accomplished men were expected to be 
able to compose poems on any topic at a moment’s notice. 
 During the early historic period in the Arabian Peninsula, the great epic 
poems composed mainly by Bedouin formed an important basis for both 
literature and language use. Th e best of these poems were selected in great 
contests held annually in Makkah, and the poems of winners were placed in 
the Ka’abah and, as a result, are referred to as the Suspended Odes or some-
times the Golden Odes. Th e odes or  qasidah s followed a set format, which 
included: opening passages describing an abandoned Bedouin camp, and the 
happy memories the campsite evokes; an account of a journey across the des-
ert, of the beauty and strength of the poet’s horse or camel, and of dangers 
encountered in the course of his travels; a ﬁ nal passage of a eulogy of a tribe 
or a particular person or an attack on them, if the poem deals with war or 
raiding. Th e odes were originally composed as oral works to be recited where 
the full body of the Arabic language could be used by the person reciting 
and felt by the audience listening. Recitations of even well-known ancient 
works today can cause the audience to respond with deep sighs, loud shouts 
of approval, or even tears. 
 Th ese great epic poems recorded the history of the Arabs and much of 
what is known today about pre-Islamic Arabia comes from studying them. 
Pre-Islamic period in Arabia is often called  Ayam al-‘Arab or the Days of 
 (meaning the time of) the Arabs (meaning the Bedouin), when tribes fought 
heroic wars over issues of honor, pasture lands, water, or trade. Th e poems 
describe the rise and fall of states, such as that of the Kingdom of Kinda in 
the ode of its exiled prince Imru al-Qays, tribal wars and feuds, such as the 
epic of the slave, born ‘Antar bin Shaddad, and of the details of tribal life 
in the desert, such as that of Labib ibn Rabi‘a. Even today much of what 
is known of recent tribal history is recorded only in the poems still recited 
for the pleasure of the tribe’s  shaykh s, members, or oﬃ  cial visitors from the 
 Jordanian government. 
 Contemporary  qasidah s composed by Bedouin follow more or less the for-
mat as established in great odes, but also make use of contemporary settings 
and deal with contemporary issues. Th e poet’s ﬁ ne Arabian horse or Omani 
camel so vividly described in the older odes are replaced in the modern ver-
sions with pickup trucks, four-wheel drive SUVs, and Mercedes-Benz taxis. 
Political and social comment are still important topics covered by Bedouin 

Literature and Media 
47
poets. Topics for contemporary Bedouin poets include: the wars in Palestine 
since 1948 or in the Gulf since 1990–91; arrival of refugees from such con-
ﬂ icts; visits to Cairo, Damascus or even European cities; long distance trade 
or migrant work in the Gulf, Iraq, or other places. 
 Other forms of poetry have been developed in the Arab world, some in the 
courts of Damascus, Baghdad, Cairo, Fez, and Cordoba. Among the most 
widespread is  zajal. Zajal dates to the early period of Arabic literature and 
became very popular throughout the Arab world due to its use of spoken dia-
lect and the fact that it lent itself easily to music. Composed of rhymed cou-
plets, it also lends itself to improvisation and spontaneity. Bored passengers 
in a long-distance taxi or bus ride enjoy having someone among them who 
knows how to make verse and keep them entertained, even if they are the 
subject of the poet’s humor.  Zajal ’s use of couplets and repetition allows the 
whole audience to participate in the performance, not only just listen to it. 
 POETRY IN BEDOUIN SOCIETY—VOICE OF THE PEOPLE 
 Poetry remains the single major literary form composed by Bedouin. 
 Jordan’s Bedouin leaders are still entertained, praised, and criticized by their 
people through poems. Individual tribesmen and women use poems to 
describe both approval and disapproval of their leaders or family members. 
Various poetic forms are used from the long epic  qasidah to short four liners 
called  rubi ‘at.  Some of them are sung, such as the  ghinnawi (or small, short 
song common among Egyptian Bedouin). Th e Arab American anthropologist 
Lila Abu Lughod studied the use of  ghinnawi by women in particular among 
the Awlad ‘Ali tribe in Egypt’s Western Desert as form of political and social 
comment and protest. Samdar Lavie, an Israeli anthropologist, conducted a 
similar study of the use of poetry among the ‘Azazmah tribe in the Sinai. 
 Bedouin poetry can be recited or sung, but is more often sung than recited. 
When the person singing is a man, he often accompanies himself with a 
one string violin-like instrument called a  rabab. So closely connected is the 
 rabab with poetry that it is often referred to as  rabab al-sha‘ir (or the poet’s 
 rabab ). Singing helps with learning and memorizing older poems and in the 
composition of new ones. Th ere are a number of forms of sung poetry among 
the Bedouin depending on the subject matter and length (see the chapter on 
Music). 
 CONTEMPORARY JORDANIAN WRITERS 
 Contemporary Arabic literature began in places like Cairo and Beirut in 
the second half of the nineteenth century when western forms such as the 

48 
Culture and Customs of Jordan
novel and novella were borrowed, replacing the more classical formats such 
as the rhymed prose  maqamat. Arab authors became masters of the novel as 
a literary form, and the Arab world produced a vast number of novels touch-
ing on topics as wide as social justice, eﬀ ects of war, or less serious subjects 
for pure entertainment. In poetry contemporary writers have been greatly 
inﬂ uenced by free verse breaking the strict regimented rules of classical poetic 
forms. Contemporary Arabic literature is as vast and varied as any in the 
world, and has often been one of the few vehicles open to social and political 
comment and criticism. 
 Damascus, Baghdad, Beirut, and Cairo are among the major centers for 
contemporary Arabic literature. Few Jordanians have been well published or 
recognized outside of their own country until recently. Th ose Jordanians who 
have wanted to pursue careers as writers have generally moved to the major 
centers in the Middle East or even to Europe or North America. Most of their 
writings are in Arabic and until the 1990s little of it was available in English 
translation. Th anks to the eﬀ orts by such people as Dr. Salma Jayyusi and 
the Project of Translation from Arabic Literature or PROTA Jordanian (and 
other Arab authors) are now accessible to the English language reader. 
 One of the ﬁ rst Jordanian authors to be translated into English is Ibrahim 
Nasrallah. Like many Jordanian writers, he is of Palestinian origin, though 
has lived most of his life in ‘Amman. Nasrallah ﬁ rst made a name for himself 
as a poet, and he is well-known and appreciated in much of the Arab world. 
His novel  Prairies of Fever,  written between 1977 and 1983, draws heavily on 
his own personal experience working in Saudi Arabia, and it deals with issues 
of identity. Th e main character, Muhammad Hamad, struggles in his attempt 
to maintain his own identity amongst the bleak place where he is employed 
to teach school. Th e novel is a masterpiece of postmodern Arabic literary 
style—a deﬁ nite break with the forms of classical Arabic literature—showing 
the inﬂ uences of Egyptian novelists such as the daring Yusuf al-Qa‘id. 
 Ghalib Halasa is another of the early Jordanian pioneers of modern  literary 
forms. Born in 1932 Halasa wrote seven novels and two collections of short 
stories before his death in 1989. His strong pro-Palestinian political  activities 
caused him to “lead an interrupted life,” according to Denys  Johnson-Davies. 
He lived in a number of Arab capitals during his life, including Beirut, 
Damascus, Baghdad, and Cairo. He was expelled from Egypt in 1976 as a 
result of his politics. His writings reﬂ ect his own life and are set in a number 
of diﬀ erent Arab countries such as Egypt. 
 Liyana Badr is of Palestinian origin. Born in Jerusalem, her life has been 
described as a “series of exiles,” ﬁ rst from Palestine to Jordan in 1948, then 
from Jordan to Lebanon in 1970 as a result of the Black September conﬂ ict 
between the Jordanian army and the Palestinian ﬁ ghters, and eventually to 

Literature and Media 
49
Tunisia.  A Balcony over the Fakihani  is a set of novellas that explore the life 
of Palestinians living in exile (in Jordan and Lebanon) as well as accounts 
of the 1982 Israeli invasion of Lebanon. While Badr gives the reader an 
excellent and personal description of the lives of Palestinian exiles, Sahar 
Khalifeh, another Palestinian Jordanian author, gives a vivid account of life 
under Israeli occupation of the West Bank in her novel  Wild Th orns.  In this 
novel Khalifeh discusses the collapse of the traditional family system under 
the strain of the Israeli occupation: problems of honor; the emerging role of 
women; and the conﬂ ict between political idealism and the harsh realities of 
life under occupation. 
 While most Jordanian and Palestinian writers have produced their works 
in Arabic, the Jordanian writer Fadia Faqir’s novel  Pillars of Salt  was writ-
ten in English. Faqir is of Bedouin origin and pursued a career in creative 
writing in the United Kingdom where she now lives and works, teaching 
Arabic literature at the University of Durham. Both of her novels,  Nisanit 
and  Pillars of Salt,  were written in English and published by Western presses. 
 Pillars of Salt  explores the lives of two Jordanian women through their own 
narrations of their life histories. While set in the 1940s and 1950s, the lives 
of the two women can be seen as typical of many Jordanian women who are 
struggling against the patriarchal nature of their society limiting what women 
are allowed to do. 
 Th e Bedouin poet Muhammad Fadil al-Hajaya uses more traditional poetic 
styles to express his political views. Following the conventions of  Bedouin 
poetry, he has produced a number of  qasidahs critical of American foreign 
policy and the actions of Arab governments. His poems  O Condoleza Rice  
and  Fad’as and Fad’us  (names used by Jordanian Bedouin for the rulers of 
the Gulf States under U.S. protection) were widely distributed in Jordan. His 
fame is growing and his poems were discovered by Said Abu Athera and Clive 
Holes, who have provided the ﬁ rst English translations of his verse. 
 MEDIA IN JORDAN 
 Media in Jordan consists of both print and nonprint varieties. Print media 
are primarily newspapers and journals, while the nonprint media are primar-
ily radio and television. Most of the media are controlled by the state, either 
directly as state organizations, such as television, or through state censorship. 
With the growth of satellite television and the availability of media from other 
Arab and non-Arab countries, state control over Jordanian media has had to 
adjust. Generally speaking, even with state control over the major forms of 
media, information on a wide range of topics is available, and people are 
fairly free to voice their personal opinions. In 2003 major changes were made 

50 
Culture and Customs of Jordan
to Jordanian laws that have opened up the media to more critical reporting 
and analysis of news events, even allowing criticism of the King. Despite 
these changes, the media-rights organization, Reporters Without Borders, 
has noted that the government still sets the tone for most of the media cover-
age of news. Th e oﬃ  cial news agency called Petra is state run by the Ministry 
of Information. 
 Print media published in Jordan are mainly state controlled. Th ere are 
four daily Arabic language newspapers, one daily English language newspa-
per, and one weekly English language newspaper. Of the Arabic newspaper, 
 al-Dustur (or  Th e Constitution ) is one of the most widely read with  al-Ra ’ i 
(or  Th e Opinion ) following in second place. Th ese two Arabic papers and the 
English language  Jordan Times are the most important source of print news, 
and though more or less free to print what they want, they remain cautious 
in their editorials. It will take some time for the local journalists to feel the 
new laws will protect them from the state. All of the major print media are 
published in ‘Amman while other less widespread newsletters and newspapers 
are published in regional cities. 
 Newspapers have an important role in the mainly male coﬀ eehouse culture 
of Jordan. Reading the newspapers, frequently a number of diﬀ erent ones, 
over cups of Turkish coﬀ ee or Arab tea are how many Jordanian men begin 
their day. Once the newspapers are read, noting diﬀ erences in coverage and 
tone, Jordanian men are ready for one of their main passions, political discus-
sions with friends. Years of state censorship has only served to reﬁ ne reading 
between the lines and develop a keen sense of political discourse. 
 An equally important source of news and entertainment is the  state-
 controlled radio and television company, called Radio Television Jordan. 
 Jordanian television has four channels; Channel One is primarily in Arabic; 
Channel Two broadcasts ﬁ lms; Channel Th ree, which some call the  “Foreign 
 Channel,” has a number British or American programs with Arabic  subtitles; 
and the Jordanian Satellite Channel. Th e Jordanian Satellite Channel is broad-
cast to the greater Arab world and to Arabs living in Europe, North America, 
and to other places with sizable Arab immigrant communities such as Australia. 
Jordan’s satellite channel has to compete with the large array of other satellite 
channels now available and has made attempts to have a broader appeal than 
to only Jordanian and Palestinian immigrant  communities, such as including 
hard-hitting news programs and a variety of entertainment programs. 
 Jordanian television has also had a long history of Hebrew language news 
broadcasts aimed at Israelis in response to the Arabic news broadcasts on 
Israeli television, which are easily picked up in Jordan without needing an 
extra antenna. Depending on where one is living in Jordan, it has been pos-
sible to have a variety of television viewing long before the arrival of satellite 

Literature and Media 
51
channels. It has been easy for Jordanians to watch Egyptian, Saudi, Syrian, 
Iraqi, Lebanese, Israeli, and even Cypriot television since the late 1960s and 
early 1970s. Access to the wider world via television has given the Jordanian 
viewer a sophisticated sense of choice and an ability to sift through what is 
broadcast as news. Th e competition has also had a role in developing better 
quality Jordanian television programming. 
 Radio, for the most part, is also operated by the government as part of 
Radio Television Jordan. Th e radio services are in Arabic, English, and French 
and include a wide variety of programs. Among the popular formats are caller 
programs where listeners are encouraged to call in and engage in frank discus-
sion. Usually called Direct Contact or  Bath Mubashir, these programs give 
the people a forum to complain about state services or even speciﬁ c ministries 
or ministers. In addition to the state radio station there has been a growth of 
private radio stations, but they tend to be entertainment oriented and play 
popular music. Th e Jordanian armed forces also operate its own radio station, 
which includes news and entertainment. 
 FILM AND  MUSALSALAT 
 Jordan does not have a ﬁ lm industry; major Arabic language ﬁ lm making 
in the region is done in Egypt and Syria. Egyptian and Syrian ﬁ lms are broad-
cast on Jordanian television and shown in cinemas where they are among 
the most popular ﬁ lms viewed by local people. Hollywood has made several 
major ﬁ lms in Jordan, the best known being  Lawrence of Arabia  and the last 
of the Indiana Jones’s series  Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade.  Jordan has 
not been able to compete with other Arab countries, such as Morocco, as a 
locale for Hollywood ﬁ lms mainly because Jordan is much more expensive 
as a location. 
 Jordan does produce a number of Arabic soap operas or  musalsalat. In 
the 1970s Jordan began specializing in “Bedouin soap operas,” which they 
quickly came to dominate. Using outdoor sets, the Jordanian Bedouin 
soaps used as many authentic props as possible, from tents and tent fur-
nishings to live animals. Jordanian actors’ ability to speak with a Bedouin 
accent made these types of series more appealing, because they sound more 
or less correct to the viewers. In order to have a broader appeal outside of 
Jordan, the actors developed a generic Bedouin dialect using features from 
a number of Bedouin dialects found throughout the Arabian Peninsula. 
Th us the Jordanian Bedouin soaps are eagerly purchased by television sta-
tions in Saudi Arabia, the Gulf States, and Iraq. Jordan’s only real rival in 
producing Bedouin series comes from Syria, but in recent years more and 
more such series are joint productions, including ﬁ nancial backing from 

52 
Culture and Customs of Jordan
the Arab Gulf States and technical and dramatic expertise from both Jordan 
and Syria. 
 A second type of television series that are somewhat like the Bedouin soaps 
revolve around rural or village life. Th ese are frequently set in the period 
before World War II or soon afterwards—no speciﬁ c dates are usually men-
tioned—and deal with traditional village life. Th e productions are usually 
ﬁ lmed in some of the better-preserved Ottoman-period sites in the country 
adding to their authenticity. Th emes in these series center on the changes 
from traditional patriarchy and strict codes of conduct for especially the 
women of the household, to more progressive attitudes about women’s edu-
cation and employment without the loss of family honor. Others deal with 
the sensitive issue of honor crimes, where a girl may be killed by her male 
relatives for injuring family honor. Family honor can be compromised should 
a girl have relationships, even friendships, with men outside of the circle of 
her close male relatives. Jordan is one of the few countries in the region that 
is actively confronting the issue of honor crimes and the state uses television 
as a vehicle for discussion. 
 In addition to Bedouin and rural soaps, Jordan also produces a number 
of excellent quality historical dramas. Again, since the 1990s many of these 
are joint Gulf/Syrian/Jordanian productions, and some of them, such as 
the 2003 series on the life of the pre-Islamic poet prince Imru al-Qays, are 
ﬁ lmed in Morocco. Th e topics of many of these are bold and new, such as 
the Syrian-Jordanian series called  Tariq illa Kabul  or  Th e Road to Kabul  about 
the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, the subsequent rise of the Taliban, and 
their eventual fall during the American invasion. Th e story was personalized 
through one Afghan family and the choices its members made, such as the 
daughter who studied Western medicine in Britain and the son who joins the 
Taliban in Pakistan. Th e series included Jordanian and Syrian actors and was 
ﬁ lmed nearly entirely in southern Jordan. 
 Jordanian television produces a number of series primarily aimed at the 
Jordanian viewing audience as well. Th ese are often set in ‘Amman and deal 
with current social and political issues in the country such as the impact 
of war in the region, education, unemployment, and changes in the family 
structure due to life in the big city. Again the use of outdoor sets and the 
high quality of acting distinguish the Jordanian-made programs from those 
produced in Egypt. Egyptian soaps are still extremely popular with the view-
ing audience but are seen as too canned, many having more or less the same 
topics and ending the same way. Since the 1980s, both Jordanian and Syrian 
series have been able to compete very well with those made in Egypt. Syrian 
series often tackle topics simply not dealt with by any other Arab country, 
including homosexuality, AIDS, and other such sensitive issues. Jordanian 

Literature and Media 
53
productions are usually not as bold in dealing with such topics, but do tackle 
important and diﬃ  cult political topics such as government corruption, the 
economic impact of globalization, and the growth of democracy in the region. 
Such topics may not be dealt with directly, but through the lens of historical 
dramas where characters from the Arab past speak of them. 
 CONCLUSION 
 Th e impact of Jordan’s literature and media is primarily the result of 
its nonprint media. Jordanian television, through its satellite channel and 
through its made for television dramas, has made important contributions 
to the development of contemporary Arab language media. Th e high quality 
of its actors, production techniques, and interesting story lines have made 
 Jordanian made for television programs among the most inﬂ uential in the 
Arab world. Jordanians have also assisted or worked as full partners in all 
stages of production with Syrians, Moroccans, and other Arabs creating new 
and challenging commentaries and criticisms of contemporary Arab society. 


 4 
 Architecture, Art, and Traditional Crafts 
 Architecture, art, and traditional crafts in Jordan are linked to the history of 
the country and its religious and ethnic diversity. Jordan has a rich archeo-
logical heritage stretching back into antiquity, which has inﬂ uenced subse-
quent architectural designs and elements of decoration. Jordanian crafts, such 
as pottery and work in silver, are also closely tied to the long history of the 
region, or to speciﬁ c ethnic groups such as the Circassians. 
 BEDOUIN ARCHITECTURE—THE HOUSE OF HAIR 
 It is appropriate to begin the discussion of Jordanian architecture with the 
Bedouin tent. The nomad tent is an ancient aspect of architecture not only 
in Jordan but the entire region stretching from the deserts of North Africa 
to those of Central Asia. Bedouin call their tent  bayt sha ‘r (or house of hair) 
to distinguish it from the permanent homes constructed by villagers that the 
Bedouin call  bayt hajar (or house of stone). 
 The tent used by Bedouin in Jordan is similar to those found in the  Arabian 
Peninsula, parts of Iran, Turkey, and Egypt but differs in shape and even in 
the materials used from those developed for the different climates in much of 
the North African Sahara or those in Central Asia. The nomad tent in Jordan 
is made from woven panels of black goat hair, which gives the tent the ability 
to be warm and water-resistant during the wet, winter months and cool and 
dry during the hot summer season. Goat hair, unlike wool, is hollow and 
when it rains the hair ﬁ lls with moisture causing it to swell making it the best 
possible construction material. Once ﬁ lled with moisture, the hair is naturally 
water-resistant and the rain runs off of it. The hair is also light, even when 

56 
Culture and Customs of Jordan
ﬁ lled with water, compared to wool, which when wet becomes too heavy for 
the wood poles and rope ties to bear and a tent made from it will collapse. 
The hair also allows air to circulate in the hot, dry summers and helping cool 
the interior of the tent even during the heat of the day. Another advantage of 
using hair instead of wool is that it is much easier to fold up and transport, 
especially in the past when camels were used. 
 Tents are made of a number of strips of woven goat hair which are usually 
about 60 to 80 centimeters or 2 to 2.5 feet wide. New replacement panels are 
added to the front of the tent while older panels that are showing strain from 
years of use are used along the lower part of the back wall. Often on the very 
bottom or the  safalah, where the tent touches the ground, pieces of cheap, 
low-quality, easily replaced sack cloth are used. Old tent panels with too 
many holes or tears are cut up and made into useful items such as bags while 
that which can not be reused is thrown away. The whole structure—the roof 
or  shagag, the back wall or  ruwag, front wall or  sitar, and the side walls or  ruf-
fah —are joined together by using sharp wooden pins called  khilal. The front 
and back walls usually have a middle panel made of both black goat hair and 
white wool for decoration. The two or three pole tents used by most families 
are usually around 2 meters or over 6 feet tall, between 9 to 16 meters or 27 
to 48 feet long, and between 3.5 to 4.5 meters or 10.5 to 13.5 feet wide. 
 The Jordanian Bedouin tents come in a number of different sizes from 
very small one pole tents to massive structures with eight poles or more used 
by Bedouin leaders to entertain guest and hold tribal councils. Tents are 
named according to the number of middle poles or  wasat needed to hold up 
the roof—side poles are never counted. Small one pole tents called  gatbah are 
used by families when on the move or when there is no need to divide the 
structure into private, family quarters and open, public quarters. Generally 
speaking most tents are the two pole type called  fazah or  wasatayn or the three 
pole type called  mthawlath. 
 Tents are divided into two main sections by a highly decorated wool 
curtain called a  sahah in Jordan. The  sahah shows the weaving talents of the 
women of the household, and are, like the whole tent structure itself, made 
on a narrow ground loom, and the panels have to be sewn together once 
they are all ﬁ nished. There are a number of different decorative traditions 
used by Bedouin women when making a  sahah , which involve using two 
major methods of weaving,  ragm or warp patterns and  nagash or twined 
weft patterns. The more common warp patterns run the entire length of 
the piece and women use natural white or brightly dyed wool yarn to make 
the designs. 
 The dividing curtain separates the tent into two major living spaces: one 
for the family and not open to visitors, which is usually called  al-mahram (or 

Architecture, Art, and Traditional Crafts 
57
the family or women’s side of the tent); and the other section used to host 
visitors and guests, which is usually called  al-shigg (or the public or men’s side 
of the tent). Both sections have their own hearth, the one in the public side 
is used mainly to keep tea and coffee available for guests. Women are able 
to go back and forth between the two sections and join in the conversations 
either by interjecting from across the  sahah or by coming to the public side 
and sitting with the guests. While Bedouin women have the ability to move 
back and forth between the two sections of a tent, men do not. Only males 
from the household or close male relatives of the women may join them on 
their side of the tent. Conversations between the women, though they may 
be overheard by men on their side of the curtain, are not heard, while women 
have no such social customs to prevent them from hearing what is going on 
in the public section of the tent. 
 The women’s section is where most of the domestic tasks take place and 
include the family’s sleeping quarters. The arrangement of the space reﬂ ects 
the work needs of the women, for example sleeping materials and anything 
not needed immediately for a task are neatly folded up and either stacked in a 
pile against the back and side walls or suspended in large bags hung from the 
tent poles out of the women’s way. When something is needed, it is quickly 
brought from its place and returned when no longer in use. The hearth is 
used to cook the family’s food but does not need to be kept going all day like 
the one for tea and coffee in the public section. 
 Village Architecture—the House of Stone 
 Jordanian village architecture dates as far back as the ﬁ rst permanent struc-
tures ever built by man in the Neolithic period (8000  b.c. ). Some of the old-
est and most important early settlement sites in the Middle East are found in 
Jordan such as Baydah (just north of Petra), ‘Ayn al-Ghazal (‘Amman), and 
Tell al-Sultan (Jericho). These early settlements were built of stone often with 
the shared walls between houses for greater stability. They were built close to 
important water sources and near their ﬁ elds of wheat or on the top of hills to 
provide better protection from possible attack. The integration of house and 
protective structures for livestock are features that have survived into the pres-
ent times in many rural villages not only in Jordan, but around the world. 
 Some of Jordan’s villages have been lived in for millennia. Archeological 
excavations have been able to prove long term use that stretches back to at 
least the Iron Age (1200  b.c. ), if not earlier, for many Jordanian towns and 
villages. Some are mentioned by name in the famous Tell Amarna correspon-
dence (1352–1333  b.c. ). These are letters between the many princes ruling 
the small states in Jordan and Palestine to the Egyptian Pharaoh Akhenaten 

58 
Culture and Customs of Jordan
(1353–1335  b.c. ). Other ancient cities in Jordan were founded by veterans 
from Alexander the Great’s armies and they introduced features of Greek 
urban life, such as the agora, straight column-lined streets, and places for 
public entertainment such as amphitheaters and hippodromes. Though the 
Hellenistic and Roman periods in Jordan lasted well over 700 years, they had 
little lasting inﬂ uence on the architecture of the country. The most lasting 
inﬂ uence came with the arrival of Islam and the blending of ancient Middle 
Eastern, Greco-Roman, and Arab Islamic features. 
 Most typical traditional village homes are square structures rarely more 
than one story tall. They have no or few windows and one front entrance, 
which opens up to an area that divides the house into public and private 
halves, not unlike the division in a Bedouin tent. The public area is often 
to the right of the person when entering the door and the private, family 
side is located to the back and left. The back is where the kitchen is found, 
and the back door opens up to a small courtyard or  hosh that is often at least 
partially paved with ﬂ agstones or cement where much of the women’s work 
is done. The courtyard often has one or more fruit (mulberry, orange, etc.) 
or nut trees (almonds) that provide important shade in the summer as well 
as produce for the family. Further shade is provided by a low-roofed over-
area called a  ma ‘ rrash. In many homes the traditional bread oven or  tabun is 
located in the yard as well. The ovens are built using a clay and straw mix-
ture and lined with small stone pebbles to hold the bread as it bakes. The 
uncooked bread is slapped against the stones and is rapidly baked, the ﬁ re 
cooking it on one side and the hot stones cooking it on the other. The fuel 
is added underneath the oven through a special opening. The whole oven is 
housed in a small one-room building. In many villages each quarter would 
have one such oven that served as place where women could meet and talk, 
much like a village guesthouse for men. 
 The family room, similar to the Bedouin tent, has bedding, clothes, and 
the like neatly stacked against the wall when not in use or needed. The ﬂ oors 
are covered with rugs often made on the same type of ground loom used by 
Bedouin women while the walls are hung with Qur’anic passages (or from the 
New Testament if the family is Christian) often made in embroidered cross-
stitch by women of the family. Paint on glass pictures made in Damascus 
again depicting religious scenes or the pilgrimage caravan were very popular, 
but have been replaced in recent years with wall clocks or commercially pro-
duced calligraphy. 
 The public room is used to entertain guests and can be quickly converted 
into a guest bedroom if the visitors stay overnight. The public room is similar 
in construction to the family’s room and is furnished in a similar fashion with 
mats, rugs, and pillows, and today often with a television. In older homes 

Architecture, Art, and Traditional Crafts 
59
there may be a place for a hearth in the center of the room to prepare tea and 
coffee, but generally speaking the tea and coffee are prepared in the kitchen, 
and children are dispatched to bring it to the host and his guests. 
 In some villages there are large mansions built by local notables and tribal 
leaders. These massive homes are traditionally located physically higher up a 
hill than those of the lesser village families and thus referred to as the Upper 
or  Fawqah quarter while the rest of the villagers live in the Lower or  Tahtah 
quarter. The massive homes are called throne houses or  Dar al-Kursi in refer-
ence to the special room used to entertain guests located on the second ﬂ oor. 
The great houses often have massive front entrances and may be the only ones 
in a village that use urban architectural decorative motifs from those found 
in cities like Damascus. Some of the houses have dedications inscribed above 
the door stating the name of the ﬁ rst of the family to build the house and the 
date the house was built. The al-Rusan family house in the village of Umm 
Qays in northern Jordan has such a dedication stone that states the house was 
built in 1898 by Falah al-Rusan, who was the local military leader or  qa ’ id 
for al-Saru  nahiyah (district) and the mayor or  mukhtar of Umm Qays. The 
entrances to these throne houses are usually ﬂ anked by stone benches called 
 mastabah s where those who came to see the head of household may be asked 
to wait. The massive entrances open up to large courtyards, which often have 
their own well and again fruit or nut trees to help provide shade. The various 
rooms of the houses open up onto the courtyards, and in the largest of these 
houses, a second smaller courtyard may also be found for the private use of 
the women of the family in imitation of the big homes of the urban elite in 
Damascus, Aleppo, and Baghdad. 
 Guests are ushered to a large, square room overlooking the entrance. The 
elevation and tall, narrow windows allow breezes to blow through and cool 
the room in the summer. The windows of homes belonging to the wealthier 
and more powerful of the families are glassed with wooded shutters that can 
be closed in the winter to keep it warm. Guests can be entertained yet be 
somewhat isolated from the daily activities of the family. The room is usually 
well-furnished with the best quality carpets from Anatolia, Iran, or Egypt; 
the pillows and mats are covered with ﬁ ne cloth from urban centers such 
as Damascus, Homs, and Aleppo. The brass brazier placed in the middle of 
the room and other brass and copper furnishings are kept well-polished and 
bright. The quality of the room and the lavish hospitality served by the host 
was all part of honor and reputation among the rural elite in the past, and is 
preserved to a great extent today. 
 The most elaborate of these throne houses were built in the late Otto-
man period. The late Ottoman style included the use of tall windows (nearly 
ﬂ oor to ceiling), usually in pairs. The windows were glassed and the most 

60 
Culture and Customs of Jordan
expensive would be made with colored glass in geometric patterns that would 
cast colored shadows in the room. Syrian mirrors, chests, cabinets, and other 
furniture made of wood inlayed with mother-of-pearl were highly popular. 
Some of the larger pieces of furniture were so covered with mother-of-pearl 
that they are completely encrusted with it. This type of furniture is no longer 
popular with the rural elite and most of them have now been sold to antique 
dealers in ‘Amman, Damascus, and Aleppo. 
 Today newer village homes are constructed with cement rather than with 
stone. Cement is cheaper and easier to build with, though not as good for 
the climate, which is cold in the winter and hot in the summer. However, 
it is easier to expand cement houses, and often the builder slowly expands it 
as the family grows in size or as they are able to afford it. Reinforced metal 
rods are left exposed indicating plans for future expansion. Cement homes 
tend to follow the same building plan as the older, traditional stone houses, 
but include more contemporary features such as indoor plumbing and bath-
rooms. Kitchens might be larger than the older ones and most homes no 
longer include the traditional bread oven or  tabun. In a survey of one in three 
northern villages conducted in the late 1980s, only one family was found to 
still maintain a traditional bread oven and only because they liked the taste of 
the bread baked in it. The family was not poor and the traditional bread oven 
was maintained because they wanted to, not because they needed to. 
 Urban Architecture—The Ottoman Legacy 
 Though many of Jordan’s cities have ancient origins, the most noticeable 
legacy today is that of the late Ottoman period corresponding to the time 
when Ottoman authority was expanding in Jordan (1840 to 1917). A few 
cities such as al-Salt and Karak have maintained a signiﬁ cant Ottoman core 
of both residential and commercial areas. Unfortunately, in most of Jordan 
many of the Ottoman buildings have been torn down and replaced with more 
modern ones, especially during the late 1960s and into the 1970s. What is 
left of the Ottoman period is now being given greater value as an important 
part of Jordan’s cultural heritage and there are efforts to preserve it. 
 Ottoman buildings can be classiﬁ ed into several regional styles. In north-
ern Jordan, where it is possible to use both white or off-yellow limestone and 
black basalt, the building often are made with alternating rows of the differ-
ent-colored stone called  ablaq. While this use of stone is older than the Otto-
man period, being a feature of urban Mamluk architecture and much older 
as a rural style in southern Syria, it was used in building several important 
public structures in Irbid, for example. The Ashraﬁ yah Mosque in ‘Amman, 
though built in the post-independence period maintains an Ottoman ﬂ oor 

Architecture, Art, and Traditional Crafts 
61
plan with a large-domed prayer hall, is the only building in ‘Amman built 
with the alternating rows of limestone and basalt. 
 The majority of Jordan’s Ottoman buildings are noted for their elegant 
but simple façades. Late Ottoman features such as narrow, tall windows are 
on the second ﬂ oor, while the street level only has the door. The street level is 
used for livestock such as riding or carriage horses or for storage. Once in the 
doorway, the person goes up a narrow staircase to the second ﬂ oor where the 
family lives. Most of the buildings are not more than two stories tall, though 
a few may have a third. The limestone mellows with age and slowly turns to 
an off-yellow or a soft-gray color. Jordan’s urban elite were not as wealthy as 
those in Damascus or Cairo, and there are none of the major buildings, pub-
lic or private, as there are in the major cities of the empire. 
 Recently the Jordanian public has begun to reassess the Ottoman period of 
their history, and some of the buildings have been purchased to be converted 
into restaurants or even holiday centers. One farmstead on the southern 
fringe of ‘Amman has been turned into a theme village called  Kan Zaman (or 
Once Upon a Time). It includes a number of shops selling traditional crafts, 
a traditional coffeehouse, and a restaurant that features Jordanian, Palestin-
ian, and Syrian foods. The same developer has opened another such restored 
village in the south of the country, not far from Petra, called  Taybah Zaman 
(or Once Upon a Time in Taybah), which was the name of the village before 
it was abandoned in the 1970s. Similar to  Kan Zaman, Taybah Zaman  offers 
the visitor a look into late Ottoman Jordan through shops, coffeehouses, and 
restaurants, and the chance to spend the night in one of the restored houses. 
 Contemporary Urban Architecture in Stone 
 Contemporary Jordanian urban architecture has pushed the limits of what 
is possible in stone construction. Jordanian architects have used local lime-
stone as the main construction material, or used it to face mainly cement 
structures. Limestone and limestone-faced buildings give ‘Amman and other 
Jordanian cities a soft mellow look even in the harsh midday summer sun. 
Structures built from the 1940s to the 1960s oftentimes use more traditional 
ﬂ oor plans and some maintain the late Ottoman-styled windows. In general, 
most of the buildings from this time period do not exceed ﬁ ve stories. 
 Starting in the 1970s ‘Amman in particular had an explosion in the con-
struction sector and middle-class Jordanians were willing to be more bold 
in the designs of their homes. Not only were architects given the chance 
to explore the limits of limestone in designs, but ideas were brought in 
from a wide variety of sources including the neo-classical ante-bellum style 
from the American south. Rather than the usual squared-off plans of the 

62 
Culture and Customs of Jordan
more  traditional stone buildings, architects began designing buildings with 
rounded corners, spirals, half circles, A-frame or other types of sloping roofs, 
and a wide range of window types and sizes. The buildings often combine 
features from a variety of origins, making ‘Amman a post-modern city, before 
post-modern was a term. 
 More recent buildings have combined cement with stone making them 
affordable, but able to be much larger than what was possible in stone alone. 
The most striking of the modern buildings is the King ‘Abdallah I Mosque 
dedicated in 1989. The mosque is constructed of cement but the octagonal 
ﬂ oor plan for the prayer hall takes its inspiration from the Dome of the Rock 
in Jerusalem. The main prayer hall is covered in a massive dome covered in 
mainly blue tile. The minarets, also made of cement, have a sculpted look as if 
made of some soft material and shaped with a knife or fork. The mosque has 
become a major landmark in the city and a symbol of the new architectural 
styles, exhibiting both a break from and a continuation of older building 
styles. 
 Palestinian Refugee Camps 
 Any discussion of architecture and housing in Jordan has to include Pales-
tinian refugee camps. Jordan has a number of major camps located mainly in 
the Jordan valley and in and around the cities of ‘Amman, Jarash, and Irbid. 
The camps were set up after the 1948 Arab-Israeli War for the thousands 
of displaced Palestinians and were augmented in the aftermath of the 1967 
Arab-Israeli War when many Palestinian refugees were made refugees for the 
second time. The camps were originally tent cities, but with time the tents 
were replaced with semi-permanent housing in most of the camps, or with 
permanent buildings in those located within the city of ‘Amman. 
 One of the main features of the camps, even those now turned into urban 
neighborhoods, is the close, dense space. Buildings in traditional neighbor-
hoods and villages are usually not crowded and are allowed a degree of space, 
especially in villages. The Palestinians were used to similar special arrange-
ments in their home villages, but the need to house large numbers helped cre-
ate the more crowded conditions found yet today. Between 1948 and 1967, 
a number of the camps, ﬁ rst established in ‘Amman, were converted by the 
Palestinians into urban neighborhoods and temporary housing was replaced 
with permanent stone or stone and cement structures. It was difﬁ cult to iden-
tify the former camps from other working-class neighborhoods in the city 
other than by their more crowded nature. Urban renewal schemes starting 
in the 1980s removed several of these neighborhoods, which have now been 
replaced with major a network of roads. 

Architecture, Art, and Traditional Crafts 
63
 Most of the Palestinian neighborhoods in ‘Amman have been absorbed 
into the city but those located outside of the city, such as the huge Biqa‘ 
Camp, are still noticeable. The Biqa‘ Camp is one of the largest in the coun-
try and most of the people have found work in the commercial agricultural 
farms nearby. The camp is extremely dense with a network of narrow alleys 
running through it, rather than real roads. The housing is semipermanent, 
that is while the walls may be made from cement, the roofs are metal panels 
held in place by cement bricks and rocks. The reason for this is that most of 
the Palestinians do not want to be permanently settled in the camps, even 
if they have been refugees since 1948, rather they want to have the right to 
return to their homes in Palestine. The lack of certain services and the semi-
permanence of their homes give them the feeling that living in the camps is 
a temporary condition. 
 Circassian Architecture—Caucasus in the Desert 
 Circassian and Shishan (Chechen) refugees began to arrive in Jordan in the 
second half of the nineteenth century. After the defeat of their main leader, 
Shaykh Shamil, at the hands of the Russians, many Circassian and Shis-
han families ﬂ ed to Ottoman territory. The Ottomans were in the process 
of expanding their rule over the more fringe areas of Syria and Jordan and 
began settling them where they could help maintain order and protect the 
cultivated areas from Bedouin raids. The Ottoman authorities helped them 
settle Jarash, Wadi al-Sir, Suwaylah, Na‘ur, and al-Azraq. The Circassians 
and Shishans brought with them their methods of building, using wood and 
stone, and their style of architecture inﬂ uenced by the mountain environ-
ment of their homeland. 
 A few buildings in Circassian style still remain in the older part of Jarash 
and Wadi al-Sir, but the majority of them, like most of the Ottoman period 
buildings, have been torn down and replaced with newer, cement structures. 
The few that do remain are distinctive with the use of pitched roofs rather 
than the local ﬂ at style. The roofs are tiled, often in green or red rooﬁ ng tiles. 
There is more use of wood in the structure of the roofs and ceilings, setting 
them off from the local building methods. 
 Traditional Arts and Handicrafts 
 Jordan’s traditional arts and handicrafts reﬂ ect the fact that the country 
has been a region of small towns, villages, and pastoral nomads since the 
last centuries of Roman and Byzantine rule (ﬁ fth to seventh centuries  a.d. ). 
Most of the arts and handicrafts were made for use, for work, and were made 

64 
Culture and Customs of Jordan
from local natural resources: wool, goat or camel hair; olive, citrus, or oak 
wood; straw; and clay. Most of the items were homemade and were primar-
ily the work of women. A small professional class of male artisans lived and 
worked in cities such as Karak, Jarash, al-Salt, ‘Ajlun, and Irbid or traveled 
among the villages and Bedouin camps setting up makeshift workshops to 
make or repair items. The ﬁ ner quality items were made by master craftsmen 
in Damascus, Homs, Aleppo, Musil, Baghdad, or Cairo. Some Palestinian 
cities such as Jerusalem, Hebron, al-Majdal, and Gaza were also well-known 
for their pottery, woodwork, or cloth, which were marketed to Jordanians. 
Wealthier Jordanian families displayed their wealth by furnishing their homes 
with imported items from these urban centers. 
 ART IN WOOL—BEDOUIN ART OF WEAVING 
 Perhaps the most representational Jordanian craft is Bedouin weaving. 
Bedouin women weave a wide variety of items, everything from tent panels 
to small bags, on ground looms. Ground looms are simple constructions but, 
because the warp is permanently ﬁ xed, the weaver must physically move the 
shed and separate the warp threads to create the needed countershed to make 
a woven item. She has to do this every time the shed and countershed have 
to be created, and because the warp is often made of goat hair, the process is 
even harder since goat hair is sticky and the threads are hard to separate. The 
loom itself is narrow, only about 60 to 80 centimeters or about 2 to 2.5 feet 
wide, and all items woven on it are narrow or are made in strips and sewn 
together usually using the herring bone or  habak stitch. 
 There are two major types of pattern weaving done on a ground loom, 
warp patterns or  ragm and twined weft weave or  nagash. Ragm, the name 
coming from the Arabic word for numbers, patterns are made by using dif-
ferent colored warp threads that run lengthwise along the piece. The weaver 
selects the one thread needed for the color and pattern on the face of the 
piece, and the other threads are left loose on the back side to be used only 
when those colors are needed in the pattern.  Ragm items have a deﬁ nite front 
and back with the back having loose threads the whole length of the pattern 
on the face. 
 Nagash, the name coming from the Arabic word for engraving, patterns are 
more difﬁ cult to make and involved a technique used in making tapestries. 
The weaver uses two weft threads that she wraps two or three times around 
the warp threads making the design. The method often leaves slits between 
some of the warp threads as is done in slit tapestries, but the Bedouin weaver 
seldom leaves long slits and instead brings the pattern together by using over-
lapping designs such as diamonds. Unlike the  ragm designs that can only run 

Architecture, Art, and Traditional Crafts 
65
lengthwise,  nagash patterns run the width of the piece and skilled weavers can 
make them match when the strips are sewn together in the end. With  nagash 
weave pieces both sides are fronts, as the design is found on both sides since 
the weft threads are wrapped around the warp threads to make the patterns. 
 Ground loom weaving is not an art form of Bedouin women only, but 
village women may also be skilled in making rugs and bags on the same type 
of loom; however, Bedouin women are without a doubt the masters of this 
craft. With few tools Bedouin women card, spin, and weave wool and hair 
produced by their own livestock into works of art. Wool is taken to cities or 
villages to be dyed into bright reds, oranges, yellows or dark blues and greens; 
few Bedouin women dye their own yarn. Bedouin women who are skilled 
weavers are valued members of their community and today are important 
sources of family income. The art of weaving has been revived in Jordan since 
the 1980s both as individual response by Bedouin women to demands by 
tourists, and also through development programs such as the Bani Hamida 
Project where Bedouin women are encouraged to make items that better ﬁ t 
contemporary European and American houses both in size and in color. The 
Bani Hamida Project is highly successful in providing Bedouin women with 
opportunities to provide income from their traditional skills. 
 In addition to the items produced on ground looms, Jordan’s traditional 
crafts include items made on vertical looms. Vertical looms can be built 
both indoors or outside and, as the name implies, the loom is constructed 
vertically sometimes with movable parts. They are more comfortable for 
the weaver as it is possible to sit while working and it is not necessary to 
bend over or to physically separate the warp threads to make the shed and 
countershed operations. Vertical looms are more frequently found in vil-
lages where it is possible to build a loom frame on a more permanent basis 
than is possible for Bedouin women. Vertical looms are not only women’s 
tools, but men’s as well. In some villages in Jordan and Syria, men used to 
weave Bedouin tent panels on vertical looms, which they sold directly to 
Bedouin or marketed through urban merchants in cities such as Damascus 
or ‘Amman. 
 Madaba and Karak are famous in Jordan for ﬁ ne rugs and cloth made 
on horizontal treadle looms. Treadle looms, unlike the ground and verti-
cal looms, are a male domain. Treadle looms have a number of movable 
parts controlled by pedals that move the shed up and down. Most of the 
items made on the treadle loom are cotton or have a cotton warp. The rugs 
made on them in Madaba and Karak are well-known in Jordan for their soft-
ness and near cloth-like appearance and feel. Madaba rugs in particular have 
become collectors’ items because few are made today, and those that are, are 
not nearly as well-made as they were in the period before 1960. 

66 
Culture and Customs of Jordan
 Art in Clay—Village Pottery 
 While weaving is the best developed art form among the Bedouin, village 
women are the creators of much of the traditional pottery in Jordan. Women 
in the ‘Ajlun region in particular were known for their pottery vessels used for 
a wide variety of purposes. Village women use a range of techniques including 
the coil or rope method, similar to that developed during the late Neolithic 
period, and it is hard from simply looking at a broken shard to accurately date 
a piece of pottery. 
 Village pottery was, like Bedouin weaving, primarily for use, but women 
learned various techniques to decorate them. The shaping of any vessel was 
done by a skilled woman using a smooth piece of wood or a broken piece 
of old pottery. Once the vessel was ﬁ nished, it would be left for several days 
to dry until it had a leathery texture when it would be painted with a light 
colored slip. If the pottery was to be further decorated, a red paint made from 
local iron-bearing rock was applied in geometric designs. The vessel would be 
allowed to dry for several weeks before a ﬁ nal ﬁ ring would be done, usually 
in an open ﬁ re. 
 More sophisticated pieces made on a pottery wheel were done by male 
artisans in urban centers such Hebron or Damascus. During the Ottoman 
period Damascus became an important center for ceramic production, 
following the general patterns and methods used in the Turkish ceramic 
centers such as Iznik. Patterns developed in Iznik, mainly ﬂ oral designs 
such as cherry trees in bloom, carnations, and tulips, were adopted in both 
Damascus and Hebron. Hebron pottery did not achieve the high standards 
of Damascus, but has endured to the present day. Hebron pottery still uses 
Ottoman designs but recently has adopted a number of other more local 
designs inspired from archeological ﬁ nds including those from Byzantine 
mosaics and Umayyad frescos from the pleasure palaces and hunting lodges 
in Jordan. 
 Art in Straw—Bedouin and Village Basketry 
 Both Bedouin and village women make plates, trays, and basket containers 
from straw or palm fronds. Again these pieces are for practical use in daily 
life, but the women use color to make intricate geometric designs. Among the 
most beautiful pieces are the large straw trays made to serve food. These are 
large round trays put on the ﬂ oor or ground and metal trays with the food 
are placed on them. Women use straw dyed in bright reds, oranges, yellows, 
and other colors to make the designs. Some of the more elaborate trays made 
for special occasions, such as to display a bride’s trousseau, may include silk 
thread in the designs or silk tassels along the edges. 

Architecture, Art, and Traditional Crafts 
67
 Village women make a number of small boxes from straw and silk thread. 
These boxes are used to store items such as sewing needles, thread, scissors, and 
the like. The boxes are suspended by ﬁ ne chains from the ceilings becoming 
elements of decoration as well as practical containers. Other containers made 
of straw or palm fronds include those for bread, fruit, grain, or  vegetables. 
Some of these are lined with leather to protect against humidity. 
 Art in Silver—Bedouin and Village Silver Jewelry 
 Silver jewelry was worn by both Bedouin and village women, only the 
very wealthy elite were able to afford gold jewelry in the past. Traditional 
jewelry was made by male artisans from the cities or traveling craftsmen 
who would set up makeshift workshops wherever they happened to be. 
Work in metals was considered beneath the dignity of Bedouin men, and 
Bedouin jewelry was made by urban craftsmen for Bedouin customers. 
Some village jewelry was made by metal workers in the villages, but again 
most village jewelry was made by urban craftsmen for village clients. Often 
the same craftsmen made pieces for both Bedouin and villagers. The only tra-
ditional pieces made by the women themselves were necklaces that consist of 
agate and other semiprecious stones, coral, shells, and cloves. Some of these 
necklaces include ancient beads from even the Neolithic period found in the 
desert or around old sites. Clove necklaces worn by brides are still part of the 
wedding traditions among both the Bedouin and villagers. 
 Traditional silver jewelry for both the Bedouin and village women tend 
to be large in size and heavy. Bracelets and necklaces tend to be wide and 
heavy, the amount of silver being a means of insurance for the women in case 
of divorce or death of her husband. Many of the pieces include designs or 
amulets to ward off the evil eye from the women and their families, especially 
children. Charms or  hijab s with Qur’anic inscriptions for Muslims or images 
of saints for Christians or with blue beads were commonly made to protect 
children from harm. Symbols such as the ﬁ sh, salamander, and frog were used 
in a number of different forms in much of the silver jewelry. 
 A variety of techniques were used to make the jewelry: hammering, repoussé, 
ﬁ ligree, granulation, sand casting, and niello. The last technique is frequently 
associated with the Circassians and what is called Circassian or Turkish jew-
elry. Niello is the use of a black “ink” made of silver, copper, and lead sulﬁ des 
in a powder form, which is placed in etched or cast designs and then melted. 
Once hardened the surface is smoothed with a ﬁ le and the black “ink” causes 
the design to be better seen. For the niello process to work, and for the niello 
to stick to the silver, the quality has be fairly high, at least 80 percent silver. 
Pieces made with lower-quality silver quickly loose the niello. Circassians use 

68 
Culture and Customs of Jordan
niello on their daggers, pistols, handles of riding whips, and saddles. In the 
past necklaces and bracelets made for Circassian women were often nielloed, 
and thus the process has been associated with them. One particular type of 
nielloed bracelet is called  asawir sirkaz (or Circassian bracelets). 
 Traditional silver jewelry for Bedouin and village women was made in the 
past in Karak, al-Salt, and Irbid, in addition to cities in Syria, Palestine, and 
the Hijaz in Saudi Arabia. One particular type of heavy silver bracelet with a 
thick central braid was made in Egypt especially for the Bedouin and is called 
 masriyyah , meaning Egyptian. Much of the jewelry in Jordan is shared with 
its neighbors, making it difﬁ cult to be able to say if an older piece was made 
in Jordan or somewhere else. There was, and is yet today, a great deal of 
exchange in silver jewelry between places as far as Yemen, Central Asia, India, 
and Egypt. Quality of the silver varies greatly depending on the source, which 
is usually melted down old pieces or coins. Most of the older silver pieces still 
found in Jordanian antique shops are higher quality, but since so little of it is 
still being made (women prefer gold over silver), they are becoming rarer and 
thus more expensive collectors’ items. 
 Contemporary Arts in Jordan 
 Since the 1950s Jordan has seen the development of ﬁ ne arts such as paint-
ing and sculpture. Few Jordanian artists have become well-known and the 
Jordanian public has become more aware of the ﬁ ne arts since the 1960s. 
The push for a better appreciation for all of the arts, including theater and 
music as well as painting and sculpture has been well received in the coun-
try. Members of the royal family have given patronage to the arts and to art 
galleries where it is possible to see the works of Jordanian artists. During 
the 1970s Jordan’s economic elite began buying the art for their homes and 
by the 1980s there had developed a sophisticated audience. Not only were 
they interested in modern art, but antiquities became an important part of 
their tastes as did Jordan’s cultural heritage. Pieces of Bedouin or village craft 
became sought after for their beauty as well as their connection with the cul-
tural identity of the country and its people. 
 CONCLUSION 
 Jordanian arts and architecture reﬂ ect the more rustic and rural nature of 
the society. While Jordan is one of the places where man ﬁ rst settled into 
large urban centers, it has been for much of its history since late antiquity 
marginalized or a rural hinterland for cities such as Damascus. Weak central 
government, especially during the Mamluk and Ottoman periods, led to a 

Architecture, Art, and Traditional Crafts 
69
Bedouinization of much of the country. The traditional architecture and arts 
are those of rural villagers and Bedouin for whom utility is an essential part 
of both architecture and art. 
 Much of the traditional art are the products of women; tents, rugs, carpets, 
pottery, and baskets are all objects of daily use but also art. Women are able 
to express themselves in these objects and the colors and materials they use 
reﬂ ect what is referred to as their mood or their own thoughts. Men also 
produce both art and architecture in the stone houses found in villages and 
the more reﬁ ned crafts such as professional jewelry smiths. Traditional arts 
and architecture have been able to survive in Jordan despite the pressures of 
globalization. Jordan’s growing middle class values traditional arts, crafts, and 
architecture, making a local market for sales and an interest in preservation 
of what is left. 


 5 
 Traditional Cuisine and Costume 
 Jordan’s traditional foods and costumes ﬁ t within the general region of Greater 
Syria, which includes Palestine, Lebanon, Syria, and Jordan. The region of 
Greater Syria as a whole constitutes one of the major divisions of the Arab 
world and is recognizably different from other cultural regions in the dialects 
of Arabic spoken, social customs, traditional foods, and traditional costumes. 
While there are a number of special aspects that make them more recognizably 
Jordanian than say Syrian or Palestinian, especially in regards to traditional 
clothing, in general these differences are minor. The region was economically 
integrated in the past and during the centuries of Islamic rule, major urban 
centers such as Damascus exercised political, economic, and cultural inﬂ uence 
over most of the region. In addition, much of the desert in both Syria and 
Jordan had been under strong Arab Bedouin inﬂ uence since antiquity. 
 TRADITIONAL FOODS OF JORDAN 
 Jordan’s traditional foods fall into several major categories which correspond 
to the social and cultural makeup of its people. These can be divided into Bed-
ouin, village, Palestinian, and Syrian/Lebanese cuisine, which correspond to 
the foods of the pastoral nomads, settled villagers, Palestinian refugees, and the 
village/urban elite with strong Ottoman cultural inﬂ uence. The national dish 
of the country is called  mansif and is the major feast dish of the Bedouin. 
 Bedouin Foods 
 As noted above, the national dish of Jordan is the Bedouin  mansif , which 
takes its name from the Arabic word meaning “half,” as the dish implies 

72 
Culture and Customs of Jordan
that each platter contains half a sheep or goat.  Mansif is the dish served by 
Bedouin  shaykh s at their daily tribal councils or by anyone celebrating an 
important occasion such as a wedding, a naming ceremony, or to welcome 
guests. The dish allows the host to demonstrate the wealth, generosity, and 
hospitality of his family and is always seen as a mark of honor for a guest. It 
is made of a ﬁ rst layer of a paper-thin type of bread called  shrak or  marquq 
placed on a large serving tray. A huge mound of rice is heaped on the bread 
and over that is placed lamb or goat meat. Over the whole dish large dippers 
of a special yogurt sauce made from  jamid, a rock hard form of yogurt, which 
is mixed with a small amount of water to make the sauce, are liberally poured 
over the dish by the host. The meal is eaten with the hands, and pieces of the 
bread are used to help make balls of rice and meat which are then tossed into 
the mouth with the ﬂ ip of the thumb. 
 There have been adaptations to this dish to accommodate settled or urban 
life where sheep or goat meat may not be readily found. A smaller version of 
the traditional  mansif can be made with chickens, though seen as less noble 
than using lamb or goat. In addition to the yogurt sauce, the more  modern 
version of the dish may include cooked vegetables such as carrots and  potatoes, 
though some may then argue the dish is no longer a  mansif. 
 Mansif is often found in Jordanian restaurants in a much modiﬁ ed version. 
Instead of the massive meal served up by the Bedouin, the dish is a humble 
amount of rice on a regular plate while the meat and the sauce are served in 
a bowl. The wafer-thin bread is also served on the side rather than under the 
rice. While purists may scoff at this version of the meal, it is nonetheless a 
popular lunch choice by many Jordanians at local restaurants. 
 Mansif is the major dish, and it is a meal unto itself, served by the Bedouin 
and its preparation often includes both the men and the women of a house-
hold. The women prepare the bread, rice, and yogurt sauce, but the men 
prepare the meat. This is especially for when the meal is going to be served as 
part of a major celebration, such as a wedding feast. Bedouin men state that 
the most important part of the dish, the meat, must be prepared by them 
since it is the most “serious” part of it. Women state that while the meat is 
an essential part, they prepare the “heart” of the dish and without the bread, 
the rice, and the sauce; the meal would not be a feast. Both parties take the 
preparation of the dish as serious responsibilities for the success of the meal 
and of the celebration. 
 Bedouin, like most pastoral nomads, are not big consumers of meat, 
but of milk and milk products. Much of their diet is centered around milk 
from sheep, goats, and, less so today, camels. The type of sheep raised by 
the  Bedouin, the ‘Awassi, is a dairy sheep whose milk has always been an 
important part of the nomads’ diet. Though the ‘Awassi does not produce 

Traditional Cuisine and Costume 
73
the large amounts of milk other eastern Mediterranean breeds do, they are 
important milk suppliers. Goats are also milked, though their milk is not as 
sweet as that from ‘Awassi ewes. Today fewer Jordanian Bedouin keep herds 
of camels as they did in the recent past, but female camels are still milked. 
Milk is either consumed when it is warm and fresh or allowed to sour into 
something  similar to buttermilk, called  rayib. Rayib is the ﬁ rst step towards 
making the various yogurts that make up much of the Bedouins’ diet. Add 
a small amount of lemon juice and churn it and it becomes butter. Add 
 increasing amounts of salt and it becomes yogurt or sour cream. 
 Breads are another staple of the Bedouin diet. Flour is one of the major 
products Bedouin have usually bought from villagers or urban merchants. 
On occasions when the winter is a good wet one, some Bedouin have grown 
their own wheat, which they sell or make into ﬂ our. Those Bedouin who 
are only semi-nomadic traditionally have raised a variety of crops including 
wheat and barley. 
 Flour is used to make a variety of breads, none of them being made with 
yeast. Most of the bread consumed by Bedouin is the thin wafer-like  shrak 
which is basically ﬂ our, salt, and water folded and folded together to make 
the dough. The dough is spread over a thin convex piece of metal or  saj that 
quickly cooks the dough on one side. It is ﬂ ipped over and the whole process 
takes only a few minutes for the bread to be ready.  Shark, also called  marquq 
by villagers, is also a common bread for breakfasts in Jordan’s villages and 
even in the cities. It is possible to buy commercially made  shrak in major 
supermarkets such as Safeway’s, not only in Jordan, but in Saudi Arabia and 
the Gulf states as well. 
 A second type of bread common among the Bedouin is one called  khubz 
min al-tabun , or literally “bread from an oven,” though among the Bedouin 
no oven as such is used. Instead the bread, which is more of a loaf, is placed 
in the coals of a ﬁ re to bake, but again the dough is basically ﬂ our, salt, and 
water. A bed of hot coals is prepared and the loaf is placed on it. It is then 
covered with more hot coals and allowed to bake for around ﬁ ve minutes 
before the coals are removed, the bread dusted off, and served fresh often with 
home-churned butter. 
 Important to any Bedouin meal or between meal times are tea and coffee. 
The preparation of Bedouin coffee, called Arabic coffee to distinguish it from 
the urban Turkish variety, is a ceremony that calls neighbors to share. The 
coffee beans are ﬁ rst roasted on an open ﬁ re in a special pan that looks like a 
giant spoon. The beans are constantly turned with a metal stirrer with a long 
thin handle. The beans are lightly roasted and then poured out into a wooded 
dish, frequently decorated with brass tacks, and allowed to cool. Once cool, 
the beans are then poured into a decorated wooden mortar and ground using 

74 
Culture and Customs of Jordan
a special beat that indicates to nearby tents coffee is being  prepared. The 
 coffee is poured from the mortar into brass coffee pots, usually made in urban 
centers such as Damascus or Homs in Syria, and simmered to a boil along 
with a few pods of cardamom. The cardamom gives the coffee a slight spicy 
taste, aroma, and a greenish color. The coffee is allowed to come to a boil 
three times and then is served in tiny ceramic cups with no handle. The 
amount of coffee is a small, perhaps not even half of the tiny cup, and is 
served to each person three times. At the end of the third cup it is polite to 
shake the cup from side to side and say “ da ’ imeh, ” or “God preserve you.” 
Bedouin consider it polite to offer three cups and for the guest to turn down 
a fourth. Coffee is always served after a major feast such as  mansif because it 
is believed that it helps with digestion. 
 Tea is also served with a degree of ceremony among the Bedouin, but 
because it is the everyday, every meal drink, it doesn’t have the special social 
role coffee has. Tea with milk is served ﬁ rst thing in the morning as part of 
every breakfast. The ﬁ rst glass of tea, always served in small handless glasses, is 
more milk than tea, and often sweetened canned milk is used. Each succeed-
ing glass has less milk and more tea until the last glasses are only tea. Bedouin 
make their tea by boiling the sugar and tea leaves in the water, making it both 
sweet and strong. Every Bedouin tent will have pots of tea either boiling on 
the ﬁ re or staying warm next to the ﬁ re all day long ready to serve guests as 
well as themselves. When a guest has had enough tea, the signal is to turn 
the glass upside down in front of them or to hand it back to the host with 
one hand covering the top and say “ da ’ imeh ,” as one does for politely  ending 
rounds of coffee. Tea is often served before a major feast, or if the family 
wants to display its hospitality and generosity, three rounds of each, coffee 
and tea are served. Tea serves as the drink when discussions are in progress 
while coffee signals the conclusion of deal, sealing an agreement such as a 
marriage proposal, sale of land, and other major events. 
 Village Foods 
 Villagers in Jordan have similar foods to their neighbors in Palestine, Syria, 
and Lebanon, using a wide variety of vegetables, milk products, poultry, and 
meats. Absent from much of the Jordanian diet is ﬁ sh which is culturally not 
a preferred food. There is strong social prejudice against eating ﬁ sh though 
in recent years fewer and fewer people have maintained the prejudice against 
it. Village foods reﬂ ect the ability to produce a larger variety of food stuffs 
such as olives, citrus fruits, almonds, pistachios, and mulberries in addition to 
various types of beans, tomatoes, onions, fenugreek, carrots, radishes, beets, 
and other vegetables. In summer grapes and melons are available. Villagers 

Traditional Cuisine and Costume 
75
raise sheep, goats, and cattle as well as chickens, ducks, and geese. All of these 
contribute their diet. 
 Village breakfasts are composed of several types of white cheeses made 
usually from goat or sheep milk; some are salty while others are sweet. Both 
black and green olives are served along with pickled vegetables such as beets, 
carrots, and cucumbers. Freshly baked breads served with butter, honey, or 
fruit preserves are always part of the breakfast. Tea, similar to the Bedouin 
tea, is served, and in season, fresh juices such as grape, orange, or mulberry 
are part of the meal. 
 Lunch is the largest meal and Arab proverbs state that women begin lunch 
once breakfast has been served. Lunches include at least one meat dish of some 
kind as the main part of the meal, though Christian families have times when 
meals are meatless according to their religious calendar. One of the typical 
dishes is  musakhin which is made of chicken spiced with sumac and served on 
Syrian pocket bread ( khubz Suri ). While Palestinians claim  musakhin as typi-
cally Palestinian, it is equally claimed by many Jordanians. The same could 
be said of nearly all of the traditional Jordanian village dishes. 
 Lunch is also the time for the wide variety of salads and bread dips made with 
cracked wheat and fresh vegetables. Salads such as Lebanese  tabbuli (cracked 
wheat, parsley, mint, and green onions),  salatah ‘ arabiyah  (tomatoes, cucum-
bers, and onions chopped into small pieces with a lemon juice and olive oil 
dressing),  tahini dip (sesame paste thinned with lemon juice),  eggplant salads 
and dips such as  Baba Ghanuj or  m ‘ tabal (cooked eggplant that has been 
skinned and then mashed with garlic, lemon juice, and  tahini ) are often part 
of the meal. 
 Following the large midday meal, traditionally men would take a rest 
before going back out to their ﬁ elds. Women would begin the clean up work 
from preparing and serving lunch before being able to take a very short rest. 
Once ﬁ nished with the rest period, women then begin preparing for their 
men to return from the ﬁ elds. 
 Dinner is not usually as big as lunch, though with the changes in people’s 
work habits it is coming to be more and more like lunch. Traditionally dinner 
was lighter than lunch and was usually a soup, stew, or other dish that could 
make use of leftovers from lunch. That which was not eaten was kept for a 
special end of the week dish using up the old, dry bread, leftover vegetables, 
and sour cream, called  m ’ jadrah. Like many such end of the week dishes, it 
was a good way to use up what otherwise would be wasted food before there 
was refrigeration. 
 Village cuisine includes a variety of spices not always used by the Bedouin. 
In the spring and fall a number of wild herbs are collected by the women to 
be dried and used in cooking and in pickling. Spices often found in village 

76 
Culture and Customs of Jordan
dishes include both black and red peppers, sweet pepper, sumac, cinnamon, 
allspice, cardamom, cloves, and coriander. 
 Villagers also make tea and coffee similar to that made by the Bedouin. 
Village tea is often made with mint in the summer and with a sprig of sage in 
the winter. Sage tea is a traditional means to help prevent colds as well as to 
help treat a cold or ﬂ u. Coffee can be the Bedouin Arabic coffee or the more 
urban Turkish coffee. Arabic coffee is made with cardamom and no sugar, 
while Turkish coffee is made with sugar but no cardamom. Villagers are criti-
cized by the Bedouin for not offering their guests the usual three rounds of 
coffee and tea, but often stop at the second cup, though in the experience of 
the author plenty of Jordanian and Syrian villagers have offered three cups 
of each. 
 Palestinian Foods 
 Palestinians make up a large portion of Jordan’s populations especially in 
cities such as ‘Amman. Palestinians who came to Jordan as refugees starting 
in 1948 came from a number of social and economic backgrounds, from 
sophisticated urban elite to pastoral nomads. The loss of lands, shops, and 
other property had a leveling effect within the refugee community even 
though many Palestinians subsequently were able to ﬁ nd jobs and ﬁ ll profes-
sional positions. Palestinian foods and traditional clothing (especially for the 
women) became important ways to help preserve their Palestinian identity. 
 While much of the traditional foods in Palestine are shared with  Jordanians, 
Syrians, and Lebanese, there are some dishes that are considered more 
 Palestinian than others. One of the typical Palestinian dishes is  maqlubah (or 
upside down).  Maqlubah takes its name from the fact the dish is cooked in 
reverse order and once ﬁ nished the pot it is prepared in is placed upside down 
on a plate and the dish falls out with what had been at the bottom of the pot 
on top.  Maqlubah is made with meat (lamb or beef) and onions initially fried 
in olive oil until lightly brown, a number of vegetables such as cauliﬂ ower, 
potatoes, eggplant, and the like are added along with some water and allowed 
to simmer. Last, once the vegetables have begun to soften, rice and more 
water are added. When the rice has turned soft and ﬂ uffy the dish is ready to 
be ﬂ ipped over onto a serving platter. 
 Other more Palestinian and Syrian type of foods include  falafel (or chick 
pea paste that is deep fried and served with pickles and  tahini sauce on pocket 
bread),  kibbeh (made with cracked wheat and ground meat either made into 
small balls and stuffed with meat and pine nuts or into a meatloaf), and 
stuffed vegetables, such as peppers, tomatoes, and potatoes. In addition, 
 several of the more urban types of desserts and sweets were introduced by the 

Traditional Cuisine and Costume 
77
Palestinians. One of the best is  kinafa Nablusi named for the West Bank city 
of Nablus.  Kinafa Nablusi is made of a bottom layer of sweet white cheese 
covered in shredded phyllo. It is baked until the phyllo begins to brown and 
then sugar and rosewater syrup is poured over it. Before serving, the top is 
sprinkled with chopped pistachio nuts. 
 Ottoman Legacy in Foods 
 The ruling class for the last 400 years or so of Syria, Lebanon, Palestine, and 
Jordan were connected to the major centers of Damascus or Cairo. Different 
foods from the Ottoman Empire were dispersed through ofﬁ cial government 
appointments of peoples from the different ethnicities of the empire. Cities such 
as Damascus and Aleppo in Syria became well known for their ﬁ ne cuisine; cui-
sine that could match that of the capital Istanbul. Jordan is a late comer to the 
Ottoman legacy in ﬁ ne cooking as many of the dishes have appeared recently. 
Jordan was not brought fully into the Ottoman fold until the nineteenth cen-
tury and had few major urban centers until after World War I. Nonetheless, 
Jordan has today some of the best restaurants in the region serving ﬁ ne quality 
Middle Eastern foods. These include salads, dips, main dishes of meat, poultry, 
and ﬁ sh, but even more so in the varieties of sweets and desserts. There is also 
wider number of spices used beyond those found in village cooking including 
basil, saffron, cumin, tumeric, and the like. Some of the dishes have names 
such as The Imam Fainted, each with an interesting story or legend about the 
origin of the name often related to the imperial kitchens in Istanbul. 
 One of the new dishes that came with the arrival of Turkish-speaking Uzbeks 
from Central Asia in the decade after World War I is  riz Bukhari or Bukharian 
rice, named for the Central Asian city Bukhara.  Riz Bukhari is similar to the 
Arabian Gulf dish called  kabsah and is made with chicken and lightly browned 
onions. Once browned, add grated carrots, chopped tomatoes, grated orange or 
lemon peel, juice of one orange or lemon, spices (cinnamon, allspice, cloves, car-
damom, a small amount of black and red pepper, and depending on the person 
cooking, saffron), and about a cup of water. Then allow the vegetables to begin 
to cook. The chicken is removed to ﬁ nish cooking by baking it in an oven while 
long grain rice is added to vegetables and chicken stock. Once the rice is cooked 
the dish is served on a platter with the chicken pieces placed on top of the rice 
and, for the ﬁ nal touch, raisins and chopped almonds are sprinkled over it all. 
 TRADITIONAL COSTUME 
 Traditional costume in Jordan is, as noted above, very similar to that found 
throughout Greater Syria. There are a few differences though, and some of 

78 
Culture and Customs of Jordan
the older designs, especially in women’s clothing, are no longer made or used. 
The breakdown into speciﬁ c types also follows that of Bedouin, village, and 
urban. The traditional clothes have been subject to change over time and 
have never been static. Like all fashion, they are dictated by tastes and avail-
ability of cloth as well as the need to be practical and functional. Of the 
ethnic minorities in Jordan, only the Circassians and Shishans have preserved 
their own traditional clothing, which they wear for special occasions. 
 Bedouin Costume 
 Bedouin costume has undergone a number of changes since the nineteenth 
century when European travelers took photos and wrote extensive narra-
tives describing it . The largest and most signiﬁ cant changes have occurred 
in women’s costume while men’s, though changed, has not been altered as 
much. 
 Men’s Costume 
 Men’s costume is simple, consisting of cotton trousers called  sirwal over 
which a long, ankle-length shirt called  dishdashah is worn.  Dishdashah s can 
be made of different kinds and weights of cloth with lighter cottons and 
synthetics usually worn in the summers and heavier cottons, linens, and 
now synthetic blends worn in the winter. Since the 1970s cheap synthetic 
cloth from Asia has replaced the better-quality cottons and wools that had 
been imported from Britain and India. Unlike in some of the nearby coun-
tries, Jordanian Bedouin do not wear light colors or white in summer and 
reserve dark colors for the winter, but are open to any color any time of 
year; however, different shades of blue tend to be the most common color 
choices. 
 The  dishdashah is usually belted with a wide leather belt or with one that 
combines leather and a form of plaiting of which the best is still made in 
Damascus. The belt may also be one that straps over the shoulders with places 
for bullets and a holster for a pistol. Men usually have a large, sharp dagger 
called  shabriyyah strapped to their belts. The dagger is used as an all-purpose 
tool for repairs to equipment such as saddles, tents, and even motor vehicles. 
In addition to the leather belt, some men may wear a long round braided cord 
made of silk that ends in two large tassels. The cord is wrapped around both 
the waist and over the shoulders and is tied on the right side, allowing the 
tassels to hang down nearly to the knee. 
 Over the  dishdashah men may wear an outer cloak called  bisht or ‘ abbayah 
which can be made of a number of different types of cloth from homespun 
wool to ﬁ ne camel hair or even silk. The better quality ones are made of camel 

Traditional Cuisine and Costume 
79
hair and have gold or silver thread embroidery down the front and along 
the seams down the arms and around the openings for the hands. Those of 
lesser quality have similar embroidery in cotton or cotton silk (cotton thread 
stretched until it has the same sheen as silk). In recent decades synthetic cloth 
from Asia has replaced real silk and to a degree camel hair; these are substan-
tially cheaper and easier to afford for the average person. 
 In the winter Bedouin men wear a large, heavy coat made of lamb’s ﬂ eece 
called  farw , which means a pelt. The lamb pelts are cut and sewn together with 
the ﬂ eece side showing to make the inner lining of the coat, which is made of 
heavy cotton, wool, or camel hair. The ﬁ ner ones are heavily  decorated with 
appliqué or cotton embroidery in special workshops mainly in Damascus 
and can cost up to $800. The less expensive variety is made of two heavy 
wool blankets cut and sewn to make a coat. Again, the coat is decorated with 
appliqué. Since the early 1980s a cheap form to the coat has become available 
replacing real lamb skins with synthetic ﬂ eece. While they have the look of 
the ﬁ ner quality coats the cost is closer to $40. 
 The man’s head cloth has a range of names but is usually called  shimagh 
or  kufﬁ yah  in Jordan. It is a large, square, often red or black checkered cloth 
of cotton or cotton and silk blend. The higher amount of silk, the ﬁ ner the 
piece, and the more expensive it is. The cloth is folded into a triangle, the 
better quality being better able to be an even triangle, and placed on the head 
so that the peak of the triangle falls down the wearer’s back. In Jordan the 
 shimagh is often trimmed in tiny tassels and each of the four ends of the cloth 
have long, elaborate tassels added to them. The use of tassels is a distinctive 
feature of Jordanian  shimagh and sets Jordanians off from their neighbors. 
Many Bedouin wear it throwing the two-side ends up over the back of the 
head. The two ends are tightened making almost a bun with it. 
 The  shimagh is held in place on the head by means of a double coiled 
head rope made of tightly braided and wrapped goat hair called ‘ aqal. 
The head rope also comes in a wide range of styles and sizes from fairly 
cheap, loosely made ones to extremely ﬁ ne ones that end in a series of long 
tassels that hang down to the midback of the wearer. Many Jordanians 
prefer to wear the ones with a number of long back tassels while those of 
Palestinian origin prefer those with one single back cord that ends in a 
short  crosspiece. Those who prefer to identify more with Syria and Syrian 
tribes wear the ones that ﬁ t on the crown of the head, are very thin, and 
end in a long cord with a design such as moon and crescent. Those with 
closer ties to tribes in Saudi Arabia wear the Saudi style head rope, which 
has with no extra back decorations and is worn more to the front of the 
head. The way the ‘ aqal is worn tells a good deal about the person, not 
only the country he may wish to be identiﬁ ed with, but also whether he is 

80 
Culture and Customs of Jordan
single and wears it at a jaunty angle to the side or is married and wears it 
straight on the head. 
 Women’s Costume 
 Women’s costumes have had the greatest change over the past hundred 
years. There have been important changes in styles of dresses, head scarves, 
and even jewelry worn. Bedouin women’s clothes have been inﬂ uenced by 
those worn by village and urban women they have been in contact with, avail-
ability of types of cloth or embroidery thread in the market, and other forces 
of fashion and economy. 
 The main part of a Bedouin woman’s wardrobe is a long, ankle length 
black dress. In the nineteenth century and into the ﬁ rst part of the twentieth 
century, these were the huge  thob ‘ ob or  khalagah (or double dress). The dress 
was made to be nearly twice the length of the woman and the extra cloth was 
pulled up and over a wide belt to form a doubled dress. The sleeves were also 
extralong and extrawide and tied behind the back to be out of the way from 
work while one was also pulled over the head and tied in place with a wide 
cloth headband. Sleeves were made to be wide and long so they could have 
multiple uses, such as keeping keys and other items that need to be handy, 
and even holding babies. 
 The dresses were decorated with embroidery along the neck and down the 
front, along the side seams and the bottom hem, and along the sleeves. The 
embroidery helped reinforce the dress and strengthen it against the heavy use 
women made of them. As a result, the embroidery wasn’t always in even pat-
terns or symmetrical designs but often was asymmetrical and looked a bit off 
when the dress was not being worn. When being worn, with one sleeve tied 
over the head and tied behind the woman’s back, as well as with the extra 
cloth looped over a belt, the designs are less off and take on more symmetrical 
patterns. 
 Some Bedouin women’s dresses have been inﬂ uenced by those of village 
women for some time. In the northern part of Jordan in particular, both 
 village and Bedouin women have embroidered their dresses with patterns 
where the exposed cloth makes the pattern. The embroidery is done in hori-
zontal strips of nearly even width, each made with a different color of silk 
or cotton ﬂ oss. This type of embroidery is a distinctive feature of villages 
in northern Jordan and some of the Bedouin tribes who used to migrate 
between northern Jordan and northern Palestine. The work needed to make 
even one strip takes a good deal of time—the patterns being made by the 
exposed dress material—and few women make them today. 
 Many Jordanian Bedouin women have been inﬂ uenced by the dresses made 
and worn by Palestinian women and the Bedouin from southern  Palestine 

Traditional Cuisine and Costume 
81
(the Negev) and Sinai. The dresses made and worn by the Negev and Sinai 
Bedouin are heavily worked silk or cotton embroidery in bright colors such 
as yellow, red, and orange. Among the women from tribes in the Negev and 
Sinai, dresses with a large amount of blue are worn by young, unmarried 
women while married women use designs in bright colors. Women who are 
widowed often switch back to blue embroidery but keep a small amount of 
color in the chest panel and around the neck. The designs tend to be more 
geometric and ﬂ oral than many of the designs used by settled village women 
in Palestine. Again the sleeves are large and wide allowing them to have mul-
tiple uses by the wearer and tied behind the back to keep them out of the way 
of work. 
 In more recent years a smaller, modiﬁ ed version of the older large Bedouin 
dress has become fashionable. The sleeves are no longer the huge, wide ones 
but are fairly small. They are still tied behind the back, leaving the women’s 
arms full mobility to work. The front of the dress has a small chest panel 
embroidered in bright colors, such as yellow or red, in ﬂ oral patterns. Some-
times dresses for special occasions may also have ﬂ oral patterns on the lower 
part of the skirt, especially on the back panel. Women wear a long sleeved 
shirt underneath the dress so that their arms are not exposed. 
 Bedouin women usually belt their dresses using a wide leather, woven 
wool, or cloth belt. The belt’s color also can tell a good deal about the woman 
in that the color red is reserved for married women. The woven wool belts are 
made by the women themselves and are often made of natural colored wool 
with small bands of black goat hair and decorated with buttons and cowrie 
shells. This type of belt is rarely found in Jordan and is associated much more 
with tribes in the Negev and Sinai. Leather belts are made in Damascus or 
other cities in Syria, but more commonly, women simply use a long piece 
of colored cloth as a belt. Red is usually reserved for married women and 
unmarried women wrap a blue or dark colored cloth around their waist. 
 The head is covered with a thin, black crepe-like cloth called a  shambar or 
 milfa ’ which is wrapped under the chin and over the head so that if she needs 
to, the wearer can bring it over her mouth and nose as a veil. The head cloth is 
held in place by another long piece of cloth folded lengthwise to form a wide 
band and tied around the head called ‘ asabah. Some of the women prefer to 
use a silk or silk and cotton brocade cloth made in Homs for the headband. 
Other women tie the headband in such a way as to form a peak, in some 
instances the women shape the headbands into extremely tall peaks or cones. 
This fashion is found more among younger women than older ones and is 
more prevalent among those Bedouin with strong ties to tribes in Syria. 
 In the past, teenage girls wore various types of caps with long tails  running 
down the back often heavily embroidered and decorated in charms, coins, 

82 
Culture and Customs of Jordan
buttons, beads, and cowrie shells. In some instances the tail was so long 
as to drag behind the girl when she walked, supposedly to “wipe away her 
 footprints.” A form of this decorated cap is still worn at special occasions in 
Jordan and Syria by Bedouin women. This is the ‘ arjah , which has a main 
structure of metal links that go around the head and another piece that goes 
over the head from front to back. The head band is made of colorful bead-
work and the tail is made of ﬁ ne brocade or some other colored cloth and 
decorated with coins and charms. The tail ends in a number of large silk 
 tassels, which keep it hanging straight. 
 Village Costume 
 Traditional village costume differs a little from that of the Bedouin though, 
in the past, villagers visited major cities and were able to purchase more 
expensive materials. They had close economic connection with urban people, 
including urban elite, and, if able to afford it, tried to emulate urban fashions. 
Introductions included the Turkish  tarbush (the tall red hat with a long black 
silk tassel), western-cut men’s jacket, as well as other urban fashion changes. 
 Men’s Costume 
 Traditional dress for village men is very similar to that of the Bedouin. 
Men wore a cotton shirt buttoned down the front, a cotton vest embroidered 
along the front and the neck, and around the sleeves and bottom, a wide 
leather or cloth belt, and the loose ﬁ tting Turkish trousers made of cotton. 
The trousers worn by Bedouin men frequently had straight legs and were not 
as baggy as that worn by village men, who traditionally preferred the type 
that were very baggy and had narrow cuffs that came down only to the calf 
of the leg. Village men wore the same kind of long, ankle-length shirt  dish-
dashah over the other shirt and vest or, similar to the villagers in Palestine, an 
overcoat called  qumbaz that buttoned or tied at the left shoulder and on the 
left at the waist. The coat was belted with a narrow leather belt and the two 
bottom ends could be tucked up into the belt to allow better leg movement 
during work. The  qumbaz was made of good-quality cotton or cotton and 
wool blends imported from Britain or of silk or cotton silk blends made in 
Syria. Today few men wear either the  dishdashah or  qumbaz though they may 
lounge in them in the house. Generally only older men still wear them and 
younger men now wear western jeans and shirts. 
 Village men still wear the  shimagh and ‘ aqal as do the Bedouin.  Villagers 
wear the same range of style, colors, and favor those with the distinctive 
 Jordanian tassels. Only the plain white  shimagh may not have tassels added to 
it. No one wears the Turkish  tarbush, though in the later part of the  nineteenth 

Traditional Cuisine and Costume 
83
century and the early part of the twentieth century some village men wore it 
with an embroidered cloth made in Syria wrapped around it. The  shimagh is 
practical headgear and it is not unusual to see Jordanian men wearing it along 
with otherwise western clothes. 
 Women’s Costume 
 Traditional costumes worn by village women demonstrate a number of 
inﬂ uences and their access to products made in major urban centers such as 
Damascus, Homs, and Aleppo. A number of Jordanian villages have histori-
cal connections to villages in Palestine or southern Syria and their embroidery 
reﬂ ects these ties. In southern Jordan, the ties have been to local Bedouin 
tribes as well as those in the Negev, Sinai, and the northern Hijaz. More elite 
women adopted styles from the urban elite, though often in a more conser-
vative form. Since the 1940s change in village clothes has been rapid and it 
is not unusual to see several generations in the same family wearing widely 
different fashions. 
 The main feature of village women’s costume, like that of the Bedouin 
women, is the dress. During the nineteenth century and into the early twenti-
eth century some village women also wore the huge  khalagah or double dress, 
however, many wore a long, ankle length dress, usually of black cotton or 
cotton and wool blend, which was richly embroidered with colorful silk or 
 cotton ﬂ oss. Jordanian women did not cover them with the massive amounts 
of ﬁ ne embroidery, as is the practice of many Palestinian women, though they 
did use many of the same types of ﬂ oral and geometric patterns favored by the 
Bedouin yet today. Some women embroidered their dresses along the seams 
with alternating red, white, and yellow ﬂ oss, and the chest panels were merely 
marked out and an X embroidered through the middle. Instead of embroider-
ing patterns on the dresses, some village women used purchased rickrack and 
then sewed it on as appliqué. In northern Jordan many of the women used to 
make the embroidered dresses where the exposed cloth made the pattern. As 
with the Bedouin dress of the same style, the embroidery was done as  different 
colored strips on the skirt of the dress and around the sleeves. In southern 
 Jordan, women from the town of Ma‘an wore huge dresses of alternating 
green and red silk panels. They were not heavily embroidered but otherwise 
looked very similar to the Palestinian  malikah or royal dress common in the 
Jerusalem-Bethlehem region. Unlike Bedouin women who usually belted their 
dresses and where belts were indicators of social status, village women did not 
always use belts. In addition, village dresses rarely had the long-wide sleeves 
common among the Bedouin, but often the sleeves were tight ﬁ tting down to 
the wrist. Today very few village women wear traditional costume except at 
special occasions like weddings and many no longer embroider. 

84 
Culture and Customs of Jordan
 Village women often wore heavily embroidered jackets over their dresses 
when going out. These were not usually home made, but purchased in cities 
such as Jerusalem or Damascus. Those that were made at home looked like 
small versions of the men’s  farw coats, but without the inner lining of lamb’s 
ﬂ eece. 
 Village women also wore similar head covers to the Bedouin; a crepe like 
scarf wrapped about the head also called  shambar and held in place with 
another cloth tied around the head also called  ‘asabah. Some village women 
added a bit of red embroidery or dyed the bottom parts of the  shambar red 
following fashions in Syria. Village women favored the heavy silk brocade 
cloth made in Homs for the ‘ asabah or used a men’s  shimagh folded and tied 
as a headband. Again, like the Bedouin, young girls wore embroidered caps 
decorated with charms, silver coins, shells, buttons, and beads. The caps also 
had long tails running down the girl’s back though rarely as long as some of 
the worn by Bedouin girls. Today these have been replaced with a head scarf 
if the girl wears any head cover at all. 
 Palestinian Costume 
 As a result of the conﬂ icts between the Arabs and the Israelis, many 
 Palestinians have sought refuge in nearby states including Jordan. For several 
decades the West Bank was incorporated into Jordan and the ﬂ ow of people 
and goods was open. Jordanian cities such as ‘Amman have large  Palestinian 
populations, as much as 50 percent of the total. While Palestinians are similar 
in many ways to Jordanians and there have been long historical ties between 
the two peoples, there are some differences in costume. Maintaining  speciﬁ cs 
of costume among the Palestinians has been an important means of  preserving 
their own identity. 
 Men’s Costume 
 Palestinian men’s traditional costume needs to be divided between that 
of the urban areas such as Jerusalem or Hebron, villagers, and Bedouin. 
Urban men were more subject to the changes in fashions in other major 
urban  centers such as Cairo, Beirut, Damascus, and Istanbul. By the end 
of the nineteenth century the modiﬁ ed European dress adopted in Cairo, 
 Damascus, and  Istanbul had already replaced other more traditional clothes. 
Only villagers and Bedouin retained less western costumes. 
 During the ﬁ rst three decades of the twentieth century costume worn by 
village and Bedouin men became more and more alike. Village men adopted 
the Bedouin  kufﬁ yah  and ‘ aqal replacing a small turban made of  embroidered 
cloth from Syria. The adoption of similar headgear was a result of the 

Traditional Cuisine and Costume 
85
 Palestinian resistance movement and the need to blend the local  populations 
against British attempts to identify rebels. The change was ﬁ rst implemented 
by young village and even urban men and generally adopted during the 
 Palestinian uprising in the 1930s. As a result there was a generalization of 
dress; the  qumbaz and  kufﬁ yah  with ‘ aqal. This has remained Palestinian 
men’s dress to the present day. 
 Women’s Costume 
 Palestinian women have retained the speciﬁ cs of regionalism or even home 
village to the present day. From a woman’s dress, the practiced eye can  easily 
tell the district or village a woman is from, and even if she is Muslim or 
 Christian. Palestinian women developed the art of embroidery and certain 
designs, colors, and even type of ﬂ oss (gold thread for example), which was 
adopted in the course of the sixteenth to twentieth centuries. There was a 
ﬂ owering of embroidery in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries 
when cheaper silk ﬂ oss from France was introduced. In addition, a number of 
European embroidery pattern books became available, enlarging the corpus 
of designs beyond the older ﬂ oral and geometric designs. Palestinian women 
used a wide variety of cloth for their dresses as well: red, green, and blue 
cloth woven in the Palestinian cities of Majdal, Safad, and Bethlehem; silks 
from Damascus and Homs; and imported cloths from Europe. Instead of the 
usual black worn by Jordanian women, Palestinian women’s dresses are in a 
number of colors such as white, green, red, as well as the multicolored royal 
dress. 
 Palestinian women traditionally wore embroidered or silk caps decorated 
with silver or gold coins. Some local styles included a heavy silver chin strap 
that hung underneath the chin and ended in a heavy silver pendant. In the 
region of Bethlehem women wore a high cap decorated with silver or gold 
coins and coral. Over the cap women wore a long embroidered head cloth 
called a  khirqah. The cloth was often cotton or linen strips sewn together and 
richly embroidered with similar designs as on her dress. While in recent years 
many Palestinian women wear the caps only for special holidays or events, 
but they have retained the  khirqah for daily use. 
 Circassian Costume 
 The Circassians and Shishans are relatively new arrivals to Jordan but have 
greatly assimilated into the Arab population today. They have preserved their 
national dress for special occasions. The men wear a costume very similar to 
that of the Russian Cossack with a tall fur hat usually made of lambskin, a 
frock coat that reaches to the knees, long, straight legged trousers, and high 

86 
Culture and Customs of Jordan
leather riding boots. The coat is belted with a leather belt which attaches to 
the back crisscrossing the chest and over the shoulders. In the belt, men wear 
a pistol and a dagger, both of these highly decorated with silver mountings. 
 Women wear several layers of long dresses over which they wear a colorful 
coat made of brocade or print cloth. They wear a rather tall embroidered cap 
over which they drape a long piece of cloth, which falls down the woman’s 
back. 
 CONCLUSION 
 Jordan is part of the cultural area of Greater Syria. Though it shares a 
good deal with its neighbors of Palestine, Lebanon, and Syria, it nonetheless 
has its own distinctive features in dialect, food, and dress. These distinctly 
Jordanian features relate to the history of the country and the strong rural, 
Bedouin and village, origin of the Jordanian identity. Palestinians living in 
Jordan have preserved their own distinctive features and, though of the same 
religions and culture as their Jordanian neighbors, have maintained their own 
identity, especially through women’s clothes and foods. As in many parts of 
the Arab world, dress and foods are important aspects of a person’s individual 
and group identity. 

The Yarmuk River separates Jordan 
(in the foreground) from Syria (in the 
background). The Battle of the Yar-
muk was fought near here. Courtesy 
of the author.
Abu Shahir is a proud member of the Bidul tribe, who have lived in area of Petra for genera-
tions. Courtesy of the author.

General view of the city of al-Salt, one of Jordan’s main cities that dates back into antiquity. 
Courtesy of the author.
Downtown ‘Amman in the old heart of the city. The two minarets of the Hussein Mosque are 
visible in the background. Courtesy of the author.

The Neolithic site al-Baydah in southern Jordan is one of the oldest settlement (village) sites 
in the world. Courtesy of the author.
Harvest season (early June) in the northern Jordanian village of Hartha. Courtesy of the author.

A Bedouin tent of the Bidul tribe at al-Baydah, north of Petra, makes use of a Nabatean ruin 
for a smooth, ﬂ at ﬂ oor surface and a sacriﬁ cial block for a table. Courtesy of the author.
Roman period ruins of Umm al-Jamal in northern Jordan. This was a Nabatean trading city. 
Today camels belonging to Sardiyah Bedouin graze among the ruins. Courtesy of the author.

Typical “throne” house in the northern village of Umm Qays. Courtesy of the author.
al-Salt has a large number of late Ot-
toman buildings. Courtesy of the au-
thor.

Late Ottoman period homes in the 
heart of al-Salt. al-Salt has some of the 
best preserved late Ottoman period 
buildings in Jordan. Courtesy of the 
author.
Qasr Bint al-Far’un, or the Palace of the Pharaoh’s Daughter, is one of the very few freestand-
ing buildings in ancient Petra that has withstood the massive earthquakes that tumbled most 
of the site. Courtesy of the author.

The Ashraﬁ yyah Mosque 
in ‘Amman uses alternating 
layers of black basalt and 
white limestone. This build-
ing style is more common in 
northern Jordan, where both 
stones are found. Courtesy 
of the author.
King ‘Abdallah Mosque blends older architectural styles with modern concepts. The mosque, 
built in the early 1980s, has become one of the most recognizable buildings in the country. 
Courtesy of the author.

Gedara, now called Umm Qays, is one 
of the Decapolis cities. The white mar-
ble statue locally called “Umm Qays” or 
“Mother of Qays” was in the center of the 
amphitheater. Courtesy of the author.
Father and son enjoy a typical Jordanian breakfast. Courtesy of the author.

Bedouin woman of the Bidul tribe in 
southern Jordan baking khubz min al-
tabun in the coals of the ﬁ re. Courtesy 
of the author.
Bedouin man of the Sa’idiyyin tribe of southern Jordan roasts coffee beans for Arabic coffee. 
Courtesy of the author.

Young Bedouin of the Sa’idiyyin tribe in southern Jordan serving Arabic coffee to guests. 
Courtesy of the author.
Bedouin men of the Bidul tribe cook the meat for a mansif or Bedouin feast of lamb. Courtesy 
of the author.

A wedding feast in the northern Jordanian village of Kharjah. The groom’s brothers help serve 
the guests sitting under a Bedouin tent. Courtesy of the author.
Bedouin newlyweds of the ‘Ammarin 
tribe of southern Jordan standing in front 
of their wedding tent, where the bride re-
ceives visitors. Courtesy of the author.

Young Bedouin girl of the Bidul 
tribe of southern Jordan spinning 
goat hair into yarn. Other members 
of the family look on. Courtesy of 
the author.
Settled Bedouin of ‘Ajarmah tribe with one of his Arabian horses. Desert bred Arabian horses 
are still important to many Bedouin in Jordan. Courtesy of the author.

 6 
 Gender, Marriage, and Family 
 Jordanian society is conservative whether referring to the Muslim majority 
or the Christian minority. The conservative nature of the society and the 
very strong family bonds are reﬂ ected in what is considered as appropri-
ate dress, behavior, and gender relations. In recent decades there have been 
some changes in the overall attitude of the country about such things as 
 dating, but Jordan remains a strongly conservative society. 
 FAMILY AND FAMILY STRUCTURE 
 Family is the basis for Jordanian society and is one of its major strengths. 
Like most Arab family structures, the Jordanian family is patriarchal with 
the male head of household as the major decision maker and the main 
 disciplinarian. Traditionally, the senior male was the head of a large, extended 
household where it was common until into the 1970s for several genera-
tions to live in either the same house or in closely clustered housing. While 
in  public the head of the household made the decisions, which were given 
order-like to all of the other members of the group, in private women had 
an important say in all matters that concerned the family. Private discussions 
held in the bedroom where even other family members could not hear were 
where the real  decisions were made. The head of the household discussed 
matters with his wife and mother, if she lived with them, and together they 
made the  decisions, though in public women’s voices were not heard. 
 The head of the household held the supreme position within the family 
structure and his wife, mother, eldest sister, or whoever was the most senior 
of the women held a nearly equal position. The other members of the  family, 

88 
Culture and Customs of Jordan
adult sons and their wives and children, unmarried sons and daughters all 
held well-understood positions within the family hierarchy. Males held 
socially superior status, even over elder sisters, and a much younger brother 
could forbid his elder sister from leaving the house or require that he as the 
male accompany her. Those women who married into the family kept their 
social position within their father’s and later brother’s households and gained 
position within their husbands’ families only after becoming mothers of sons. 
Until she became the mother of a son, her position was the lowest in the 
 family hierarchy with the least voice. 
 It was important to both men and women to have sons. Social standing for 
both was connected to being able to be called “Father of”  (Abu) or “Mother 
of”  (Umm) the ﬁ rst male child, resulting in names such as Abu Muhammad 
or Umm Khalid. Some names were linked to Islamic or Christian traditions 
such as if the father’s name was Ibrahim, the child was often called Khalil 
thus, even before marriage a man might be called Abu Khalil based on long 
traditions of naming children. Once a person became “Father of” or “Mother 
of”, people preferred to refer to them this way rather than use their given 
names. 
 In the traditional family, the closest relations were often cross gendered. 
That is, the strongest relationships were between fathers and their  daughters, 
mothers and their sons, and brothers and sisters. These bonds reﬂ ected the 
needs of the traditional, extended family system, and where there were no 
other social networks to take care of divorced, widowed, or aged  family 
 members. The strong bonds between fathers and brothers with their daugh-
ters and  sisters stemmed from the fact that, although she moved into another 
household when married, she did not join her husband’s family. She remained 
a member of her own family, did not change her family name to that of her 
husband, and could always count on the protection of her father and  brothers 
should she need it. If a woman was abused or unhappy in her husband’s 
house, she could seek the protection of her father or brothers who were duty 
bound by social custom to take her side. Mothers needed similar protection 
of their sons once they had grown old with no other male to provide for 
them. 
 The head of the household gave orders to all of the other members of the 
family and expected to be obeyed out of respect as well as out of duty and 
responsibility. It was considered to be the mark of a bad family should sons, 
daughter, daughters-in-law, or any member of the household argue back or 
refuse to do as they were told. When the patriarch gave an order that seemed 
contrary to the general will of family members, they would appeal not to him, 
but to the most senior of the women to intercede with him on their behalf. 
If asked in private particularly by his wife or mother to change his mind, it 

Gender, Marriage, and Family 
89
would be difﬁ cult to refuse, and while not challenged in public, he would 
usually listen to them. The women could employ a wide range of subtle pres-
sures, such as late meals, badly cooked foods, or sloppy housework, should 
he refuse to listen to their appeals. The house would return to normal once 
he changed his mind. 
 In the traditional family the men were responsible for the public sphere 
including income generation. Boys began accompanying their fathers once 
they were no longer considered to be children and needed to be in the com-
pany of men rather than women. This began around the age of eight and 
boys would be required to spend an increasing amount of time away from the 
protection of their mothers. In the traditional family the public role of the 
male was learned at an early age. Many of the travelers in the nineteenth and 
ﬁ rst part of the twentieth centuries were astonished at the ability of young 
boys to act as hosts during visits to families. Taking their responsibility as 
males seriously, these young boys would take the place of older male relatives 
when they were absent and act as host for visitors. Not only would they take 
the role of welcoming the guest, but they would prepare tea and coffee and 
slaughter a sheep or goat for the guest’s meal. 
 Women were expected to remain at home, but were often called upon to 
help with planting, harvesting, and winnowing crops, or herding, especially 
small stock such as sheep and goats. While women often assisted in farm 
labor or herding livestock, their primary duty was to maintain well-ordered 
households. Women managed the house and were responsible for shopping, 
cooking, cleaning, spinning, weaving, making clothes, and child rearing. 
Young girls began to assist their mothers at an early age and often girls as 
young as ﬁ ve or six years old would be given tasks such as to fetch water from 
a fountain or spring, or to watch and care for younger siblings. By the time 
she was twelve, a girl was able to do nearly all the tasks required to be a good 
wife and mother. 
 One of the most important concepts to maintain the good reputation of 
a family was and to a great extent is yet today honor (the opposite of which 
is shame). Honor is linked to the behavior of the members of a family, espe-
cially for the women. An Arab proverb says that the honor of a family rides 
on the skirts of its women, meaning that women carry the greatest share of a 
family’s reputation. In a traditional family women are to be modest in dress, 
manners, and speech. Boys are more indulged and some bad behavior can be 
excused as youthful energy, but still such indulgence has its limits. Boys who 
gain reputations for poor manners, rude speech, and lack of proper respect 
are considered a family shame. In a society like Jordan’s, where there is a 
strong traditional value of group rather than individual, the bad reputation of 
one family member has direct impact on the group as a whole. A family with 

90 
Culture and Customs of Jordan
a bad member is itself judged as a bad family and others would be reluctant to 
marry into it for fear of being also considered bad. It is important to maintain 
a good reputation that respects the concept of honor. 
 Despite important changes in recent decades, the family remains an 
 important part of Jordanian culture. Respect for elders is still found, though 
few still kiss their fathers’ or mothers’ hands whenever they enter their 
 presence as they did before as a public recognition of this respect. Honor and 
the reputation of being a good family are still important values to  Jordanians. 
The family structure has had to adapt to rapid economic, political, and 
social changes and, though many families today are no longer the traditional 
extended type, the cultural values it represented are still respected. 
 Gender 
 Gender relations are guided by the principles of a deeply Muslim people. 
Though some 15 to 20 percent of Jordanians are Christians, they share many 
of the same conservative values as are articulated by their Muslim neighbors. 
Jordan was a largely rural society until the 1950s and the traditional, conser-
vative values held by Jordanians reﬂ ect this heritage. Men and women in rural 
communities, whether Bedouin or villager, were able to meet and talk, strict 
social rules maintained a degree of social distance between them. 
 In Bedouin society women have always had greater freedom of move-
ment than among settled peoples in the Middle East. The very nature of 
pastoral nomadism requires women to take active roles in the daily activities 
of the family. Women need to leave the protection of the tent to ﬁ nd fuel 
and fetch water on a daily basis. Young unmarried girls are often required 
to tend ﬂ ocks of sheep and goats while the males deal with larger and more 
difﬁ cult livestock such as camels. Men have frequently had to be gone for 
extended times, either herding camels or working in towns and cities,  leaving 
women and children to take care of matters at home. Bedouin women have 
long done their own marketing, selling rugs and other woven items, milk, 
milk products, or even their own livestock, as well as buying supplies from 
 village and urban merchants. Bedouin women’s involvement in the family’s 
income activities has meant that they are able to have a greater say in family 
 matters. 
 Bedouin women make the decision to stay on the male side of the tent 
when guests arrive or not. While male guests are required to stay on the male, 
public side of the tent, the women of the tent have the option to move from 
the public to the private side. Even if they have decided to move to the pri-
vate, female side of the tent, women may join the conversation through the 
curtain that divides the sections. 

Gender, Marriage, and Family 
91
 Village women have also been required by the necessity of work to leave 
the house and engage in marketing activities with men. Women frequently 
had to assist the men of the household in agricultural labor, but with the men 
of their household present. Strong social conventions about family honor 
and reputation limit the types of interactions as well as the proper place and 
time for them to meet. Women could go to the market on their own, but 
only in the weekly markets or in urban markets where she was under the 
watchful eye of family and family friends. Girls under 15 years of age and 
women over 50 years of age had greater freedom of movement and greater 
ability to interact with strangers in places like markets. Village and urban 
women in Jordan traditionally have had less freedom of movement than that 
of  Bedouin women, but more so than many village and urban women in 
many other parts of the Islamic world. While Jordanians are conservative, 
they are also  practical. Attempts to restrict and segregate attendance at school 
sports events by Islamic fundamentalists in the 1990s resulted in them losing 
seats in  parliament in the following elections. 
 Jordanian women have held high positions in the government since 
the 1960s though these were appointed positions by the King or various 
 ministers. Jordanian women did not run for elected ofﬁ ces until the 1980s 
and were not elected until the election of 1993 when Tujan al-Faisal became 
the ﬁ rst woman elected to parliament. Women have entered the job market 
in increasing numbers as well. The Royal Family has promoted the greater 
public participation of women and many of the Royal women are well-
known ﬁ gures both inside and outside of Jordan. Jordan’s queens have been 
involved in social development and the promotion of women since the early 
1970s as have a number of the princesses. Several have established important 
high  proﬁ le social service foundations. Jordan has one of the highest literacy 
rates in the Arab world for both men and women. Jordanian women have 
sought university degrees since the founding of the University of Jordan, 
while women from the elite Palestinian families have been seeking higher 
degrees since the 1920s. Jordanian women are far from the meek, secluded 
picture many have of the traditional, conservative Muslim woman.  Jordanian 
women are found in nearly every ﬁ eld of work. For example, Jordan is the ﬁ rst 
Arab country to have women taxi drivers (who take only women  passengers). 
Soon after Jordan’s ﬁ rst woman taxi driver was made known to the broader 
Arab world through newspaper articles, Egypt also began having women taxi 
drivers. 
 Jordanians have found interesting ways to maintain important cultural 
values but adapt them to the changing times. For example, Jordan is the ﬁ rst 
Arab country to have women-only coffeehouses. In the past, the coffee house 
was a male space where no women would be found, at least no respectable 

92 
Culture and Customs of Jordan
woman. In 2004 the ﬁ rst coffeehouse for women opened in ‘Amman where 
women can go after work, relax with friends over cups of coffee or tea, smoke 
a water pipe, listen to music, and talk just as the men have done for centuries. 
The only men allowed are those who work in the kitchen. Husbands, fathers, 
and brothers have taken to the idea since the place is respectable, owned and 
managed by women, and no men are allowed. Important cultural values of 
honor are not compromised by the women only coffeehouse, but are upheld 
in a new more contemporary way. 
 MARRIAGE CUSTOMS 
 Marriage customs in Jordan have changed greatly in the past several decades 
from the traditional style taking several days to a week to celebrate to a more 
western inﬂ uenced one-day event. Today most Jordanian  weddings are hardly 
distinguishable from those of any of the nearby countries,  Palestine,  Lebanon, 
Syria, and Egypt. The traditional wedding was a large affair that took place at 
the homes of both the groom and the bride. Similar to many other aspects of 
culture in Jordan, the main differences in customs were between  Bedouin and 
villagers, with the villagers having many customs in common with  villagers 
in Palestine and Syria. 
 Most Bedouin still try to maintain traditional wedding celebrations that 
last between ﬁ ve to seven days. The preferred marriage is between ﬁ rst 
 cousins, what is called  ibn ‘ Amm or the father’s brother’s son. In the past the 
 ibn ‘ Amm had the right of ﬁ rst say before a girl could be married and only 
if he gave up his right could she accept the marriage proposal from another 
man. The main purpose behind such close marriages was, and is, to keep the 
family’s property within the family since girls inherited their own share from 
their fathers. In Bedouin society women frequently control their own prop-
erty and inheritance without the interference of their husbands. Thus to keep 
major economic assets from leaving the family, marriages were encouraged 
between fairly close family members. 
 When a young man wanted to get married, he and his father would  discuss 
the matter with the women of the family who would have a better idea of 
which girls, including his cousins, would make suitable wives. Often the 
young man would have begun a quiet courtship talking to the girl as she 
went about her daily tasks and volunteering to act as the guard when the girls 
take the sheep and goats out to graze. In a close-living society such as the 
Bedouin, there are a number of opportunities for young people to meet and 
talk without compromising the girl’s honor, especially if they are relatives. 
Once the young man’s parents agree he can be married, he and his father visit 
the tent of the intended bride. They come formally dressed to indicate the 

Gender, Marriage, and Family 
93
seriousness of the visit. The father of the bride, seeing their formal dress, will 
dress himself up in similar clothes and then come to greet them on the men’s 
side of the tent. The discussion will begin and should both parties agree to the 
wedding, it is sealed with coffee. 
 Depending on the amount of materials that need to be prepared, the wed-
ding may take place shortly afterwards. The bride is expected to bring with 
her much of the tent’s furnishings called the  jihaz and it is a chance for her 
and the women of her family to display their talents in weaving. She may, for 
example, have a tent she has made ready for their new home. The bride and 
her female relatives make and embroider her wedding clothes and those she 
will take with her. The groom’s family sends out invitations (usually this is 
done orally with the young men of the family dispatched to carry the mes-
sage) to all of the nearby tents, whether from their tribe or not and the larger 
the number invited the better for the family’s reputation. Invitations will 
be sent to the tribal leadership as well and usually the  shaykh s attend. The 
groom’s family begins gathering all of the food they will need to provide a 
feast for the guests. 
 The week of the wedding celebration begins with small evening gather-
ings at the tents of both the bride and groom. These begin as small affairs 
and as each night progresses to the ﬁ nal wedding day, they increase in size 
numbers invited, and amount of food served, especially at the groom’s tent. 
At the groom’s tent the men present dance and sing or shoot joy shots into 
the air with their riﬂ es or pistols. At the bride’s tent the gathering is more of a 
women’s affair and culminates in the  henna night when the bride’s hands and 
feet are decorated with a paste made from the  henna plant which stains the 
skin a red color. The paste is applied to the skin and then wrapped in cloth to 
allow it to dry and set the designs. The length of time the paste is left on the 
skin relates to how deep the color is and how long it will be visible; the longer 
it is left on, the deeper the color and longer it will last. 
 The day of the wedding the groom is made ready by his male relatives and 
close friends who shave him after he has bathed. He dresses in new clothes and 
waits for the arrival of his bride a bit later in the day. As he waits the guests 
begin to arrive and congratulate him. The women of his family begin to make 
the wedding feast of  mansif (see the chapter on foods), cleaning and cooking 
the rice as well as preparing the yogurt sauce. The men of his family slaughter 
the sheep, goats, or camels—it is believed the meat needs to be consumed soon 
after an animal is slaughtered—and cut them into pieces to be cooked in large 
pots over open ﬁ res. Other members of the family and the groom’s friends 
keep rounds of coffee and tea going as guests continue to arrive. 
 The bride, once dressed in her wedding dress, puts on jewelry which usu-
ally includes a necklace made of cloves and a number of silver (and now more 

94 
Culture and Customs of Jordan
often gold) bracelets, and a large silk cloth (often green in color) covering her 
whole head; she is brought from her tent by her female relatives and seated 
on a horse that is led by her closest male kinsmen. Other men of her family, 
cousins and uncles, ride in front of her making daring dashes and shooting 
off their guns. The procession is followed by the women and young people of 
her family who sing and clap or carry various parts of her  jihaz, or all of the 
things she would need for her own household including furniture. 
 When she arrives at the groom’s tent, she is quickly taken to a small, 
 separate tent set up just for the young couple. The groom is then brought to 
the tent to consummate the marriage. Once this has been done, the bride is 
visited by the women who come to congratulate her while the groom rejoins 
the guests. The feast is served once it is ﬁ nished cooking, and men and women 
eat separately. When the meal has been eaten, last rounds of coffee are served 
and the guests begin to depart. 
 The bride remains in the separate tent for seven days visited only by the 
groom and women. This time marks her transition from a single woman in 
her father’s tent to a married woman in her husband’s tent. Among  Bedouin 
who are now settled, a room within the house serves the same purpose. When 
the seven days is over, the women of the groom’s family take her out to 
a well or water source where the bride is washed and dressed in her ﬁ rst 
 regular clothes as a married woman. She then is ready to take her place in her 
husband’s household. 
 Traditional village weddings are a long process that begins with the 
engagement. In the past the young couple was not usually actively involved 
in selection of their partner, but the elder women of the two families would 
feel out the prospects. This would be done where women could meet and 
discuss their children with each other such as at the market or at the public 
bathhouse. Christian women used the occasion of mass on Sunday. These 
were places where the women could observe the young girls and judge their 
honor. Should the elder women decide that the available son and daughter 
were of good families and would make a good husband or wife, the women 
would then tell the matter to the men of the two households. The father 
of the groom accompanied by other men of the family, and sometimes the 
prospective groom as well, would then call upon the father of the prospec-
tive bride and begin the discussion. The men would talk about their families, 
their reputations, the characteristics of their children before the father of the 
prospective groom would breech the question about marriage. Should the 
girl’s father agree to the wedding proposal, rounds of coffee would be served 
to signify the agreement had been made. 
 Once the agreement had been made between the two families, the family 
of the groom would host an engagement party. The entire local  community 

Gender, Marriage, and Family 
95
would be invited and congratulations would be given. The family of the 
groom would take one room of the house to receive the guests, while the 
family of the bride would take another room to receive the guests separately. 
No large meal was served, but cakes and other sweets would be available 
along with fresh fruit juices, coffee, and tea. In more recent years cigarettes 
have been added to the offerings. These are passed around to the guests by 
younger brothers or cousins of the groom, who are kept busy making sure all 
of the guests have something to eat or drink. In some instances the engage-
ment was and is still formalized by what is called in Islam “writing the book.” 
This is the formal written agreement between the bride and groom witnessed 
before an Islamic judge. In all practical purposes the signing of the agreement 
marries the two. To break the engagement formalized in this way requires the 
same procedure as divorce in Islamic law. Often the “writing the book” was 
held off until much closer to the actual wedding celebration. 
 Preparations for the wedding mobilized both families; the bride and her 
family had to make her wedding clothes as well as bring what is known as 
the  jihaz, all of the things she would need for her own household including 
furniture. In the past, it could take months of long hours of work to make 
the heavily embroidered dresses she would wear at her wedding or would 
take with her to her new home. All the able women in her family would be 
engaged in helping embroider the clothes. Sometimes the sisters of the groom 
give the bride embroidered items and would make their brother embroidered 
handkerchiefs. The grooms family was responsible for the wedding celebra-
tion itself, making sure everyone who needed to be included was invited, 
preparing the wedding meals, hiring musicians, hiring tents if need be, and 
making sure there was a large enough place to hold the wedding. The cost of 
the wedding celebration was and is yet today the responsibility of the groom’s 
family. 
 As the wedding day came closer both families concentrated on the 
 preparations and this often took on a party-like atmosphere with singing and 
dancing, especially among the women of the families. The songs that were 
traditionally sung told of the strength of the groom and praised the beauty of 
the bride, cultural ideals of a proper young couple. 
 Traditional wedding celebrations often took up to one full week beginning 
with small gatherings of the family and close friends of the groom or bride in 
their parents’ homes or in tents set up near the houses. These ﬁ rst gatherings 
often did not include a full meal, but fruit, sweets, juices, and tea. There was 
singing and dancing, with mainly the young being involved. As the actual 
wedding day grew closer, each night the parties increased in the number of 
people invited and the amount of food served while the activities concen-
trated on the preparations. The night before the wedding day women held 

96 
Culture and Customs of Jordan
a  henna party where the bride’s hands and feet were decorated with designs 
made with a paste made from the  henna plant. In Jordan village brides did 
not have the intricate patterns done associated with the Gulf countries and 
India, but were often large dot on the palms of the hands and the bottom of 
the feet similar to those of Bedouin brides. While the bride is being  hennaed 
the other women sang songs about married life, the virtues of a husband, 
and other wedding topics. While the bride was  hennaed the night before the 
wedding celebration, the groom’s friends would take him the morning of the 
celebration to the bathhouse for a total scrubbing and a shave. While this was 
being done his friends would sing and tell jokes. 
 Once both the bride and groom were dressed and made ready, their friends 
and relatives would accompany them to the home of the groom’s parents. In 
the past the bride and groom would ride horses and each family would follow 
singing and clapping. Today the procession for the bride is still done, but by 
car and truck. All of the horns are beeped and the passengers are singing and 
clapping. While the groom’s friends may still take him to the bathhouse, it is 
less done today, unless the family itself wants a full traditional wedding. 
 In Jordan, unlike in some of the nearby countries, village men and women 
still prefer to sit in segregated groups; often the men sit outside in front of 
the groom’s parents house, and the women, inside the house. Young men 
sing and dance while the older men usually look on and use the occasion 
to catch up with local news. Women have their own party inside the house, 
attending to the bride and giving her advice. They may also sing and dance 
or watch the young men dance through the windows. Cakes, pastries, can-
dies, tea,  coffee, and today cigarettes are served continuously by the groom 
and his male  relatives making sure that everyone is taken care of. As the 
groom becomes more and more busy as the day wears on the duty falls more 
and more to his younger brothers. Around noon a main meal will be served 
which traditionally was  mansif. Once the meal has been served, the bride is 
brought to the room where the groom is waiting and in the past the wedding 
celebration did not end until the bride’s virginity had been acknowledged by 
 showing a bloodied white cloth or her underwear. It was the women of the 
families who did this often placing the bloodied cloth on a basket tray and 
parading it around to show all of the guests. The woman carrying the tray 
would be accompanied by the other women of the two families singing and 
clapping. 
 Today many weddings have adapted to the new lifestyle in cities such 
as ‘Amman and few families have the time and money for the week-long 
 traditional wedding, even in the countryside. Jordanian weddings have taken 
on the usual combination Western and Arab format found in many Arab 
countries of the region. The bride wears a very Western-styled white dress and 

Gender, Marriage, and Family 
97
the wealthier may have them made in Europe. The groom wears a  Western-
styled formal suit, often black in color. The bride’s family still takes her to 
the wedding celebration in a procession of cars, but instead of the house of 
the groom’s parents, it is often a special wedding hall or the banquet hall of 
a large hotel. Instead of the segregated seating found even today in Bedouin 
or village weddings, the guests sit at dining tables in family grouping. Few 
urban Jordanians would think of displaying the bride’s underwear, but even 
contemporary weddings may end in immediate divorce if the bride is not a 
virgin. 
 CONCLUSION 
 Jordanians have had to make a number of concessions to the rapid 
 economic changes that have occurred since the 1940s. While remaining 
a deeply  conservative society, they have modiﬁ ed many of their traditions 
 without losing their important values. Both men and women have become 
much better educated, and Jordanians are among of best educated  population 
in the Middle East. Women have increasingly been integrated into the job 
market in a wide variety of ﬁ elds without the loss of personal and family 
honor. 
 Marriage traditions are maintained by those who can afford the week-long 
celebrations, but few families can do this today. Increasingly Jordanians have 
adopted the less elaborate weddings similar to most other urban Arabs in 
the Middle East—a mix of tradition with borrowings from the west. The 
cost of even the modiﬁ ed version is so high that some Jordanian men with 
lower incomes may have to wait until their mid-30s to marry saving money 
to pay for their wedding. Weddings are still important social markers for 
 families where they can display important social values such as generosity and 
 hospitality. 


 7 
 Social Customs and Lifestyle 
 Jordanians have preserved a good deal of their traditional cultural values even 
if many of the speciﬁ c customs have undergone great change in the past ﬁ fty 
years. Jordanians have become a largely urban and middle class society since 
the end of the 1940s. They have changed from rural villagers and Bedouin 
to become one of the most highly educated urban populations in the entire 
Middle East. Despite the impact of these rapid economic and social changes, 
Jordanians have remained conservative in their world view. An outside 
observer is immediately struck by the modernity of life in a city like ‘Amman, 
as well as the deep respect Jordanians have for their own cultural values and 
heritage. 
 HONOR AND SHAME 
 The concepts of honor and shame have been greatly overstated in a number 
of studies of not only Jordan but of the entire Mediterranean region; how-
ever, honor and shame are important elements and are measures of a good 
or bad family. Honor is a collective for an entire group of related people, not 
only of a single individual. The same can be said of shame; a shameful act 
will taint an entire group of people and impact possible future relations with 
other families. 
 There are several types of honor when the topic is discussed in Arabic and 
different terms are used. When speaking of the public honor of an extended 
family or large lineage the term ‘ ird is used. Such honor is touched when com-
ments are made by others about the behavior of especially the women of the 
family or lineage. To cast doubt on their honor can result in a  “blackening” 

100 
Culture and Customs of Jordan
of the entire family’s name. When the name has been blackened it has to be 
“whitened” and in some instances it can only be whitened by blood. 
 Honor crimes, where a girl or boy is severely punished for damaging the 
honor of a family, are not common, but they do sometimes still occur among 
rural Jordanians. Honor crimes may require even the death of the young 
person who acted in such a way as to blacken the family’s honor. This is most 
often by behaving immorally, such as having sex out of marriage or even just 
the rumor of such an action. The family can put this right only by punishing 
the persons so charged, and the severest punishment is usually reserved for 
the girl. Her father, brothers, and uncles are responsible for the punishment, 
which on rare occasions means that she is killed by them. 
 Jordan is one of the few countries in the Mediterranean that has brought 
the issue of honor crime into public debate. While it does occur in a num-
ber of countries in the Mediterranean including Spain, Italy, and Greece, 
 Jordan has confronted the practice enacting harsher laws for the men 
involved. As a result of bringing honor crime into public scrutiny, many 
people have  mistakenly concluded that it is a bigger issue in Jordan than in 
other  Mediterranean countries. Instead one should understand that Jordani-
ans’ willingness to deal with the matter means that they are among the few 
who are trying to bring such practices to an end. 
 In learning what is right and wrong Jordanian children are told that some-
thing is good,  zayn or that it is a shame, ‘ ayb. Any action or thought that can 
bring shame on the family is usually called ‘ ayb; it is used to teach children 
both in the privacy of the home or in public places. Children may not need 
any other form of correction other than to be told  ‘ayb by an adult or even an 
older child. In addition to ‘ ayb children learn that to transgress basic cultural 
norms is a larger mistake because it is  hasham. Hasham involves those social 
norms touching on ‘ ird, sex and the honor of women, for which punishment is 
far more severe. The respect Jordanians have for these important social norms 
is among the major reasons why they are a conservative people  (Muslims and 
Christians), not because the ofﬁ cial government system enforces strict rules of 
social interaction, but because Jordanians themselves respect them. 
 Recent changes in the economics, the educational levels, and the subse-
quent social interactions between men and women have meant that some of 
the very strict rules that would have applied in the more rural settings of the 
past cannot be applied in a city like ‘Amman. In the rural areas and among the 
Bedouin interactions between women of a family and a stranger are  limited 
and may require a male chaperone. Today in the workplace,  especially in the 
cities, this is not possible; women will come into contact with men who are 
not from their families and whom they do not know. Interaction between 
them means that social distances need to be maintained and some  Jordanian 

Social Customs and Lifestyle 
101
Muslim women have adopted wearing what is called Islamic dress in one form 
or another to help enforce the social distance. In some businesses it is not 
unusual to ﬁ nd certain ofﬁ ces are nearly all women while others are nearly all 
male employees. Female employees will take lunch with other women from 
the ofﬁ ce or nearby ofﬁ ces while men do the same. 
 During the decades of the 1970s and 1980s more and more Jordanian 
women came into the job market at nearly all levels. They were needed to 
replace men who found better paying jobs in Saudi Arabia and the Gulf 
countries where their high levels of education were needed. Jordanian  families 
overcame their reluctance to allow their daughters, sisters, and wives to work 
as they ﬁ lled important jobs. Economic necessity helped overcome custom 
and today Jordanian women account for around 25 percent of the total work 
force in the country. Nonetheless, it has been done in such a way as to not 
damage the honor of the women and their families; for example, women 
taxi drivers who only take female passengers or “family wings” of restaurants 
(found in many Islamic countries) where single women (and families) may 
eat without being looked at by strange men. 
 RESPECT 
 Another cultural value closely connected to that of honor is respect. 
Respect begins within the family, and children are taught to show respect 
to their  parents, grandparents, and older family members. Until recently, a 
well-behaved child would be expected to greet his or her parents, especially 
their father, by kissing his hand then touching their forehead with his hand. 
No matter the age of the child, fathers in particular were to be shown great 
respect in both the privacy of the home and in public. 
 One of the measures of a good family was observing the respect shown to 
older family members by the young. Public respect was also to be demon-
strated between younger members of society with anyone older. Children 
were taught to speak politely to strangers and to refer to anyone older as uncle 
or aunt. Well behaved Jordanian children still use the family terms of uncle 
or aunt when addressing an elder person, but very few families still insist on 
kissing their hands. 
 VISITING FAMILY AND FRIENDS 
 Jordan is a strongly family-oriented society and among the social customs 
still conformed to today is that of visiting family and friends. It is considered 
a necessity to visit as a means to keep families together as well as an important 
means to demonstrate friendships. Certain days of the week, such as Fridays 

102 
Culture and Customs of Jordan
for Muslims and Sundays for Christians, often include large meals at the 
home of the family patriarch or at least at a relative’s house after the noon 
prayer or morning mass. The month of Ramadan is marked by frequent visits 
between households and sharing breaking the day’s fast. The ﬁ rst week of 
Ramadan, Jordanians tend to visit mainly the homes of relatives while during 
the other three weeks they often visit the homes of friends. 
 Visiting has its social rules and the guest/host relationship is an  important 
feature of the culture. For both guest and host, there are expectations of 
behavior, length of stay, and level of hospitality given, depending on the 
closeness of the relationship between the parties and the purpose of the visit. 
The visit could be formal, such as to propose marriage or close a business deal, 
or informal between close friends or relatives. Some of the newer apartment 
complexes have been built with two entrances for each apartment; one for the 
family to use and one for guests. Many homes and apartments are built so 
that the women of the family do not have to come into direct contact with a 
guest and still go about their normal activities without being seen or  having 
their honor compromised. These special guest rooms are a contemporary 
form of the traditional guest room or house found in the village architecture 
(see chapter on architecture). Like the older form, the room is usually one of 
the more lavishly decorated in the house and can be in traditional or Arab 
style, where guests are expected to sit on mattresses covered with  Bedouin 
rugs and there is a hearth for the host to prepare Arabic coffee in front of the 
guest or in European style with a western arrangement of chairs, tables, and 
couches, and no hearth for coffee. 
 Food and drink are important features of visiting, even between close 
friends and family members. For a host to not provide at least fruit, sweets, 
coffee or tea would be the mark of both bad manners and a poor host. If 
unexpected guests arrive and a family isn’t prepared, then children will be 
sent to buy things from a nearby store or borrow from a neighbor. Since 
guests will often drop by unexpectedly, most Jordanian families have a supply 
of foods and drinks for them. Women are expected to be ready to even make 
a meal should a guest arrive and be hungry. Guests will be urged to eat and 
drink by the host who will often repeat phrases such as  ahlan wa sahlan, ya 
hala ’  bil-Dayf, or  tafaddal meaning “welcome,” “welcome to our guest,” and 
“help yourself.” Guests are bound to take something. To visit and refuse to 
eat or to take a coffee or tea would mark a cold relationship and even hostility 
on the part of the guest. 
 The guest/host relationship is very important stemming from the rural 
and Bedouin background of many Jordanians. In the past and even today 
among the Bedouin, a guest is welcome no matter who he is. A member of 
an enemy tribe is welcome in the tent of his host and by custom is allowed to 

Social Customs and Lifestyle 
103
remain for three days. Politeness dictates that on the morning of the fourth 
day the guest will leave and for another three days is protected by his host. 
The act of providing and accepting food and drink establishes an important 
bond between the two with understood obligations on the parties. One way 
of  ending problems between families, especially among the Bedouin, is for 
a meal to be served and both parties invited to participate—to break bread 
together or in Arabic to eat salt and bread together. 
 HOSPITALITY AND GENEROSITY 
 Jordanians take the cultural values of hospitality and generosity seriously 
and one frequently hears the Arabic greeting  ahlan wa sahlan  or “welcome” 
wherever one goes in the country. Often the greeting is put in the dual form 
 ahlayn wa sahlayn  meaning “the visitor is doubly welcome” or with  marhabah 
(another word for welcome in Arabic) or even  mi ’ t marhab “one hundred 
welcomes” added to the phrase. Another traditional greeting is  ya hala ’ or  ya 
hala ’  bil-Dayf (or greetings to our guest). When visiting a Jordanian home 
the guest will be frequently told he is welcome and urged to eat and have tea, 
coffee, or juices with  tafaddal or please partake. Jordan is known as the Land 
of  Ahlan wa Sahlan. 
 Customs of hospitality and generosity are part of the duties of a good host 
in Arab culture that stretch far back into antiquity. The great pre-Islamic 
epics tell of the lavish hospitality of tribal leaders and ruling Quraysh clan 
of Makkah had established a reputation for generosity at the time of the 
Prophet Muhammad. Present day hospitality and generosity are measured 
next to the legends of the past, such as those of the Bedouin boy Hatim 
al-Tayy who in order to feed guests slaughtered his father’s camels until not 
a one was left. Among the Bedouin, poverty of a family when linked to their 
generosity to guests is greatly admired and no Bedouin leader can maintain 
his position if he is not both hospitable and generous to whoever comes to 
his house.  Bedouin who have particular reputations for Hatim al-Tayy like 
 generosity are not only greatly admired, but will be pointed out to others 
 during  celebrations such as weddings. 
 Hospitality and generosity are cultural values shared by all Jordanians, 
but Bedouin often criticize villagers for what they consider to be a lack of 
both.  Villagers will accept Bedouin invitations or will avail themselves of the 
 hospitality of any tent knowing a guest will not be turned away and there will 
always be a meal or at least tea. However, Bedouin claim the reverse is not 
always true. Villagers they deal with for summer pasture and water will not 
invite them into their homes, and their homes are more restricted. Tales of 
 villager miserliness—only two cups of coffee or glasses of tea for  example—will 

104 
Culture and Customs of Jordan
be told to illustrate that they are not as virtuous as the Bedouin. While it is true 
that villagers do not invite people to their homes as often as the Bedouin, they 
deﬁ nitely do invite, and in the experience of the author, are just as hospitable 
and generous to a stranger as the Bedouin. In the recent past, some villages had 
special guest houses to both house guests overnight and serve as places where 
the village notables could honor their guests with large meals (see chapter on 
architecture). In addition the guest would not be in contact with the women 
of any household and their honor would not be compromised. 
 Generosity can be taken to extremes by Jordanians who feel it is their 
responsibility for the guest to leave happy. If a guest admires something in the 
house, it will be immediately offered as a gift unless in the course of admir-
ing it, the guest invokes the name of God by saying something like  Ma Sha ’ 
 Allah (what God wills) and makes it clear that its place is in the house of the 
host. The hospitality and generosity of many rural Jordanians, especially the 
Bedouin, is frequently abused by tourists who enjoy it without understand-
ing or appreciating the costs they are causing the family. Honor is such that 
no one will ask for compensation, though in places where tourists have so 
greatly abused these social customs, people have had to put aside honor and 
ask for money. The concepts of hospitality and generosity are reciprocal, that 
is, the host of today is the guest of tomorrow and the hospitality shown a 
guest will be repaid by someone in the future. If this is not possible, then it is 
both polite and customary to bring gifts for the host’s family. Such gifts can 
be candies or pastries (sometimes in brought in inlaid wooden boxes from 
Syria), sets of juice or tea glasses, or coffee cups for Arabic coffee. These will 
not be opened while the guest is still there, but will be opened later when if 
they are not liked, no one will know and be hurt. 
 SOCIAL CLUBS: RELIGIOUS, ETHNIC,
AND GENDER SPACES 
 Among the very important places for community gatherings are social 
clubs. Some of the social clubs are based on religion or ethnic identity; there 
are social clubs for example for Orthodox Christians, Armenians, Circassians, 
Shishans, and Palestinians. These serve important social functions for the 
communities and can be the focal point of much of their activities. 
 Social clubs are places where parents can come with their children and 
oftentimes the clubs provide play spaces, planned activities for the children, 
and perhaps even a swimming pool. Parents can leave the children at the club 
or spend time there themselves talking to each other as the children are taken 
care of by club employees. The clubs are places where women in particu-
lar can observe possible future marriage partners for their children and note 

Social Customs and Lifestyle 
105
those who are behaving properly and those who are not. Clubs are also places 
where young people can mix without there being any sort of problem. The 
group activities are chaperoned and parents can feel comfortable allowing 
their children to go even if they are not present. 
 Some social clubs like those for the Circassians and Armenians have been 
important means for cultural survival for minorities. The clubs serve as places 
where minority languages are spoken and where children are taught their own 
dances, songs, celebrate national holidays and events, and encouraged to wear 
national dress at such events. In recent years the Circassians and Shishans 
have used such organizations as the main tool for a cultural renaissance where 
Circassian and Shishan cultural awareness and pride have been revived among 
the young. Special cultural days have been organized for not only members of 
the Circassian and Shishan communities, but are open to the general public. 
Displays of arts, crafts, music, dance, and foods not only help revive cultural 
awareness among their own young people, but help develop awareness among 
non-Circassians and Shishans as well. Circassians and Shishans have played 
important roles in the recent history of Jordan and public activities by their 
social clubs help highlight their contributions to the country. 
 One of the most important social clubs is the coffeehouse. The coffee-
house has been until the past few years a male space where men come to 
read the newspaper, discuss politics, play backgammon or chess as well as 
to have a Turkish coffee and smoke a water pipe. The coffeehouse has a 
long tradition in Jordan and the nearby countries, dating back as far as 
perhaps the Mamluk period. Before coffee was discovered by a wandering 
Suﬁ   mystic in Ethiopia, such places were teahouses and served not only 
as important male spaces, but also as places of business. It was a better 
place to discuss the details of a business agreement with a more relaxed 
atmosphere. Entertainment was often part of the experience and profes-
sional storytellers were employed by the owners of such businesses to recite 
popular tales, such as that of the great pre-Islamic Bedouin hero Antar bin 
Shadad, the tragic love story of Qays and Layla, the Bedouin hero Abu 
Zayd al-Hilali, or the  Mamluk Sultan  Baybars al-Bunduqdari. When the 
radio was  introduced most of the  storytellers lost their trade, though there 
are still a few  coffeehouses in al-Zarqa’, Jordan and Damascus where tradi-
tional storytelling is an evening feature. Today the radio has been replaced 
by the TV but the  general purpose of the establishment is the same: a men’s 
club often patronized by the men of the neighborhood. 
 Jordan is the ﬁ rst Arab country to have an all women’s coffeehouse. Based 
on the same principles as that of the traditional male coffeehouse, the one for 
women offers tea, coffee, games, and heated political discussion. The success 
of the all women’s coffeehouse in ‘Amman may spark similar ones in Jordan 

106 
Culture and Customs of Jordan
or other parts of the Arab world where career women also want some form of 
relaxation away from the house. 
 EMERGENCE OF THE MIDDLE CLASS 
 Since the 1960s more and more Jordanians have become urban and mid-
dle class. The percentage of Jordanians who have a minimum of a high school 
diploma and who work in the service sector or in white collar jobs has greatly 
increased. Unlike many other countries in the region, Jordan has a fairly large 
middle class. While most have tried to maintain the core values of their more 
rural origins, nonetheless, the changes in their economic and educational 
 levels has meant that they have had to adjust their lifestyles. 
 The optimal age for marriage has risen for both men and women as a result 
of the rise in educational levels. Many postpone making marriage plans until 
they have ﬁ nished university or post high school vocational training. Men 
want to establish themselves in a job with a good salary before thinking seri-
ously about marriage. Women too want to ﬁ nish their education before being 
tied down with a husband and family, and more and more agree to marriage 
only if they are going to be allowed to work. Muslim Jordanian women take 
advantage of the need for a marriage contract and will stipulate clauses such 
as right to work. 
 Many Jordanians attend universities inside Jordan or abroad and among 
the new ideal quality for a good bride is one who has a university degree. 
Some marriages are dependent upon the bride to be completing her BA 
degree within a speciﬁ c number of years indicating no failed courses. Edu-
cated wives are seen as better as they are better partners in life being able to 
understand the work pressures of their husbands. They are expected to be 
better mothers because they can understand medical care and nutrition better 
than an uneducated woman as well as help the children with their homework. 
Educated wives may also have careers that can be a great help to the overall 
income for the family. 
 MIDDLE-CLASS VALUES AND TRADITIONAL VALUES 
 The growth of a new middle class has brought younger Jordanians into 
conﬂ ict with some of the older traditional social customs. Many of these 
focus on the family, children, and women’s place within family and society. 
 The Jordanian family is changing from the rural ideal of a large number 
of children to the smaller, western model of two to three children. Both men 
and women tend to marry later than their parents and grandparents, reduc-
ing the number of years a married woman is able to have children. There 

Social Customs and Lifestyle 
107
are still pressures from the older members of their families to have  children 
as soon after marriage as possible; a woman who is not pregnant within the 
ﬁ rst year of marriage was the subject of gossip in the past, but many younger 
 Jordanians are making the choice to postpone having children and space them 
out. Women may not have a child until several years after being  married 
 especially if she has her own work career. 
 Career women are a relatively new idea in Jordanian society. It is not to 
say that in the past women were not involved in owning and managing busi-
nesses. The Ottoman court records in Damascus have numerous references to 
major businesses owned and managed by women, but they were for the most 
part wealthy urban women. For most Jordanians, women were the managers 
of houses, while men were the bread winners. Women remained at home 
until the shock of the ﬁ rst Arab-Israeli War drove thousands of  Palestinians 
into refugee camps and women had to work for the daily survival of their 
families. Jordanian women took to the job market when Jordanian men 
were recruited for middle- and high-level management positions in the Gulf 
States and Saudi Arabia. As late as 1982 Jordanian families refused to let their 
daughters and wives work in positions such as waitresses or airline hostesses. 
 Jordanian women were greatly helped by the examples of the Royal 
women. The wives and daughters of King Hussein were involved in 
numerous social and educational programs highlighting the need for all 
 Jordanians to be  educated and the right for women to choose a career. 
Jordanian women entered schools of science and engineering where many 
have excelled.  Jordanian women are studying not only in local institutions 
of higher education, but in Europe, North America, and Asia. The high 
proﬁ le of the Jordanian royal women has been important role models for 
all Jordanian women. 
 CONCLUSION 
 Despite the changes to the family size and the greater role for women in 
the economy, traditional values are strong. The changes that have occurred 
have not so far changed the way people think about their values—or passing 
these values on to their children. The basic core values such as honor, respect, 
hospitality, and generosity are still part of all Jordanians. 


 8 
 Music and Dance 
 Traditional music and dances in Jordan are mainly those of the rural  populations: 
villagers and Bedouin. Most musicologists would classify them as folk meaning 
that they are not the sophisticated music and dance found in such centers of high 
Arab culture as Damascus, Aleppo, Baghdad, or Cairo, but a more rustic music 
produced more by gifted amateurs rather than trained professionals. However, 
the roots of the more sophisticated music of high Arab and Islamic culture are in 
the music of the Bedouin. In addition, many village performers were exposed to 
the reﬁ ned tastes of urban professionals even in the past. Jordanians have been 
linked closely to important cultural centers such as Damascus for millennia. 
Jordan’s desert was a favorite retreat for the Umayyad princes who organized 
lavish parties that always included music and dance. Other ruling dynasties have 
left a lasting inﬂ uence on local music, most notably the Ottomans. 
 Arabic music has several major roots: pre-Islamic Arabia and Persia, as well 
as Classical Greece. Each of these has contributed to the set of modal scales or 
 maqamat used and eventually eight different modal scales were established along 
with a large number of sub-modal scales between the ninth to tenth centuries 
 a.d. in Damascus, Baghdad, and Cordoba, major centers of Arabic culture at 
the time. The development of Arabic music took several centuries starting under 
the patronage of the Umayyad rulers in Damascus and later the ‘Abbasids in 
Baghdad and the Umayyads in Cordoba. Inclusion of numerous ethnicities in 
the expanding Arab-Islamic empires allowed direct contact between different 
traditions from India and Central Asia to Spain. Systems of musical notations 
and instruments were introduced and modiﬁ ed into the Arabic music of today. 
 As noted above, an array of new musical instruments were introduced, devel-
oped, and reﬁ ned. The Arabs already had a wide range of drums made with 

110 
Culture and Customs of Jordan
wooden or ceramic bodies with one or two heads of animal hide or ﬁ sh skin. 
End-blown cane ﬂ utes were the main wind instruments, along with the several 
types of reed instruments. Of the string instruments, the Arabs developed the 
one-stringed ﬁ ddle or  rabab, the lyre or  simsimiyah, and the ‘ ud or lute (the word 
“lute” is derived from the Arabic  al- ‘ ud ). Other instruments were  borrowed from 
the ancient civilizations of Mesopotamia, Egypt,  Anatolia,  Persia, and the Indus 
valley. Since the nineteenth century a number of  western  instruments have been 
adopted to Arabic music such as the violin, piano,  saxophone,  trumpet, and 
most recently the electric organ, guitar, and synthesizer. 
 BEDOUIN MUSIC AND DANCE 
 The Bedouin music is one of the primary sources for Arab and Islamic 
musical forms. Bedouin music was and is primarily vocal and instruments, 
when used, are there to assist the voice or ﬁ ll the void while the singer takes 
a breath, speaks to the audience, or composes the next set of verses. Bedouin 
love poetry and the better singers are also the better poets. That is, the voice, 
while important, may not sound musical to an outsider, but for the Bedouin 
listening, the skill to improvise and produce a new poem, even if based on an 
existing format, is what makes the singer good. 
 There are a number of different types of poetry which are also considered to 
be types of music. The type of poem, long epic ( qasidah ) or short love poem 
( ghazal ) or even shorter haiku-like social criticism poem ( ghinwiyah ), inﬂ uence 
how they are sung, the number of people singing, use of refrain, and whether or 
not it has instrumental accompaniment. Many Bedouin songs are without any 
accompaniment other than clapping hands or one-sided drums. The rhythms 
used reﬂ ect those of Bedouin life such as the pace of a riding camel. 
Bedouin use few musical instruments but the  rabab or  rababah is essential 
to the recitation of poetry (see chapter on literature). The  rabab is often-
times called  rabab al-sha ‘ir or the poet’s  rabab. The instrument is simple 
and easy to make being a shallow square sound box covered in skin with 
a long, thin round stick to form the neck. There is only one string made 
of horse hair or animal gut and the instrument is played with a bow, again 
simply made from a bent stick with horse hair to make the string. There 
are no frets on the neck, which allows a skilled player a large range of notes 
despite the fact it has only one string. The  rabab may sound off-key when 
ﬁ rst heard by someone not used to it, but its low tones go well with the 
ﬂ ow of epic poetry and forms a soothing background for the listeners. In 
contemporary performances the  rabab may be replaced by a violin, but it 
might be played as if it were a  rabab resting on the player’s leg rather than 
being held under the chin and bowed in the same fashion as a cello.

Music and Dance 
111
 Most Bedouin music is vocal and it would be rare to hear something that 
was only instrumental. Instrumental music is more or less conﬁ ned to that of 
shepherds playing ﬂ utes to pass the time. Songs frequently employ a limited 
range of notes and those for celebrations are for a group; solos are not common 
other than to sing a verse for a call and response format. Songs are accompa-
nied by clapping, which can produce complicated, syncopated rhythms, and 
large round one-sided hand drums called  tar s. It is rare that men and women 
sing or dance together, but at celebrations such as  weddings women and men 
may engage in call and response songs between them, though they do not sit 
together. 
 There are a number of different dances performed by the Bedouin, and like 
the music, there is little mixing between men and women. Most dances are 
for celebrations, especially weddings, and most men’s dances are line dances 
of one kind or another. Men take their places in long straight lines standing 
shoulder to shoulder. In front of the line there are several lead dancers, and in 
some Bedouin dances, the leader can be a woman. When the leaders are men 
they move back and forth in front of the line using their robes or  bisht s like 
giant bird wings—it is supposed to imitate the movements of an eagle. The 
men in the line clap in time with the movements of the leaders and their own 
upper body movements, as they chant in unison a breathy “a-hee.” When 
a woman leads such dances she often brandishes a sword which she uses to 
signal the men in the line to follow her commands: stand, bend, move right, 
and so forth. The dance becomes faster and more and more frenzied until the 
leaders indicate that it is over by dropping the sleeves of their  bisht s or the 
sword down to their sides. 
 Another popular men’s line dance is the  dabkah, where again the men 
line up shoulder to shoulder or place their arms on the shoulders of the men 
next to them. In the  dabkah the line moves, often in a circle, using speciﬁ c 
steps punctuated with stomps and kicks. Bedouin forms of  dabkah tend to 
be less complicated than those of the villagers with fewer variations of steps 
or step patterns.  Dabkah requires using some musical instruments, mainly a 
drum, usually made of ceramic with either ﬁ sh skin or leather head, called 
a  darabukah and a cane or metal end blown ﬂ ute called a  nay. Women also 
perform  dabkah standing closely together and holding each others’ hands. 
The movements are restrained and digniﬁ ed allowing their dresses to swing 
and sway gracefully indicating the steps. 
 Village Music and Dance 
 Village music and dance is greatly inﬂ uenced by both Bedouin traditions 
and urban high-art traditions. Village musicians employ a much wider  variety 

112 
Culture and Customs of Jordan
of musical instruments than the Bedouin, and they rarely play the  rabab. 
The more traditional and rustic instruments, such as some of the reed wind 
instruments such as the  mizmar, are sometimes replaced today with electric 
organs attempting to make a similar sound. 
 Villagers have long been exposed to the urban traditions of small,  chamber-
like orchestras, which until the early twentieth century performed in urban 
coffeehouses and even some of the better bathhouses or  hamam s. The orches-
tra played instrumental music or included at least one singer capable of 
 singing popular or art songs. The orchestras were composed of around ﬁ ve 
or six musicians who played the  darabukah, the  riqq (or tambourine), the 
 kaman or  kamanjah (or violin), the  nay (or cane ﬂ ute), and the  qanun (or 
plucked zither). Among the types of late Ottoman music that such musical 
groups performed was the  basharf, which is the Arabic version of the Turkish 
word  pesrev, originally an instrumental prelude to a longer sung piece. Other 
forms borrowed into village music from urban art music are  muwashshahat 
 (originally from Muslim Spain) and  qadud al-Halabiyah  (a Syrian form 
 similar to the  muwashshahat ). These later two used colloquial Arabic in part 
if not all of the words. A popular musical poetic form is the  zajal (see the 
chapter on literature) which is usually in colloquial Arabic.  Zajal is often sung 
by two opposing sides with the poets improvising lines which their side then 
sings as a chorus. Such songs are usually accompanied by some one playing 
the  darabukah and perhaps an ‘ ud or a long necked variety with metal strings 
called a  buzuk, similar to the Greek bouzouki. 
 Like the Bedouin, village men and women traditionally did not sit together 
to sing or listen to music. Both entertained themselves even during impor-
tant celebrations. Men and women would gather in different places, or if in 
the same house, in different rooms. Women were less proﬁ cient in playing 
musical instruments and for the most part used only drums with their songs. 
Women did not engage in the same kinds of songs to display the poetic 
skills that men did, but nonetheless, their songs are equally important. Many 
songs tell of their lives, both the good and the bad, as well as give advice to 
the younger women. Women used a number of devises, such as comedy, to 
 illustrate or to give deeper meanings to the listeners. Unlike Bedouin women 
who have a wide audience for their songs of criticism, traditionally village 
women were conﬁ ned to speaking to each other. 
 Village dances were and still are line dances. Line dances are found 
throughout the eastern Mediterranean from the Balkans on the west, to 
Iraq on the east, and Sinai and Jordan on the south. In most of the Arab 
countries the dance is called  dabkah and it varies somewhat from place 
to place; it is possible for the trained eye to know if the dance being per-
formed is Syrian, Lebanese, Palestinian, or Jordanian. The Bedouin in 

Music and Dance 
113
 Jordan have a slow and stately form of the dance, while the villagers have a 
number of different steps, some of which are rapid and highly complicated 
combinations of stomps and kicks. Similar to the Bedouin, most village 
 dabkah is accompanied by the  darabukah and the  nay, or the large double 
sided drum called  tabl and the reed instrument similar to an oboe called 
 mizmar. 
 Similar to the Bedouin  dabkah, in village forms of the line dance men 
place their arms over the shoulders of their neighbors and follow instruc-
tions given by the dance leader who is positioned in front of the line. The 
leader holds a short stick, which he uses to help send speciﬁ c messages to the 
rest of the dancers. By holding it in a certain way, the other dancers know 
what steps are coming up so that the whole group stays together. The lead-
er’s signals are also read by the drummer and ﬂ ute player who know how to 
change the music if need be. Some dance leaders use highly decorated sticks 
covered in woolen braid and tassels. Others may prefer to use an embroi-
dered handkerchief which has beaded tassels at each of the four corners that 
he will spin in the air as he calls the steps. Jordanian  dabkah differs from 
those around it by certain steps, such as one where the dancers do a number 
of very quick kicks in succession, usually ﬁ ve, while in place followed by a 
single stomp step. 
 Women have their own  dabkah and for men and women to be in the 
same line while dancing is a recent change and an inﬂ uence from profes-
sional Palestinian, Lebanese, and Syrian folk troupes. Traditionally village 
women did not dance with the men, but separately either in their own space 
or interspersed between men’s dances. The women join hands and move 
in a slow stately manner in a large circle. The leader takes her place at the 
head of the line and the others follow her movements and steps. Similar to 
 Bedouin women, the movements of the dancers’ dresses give the dance an air 
of  dignity and calm. 
 For weddings in particular, women have other dances that they perform 
only for each other. These are folk versions of the better known cabaret dance 
called Belly Dance in the west, but  raqs baladi (local dance) or  raqs sharqi 
(eastern dance) in the Middle East. Women move their shoulders and hips 
to the beat of drums. In the past, these dances were used to help educate a 
bride on her sexual duties, thus the songs women sing while others dance are 
ﬁ lled with innuendo and double meaning, causing great laughter among the 
women. Unlike the more familiar cabaret form of the dance, women do not 
wear suggestive clothing other than to tie a scarf around their hips or waists to 
accentuate that part of the body. Until the early twentieth century wealthier 
rural elite would hire professional all-female music groups from the cities to 
entertain the women during their nightly parties leading up to a wedding. 

114 
Culture and Customs of Jordan
The women who performed in such groups were not highly respected since 
such professions caused them to lose much of their honor and they were 
 classiﬁ ed by most with prostitutes. 
 Circassians and Shishans 
 The Circassians and Shishans preserved their music and dance traditions, 
and in the past several decades they have actively promoted them among their 
own youth. Their music and dance traditions differ greatly from those of 
their Arab neighbors coming from the Caucasus Mountains between Turkey, 
Iran, and Russia. Their music has more in common with that of Iran and 
Turkish-speaking Azerbaijan than with the Arabs. 
 Circassian and Shishan music does have the same modal base as that of 
the Arabs, but owes its interpretation to that of the Turks and Persians. The 
singing voice is important, as it is with the Arabs, but the style favors greater 
use of melismatic passages and higher octaves similar to Persian and Turkish 
traditions. The rhythms used also are similar to Turkish and Persian ones 
using more of the player’s ﬁ ngers striking the drum head individually rather 
than with the more open-hand Arab method. 
 More traditional musical instruments have been to a great extent 
replaced by the accordion. While older string instruments such as the  saz, 
a long necked lute with several sympathetic drone strings, and soft sound-
ing reed instruments such as the  duduk are still played, the accordion has 
come to dominate dance music. The accordion is accompanied by several 
types of drums, most very similar to those used by the Arabs though the 
more traditional form of the Circassian version of the  darabukah is made 
of wood and not ceramic, giving the sound a more rounded tone rather 
than the crisp sound of the Arab drum. Circassians also use the large round 
hand drum or  tar , though theirs has a narrower body and can be even 
larger in diameter. 
 Circassian and Shishan dance has much in common with ballet. The 
men dance on the tips of their toes making graceful walking-like steps. 
With their Cossack-like dress and high leather boots they are a striking ﬁ g-
ure dancing on their toes. The men use their arms and hands while dancing 
much again like a ballet dancer. In some Circassian dances men throw their 
daggers high into the air and catch them as they come plunging down. Men 
and women dance together in pairs and the women’s movements are barely 
discernable. She seems to glide effortlessly across the ﬂ oor with no evidence 
that her feet are moving. Her ﬂ oor-length dress makes no sign that her feet 
and legs are in motion, and her upper body and head stay perfectly straight 
and steady. 

Music and Dance 
115
 Contemporary Music 
 Jordan has not been an important center of Arab music but Jordanians 
are avid consumers of it. From the end of World War I until the middle 
of the 1970s most of the popular music in the Arab world came from two 
major sources, Egypt and Syria. Egypt, and Cairo in particular, was the 
 cultural capital of the Arab world, whose singers such as Umm Kalthum are 
 listened to throughout the Arab world and beyond, even today. Those who 
wanted to have careers in music came to Cairo. The Syrians Farid al-Atrash 
and his sister Asmahan, the Lebanese Sabah, and even the Algerian Wardah 
al-Jaza’iriyah all went to Cairo and sang in the Egyptian dialect. Starting 
in the 1950s Beirut also was able to assert its inﬂ uence in the Arab world. 
Both Beirut and Damascus had recording studios as early as the 1890s, 
but distribution of their music was limited. Lebanese and Syrians began 
to  produce popular hits using their dialects of Arabic, and in the 1960s 
stars such as Fairuz and Wadi‘ al-Saﬁ  could compete with the Egyptian stars 
such as Abd al-Halim Haﬁ z and Najat al-Saghirah. In the 1960s Jordanian 
music was represented by the Bedouin star Samirah Tawﬁ q, who sang more 
rustic sounding songs in the Bedouin dialect. Her music became popular 
 throughout the Arab world and was identiﬁ ed as Jordanian, though she was 
not. At the same time Syrian music made itself felt with singers such as 
Sabah al-Fakhri and Fahd Balan. 
 Saudi and Gulf Arab music ﬁ rst entered into the mainstream of popular 
Arab music in 1976 when Talal Madah’s song “Magadir” became an inter-
national (international being within the Arab world) hit. His success was 
followed by other Saudi singers such as Muhammad ‘Abduh. Saudi and 
Gulf music remains popular today, but in the early 1980s the new Cairo pop 
sound called  Jil (or new generation music) exploded onto the music scene 
with the Egyptian Nubian singer Muhammad Munir. The new Cairo sound 
was quickly adopted by younger Lebanese singers and a Cairo-Beirut connec-
tion was established that still exists today. 
 In 1990 Algerian Rai music was able to have its ﬁ rst pan-Arab hit with 
the song “Didi” by Shab Khalid. Most Jordanians had a hard time at ﬁ rst 
understanding the Algerian dialect or the political and social criticisms in the 
music, but today other Algerian and Franco-Algerian singers such as Shab 
Mami and Rachid Taha are well known in the Arab east. August of 1990 
also marked the start of the ﬁ rst Gulf War between Iraq and the United 
States with Iraq’s invasion of Kuwait. Many Jordanians did not support 
the United States decision to militarily force Iraq out of Kuwait. Although 
 Jordanians were familiar with Iraqi music and singers such as Sa‘adun al-
Jabir since the 1970s, the war seemed to spark an even greater interest in it. 

116 
Culture and Customs of Jordan
After the United States invasion of Iraq in 2003 Iraqi music became even 
more popular with the Jordanian public. 
 Today young Jordanian singers have a range of styles to choose from. Some 
may wish to be traditional while others prefer the Cairo-Pop  Jil style. Others 
have begun to sing Iraqi songs, especially  chobe, the Iraqi line dance similar to 
the  dabkah. Jordan has a number of locally known artists, but few Jordanians 
have broken into the larger Arab market. There are local recording studios, 
and on local television it is possible to see their music videos, but few have 
gone on to stardom in Beirut or Cairo, which remain the two most important 
centers for Arab music. 
 CONCLUSION 
 Jordanian music and dance has long been that of rural people. Jordan’s ties 
to urban centers such as Damascus did inﬂ uence Jordanian musicians and 
singers, but the conservative nature of the population meant that its inﬂ uence 
was limited. There were few Jordanians who could patronize a professional 
class of musicians and singers, thus most of the music and dance performed 
were for special occasions and performed by gifted amateurs. While the 
poetic forms were highly developed, especially by the Bedouin, sophisticated 
art music and dance remained an urban art associated with Damascus, Cairo, 
and Baghdad. 
 The introduction of diverse music styles increased with the increase in 
broadcast media after World War I. Radio and ﬁ lms brought the popular 
and classical forms of music from mainly Cairo at ﬁ rst. The increase in local 
broadcasting stations from countries like Lebanon and Syria gave rise to a 
pride in the similar musical traditions of Greater Syria among Jordanians. 
With television Jordan was opened up to even greater inﬂ uences, and clearly 
some have been politically motivated. As noted above, Iraqi music had been 
known for some time before young Jordanians began to produce it themselves 
following the American invasion in 2003. Popularity of Lebanese  singers 
such as Fairuz and the Palestinian Marcel Khalifah has much to do with the 
politics of the 1960s to the 1990s in the Arab world. Today Jordanians are 
familiar with nearly every form of Arab music from the most traditional to 
the new forms of Arabic rap. 

 Glossary 
 ‘Abayah Another name for a Bisht. 
 Ablaq Alternating layers of black basalt and white limestone building stones; architectural 
style developed by the Mamluks for major urban monuments and used by peasants in 
southern Syria, Jordan, Lebanon, and Palestine where the natural rock is available. 
 Abu Arabic for father; used in honoriﬁ c title such as Abu Muhammad noting the ﬁ rst born 
male child in a family. 
 Adab Literature; manners. 
 Adhan Call to prayer. 
Adib A well educated and mannered person. 
 Ahlan wa Sahlan Welcome; Jordanians use the phrase so often that the country is called the 
“Land of Ahlan wa Sahlan.” 
 Al-Mahram The closed, family, women’s side of the tent. 
 Al-Shigg The public, men’s side of the tent. 
 Amir Prince; under the Mamluks the term was applied to the highest ranking military com-
manders. 
 ‘Aqil Intelligence; among the Shi’ites it refers to the Cosmic  Intelligence .
 ‘Arjah A highly decorated headpiece worn by village and Bedouin women in southern Syria 
and northern Jordan. 
 ‘Asabah Headband worn by women; in Jordan it is often made of  brocade cloth from Homs, 
highly colorful ﬂ oral cottons; or a man’s shimagh. 
 Asawir Shirkaz Circassian bracelets. A type of jewelry introduced by the  Circassians and 
Shishans; nielloed work on silver. 
 ‘Ashurah The 10th Day of the ﬁ rst Islamic month. Among Sunnis it is a children’s festival 
while for Shi’ites it marks the death of Imam Hussein. 
 Asil Pure; term is used to designate those Bedouin tribes whose  economy used to be based 
on raising camels. It is also used to refer to purebred horses or camels. 

118 
Glossary
 ‘Asr Mid-afternoon prayer. 
 Atabek Turkish term and a title given to high dignitaries under the Saljuqs and other Turk-
ish dynasties. 
 Awlad Sons of as in the tribal name Awlad ‘Ali. 
 ‘Ayb Shame; shame on you. 
 ‘Ayn Arabic word for eye as well as for a natural spring. 
 ‘Ayn al-Hasud Evil eye or eye of envy; believed can cause great harm if attracted by too 
much praise. 
 Badiyah Desert that can be lived in most of the year such as Badiyat al-Sham. 
 Badu The Arabic plural for Bedouin—singular is Badawi. 
 Bani Sons of as in the tribal name Bani Khalid or Bani Sakhr. 
 Barakah Blessings; usually in reference to divine blessing. 
 Bashraf (Pesrev) An instrumental introduction to a much longer musical piece in classical 
Arabic and Turkish music. The word is the Arabic form of the original Turkish word, 
Pesrev. 
 Bayram Turkish term for festival, feast. See also ‘Id. 
 Bayt House, home, household. 
 Bayt Hajar Literally “House of Stone”; term used by Bedouin for the  permanent dwellings 
built by villagers. 
 Bayt Sha‘r Literally “House of Hair”; the black, goat hair Bedouin tent. 
 Bisht Large outer cloak worn by men. 
 Buzuk Long necked lute with metal strings similar to the Greek  bouzouki. 
 Chobe Popular line dance in Iraq very similar to the dabkah. 
 Dabkah Popular line dance in Jordan, Palestine, Lebanon, and Syria. 
 Darabukah Single headed cylinder drum made of metal or ceramic. 
 Dar al-Kursi Literally “Throne House”; term used to refer to the large village and urban 
homes with an upper story guest room. 
 Dishdashah Ankle-length shirt worn by men in the Middle East. 
 Duduk Soft, mellow sounding reed instrument used by the Circassians and Shishans. 
 Duhur Mid-day prayer. 
 Fajr Dawn prayer. 
 Farw Pelt; winter coat worn by Bedouin men made of several sheep pelts sewn together to 
make a coat. 
 Fath Literally opening or victory; al-Fath is the name of the  Palestinian organization 
founded by Yasir ‘Arafat and has come to dominate the Palestinian Liberation Organiza-
tion (PLO). 
 Fazah or Wastayn Tent with two main poles. 
 Fusha Classical or Standard Arabic; based on the Qu’ran and the  conventions of written, 
literary Arabic. 
 Gatbah One-poled tent. 

Glossary 
119
 Ghazal Love poem. 
 Ghinnawi Short poem or song most often used to make social or political comment. 
 Habak Herringbone stitch; frequently used stitch in weaving and in clothing. 
 Hadar Arabic designation for settled peoples, especially villagers. 
 Hadith Sayings of the Prophet Muhammad; one of the ﬁ ve major sources for Islamic law. 
 Haj Pilgrimage; the once in a lifetime pilgrimage made by Muslims to Mecca. 
 Hammam Turkish bath. 
 Hasham  Shame. 
 Henna The leaves of the plant are ground into a powder and when mixed with water 
becomes a paste used to decorate hands and feet of women for special occasions. 
 Hijab Charm or talisman; also the term for the scarf or veil worn by many Muslim 
women. 
 Hilf “Ally”; term used for the association between Bedouin tribes of equal status. 
 Hosh Courtyard. 
 Ibn ‘Amm First cousin on the paternal side; traditionally the preferred  marriage partner for 
a young woman. 
 ‘Id Holiday, festival, feast. 
‘ Id al-Adha (Bayram Qurban) Literally “of the Sacriﬁ ce”; festival that marks the closure of 
the Haj rituals. 
‘ Id al-Fitr Literally “of Breaking the Fast”; the festival that marks the end of Ramadan. 
 Ijma‘ Consensus; one of the ﬁ ve major sources of Islamic law. 
 Ikhwan Brothers; often applied to mean brotherhood 
 Imam In Sunni Islam the term is applied to any one who leads prayer; in Shi’i Islam the 
term is used for those who were accepted as the head of the community. For most of the 
Shi’i today there have been 12 Imams and they are expecting the return of the 12th. 
 Intifadah Uprising; term used to describe the recent conﬂ ict between the Palestinians in the 
occupied territories and the Israeli  authorities. 
 ‘Ird Public honor of a family or tribe. 
 ‘Ishiyah Night prayer. 
 Jabal Mountain. 
 Jamid Hard type of yogurt; made by adding salt to cause the yogurt to dry. 
 Jazirah Island. 
 Jihaz The household materials brought to a newly weds home by the bride. 
 Jil Literally “generation”; the name for a type of popular Egyptian music also called Cairo Pop. 
 Jinn Genie; spirits mentioned in the Qu’ran as created from ﬁ re and can be both good or 
evil. 
 Jund Military district; one of the administrative divisions used after the Arab conquest of 
former Byzantine and Sassanid territories. 
 Kaman, Kamanjah Terms used for the western type violin that has greatly replaced the 
rabab. 

120 
Glossary
 Khalifah Caliph; term used for the person who is the earthly successor to the political power 
and authority of the Prophet Muhammad as head of the entire Muslim community. 
 Khawah “Brotherhood” tax imposed on settled peoples or weaker  Bedouin tribes by the 
Asil tribes. 
 Khirqah Traditional headcloth worn by village women in Palestine and Jordan, often highly 
decorated with embroidery. 
 Khubz Bread. 
 Khubz min al-Tabun Type of bread baked in a tabun or traditional oven or in hot coals. 
 Khubz Suri Syrian bread; pocket bread. 
 Kufﬁ yah Another term for the traditional head cloth worn by men. 
 Madhhab School of law in Islam. There are four schools of law in Sunni Islam; Hanbali, 
Maliki, Hanaﬁ , and Shaﬁ ’. Most Jordanians belong to the Shaﬁ ’ school. 
 Maghrib Sunset prayer. 
 Malikah Literally “royal”; colorful woman’s dress made of green,  yellow, and red strips of 
silk cloth sewn together vertically then  embroidered with silk ﬂ oss and gold or silver metal 
threads. This type of dress was common in the region of Ma’an in southern Jordan as well 
as in the Bethlehem area of Palestine. 
 Mamluk Arabic term meaning “owned” used for military slaves who replaced dependency 
on tribal levies. They came to power in Egypt and Syria after the collapse of the Ayyubid 
dynasty in 1250. Bahri Mamluks ruled from 1250 to 1382 and the Burji Mamluks ruled 
from 1382 to 1517. 
 Mansif National dish of Jordan; half of a sheep or goat severed on a bed of rice and shrak 
over which a salty yogurt sauce is poured. 
 Maqam(at) The term has a number of uses; a place where an important  person in Islam is 
buried; a type of Arabic prose; a musical mode. 
 Ma‘rash Covered work space in a traditional village courtyard. 
 Marhabah Welcome, and another word in Arabic for welcome; the usual response is “Mar-
habtayn” or “Two Welcomes” or “You are  doubly welcome.” 
 Masaharti The person employed in a neighborhood to announce the last meal of the night 
before the day’s fast begins during Ramadan. 
 Masriyyah A type of silver bracelet popular with Bedouin women made in Egypt. 
 Mastabah Bench; often built of stone and ﬂ anking the entrance to major homes in villages 
and cities. 
 Mawlid al-Nabi The Prophet’s Birthday. 
 Milfa’ See Shambar. 
 Millet Turkish term from the Arabic millah; a religious community  recognized by the Otto-
man state as a community and thus allowed to have its own internal regulations with a 
recognized head responsible to the state. 
 Mizmar Traditional double-reed musical instrument frequently used in folk music. 
 Mthawlath Tent with three main poles. 
 Mukhtar Village headman usually chosen from among the leading  families. 

Glossary 
121
 Musakhin Jordanian/Palestinian dish made of baked chicken and bread  seasoned with 
sumac. 
 Musallah Place for prayer; usually the extended areas outside the precinct of a mosque. 
 Musalsalah Television series. 
 Mutusarraﬁ yyah Ottoman period administrative district composed of several  sanjaqs . 
 Muwashshahah Type of poetry developed in al-Andalus (Muslim Spain) using both Classi-
cal and spoken Arabic set to music. 
 Nagash Type of weaving where the wrap threads are wrapped with the weft to make the 
pattern. 
 Nahiyah District or region; refers to the settled areas of northern Jordan who formed defense 
regions to repel Bedouin raids. 
 Nay End-blown ﬂ ute made of reed or metal. 
 Qadud al-Halabiyyah A type of music based on the  muwashshahah developed in Aleppo. 
 Qa’id Commander or leader; in Jordan the term was applied to the person selected to serve 
as the military leader in case of Bedouin attack. 
 Qanun Term has a number of applications; law; type of plucked zither used in classical 
Arabic music; small clay or metal brazier found in rural homes. 
 Qasidah Long poem. 
 Qiyas Analogy; one of the ﬁ ve major sources for Islamic law. 
 Qumbaz Man’s overcoat worn over the dishdashah; often made of heavier types of cloth and 
made to be tied at the shoulder and waist. 
 Rabab One stringed bowed instrument often used to accompany  recitations of poetry. 
 Rabab al-Sha‘ir The Poet’s Rabab. 
 Ragm Type of weaving where the design is made by using different colored warp threads 
that are exposed by the weft otherwise left to “ﬂ oat” along the back of the piece. 
 Raqs Dance; raqs baladi and raqs sharqi refer to belly dance. 
 Riqq Tambourine. 
 Ru‘a Designation for those Bedouin who have traditionally been semi-settled and whose 
migration patterns were very limited. They raised small stock such as sheep and goats and 
raised some agricultural products such as wheat or maintained small orchards of fruit trees. 
 Rubi‘at Short poem composed in four lines. 
 Ruffah Sides of tent. 
 Ruwaq Back wall of a tent. 
 Safalah Lower part of the back of the tent that touches the ground. 
 Sahah Tent divider to separate the private, family side of the tent from the public, men’s side. 
 Salah(t) Prayer; in Islam there are ﬁ ve daily prayers. 
 Sanjaq Turkish term for a ﬂ ag and during the Ottoman period applied to the smallest level 
of administrative district. 
 Saz Turkish ancestor of the buzuk; a long necked lute with metal strings with the lower reg-
ister used as a drone when played, which gives a distinctive sound to Turkish music. 

122 
Glossary
 Shabriyyah Traditional dagger worn by Bedouin men. 
Shagag Roof pieces of the tent.
 Shahadah Declaration of faith “There is no god but God and Muhammad is the Prophet 
of God.” 
 Shambar Light cloth worn traditionally by women to cover their hair, face, and neck. 
Shari‘ah Islamic law.
 Sharif Term used to designate direct descendants of the Prophet Muhammad. 
 Shawayah Designation for those Bedouin tribes who have traditionally raised small stock 
such as sheep and goats, which limits their migration range. 
 Shi‘a (Shi‘i) From the Arabic phrase Shi‘at ‘Ali, or the Partisans of ‘Ali, who were the sup-
porters of ‘Ali ibn Talib, cousin and son in law of the Prophet Muhammad, in his bid to 
be the head of the Islamic state. 
 Shimagh Traditional head cloth worn by men; the shimagh is of high quality usually being 
a mix of cotton and silk. 
 Shrak or Marquq Type of wafer thin bread popular with the Bedouin. 
 Simsimiyah A lyre; ancient musical instrument still played by some Bedouin in the region. 
 Sirwal Turkish trousers; the wide, baggy traditional trousers worn by men in the region. 
 Sitar Front of a tent brought down to indicate no one is home or the family is not prepared 
to receive guests. 
 Siyam Fast during the month of Ramadan. 
 Suﬁ  Islamic mystic. 
 Suhur Last meal of the night before the day’s fast begins during  Ramadan. 
 Sultan Ruler; literally the person who holds real temporal power and authority. 
 Sunnah The actions of the Prophet Muhammad; one of the ﬁ ve major sources for Islamic law. 
 Sunni From the Arabic phrase Ahl al-Sunnah or People who abide by the Practice of the 
Prophet. They supported the succession of the Prophet through election by a consultative 
council rather than the blood descent from ‘Ali. 
 Suq Market. 
 Surah Chapter of the Qu’ran. 
 Tabun Oven. 
 Tar Large, round single-headed drum with a wooden frame. 
 Tarawih Extra prayer offered during Ramadan after the ‘Ishiyah prayer. 
 Tarbush Turkish term for the red felt conical hat worn by Ottoman  ofﬁ cials and urban men 
in the late Ottoman period. 
 Thob Clothes; dress. 
 Thob ‘Ob (Khalagah) Large double-dress common among Bedouin women and some Jor-
danian village women. The dress was so large that it was pulled up over a belt causing heavy 
folds to fall back down to the woman’s ankles. 
 ‘Ud Arabic ancestor to the European lute. Oval-shaped string  instrument played with a 
feather plectrum. Its soft, deep sounds makes it the “king” of Arabic instruments and a 
favorite for solo performances. 

Glossary 
123
 Umm Arabic for mother; used as an honoriﬁ c title such as Umm Muhammad or Mother of 
Muhammad to note the eldest male child of the family. 
 Wadi Valley or small, seasonal stream. 
 Wasat Middle; in a tent refers to the main middle pole. 
 Wazir Government minister;  wizarah is a government ministry. 
 Wudu‘ Ablution; ritual washing required of all Muslims prior to prayer. 
 Ya Hala’ Welcome; a shortened version of “Ahlan” often used in phrases such as “Ya Hala’ 
bil-Dayf” (or “Welcome to our guest”). 
 Zajal Type of poem easily adapted to music. 
 Zakat Poor tax; money collected from those who can afford it at the end of Ramadan to be 
given to the poor. 


 Bibliography 
 Abidi, Aqil.  Jordan: A Political Study.  London: Asia Publishing House, 1965. 
 Abu Jaber, Kamil.  The Jordanians and the People of Jordan.  Amman: Royal Scientiﬁ c Society, 
1980. 
 Abu Jaber, Kamil and Fawzi Gharaibeh. “Bedouin Settlement: Organizational, Legal, and 
Administrative Stucture in Jordan.” In  The Future of Pastoral Peoples , eds. J Galaty, 
P. Salzman, and D. Araonson, 294–300. Ottowa: International Development Research 
Center, 1981. 
 Abu-Lughod, Lila.  Veiled Sentiments: Honor and Poetry in a Bedouin Society.  Cairo: The 
 American University in Cairo Press, 1986. 
 Amiry, Suad and Vera Tamari . The Palestinian Village Home.  London: British Museum 
 Publication, 1989. 
 Antoun, Richard.  Arab Village: A Social Structural Study of a Trans-Jordanian Peasant Com-
munity.  Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1972. 
 Aruri, Nasser.  Jordan: A Study in Politics.  The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1972. 
 Bacharach, Jere.  A Near Eastern Studies Handbook.  Seattle: University of Washington Press, 
1976. 
 Badawi, M.  Modern Arabic Literature.  Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993. 
 Badr, Liyana.  A Balcony over the Fakihani. Translated by Peter Clark and Christopher Tingley. 
New York: Interlink Books, 2002. 
 Beaumaont, Peter, Gerald Blake, and Malcom Wagstaff.  The Middle East.  London: John 
Wiley and Sons, 1976. 
 Bourbon, Fabio.  Petra Jordan ’ s Extraordinary Ancient City.  New York: Barnes and Noble 
Books, 2004. 
 Chatty, Dawn.  From Camel to Truck: The Bedouin in the Modern World.  New York: Vantage 
Press, 1986. 
 Cleveland, William.  A History of the Modern Middle East.  Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 
1994. 
 Creswell, K.A.C.  A Short Account of Early Muslim Architecture.  Cairo: The American  University 
in Cairo Press, 1989. 

126 
Bibliography
 Dallas, R.  King Hussein: A Life on the Edge. London: Proﬁ le Books, 1998. 
 Faqir, Fadia.  Pillars of Salt.  New York: Interlink Books, 2004. 
 Fisher, W. B.  The Middle East: A Physical, Social, and Regional Geography.  London: Methuen 
and Company, Ltd, 1971. 
 Fernea, Elizabeth and Basima Bezirgan, eds.  Middle Eastern Muslim Women Speak.  Austin: 
University of Texas Press, 1977. 
 Fernea, Elizabeth Warnock, ed.  Women and the Family in the Middle East: New Voices of 
Change.  Austin: University of Texas Press, 1984. 
 Glubb, John Bagot.  A Soldier with the Arabs. London: Hodder and Stoughton, 1957. 
 ———.  Syria, Lebanon, and Jordan.  New York: Walker and Company, 1967. 
 Gubser, Peter.  Jordan: Crossroads of Middle Eastern Events.  Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 
1983. 
 Hafez, Sabry and Catherine Cobban, eds.  A Reader of Modern Arabic Short Stories.  London: 
Al Saqi Books, 1988. 
 Harding, G. Lankaster.  The Antiquities of Jordan.  London: James Clarke and Company, Ltd, 
1967. 
 Hiatt, Joseph. “State Formation and Encapsulation of Nomads: Local Change and Continuity 
Among Recently Sedentarized Bedouin in Jordan.”  Nomadic Peoples 15 (1984): 1–11. 
 Hitti, Philip.  History of the Arabs.  London: St. Martin’s Press, 1973. 
 Hussein of Jordan, King.  Uneasy Lies the Head: An Autobiography of King Hussein of Jordan.  
London: Heinemann, 1962. 
 Jayyusi, Salma Khadra.  Modern Arabic Poetry.  New York: Columbia University Press, 1991. 
 Johnson-Davies, Denys, selected and translated by.  Under the Naked Sky: Short Stories from the 
Arab World. New York: The American University in Cairo Press, 2003. 
 Jureidini, Paul and R.D. McLaurin.  Jordan: Impact of the Social Change on the Role of the 
Tribes. New York: Praeger, 1984. 
 Kalter, Johannes, ed.  The Arts and Crafts of Syria. London: Thames and Hudson Ltd, 1992. 
 Kawar, Widad, Marian Awwad, and Maria Abu Risha.  Weaving in Jordan.  Amman: The 
 Jordan Crafts Council, 1980. 
 Khalifeh, Sahar.  Wild Thorns. Translated by Trevor LeGassick and Elizabeth Fernea. London: 
Al Saqi Books, 1985. 
 Khouri, Rami.  Petra: A Brief Guide to the Antiquities. Amman: Al Kutba Publications, 1989. 
 Lancaster, William.  The Rwala Bedouin Today , 2nd ed. Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland Press, 
Inc., 1981. 
 Layne, Linda.  Home and Homeland: The Dialogics of Tribal and National Identities in Jordan.  
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1994. 
 Lewis, Bernard, ed.  The World of Islam: Faith, People, Culture.  London: Thames and Hudson, 
1976. 
 Lewis, Norman.  Nomads and Settlers in Syria and Jordan, 1800–1900.  New York: Cambridge 
University Press, 1987. 
 Lias, Godfrey.  Glubb ’ s Legion. London: Evans Bros., Ltd, 1956. 
 Lunt, James.  Hussein of Jordan: A Political Biography.  London: Macmillan, 1989. 
 Ma’oz, Moshe.  Ottoman Reforms in Syria and Palestine 1840–1861.  London: Oxford  University 
Press, 1970. 
 Munif, Abd al-Rahman.  Story of a City: Childhood in Amman.  Translated by Samira Kawar. 
London: Quartet Books, 1998. 
 Musil, Alois.  The Manners and Customs of the Ru ’ ala Bedouins. New York: Charles R. Crane, 
1928. 

Bibliography 
127
 Nasrallah, Ibrahim.  Prairies of Fever.  Translated by May Jayyusi and Jeremy Reed. New York: 
Interlink Books, 1993. 
 Nicholson, R.A.  Literary History of the Arabs.  Cambridge: University of Cambridge Press, 
1969. 
 Nyrop, Richard.  Jordan, a Country Study.  Washington, DC: American University, 1980. 
 Ochsenwald, William.  The Hijaz Railway.  Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press, 1980. 
 Pappe, Ilan.  A Modern History of Palestine: One Land, Two People.  Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 2004. 
 Patai, Raphael.  The Kingdom of Jordan.  Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1958. 
 Peake, Ferderick.  History and Tribes of Jordan.  Coral Gables, FL: University of Miami Press, 
1958. 
 Plascow, Avi.  The Palestinian Refugees in Jordan, 1948–1957. London: Cass, 1981. 
 Provence, Michael.  The Great Syrian Revolt and the Rise of Arab Nationalism.  Austin:  University 
of Texas Press, 2005 
 Racy, A. J.  Making Music in the Arab World : The Culture and Artistry of Tarab.  Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2003. 
 Rajab, Jehan.  Palestinian Costume. New York: Kegan Paul International, 1989. 
 Raswan, Carl.  Black Tents of Arabia (My Life Among the Bedouin).  Boston: Little, Brown and 
Company, 1935. 
 Robins, Philip.  A History of Jordan.  Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004. 
 Rollin, Sue and Jane Streetly.  Blue Guide: Jordan.  New York: A & C Black, 2001. 
 Rogan, Eugene and Tariq Tell, eds.  Village, Steppe and State: The Social Origins of Modern 
Jordan. London: British Academic Press, 1994. 
 Sabbagh, Suha, ed.  Arab Women: Between Deﬁ ance and Restraint.  New York: Olive Branch 
Press, 1996. 
 Salibi, Kamal.  The Modern History of Jordan.  London: IB Tauris, 1993. 
 Shoup, John.  The Bedouins of Jordan: History and Sedentarization.  MA thesis, University of 
Utah, 1980. 
 ———. “Pastoral Nomadism in Jordan and Syria.”  Cultural Survival Quarterly 8(1) 
(1984):11–15. 
 ———. “Impact of Tourism on the Bedouin of Petra, Jordan.”  The Middle East Journal 39(2) 
(1985): 277–291. 
 ———.  Hima: A Traditional Bedouin Land-Use System in Contemporary Syria and Jordan.  
PhD diss., Washington University in St. Louis, 1990. 
 Shryock, Andrew.  Nationalism and the Genealogical Imagination: Oral History and Textual 
Authority in Tribal Jordan. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1997. 
 Shwadran, Benjamin.  Jordan, a State of Tension. New York: Council for Middle Eastern Affairs 
Press, 1959. 
 Snow, Peter.  Hussein: A Biography.  Washington, DC: R.B. Luce, 1972. 
 Vatikiotis, P.J.  Politics and the Military in Jordan: A Study of the Arab Legion, 1921–1967.  
London: Cass, 1967. 
 Weir, Shelagh.  The Bedouin. London: British Museum Publication, 1990. 
 Weir, Shelagh and Serene Shahid.  Palestinian Embroidery. London: British Museum 
 Publication, 1988. 
 Wilson, Rodney, ed.  Politics and the Economy in Jordan.  London: Routledge, 1991. 
 Zeine, Zeine.  The Struggle for Arab Independence.  Delmar, NY: Caravan Books, 1977. 
 Zubaida, Sami and Richard Tapper, eds.  A Taste of Thyme: Culinary Cultures of the Middle 
East.  New York: Taurus Parke Paperbacks, 2000. 


 Index 
 ‘Abbasids, 13, 109 
 ‘Abdallah ibn Hussein ibn ‘Ali (‘Abdallah I 
of Jordan), 18, 19, 20, 21, 22 
 ‘Abdallah ibn Hussein ibn Talal (‘Abdallah 
II of Jordan), 27, 28 
 ‘Abd al-Nasir, Gamal, 22, 23, 24, 26 
 Agriculture: dry land, 6, 58, 74, 89; 
 irrigated, 2, 3, 74, 89; origin, 10; 
 pastoralism, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 72, 76, 89, 
90, 92 
 ‘Ajlun: District, 21, 40, 66; Jabal, 1, 2, 3, 
7, 14 
 al-‘Aqabah: city, 4, 12, 16, 17, 19, 24, 28; 
Gulf of, 2, 14 
 Aleppo, 14, 16, 59, 60, 77, 83, 109 
 ‘Amman: architecture, 61–62; Black 
 September, 24; capital of Jordan, 
1, 5, 21, 25; Palestinian refugee 
 neighborhoods, 63; Philadelphia, 11; 
population, 4, 7, 76, 84; Rabboth 
Ammon, 3, 10, 11 
 Arabic: dialects, 5, 17, 47, 51, 71, 86, 116; 
language, 8, 13, 36, 45, 46, 50, 53; 
 literature, 45, 46, 47, 48, 53 
 Arab(s): Arab-Israeli conﬂ ict, 21–22, 48–49; 
ethnicity in Jordan, 4–5; family, 87; 
nationalism, 22, 23, 26; Revolt, 18–19 
 ‘Arafat, Yasir, 24, 27 
 Architecture: Bedouin, 55–57;  Circassian, 
8; contemporary styles, 61–62; 
 Ottoman, 60–61; urban, 102; village, 
57–60 
 Armenians, 8, 9, 36, 104, 105 
 Azraq, 3, 29 
 
Baghdad, 13, 45, 47, 48, 59, 109 
 Bani Ghassan, 5, 12, 29, 36, 38 
 Basketry, 66–67 
 Bayt hajar (house of stone), 55, 57 
 Bayt sha’r (house of hair), 55–57, 58, 60 
 Bedouin, Christian, 29; gender relations, 
90, 91, 92; hospitality, 103, 104; poetry, 
46–47, 49, 65; political organization, 
5, 6, 7, 17; population in Jordan, 4–5; 
revolts, 21; television series, 51–52; 
tribes, 5, 6, 7, 10, 11, 13, 16, 17, 18, 19, 
20, 21 
 Byzantium, 9, 12, 13, 29, 36, 38, 63, 66 
 
Cairo, 2, 13, 15, 16, 18, 19, 40, 41, 45, 47, 
48, 61, 77, 84, 109 
 Camels, 6, 7, 11, 46, 56, 64, 73, 78, 79, 109 
 Christian(s): Arab, 5, 12; communities, 38; 
conservative values, 100; non-Arab, 8; 
population in Jordan, 29, 35, 87; social 
clubs, 104 
 Christianity, 12, 14, 35, 37, 41, 42; foods, 
37, 75; holidays, 37–38;  mosaics, 35; 
ofﬁ cial recognition and organization, 36, 
37, 38, 39; popular belief, 40, 42 

130 
Index
 Circassians, 8, 9, 15, 17, 24, 30, 55, 63, 67, 
68, 104, 105 
 Clothes: Bedouin, 78–82; Bedouin, men’s, 
78–80, 82, 84; Bedouin, women’s, 80–82, 
84; Circassian, 85–86; Palestinian, 
84–85; Palestinian, men’s, 82, 84–85; 
Palestinian, women’s, 83, 85, 86; village, 
82–84; village, men’s, 82–83; village, 
women’s, 83–84 
 Coffee: Arabic, 57, 73–74, 76, 93, 94, 102, 
103, 104; Turkish, 50, 59, 73, 76, 89, 
94, 95, 96, 105 
 Coffee house, 50, 61, 92, 105 
 Crusaders, 5, 9, 14, 15, 16, 36, 38; battles, 
14, 15; castles, 9, 14, 15 
 
Dabkah  (folk line dance).  See dance 
 Damascus, capital city of Syria, 13, 15, 17, 
19; cultural inﬂ uence, 40, 41, 45, 47, 
48, 59, 66, 71; pilgrims route from, 14, 
16, 18, 23; political  inﬂ uence, 71 
 dance: Bedouin, 93, 110–11; Circassian, 
114; village, 95, 96, 111–14 
 Dead Sea, 2, 3 
 Druze, 29, 30, 31; Jabal, 2, 30, 31; 
 Rebellion, 30; religion, 30–31 
 
Edom, 3, 10, 11 
 Egypt: Arab-Israeli conﬂ ict, 22, 25; cultural 
inﬂ uence, 25, 48, 51, 52, 110; political 
inﬂ uence, 10, 11, 15, 17, 21, 23, 57; 
routes to, 16 
 Embroidery, 58, 80, 83, 84, 85, 93, 95 
 
Fatimids, 13, 14, 30, 35 
 Faysal ibn Hussein (King of Syria and then 
of Iraq), 18, 19, 20 
 Fine Arts, 68 
 Foods: Bedouin, 71–74, 75, 76, 93, 94; 
holiday, 32, 34, 35; Jordanian, 61, 
71–72, 93, 96; Ottoman, 71, 77; 
 Palestinian, 61, 71, 75, 76–77, 86; 
 Syrian-Lebanese, 61, 71, 75, 76; urban, 
71; village, 71, 73, 74–76 
 France, 15, 19, 20, 30 
 
Goats, 6, 55, 56, 64, 92 
 Great Britain, 18, 19, 21, 22, 49, 50, 52, 
78, 82 
 Greek, 11, 58, 109; Decapolis, 9, 11 
 
Hadar  (settled peoples), 7, 20 
 Hijaz Railway, 9, 18, 23 
 Honor, 40, 89–90, 92, 94, 97, 99–101, 
104, 107, 114 
 Hospitality, 74, 75, 102, 103–4, 107 
 Hussein, Saddam, 26, 27, 28 
 Hussein ibn ‘Ali (Sharif of Makkah), 
18, 19 
 Hussein ibn Talal (King of Jordan), 22, 23, 
24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 107 
 
Iraq: Islamic period, 12, 13; modern 
period, 20, 21, 23, 26, 28; music, 112, 
115, 116 
 Irbid, 4, 6, 7, 60, 68 
 Islam: Five Pillars of, 31–33; holidays, 
33–35; jurisprudence, 30; popular belief, 
40–42 
 Israel, 7, 9, 10, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 47, 49, 
50, 84, 107 
 Istanbul, 18, 36, 77 
 
Jarash, 4, 7, 8, 11, 17, 63 
 Jerusalem, 1, 10, 14, 15, 22, 32, 36, 37, 38, 
39, 41, 48, 62, 84 
 Jewelry: gold, 94; silver, 67–68, 93 
 Jordan River, 2, 3, 14, 24 
 Jordan Valley, 2, 10, 14, 23, 24 
 
Karak, 4, 5, 6, 7, 11, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 
20, 29, 36, 40, 60, 56, 68 
 Kuwait, 15, 26, 115 
 
Latin Kingdom of Jerusalem, 14 
 Lebanon: civil war, 25, 39, 43; Druze, 31; 
French mandate, 19; independence, 
21; music, 112, 115, 116; Palestinian 
 refugees, 22, 24, 49 
 
Ma’an, 6, 16, 26 
 Madaba, 4, 35, 65 
 Madinah, 18, 19, 35 
 Makkah, 14, 15, 16, 19, 31, 32, 33, 34, 
46, 103 
 Mamluks, 8, 15, 36, 60, 68, 105 
 Marriage, 92–97, 106, 113 
 Mediterranean, 1, 11, 14, 41, 99, 100, 112 

Index 
131
 Military, Jordanian, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 48 
 Millet system, 38–39 
 Moab, 3, 10 
 Muhammad, the Prophet of Islam, 12, 29, 
30, 31, 32, 33, 35, 40, 42, 103 
 Musalsalat (television series), 51 
 Music: Arabic, 109, 115; Bedouin, 92, 109, 
110–11, 116; Circassian and Shishan, 
114; contemporary, 115–16; instru-
ments, 47, 109–10, 111, 112, 113–14; 
urban–high art, 99–110, 113, 116; vil-
lage, 95, 96, 111–14 
 
Nabateans, 5, 11, 12 
 Nahiyah (district), 17, 59 
 Negev Desert, 6, 7, 81, 83 
 Neolithic, 4, 10, 57, 66, 67 
 Newspapers, 49; Arabic language, 50; 
 English language, 50 
 
Ottoman(s): cultural inﬂ uence, 32, 35, 59, 
66, 109, 112; period of rule, 7, 9, 16, 
17, 19, 31, 63; pilgrims route, 16, 33 
 
Palestine: cultural inﬂ uence, 57, 71, 77, 80, 
81, 112; Islamic period, 5, 13;  modern 
period, 18, 19, 20, 21; pre-Islamic 
period, 10, 11 
 Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), 
23, 24, 25 
 Palestinian(s): Arab-Israeli conﬂ ict, 21, 
26, 27; Black September, 25; culture, 
39, 79, 116; population in Jordan, 7; 
 refugees, 4, 24, 48–49, 62, 63, 107 
 Patriarchy, 39, 40, 49, 56–57, 58, 87–92, 
99–101, 106–7 
 Persia, 10, 12, 109, 110, 114 
 Petra, 2, 6, 10, 16, 26, 27, 36, 40, 57, 61, 
109 
 Poetry, 46, 47, 49 
 Pottery, 66 
 
Qasidah (epic poem), 46, 47, 49, 110 
 Qur’an, 30, 32, 33, 40, 42, 58, 67 
 
Radio, 51, 116 
 Rainfall, 3 
 Red Sea, 2, 11, 15 
 Respect, 101, 107 
 Rift Valley, 2, 3, 28 
 Romans, 9, 11, 12, 58, 63 
 
Saljuqs, 13, 14, 60, 68 
 al-Salt, 4, 7, 40, 60, 68 
 Saudi Arabia: Bedouin TV series, 5; 
 cultural inﬂ uence, 79; Gulf War, 26; 
opposition to Nasirism, 23; rise of 
 modern state, 20–21 
 Shame, 99–101 
 Shari’ah (Islamic law), 29, 30, 95; Schools 
of Law, 29 
 Sheep, 6, 7, 64, 72–73, 75, 79, 92 
 Shi’a, 13, 29, 35, 38 
 Shishans, 8, 9, 30, 63, 104, 105 
 Showbak, 14, 15, 16, 18, 19 
 Social Clubs, 104–6 
 Sunni, 8, 29, 35 
 Syria: cultural inﬂ uence, 41, 51, 52, 60, 
71, 77, 79, 82, 88; Islamic period, 5, 13, 
14, 15, 17; Pre-Islamic period, 10, 11, 
12; modern period, 19, 22, 23; music, 
112, 115 
 Syrian Desert  (Badiyat al-Sham), 2, 5, 12, 
38, 71 
 
Tea, 57, 59, 73, 74, 75, 89, 93, 94, 95, 96, 
102, 103, 104 
 Television, 33, 49, 50, 53 
 Turks, 8, 13, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 30, 67, 
114; Turkomen, 8; Uzbeks, 8, 30, 77 
 
Umayyads, 5, 13, 35, 66, 109 
 United States: Arab-Israeli conﬂ ict, 25, 27; 
Gulf War, 26, 115–16; War on Terror, 
28, 52 
 
Wadi ‘Arabah, 2 
 Wadi Mujib, 3 
 Wadi Sirhan, 2, 3 
 Weaving, 56, 64–65, 89 
 West Bank, 22, 23, 25, 26, 29, 49, 77 
 
Yarmuk River, 2, 40 
 
Zajal (type of sung poetry), 47, 112 
 al-Zarqa’: city, 4, 7, 8, 105; River, 2 


 About the Author 
 JOHN A. SHOUP is Associate Professor of anthropology at Al Akhawayn 
University in Ifrane, Morocco. 

 Recent Titles in
Culture and Customs of the Middle East 
 Culture and Customs of Israel 
 Rebecca L. Torstrick 
 Culture and Customs of the Palestinians 
 Samih K. Farsoun 
 Culture and Customs of Saudi Arabia 
 David E. Long 
 Culture and Customs of Iran 
 Elton L. Daniel and Ali Akbar Mahdi 





