
Culture and Customs 
of Morocco 

Morocco. Cartography by Bookcomp, Inc. 

Culture and Customs 
of Morocco 
<^0"^> 
RAPHAEL CHIJIOKE NJOKU 
Culture and Customs of Africa 
Toyin Falola, Series Editor 
GREENWOOD PRESS 
Westport, Connecticut • London 

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Njoku, Raphael Chijioke. 
Culture and customs of Morocco / by Raphael Chijioke Njoku. 
p. cm. — (Culture and customs of Africa, ISSN 1530-8367) 
Includes bibliographical references and index. 
ISBN 0-313-33289-4 
1. Morocco—Civilization. 2. Morocco—Social life and customs. 
I. Title. II. Series. 
DT312.N57 2006 
964—dc22 
2005026178 
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data is available. 
Copyright © 2006 by Raphael Chijioke Njoku 
All rights reserved. No portion of this book may be 
reproduced, by any process or technique, without the 
express written consent of the publisher. 
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 2005026178 
ISBN: 0-313-33289-4 
ISSN: 1530-8367 
First published in 2006 
Greenwood Press, 88 Post Road West, Westport, CT 06881 
An imprint of Greenwood Publishing Group, Inc. 
www.greenwood.com 
Printed in the United States of America 
The paper used in this book complies with the 
Permanent Paper Standard issued by the National 
Information Standards Organization (Z39.48-1984). 
10987654321

For my daughter Chinma Emmanuelle Njoku 

This page intentionally left blank 

Contents 
Series Foreword ix
Preface 
xi 
Acknowledgments 
xiii 
Chronology 
xv 
1 
Introduction 
1 
2 
Religion and Worldview 
21 
3 
Literature and Media 
39 
4 
Art and Architecture/Housing 
57 
5 
Cuisine and Traditional Dress 
77 
6 
Gender Roles, Marriage, and Family 
93 
7 
Social Customs and Lifestyle 
109 
8 
Music and Dance 
125 
Glossary 
137 
Bibliographic Essay 
141 
Index 
ix
149

This page intentionally left blank 

Series Foreword 
AFRICA is a vast continent, the second largest, after Asia. It is four times the 
size of the United States, excluding Alaska. It is the cradle of human civiliza-
tion. A diverse continent, Africa has more than 50 countries with a popula-
tion of over 700 million people who speak over 1,000 languages. Ecological 
and cultural differences vary from one region to another. As an old continent, 
Africa is one of the richest in culture and customs, and its contributions to 
world civilization are impressive indeed. 
Africans regard culture as essential to their lives and future development. 
Culture embodies their philosophy, worldview, behavior patterns, arts, and 
institutions. The books in this series intend to capture the comprehensiveness 
of African culture and customs, dwelling on such important aspects as religion, 
worldview, literature, media, art, housing, architecture, cuisine, traditional 
dress, gender, marriage, family, lifestyles, social customs, music, and dance. 
The uses and definitions of "culture" vary, reflecting its prestigious associa-
tion with civilization and social status, its restriction to attitude and behavior 
in globalization, and the debates surrounding issues of tradition, modernity, 
and postmodernity. The participating authors have chosen a comprehensive 
meaning of culture while not ignoring the alternative uses of the term. Each 
volume in the series focuses on a single country, and the format is uniform. 
The first chapter presents a historical overview, in addition to information on 
geography, economy, and politics. Each volume then proceeds to examine the 
various aspects of culture and customs. The series highlights the mechanisms 
for the transmission of tradition and culture across generations: the signifi-
cance of orality, traditions, kinship rites, and family property distribution; the 

X 
SERIES FOREWORD 
rise of print culture; and the impact of educational institutions. The series also 
explores the intersection between local, regional, national, and global bases for 
identity and social relations. While the volumes are organized nationally, they 
pay attention to ethnicity and language groups and the links between Africa 
and the wider world. 
The books in the series capture the elements of continuity and change in cul-
ture and customs. Custom is not represented as static or as a museum artifact, 
but as a dynamic phenomenon. Furthermore, the authors recognize the current 
challenges to traditional wisdom, which include gender relations; the negotia-
tion of local identities in relation to the state; the significance of struggles for 
power at national and local levels and their impact on cultural traditions and 
community-based forms of authority; and the tensions between agrarian and 
industrial/manufacturing/ oil-based economic modes of production. 
Africa is a continent of great changes, instigated mainly by Africans but 
also through influences from other continents. The rise of youth culture, the 
penetration of the global media, and the challenges to generational stability 
are some of the components of modern changes explored in the series. The 
ways in which traditional (non-Western and nonimitative) African cultural 
forms continue to survive and thrive, that is, how they have taken advan-
tage of the market system to enhance their influence and reproductions also 
receive attention. 
Through the books in this series, readers can see their own cultures in a dif-
ferent perspective, understand the habits of Africans, and educate themselves 
about the customs and cultures of other countries and people. The hope is 
that the readers will come to respect the cultures of others and see them not 
as inferior or superior to theirs, but merely as different. Africa has always been 
important to Europe and the United States, essentially as a source of labor, 
raw materials, and markets. Blacks are in Europe and the Americas as part of 
the African diaspora, a migration that took place primarily due to the slave 
trade. Recent African migrants increasingly swell their number and visibil-
ity. It is important to understand the history of the diaspora and the newer 
migrants, as well as the roots of the culture and customs of the places from 
where they come. It is equally important to understand others in order to be 
able to interact successfully in a world that keeps shrinking. The accessible 
nature of the books in this series will contribute to this understanding and 
enhance the quality of human interaction in a new millennium. 
Toyin Falola
Frances Higginbothom, Nalle Centennial Professor in History 
The University of Texas at Austin 

Preface 
MOROCCO is a strategically located North African country. Historically, it has 
been a melting pot of different civilizations, including African, European, 
Middle Eastern, and Asian cultures. This accounts for the country's rich 
and elaborate traditional practices and customs. This book explores Moroc-
can ways of life with a particular focus on aspects that distinctly define the 
uniqueness of the country and its people, its society and institutions, and the 
lifestyle of a new generation of people gradually turning away from the strict 
religious observances of the older generations. 
Notwithstanding the pervading Pan-Islamic identity in practice, certain ele-
ments of Berber indigenous traditions and customs have proved resilient. Long 
before the beginning of the twentieth-century European imperialism in Africa, 
the indigenous Berbers of North Africa had made contact with different impe-
rial powers and visitors, exchanging goods, curiosities, gifts, religion, political 
systems, and ideas with the Phoenicians, Romans, Vandals, Arabs, and so on. 
French colonialism introduced Western-style bureaucracy, education, technol-
ogy, cash economy, and new cities, developmental infrastructures and modern 
amenities that have reordered preexisting institutions and the people s lifestyles. 
This book provides a sense of social change in a historical context. It introduces 
the reader to the making of a hybrid socioeconomic milieu within which Arab, 
European, and African cultural traditions combined with indigenous practices 
in fashioning ideas, values, norms, and manners that one can today regard as 
Moroccan. 

This page intentionally left blank 

Acknowledgments 
THE SAYING THAT NO one person has written a book is most applicable to 
the circumstances that have seen me through this project. First, I benefited 
immensely from the expertise of my editor, Ms. Wendi Schnaufer. Her immense 
experience was mostly demonstrated in her patience and brilliant suggestions 
for improved standards and general conformity with style and content. 
I owe special thanks to Professor Toyin Falola, who invited me to write the 
book, discussed the project with me at the initial stage, and encouraged me to 
produce a good work. His continued communication and very generous con-
tributions served as a reminder that I should keep up progress on the project. 
With normal teaching and other professional engagements serving as a serious 
distraction, I relied heavily on the help provided by my research assistants and 
other colleagues in Morocco, Belgium, and the United States. Nasr Yahyaoui, 
Habib Essbai, Abdenasser Essbai, Lekan and Abimbola Badru, Elizabeth Smith, 
Melinda Nicole Daniel, Denise Martin, and Susanne Dickmann read different 
drafts of this manuscript and provided immense input. Then came help from 
colleagues and friends Professors Lateef O. Badru, John Mackey, John McLeod, 
Bruce Adams, Benjamin Harrison, Karen Spierling, Scott Levi, Mary Bani, 
Ricky Jones, Blaine Hudson, Theresa Rajack-Tallyey, and Rita Hettinger. 
I owe immense gratitude to Professor Valerie K. Orlando of Illinois Wesleyan 
University in Bloomington for her generosity with time and resources. 
Ms. Lee Keeling, ever helpful, handled the formatting of the manuscript and 
pictures according to acceptable standards. 

XIV 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Finally but not the least, I must not forget to thank my undergraduate 
and graduate students of 2004 who discussed the idea of this project and 
conducted research on a number of topics. Their contributions and support 
are highly appreciated. 
Part of the funds for this research was provided by the Dean's Incentive 
Fund and by the African American Development Fund of the School of Arts 
and Social Sciences (University of Louisville, Kentucky). 

Chronology 
40,000-25,000 B.C.E. Indication of an advanced Paleolithic culture or
cave dwellers in the entire Mediterranean region. 
3000-2200 B.C.E. 
Ancient Egyptian, Greek, and Roman sources 
record presence of the Berber people of North 
Africa in the area known today as Morocco. 
2000 B.C.E. 
Sahara region begins to desiccate. 
1200 B.C.E. 
Phoenicians, a seafaring people, arrive in North 
Africa. Although they mainly settle in Tunis, their 
presence is also significant in the Moroccan towns 
of Tangier and Chellah (near Tetouan). 
c. 146 B.C.E. 
Beginning of Carthaginian influence in Morocco, 
lasting until the arrival of the Romans. 
429 C.E. 
Vandals defeat the Roman imperial power and by 
extension assumed control of North Africa. 
683 
Arab people of the Arabian Peninsula invade 
North Africa. 
710 
End of Berber resistance to Arab presence and the 
beginning of their conversion to the Islamic religion. 

xvi 
CHRONOLOGY 
785-790 
Arrival of Moulay Idriss I and the establishment 
of the foremost Muslim dynasty, know as the 
Idrissid (descendants of the Prophet Muhammad). 
The Idrisses rule Morocco for about 200 years 
(789-987 C.E.). 
807-808 
City of Fez founded by the Idriss rulers. 
818 
Arabs are expelled from Spanish lands, and hundreds 
of Arab families arrive in Morocco from Cordoba. 
c. 1000-1700 
Succession of dynasties and religious movements, 
including the Almoravid (c. 1061-1148) and 
Almohad dynasties (c. 1148-1269), which at their 
respective peaks control all of Morocco and parts of 
present-day Algeria and Spain. 
1070 
City of Marrakech, located in the midwestern 
region of Morocco, is established by the Almohad 
rulers. 
1666-1672 
Alawis, or Alouites, the current ruling dynasty, 
establishes its monarchical authority under Moulay 
Ismail. 
Quarrel over Spain's Ceuta enclave; Spain declares 
war and wins a further enclave and an enlarged 
Ceuta in the settlement. 
Spain claims a protectorate in coastal areas of 
Morocco. 
France and Spain agree on their respective zones of 
influence in Morocco. 
Algerian (in French, Algeciras) Conference in 
Spain; France and Spain get the go-ahead to police 
Moroccan ports and collect customs fees. 
1912, March 30 
Morocco becomes a French protectorate under 
the Treaty of Fez, administered by French 
Resident-General Louis Hubert Gonzalve 
Lyautey (1854-1934), although Berber resistance 
continues until 1933. Spain continues to operate 
its coastal protectorate. The sultan of Morocco 
maintains a largely figurehead role. 
1860 
1884 
1904 
1906 

CHRONOLOGY 
xvi 1 
1927, November 18 
1929, July 9 
1933 
1943 
1947, April 9 
1953, August 20 
1955, November 16 
1956, March 2 
1956, March 3 
1961, February 
1963 
1963, August 21 
1965 
1971 
1973 
Mohammed Ibn Youssef (1911-1961; later 
Mohammed V) succeeds his father as the Sultan of 
Morocco at the age of 18. 
Birth of Hassan (1929-1999) in Rabat, who later 
reigns as King Hassan II. 
Remnants of Berber resistance to French colonial 
control are pacified. The colonialists set up an 
indirect rule system in the region. 
Istiqlal (Independence) Party is established to press 
for an end to colonial rule. 
Sultan Youssef s historic trip to the northern city of 
Tangier, during which his bold nationalist speech 
revives the nationalist consciousness and resistance 
to French colonial rule in Morocco. 
Sultan Youssef and family are exiled to Madagascar 
by French Resident-General Theodore Steege. 
Sultan Mohammed Youssef and the royal family 
return from exile. 
Madrid Accord establishes the end of the French 
protectorate. Spain keeps its two coastal enclaves of 
Ceuta and Melilla. 
Sultan Mohammed Ibn Youssef declares himself 
King Mohammed V 
Death of King Mohammed V; King Hassan II 
succeeds his father. 
Historic general parliamentary elections held in 
Morocco. 
Birth of Crown Prince Sidi Mohammed. 
Amid growing social unrest, King Hassan II declares 
a state of emergency and suspends parliament. 
Attempted military coup fails to depose the king 
and establish a republic. 
Polisario movement begins. It aims to establish an 
independent state in Spanish Sahara, a territory 

XVI11 
CHRONOLOGY 
south of Morocco. Algeria declares support for the 
movement. 
1975, November 6 
Green March Day: King Hassan II orders 350,000 
civilian volunteers to cross into Western Sahara in 
a dramatic show of solidarity for the king in his 
claim over the territory for the state of Morocco. 
1975, December 
Spain signs the Madrid Accords, withdrawing from 
Spanish Sahara (soon to become Western Sahara) 
and transferring it to joint Moroccan-Mauritanian 
control. Amid objections and threats of military 
intervention from Algeria, Moroccan forces enter 
and occupy the territory. 
Moroccan and Algerian troops clash in Western 
Sahara. Algeria announces the formation of the Saha-
rawi Arab Democratic Republic (SADR) and forms a 
government in exile. Morocco and Mauritania divide 
Western Sahara. 
1976 
Fighting between the Moroccan military and 
Polisario (nationalist forces) over the sovereignty of 
Western Sahara. 
1983 
Meeting between King Hassan II and the Algerian 
president aims to achieve better relations between 
the two neighbors. 
1983 
King Hassan II cancels planned elections amid 
political unrest and economic crisis. 
1984 
Morocco leaves the Organization of African Unity 
in protest at the admission of the Saharawi Arab 
Democratic Republic (SADR) to the continental 
body. Polisario claims to have killed more than 
5,000 Moroccan soldiers in offensives between 
1982 and 1985. 
1988 
Morocco resumes full diplomatic relations with 
Algeria. 
1991 
United Nations—monitored ceasefire begins in 
Western Sahara, but the territory's status remains 
1976, February 

CHRONOLOGY 
xix 
1998 
1999, July 23 
2001, November 
2002, July 
2002, December 
2003, February 
2003, May 7 
2004, February 
2004, August 24, 29 
2004, October 9 
undecided and numerous ceasefire violations are 
reported. 
First opposition leader, Abderrahmare Youssoufi, 
becomes official. 
Death of King Hassan II; his son, Sidi, takes over 
as Mohammed VI. 
King Mohammed VI starts a controversial tour of 
Western Sahara, the first by a Moroccan monarch 
in a decade. 
Morocco and Spain agree to a U.S.-brokered 
resolution over the disputed island of Perejil. Spanish 
troops had taken the island after noticing the unusual 
presence of Moroccan soldiers. 
Morocco and Spain unsuccessfully try to reestablish 
full diplomatic relations after the conflict over the 
disputed island of Perejil in July. 
Casablanca court jails three Saudi members of 
al-Qaeda for 10 years after they are accused of 
plotting to attack U.S. and British warships in the 
Strait of Gibraltar in 2002. 
Forty-one people are killed and many are injured 
in a series of suicide bomb attacks in Casablanca, 
allegedly funded by al-Qaeda. 
Morocco is hit by strong earthquake, leaving more 
than 600 people dead. The quake shakes rural areas 
near the Mediterranean city of Al Hoceima, affect-
ing primarily three remote villages—Ait Kamra, 
Tamassint, and Imzourn. 
Hicham El Guerrouj, one of Morocco's most 
accomplished athletes, wins the 1,500 and 5,000 
meters titles at the 2004 Olympic Games in 
Athens, Greece. 
Mohammed VI appoints Driss Jettou as prime 
minister and leader of government business. 

XX 
CHRONOLOGY 
2005, August 18 
Polisario Front releases 404 Moroccan POWs held 
since the UN-brokered ceasefire in 1991. 
2005, August 20 
His Majesty King Mohammed VI orders the release 
of 417 prisoners, including political prisoners, on the 
occasion of the 52nd anniversary of the Revolution 
of the King and People. 

1 
Introduction 
Morocco is like a tree, whose roots lie in Africa, 
but whose leaves breathe in European air. 
(Le Maroc est comme un arbre, dont les racines se situent 
en Afrique, mais dont les feuilles en air europeen.) 
—King Hassan II of Morocco (ruled 1961-1999) 
T H E KINGDOM OF MOROCCO is the most westerly of the North African states. 
It is one of the key African countries of the Maghreb (Arabic for "further 
west") region that includes Morocco, Algeria, and Tunisia. Its area of 174,000 
square miles (446,550 square kilometers), including plains, mountains, and
stretches of desert wasteland, is just slightly larger than the state of California 
in the United States. Morocco, sometimes called Al mamlaka al Maghribia, 
has an estimated population of more than 32 million, which continues 
to grow at an annual rate of 1.61 percent, with a birthrate as high as 22.79 
births per 1,000 and a mortality rate of 5.71 deaths per 1,000 population. 
The average life expectancy at birth for the total population is approximately 
70.35 years (male, 68.06 years; female, 72.74 years). The capital is the north-
eastern coastal city of Rabat; however, the largest and most famous is the 
chief port city of Casablanca. Cultural ideas and institutions are as varied as 
geographical conditions. 
As depicted in the 1942 film Casablanca, starring Humphrey Bogart, 
Morocco typically appears in the minds of many foreigners as a mysteri-
ously different land. It remained independent for centuries as it developed a 
rich culture blended from Berber, Arab, African, and European influences. 

2 
CULTURE AND CUSTOMS OF MOROCCO 
Morocco eventually became a French colony in 1912 while the Spanish 
controlled the small port cities of Ceuta and Melilla in the north and the 
Spanish Sahara in the south. After 44 years of Franco-Spanish colonial-
ism, the country regained its independence on March 2, 1956, with Sultan 
Mohammed V, also known as Mohammed ben Youssef (ruled 1927-1961) 
as the head of government. Postcolonial Morocco is yet to establish a full-
fledged democracy. King Mohammed V died in 1961 and was succeeded 
by his son, Hassan II, who ruled for 38 years. Under Hassan II (ruled 
1961-1999), the emergent nationalist political parties maintained a nomi-
nal presence and his piecemeal political reforms in the 1990s resulted in the 
establishment of a bicameral legislature in 1997. Given the sizable number of 
its indigenous Jews, Morocco under Hassan was favorably disposed toward a 
vital Arab peace with the state of Israel. At his father King Hassan Us death 
in 1999, Mohammed VI succeeded to the throne. Although human rights 
groups criticized the late king for his brutal response to political opponents, 
his successor was widely perceived as a leader who would press on with demo-
cratic openings. Parliamentary elections were held in September 2002, the 
second time since August 1970 when the late King Hassan first endorsed a 
new constitution and restored parliamentary government. Municipal elections 
followed in September 2003. Morocco, with strong support from Spain, is 
angling for membership in the European Union (EU), its principal trading
partner. So far, there appears to be little enthusiasm for the idea among the EU 
leaders—probably because of some intractable problems plaguing the North 
African country. 
Morocco is faced with a number of issues that need be addressed to win 
a more favorable international acceptance. To the south, the issue of its annex-
ation of Western Sahara in the late 1970s remains unresolved, pending the 
outcome of a proposed referendum on self-determination that Morocco has so 
far not allowed. To the north, a dispute with Spain in July 2002 over the small 
island of Perejil revived the issue of the sovereignty of the Spanish-controlled 
islands of Ceuta and Melilla, on the Mediterranean coast. More recently, the 
involvement of its citizens in the Madrid (Spain) terrorist train bombing in 
March 2004 has hindered any advance in Morocco's international relations. 
Religious fundamentalism and terrorist activities are heavily funded with 
profits from illicit drug trafficking in cannabis, hashish, and marijuana. 
Morocco is the world's largest exporter of cannabis, cultivated in the rugged 
countryside of the Rif Mountains, especially in the districts of Ghafsai and 
Taounat. Until the recent wave of terrorist bombings in the country, the 
Moroccan government has not done much to fight against the powerful 
cartel that runs the over 8 billion dollar drug trade in Morocco. While addicts 
openly have their fix, European visitors and smugglers have also found it 

INTRODUCTION 
3 
easy to traffic drugs and sex with young boys in the streets. With pressures 
from the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), the United 
States, and other Western governments, the authorities in Morocco have 
recently launched a more aggressive campaign against these illicit businesses. 
In 2004, for instance, a total of 687 foreign smugglers were apprehended. 
Unless the government is able to resolve these and other issues, it is unlikely 
that Morocco will realize its dreams of a closer and more respectable relation-
ship with the Western world. 
LAND 
Morocco is strategically placed at the geographical intersection between 
Europe, Asia, and the rest of Africa. It borders the Atlantic Ocean to the 
west; to the north are the Mediterranean Sea, the Straight of Gibraltar, and 
Spain; to the south are Western Sahara and the Sahara, and to the east is 
Algeria. The country's geography is diverse and divided into five regions by 
a stretch of rugged mountainous landscapes. The Rif Mountains parallel 
the Mediterranean coast from Ceuta to Melilla, with large areas of flank-
ing plateau, valleys, and rich coastal plains. The coastal plains of western 
Morocco stretch from the northern city of Tangier southward to Essaouira, 
where the High Atlas Mountains interrupt the plains that reach the sea at 
that point. The mountains are divided into three areas, the Middle Atlas, the 
High Atlas, and the Anti-Atlas ranges. To the south of the Rif and the Sebou 
(or Sebu) River basin is the Middle Atlas, separated from the eastern fringes 
of the High Atlas farther south by the valley of the Abid River. The High 
Atlas extend some 450 miles in length and forty miles in width and divide 
the country into two distinct climatic zones—one that receives the westerly 
winds from the Atlantic and one that is influenced by the proximity of the 
Sahara. The Anti-Atlas to the south, the homeland of the Amazigh Berbers, 
is connected with the High Atlas by means of the volcanic massif of Siroua. 
Farther to the south of the Anti-Atlas are oases (smara), seasonal rivers, and 
little island towns. This complex network of mountains, plateaus, valleys, 
rivers, seas, and oceans brings about climatic diversities that are difficult to 
summarize. 
In broad terms, the north is considered warm and temperate and the south 
semiarid. The Mediterranean climate in the western and northern Morocco is 
strongly modified by local factors such as the mountain ranges and proximity 
to the seas. The Rif and the Atlas chains act as a barrier between western and 
eastern parts of the country. The westerly winds that come off the Atlantic in 
the winter bring snow and rain to the western flanks of the mountains, leaving 
little to the eastern steppes and plains. The temperature does not fall below 

4 
CULTURE AND CUSTOMS OF MOROCCO 
46 degrees except in the Middle Atlas ranges, where the temperature may 
reach zero degrees and the weather may be harsh. Winter weather conditions 
may vary from severely cold and rainy to inadequate rainfall, which is usually 
accompanied by poor agricultural production. 
Rainfall in spring is usually slight and irregular, and the mean temperature 
is about 68 degrees. Around the Mediterranean coast, the climate is gener-
ally mild and sunny. The land around the Atlantic coast has enough rainfall 
to sustain land fertility and good agricultural yield. Heavy rainfalls occur in 
some parts of the Rif Mountains, the Middle Atlas ranges, and some areas of 
Tangier closer to the Strait of Gibraltar, but most parts of the Sahara in the 
south experiences an average rainfall of less than 4 inches per year. 
Summer is generally hot and dry, except along the Mediterranean coast, 
where it is humid, and in the Rif and Atlas ranges, where the temperatures 
are cool, although the sun may be fierce. Summer rain occurs only in the 
mountains and is accompanied by violent storms in June and July—similar 
to weather often experienced in Appalachia of the United States between June 
and August. Although it is somewhat cool during winter, the Moroccan desert 
is unbearably hot in summer. This is largely because of the anticyclone from 
the North Atlantic close to Portugal, the winds from the northeast (levante), 
and the occasional desert winds, such as the sirocco and chergui. The driest
months are between April and October. The climate, of course, influences the 
overall culture of the inhabitants—their agricultural production, settlement 
patterns, and so on. 
About 20.12 percent of Morocco's landmass is agriculturally rich. This 
includes some fertile lowlands along the coast, which are blessed with the 
constant flow of rivers. The lands lying between the Atlas and Rif ranges 
and in the valleys of the Atlas are also very fertile. Alluvial plains are rare but 
are found around the Rharb Plain and the Sous River Valley. Moving away 
from the coastal plains, agricultural fertility diminishes as the land rises and 
moves into the steppe and the mountainous interior. The Atlas Mountains 
divide the country and the northern fringes of the Sahara in the south. In 
the south and southeast, the land is poor, with rocks and desert encroach-
ments, and is sparsely inhabited by nomads. As a study on the geography of 
Morocco notes, the agriculturally rich areas of Morocco—the coastal plains 
and plateaus and the north and west of the Atlas ranges—are known as inner 
Morocco, or what the French and Spanish colonial powers in Morocco used 
to call "useful Morocco" (or le Maroc utile).l 
Inner Morocco, also know as "land of the Makhzen" (or bled el-Makhzeri), 
harbors all the big cities and most of the country's population. The descendants 
of the Arabs that arrived in the seventh century have maintained domicile in 
and around the arable plains and coastal lowlands. In much of these areas, 

INTRODUCTION 
5 
the population density exceeds 100 persons per square mile. In the highly 
urbanized, intensively farmed coastal strip centering on Casablanca, the pop-
ulation density reaches more than 1,000 per square mile. In sharp contrast, 
the population is sparse south of the High Atlas, which run deep into the 
Sahara. In these areas, the population is concentrated in oases lining the Draa 
River Valley. In the hills, steppes, and mountains, the local Berbers, who have 
lived in the area since the time of the Phoenicians, and some Bedouins scratch 
out a living as herders or traders. The land route to inner Morocco, run-
ning from Rabat through Meknes and Fes then northeastward to Taza and 
to Oujda, is located between the Middle Atlas and the Rif Massif. This is the 
east—west access route to the coastal cities of Casablanca and Rabat. Together 
with the Upper Moulouya Valley and the Eastern High Plateau, the highway 
running through Taza is also one of the three features that geographically 
divide eastern Morocco. 
PEOPLES 
Morocco, like most Arab and African societies, contains hundreds of 
small linguistic communities. In the past, most of these subnationalities 
were independent and self-sufficient. Today, ethnic boundaries are becom-
ing less salient with centuries of miscegenation and the predominance of 
Arabic as the language of power and identity. Thus, Berber or Arab identity 
has become more of a reflection of personal behavior rather than of mem-
bership in a distinct and delimited social entity. Morocco's Arab-Berbers 
constitute a 99.1 percent majority of the population. Its indigenous Jewish 
elements make up 0.2 percent of the population. Other minorities, includ-
ing Moors (or Arabs of mixed parentage), black Africans (or Negroes), and 
Europeans (white immigrants)—who mostly reside in the cities—make up 
about 0.7 percent of the population.2 The population's statistics present an 
interesting combination of youth and ethnic solidarity. About 40 percent 
of the people are younger than 15 years old, and they mostly live along the 
Atlantic coast or in the High Atlas Mountains. Like most nations, the people 
are divided into rural and urban dwellers. 
About one-third of Morocco's 32 million people are urban dwellers, and 
nearly one-third of this number live in Casablanca alone. Segments of the 
urban population are composed of educated Moroccans, foreigners, wealthy 
businessmen, and small local grocers who represent the epitome of the adapt-
able trading spirit of the Arab world. The local Berbers (and also the rural 
inhabitants) occupy mostly the mountainous countryside. The Berbers, who 
claim to be of European descent because of their fair pigmentation and their 
blue or green eyes, originally called themselves Amaziah. It was the Romans 

6 
CULTURE AND CUSTOMS OF MOROCCO 
who first called them Barbarus, from which comes the word Berbers. There 
are three distinct Berbers: the Ruffians of the north, the Chleuhs of the 
Middle and High Atlas, and the Soussi of the southwest. Within their local 
community, the Berbers derive their primary social identity from member-
ship in a specific linguistic section; however, Berber identity could be easily 
lost if an individual settled with his family away from the indigenous group. 
Today, most Moroccans are of mixed ancestry between the Berbers, Arabs, 
and Africans. These admixtures have produced the varied Arabic dialects 
found in the country. 
Most of the ancestors of modern Morocco's Jews (often called the Sephardi 
or Sepharadhi) arrived after the Christian reconquest of Arab-controlled 
Spain in the late fifteenth century. Others, however, were originally Berber 
speakers but later converted to Judaism and lived in various parts of the 
country—either in predominantly rural Jewish villages or as single families 
or small groups in non-Jewish families. Some of the Sephardi lived in special 
Jewish quarters called mellah. Others settled in cities, generally entering 
fast-paced businesses including artisan trade, illegal currency exchange, and 
trade in precious materials such as silver, gold, and diamonds. Although the 
Moroccan Jews have control over a significant portion of the economy, their 
population has remained small, partly because of immigration to Israel after 
it was created in 1948. More recently, Moroccan independence in 1956 and 
the increase in Pan-Arabic consciousness have combined to force a huge 
population of Jews out of Morocco. 
A considerable but rapidly dwindling European community comprising 
the French, Spanish, and British and other Westerners live in the big cities, 
too. Many are expatriates employed by the government as teachers, techni-
cians, corporate business managers, and so on. Their role in managing the 
economy of the country is crucial. 
Moroccans of Berber-Arab descent have some unique and distinct 
characteristics that easily distinguish them from their neighbors. They are 
sometimes blue-eyed, with a variety of skin coloring due to generations of 
intermarriage, and are typically tall and thin, features that enables them to 
trek good distances. Moroccan women love gorgeous-looking clothes and 
they take time to adorn their bodies with body ink or dye, jewelry, and other 
forms of ornamental decorations. 
LANGUAGES 
The three major languages in Morocco are Arabic, Berber, and French. 
The official language, spoken by more than 70 percent of the population, is 
Arabic. The Berber speakers make up about 30 percent of the population. 

INTRODUCTION 
7 
French is the main language of business, government, and international 
relations. The school curriculum reserves an important place for the learning 
of the French language to promote interaction with the non-Arab world. 
Language is said to be the "principal determinate of ethnicity" even after 
centuries of miscegenation.3 Arabic speakers are regarded as Arab and Berber 
speakers as Berber, regardless of their actual blood heritage. Berber, which 
belongs to the Afro-Asiatic language family, is encountered in different 
local tongues, but the three principal dialects include Tarifit, spoken near Al 
Hocema; Tachelhi, which is predominant in the southwestern region near 
Agadir, northeast of Marrakech, and east of the Draa Valley; and Tamazight, 
which is spoken in the Central Atlas region. Before the Arab invasion of 
North Africa in the seventh century, Berber was the dominant language spo-
ken across North African. Today, the various local tongues have been mostly 
consigned to the mountain and dessert areas of Morocco. Having developed 
no writing culture, a common problem with speakers of most indigenous 
African languages, the Berbers lack the cohesive identity that a language 
can help create. Because written messages must be transmitted in another 
language, the indigenous tongue has been undergoing a process of corruption 
(or Arabization) as many Arabic words make their way into everyday usage. 
All sacred terms and the language of classroom instructions, for example, are 
mostly drawn from Arabic rather than Berber language. 
Arabic, the most dominant form of language in North Africa and most 
of the Middle East, is one of the most historical languages in the world, 
widely recognized in the ancient cuneiform records of Mesopotamia. Its 
classical (Modern Standard Arabic) and popular (Moroccan Arabic) forms 
are spoken in the inner cities, plains, and mountains of Morocco. Modern 
Standard Arabic, the language of the Quran, is widely used throughout the 
contemporary Arab world. In Morocco, it is used in newspapers, correspon-
dence, news broadcasts, speeches, and for most higher learning, especially 
in philosophy and religious studies, but rarely in conversation. Moroccan 
Arabic is the common language of the majority. Other Arabic speakers, with 
the possible exception of Algerians and Tunisians, find it somewhat difficult 
to comprehend Morocco's colloquial Arabic. Although Arabic has greatly 
influenced Berber life and customs, the indigenous culture has, in turn, influ-
enced the pronunciation of classical Arabic in Morocco more than elsewhere 
in the Muslim world. 
French is used in government circles and the cities. Despite the govern-
ment's attempt to preserve the predominance of Arabic as the official lan-
guage in Morocco since the end of colonialism in 1956, the use of French 
has proved somewhat indispensable. Great progress has been made toward 
Arabizing some institutions, but in other fields, a total change is not likely 

8 
CULTURE AND CUSTOMS OF MOROCCO 
to occur. For instance, although Arabic is well suited to the writing of poetry 
and philosophical and religious texts, it is unsuitable for technical subjects. 
French will remain in use in businesses and factories for some time because 
politicians and civil servants find it useful to interact with Europeans and 
others in Francophone Africa. This has caused literacy in French to be accept-
able among Arabic speakers. Additionally, about 20,000 Spanish speakers 
work in small organizations and centers in Morocco. Meanwhile, Arabic has 
continued to excel because the national educational philosophy is informed 
by the teachings of the Islamic holy book, the Quran. 
EDUCATION 
Government-funded education is free and compulsory from the age of 
7 to 13, although the law obligating citizens to receive a certain level of literacy 
is not enforced. The 2004 literacy level was 51.7 percent of the population 
aged 15 years and older. The male-to-female literacy ratio is 64.1 percent to 
39.4 percent. Although some families are strongly committed to the educa-
tion of their female members, generally girls spend less time in school because 
their families often need them to assist the older women in their domestic 
tasks. Schools teach in Arabic until the third grade, after which bilingual 
education starts in both Arabic and French. After secondary school, the ratio 
of female-to-male enrollment drops sharply, often standing at 3 percent to 
5 percent. University education is highly valued because it holds the promise 
of raising individual social status and standard of living, but the wealthy have 
a privileged access to higher education. The percentage of school enrollment 
for Moroccans has been on the increase since the 1980s. Among the most 
popular universities in Morocco are the University of Rabat and the Islamic 
Karouine University. Invariably, improvement in education has resulted 
in creating more economic opportunities, especially for the young people 
flocking to the cities. 
CITIES 
Cities have become more powerful in size and influence as increasing 
population and economic development tend to complement each other. With 
an annual influx of people estimated at 7 percent, Casablanca is the nation's 
most populous city and is the chief port city. With its high-rise buildings and 
beautiful historical Arabic architecture, the city combines the glamour of a 
modern city with the curious charm of an ancient Arab world. The harbor of 
Casablanca is one of the most modern in Africa. Rabat, the capital of Morocco, 
is the second largest city. The northern city of Tangier, one of Morocco's 

INTRODUCTION 
9 
popular travel destinations, presents a picturesque and peaceful community 
near the Strait of Gibraltar. It is a huge tourist attraction and is considered 
high profile in some places because many artists and authors reside there. The 
former colonial coastal cities of Casablanca, Rabat, Tangier, Kenitra, and Safi 
are centers of industry and commerce. They have large foreign populations 
and are also the favorite destinations of rural migrants. The modern sections 
of these cities are carefully laid out with broad avenues, parks, and tall build-
ings. The neighboring ancient Muslim and Jewish quarters (called medina 
and mellah, respectively) are usually crowded, with low mud-brick houses 
along narrow, twisting alleys. Close to the modern cities, including Casa-
blanca and Rabat, are shantytowns (bidonvilles), agglomerations of makeshift 
shacks, frequently built of flattened oil drums, bits of lumber, and corrugated 
iron, in which the poorest and most recent rural migrants take shelter. 
RESOURCES, OCCUPATIONS, AND ECONOMY 
Morocco is blessed with arable land, abundant water with fish and salt 
deposits, and generous quantities of phosphates and other minerals such as 
iron ore, manganese, lead, and zinc. Its scenic beauty has also made a vigorous 
and ongoing tourist trade possible. The economic potential of these resources 
partially explain why the control of Morocco was desired by foreign powers. 
Morocco's modern economy consists of industries such as mining, food pro-
cessing, leather goods, textiles, construction, and tourism. Grain, citrus, wine 
grapes, and olives are grown commercially. About 50 percent of the popula-
tion work in the agricultural sector, 35 percent in the service industry, and 
15 percent in industry. The per capita income of Morocco is approximately 
U.S.$4,000. 
According to a 2005 estimate, Morocco has an unemployment rate of 
23 percent.4 Most of the population can find only casual, seasonal, or itin-
erant jobs, and there is no state-sponsored employment insurance or social 
security benefits for the unemployed. Unemployment has led to the estab-
lishment of several male and female brothels in the big cities, particularly in 
Casablanca and Marrakech. Although there is a growing middle class, the gap 
between the rich and the poor has widened, thereby provoking increasing 
social unrest and food riots, which became rampant in the 1980s. 
Like most African economies, Morocco's economy is largely agricultural, 
despite the government's ambitious quest to develop industry. As the govern-
ment attempts to modernize the agricultural economy, farmers are gradually 
changing from traditional practices to more effective, mechanized methods. 
The arable lands support the production of cereal crops such as barley, wheat, 
and corn. Other significant cash crops include different types of citrus fruits, 

10 
CULTURE AND CUSTOMS OF MOROCCO 
wine, vegetables, and olives. Moroccans also raise livestock to meet their 
domestic needs. The developing industrial sector provides a large number of 
jobs. Morocco is one of the world's leading producers of phosphates. Due to 
the high number of bodies of water in the area, fishing has become a prosper-
ous industry. Meanwhile, the government is constantly encouraging small 
businesses to continue with its policy of diversification and industrialization. 
Tourism is also a huge factor in the economy, thanks to the country's great 
beaches and historical monuments. 
GOVERNMENT 
The present government in Morocco may be described as a constitutional 
monarchy. King Mohammed VI, the head of government, succeeded his 
late father, King Hassan II, on July 23, 1999. The king appoints the prime 
minister, following legislative elections, and also chooses the Council of 
Ministers. Driss Jettou, was appointed prime minister on October 9, 2002. 
In his first national address shortly after his father's death, Mohammed VI 
declared his commitment to the constitutional monarchy, political pluralism, 
and economic liberalism. He promised to tackle poverty and corruption, cre-
ate jobs, and address Morocco's poor human rights record. Early indications 
suggested that the new king was serious about his depoliticization program. 
In a move that was widely held as populist, Mohammed VI shunned the 
glamour of his father's numerous royal palaces and disposed of a number of 
the royal limousines. Although these initial steps endeared Mohammed VI to 
many of the country's reformers and young people, many Islamic conserva-
tives strongly opposed his liberal pretensions. Other critics also questioned 
his ability to uphold human rights and free speech. All these adjustments, 
turns, and twists are best understood in light of Morocco's long history of 
dynastic conquests, imperial rule, and religious conversions. 
HISTORY 
Early History 
The historical evolution and development of Morocco has been marked 
by different groups of settlers and conflicts. This region of Africa is quite 
remarkable for its distinctiveness and role as the center of several medieval 
empires that at various times controlled much of North Africa and the south-
ern parts of Spain. Unlike much of North Africa, Morocco did not fall under 
Ottoman Turkish rule in the sixteenth century. The remarkably brief period 
of the French and Spanish protectorates (1912-1956), during which tribal 

INTRODUCTION 
11 
resistance was succeeded by Moroccan nationalism that produced by such 
leaders as Allal al Fassi, may be seen simply as a hiatus in the long history of 
modern Morocco. 
Cave-dwelling people from the prehistoric Stone Age (c. 40,000—25,000 
B.C.E.) originally inhabited the area of Africa now called Morocco. The 
remains of a Neanderthal boy were discovered in a cave near Rabat during 
a 1933 excavation. It is estimated that this boy, about 16 years old, lived 
approximately 50,000 years ago. At that time, this region was a dense for-
est occupied by lions, panthers, giraffes, ostriches, elephants, and antelopes. 
Rock drawings that date from 8000-5000 B.C.E. also affirm that a Neolithic 
culture flourished here until the Sahara region began to desiccate as a result of 
climatic changes that began after 2000 B.C.E. 
The indigenous Berbers, who belong to the broad Afro-Asiatic-speaking 
peoples, entered the Maghreb around the Rif and Atlas Mountains early in 
the second millennium B.C.E. when the Neolithic invaders came in contact 
with the Bafots, a dark-skinned people, and remnants of the earlier Savannah 
people, who occupied the surrounding oasis. With no distinct name or geo-
politics, the Berbers associated themselves primarily with family villages. The 
various villages competed with each other for the available resource control, 
especially the limited grazing grounds. Collectively they called themselves 
Amaziah (or imazighan), which means "free men." 
Evidence indicates that in the twelfth century B.C.E., the Phoenician mer-
chants arrived from their chief cities of Tyre and Sidon on the western coasts 
of Mediterranean and established trading posts at such places as Tangier, 
Ceuta, Melilla, and Tetouan. Later, people from Carthage (Kart-hadsht, or 
"New Town")—a town founded by the Phoenicians in about 814 B.C.E. in 
what is now Tunisia—tried to claim the northernmost region of Morocco. 
Neither of these foreign powers moved into the hinterland, but they traded 
with the Berber herders and farmers at coastal points. 
In 146 B.C.E. after Rome plundered Carthage and laid waste to its people 
and their resources, Roman influence began to spread rapidly throughout 
northwestern Africa. For the next two centuries, the Romans administered 
the areas of present-day Rabat, Fes, and Taza, which they called the Prov-
ince of Mauretania Tingitana, with its capital at Tingis (now Tangier). The 
Latin word Mauretania meant the land of the Moors—from which the name 
Morocco is derived. The Romans, who established colonies in Morocco, 
described the indigenous Berbers as an intractable people who gave their 
legions constant trouble. 
In the third century C.E. the Romans were compelled to withdraw their polit-
ical authority over Morocco as a result of dynastic crisis at home and relentless 
Berber pressure. This left the Roman influence in Morocco limited to only 

12 
CULTURE AND CUSTOMS OF MOROCCO 
Arch in Volubilis, the ruins of an ancient Roman city. Courtesy 
of Valerie Orlando. 
Tangier, then administered by the empire's authority in Spain. One significant 
influence of Roman rule in Morocco is that many Berbers accepted Christianity, 
which they adopted in a hope to overcome the imperial authority from within. 
In the fourth century C.E., Christianity was made a state religion, and four 
bishoprics were established in Morocco. Also, Judaism won more converts as 
one of the oldest religions in Morocco. Although some Jews came to Morocco 
with the earlier Punic wars (264-241 B.C.E. and 218-201 B.C.E.), others arrived 
after the destruction of Jerusalem by the Roman army led by General Titus in 
70 C.E. The Berber versions of Christianity and Judaism incorporated some 
elements of the indigenous religion. 
In 429 C.E. the Gothic Vandals of eastern Germany overran the Roman-
Christian army commanded by Castinus and soon took control of North 
Africa, including Morocco. As a form of resistance, the Berbers became 
nomads in an attempt to escape the atrocities wrought by the Vandals. The 
camel, which was brought to northwestern Africa by the Romans in about 
200 B.C.E., helped to make Berber nomadic life a lot easier. Between 533 C.E.
and 534 C.E., the Byzantine successors to the Roman Empire defeated the 
Vandals and tried to restore the prestige of Christianity as an imperial reli-
gion. But this new order had limited success because the independent-minded 
Berbers were averse to a new imperial master whose authority was restricted 
to scattered cities and fortified outposts. By the seventh century, as European 
political hold weakened, North Africans began to turn their focus away from 

INTRODUCTION 
13 
Columns in Volubilis. Courtesy of Valerie Orlando. 
the ancient European empires. In effect, what resulted was the meeting of the 
indigenous Berber culture with the culture of Arabs under the vehicle of the 
Islamic faith. 
The Coming of Arabs and Islam 
In 681 C.E., Sidi Uqba (or Okba) ben Nafi led the first Arab raids into 
Morocco through the Taza highway and into the plains in an attempt to con-
vert the Berbers (whom they saw as infidels) to Islam by the sword (besiff). 
For years, Berber resistance delayed Arab control and total conversion. Even-
tually, in 710, Arab armies led by Musa (or Mousa) Ibn Nusayr, the governor 
of Islamized Tunisia (then known as Ifriquiya), succeeded in capturing and 
converting the Berbers of the plains and northern cities but not the Jewish 
inhabitants of Morocco. Once converted, the local Berbers formed the bulk 
of the army that invaded Spain in 710 C.E. They took control of most of the 
Iberian Peninsula under the Umayyad dynasty in Damascus. 
Around 785, a recurring doctrinal rift between the Shia and Sunni sects 
of Islam led to the establishment of the first dynasty, the Idrissi (788-987), 
in Morocco. Idris Ibn Abdullah (died 791), a great-great-grandson of Ali 
(son-in-law of the Prophet Muhammad and the fourth succeeding caliph to 
Muhammad), fled to Morocco after a defeat by the Sunni supporters of Ali's 
rival, Muawiya, a leader of a powerful branch of Muhammad's kinsmen, the 

14 
CULTURE AND CUSTOMS OF MOROCCO 
Quarish (or Quraysh) family of Mecca. The founder of the Idrissi dynasty, 
known as Idrissi I, was known for his piety and charisma and enthusiasti-
cally welcomed by the Berbers. Some of the major landmarks of the dynasty 
included the establishment of the city of Fes between 807 and 808 C.E. and 
the founding of the popular Kairouyine University of Fes, one of the lead-
ing centers of learning in the world. The Idrissi dynasty began to wind down 
shortly after it was divided between the various sons of Idriss II in 987 C.E. 
While some of the new rulers maintained control of their respective princi-
palities, others devoted their time to the enthronement of a more orthodox 
Islam within their spheres of influence. As a result, the Idrissi rulers became 
politically irrelevant. The political vacuum created by this development was 
quickly filled by two rival groups—the Fatimids and the Umayyads—between 
whom political power, in most parts of Morocco, revolved until the coming 
of the Almoravids. 
The Almoravid dynasty (c. 1061-1147) ruled for about 86 years. It was 
the first of three Berber dynasties that ruled Morocco during the Islamic 
era, which began around 622 C.E. when the Prophet Muhammad fled from 
Mecca (a journey known as the Hegira). At its peak, this dynasty extended its 
power from northwestern Africa to Algiers (capital of modern Algeria). The 
Almoravids also dominated parts of southern Spain. After the Almoravids 
power faded, the Almohads displaced them. 
The Almohad dynasty (c. 1148-1269) ruled for about 121 years. At its 
peak, the Almohads turned Morocco into a Muslim empire whose frontiers 
encompassed what is today Algeria, Tunisia, Libya, and large parts of Spain 
and Portugal. By 1148, Abdel el Moumin, one of its greatest leaders, had 
secured control of all of Morocco, extending the territories of his empire far 
beyond the boundaries of his predecessors. Between 1160 and 1210, great 
architecture and industry, particularly weaving in silk, flourished in Morocco. 
Additionally, gold coins were produced as a medium of exchange. By 1230, 
this dynasty was growing weaker and its dominion shrinking in the face of 
challenges mounted by local dissidents. In desperation, the caliph accepted 
an offer of 12,000 Christian soldiers from King Ferdinand of Castile and 
Leon to help crush local dissidents and reclaim Marrakech from the rebels. 
In exchange for this favor, the ruler granted the Europeans permission to 
construct a Catholic Church in Marrakech. Eventually, the Merinid dynasty 
succeeded the Almohads in 1248. 
Although the Merinid ruler had been jostling for power since 1146, they 
effectively took control of Morocco around 1248 when Abou Yahya moved 
his capital from Rabat to Fes. One of its notable leaders, Abou el Hassan, 
popularly known as the Black Sultan (reigned 1331-1351), ruled with an iron 
hand. After his death, his son ruled until 1358, when his opponents strangled 

INTRODUCTION 
15 
him. From this point, the reigns of succeeding young sultans were marked by 
anarchy, coinciding with the Spanish and Portuguese expulsion of the Mus-
lims from Spain. Many of the Moors who fled Spain established enclaves 
along Morocco's Mediterranean coast. The Merinid rulers were compelled 
by the victorious Spanish and Portuguese forces to compromise. Expectedly, 
the Merinid dynasty drifted into a state of prolonged decline, and its subjects 
were upset about the way their rulers yielded to Christian demands, including 
loss of control over the lucrative trans-Saharan gold trade with the emergence 
of the Atlantic trade as an alternative route to western Sudan. Moroccans 
generally view this era as a time of tyranny and oppression at the hands of 
foreign invaders. As is often the case with colonial domination, the presence 
of the Europeans revived Berber resistance against the pervading Arab pres-
ence in the Maghreb. 
The Wattasid (or Ouatassids) dynasty (c. 1465-1550) came to power 
shortly before the beginning of the Spanish Inquisition in 1478. Mohammed 
Al-Burtughali, the sultan of the Wattas (Wattasids) reigned at Fes, whereas 
local tribal authorities and Sufi orders held authority over the rest of the coun-
try. The Wattasids established a chain of Islamic colleges to promote teaching 
and learning in the empire. In 1492 an influx of both Jews and Moors fled the 
Inquisition in Spain. The influx of the refugees increased the local population 
and benefited both the economy and the culture of Morocco. In this period, 
artistic and architectural traditions flourished in Morocco as the Moors intro-
duced the kingdom to new intellectual and creative ideas. Some of the great-
est architecture, fountains, mosques, courts, and buildings—both public and 
residential—were constructed during this period. By the mid-sixteenth century, 
the Wattasid dynasty was clearly under a threat of disintegration. Its greatest 
enemies were the Sa'adians, who seized control of Marrakech. 
The Sa'adi dynasty (c. 1555—1668) more or less became a force to reckon 
with in 1525 when they seized control of Marrakech as a dissident faction. 
The Sa'adians eventually overthrew the Wattasids in 1557 and successfully 
took total control of Morocco. It was the first Arab dynasty since the fall of 
the Idrissids in 987 C.E. The Sa'adians are mostly remembered for driving 
out the Christians and organizing the Central Government (Makhzen). The 
Makhzen has survived as a sociopolitical legacy with little changes today. 
The Alawi (or Alaouites) dynasty (1666-present), the current rulers 
of Morocco, ascended the throne in 1666. Sultan Moulay Ismail (ruled 
1672-1727), one of the most popular rulers of the dynasty, was in power 
for 55 years. As soon as he ascended the throne, Ismail chose Meknes as his 
capital, and under him, Morocco experienced a period of prosperity. The 
sultan, who is primarily remembered for his flamboyant lifestyle, built pal-
aces, mosques, terraces, gardens, shops, and fountains. Some of his legacies 

16 
CULTURE AND CUSTOMS OF MOROCCO 
also included acquisition of hundreds of concubines and nearly 1,000 
children, including 700 sons. Ismail was also known for his brutal reputa-
tion and bad temper. He was known to kill slaves on the spot if he thought 
their performance was substandard. 
European Colonialism and Independence 
European territorial incursion into North Africa gained momentum as 
Muslim power began to wane in the late fourteenth century. In 1399, the 
Castilians (of Spain) occupied Tetouan, and in 1415 the Portuguese wres-
tled Ceuta from Ottoman control and introduced Portuguese and Spanish 
influence over the coastal regions of Morocco. Gradually, the Portuguese 
gained control of most of Morocco's Atlantic coast and left Spain with a 
number of enclaves on the Mediterranean coast. In 1492, Spain, under 
rulers Ferdinand V and Isabella I, reclaimed Granada, a former Muslim 
stronghold. Thousands of Spanish Muslims and Jews either fled or were 
deported to Morocco, where many of them later gained influence in gov-
ernment and commerce. In 1578, the Moroccans defeated the invaders, 
and in the seventeenth century they successfully recovered control of most 
of the coastal cities. 
By the beginning of second half of the nineteenth century, however, 
Morocco was becoming increasingly weak and isolated and was unable to 
withstand the challenges of European colonial overtures and successfully 
defend its long-standing history of organized society. Trouble began in 1894 
when Abd el Aziz (ruled 1894-1908) ascended to the throne and began 
squandering of the country's treasury on luxuries. This reckless style of lead-
ership made Morocco vulnerable to foreign control when Aziz accepted a 
loan from France to solve his country's financial problems. His brother and 
successor, Moulay Hafid (ruled 1908-1912), who overthrew Aziz in 1908, 
was forced to sign the Protectorate Treaty with France in 1912. The treaty 
granted France power over Morocco's foreign affairs and defense, and the 
southern part of Morocco (known today as Western Sahara) was placed under 
Spanish control. 
The Moroccan people were upset with foreign domination of their affairs. 
Consequently, the Berber warrior groups launched a war of resistance against 
the European colonial presence, and France could not restore order until 
1934. The first French resident general, Marshal Lyautey (1854-1934), rec-
ognized that the Moroccan government and culture should be respected. He 
also acknowledged that it was crucial to incorporate the younger generation 
in the modernization of Morocco, or disaster could result as they became 
frustrated and rebellious. 

INTRODUCTION 
17 
The resident generals who came after Lyautey did not share the same vision 
of respect for the indigenous culture. They soon turned Morocco into a vir-
tual colony, controlling all aspects of the country's affairs and sidelining the 
traditional ruling class. At one point, the sultan was so alienated from power 
that he had to read the French newspapers to find out what was going on in 
his own land. Expectedly, an independence movement against French colo-
nialism emerged in Fes in the 1930s and blossomed through the 1940s. It was 
met with violence and repression, but ultimately Morocco won its indepen-
dence on March 2, 1956. In 1963, Morocco's first constitution was written. It 
guaranteed basic democratic freedoms and provided for an elected parliament 
but still granted the king substantial power. 
Postcolonial Morocco experienced many challenges as it underwent many 
changes. For instance, the sultan changed his title to king. On the inter-
national scene, Morocco joined the Arab League and helped found the 
Organization of African Unity (now known as the African Union) in 1963. 
Additionally, the relationships between Morocco and France and Spain—its 
former colonial masters—have held, despite periodic diplomatic conflicts. 
Although positive changes took place, much political unrest occurred 
throughout the 1960s and 1970s, including a number of attempted coups 
d'etat. A stiff rejection of the 1963 constitution, despite a second draft by 
the opposition, forced King Hassan II to declare a state of emergency in 
1965 and further entrench his autocratic rule. Also in the 1960s and 1970s, 
Moroccans and Algerians fought over border issues. In 1975, the lingering 
question over the sovereignty of Western Sahara, which Morocco claimed in 
the historic Green March in November, sparked conflict between Morocco 
and Algeria. Spain had hurriedly transferred its control over Western Sahara 
to Morocco and Mauritania to avoid a costly anticolonial war as the Polisario 
nationalist group prepared for an armed confrontation. The manner in which 
Spain arbitrarily transferred the sovereignty of its former colony to Morocco 
upset Algeria, and a war broke out between Morocco and its close neighbor. 
The war ended in a cease-fire with a proposal for a self-determination ref-
erendum in which the people of Western Sahara would choose to become 
independent or remain a part of Morocco. Relations between Morocco and 
Algeria were restored in 1988. 
The war with Algeria forged unity among Moroccans. In 1984, parliamentary 
elections, held to further the democratization process in Morocco, established 
a constitutional monarchy. In 1998, a narrow majority elected Abderrahmane 
Youssoufi, a socialist leader and former dissident exiled to France, as prime 
minister. This election demonstrated accommodative spirit by King Hassan II 
and was widely welcomed as an example of democracy in action in Morocco, 
with expectations for further democratic openings.5 

18 
CULTURE AND CUSTOMS OF MOROCCO 
In 1999 Mohammed ben Al Hassan succeeded his father to the throne as 
King Mohammed VI. The new king, who is still in power, increased the pace 
of democratization and liberalization. Many exiled dissidents were allowed to 
return to Morocco. More evidence of his open policies was the 2000 march 
of 40,000 women in support of increased rights for women. More than just 
political changes are taking place, however. Presently, Morocco is seeking 
foreign investment and economic development. They have more than 100 
enterprises, including two breweries, a winemaking company, and 11 luxury 
hotels. Outside of Islam, the main influence active in Morocco is Western 
cultural and economic styles, particularly in the urban areas where the mod-
ern world has made inroads into the indigenous culture. The government 
has initiated many policies geared toward claiming Morocco's place in the 
global community. There are trade deals to manage and arguments with other 
nations about access to the resources of the sea. There are also policies dealing 
with typical modern world issues such as population growth, equal rights, 
literacy, access to health care, and so on. 
CULTURAL ISSUES 
King Hassan II metaphorically described the mixed cultural heritage of 
Morocco as a tree whose roots lay in Africa but whose leaves breathe in Euro-
pean air. This may be an ideal depiction of the society if the "tree" approxi-
mates the most influential and long-lasting force in modern Moroccan 
society. Indeed, although the European cultural influences have remained 
remarkable, Muslim ideology and customs permeate Moroccan life. Islamic 
ideas and worldview dominate the ways millions of Moroccans explain real-
ity, understand how the country works, relate to other members of the soci-
ety, react to events and changes, and reflect on and even predict their future 
and that of their country. 
The European cultural influences introduced by the Spanish to the north-
ern and southern extremities of the country remain considerably important. 
The impact of French colonialism is more visible in the military, civil service, 
and modern sectors of the economy, political parties, and the general govern-
mental structures. The French language continues to be widely used by the 
governing elite and the commercial interests, even though Arabic has been 
constitutionally designated as the official language since 1962. 
NOTES 
1. See Dale F. Eickelman, Moroccan Islam: Tradition and Society in a Pilgrimage
Center (Austin: University of Texas Press, 1942), 16; American University Foreign 

INTRODUCTION 
19 
Area Studies Division (FASD), Area Handbook for Morocco (Washington, D.C.: U.S. 
Government Printing Office, 1966), 51. 
2. The Moors of Morocco mostly descended from the Spanish Moors. They live 
mostly in the towns and big cities and have acquired wealth through commerce. 
3. See, for instance, Harold D. Nelson (ed.), Morocco: A Country Study 
(Washington, D.C.: American University Press, 1985), 101. 
4. Wayne Edge, Global Studies: Africa, 11th ed. (Dubuque, IA: McGraw-Hill, 
2006), 135. 
5. Abdeslam M. Maghraoui, "Depolitization in the Arab World? Depolitization 
in Morocco," Journal of Democracy 13, no. 4 (October 2002): 25-32. 

This page intentionally left blank 

2 
Religion and Worldview 
ISLAMIC RELIGIOUS IDEALS AND worldview permeate all aspects of social order 
in Morocco. Islam, which means "submission," effects the attitude of the great 
majority of Moroccans toward social action, their comprehension of reality, 
governmental power and authority, interpersonal and group relationships, 
reaction to events and changes, and how they reflect on and even foresee 
their future and that of their country. Article 6 of the Moroccan constitu-
tion identifies Islam as the state religion (al-Islam din ad-dawla), and nearly 
98.7 percent of Moroccans are Muslims. Other small minority religions, 
such as Christianity (1.1 percent) and Judaism (0.2 percent), are tolerated 
to a certain degree. 
Given its predominance in Morocco, the Islamic ideologies structure 
frames of reference against which "natural attitudes and behaviors" toward 
the world (worldview) are constructed. Religion, as identified by the famous 
philosopher Karl Marx (1818-1883), is the "opium of the masses." It often 
fulfills emotional, psychological, and even material wants. It can be used 
to explain human existence and help understand the complexities of life. 
Moroccans also turn to religion to deal with problems of insecurity, troubled 
relationships, witchcraft, and other sufferings of life, such as unemploy-
ment, poverty, sickness, and death. Human trials move people to seek solu-
tions and remedies through prescribed rituals and adherence to the existing 
taboos, norms, and values that define their cosmology. A people's world-
view or cosmology determines key concepts in which social actions and 
behaviors coalesce. In Morocco, as in every society, these natural impulses 
are transmitted to the young members of the society through a process of 

22 
CULTURE AND CUSTOMS OF MOROCCO 
socialization. As individuals relate to society and tackle the realities of their 
life challenges, they tend to adopt new ideas and introduce fresh mean-
ings on inherited values. This may result in conversions to new doctrinal 
orientations, as in the case of the Arab-Berbers who have been compelled 
by their historical experience to reshape their belief systems and ritual prac-
tices since the seventh century. To make religious ideas and worldview in 
Morocco more intelligible, the basic tenets of the Islamic religion will be 
highlighted first here because they offer the believer a comprehensive mean-
ing to life. In some places, these overlap with the indigenous Berber belief 
system and practices. Thus, understanding this complexity gives a complete 
worldview of Moroccans. 
WORLDVIEW 
In Islam there is no separation of the sacred from the profane. The ulti-
mate essence of life is to please God (Allah) through obedience to his will 
to attain the reward of paradise after death. Because the spiritual in Islam 
both detects and renews the temporal, creed and deed are like two sides of 
the same coin; hence, Islam is appropriately acknowledged as a total religion. 
Muslims are expected to be community oriented—that is, to be their brothers' 
keeper. Although not written in the Quran (the holy book of Islam), as are 
the Ten Commandments in the Bible, the five pillars in Islam (i.e., the car-
dinal articles of the faith) exert enormous influence on all aspects of society. 
These fundamental beliefs and practices, which must be honored for believ-
ers to attain the reward of paradise, are derived from both the Quran and the 
recorded lifetime practices (known as Sunna) of the Prophet Muhammad as 
observed by his close relations and acquaintances. The Quran is compiled 
from the recorded sayings and activities of the Prophet. These recorded say-
ings and activities are also called the Hadith. The Sunna constitutes the 
basic ideal in Muslim behavior. Muslims, including Moroccans, who strictly 
adhere to the traditions of the Prophet, are known are Sunnis. The other 
major sect in Islam, known as the Shiites (shiat All, or the party of Ali), cur-
rently accounts for about 15 percent of all Muslims in the world.1 The Shi-
ites also adhere to the traditions of the Prophet but fundamentally disagree 
with the Sunnis on succession. The five pillars in Islam include the Islamic 
testimony (shahada), daily prayer (salat), almsgiving (zakat), fasting (saivm), 
and pilgrimage (hajj). 
Islamic testimony (shahada) is similar in importance to the Apostles 
Creed in Christianity. Shahada reaffirms the basic belief in the unity and 
oneness of God. This verbal profession is also known as tawhid. As an 
Islamist emphasizes, for Muslims, God is "beyond distinction and division 

RELIGION AND WORLDVIEW 
23 
and has no equal or associate."2 Therefore, the Quran enjoins Muslims to 
serve no other gods but Allah to avoid the shame resulting from corruption 
of spiritual morals and destruction. Believers hold the Prophet Muhammad 
as the last and most outstanding messenger of Allah to whom the Holy 
Scriptures (Quran) were revealed. In strict Muslim practice, the Islamic 
testimony is supposed to be 
the first thing that a child should have uttered in its ear and the last thing that a 
dying person should hear. Parents may begin to teach their children how to speak 
by repeating the shahada as a father utters (Allahu Akbar" (God is all Great) and
Ashadu anu la Allah ila Allah" (I bear witness that there is no deity but Allah).3 
The testimony of belief in the divine unity and oneness of God serves as the 
introductory message for each of the five daily prayer calls in Islam. 
Prayer (salat) in Islam commences with a recitation of "the testimony of 
belief," or tawhid. Muslims are obligated to recite their prayers five times daily, 
at dawn, midday, midafternoon, sunset, and nightfall. In typical Islamic soci-
eties, mosques (masjid), the Muslim place of worship, are strategically located 
in all neighborhoods. Like Sunday Christian worships, Muslims' Friday con-
gregational prayers are considered a good form of adoration, although it is 
not compulsory that everyone regularly participate. Believers are encouraged 
to recite their prayers wherever they are during each of the five daily calls 
to prayers. Women are not expected to regularly participate in prayers inside 
mosques. This is because a congregation of both sexes is commonly perceived as 
a source of distraction from the intended center of attention on God. A leader 
of prayer (Imam), who faces the direction of Mecca (the mihrab), leads Friday 
communal worships. 
Fasting (sawn), usually observed in the month of Ramadan lasts for an 
entire lunar month of 29 days. The specific days of Ramadan are unfixed 
because of the lunar calendar and occurs at different seasons in different years. 
This period is generally perceived as a time for believers to resist worldly 
attractions. It reminds Muslims of God's revelation of the Quran to the 
Prophet Muhammad. All Muslims, with the exception of the ill, the young, 
travelers, and pregnant women, are expected to participate in Ramadan by 
abstaining from food, drink, tobacco, and sex during daytime hours as a way 
of promoting personal spiritual discipline. The Ramadan fasting commences 
each day with a prayer and a light meal usually prepared before sunrise. 
At sunset, family members gather to break the day's fast over dinner. In this 
way, Ramadan also serves as a time of family reunion and sacrifice. It chal-
lenges Muslims to share in the burden of the less privileged and to demon-
strate unity through acts of piety. 

24 
CULTURE AND CUSTOMS OF MOROCCO 
Almsgiving (zakat ov sadaqa) is reverence of God as well as an act of service 
to the Islamic community (umma). Predicated on the existence of economic 
inequality, Islam demands that every Muslim help the needy and strengthen 
faith through generous material gifts. This religious tax of about 2 to 3 percent 
on one's accrued assets is similar to the Christian tithe. One of the noblest 
forms of zakat is that given secretly to the needy. Certain charitable gifts 
(waqf) can be in the form of endowments dedicated to the honor of God. In
some Muslim countries, zakat has become a state-imposed compulsory alms 
tax or "pious endowments" and have become a popular indicator of a suc-
cessful Islamic government, including Saudi Arabia, Libya, Kuwait, Bahrain, 
Pakistan, Sudan, and Iran. In the past, pious endowments in Morocco have 
provided funds for the ritual circumcision of orphaned boys, provided cloth-
ing and food to the needy, paid for the burial of the poor and strangers, and 
financed the marriages of destitute subjects. Today, the system focuses mostly 
on provision and maintenance of the religious infrastructures in the country. 
The annual pilgrimage (hajj) to the holy places of Mecca and Medina, in 
Saudi Arabia, comes after the festivities of Ramadan, between the 8th and 
13th of the 12th month of the Muslim lunar calendar, Dhu al-Hijja. At least 
once in their lifetime, believers who can afford the costs are obligated to 
perform a pilgrimage to Mecca. The Ka'aba, a small stone building holding 
the black stone given to Abraham by the Angel Gabriel, is at the heart of the 
hajj. The Ka'aba symbolizes God's covenant with Abraham's son Ismail, who 
is believed to be the ancestor of all peoples of Arab descent and, by extension, 
the Muslims. Male pilgrims at the holy sites must cover their heads and dress 
in a seamless white garment (ihram). Like everyday prayer, the pilgrimage 
commences with the Islamic testimony and continues with a recital saying, 
"Here I am O God at thy Command! Thou art without associate." Pilgrims 
then proceed to the Ka'aba—Hebrew equivalent of the Holy of Holies or 
Christian tabernacle of the Eucharist. Although not an object of worship, 
at the Ka'aba, pilgrims may touch or kiss the black stone, as did the Prophet 
Muhammad, while they circle the stone seven times. Pilgrims must also resist 
engaging in sexual relations throughout the period. Among other activities, 
they stone three pillars that symbolize evil and Satan, and they visit the plain 
of Arafat, where they stand for hours before God and ask for divine mercy 
for all Muslims. On the third day, all pilgrims give ram, sheep, or goat sac-
rifices in commemoration of Abraham's unflinching willingness to sacrifice 
his only son, Isaac, to God. Muslims all over the world join in this festival 
called the Great Feast, or Eid al-Kabir or Eid al Adha (Festival of Sacrifice), 
by offering their own animal sacrifices. On the return from the pilgrimage, 
the men will earn the title al hajj and the women al haja. These titles come 
with expectations of a higher moral behavior. It requires the holder to practice 

RELIGION AND WORLDVIEW 
25 
fairness, respect, and honesty. It also forbids adultery, gambling, usury, drinking 
of blood, drinking of alcohol, and eating of pork. Muslims believe that the 
performance of the pilgrimage rituals has the benefit of spiritual healing and 
renewal. 
Although not part of the five pillars, some Muslims now consider jihad, 
Arabic for "striving" or "struggle," as the "sixth pillar" of Islam. The essence 
of jihad is that Muslims must vigorously promote the cause of their religion. 
This should be done by acts of verbal persuasion, exemplary work, personal 
demonstration of spiritual force, and by war when the occasion demands. In 
this context, warfare becomes a sacred duty, and those who die in the cause of 
a jihad are promised the reward of paradise as martyrs (shahid) to their faith. 
In reality, a true jihad is rarely justified because Muslim factions often engage 
in wars to achieve vested interests. 
Generally, the Quran, like the Bible, teaches the existence of guardian 
angels, resurrection and life after death, and heaven and hell. Islamic doc-
trine teaches believers to respect and show kindness to their parents and to 
eschew adultery. Muslims are also cautioned against covetousness and mur-
der, although the latter is permitted with a just cause. In commerce, Muslims 
must give full measure and weigh with even scales. According to the teachings 
of the Prophet, which parallels the Golden Rule, a true believer must do unto 
others that which he desires for himself. In Islam, wealth not accumulated 
through usury, gambling, prostitution, and other such vices is considered 
divine. Poverty is seen as the work of the devil. Additionally, the enslave-
ment of fellow Muslims is forbidden, as are lust, homosexuality, idolatry, and 
immodest attire for women. Also prohibited are the use of alcohol, gambling, 
suicide, and eating of pork or other animals that are not killed in accordance 
with Muslim rites. 
The foregoing is an overview of the essence of religion and worldview in 
Islam. Although Muslims everywhere generally hold the teachings of the 
Prophet Muhammad as divine, there are differences in the practical obser-
vances of these doctrines between individuals, sects, and countries. These 
divergences simply mirror the influence of local culture and historical fac-
tors within the different Muslim communities across the world. In Morocco, 
the pre-Islamic indigenous Berber belief systems and practices have blended 
with the tenets of the Islamic religion to produce a unique brand of Islam in 
practice today. 
INDIGENOUS RELIGIONS AND CHANGE 
Although much of the indigenous Berber culture and belief systems have 
been interwoven with Arab Islamic culture and history, some surviving 

26 
CULTURE AND CUSTOMS OF MOROCCO 
remnants of the local practices are still visible. Arab conquest of Morocco in 
the seventh century and the subsequent conversion of the local Berbers to 
Islam did not automatically result in a total destruction of the local culture. 
This is more the case when the majority of the intruding Arabs stayed in the 
more fertile coastal cities, whereas the local Berbers continued with their 
usual ways of life on the steppe, mountainous Rif, western and middle Atlas 
mountains, the oases of the Sahara, and other difficult-to-access locations. 
Even after centuries of assimilation through intermarriage, systemic Ara-
bization, and exercise of central authority, elements of difference between 
the local and the imperial religion have proved resilient. This difference is 
evident in the brands of Islam practiced by the predominantly Arab urban-
ites and the largely Berber rural inhabitants. Scholars, however, have shown 
little interest in understanding the pre-Islamic indigenous religions of the 
Berbers. Among other problems of study is the lack of a pre-Islamic indig-
enous writing culture in which Berber culture would have been preserved. 
Even with the introduction of Arabic and Western forms of writing, early 
foreign scholars—and often exponents of the now discredited "hametic 
hypothesis"—systematically downplayed African history and cultural 
achievements by assigning every significant element of culture found on 
the continent to foreign influence.4 The dramatic and overzealous Berber
acceptance of Islam after initial resistance also did not help in preserving 
an unadulterated account of their religious traditions. The Berber response 
to Islam may have sprung from the crisis that followed the defeat of their 
ancient ancestral gods by Islam. The Berber apparently saw the discernibly 
successful alien religion as a ready weapon that could be adopted to redress 
the sociopolitical order in their favor.5 Contrasts between the urban and
rural forms of Islamic practices in Morocco can be drawn. 
In the cities, the religious observances follow the stricter orthodox form 
of Islam commonly associated with many Arab states. For instance, restric-
tions exist on female movement and dress, although these restrictions seem to 
be decreasing with time. As the educated urban elite gained employment in 
modern industries and other Western-style institutions, increasing secularity 
became the trend. Although many devout Muslims still live in the cities, the 
emergent Westernized class of professionals is gradually dropping its strict 
observance of religious duties. 
In the countryside, where Berber culture is predominant, Islam has mixed 
with local customs to form a unique amalgam of Quranic practices, with pre-
Islamic belief in brotherhoods (agurram; plural, agurramen), the veneration of 
local saints, belief in the existence of spirits (djinns) and the evil eye (dhittawin 
taajfanain), and other unorthodox ritual practices. Women, alienated from 
public practices of mainstream Islam and political power, particularly have 

RELIGION AND WORLDVIEW 
27 
• • 
Berber woman of Errachidea. Courtesy of Valerie Orlando. 
clung to these hybrid cultural traditions and, as such, continue to pass them 
to the younger members of their families. 
Religion in pre-Islamic Berber society followed a common pattern found 
in most African societies. The traditional African religious practices are gen-
erally characterized by beliefs in spirits, deities, and gods that demand ritu-
als, sacrifices, annual ceremonies, and other activities. Similarly, the Berbers 
believed in the existence of a special group of spiritual beings called djinns, 
whose supernatural powers can be used for either benevolent or malevolent 
purposes. In this light, the people sought protection from the evil djinns with 
magical incantations, petitions, offerings, animal sacrifices, and the use of 
objects believed to be fortified with special holiness (baraka), such as gun-
powder, iron, and salt. 
The origin of the belief in the djinns among the Berbers of North Africa 
cannot be exactly pinpointed. What is clear, however, is that this tradition 
developed outside the influence of a similar pre-Islamic Arab belief in the 
existence of spirits that infiltrated Islam from 632 C.E. The similarity in 
name found in the Berber and Arab spirits may be attributed to centuries of 
cross-cultural exchanges between the people of North Africa and their Mid-
dle Eastern neighbors. As well, the Berber practices were largely similar to 
those found in precolonial Guinea, Mali, Sudan, and Hausaland in Nigeria. 
The West Africans, often commonly referred to by the ancient Berbers as 
Guineans, were particularly known in North Africa for their expertise in 
exorcizing demons. 

28 
CULTURE AND CUSTOMS OF MOROCCO 
In Morocco, the belief in spirits pervaded every aspect of life. The abodes 
of the djinns included any conceived space, such as underground caves, 
mountains, valleys, hills, the air, rivers, seas, trees, and so on. The most com-
mon belief is that Satan (iblis) is the chief of the evil spirits. The belief in the 
existence of Satan, however, conjures less fear in the minds of people than do 
the lesser but more mischievous demons. 
Much of what historians know today about the indigenous Berber religious 
tradition is because of the Swedish scholar Edward Westermarck, whose pio-
neering anthropological studies of the early 1900s remain a guiding light.6 
According to his work, among the djinns of Morocco, the most prominent is 
named Aisa Qandaisa. This spirit is distinctly from others of Oriental deriva-
tion. A prominent characteristic of Qandaisa is her libidinousness. She lives 
in rivers, springs, or the sea and is believed to be the old goddess of love, simi-
lar to the Moorish jenniya, which has a most disreputable character. In the 
Rif region and Dukkala (or Doukkala), situated on the banks of the Omm-
Erbegh River, the folklore contains stories of marriage and sexual intercourse 
between men and the female spirits djinniyas. 
In Berber folklore, the djinns are said to act like human beings in various 
respects, even when they have no bodies. They can enter anywhere anytime, 
and they speak with a thin voice. These spirits may assume different forms, 
including monsters, black men, stones, and animal shapes such as goat, sheep, 
frog, tortoise, and dog. The columns of sand and dust, which often pass 
through the plains of southern Morocco, were perceived as the handiwork of 
malevolent djinns. If a person stumbled in the dark, it was believed that he or 
she had trampled on a djinn. In recent times, the familiar phrase "In the name 
of God, the merciful and compassionate" (Bismillah r-rahim) is recited to keep 
the dangerous evil beings at bay. In the Andjra area of the Rif Mountains, 
the belief was held that the evil spirits pushed murderers to take lives. Even 
today, some people still believe that violent manifestation of disorders such as 
convulsion, epileptic and paralytic fits, and mental illness or epidemics such as 
cholera and measles (buhamrum) are the handiwork of diabolical spirits.
Westermarck's anthropological study has further revealed that evil djinns 
are believed to promote the practice of witchcraft (shor), a belief commonly 
shared in most parts of sub-Saharan Africa. One example of this belief is that 
the power of the djinns could be used by an enemy to set others in discord 
with their families, friends, or fellow workers. The ritual involves killing a 
black hen and shaving its head with a razor. A charm containing names of 
djinns is written on the head of the hen with its own blood. The head is then 
thrown into the adversary's house or workplace, and it is believed that within 
three days the malevolent spirits invoked in the ritual will set the targeted 
individuals or group against one another.7 

RELIGION AND WORLDVIEW 
29 
In a traditional African universe where humans and spirits shared a 
common space, it was natural that men and women found ways to guard 
themselves and their belongings against fiendish attacks. Some of the ways 
designed to guard against attacks from such wicked spirits included the 
burning of candles, putting salt in or underneath pillows, and wearing amu-
lets made of pieces of iron, steel, silver, and brass. Today in Morocco, reciting 
passages from the Quran has become one of the most efficacious weapons 
against demonic attacks. This practice highlights an aspect of the adapta-
tions between the Islamic religion and the indigenous culture. 
The belief in djinns is also closely connected with the dread of the "evil 
eye." The evils caused by them are largely the same as those mentioned pre-
viously, as are the classes of persons particularly exposed to them and the 
charms used against them. As another anthropological study illustrates, the 
evil eyes emanates from the belief that people can cause others harm by con-
ceiving evil in their minds, which brings on the malevolent spirits against 
the object and causes the harm that is intended to befall the person or thing 
upon whom the evil eye has been cast.8 In Fes, certain passages of the Quran 
have been found helpful as a protection against the evil eye. This again shows 
the overlay of Islamic rituals on indigenous practices and how this blend has 
produced a unique form of Islam found in Morocco. 
The relations between men and spirits, however, are sometimes pleasant. It 
is believed that those who possess the power can use the services of the spirits 
for their own purposes. In the Souss (or Sus) region, including the capital 
Agadir, for instance, some holy men are believed to use the power of words 
in the Quran to manipulate the strength of the djinns. Other holy men are 
believed to possess the power to open a closed door without a key. Similar 
to divination in African traditional religion, some magicians (hokama) from 
Souss are believed to find buried treasures with the help of the djinns. Such 
acts of divination also may be deployed to apprehend criminals, to get news 
about an absent member of the family, or to inquire about the fate of a sick 
person at home. According to a detailed study, there are occasions during 
harvest seasons when farmers induce the djinns with sacrifices to give special 
holiness (baraka) to the grains. In Aglu, for example, part of harvest may 
involve the farmer slaughtering a sheep to increase the baraka contained in 
his grain. The animal sacrifice is made in honor of the master of the thresh-
ing floor (Imluk unrar), who is addressed as follows: "Master of the threshing 
floor, look here, we killed for you" (Lmlik unrar, hayyagg ngrarsfillaun).9 
The foregoing elucidates a striking religiosity common in most African 
indigenous societies. The Berbers, like other African peoples, are gregari-
ous; the family often holds property in common, and a man can call upon 
the services of his fellow villagers for certain purposes, such as the building 

30 
CULTURE AND CUSTOMS OF MOROCCO 
of a house, clearing of farmland, and so on. The community often makes 
provision for the poor. An insightful study of the Aith Waryaghar and the 
Ibuqquyen, two local Berber communities of the Rif region, notes that every 
individual belongs to an aggregate, which shapes his or her allegiances; at the 
same time, each person is autonomous and seeks to maximize options. Every 
life event is subject to the condition that "if God so wills" (insha-allah). As 
this study further explains, underlying contracts is the premise that certainty 
is controlled by God and not by humans.10 
Islam and Social Change 
In general, Islam retained some aspects of the pre-Islamic Arabic belief in 
small gods and spirits. The Prophet Muhammad recognized the existence of 
these gods in ancient Meccan society but classed them among the demons. 
Apparently, the benevolent spirits were adopted into the world of Islam, 
whereas the malevolent ones were classified as opponents of Allah. Hence, 
the Quran stands as a powerful antidote to their activities. Centuries after the 
introduction of Islam, the Berbers have retained certain elements of their cul-
ture, although these customs have been reproduced and given new meaning. 
Berber culture is intricately premised on ritual ceremonies and symbolism. 
With the challenges of their harsh, semiarid, and mountainous environment, 
the Berbers rely on natural rituals to survive and give meaning to everyday life. 
As a result, the Berbers, although they identify with the Islamic religion, do 
not often adhere strictly to the set observances. It is not uncommon to find a 
Berber who could not resist the temptation of a daytime feast or indulgence in 
alcohol during the month of Ramadan fasting. Cults of saintly veneration tend 
to attract more serious devotion among the Berbers, and it is common to find 
descendants establishing communities around the tombs of departed holy men. 
Almost every village in Morocco has its saint or prophet, and arguments as to 
their relative sanctity and powers sometimes provoke intervillage conflicts. 
Holy Men and Saints 
A close connection exists between the belief in the existence of spirits and 
the notion of individuals endowed with holiness or divine blessings. In this 
cosmology, it is believed that saints have control over both the good and the 
bad spirits, and they assist saints in performing their miracles. In this context, 
the spirits act as the servants of the saints as well as of living men. As a detailed 
study on the folk religion notes, the concept of holy men in Moroccan religion 
is similar to that in European Christianity. The religious reverence of local 
holy men tends to peak after their death, and all relics associated with them, 

RELIGION AND WORLDVIEW 
31 
King Mohammed V s mausoleum in Rabat. Courtesy of Valerie 
Orlando. 
including their tombs (kubba), are elevated to the same saintly status. The 
local people conceive such holy men as their patron and protector saints. It 
is, therefore, common for individuals troubled by various forms of hardships 
and tragedies, such as sudden and frequent deaths in families, barrenness, and 
unemployment, to visit the tombs of the local saints to ask for their special 
blessings and intercessions.11 
Most neighborhoods and communities have their different patron saints. 
In Fes and Meknes for instance, Mulay Idris and Sidi Muhammad ben Isa, 
respectively, are among the most popular saints. Sometimes urban migrants 
come to their host communities along with their local saints; others simply 
adopt a new cult or resuscitate a weak one. A good example of the latter situ-
ation in encountered in Casablanca, where the growing number of shanty-
towns (bidonvilles) and suburbs have absorbed the rural communities along 
with their patron saints. 
The veneration of saints is widespread among the uneducated, particu-
larly the rural and urban poor, and among many urban middle-class women. 
Saintly veneration has witnessed a long-term decline in the cities, probably 
because of the increasing impact of Western education and influence, the 
general secularization of life, and the greater tendency toward orthodoxy 
among reform-minded city dwellers. 
Government attitude toward the cult of saints could be described as benev-
olent tolerance. For instance, in the late 1960s, King Hassan II turned the 

32 
CULTURE AND CUSTOMS OF MOROCCO 
tomb of his father, King Mohammed V, into one of the most symbolic sites of 
power and saintly veneration in Morocco. This symbolism is sustained by the 
claims of the present ruling dynasty, the Alaouites, to descent from the lineage 
of the Prophet Muhammad. 
Similarly, the descendants of other key saints (awlad siyyid) often use their 
claim to holy ancestry to corner special privileges. These lineages, as care-
takers of the tombs and shrines of Marabouts, receive contributions from 
pilgrims and devotees of these saints. Over the years, the traditional Islamic 
concept of pilgrimage to Mecca has been widely reinterpreted in the popular 
culture to include pilgrimage to shrines of the saints. Some Berber-Arabs of 
the Rif Mountains equate seven pilgrimages to the shrines of Mulay Idris at 
Fes to a pilgrimage to Mecca. 
Belief in the hagiography of saints is institutionalized in strong cults of 
brotherhoods still existing in Morocco. In the traditional Berber society, net-
works of brotherhoods serve as a symbol of identity for all those who profess 
loyalty to a particular patron saint. As an aspect of popular culture, the leaders 
of these brotherhoods enjoy enormous political and religious influence. 
Networks of Brotherhoods 
Networks of brotherhoods loyal to pious men or holy people have devel-
oped to be a prominent part of Islam in Morocco. These holy men are called 
Sufi, apparently because they often dress in woolen (suf) attire. The ninth 
and tenth centuries witnessed the rise of prominent Sufi leaders who attracted 
many followers because of their teachings, assumed the ability to cure con-
ditions such as epilepsy, exorcised those possessed by demons, and led a 
simple lifestyle, which easily identified with the poor. In Morocco, Sufism 
soon became popular because it was easily adaptable to certain aspects of 
the indigenous Berber traditions. Thus, as the leaders of the old mystical 
order championed the conversion of fellow Berbers, a corruption of the faith 
seemed inevitable. By retaining elements of their indigenous belief systems 
and practices, the form of Islam preached from the start was already tend-
ing toward Islam's mystical (tariqa) path. Across North Africa and Western 
Sudan, these brotherhoods built their cult of loyalties around local saints or 
masters who were believed to show the "way" as chosen guides. 
Islam, as preached among the brotherhoods, continued to reinforce 
the authority of the local elite as their disciples sought to win God's favor 
through their spiritual masters or guides. Similar to the kind of reverence 
for saints in the Catholic Church, Muslims in Morocco believe that some 
divine grace is granted to ordinary mortals who come in contact with indi-
viduals and objects that possess divine holiness (baraka). Although this form 

RELIGION AND WORLDVIEW 
33 
of belief is in conflict with orthodox Islam, the conformist Islamic teachers 
(ulema) have no choice but to accommodate them. Today, the old brother-
hood system continues to exist in Morocco, despite attempts to rid the faith 
of it. Their evident success and social utility rests in the fact that people 
run to them in times of crisis. Thus, the orders came to exercise significant 
political influence in Morocco. 
RELIGION AND POLITICS 
Islam disapproves of the rule of non-Muslims over the community of 
believers (umma). In Morocco, as in other Islamic states, the political leader 
must also be able to lead the faithful. The Quran prescribes the unity of the 
individual, state, and society under the all-powerful will of God. Islamic rulers 
exercise both temporal and religious authority, and the Western idea of sepa-
ration of church and state appears irrational. Islamic countries like Morocco 
are theoretically divided into three domains. All Muslims collectively form the 
abode of Islam (Dar al Islam). The People of the Scripture—the adherents of 
other revealed monotheistic religions, Judaism and Christianity—are allowed 
to practice their religion as "protected people" (dhimmis). Polytheists are con-
signed as people in darkness needing of salvation. Accordingly, the people are 
designated as either citizens, in the case of Muslims, or subjects—all others 
who do not practice the faith. These designations come with all the accoutre-
ments of power and privilege.
To obtain legitimacy, the leader of the Islamic community must demon-
strate attributes of holiness and charisma. The leader is believed to impart 
some of this blessedness to the people and to objects with which he comes 
in contact. It is commonly accepted that the predisposition to special holi-
ness or blessings runs in families, hence monarchical governments rule most 
Islamic countries. Expectedly, the Prophet Muhammad is believed to have the 
most charisma and holiness. Therefore, his descendents (the shaifa) are highly 
respected because they are believed to have inherited many divine blessings 
from the great Prophet of Islam. In the past, some Berbers who are pos-
sibly descended from the original Arabs have tried to assert their claims of 
sainthood and sharifian descent with varying degrees of success. The claim of 
the royal family of Morocco to be descendants of the Prophet Muhammad 
accords the current king, Mohammed VI, an overarching respect, authority, 
and legitimacy among his people. 
Similarly, in the various regions predominantly inhabited by Berbers, the 
notions of holiness and charisma (baraka) equally serve as crucial sources 
of leadership and legitimacy. Individuals who appear to be endowed with 
great holiness are looked up to as leaders of society. Often, the Muslim 

34 
CULTURE AND CUSTOMS OF MOROCCO 
monks or hermits or holy men (Marabouts), especially those reputed to 
have extraordinary spiritual power, are in open opposition to the authority 
of the sultanate. These local leaders still recognize the superior blessedness 
of their king and national leader. 
Although Islamic ideas dominate all aspects of life in Morocco, the teachings 
of Judaism and Christianity are acknowledged as the basis of the Muslim 
faith. Therefore, it is imperative to briefly look at the nature of power relations 
between the overwhelming Muslim majority (98.7 percent) and members of 
the minority religions, Christianity and Judaism, which together account for 
1.3 percent of the total population. 
CHRISTIANITY 
Christianity, as a monotheistic religion, figures prominently in Islamic belief 
systems and practices. Before Islam, the Romans, and later the Byzantines, 
had introduced Christianity in the area today called Morocco. The German 
Vandals, who dominated the North African region from 430 C.E., expended 
every effort to obliterate the Christian heritage in Morocco.12 Whereas the 
Vandals hounded the Catholics and destroyed their churches, they favored 
the Jews and granted them freedom of religious expression. The Byzantines 
defeated the Vandals in 553 C.E. and tried to restore the authority of the 
Catholic Church in Morocco. This effort met with Berber indifference, and 
therefore little success was made until the arrival of the Arabs in the seventh 
century. 
Today, Christianity in Morocco is chiefly the religion of French, Spanish, 
and other European settlers or recent immigrants. Approximately 350,000 
Christians, both foreigners and locals, live in Morocco. The past two decades 
have seen only a very small number of new converts through the activities 
of foreign missionaries—particularly those of the Roman Catholic Church, 
which was established in Morocco in the nineteenth century. Roman Catho-
lic archdioceses are located in Rabat, the national capital, and Tangier, the 
northernmost city, which have a long history of European contact. Casablanca 
and Fes are among the other big cities that also have congregations. The local 
authorities and media are not enthusiastic about renewing the Christian faith 
in Morocco, but they encourage the founding of Western-style schools, hos-
pitals, dispensaries, and other institutions. 
Generally, the minority Christians are regarded as second-class citizens, 
and this social classification comes with limited opportunities. For instance, 
although there is no existing law permitting employers to know employees' 
religious backgrounds as a condition for employment, some employers have 
all the same tried to discriminate against their non-Muslim employees. In terms 

RELIGION AND WORLDVIEW 
35 
of opportunities, most Christians going into private business lack access to 
much-needed capital. Some Christian neighborhoods also count among the 
most deplorable ghettos. As a result of this marginalization, young Chris-
tians are forced to migrate to the big cities or overseas in search of better 
opportunities. All these problems have combined to curb the growth of 
the local church. Thus Christianity in modern Morocco is restricted to the 
European immigrants, who, despite their strategic importance in the modern 
economy, are theoretically viewed as "the protected people." 
JUDAISM 
Judaism, Islam, and Christianity are monotheistic religions. Moroccan 
Jews form the largest Jewish community in the Arab world. The Jewish pres-
ence in Morocco has been a subject of controversy even though the earliest 
evidence of a Jewish presence in northern Morocco is found on tombstones 
dated from the second century C.E. Many of the Jews moved into Morocco 
from Carthage (Tunisia) along the Mediterranean coast. Others arrived from 
the area known today as Libya. They easily mixed with some local Berber 
groups in both Algeria and the mountains and oases of Morocco. 
During the Reconquista of the sixth and seventh centuries, the Moroccan 
Jewish community increased as a result of incursions of Spanish Jews and 
mass conversions of Berber tribes. A large Jewish community of about 70,000 
lived in Morocco until the late 1940s, when the state of Israel was created. 
This, together with the Arab-Israeli wars of the 1950s and 1960s, forced 
many Jews to leave Morocco in large numbers. 
Although always subject to the authority of the sultan or king of Morocco, 
the Jews are granted administrative autonomy over their local community 
and institutions, including the rabbinic courts. Exceptions are obtained in 
cases involving legal disputes between Jews and Muslims, in which case the 
Islamic judicial code (Sharia) takes precedence. In Morocco, the powerful 
chief rabbi and rabbi-judges, known as dayyanim, serve as both spiritual and 
judicial leaders. 
Over the centuries, the Moroccan Jews, like their Berber-Arab Muslim 
countrymen, have developed a tradition of rituals and pilgrimages to the 
tombs of holy men. Across Morocco, Muslim authorities recognize about 
13 such sites. Every year on designated dates, Jews from around the world, 
including Israel, visit these graves. The grave of a particular pious rabbi of 
Moroccan origin, named Israel Abu-Hatseira, draws the largest number of 
pilgrims. 
The Jewish community has undergone a profound change during its history, 
from relative freedom from abuses in the pre-Almohad (i.e., before 1150 C.E.) 

36 
CULTURE AND CUSTOMS OF MOROCCO 
dynasty in Morocco to intimidation and persecution after the ascendance of 
the Almohad ruler Abu Yusuf Y'aqub al Mansur (1184-1199). Nonetheless, 
the relationship between the Jews and the Muslims has remained relatively 
cordial even though it has endured occasional tensions. 
Today, the Jews living in Morocco are fairly treated, although their exact 
political status has been debated. This state of affairs denotes the underlying 
process of a radical flux that characterizes the Jewish community in modern 
Morocco. For instance, the traditional Jewish homes called mellahs have con-
spicuously disappeared. The younger generation of Jews has rarely considered 
it desirable to live in Morocco because of their lower status and limited oppor-
tunities. Casablanca, Fes, Marrakech, Rabat, and Tangier still have synagogues, 
old-age homes, and Jewish restaurants, but it appears that the future existence
of a substantial Jewish population in Morocco is unlikely. This more so, given 
the recent increase in Islamic militancy worldwide. The May 16, 2003, suicide 
attacks on four Jewish targets in Casablanca have not helped in assuring the 
Moroccan Jews that they are safe in this North African region.13 
In general, the predominance of Islamic ideas and worldview in Morocco is 
a product of history, environment, government, and society. Over the centu-
ries, Islam has interacted with both the indigenous Berber belief systems and 
elements of pre-Islamic Christianity and Judaism—all combining to produce 
the distinct form of Islam in practice today. Whereas Arabs and Berbers are 
profoundly Islamized, the prevalent social organizations of the latter do not 
reflect the unity envisioned by orthodox Islam. The religion, in a sense, is 
largely a natural and integral part of the individual rather than of the group. 
Both the Berbers and Arabs have retained and modified beliefs in holy men, 
saints, brotherhoods, spirits, and their accompanying rituals. These together 
have colored the worship of both the Muslim clerics and the Western-educated 
elite. The latter appears to be more sympathetic to the Christian and Jewish 
populations with whom they share mutual business interests. Islam in Morocco 
is indeed a superimposition of Quranic ritual and ethical principles on top of 
belief in spirits (djinns), the evil eye, rites to assure good fortune, the practice of
hagiography, and the increasing culture of globalization. 
NOTES 
1. This sect originated as a political movement supporting Ali (the cousin and 
son-in-law of the Prophet Muhammad) as the rightful leader of the Islamic world. 
2. Ira G. Zepp Jr., A Muslim Primer: Beginner s Guide to Islam, 2nd ed. (Fayetteville: 
University of Arkansas Press, 2000), 31. 
3. Carolyn Fluehr-Lobban, Islamic Societies in Practice, 2nd ed. (Gainesville: 
University Press of Florida, 2004), 35. 

RELIGION AND WORLDVIEW 
37 
4. Until recently, the exponents of the hametic hypothesis claimed that Negro 
Africans were not capable of achievements on their own. In this view, they tried to see 
any important element of cultural, technological, and scientific achievements found 
in Africa as having been brought to the continent by other peoples of non-Negro 
origin. 
5. Mervyns Hiskett, The Course of Islam in Africa (Edinburgh: Edinburgh 
University Press, 1994), 2. 
6. Edward Westermarck, The Belief in Spirits in Morocco (Abo, Finland: Abo 
Akademi Press, 1920). This source provided the substance of the foregoing illustra-
tions on local Berber religious practices. 
7. Ibid., 115-116. 
8. M. W. Hilton-Simpson, "Some Superstitions noted among the Shawia Ber-
bers of the Auries Mountains and their Nomad Neighbors," Folklore 26 (1915): 
228-234. 
9. Westermarck, Spirits in Morocco, 118. 
10. Roger Joseph and Terri Brint Joseph, The Rose and the Thorn: Semiotic Struc-
tures in Morocco (Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 1987), 13-17. See also David 
Montgomery Hart, The Aith Waryaghar of the Moroccan Rif: An Ethnography and His-
tory (Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 1978). 
11. Richard F. Nyrop et al., Area Handbook for Morocco (Washington, D.C.: U.S. 
Government Printing Office, 1972), 91. 
12. The Vandals are one of the eastern German groups comprising the Vandals, 
Visigoths, Ostrogoths, Lombards, and Burgundians. They were involved in the 
demise of the Roman Empire under their leader Gaiseric, who ruled between 428 
and 477 C.E. 
13. The terrorist attacks killed 28 bystanders and 13 suicide bombers who were 
believed to be part of the network linked to Osama bin Laden, the mastermind of 
the September 11, 2001, attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon. There 
were no Jewish casualties in the Morocco attacks because they occurred on a Jewish 
holiday when the buildings were empty. 

This page intentionally left blank 

3 
Literature and Media 
Cocktail parties shock our festive customs; 
Alien habits invaded thoughts and homes.1 
—Mohammed Abu-Talib, 2003. 
MOROCCANS HAVE EXPLORED THEIR multicultural Barbary, Jewish, Arabian, 
and European traditions to create impressive literary achievements. Mohammed 
Abu-Talib's (1930-2000) poetry, reprinted in 2003, aptly captures the sturdy 
Berber-Arabic cultural setting on which French colonialism (1912-1956) 
was superimposed. Before the arrival of Europeans, Arabic literary culture 
thrived in Morocco. The cosmopolitan and historic cities of Tangier, Fes, 
and Casablanca were popular for hosting world-class writers and poets whose 
works expressed ideas of universal interest. Many of these scholars carved out 
a niche for themselves in the field of Arabic literature, tapping into the rich 
oral traditions of Berber-Arabs. The dawn of European colonialism across the 
African continent brought new dimensions to what it meant to be literate. 
For the Moroccans, literacy also meant learning to read and write in French, 
but they did not discard their Islamic heritage. Rather, the old order gradually 
sought accommodation with the new. In the midcolonial era (1920-1939)— 
particularly from the 1930s—Moroccan poets and writers, by writing in 
French and later English, began to demonstrate strength of mind that has pro-
gressed toward a rediscovery of the country's position in the literary world. 
As the colonial order aggrandized by strengthening its bureaucracy and 
mission schools, the Moroccans quickly picked up the rudiments of the white 
man's education, fashioning their newly acquired knowledge into a weapon of 

40 
CULTURE AND CUSTOMS OF MOROCCO 
combat against colonialism. The emergent educated elite established 
nationalist newspapers, which they recognized as crucial in getting their 
ideology across to the less privileged masses whose support was, nonethe-
less, important for the achievement of the ultimate goal of independence. 
After independence in 1956, the media expanded with the establishment 
of more daily and weekly newspapers, magazines, periodicals, and radio 
and television stations. In 1993 the popular poet, essayist, and novelist 
Abdelhak Serhane's Sun of the Obscure Ones (Le Soleil des Obscurs) won 
the French Prize of the Arab World (Prix Francais du Monde Arabe), 
which is the most prestigious prize for literature in the Arab world. The 
award symbolized a rediscovery of Morocco's long history of literary excel-
lence, which had peaked during the Merinid (1146-1546) and Wattasid 
(1465-1546) dynasties. 
To better understand Morocco's diverse and wide-ranging literary envi-
ronment, it is important to explore literary works in Moroccan Arabic, 
classical Arabic, French, and English. Standard use, proper words, letters, 
and sounds have been developed for the unique Moroccan Arabic that is 
rarely spoken outside the country. This orthography has become a medium 
of education, socialization, historical preservation, scholarly inquiry, and 
cultural nationalism. Traditions preserved in oral literature have survived 
as new talents produce and reproduce both new and old ideas and others 
publish in Moroccan Arabic for targeted local readers. Accounts recorded 
in the classical Arabic language of 28 alphabetic letters, which differs from 
the Roman alphabet, still occupy a prominent place in Morocco. Mean-
while, the ability to produce creative works in French and English has 
launched some Moroccan authors to international acclaim as their works 
are now more readily accessible to an international readership. Early on, 
Western scholars and writers, such as Jean-Claude Blachere, Hamilton A. 
Gibb, Ernest Gellner, Clifford Geertz, and particularly Paul Bowles (who 
resided in Tangier for many years), helped bring Arabic literary tradition to 
the Western reader.2 In Morocco, the most popular literature and television 
dramas are in classical Arabic or Moroccan Arabic, which is a combination 
of Arabic and the various indigenous Berber dialects. The reason for this 
is that it is easier to successfully communicate humor in a language com-
monly understood by the people. The new generation of North African 
writers now writes in one language and then have their works translated 
into one or more other languages to satisfy both local and international 
markets. The ability to transliterate from one language to the other has 
made the rich indigenous oral literature of Morocco readily available to 
the international audience. 

LITERATURE AND MEDIA 
41 
ORAL LITERATURE 
As one writer has stated, "folklore keeps the past alive."3 The cultural 
traditions of the Berber-Arabs of North Africa are rich in this type of cre-
ative oral literature. Although at a diminishing level of patronage, the 
indigenous folklore has survived colonial assault. Moroccan folklore varies 
from area to area, and each tells a unique story. The annual Marrakech 
Festival of Morocco remains a bounty of literary culture and tradition. 
Although oral literature is not as widespread as written works, storytelling 
remains one of the most common forms of education and entertainment in 
Morocco. In their different studies on oral literature in Morocco in particular 
and the Maghreb in general, some scholars have highlighted the role of moth-
ers in storytelling and the transmission of culture to the younger generation. 
Through nighttime family stories, Moroccan women help in the formation 
of imageries that are often presented in modern literary writings.4 As recently 
as the 1970s and 1980s—that is, before televisions became widespread—the 
professional itinerant storytellers (hakawati) frequented the open markets in 
Morocco, summoning their audience by the tap of drums. In an eyewitness 
account, in The Voices ofMarrakesh, one observer offered a vivid description
of storytelling in the 1970s in Morocco. According to this source, the story-
tellers usually drew the largest crowds at informal public gatherings. People 
gathered around them and were never in a hurry to leave. 
Their performances are lengthy; an inner ring of listeners squat on the 
ground 
Others standing, form an outer ring; they, too, hardly move, spell-
bound by their storyteller s words and gestures. Sometimes two of them recite 
in turn. Their words come from further off and hang longer in the air than 
those of ordinary people.... In honor of their words, storytellers wore striking 
clothes. They were always dressed differently from their listeners. . . . They gave
the impression of exalted yet somewhat fairytale personages. They spared few 
glances for the people by whom they were surrounded. Their gaze was on their 
heroes, their characters.5 
This depiction tells about the special expertise and intellectual abilities of the 
storytellers, who were gifted enough to hold their audience spellbound for 
hours. They carefully chose their stories and plotted the narratives to gener-
ate and sustain interest and curiosity. The listener not only wants to hear the 
end of the story, but also plans to catch the storyteller another day, if pleased 
by his performance. The content and context of a story may be changed or 
modified by the professional entertainer to reflect current issues, teach morality, 
and to satisfy his audience. 

42 
CULTURE AND CUSTOMS OF MOROCCO 
Exploiting his popularity and expertise for maximum rewards, the storyteller 
usually demands some form of monetary compensation from his listeners 
before beginning his story. As the story unfolds, the storyteller improvises 
a song that sums up the sequences of the completed parts of his narrative. 
He gauges the dept of interest and satisfaction his audience derived from his 
stories. If everything is going well, the storyteller may require his listeners to 
pay a second or even the third time to hear the end of his story. Often, the 
storytellers are also skillful drummers and singers—skills that go together 
with the profession. Otherwise, they hire the needed hands. For more effect, 
the stories are systematically interspersed with drum beats and prayers. Story 
topics are diverse, and the storyteller carefully determines his choice of topics 
in the same manner as a schoolteacher plans classroom instruction. Much 
of the folklore has connections with the good and bad spirits (djinns) and 
the casualties of evil eye. According to one study, such remedies as personal 
hygiene and burning of incense are often recommended.6 Other topics dwell 
on social ills, animals and their unique qualities, famous scholar-saints, and 
ancient Berber-Arab heroes. The storytellers have woven tales about how
account, in The Voices ofMarrakesh, one observer offered a vivid description
as to why, for instance, the owl is a wise animal. Their stories also enlighten 
the listener on human wisdom, follies, and morality. A story on envy and 
malignant joy, for instance, may begin or end with an exhortation, "If there is 
much envy in Gharb, sell your property and go to India." This simple advice
teaches one how to be mindful of the dangers of envy to personal safety. 
Famous saints such as al-Yusi and Mulay Ismail are often the subject of these 
folktales. According to an expert, the legends of al-Yusi and Ismail are popu-
lar in Morocco because they conform "to the classic theme of the virtuous 
saint overcoming an unjust ruler."7 
Many aspects of Berber-Arab folklore have been integrated with main-
stream written literature and historiography. A good example is the legend of 
Kahina, a North African heroine: 
No legend has been adopted, transformed, or used by as many social groups 
as the legend of Kahina 
It has reflected most of the modern ideologies in 
the Mediterranean and mirrored the early Islamic ideology and the medieval 
ideology of Islam, as well as modern ideologies in both Europe and Islam: 
colonial ideology, European anti-colonialism, Arab nationalism, North African 
nationalism, Berber nationalism, Zionism, and feminism.8 
Indeed, this legend of Berber origin, which has been refashioned and reproduced 
to suit diverse purposes, illustrates how many aspects of the indigenous folklore 
have been successfully incorporated into the mainstream historiography. 

LITERATURE AND MEDIA 
43 
Other aspects of the folklore have been recorded in creative writings, 
audiocassettes, and videos. Some important examples of such works of 
ethnography are those by Edward Westermarck and Ernest Gellner.9 These 
authors and other recent writers have identified oral artistic expressions in 
a variety of genres: proverbs, songs, festivals, and oral narratives. Each of 
these forms describes and analyzes creativity, values, norms, traditions, and 
histories. They capture and explain changes in culture, the lives of eminent 
figures, social institutions, and practices. Above all, they aim to educate the 
younger generation and to prepare them for life's challenges. 
Like their counterparts elsewhere, the premodern sovereigns of Morocco 
patronized poets and their works. Poetry is one of the most popular celebra-
tions of kings, noblemen, and heroes. In the late thirteenth and fourteenth 
centuries, Leo Africanus and Ibn Khaldun—two geniuses who ranked among 
the greatest of North African historians—documented the thriving Moroc-
can mystics who produced certain kinds of poetic genres often considered 
unconventional in strict Muslim practice. According to Leo Africanus, 
It is not rare for some gentleman to invite to his festivities one of the mas-
ters among those principal Sufis (mystics) with all his disciples. When they 
arrive at the banquet, they begin by saying their prayers and singing hymns. 
Once the hymn is finished, the most aged begin to rend their garments and 
if, while dancing, one of these aged men falls, he is immediately raised up 
and set on foot again by one of the young Sufis, who frequently gives him a 
lascivious kiss.10 
Besides poems created for merriment and conviviality, there are other cat-
egories associated with rituals, divinations, and rites of passage. A study on 
Rifian poetry revealed that the Berbers compose romantic poems in simple 
lyrics to gain the attention of women with singing and deliberate sexual 
movements. The poems, which aptly portray the people's everyday life, 
allow the poet to speak symbolically of love. Some of the poems depict the 
intention of a young woman to persuade her father not to force her into 
a marriage with a stranger; others are meant to alert men when a young 
woman is seeking a potential husband.11 Poems among the Berber-Arabs are 
common and are encountered in diverse forms. Altogether, this category of 
poems, like music and dance, are more than mere artistic creation. Indeed, 
the poems are for pleasure as well as part of the social discourse and means 
of conferring influence and status. The upgrading of the various aspects of 
the indigenous oratory has, thus, offered enormous cultural resources upon 
which modern Morocco depends in constructing a common identity and 
inspiring its citizens. 

44 
CULTURE AND CUSTOMS OF MOROCCO 
LITERATURE IN BERBER AND ARABIC LANGUAGES 
In Morocco, the coming of Islam in the seventh century and the introduction 
of a writing culture in Arabic language both encouraged and enriched the 
flourishing of a literary tradition that has continued to grow as new talents 
emerged. Arabic language promoted creative enterprise through a successful 
education system based on the Quran. Abd Allab Bib Yasin (died 1058) and 
his sectarian movement known as al-Murabitun (Almoravids) established a 
center for prayer and Islamic instruction in the eleventh century. Also, the 
establishment of numerous institutions of higher learning (madrassas) in 
Morocco, especially in the dynastic periods of the Merinids (1146-1546) 
and the Wattasids (1465-1549), attests to the success of Islamic education 
in the Maghreb. The madrassas in Morocco were particularly popular for 
their cosmopolitan outlook. The Muslim scholars and teachers (ulama) of 
this generation dedicated time to learning and writing in Islamic culture. The 
scope of their interests mirrored the drive of the predominantly Sufi religious 
order in Morocco to intellectual pursuits. Some examples of notable Arabic 
scholars of Morocco included Ibn Ajarrum, Abu'l-Hasan, Abu'lnan, and Abu 
Abdallah Ibn Battuta. Many foreign scholars, including legends such as Leo 
Africanus, Ibn Khaldun, and Ibn al-Khatib, found their peace residing in 
Morocco, particularly in Fes, Casablanca, and Tangier. In essence, when one 
talks about the literary traditions of Morocco in the precolonial era, it must 
be emphasized that this was a long historical practice comprising Middle 
Eastern, European (particularly Spanish Andalusia), Jewish, and indigenous 
Berber-African input. 
Ajarrum (died 1322) was a Berber, born in the small town of Sefrou. 
According to a detailed study on the intellectual life in Fes during the reign of 
the Merinides, Ajarrum wrote a "treatise on grammar which, in one thousand 
verses (from which it takes its name of Alfiya, alf signifying one thousand) 
summarized the essentials of Arabic grammar."12 Although underused today 
by students of Moroccan and Islamic studies, this document remains an 
important source of information on the development of writing in classical 
Arabic and Moroccan Arabic orthographies. 
Among all the pious scholars (i.e., the alem; singular, oulem or alim) 
of the premodern Arab world, Abu Abdallah Ibn Battuta (1304-1377) of 
Morocco is widely acknowledged as the most traveled in world history, per-
haps with the exception of the Italian explorer Marco Polo (1254-1324). 
The descendants of Battuta were rural Berbers of northern Morocco. His 
parents were professional jurists and judges who practiced their trade 
in Morocco and Andalusia (southern Spain). Battuta grew up in Tangier, 
where he was trained in juridical sciences, grammar, logic, rhetoric, law, and 

LITERATURE AND MEDIA 
45 
theology. Contemporary African historians owe a lot to Battuta's vivid eye-
witness (although sometimes biased) accounts of life in medieval West and 
East Africa. Ever adventurous, Battuta visited the ancient Mali Empire 
between 1352 and 1354. As a Sufi (a believer in the mystical and ecstatic 
dimension of Islam), Battuta betrayed in his writings, Travels in Asia and 
Africa 1325—1354 and Ibn Battuta in Black Africa—still one of the rare 
original sources of West African history—his astonishment with the cul-
tural differences between his Morocco and the various western and eastern 
African societies he encountered during his travels.13 
Abu'l-Hasan and Abu'lnan were scholarly princes, whose strong interests 
in Islamic learning saw the king's court almost in competition with the uni-
versities as the leading center of intellectual activities in premodern Morocco. 
According to Battuta, each morning the king usually gathered around him 
scholars and learned men with whom he conversed on topics of inter-
est. Their favorite subjects of conversation often included verses from the 
Quran dealing with jurisprudence, mysticism, and poetry.14 Leo Africanus, 
a contemporary of Ibn Battuta, added that the sovereigns of the Merinides 
dynasty of Morocco were proud sponsors of competitions in poetry, particu-
larly on the anniversary of the Prophet Muhammad's birthday. As Africanus 
observed, "The reciter stood on a very high platform. Then following the 
judgment of competent persons, the king gave to the most highly esteemed 
poet one hundred pieces of gold, a horse, a female slave, and the garment 
that he was wearing. He had other pieces of gold given to all the others, so 
that all took leave of him with a reward."15 This generous size of rewards 
attests to the immense respect the king's court held for intellectuals and 
literary creativity. 
A critique of intellectual life in medieval Morocco and the Arab world, 
however, may include the pervading influence of Islam on ideas and thought 
as a shortcoming. Islam conceived the individual as a means of interpreting 
inspired knowledge. In this regard, most of the works of these scholars look 
alike—in the sense that many focus on Islamic religious issues—hence, 
contemporary and more secular writings have easily overtaken them in 
popularity. Yet, there are many timeless aspects of Arabic literature. Like 
the Christian Bible, the Quran, compiled more than 13 centuries ago, 
has continued to serve as a useful source of knowledge about mysticism, 
historical knowledge, social control, government, law, and jurisprudence. 
Above all, the Quran represents the critical interpretation of the prophetic 
texts and theology of the unity of God. Therefore, Arabic education and 
writing have remained a priority throughout Morocco. European colonial-
ism brought new concepts and ideas that helped enrich and transform 
Morocco's literature and media. 

46 
CULTURE AND CUSTOMS OF MOROCCO 
LITERATURE IN FRENCH A N D ENGLISH 
French colonial policies in Morocco changed with time, and diverse objec-
tives and goals drove European cultural imperialism in the country. Initially, 
French colonial education targeted only the indigenous Berbers. The Arabs 
were ignored because the Europeans thought the Islamic culture would help 
to preserve the peace and order necessary for colonial exploitation. Because 
Western education and Christianity opened new opportunities for employ-
ment in the colonial service and social mobility for the newly educated, 
however, Western education became equally desirable for many Moroccans 
of Arab descent who wanted to avoid alienation from the new colonial order. 
This drive resulted in an increasing taste for European ideas and institutions 
as well as the quest for freedom from colonial subordination. 
In the late 1920s, modern Moroccan literature began an inchoate but his-
toric transition from its Arabic audience to French and Western readership 
with the appearance of political essays and articles (maqala) in pamphlets 
and periodicals. By the end of the World War II in 1945, the new trend had 
entered a radical phase. Moroccan nationalist intellectuals such as Allal Al 
Fassi, Abd el Krim, Abdelkabir Khatibi, and Abdelkarim Ghellab had started 
gaining popularity for their nationalist writings in classical Arabic verses. 
These scholar-nationalists attacked capitalism and its bureaucratic institu-
tions, which they perceived as slowing down the pace of decolonization. 
World War II had seriously injured French colonial pride, thereby provid-
ing new vehicles for articulating social and political thought in the context 
of increasing agitation for independence. Additionally, with the emergence 
of the Cold War (1944-1989), the East-West ideological struggle quickly 
attracted the fascination of most African authors, including their Moroccan 
counterparts. Across Africa, literature and creative writing became encapsu-
lated in anticolonial undertones. 
In August 1951, Al Istiqlal (Independence), a weekly tabloid of the Istiglal 
Party, began to publish nationalist commentaries in French. Expectedly, 
these anticolonial essays drew the ire of the French colonial officials as mani-
fested in the temporary suspension of the Istiglal Party in 1952. Meanwhile, 
Mohammed A. Tazi's fiction attained a wide audience in the period of decol-
onization. Tazi's creative works represented an important period of change to 
new political ideas published in magazines like the Signpost of Truth (Thawat 
al Haq), also owned by the Istiqlal Party. Like most of their counterparts 
elsewhere, the nationalist writers defended the precolonial Arabic-Islamic 
social values and conservative literary trends. Another nationalist newspa-
per The Speaker (The Aqlam), published by the National Union of Popu-
lar Forces (Union Nationale des Forces Populaires, UNFP), also supported 

LITERATURE AND MEDIA 
47 
nationalist ideological essays and academic papers that promoted nationalist 
sentiments.16 Nevertheless, imperial culture wrought a profound effect on 
Arabic literature. This effect has continued to manifest in varied forms such 
as lingering traces of dissent to adoption of Western institutions and styles, 
campaigns against monarchical authority, reform of Islam, and the struggle 
of women to free themselves from patriarchal control. 
The recent trends have occupied the works of modern writers such as Driss 
Chraibi, Mohammed Abu-Talib, Abdelhak Serhane, and Mohammed Zefzaf. 
The emergent authors write about the cultural heritage of Morocco in partic-
ular and that of North Africa and the Middle East in general for their African, 
Muslim, and Western readers. Although they possess different levels of exper-
tise and varieties of interests, these writers exhibit unity in many ways. Their 
works communicate a profound sense of duty to construe the sociopolitical 
changes of the postcolonial order. Their ability to communicate in Arabic, 
French, and recently in English demonstrates their implicit hunger to adver-
tise their gifts of prose beyond the limited confines of the Arab world. 
Driss Chraibi writes mostly in French, although he distorts the language 
rules and uses a disproportionate number of vulgarities as a distinct form 
of opposition to official literary expectations. The spirit of dissention that 
was formed in the colonial era remained a common character of postcolo-
nial literature up to the 1980s and 1990s. One of the dominant themes of 
Chraibi's novels has been the call for sociopolitical reforms in postcolonial 
Morocco. Since the 1950s, Chraibi has been calling for resistance against 
outdated Islamic and Christian religious ideas, but his Open Succession (Suc-
cession ouverte), published in 1962, diverted a bit from this focus with an 
economic history of French expatriate workers' lives in colonial Morocco.17 
Among Chraibi's most popular novels are The Simple Past (Le passe simple), 
which came out in 1954 as an attack on patriarchal forms of control that he 
perceives as often reducing the voices of women and children to oppressive 
silence and obedience. In reference to paternal authority (Le Seigneur), Chraibi 
observed that "any life other than his [father's] own ... is annihilated."18 In a 
recent collaboration with Gareth Stanton, An Investigation with the Country 
(Une Enqueue Au Pays), Chraibi depicts life in postcolonial Morocco as a 
continuation of the oppressive colonial system.19 
Mohammed Abu-Talib emerged in the 1960s as one of the most popu-
lar Moroccan writers in English. Abu-Talib is largely seen as the initiator of 
English studies in Morocco. He helped shape English language and literature 
in Morocco through teaching, planning, administration, and scholarly writ-
ing. His works aim to enhance individual identity through historical and 
cultural dialectics of diversity. In his works, Abu-Talib speaks to the reality of 
cultural differences in the context of transformation and change. Abu-Talib 

48 
CULTURE AND CUSTOMS OF MOROCCO 
is a benevolent social critic, and his poetry communicates social realities with 
an original touch of humanistic appeal and liberal doses of humor, notwith-
standing the difficult task he chooses by trying to construe these works in an 
alien language. 
One of the greatest revelations in recent times is Abdelhak Serhane who 
came into the limelight with his First Draft (Messaouda), published in 1983, 
which won the Literary Prize of the Free Radio (Prix Litteraire des Radio 
Libres) in 1984.20 With a passion for criticizing social ills, Serhane's two major 
works, Children of the Narrow Streets (Les enfants des rues etroites) and Sun of 
the Obscure Ones (Le Soleil des obscurs), highlight some dysfunctional aspects 
of traditional society in Morocco that tend to disallow the young people the 
enabling environment for development and happiness.21 This genre is fur-
ther explored in The Love to Circumcise (Lamour circoncis), which dwells on 
circumcision and condemns acts of sexual pervasion, hypocrisy, and similar 
practices that are commonly encountered in Morocco even among those con-
sidered pious men.22 
New literary stars such as Mohammed Zefzaf continue to appear in 
the educational institutions of Morocco. Zefzaf, a high school teacher, is 
widely considered to be the most prolific of contemporary fiction writers. 
He writes on any contemporary social issue. In 1970, Zefzaf published 
his controversial work entitled The Woman and the Rose (Al-Mar-ah wa 
Lwardah), which was perceived by religious conservatives as too immoral 
and therefore potentially corruptive.23 The author is also perceived as 
unpatriotic for his apparent positive views of Western culture over Arab or 
Maghrebi traditions. 
POETRY 
Poetry has always been important in Morocco, first as part of estab-
lished indigenous tradition and later as a vibrant Arabic and English genre. 
Many poems are encountered as parts of a collection of selected liter-
ary pieces, passages, works of art, and music. Others appear in the print 
media and in academic magazines. The elegant poetic works of Paris-based 
Mohammed Khair Eddine (b. 1942) bear the hallmarks of the influence 
of French culture on modern literary forms. Eddine's poems focus on the 
need to change Moroccan customs and traditions, especially those con-
cerned with monarchical and patriarchal authority and power. Eddine's 
long period of residence in France helped him shift from nationalistic 
ideological writings to a more artistic expression. His works and others of 
the same genre are published in Souffles (Blown), a French-language literary 
review established in 1966. 

LITERATURE AND MEDIA 
49 
Ahmed Sefrioui, a poet of Berber descent who writes in French, won 
respect with his unique depiction of everyday life in ethnographic novels. 
Particularly, The Box of Miracles (La Boite a Merveilles), which focused on the 
life of ordinary craftsmen in his hometown, Fes, was widely read in Morocco. 
Also, his collection of short stories, The Garden of the Magic Spells, or, the Per-
fume of the Legends (Le jar din des sortileges, ou, Le parfum des legendes), which
was produced in the form of parables, received wide interest.24 
Among the emerging writers, Ahmed Lemish, a high school teacher in 
Rabat, has drawn national recognition for his stubborn resolve to write 
poems in the local Moroccan Arabic rather than the more widely read clas-
sical Arabic or even French or English. For years, this resolve cost Lemish 
the respect and recognition he deserved among his intellectual cohorts in 
Morocco, despite his scholarly publications in literary journals. His recent 
work, Who embroidered the water ...!? (Shkun Trez Lma ...!?), came as a suc-
cessful surprise to his critics.25 
In Morocco, most literary writers are men. Male writers primarily produce 
gender-biased narratives, focusing on male heroes and characters. The past 
three decades, however, have seen the emergence of female authors who have 
been contesting a rightful place for women in the history and development 
of Moroccan society. 
FEMALE AUTHORS 
Moroccan female writers deal more often with the contributions of women 
to the independence struggle of the 1940s and 1950s as well as to gender 
issues. One contemporary author revisited the "historiographic struggle 
that has taken place over Morocco's national liberation movement."26 She 
shows how, in their quest for social change, Moroccan women have not only 
confronted gender-biased status legislation and the predominantly Islamic 
patriarchal forms of authority but also challenged the dominant historiog-
raphy, especially with respect to the anticolonial struggle. Largely, feminist 
historiography aims to claim a rightful place for women in the mainstream 
history of contemporary Morocco. 
Among these feminist writers is Leila Abouzeid, a graduate of the Univer-
sity of Texas at Austin and a pioneer female writer of literature translated into 
English. An accomplished fiction writer, Abouzeid used the style of traditional 
storytellers to relate events in her stories. Her first and most popular novel, Year 
of the Elephant: A Moroccan Woman s Journey towards Independence, presents 
women's perspective on contemporary problems of poverty, gender, divorce, 
and other family-related issues.27 This work is also important for its demon-
strated bravery in focusing on the forces of traditional culture and modernism, 

50 
CULTURE AND CUSTOMS OF MOROCCO 
calling for a critical revaluation of the meaning of independence from both 
the national and the individual standpoints. Abouzeid extended this topic in 
her Return to Childhood, which is a sort of personal experience of the impact of 
the Moroccan nationalist struggle of the 1950s on family order.28 In her most 
recent work, the semiautobiographical The Last Chapter, Abouzeid tells about 
the struggles of a young Moroccan woman to gain identity in the new society 
under transition in the second half of the twentieth century. The author locates 
the interaction between the Western and traditional values in a shifting but 
conflicting context.29 
Other contemporary female writers have also made their marks in poetry. 
For instance, Amina El Bakouri's poems are full of references to the Arabic 
poetic heritage. With striking success, Bakouri uses the complex interrelation-
ship between different texts as a guide to literary interpretation. This original 
approach symbolizes a sort of recovery of Morocco's past poetic memory. 
Although Bakouri writes in classical Arabic, her poems are lucid, and the style 
oozes a spiritual aura.30 Similarly, Toura Majdouline's unique natural style in 
Leaves of Ash and The Weary has won her respect.31 The tone of her poems is
serene and discreet. At the same time, the poems depict remarkable bravery, 
with a touch of simple and realistic representations. 
Female authors focus on how the Moroccans themselves view, relate to, 
and represent their own culture. They challenge monarchical control and 
continuing patriarchal authority with a strong yearning for a truly free soci-
ety, which was promised in the rhetoric of the anticolonial struggle. In this 
context, women's struggle in Morocco, as revealed in the recent historiogra-
phy, represents a new phase in the continuing quest for a freer society. As the 
monarchy struggles with the dilemma of balancing privileged authority and 
power with democratic freedom, a more critical and vigorous press holds the 
promise to sustain the campaign for reforms. 
NEWSPAPERS AND MAGAZINES 
The Moroccan modern press dates back to the beginning of the colonial 
era. Between 1903 and 1923, the press, such as it was, served to consolidate 
the French colonial administration in Morocco. Gradually, the press developed 
in phases in response to both international events and nationalist movements. 
Press ownership has also transformed in phases from a mouthpiece of the colo-
nial administration to a supporter of monarchical authority since indepen-
dence. The latest development is the gradual emergence of private ownership of 
newspapers and magazines. 
Generally, monarchical authority has created problems of freedom for 
the media in Morocco. The major government-owned newspapers include 

LITERATURE AND MEDIA 
51 
the dailies Al Anbaa, Le Matin, and Assahra. The government controls 
newspapers through bureaucratic supervision of news broadcasts and 
appointment of trusted managers of the media houses. Such governmen-
tal censorships have attracted both local and foreign condemnations. In 
2003, for instance, the media rights organization Reporters Sans Fron-
tiers (Reporters without Borders), based in Paris, strongly condemned 
the habitual prying in the press by the intelligence services. It attacked 
Morocco's press law, which stipulates prison terms for writings that ques-
tion the relevance of Islam in society, continued monarchical authority 
amid the new global quest for democratic institutions, or the legitimacy of 
Morocco's territorial claims over Western Sahara. 
In spite of government censorship, recent strides have been recorded in the 
continuing expansion of the print media. Recent legislative openings have 
resulted in increases in the number of daily, weekly, and monthly newspaper 
houses in Morocco. In 2000, there were about 1,780 local and foreign news-
papers in circulation. These newspapers and magazines cover a wide spectrum 
of interests—politics, religion, medicine, economy, sports, women, computers, 
arts, decoration, youth, education, and so on. They carry news items, edi-
torials, advertisements, and columns, reflecting the gradual response of the 
sociopolitical space to the globalizing world order, with the monarchy dem-
onstrating more tolerance to criticism and divergent views. A state statute 
of August 2, 1995, allows for expression of political ideas and sociocultural 
opinions within a defined press code, which empowers the minister of the 
interior to punish any publication considered offensive to government. As 
in all Islamic states, most Moroccan newspapers devote a front section to 
Islamic sermons. Low literacy levels limit newspaper readership, and com-
petition among publishers for advertising is intense. Since 1999, Morocco's 
private press has gradually engaged in free debate on a number of previously 
taboo issues, including social problems. 
RADIO AND TELEVISION 
Local radio broadcasting began in Morocco in 1924 under the French colo-
nial administration. After World War II, the government granted nationalists 
the freedom to establish radio broadcasting. Shortly before its independence, 
the French colonial authorities also established the first television station in 
Morocco in 1954. This was the first in the entire Arab world. In Novem-
ber 1958, the late King Mohammed V established the Maghreb Arab Press 
Agency (Maghreb abd Arabe Presse; MAP) with the motto "News is sacred, 
comment is freedom." The MAP has wide local and international outreach 
and is a leader in international news broadcasting in Morocco. Radio and TV 

52 
CULTURE AND CUSTOMS OF MOROCCO 
broadcasting, like the print media, serve to educate, inform, and entertain 
the people. The expansion of the economy since the end of colonialism has 
made more radio and television sets available to the people, and the number 
of stations has increased. 
A nationwide television network began broadcasting in 1962. As with 
the print media, the television stations are under governmental control. 
All materials shown on television usually pass through strictly bureaucratic 
surveillance. In the beginning, television relied on foreign programs and 
films. The Center for Moroccan Cinema (Centre for Cinematographique 
Marocain [CCM]), founded in 1944, influenced TV programs until inde-
pendence in 1956, when the organization was turned over to the new 
government. The determined quest for the Arabization of education in 
postcolonial Morocco brought about a rediscovery of the place of folk per-
formers, films, plays, and drama series produced mostly in the Arab world. 
While the CCM was undergoing a program of indigenization, Egypt pro-
vided an important source of films and other television programs. Today 
the CCM is still responsible for the promotion and regulation of the film 
industry, and the popularity of films made in Algeria and Morocco have 
since displaced their Egyptian competitors. The government uses tele-
vision as a medium to propagate religious morality and encourage civic 
engagements. As a vehicle for transmitting education and culture, the sta-
tions, too, broadcast school programs. A recent study noted that television 
"generally thought of as placing few literary requirements on the viewer, 
now reaches the homes of Moroccans of all socioeconomic levels."32 The
Moroccan television industry continues to grow and to seek the means to 
adapt to its local milieu. 
The focus of improvement in this sector has been on adaptation to new 
global technological improvements. Today, the electronic media covers nearly 
all parts of the country. The government-owned Moroccan Broadcasting Net-
work, Radio-Television Marocaine (RTM), serves a wide range of audiences 
in Arabic, French, English, Spanish, and the three major Berber dialects— 
Tamazight, Tachelhit, and Tarifit. The government also retains a substantial 
control of Medi 1 (Radio Mediterranee International), based in Tangier. Medi 
1 broadcasts programs in Arabic and French. The number of households that 
own radios and televisions has increased substantially since the early 1980. 
According to a 1999 U.S. Department of State estimate, the country has a 1:3 
ratio of radio ownership and 1:6 ratio of television ownership.33 Given that 
family sizes are usually large in Morocco, these figures imply that there is at 
least one radio and/or television per household. The moderate cost of satellite 
dishes has also enabled about 1.2 million viewers to access to a wide variety 
of foreign programs. 

LITERATURE AND MEDIA 
53 
The government owns the two major television networks, RTM and 
2M-TV, based in Casablanca. Meanwhile the government has expressed the 
intention to liberalize and privatize these state-owned media houses, but 
the plan may be a long time coming because the monarchy is mindful of the 
likely political costs of losing its control of the media. Altogether, about 35 
television stations operate in Morocco, including the Western Sahara, where 
the National Radio (NR) and Saharan Arab Democratic Republic (SADR), 
launched in the 1970s, continue to serve the independent struggle of the 
Polisario Front. N R and SADR transmit news in Arabic and Spanish. 
THE INTERNET 
Despite a lack of consistent government policy for its development, 
Moroccans have boldly taken on the emerging trend in Internet access. Per-
haps with the exception of South Africa and Nigeria, Morocco has one of the 
largest telecom sectors in Africa. Morocco has about half a million internet 
users, and the government can censor any Internet site, particularly those 
hostile to its policies on Western Sahara. Web users in Morocco can access 
information from offices and private homes. 
NOTES 
1. Mohammed Abu-Talib, "Drink to the Prophet," in Richard S. Harrel, 
William S. CaroU, and Mohammed Abu-Talib, A Basic Course in Moroccan Arabic 
(Washington, D.C.: Georgetown University Press, 2003). 
2. For an erudite analysis on the works of Westerners who specialized in Arabic 
studies, see Roger Allen, The Arabic Literary Heritage: The Developments of Its Genres 
and Criticism (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998). 
3. See Arthur Palmer Hudson, Folklore Keeps the Past Alive (Athens: University of 
Georgia Press, 1962). 
4. See Zohra Mezgueldi, "Mother-word and French-language Moroccan writ-
ing," Research in African Literatures 27, no. 3 (fall 1996): 1-14; Heidi Abdel-Jaouad, 
"'Too Much in the Sons': Mothers and Impossible Alliances in Francophone Maghrib-
ian Writing," Research in African Literatures 27, no. 3 (fall 1996): 15-33. 
5. Elias Canetti, The Voices ofMarrakesh: A Record of a Visit, trans. J.A. Under-
wood (New York: Seabury Press, 1978), 77. 
6. For an interesting account, see Norman A. Stillman, The Language and Culture 
of the Jews ofSefrou, Morocco: An Ethno linguistic Study (Manchester, UK: University 
of Manchester Press, 1988). 
7. Henry Munson Jr., Religion and Power in Morocco (New Haven, CT: Yale 
University Press, 1993), 190. For more on the common themes that dominate pro-
fessional storytelling in Morocco, see Harold D. Nelson, ed., Morocco: A Country 
Study, 4th ed. (Washington, D.C.: American University Press, 1978), 138. 

54 
CULTURE AND CUSTOMS OF MOROCCO 
8. Abdelmajid Hannoum, Colonial Histories, Post-Colonial Memories (Portsmouth, 
NH: Heinemann, 2001), xv. 
9. Edward Westermarck, The Belief in Spirits in Morocco (Abo, Finland: Abo 
Akademi Press, 1920); Edward Westermarck, Ritual and Belief in Morocco (London: 
n.p., 1926); Edward Westermarck, Wit and Wisdom in Morocco: A Study of Native 
Proverbs (London: Routledge, 1930); Ernest Gellner, Saints of the Atlas (Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1969). 
10. Leo Africanus, cited in Roger Le Tourneau, Fez in the Age of the Marinides, 
trans. Besse Alberta Clement (Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1961), 128. 
11. Roger Joseph and Terri Brint Joseph, The Rose and the Thorn: Semiotic Struc-
tures in Morocco (Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 1987), 92. 
12. Le Tourneau, The Marinides, 121-122. 
13. Said Hamdun and Noel King, Ibn Battuta in Black Africa (Princeton, NJ: 
Markus Wiener, 1996), ix-xxxii, 1-12. 
14. See Mahdi Agha Husain, "Manuscripts of Ibn Battuta's Rihla in Paris," Journal 
of the Asiatic Society of Bengal 20 (1954): 22-32; Mahdi Agha Husain, "Ibn Battuta, 
His Life and Work," Indo-Iranica 7 (1954): 6-13; G.H. Bousquet, "Ibn Battuta 
et les Institutions Musulmanes," Studia Islamica 24 (1966): 81-106. 
15. Leo Africanus, cited in Tourneau, The Marinides, 127. 
16. Nelson, Morocco, 136-137. 
17. Driss Chraibi, Succession ouverte (Paris: Denoel, 1962). 
18. See Driss Chraibi, Le Passe Simple (Paris: Denoel, 1954), 15; or see Driss Chraibi, 
The Simple Past, trans. Hugh A. Harter (Washington: Three Continents, 1990). 
19. Driss Chraibi, Une Enquette Au Pays (Paris: Editions du Seuil, 1981). 
20. Abdelhak Serhane, Messaouda (Paris: Editions du Seuil, 1983). 
21. Abdelhak Serhane, Les Enfants des rues etroites (Paris: Editions du Seuil, 1986);
Abdelhak Serhane, Le Soleil des Obscurs (Paris: Editions du Seuil, 1992). 
22. Abdelhak Serhane, Eamour circoncis (Paris: Paris-Mediterranee, 2001). 
232. Mohammed Zefzaf, Al-Mara wa al-warda [The Woman and the Rose] (Beirut: 
Al-Dar-al-Muttahida li al-Nashr, 1970). 
24. Ahmed Sefrioui, La Boite a Merveilles (Paris: Editions du Seuil, 1954); 
Ahmed Sefrioui, Lejardin des sortileges, ou, Le parfum des legends (Paris: L'Harmattan,
1989). 
25. Ahmed Lemish, Shkun TrezLma ...!? (n.p., 1994). 
26. Liat Kozma, "Moroccan Women's Narrative of Liberation: The Passive Rev-
olution?" in James McDougall (ed.), Nation, Society and Culture in North Africa 
(Portland OR: Frank Cass, 2003), 113. 
27. Leila Abouzeid, Year of the Elephant: A Moroccan Woman s Journey towards 
Independence (Austin: University of Texas Press, 1990). 
28. Leila Abouzeid, Return to Childhood (Austin: Center for Middle Eastern Stud-
ies, University of Texas, 1999). 
29. See Leila Abouzeid, The Last Chapter (Cairo: American University Press, 
2003). 
30. Amina El Bakouri, Rdian Ydtika Lmadih (Rabat: Sais Midit, 2002).

LITERATURE AND MEDIA 
55 
31. Touria Majdouline, Leaves of Ash (Rabat: Union of Moroccan Writers, 1990);
Touria Majdouline, 77?^ Weary (Oujda, Morocco: Dar al Jusoor, 2000). 
32. Daniel A. Wagner, Literacy, Culture, and Development: Becoming Literate in 
Morocco (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993), 36. 
33. See also Annuaire Statique du Maroc [Annual Statistics of Morocco] (Rabat: 
Ministry of Communication, 1999, 2000). 

This page intentionally left blank 

4 
Art and Architecture/Housing 
ART AND ARCHITECTURE/HOUSING DESIGNS are expressive forms of the totality 
of Morocco's sociocultural heritage. They provide historians with a rich 
source of information on the people's civilization and the link between the 
past and present. Like other aspects of life in the kingdom, Moroccan art and 
architecture have been heavily influenced by Barbary, Arabic, Jewish, Roman, 
and European (particularly Spanish and French) cultures. In Morocco, art-
work is found in traditional handicrafts produced in stone, silver and gold, 
fabric, leather and skin, wood, earthenware, ceramics, iron, and brass. Tra-
ditional architectural decorations are found mainly in the form of mosaics 
and murals. A mosaic is a form of surface decoration produced by arranging 
pieces of different colors to shape a desired pattern; murals are a decorative 
art applied to form an integral part of a wall or ceiling surface. Since inde-
pendence in 1956, art and architecture in Morocco have been identified as 
crucial forms of cultural expression, identity formation, and nation building. 
In this regard, early in the 1960s, the government of King Hassan II (died 
1999) established centers for artistic education that, among other things, 
aim to preserve the rich cultural heritage of the people and to expand on the 
country's lucrative tourist industry. 
Given the diverse and dynamic roots of Morocco's cultural life, it is dif-
ficult to draw a clear line between the traditional, contemporary, or modern 
categories of art and architecture. Even more elusive is the notion of Ber-
ber, Arab, Jewish, Roman, or European models.1 Each of these categories 
overlaps one another, and their histories cut across different cultures and 
historical eras. Therefore, it is more appropriate to state that Morocco's art 

58 
CULTURE AND CUSTOMS OF MOROCCO 
and architecture are a harvest of cultural diversity. This hybridism makes 
Morocco an interesting subject of study. For analytical convenience, two 
genres of art and architecture/housing may be identified, traditional and 
contemporary forms.2 
Neither of these categories constitutes a completely isolated study or a 
balanced chronological narrative. Although the timeless precolonial trends 
have been retained, they are gradually adapting to the postcolonial styles 
and tastes and the use of modern tools and technology. With the exception 
of buildings, quarters, and infrastructures associated with modern institu-
tions and businesses, the architectural landscape has retained much of its 
precolonial identity. French colonialism beginning in the twentieth century 
introduced painting as a separate art form; however, Western-style painting 
is yet to assume a distinct Moroccan image. It still exists as one of those 
indulgences of the eccentric and rich with a taste for Western lifestyles. 
The traditional artisans and craftsmen have continued to dominate, using 
modern technology to standardize their products for both the local and 
international markets. 
ART 
Traditional Art Forms 
Morocco's hybrid artistic tradition is an important part of its architecture 
and housing. Decorative art forms consist of patterns produced on stone, fab-
ric, earth, ceramics, plaster, wood, and tile. Elaborate tile mosaics (or ceramic 
tiles) called zelliges are a striking form of traditional art of Morocco. The most 
visible success of this art is best observed with the decoration of mosques, pal-
aces, colleges, and other public buildings, including private homes of afflu-
ent individuals. Zelliges are arranged in different patterns and colors. Some 
experts have observed that the most distinctive aspect of Moroccan archi-
tecture is the recurring form of the horseshoe arch (structured round and/or 
pointed), which actually is one of the legacies bequeathed to North Africa via 
Spain by the Visigoths of Scandinavia. In Morocco, the horseshoe arches are 
an integral part of framing and decoration of gateways, doors, and windows 
of any sizable building. A detailed study of this form of artistic style observes 
that "decoration is so much a part of architecture that a building is as much 
the creation of the specialized craftsmen who adorned it with plasters, wood, 
mosaic, and tile as of the masons who outlined the basic structures."3 
Although elaborate artistic decorations are usually a component of archi-
tecture, this is not necessarily a rule for the Berbers of southern Morocco, 
where the buildings are not always decorated. This exception is partly con-
nected with the use of certain building materials such as pressed earth and 

ART AND ARCHITECTURE/HOUSING 
59 
Palace mosaic, Meknes. Courtesy of Valerie Orlando. 
straw, which are not easily amenable to elaborate decorative patterns. Here, 
the mental disposition toward architecture is determined first and foremost 
by the search for security. This explains the location in the precolonial era of 
most houses on hilltops, ridges, and bluffs. 
Besides crafts employed in architectural decorations, a rich harvest of 
locally produced handicrafts are made by specialized and talented Moroccans 
with the skills to produce items for fashion and household use in forms of 
stone, silver and gold, fabric, leather and skin, wood, earthenware or ceram-
ics, and iron and brass. Among other handcrafts, Moroccan leather, pottery, 
brass trays, and iron grillwork are particularly recognized internationally for 
their finesse. Stone carving is one of the indigenous artworks of Morocco. 
The "desert rose" of the Sahara is a typical stone with a crystal formation that 
makes a fine decorative object. Soapstone, a soft local stone, is amenable to 
carving items like animal and human figurines. Other artworks in stone are 
paperweights, candleholders, and boxes. 
In Morocco, smithing is a traditional art that goes far back in time. Moroccan 
silversmiths, for instance, are exceptional because they fashion their jewelry 
by first removing the silver from the ore. Silver jewelry comes in different 
forms, but the most fashionable among Moroccan women appears to be the 
heavy solid silver bracelets with deeply engraved patterns. Other items include 
earrings, anklets, and necklaces. Some of these are elaborately fashioned with 
semiprecious stones or studs with the surface polished to a high shine. Simi-
larly, gold jewelry is an important and unique part of the smithing industry. 

60 
CULTURE AND CUSTOMS OF MOROCCO 
Gold jewelry is mainly found in the big cities, where the rich merchants, 
government officials, and other wealthy individuals and visitors are most 
likely to patronize the jewelers. 
One distinctive souvenir from Fes is known as the hzam, which is 
entirely different from the gorgeous and expensive silk belts also known 
by the same name in Fes. This hzam is often used for picture framing and 
embroidered with modern patterns. A hzam measures about four centimeters 
wide by two or four meters long. Another souvenir is the mdemma, which 
is a waist belt made of superior leather and fixed with satin strips and gold 
embroidery. It comes with a highly ornamental buckle made of gold or 
silver. In Morocco, goldsmiths usually have their own separate quarters 
where security is provided and members of the guilds operate with utmost 
discretion. 
Weaving is one of Morocco's oldest traditions and crafts. Weavers use wool, 
silk, and cotton to produce an assortment of products such as long robes, 
tablecloths, blankets, and tea set covers in both plain and colorful patterns. 
Another common form of weaving in Morocco is basketry. Moroccan artisans 
use canes to produce assortments of items of different shapes and sizes for 
decorative and household purposes. Some baskets are designed with covers 
for storage; others are produced as toys of different sizes and shapes. The most 
popular products made by weavers are well-designed and beautiful oriental 
rugs, which are commonly used for wall decorations and floor coverings and 
covers for cushions, beds, pillows, chairs, and other items of furniture. The 
exquisite silk and cotton throws of Morocco come in different bright pat-
terns and colors. Some types of rugs are used for special occasions such as 
weddings. 
There are wide-ranging regional variations in Moroccan arts and crafts. For 
instance, the rugs produced in the country are of different qualities, patterns, 
and colors, and they are usually named after their specific villages, towns, or 
cities of origin. Rugs made in big cities such as Fes, Casablanca, Tangier, and 
Rabat are named after their cities of origin. These are also identified as "city 
rugs" because of their characteristic bright colors and rectangular patterns. 
Rabat, the city capital, is renowned for producing one of the finest oriental 
rugs, which is also among the most expensive in the world. Those originat-
ing from the dominantly Berber homelands of the High Atlas are generally 
identified by their more original patterns. According to one source, "rugs of 
the High Atlas type have a rustic weave with large knots, with four or five 
shoots of weft between each row of knots. The depth of the pile is intended 
to compensate for the low number of knots. The Lozenge pattern completely 
covers the field."4 These rugs are predominantly brown with golden yellow 
borders. They are ideal for modern or rustic interior designs. 

ART AND ARCHITECTURE/HOUSING 
61 
Similarly, artisans in Morocco have been successful in producing thousands of 
products made from leather and skin. The abundance of sheep and goats raised 
in the country provides a rich source of leather and skin from which a wide 
variety of products such as luggage, satchels, belts, wallets, musical instruments, 
slippers, and shoes are made. Desk sets and office furnishings with arabesque 
designs are also made from leather and skin both for the local and international 
markets. Among the various types of handbags is a small type especially made 
to carry the Muslim holy book, the Quran. The more fashionable ones are 
made of durable sheepskin finished with colorfully embroidered designs and 
provided with shoulder straps and zippers. Moroccan leather fashion products, 
like their rugs, rank among the most renowned in the world. For instance, the 
traditional slippers (bulgha or baboosh), which have been improved upon with 
the aid of modern tools and technology and produced in different colors, sizes, 
and patterns, have today found their ways into the bedrooms of Belgians, 
Britons, and French. 
Woodworking is another important part of art design and decoration 
in Morocco. Skillful artists have successfully used wood indigenous to 
Morocco for various products. For instance, in Marrakech and the rocky 
city of Azrou, lying south of Meknes (in Berber azrou means "rock"), the 
woodworkers and cabinetmakers mostly use hardwoods that grow in the 
local forests, including cedar, pine, olive, and walnut. Cedar is also used 
in making coffers, or strongboxes, specially constructed to hold important 
Store in Meknes displaying an array of exquisite oriental rugs. 
Courtesy of Valerie Orlando. 

62 
CULTURE AND CUSTOMS OF MOROCCO 
items such as money, jewelry, and, traditionally, women's caftans. Among 
other woods, ebony (a hardwood that grows in the tropics) and citrus are 
ideal for products that require a delicate surface finish, such as chessboards. 
Thyua is a wood often preferred for furniture, including marquetry coffee 
tables and decorated caskets. It is also used for making hard-carved boxes 
for jewelry and for sizable cigarette cases that one can easily carry. Crafts-
men working in different kinds of wood also produce large trays that appear 
to be woven like a carpet. Intricately painted wood is also very popular in 
Morocco. The old city of Fes is particularly known for its wooden cribs that 
have a brightly painted finish. 
Pottery is another traditional form of Moroccan art. Potters working with 
clay and burnt earth design pots, kettles, and vases of different shapes and 
sizes for household, decorative, and musical purposes. Other items com-
monly produced by potters include plates, jugs, coffee-sets, saucers, cups, and 
cooking pots glazed with black designs. Some ceramic products are covered 
with fine leather and decorated with gold design. Safi (or Asfi), a seaport city 
of western Morocco that lies on the coastal plains along the Atlantic Ocean, is 
widely acknowledged as the pottery capital of the world. Safi potters are also 
proficient in metalwork. 
Metal and brass work are found in a wide variety of protective, artistic, 
and decorative grilles as well as household items such as lamps, candleholders, 
small tables, chairs, and various kinds of ornamented items. Brass work is an 
important part of the handicraft industry. Artistically decorated candleholders, 
trays, and ashtrays are produced in brass. Some of the trays are big enough 
to be placed on wrought iron legs to make a table. Other products include 
finely carved door knockers, sugar boxes, incense burners, and lanterns. Some 
Moroccan lanterns feature sapphire, ruby, emerald, amethyst, and topaz colored 
glass that cast a charming light. The most popular lamp is made from leather 
colored with henna decorations. 
To preserve their rich artistic tradition, postcolonial governments in 
Morocco have stimulated interest in the growth and development of handi-
crafts by encouraging skilled craftsmen to use the various art centers estab-
lished across the country. Every year, the pool of artisans and craftsmen who 
participate in the annual Month of Handicrafts festivals are recognized for 
their contribution toward the preservation of the indigenous culture. The 
most outstanding artworks presented at the festivals are reserved for display 
in the various national and regional museums in Rabat, Tangier, Marrakech, 
Fes, and Meknes. Although local artisans have continued to dominate the 
industry with indigenous crafts and items produced with local materials for 
commercial purposes, Western-style painting has yet to win a popular audience 
in Morocco. 

ART AND ARCHITECTURE/HOUSING 
63 
As a distinct art form, contemporary painting remains the prerogative of 
the educated elite or the so-called Westernized individuals. Most Moroccan 
painters were trained in France just like many of their patrons, who have had 
some kind of connection with Europe and other Western countries, includ-
ing the United States and Canada. Contemporary Moroccan painters primar-
ily use natural subjects such as the human form, trees, street scenes, animals, 
and other objects in their natural habitats. These works are mostly produced 
in Western-style abstractions. Generally, Islam prohibits the depiction of any 
living thing that has a soul, including people and animals. 
Moroccan artists capture the people's worldview, their ideas of creation, 
individual and common aspirations, value systems, family connections, 
social life, history, politics, and trade and occupations. Art objects exchanged 
between rulers of different countries serve as objets denvoi.5 Artistic work
in Morocco also provides information on processes through which society 
has adapted to sociopolitical and economic changes from one historical era 
to another. A closer study of art forms may reveal regional variations as well 
as origins and patterns of dispersion of a material culture. In precolonial 
Africa, artists were widely revered for their special skills rather than for their 
wealth. As culture carriers, they also help to preserve their local history by 
providing representations of battles and warriors, dances and performers, 
manners of dressing, visitors, heroes, kings, queens, and other important 
personalities. In modern Morocco, the prominent role played by artisans 
in promoting the tourist industry has brought them both popularity and 
prosperity. Although the local artist in the past did not get much mon-
etary reward, his skill was nonetheless widely respected and appreciated far 
beyond his land. Similarly, successful contemporary artists have also carved 
out a niche for themselves. 
Contemporary Art Forms 
With the dawn of European colonialism in 1912, artistic expression 
began its gradual transition to what is today referred to as contemporary. 
The French colonial schools, established after the protectorate agreement of 
1912, introduced young Moroccans to the French ways of life and European 
art. Moroccans who continued their studies in France and other parts of 
Europe specialized in art as an academic discipline in the hope of expand-
ing the rich artistic heritage of Morocco with new ideas, expressions, and 
media learned from the West. The Western-educated artists, who are often 
affiliated with an institution of higher learning, constitute the majority of 
the producers of the so-called contemporary or modern arts. The art stu-
dios and business ideas of the contemporary artists have been fashioned 

64 
CULTURE AND CUSTOMS OF MOROCCO 
after their foreign models. Among them are Andre Elbaz, a Moroccan Jew, 
whose works depict such images from Jewish spiritual culture as the city 
of Jerusalem, the prayer, typical synagogue settings, and the Holocaust.6 
Although Elbaz and others such as Ben Haim paint in the abstract expres-
sionist tradition, their choice of themes also reflects their multicultural 
indigenous environment. 
With the strong reputation of Moroccan traditional art and architecture 
worldwide, contemporary artists are confronted with daunting challenges in 
breaking new ground. To win recognition and respect, contemporary artists 
must improve on existing legacies. Considering the excellent craftsmanship 
that has flourished in Morocco since the sixteenth century, the contemporary 
artist can tap from both traditional and European art forms to create some-
thing innovative. A good example along this line is the Wafabank art gallery 
in Casablanca. In 1988, Wafabank, a major commercial financial institution 
in Morocco, displayed modern art in the foyer of its corporate headquarters. 
Through its patronage of local art, the bank solidified its image as part of a 
Moroccan nation. While promoting an image of the investment institution, 
the bank also tried to project its image as a competitive participant in global 
capitalism. The artistic imagery represented modern Morocco turned toward 
the future.7 
Meanwhile, existing religious and traditional values tend to constrain the 
freedom of painters to explore their talents. In Islam, certain kinds of artistic 
expression are not permitted. Muslims hold the belief that angels will not enter 
a house that has pictures or sculptures of anything that contains a soul. For 
the artist, this taboo is even more restrictive in view of the competition from 
Western counterparts who are free of religious, social, or political constraints. 
Consequently, the contemporary Moroccan painter is trapped between two 
worlds—religious strictures and secular enchantments. The path to artistic 
success lies in making the best out of this dualism. 
Because of religious restrictions, European artists who visited Morocco in 
the colonial period usually stayed in the Jewish quarters, or mellahs (a com-
mon word for the various Jewish quarters of Moroccan towns and cities). 
The mellahs were more accessible to Europeans than the old Muslim quar-
ters known as old medina. While the European artists introduced Moroccan 
Jews to Western paintings, European painters were in turn influenced by 
Jewish culture and, by extension, Moroccan art forms. The paintings of the 
Europeans and their Moroccan cohorts depicted Jewish social ceremonies 
such as weddings. Images of Jewish women featured prominently in both 
the painting and the photography of visiting European artists. This was 
because Jewish women were more likely to be comfortable posing for the 
artists. 

ART AND ARCHITECTURE/HOUSING 
65 
ARCHITECTURE 
Traditional Architecture/Housing 
Moroccan architecture has been heavily impacted by Islamic traditions and 
later European influences, the climate, modes of religious worship and rituals, 
regional histories, and local materials. All have combined to give Moroccan 
architecture a diverse but unique expression. Westerners refer to Morocco's 
architectural style as Hispano-Moorish because of the influence brought by 
the Arabs who were expelled from Europe in the eighth century. The styles 
and patterns brought from Spain by these Arabs soon expanded, emerging as 
a popular culture. Hispano-Moorish architecture peaked in Morocco between 
the twelfth and fourteenth centuries, with the horseshoe-shaped arch emerg-
ing as the most distinctive feature of the style. 
This form of traditional architecture is best appreciated in the exquisite 
mosques and temples that dot the large cities in Morocco. The medieval 
architectural landmarks found everywhere are eloquent reminders about the 
people's diverse cultural heritage, style and taste, politics, ethnic and religious 
identity, and the way Muslims, Jews, and foreigners lived and interacted with 
one another. The Muslim medinas, the Jewish mellahs, the fortresses of the 
Berbers and their Marabout saints, the palaces of the sultans, and the Casbahs 
of the provincial and local governors (viziers) and the local judges (qaids) all 
Medieval Castle in Ouarzazate, Morocco. Courtesy of Valerie 
Orlando. 

66 
CULTURE AND CUSTOMS OF MOROCCO 
reflect important parts of this history. Each ethnic group in a particular city 
has its own quarter. This reminds historians about authority and power rela-
tions, social customs, ethnic and religious identities, and patterns of civic 
engagements.8 
Today, the inner parts of the Atlas Mountains and the southern fringes of 
the desert remain as predominantly Berber homelands. The Berbers have, 
with some modifications, retained the fortresslike forms of architecture 
known as the Casbah. It is typically constructed to withstand enemy assault. 
In essence, a Casbah in the Berber country is a feudal castle or a fortified vil-
lage with interconnected parts. In the era of the Islamic invasions of North 
Africa and Spain, a fortified section of the Casbah known as the ksar was 
where loyal residents sought protection in times of danger. In the Sahara 
and Atlas Mountain regions, however, the word ksar generally refers to forti-
fied and walled villages.9 The Casbahs also serve as both residential houses 
and storerooms. 
Some of the houses built before the 1920s were located about 300 meters 
from one another and planned without windows. They have towers and pill-
boxes from which a family could repel enemy attacks. Others have only a few 
openings with sides opening outward, usually for allowing the firing of can-
non. Although there are few dangers for residents today, some authorities have 
noted the resilience of "the architectonic notion of a house as a defensive for-
tress against a dangerous external world continues, as each house is surrounded 
Medieval castle in Essaouira, Morocco. Courtesy of Valerie 
Orlando. 

ART AND ARCHITECTURE/HOUSING 
67 
by groves of prickly pears and inhospitable domestic dogs."10 Also, the camps 
of the black, squat, and goat-hair tents of the Berber nomads still exist in the 
isolated mountain steppes bordering the Sahara.11 
Big cities such as Tangier, Fes, Rabat, and Casablanca have landmarks that 
define Morocco's artistic and architectural achievements in more elaborate, 
diverse, and cosmopolitan settings. Tangier, for instance, reflects a multicul-
tural foundation of the people's architecture. The architecture of the city tells 
a part of the people's history. Tangier has five-star hotels, which are primarily 
Muslim public buildings rebuilt to attract tourists and other visitors. This 
trend in remodeling, which began with the Mohammed V mausoleum and 
a set of other large projects, has been branded by some scholars as the "Has-
sanian architectural style."12 Tangier also hosts Chaouen, the palace of the 
sharifs—that is, the descendants of the Prophet Muhammad. Another impor-
tant historical structure of the city is Abdel el Krim's well-secured fortress, 
which tells a history of the fierce Berber anticolonial resistance in Morocco 
from 1912 to 1934. This castle is now a popular tourist attraction. Overall, 
the most impressive architectural landmark of Tangier is the twelfth-century 
medina with its 27 mosques and markets and its shops (souks) that sell crafts 
to tourists. 
Typical fortified desert home in the Errachidean Tafilalet region 
between the Atlas Mountains to the north and the Sahara to 
the south. Courtesy of Valerie Orlando. 

68 
CULTURE AND CUSTOMS OF MOROCCO 
Fes, popularly known as the Three Cities, including the adjacent suburbs 
of Moulay-Idriss and the ancient Roman city of Volubilis to the west, repre-
sents an important part of the architectural history of Morocco. Besides being 
the third largest city in Morocco, Fes is generally known in the Arab world 
for its wonderful marble temples, sculptures, luxurious baths, and mosaic 
floors. The walled section of its medina (or Arab quarter), located on a hill to 
the east, remains as one of the most complex architectural landmarks of the 
town. Some of the historical landmarks include ancient monuments, mosques, 
Quranic colleges, inns, mellahs, and shops. The medina (also called Fes el Bali) 
is in the style of a Roman amphitheater. Directly facing the main city gates 
is a hillside studded with stones of ancient cemeteries, and nearby are the 
larger tombs of the revered righteous men (Wali Saleh) of Fes. The streets are 
typically narrow with a network of alleyways that were not originally meant 
for modern cars. The houses are often tall. Also in the medina section of Fes 
is the Dar Batha, a nineteenth-century palace now serving as the Museum 
of Moroccan Art and Handicrafts. Another important landmark is the Bou 
Imania Medersa, a fourteenth-century college complex, which represents a 
fine example of Merinid architecture. The walls are covered with mosaics, 
carved plaster, and elaborately patterned cut and uncut loops. Its penthouse 
is finished with details(e.g. elaborate artistic decorations and paintings), and 
the courtyard is paved in romantic colors. 
Most traditional buildings in Morocco are modeled after the mosques, 
thereby capturing the dominant religion of the people. The mosques are typi-
cally constructed with a high entrance door and a green tiled roof. The court-
yards have a fountain for ritual ablution, and a hall is divided into aisles to 
separate the sexes. A recess in the wall (mihrab) is strategically placed to show 
the direction of Mecca. All the mosques have a pulpit from which the prayer 
leader (Imam) officiates during Friday congregational prayers. 
The Quranic colleges and universities established early in the twelfth century 
were closely modeled after the mosques, with courtyards that have fountains 
and with prayer halls. The structures are also decorated with mosaic tiles, glass-
work, stucco, and Kufic script (named after the Iraqi town of Kufa where this 
form of art originated). 
Fes also has the oldest and largest Jewish quarter (mellah) in Morocco, 
established in 1438.13 Although the mellahs of Morocco, including the one 
in Fes, are now mostly deserted, they provide information on Jewish social 
life in Morocco. In this part of the Muslim world, walls characteristically sur-
rounded each mellah, especially those built in the period of religious fanati-
cism under the Almohad dynasty (c. 1062-1269). The mellah of Fes was built 
by Sultan Abu Said (died 1250) and was located close to his palace to ensure 
the protection of the Jews from Muslim fanatics. A recent study of Jewish 

ART AND ARCHITECTURE/HOUSING 
69 
Fez, the most precious of all Moroccan cities and one of the 
most important places in the Islamic world. Courtesy of Valerie 
Orlando. 
mellahs in Marrakech, by an art historian at the Hebrew University Jerusalem, 
reports that the houses followed a rudimentary style, which extended to other 
structures in the quarters across Morocco, including Fes. All the synagogues 
were built virtually in the same pattern across Morocco. They were typically 
located in a narrow alley. The slightly irregular red clay walls had "an unfin-
ished quality to them like the huts niched in the slopes that blend into the 
landscape of southern Morocco."14 
Even though a mass exodus of Moroccan Jews occurred in the wake of the 
Arab-Israeli conflicts beginning with the founding of the state of Israel in 1948, 
most of the synagogues are still standing in the mellahs, even though the quar-
ters are now largely occupied by Muslims. A characteristic feature of the syna-
gogues is an unmarked entrance located off a dim alley that leads through a 
door to a rectangular room (ezrat nashim) reserved for women. This provision 
for women is apparently a twentieth-century innovation in Morocco. In the past, 
women were traditionally restricted to the entrance of a synagogue. The small 
rooms of a synagogue were constructed in a row, with a window in the ceiling 
as the only source of light. Inside the synagogue, the Ark of Covenant, symbol-
izing God's special covenant with the Jews, is usually located against an eastern 
wall, facing the direction of Jerusalem. The lectern, originally made of wood, 
is positioned at the center of the western wall of the synagogue. Newer lecterns 
in Jewish synagogues, like that of "Alzama" (one of a series of newly designed 

70 
CULTURE AND CUSTOMS OF MOROCCO 
House in the Medina, Fez. Courtesy of Valerie Orlando. 
Interior garden of a house in the old medina section of Fez. 
Courtesy of Valerie Orlando. 
synagogues built around a large and well-maintained courtyard), constructed 
in the early twentieth century in Marrakech, are made of marble. Red clay 
benches covered with colored fabric and small cushions line the sides. In the 
center of the synagogue—that is between the lectern and the Ark—is a row 
of wooden chairs. A common characteristic of all Moroccan synagogues is the 

ART AND ARCHITECTURE/HOUSING 
71 
Interior of a medina house, Fez. Courtesy of Valerie Orlando. 
abundance of oil lamps (qandils) lit in memory of the dead. The qandil is sus-
pended by chains and ends in a silver or copper ring in which the lamp is set. 
The wick has been replaced in many lamps by electric bulbs. Whereas some 
synagogues are smaller and more modest, others, like some found in Fes and 
Meknes, are elaborately ornamented. For instance, the Sadoun synagogue in 
Fes is one of the most lavish in Morocco. Its walls are completely covered in 
fine plaster and ornamentation with tilted glass panes in the windows above 
them. This building demonstrates the pervading impact of Muslim traditions, 
which extends not only to mosques but also to other public buildings such 
as palaces and houses decorated in stucco and ceramic tiles (zelliges). In other
words, Jewish synagogues were constructed on the same pattern as other build-
ing, and their artistic decorations have been influenced by Berber, Islamic, and 
European cultures. Synagogues build by Moroccan Jews and recent immigrants 
depict regional diversities and traditions that are impossible to assign to a single 
culture. 
A discussion about the history of architecture and housing in Fes would be 
incomplete without a brief look at Moulay-Idriss—a suburb lying to the west 
of Fes and named after the founder of Morocco's first dynasty. The town has a 
mausoleum (dareeh) containing the remains of the respected Moulay Idriss I. 
Because it is a sacred center, Sufis (a sect in North African Islam) mostly inhabit 
the area. Tourists are allowed to visit but are prohibited to spend the night here. 
Housing and architecture in Moulay-Idriss represent primarily the original 

72 
CULTURE AND CUSTOMS OF MOROCCO 
Muslim style. Narrow, windowless lanes, decorated with lovely carvings on square 
cedar doors, lead up to the Casbah. In the rich neighborhoods, the entrance 
doors were constructed to ensure the privacy of the occupants. 
As one of the legacies bequeathed by the Merinidian (c. 1248-1420) 
era sultans who first established their capital here in the mid-thirteenth 
century, the town is lined with such splendid structures as Muslim col-
leges, libraries, and the sultans' palaces.15 The interior decorations of the 
buildings were specifically designed. The ceiling arches are skillfully carved 
cedar. The finish work reveals much about the Moroccans reputation in 
stuccowork. The marble, mosaics, earthenware tiles, and marked enamel 
plates are all outstanding. The doors are finished with gilded leather and 
the portals studded with chased bronze sheets. By the time of the Almohad 
dynasty, Fes had about 
785 mosques and other places of devotion, nearly 100,000 houses, 81 fountains 
and 93 public baths and 476 caravansaries and fondouk rest-houses. . . . The
historical picture of the city is rounded off as we learn that it then had 3,064 
weaving-mills, 116 dyeworks, 168 pottery establishments and 86 tanneries, 
while in the Fes souks there were fewer than 9,183 shops in which the famous 
products of North Africa's most accomplished craftsmen were on sale.16 
Although a complete account of art and architecture in all the cities and 
towns of Morocco is impossible here, Morocco's capital, Rabat, and Casablanca, 
Historic village of Moulay Idris. Courtesy of Valerie Orlando. 

ART AND ARCHITECTURE/HOUSING 
73 
the third largest city in Africa after Lagos (Nigeria) and Cairo (Egypt), will 
be covered briefly. Rabat was founded in the twelfth century. Today it is a 
cosmopolitan capital city of gardens (riyadhs) and monumental structures. 
The medina section of Rabat, built in the seventeenth century, still retains its 
Andalusian character because it housed Muslims originally driven from Spain. 
Fortified walls surround the historic Quadias fortress, which is accessible 
through a gateway built during the reign of Yacoub (or Jacob) El Mansour 
(1185-1195). The main gate leads into the inner garden, designed in 1915. 
Bougainvillea covers the wall, and birds build nests on the barricades. 
Installed in the gardens of Casbah is a smaller palace that now serves as the 
museum of Oudaia. The building was originally built in the seventeenth 
century. The ceremonial hall is adorned with the best oriental rugs made 
in Rabat. The terrace has a pond. Inside are a set of local musical instru-
ments and an exhibition hall for jewelry. Another salon is completed with 
a brocaded divan, a copper incense burner, sculptured chests, and embroi-
dered cushions. This section is reserved for rituals and customs. Like every 
other city, Rabat also has a Jewish quarter (mellah). One of the most promi-
nent features of the city is the imposing royal palace, where the king resides 
with his family and where he meets with state officials, friends, important 
dignitaries, and foreign envoys. 
All the royal palaces in Morocco were designed with the help of top artists 
and craftsmen in the kingdom. They demonstrate the power and authority of 
the king as the father and custodian of the nation. Most of the king's palaces 
in Morocco have very plain exteriors. Like the mosques and Islamic colleges, 
the palace courtyard is the central feature, and rooms are constructed around 
it. The judgment hall is finished with an elaborate and spacious balcony from 
which the sultan receives homage from his subjects. 
Casablanca, the "white city," is the most "modern" of all the cities in Morocco 
and has more Western-style structures than the other cities. The city is particu-
larly distinguished for its wide streets, in contrast with the narrow streets of 
old cities like Fes and Tangier. Like the other cities, however, Casablanca still 
has its original Arab settlement, or "old medina," with its narrow streets with 
weathered houses. There are also magnificent mosques built during the reign 
of Sidi Mohammed be Abdella (1757-1790). 
As a modern city, Casablanca is unique for its new residential and business 
quarters—called "new medina" (villes nouvelles). The French established the 
miles nouvelles in 1921 as part of the innovation that brought colonialism to 
the people. New medina is home to Mohammed V's (died 1961) magnificent 
palace, erected at the end of World War I in 1919, which remains as one of 
the city's principal monuments. Government and private businesses, however, 
have erected several Western-style high-rise buildings. Among these, the most 

74 
CULTURE AND CUSTOMS OF MOROCCO 
impressive is perhaps the United Nations Square, which is completed with a 
post office, municipal theater, and city hall, along with a McDonald's. Also, 
both the Arab League headquarters and the imposing French government's 
building (Place de France) stand out. The emerging Western-style architecture 
is fast encroaching on the seemingly unyielding Oriental tradition. The resi-
dential areas are complete with gardens, Moorish fountains, amusement parks, 
golf courses, and colonial houses. 
This picture of affluence is in sharp contrast to the surrounding slums 
(bidonvilles), which first appeared in Casablanca in the 1920s after the expan-
sion of the population of the city. The bidonvilles often serve as transit stations 
for newly arrived families who can find affordable accommodations in the 
makeshift structures formerly occupied by renters who moved to the city after 
securing better-paying jobs. The government in Morocco has, within its lim-
ited ability, tried to provide a suitable accommodation for its citizens, but this 
has been constrained by lack of adequate resources in the face of a fast-growing 
population. 
Overall, architecture and housing in Casablanca, Rabat, Fes, Tangier, and 
other Moroccan cities "stand in sharp contrast with a Western discourse that 
visualizes the Moroccan city as disordered, its streets insalubrious, its water 
system in a state of dilapidation."17 It is important to reiterate that contem-
porary housing and architecture in Morocco are undergoing a dynamic and 
ongoing process. This will continue to adjust and expand in response to both 
local and international adaptations in style, taste, and technology. It is also 
crucial to note that ethnic, class, and urban and rural differences have com-
bined in different degrees in determining the direction of the recent develop-
ments. The new generation of technocrats and young people in the big cities 
are predisposed to Western-style residential houses. The poorer individuals 
who cannot afford accommodation in the palatial neighborhoods are forced 
to make do with shanties or the older and more traditional architectural styles. 
Against the notion that tends to see Islamic architecture as relatively static, 
one must emphasize that it, as in every culture, is dynamic in nature. 
NOTES 
1. A similar point has been made by Wilhelmina Schripper in "The Verbal and the 
Visual in a Globalizing Context: African and European Connections as an Ongoing 
Process," Research in African Literature 31, no. 4 (2000): 139-54. 
2. See also Bogumil Jewsiewicki, Cheri Samba: The Hybridity of Art [E hybridite 
d" un art] (Westmount, Quebec: Galerie Amrad African Art Publications, 1995). 
3. Richard F. Nyrop et al., Area Handbook for Morocco (Washington, D.C.: U.S. 
Government Printing Office, 1972), 139. 

ART AND ARCHITECTURE/HOUSING 
75 
4. E. Gans-Ruedin, The Connoisseurs Guide to Oriental Carpets, trans. Valerie 
Howard (Rutland, VT: Charles E. Turtle, 1971), 417. 
5. For a good discussion on this, see Christine Mullen and Sarah Fez, eds., 
Objects as Envoys: Cloth, Imagery, and Diplomacy in Madagascar (Washington, D.C.:
Smithsonian Institution, National Museum of African Art in association with the 
University of Washington Press, 2002), 1. 
6. See also Daniel J. Schroeter and Vivian B. Mann, eds., Morocco: Jews and Art 
in a Muslim Land (London: Merrell, 2000). 
7. James McDougall, ed., Nation, Society and Culture in North Africa (Port-
land, OR: Frank Cass, 2003), 136, 144. See also Katarzyna Pieprzak, "Citizens and 
Subjects in the Bank: Corporate Visions of Modern Art and Moroccan Identity," 
Journal of North African Studies 8, no. 1 (2003): 131-54. 
8. A historian of African architecture has also underscored this point in a recent 
book; see Nnamdi Elleh, Architecture and Power in Africa (Westport, CT: Praeger,
2002), 112. 
9. Hsain Illahiane, "The Break-up of the Ksar: Changing Settlement Patterns 
and Environmental Management in Southern Morocco," Africa Today 48, no. 1 
(2001): 21-48. 
10. Roger Joseph and Terri Brint Joseph, The Rose and the Thorn: Semiotic Structures
in Morocco (Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 1987), 16. 
11. Hans Seligo, Morocco, trans. G.A. Colville (Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 
1966), 49. 
12. Philippe Ploquin and Mohammed-Allal Sinaceur, La Mosquee Hassan II 
[The Hassan IIMosque] (Dremil-Lafage, France: Editions D. Briand, 1993), 17.
13. The oldest of all the Jewish mellahs in Morocco is the Fez el-Bali (the "old city") 
founded by Idriss II in the ninth century. 
14. Ariella Amar, "Moroccan Synagogues: A Survey," The Israeli Review of Arts 
and Letters 106 (February 1999): 1-6. For a detailed study of Jewish life in Morocco, 
see the impressive study by Daniel J. Schroeter, The Sultan s Jew: Morocco and the 
Sephardi World (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2002). 
15. Seligo, Morocco, 11. 
16. Ibid., 11-12. 
17. Susan Gilson Miller, "Watering the Garden of Tangier: Colonial Contestations 
in a Moroccan City," in Susan Slyomovics, ed., The Walled Arab City in Literature, 
Architecture and History: The Living Medina in the Maghrib (Portland, OR: Frank 
Cass, 2001), 42. 

This page intentionally left blank 

5 
Cuisine and Traditional Dress 
CUISINE 
MOROCCAN CUISINE AND EATING habits are expressive forms of sociocultural 
practices that denote personal, familial, and social habits and identities. They 
also underscore societal values and etiquette because the preparation of cer-
tain foods and dishes are dictated by customs and rules at certain periods 
of the day or year. Over the centuries, the natural gifts of ocean, sea, and 
arable parts of Morocco's diverse land have enabled the growth of a wide 
variety of fruits, meat, vegetables, and seafood that support the population 
and enrich the people's diets. Even regions threatened by drought (dhamurth 
nj-bur) such as some parts of the Rif Mountains, as opposed to the irrigated 
(dhamurth w-aman) parts, have continued to sustain life with the success of 
barley cultivation as well as poultry, sheep, and goat farms. 
Strategically located at one of the most important termini of ancient trad-
ing circuits, Morocco's kitchen today is an amalgam of different cultures. 
The "kitchen of Morocco combines European infusion, Arab trade and 
age-old custom."1 The Arabs, who appeared in Morocco in the late seventh 
century, brought with them via the trans-Saharan and trans-Mediterranean 
trade routes new recipes, varieties of breads, and spices from China, India, 
Malaysia, and West Africa. From the Ottomans, grilling and barbecue were 
popularized. From the Portuguese and Spanish, the Moroccans learned new 
dishes and received food crops such as maize from the New World in the 
fifteenth century. Under colonial rule between 1912 and 1956, the French 
introduced pastries, desserts, ice creams, confectionaries, and the custom 

78 
CULTURE AND CUSTOMS OF MOROCCO 
of mixing grilled food with salads with lettuce and so on. The French also 
introduced new techniques of agriculture, which have improved crop yield, 
expanded the vineyards, and improved the quality and quantity of wine in 
Morocco. However, most of the cooking methods, cuisine, dietary habits, 
and social customs that exist today have long been part of the indigenous 
Berber culture before the various alien influences made inroads. Others are 
practices common to Africans, Asians, Arabs, and Europeans. This diversity 
forms a gastronomy that reflects a vibrant and lively culture explored by the 
women (dada) and professional chefs of the country and is what is now popu-
larly acknowledged as Moroccan cuisine. 
Popular Cuisine 
In a book written for an American audience, Paula Wolfert, a former resi-
dent of Morocco, identified four dishes that she claimed to be the most popu-
lar among Moroccans. Top among these is couscous, which is a type of grain 
processed from semolina. Couscous can also be made from grains such as bar-
ley, millet, and cornmeal. The next in popularity, according to the author, 
is a huge pie or thick pastry called bisteeya (also bsteeya, bastela, bastila, and
pastilla). Then there is the mouthwatering roasted lamb (mechoui or mashw) 
prepared as barbeque. The fourth is a chicken dish (djej emshmel) prepared 
with lemon and olives.2 Although this list may still be relevant, it is difficult 
to choose only four from the numerous dishes of Morocco. First, Moroccan 
cuisine is dynamic, as the women and professional cooks continue to experi-
ment with a wide range of recipes. Second, as people often say, "the best meals 
are not found in restaurants" but in the home. It is therefore hard to make any 
conclusive statement from restaurant meals. Food culture differs from person 
to person, family to family, and region to region. Moreover, the foodstuffs 
available to the rich are not the same ones that are accessible to the poor. Sim-
ple meals made from wheat or barley are the most affordable for the average 
person in Morocco. Third, a survey of Morocco's popular cuisine must include 
a discussion of bread. Among other significances, bread is not only a common 
part of everyday meals but is also perceived as a sacred gift from Allah (God). 
Bread (Ksra or KhbozJ 
A common Moroccan proverb challenges the deprived to "manage with 
bread and butter until God sends the honey." This adage emphasizes both the 
availability of bread to everybody, rich or poor, and its reverence as a sacred 
food. The Berbers of the Rif Mountains have long sustained themselves with 
their staple breads made from barley. They supplement their favorite breads 
with a variety of other products such as potatoes, tomatoes, onions, garlic, 

CUISINE AND TRADITIONAL DRESS 
79 
pepper, squash, fruits, and nuts. Berber men cultivate barley, which their 
women produce into flour and then bake it into bread. In fact, the imagery 
of converting barley to bread "is very clearly recognized in the [traditional] 
wedding ceremony, when the bride brings barley seed to her husband's house 
to scatter in the coming cycle of planting."3 
Until the late 1980s, almost all households in Morocco would bake their 
own bread. The development of modern cities and the increasing demand of 
professional careers on family life are beginning to change this practice. Orig-
inally, community ovens (known as fran) were strategically located in every 
neighborhood to enable families to bake their bread. This was before families 
started buying their own ovens. In the public bakeries, each family distin-
guished their breads with identification signs and letters. With the increasing 
demands of urban life, professional careers, and women's gradual departure 
from the traditional role of a housewife, some individuals and families have 
little time to make their own breads. 
Moroccans bake a wide variety of breads from coarse barley, flour, wheat, 
sorghum, and millet. Often the bread is thin, flat, and round or shaped into 
a long crispy dough. Women knead the dough methodically until the yeast is 
evenly distributed and enriched with herbs, spices, protein, and other ingre-
dients. The Berber women are famous for a special kind of local bread called 
therfist, which is unleavened bread prepared in sheets. The Tuaregs of the 
southern part of the country bake on hot sand and call their special bread 
tagella. Typical Moroccan breads include khboz bishemar and khboz milka. 
The latter is flattened circular dough cooked until brown on both sides. The 
khboz bishemar is baked in a unique form with fat and spices stuffed inside 
the dough. As it bakes, the fat runs out through holes pierced in the dough, 
leaving behind a mouthwatering aroma of spices and herbs. Holiday bread is 
originally from the port city of Essaouira on the Atlantic west coast of Mar-
rakech. It is prepared according to special family recipes with dry yeast, sweet 
butter, granulated sugar (sukkar), salt, sesame seeds, cornmeal, aniseed, and 
buttermilk. Generally, Moroccan breads are heavy, spicy, soft-crusted, highly 
absorbent, and ideal for dipping into the special stew, tajine. In a society 
where most people eat with their fingers, bread often serves as a utensil for 
stirring and bringing food into the mouth. It is a custom in Morocco for one 
person to distribute bread when all are seated at the table.4 
Couscous (Grain) 
Couscous is widely acknowledged as the national dish of Morocco, and 
it is also popular in the whole of the Maghreb. It is of Berber origin, and it 
means more than the prepared dish and the granules of semolina. Couscous 
also means "food" in Moroccan Arabic because it is generally affordable to the 

80 
CULTURE AND CUSTOMS OF MOROCCO 
poor and therefore a regular part of the people's daily meals. According to a 
study made in 1972, most families were still sending their "wheat to the local 
mill to be ground to the degree of fineness they preferred."5 Couscous may also 
be prepared with other types of grains, including wheat, barley, sprouts, corn, 
millet, crushed acorns, and even breadcrumbs. Although the various grains can 
be prepared in dissimilar ways, they turn into couscous only when covered and 
cooked over low heat and allowed to simmer. Steaming is said to be a tradi-
tional Berber way of cooking because of the scarcity of wood in the semiarid 
land. Couscous may be served with stew (tajine) with different types of meats 
and vegetables such as turnips, chickpeas, and onions. In Fes, the stew is often 
light, and the ingredients are delicately cooked and seasoned with onions, black 
pepper, saffron, and ginger. It is normal to serve couscous with loaves of bread. 
The Pastry or Pie (Bisteeya) 
Bisteeya is one of the richest and most exotic meals of Morocco. It can be
described as a huge pie delicately made of layers of spicy pigeon or chicken, lem-
ony eggs cooked in a savory onion sauce, and toasted and sweetened almonds. 
Baked together, the recipe forms a uniquely Moroccan pastry. People disagree 
over the origin of this dish. Some claim it came from Andalusia, Spain, based 
on the similarity of the word bisteeya to the Spanish word pasteles (or "pastry
confections"). Others postulate that bisteeya was brought to Morocco in the
seventh century with the invading Arabs from the Middle East and that the 
Arabs in turn got this recipe from the Chinese. Whatever its origin, the Moroc-
cans, like their Asian, African, and European neighbors, have borrowed and 
adapted ideas originating from other cultures in creating their distinct ways of 
life, including food and dietary habits. This pie is typically enormous and must 
be prepared in a big tray that can serve up to 10 people. The preparation of 
the dough demands expertise and experience. There are regional variations of 
bisteeya. For instance, in Fes, bisteeya is traditionally prepared with pigeon meat
(instead of chicken), and the diameter is about 20 or more inches. Pigeons in 
Morocco are of a different variety from those found in the United States, and so 
they taste different. The Berbers in the Middle Atlas region of central Morocco 
make a distinct bisteeya with pounded beef or lamb and seasoned with cinna-
mon and egg. The Berbers call this version of bisteeya tarkhdoult. The version
made in Marrakech is prepared with milk and orange flower water. Generally, 
the pastry is prepared according to individual taste. 
The Chicken Dish (Djej Emshmel) 
The chicken (djej) dish is prepared in different ways, but basically it is a lemon 
and olive stew. As desired, other ingredients, such as eggs and onions, may also 
be added. The chicken is slowly simmered with olives and preserved lemons 

CUISINE AND TRADITIONAL DRESS 
81 
in a smooth sauce seasoned with saffron, cumin, ginger, and paprika. When 
the dish is prepared, as in Meknes, with spiced and creamy lemon and served 
with olive sauce, it represents the original djej emshmel. When the chicken is
prepared with a combination of eggs, it becomes djej masquid bil beid. When 
pigeon (frach) is substituted for chicken, the dish is called frach masquid bil 
beid. Some families prepare their favorite chicken dish using the locally grown
bitter green olives, and the dish is called djej bil zeetoon meslalla. 
Stew or Sauce (Tajine or Tagine) 
The Moroccan traditional stew or tajine is of Berber origin and may be 
prepared in different ways. Actually, the word tajine, or tagine, is both the 
name of the completed dish and the name of a locally manufactured pot 
made from earthenware. The pot comes in different shapes and sizes, and 
it cooks food slowly. Traditionally, tajine is mainly prepared with chicken 
and lamb. Now it can be prepared with anything, including camel or fish. 
(What the Moroccans regard as soup [shourba] is harrira, which is pre-
pared with mutton and spices. Harrira is quite different from tajine.) The 
recipe for tajine includes heating oil and spices in a cold clay pot. Then 
the meat or fish is added and cooked over low heat. Finally, vegetables are 
added and allowed just enough time to cook. The preferred tajine is lemon 
chicken marinated in olive oil, onions, black pepper, salt, saffron, garlic, 
and mosses.6 
Spices/ Aromatics, and Herbs 
The use of spices is perhaps the most distinctive element of Moroccan cuisine. 
Most of the spices in use today were brought to Morocco many centuries 
ago from India, China, the Middle East, and sub-Saharan Africa. Given the 
importance of spices, herbs, and other types of culinary aromatics in Moroc-
can cuisine, it is propitious to identify some of the most popular spices found 
there. They are used not only for the enrichment of food flavor and taste but 
also for their sophisticated medicinal values. The 10 most important spices 
commonly used are cayenne (felfla), cumin (kamoon), cinnamon (karfa), tur-
meric (quekoum), saffron (zafrane), ginger (skinjbir), paprika (felfla hlouwa),
black pepper (elbezar), aniseed (nafaa or habbt), and sesame seeds (jinjelan).
Other aromatics include allspice (noioura), caraway (karwiya), cloves (oud 
el nouar), coriander seeds (kosbour), gum arabic (mska), fenugreek (helbah), 
licorice (arksous), honey dates (nabka), and orrisroot (amber el door). The 
most popular herbs and plants include onions (sla), garlic (tourma), parsley 
(madnouss), and green coriander (kosbour)J The way in which these spices, 
herbs, and aromatics are used largely depends on individual taste, type of 
dish, and quantity being prepared. 

82 
CULTURE AND CUSTOMS OF MOROCCO 
MEALTIME 
In Morocco (unlike the practice in most sub-Saharan African societies 
where dinner is the major meal of the day), lunch is the main meal and 
"eat-as-you-can" or "as-you-can-afford" seems to be the common practice. It 
is only during the month of Ramadan (the month of fasting) that Muslims 
eat at sunset and before sunrise. Whereas most Africans, especially those in 
the sub-Saharan region, characteristically serve a single-course meal, Moroccans, 
like the Europeans, Americans, and Asians, serve several courses. In Morocco 
there is neither a common national menu to which everybody must adhere 
nor an established order of serving meals. What is on the menu and how 
many courses are served depend much on individuals' tastes, family habits, 
and, more importantly, their financial capacity. A large portion of the foods 
grown in Morocco is exported to Europe in order for the government and 
farmers to secure foreign capital for the importation of machines and to 
finance development projects. Consequently, there is an abnormal problem 
of food scarcity. The wealthy enjoy sumptuous meals, but the poor rarely eat 
a balanced diet. 
There are three daily meals—breakfast (futo), lunch or midday meal (rada), 
and dinner (asha). Breakfast is usually light, consisting of bread, butter, olive 
oil, black olives (dipped in a special salt), jelly, and other simple foods. Bread 
is the most common food for breakfast. It is eaten with butter or dipped into 
preserved olive oil with tea and juice. 
Lunchtime in Morocco, as in most Mediterranean countries, including 
modern Spain, is almost inseparable from family and therefore sacred. It is a 
period of the day for an elaborate family meal as well as a time for rest before 
returning to work. In line with the law, many businesses and offices are closed 
for the midday meal, and most family members rush home for lunch. Excep-
tions include those who work in locations far away from home. With the 
majority of women still playing the traditional housewife role, the midday 
meal is elaborate and ritualistic. It therefore offers an ideal setting to assess 
table manners and eating habits. Lunch preparation may take hours or even 
days, depending on the type of meal, the size of the family, the number of 
persons involved in the preparation, and the quality and number of courses 
planned. Family meals are prepared differently from ceremonial meals. For 
the women for whom managing the home is their primary duty, cooking is
not only a form of expression, it is also a symbol of privilege and power. They 
begin preparing lunch for their families soon after breakfast is over. In ideal 
circumstances, the midday meal commences with a series of green vegetables 
or salads served as appetizers (tapas). Stew (tajine) or what Americans and 
other Westerners call soup is served next, with vegetables, hard-boiled eggs, 

CUISINE AND TRADITIONAL DRESS 
83 
and flat bread. The main dish of the midday meal for well-to-do families is 
often a lamb or chicken served with a generous measure of couscous, which 
is also garnished with vegetables. 
Considering the typically generous size of the midday meal, dinner is often 
plain—mainly consisting of the lunch leftovers. Families who can afford them 
may add salads, omelets, and/or meat. Snacks are not common in the local 
diet. Rather, varieties of dried fruits and nuts are consumed. Recently, crunchy 
chips and fast foods have emerged in corner shops across Morocco. This is an 
aspect of globalization that is increasingly bringing peoples of all cultures into 
closer contact with Western practices, including tastes for Western food and 
beverages.8 
Beverages 
The most popular and widely affordable beverages in Morocco include 
water and mint tea. Also available are wines, coffee, milk, and varieties of 
fruit drinks. A study has revealed that since World War II when American 
troops stationed in Morocco introduced Coca-Cola to the people, carbon-
ated mineral waters have found a growing number of consumers.9 Although 
ordinary water is cheaper, the privileged are used to drinking water treated 
with gum arabic (known in Morocco as mska, a water-soluble gum obtained 
from Acacias arabica and used in the making of pharmaceuticals, confections, 
and other products). This is referred to as "perfumed water" because of the 
sweet-smelling scent and lingering taste of the gum arabic. Across Morocco, 
obtaining good drinking water can sometimes be a problem, especially in the 
smaller cities and the semiarid villages of the mountainous countryside. The 
government has been working to make drinking water available to most parts 
of the country. 
The characteristically sweet mint tea is a national beverage enjoyed in 
Morocco. British traders brought tea into the country around the first decade 
of the nineteenth century, and the local people have developed a distinct taste 
for their special mint tea. The tea may be prepared in different ways, but the 
basic recipe involves green tea, steeped and laced with a generous amount 
of white sugar and fresh spearmint. This tea is drunk from small glasses and 
tastes so sweet that it becomes addictive. Nowadays, the three glassfuls tra-
ditionally taken at meals or ceremonies have been more or less abandoned. 
Those with diabetes or other health concerns must either stay away from it or 
learn how to drink their tea without sugar. 
Moroccans also enjoy wine. The Mediterranean climate is ideal for growing 
grapes. Initially, Moroccan Jews distilled alcoholic beverages from grapes, dates, 
honeycombs, pomegranates, and raisins. One of their favorite brews is the 

84 
CULTURE AND CUSTOMS OF MOROCCO 
fig brandy produced in the Telouet region of the High Atlas Mountains. After 
the protectorate agreement of 1912, the French established more vineyards 
across Morocco, especially around Fes, Rabat, and Meknes. These vine-
yards account for a substantial part of the Maghrebean source that accounts 
for about 10 percent of world's wine. Moroccan wines include white and red, 
Cabernet, Sidi Larbi, Vieux Papes, Valpierre, Chaudsoleil, and a special wine 
called Gris de Boulaouane. Under normal and strict religious observances, 
Islam abhors the consumption of alcohol. Those who cannot resist tempta-
tion tend to satisfy their taste under the cover of darkness. In big cities such 
as Casablanca and Rabat, young people indulge in alcohol at parties, bars, 
discotheques, and during private banquets (diffas) and celebrations. Moroccan
wines are very good and inexpensive. Their special qualities have won them 
ready markets internationally. 
Given the religious prohibitions on alcohol, nonintoxicating beverages and 
fruit juices (sharbat) such as nut, apple, almond, orange, lemon, grape, and 
pomegranate and mineral waters are popular in Morocco. Coffee is also con-
sumed. Moroccans sometimes add spices to their coffee. 
Cuisine and Ceremonies 
Moroccans love their food and celebrate their important festivals and cer-
emonies with eating and drinking. Food is both a necessity for survival and an 
expression of wealth, class, social nature, and culture. To the Moroccan, food 
connects with "the finer instincts of life and love as well as the sheer delight 
in sensual gratification."10 
In contrast to the preparation of family meals, ceremonial meals are pre-
pared more elaborately. Professional chefs are usually involved in the prepa-
ration of dishes intended for guests at special occasions. The host may not 
participate in the cooking except to provide the required ingredients and 
instructions. Also, women may not be involved in the preparation of certain 
meals at such occasions. After the guests are seated at a low table, a ceremonial 
pouring of perfumed water on three fingers of the guests' right hands is per-
formed, and the host claps his hands before the banquet is served. The three 
fingers on the right hand are ritually cleaned because Moroccan's eat with 
their fingers instead of with spoons and forks. For starters at a banquet, a cool 
fresh salad may comprise a combination of any of the following: eggplant, 
sliced tomato (batinjaan), green pepper, mixed herbs, and oranges. Oranges 
are grown in Morocco in large quantities. 
In other celebrations, such as weddings, circumcisions, rites of passage, 
and return from a hajj, women of the house are involved in the preparation 
of meals. The hostesses dress in long robes tucked in front with the wide 

CUISINE AND TRADITIONAL DRESS 
85 
sleeves held in place with a twisted cord. The preparation of certain ceremo-
nial meals might take days. This is especially so when the menu involves 20 
or 30 courses. The ceremonial dinner may commence with a crisp pigeon pie 
(bisteeya) rolled very thin and sometimes filled with a chicken mixture and 
prepared in as many layers as desired.11 The host then serves roasted bits of 
beef or lamb (kebab) flavored with spices and animal fat. This is accompanied 
by the traditional spicy stew, tajine. The tajine is sometimes served with bread 
(khubz). If not served as an appetizer, then eggplant salad or chopped tomato 
salad may be served with couscous—which often comes as the main course. 
After the main course, sliced melon and honey and almond pastries are served 
as part of a series of desserts, which traditionally ends with several small cups 
of mint tea. 
One special ceremonial meal of Morocco, which is typically Berber in ori-
gin, is the traditional whole roasted lamb, or barbecue, known among the 
Berbers as mechoui or mashwi. Long before foreign intrusion, most Berber 
households kept goats, sheep, cattle, and fowl for their dietary needs. Today, 
goat and sheep remained the major domesticated livestock. Livestock provide 
a source of meat, butter, milk, and eggs, and they also serve as capital reserve 
that can easily be converted into cash. In most African indigenous commu-
nities, including the countryside (bled) of Morocco, meat is rarely part of 
the everyday family menu; rather, it is reserved for important occasions such 
as births, initiations, weddings, and burial ceremonies when meat is shared 
among the members of the community. 
The mechoui is prepared by rubbing the lamb with garlic, ground cumin, 
and olive oil and then roasted over a fire until it turns deep brown. This 
meal is often used to mark the Muslim festival of Aid El Babir, which comes 
after the month of Ramadan. In another ceremony for the birth of a child, 
a lamb is killed for a feast on the seventh day after the birth. Male circumci-
sion ceremonies are also marked with a similar celebration. The sumptuous 
whole-lamb barbecue is expensive and therefore not a common meal for the 
poor, but it is the main course of a special Moroccan royalty feast known as 
the zerda. 
TRADITIONAL DRESS AND FASHION 
The Djellaba (or Zellaba) 
The djellaba is a popular garment originally worn by Moroccans men. 
Since the mid-twentieth century, the djellaba has become part of women's 
fashion even beyond Morocco. The djellaba is a type of long outer robe, 
distinguished by its long sleeves and hood. The most popular color for men 

86 
CULTURE AND CUSTOMS OF MOROCCO 
is white. A European visitor to Tangier in 1897 described the entire city as 
having the look of a vast monastery of Dominican monks: "everyone wears a 
long white linen or woolen cape, furnished with a hood, which in most cases 
is drawn over the head."12 This scenario has only changed slightly because the 
popular white djellaba still remains in vogue. The men's version is made with 
the sleeves clinging to the arms. In a society where the men often like to shave 
their heads so they are almost bald, a prominent feature of the dress is a hood, 
which offers the body protection from the harsh elements of the weather— 
sand, sun, and moisture. The men also wear a small red cap (chechiya) under 
the hood. 
The women's version of the djellaba is a long-sleeved, loose-fitting garment 
with a hood, large pockets on both sides, and a zipper in front to make it 
easier to put on and take off. Although there are many regional and class 
variations of dress for women, the djellaba has become one of the favorite 
designs for "urban women for attending school or work as well as for other 
activities."13 
The Burnoose 
The Burnoose is a one-piece cloak worn mainly over loose tunics—that 
is, a simple pull-on garment that is made with or without sleeves and usually 
Zellaba (djellaba) fashion store in the city of Moulay Idris. 
Courtesy of Valerie Orlando. 

CUISINE AND TRADITIONAL DRESS 
87 
knee-length or longer, belted at the waist, and worn by men and women. The 
burnoose is of Berber origin and traditionally made like a simple robe. It is 
cut in a half-circle design and has a hood like the djellaba. The hood pro-
vides protection from the punishing desert sun and sand. Today, the Berber 
burnoose has undergone some design changes. Although the latest versions 
appear remarkably different from the original design, the successful urban 
executives wear them over business suits in the manner of President Hamid 
Karzai of Afghanistan. 
The Turban 
Another important part of men's traditional wear is the turban and the 
little knit cap with a patterned band around it. A turban is a headdress worn 
mostly by Muslims in most parts of the eastern Mediterranean, including 
North Africa and South Asia. Both the turban and the knit cap are worn close 
to the head. There are brimless so that they do not interfere with bows made 
during prayers.14 The turban with the red fez is popular among business-
people. Rather than the turban, average rural dwellers and ordinary people 
wear the little round knit caps. 
The Caftan 
The traditional garment for women is the silk or cotton robe called 
the caftan, which often comes with gold belts and decorated bands on 
the edges. It is one of the most popular and perhaps most beautiful of 
all female attire found in Morocco. Traditionally, it was a long robe that 
came down to the feet. Today, it is common to find caftans shortened to 
the ankle and made of any fabric. Some are made with expensive materials 
and decorated with embroidery. This expensive type is usually reserved for 
weddings and other special occasions. At weddings, the bride adorns her 
head with a bright-colored headband. On her feet she wears traditional flat 
open-heeled slippers (sbabsushat), known in French as babouche or babouj, 
with tassels and trimmings. The babouche is worn by both sexes and it is 
also popular in Algeria, Tunisia, and some parts of Libya. 
The Great Dress (Kswat el Kebira) 
Among the Jews of Morocco, the women are distinguished by their tradi-
tional costume known as the Great Dress (Kswat el Kebira). The origin of this 
attire has been traced back to the Spanish Jews, known as the Sephardim. Fol-
lowing their expulsion in the fifteenth century, those who resettled in Tetuan, 

88 
CULTURE AND CUSTOMS OF MOROCCO 
Morocco, made the Great Dress one of their most popular costumes. It is 
decorated with ornate embroidery in varied colors and comes in several parts. 
The first is a wrap skirt usually made of velvet with bands of gold embroidery 
and is called the jeltita. In Spain this is known as giraldetta. The second part 
of the Great Dress is an open top with short sleeves known as the gonbaiz. 
The third part is a trimming, like a bracelet, worn inside the gonbaiz and 
called the punta or ktel. The fourth part of the dress is a shawl (kmam) worn
over the shoulders. The last part is a belt or girdle (hzam) with elaborate and 
expensive gold embroidery. Originally, the Great Dress was proudly offered as 
a gift to young maidens from their fathers. It symbolizes parental consent to a 
daughter's relationship with a prospective suitor. Hence, the Great Dress was 
initially worn at a prenuptial (henna) ceremony. These days it is fairly com-
mon to see young women wear the Great Dress on other special occasions. 
The dress could now be made of velvets, brocades, and silks. 
Adornments 
Moroccan women, like women the world over, love to wear jewelry. Heavy 
earrings, bracelets, anklets, and strings of pearls are some of the common 
objects of adornment. The women adorn their hands with bracelets of differ-
ent designs and ornaments. Similarly, those who can afford the costs adorn 
their legs with anklets made of precious stones. The necklace is both an 
object of fashion and an object of affluence. Moroccan women love to keep 
an assortment of expensive trinkets, ranging from the simplest Zagora and 
Tuareg necklaces to the expensive maguna and coin-coral jewels. 
European Impact 
Although Moroccans today mostly dress in their traditional garments and 
costumes, Western styles of dress are gradually making inroads, especially 
among the younger generation. It is therefore proper to state that for both 
the younger and older generations, dressing has become an expression of local 
as well as global identity or "modernity." For instance, a student may have a 
wide selection of Western-style shirts, trousers, suits, sportswear, and Italian 
or Spanish shoes but will maintain his traditional djellaba for going to the 
Mosque, attending weddings, and for other similar outings. Sometimes, city-
dwellers combine Western-style suits and shirts with their traditional robes. 
It is common to come across men wearing foreign shoes and sneakers in cities 
like Casablanca and Rabat. European dress began to appear in the second 
decade of the twentieth century, following French colonial rule in Morocco. 
Initially, the Moroccan Jews were the first to take to European textiles and 

CUISINE AND TRADITIONAL DRESS 
89 
fashions, especially trousers, shirts, and hats for men.15 Today, Western-style 
dress has significant impact on the way young people dress. 
Whereas the women still dress primarily in traditional garments and cover 
their heads with veils (pushi) in respect for religious demands, some, especially 
the educated women and gender activists with Western contacts, have begun 
to appear at work, in colleges, and in other public places dressed in jeans and 
simple shirts or blouses. Also, urban married women are more likely to wear 
makeup than are single women. This is because most potential bridegrooms 
are reluctant to marry young women who wear cosmetics and dress like West-
erners. A recent study in Casablanca found that these unmarried women are 
considered untraditional, liberated, wild, and therefore not the "serious" type 
men look for in wedlock.16 
Dress and Identity 
Moroccans are what they wear. In other words, there is an intricate expres-
sion of self in the manner in which Moroccans dress. Traditional dress, like 
food, art objects, and design, reveals much about a people's cultural heritage— 
their values, aesthetics, taboos, norms, transmitted culture, adaptations, and 
shared history. Dress and identity also connect to the economics, politics, and 
the predominant religion of a society. 
For instance, the brimless traditional turban, knit cap, and veil widely 
worn in Muslim societies reflects not only the religion but also tells something 
Young women in the street dressed in Western-style attire. 
Courtesy of Valerie Orlando. 

90 
CULTURE AND CUSTOMS OF MOROCCO 
Women wearing traditional long dresses, headscarf, and veils 
at a literacy program in Ifrane, Morocco. Courtesy of Valerie 
Orlando. 
about the modes of worship in Islam. It allows room for bowing down, with-
out having to adjust the headdress or removing it completely. Similarly, the 
emphasis on long-sleeved dresses and costumes that fall to the legs have a con-
nection to the Islamic religion. Islam forbids exposure of the human body so 
as not to tempt the weak of society to indulge in lewd acts; therefore, it is ideal 
for men and women to wear modest attire. The traditional head scarf and veil 
worn by women in Muslim societies, including Morocco, encourage the image 
of women in this part of the world as humble, respectful, and virtuous home 
managers. Therefore, Moroccan women in seclusion, especially city dwellers, 
are encouraged to adhere to this tradition. In the countryside and among the 
Berbers, a scarf, tied around the head, is a more popular kind of covering. In 
the 1980s, when the number of women who wore the veil declined, the Sufi 
religious sect immediately launched a revivalist movement. The young people 
became more prayerful and perceived religion as a "personal anchor when other 
symbols of identity were under strain." Similarly, many working women came 
to equate the veil with "personal freedom: they expressed their religious identity 
by wearing Islamic dress and emphasized their personal identity by working."17 
In the context of decolonization in Morocco (1940s-1956), the scarf repre-
sented not only a religious and cultural symbol but also identification with the 
national liberation struggle because it showed the face. This competing notion 
of the scarf is now a subject of debate as to whether it is actually a symbol of 

CUISINE AND TRADITIONAL DRESS 
91 
religion or overarching patriarchal authority and domination.18 For the more 
liberated Berber women, the scarf tied around the waist embodies an attempt 
to define their original non-Arab cultural heritage. 
NOTES 
1. Catherine Hanger, World Food: Morocco (Victoria, Australia: Lonely Planet 
Publications, 2000), 15-16. 
2. Paula Wolfert, Couscous and Other Good Food from Morocco (New York: 
Harper and Row, 1973), 1-3. 
3. Roger Joseph and Terri Brint Joseph, The Rose and the Thorn: Semiotic Structures
in Morocco (Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 1987), 19. 
4. Wolfert, Couscous, 49-55. 
5. Claudia Roden, A Book of Middle Eastern Food (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 
1972), 277. 
6. The mosses (phylum Bryophyta), seedless vascular plants, come in different 
varieties. They are found in most geographical zones around the world, including the 
desert. The leaves have medicinal value. 
7. For a detailed treatment on the uses of these herbs, spices, and aromatics, see 
Wolfert, Couscous, 19-32. 
8. See Hanger, World Food, 15-16. 
9. See C. R. Pennell, Morocco since 1830: A History (New York: New York 
University Press, 2000), 260. 
10. Hanger, World Food, 14. 
11. Harold D. Nelson, ed., Morocco: A Country Study, 4th ed. (Washington, D.C.: 
American University Press, 1978), 125. 
12. Edmondo De Amicis, Morocco: Its People and Places, trans. Maria Hornor 
Lansdale (Philadelphia: Henry T. Coates, 1897), 5. 
13. Susan Ossman, Picturing Casablanca: Portraits of Power in a Modern City 
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1994), 203. See also Susan Ossman, Faces 
of Beauty: Casablanca, Paris, Cairo (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2002). 
14. Nelson, Morocco, 125-26. 
15. Daniel J. Schroeter and Joseph Chetrit, "The Transformation of Eassaoira 
(Mogador) in the Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries," in Harvey E. Goldberg, ed., 
Sephardi Middle Eastern Jewelries: History and Culture in the Modern Era (Bloomington: 
Indiana University Press, 1996), 103, 109. 
16. Ossman, Picturing Casablanca, 167'. 
17. Ibid., 364; Mounia Bennani-Chraibi, Soumis et rebelles: les jeunes au Maroc 
(Casablanca: Edition le Fennec, 1994), 89-100; Henry Munson, Religion and Power 
in Morocco (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1993), 162-67. 
18. Ossman, Picturing Casablanca, 203. 

This page intentionally left blank 

6 
Gender Roles, Marriage, and Family 
SURVIVING INDIGENOUS BERBER CUSTOMS, Arab and Jewish family practices, 
and European influences have all combined to form contemporary kinship 
practices, family organization, marriage traditions, and notions of gender rela-
tions in Morocco. With expansion of Western-style education, closer contacts 
with peoples of other cultures (including Africans, Asians, and Europeans), 
and continuing changes in socioeconomic structures and individual lifestyles, 
the Moroccan family has been responding to dynamics that will continue to 
shape it. Since the 1970s, for instance, most of the newly educated elite, espe-
cially those who received their degrees in France, Belgium, Spain, the United 
States, or other Western countries, have returned home to make marriages and 
establish what is often referred to as a more "individualistic" family practices. 
Whereas the emergent class demonstrates a preference for a smaller and easily 
manageable family size, most Moroccans have continued to follow tradition 
with a preference for polygamous marriages, large families, and close kinship 
and family ties. 
As a universal institution, the family is both an organic and social unit of 
acculturation. Members are linked by blood, and new members are incorpo-
rated through marriages. For the welfare and continuity of a unit, members 
often maintain a common residence as well as follow instituted norms for pro-
duction and reproduction. This communal relationship ensures generational 
continuity through prescribed codes of sexual relationships. Therefore, similar 
to what is found in most African and Asian societies, family life is at the center 
of Moroccan social order, and children are socialized in accordance with family 
traditions as an integral part of the wider societal values, expectations, taboos, 

94 
CULTURE AND CUSTOMS OF MOROCCO 
and religion. In most parts of the so-called Third World, where social security 
rarely exists, the family fills that vacuum, with the more privileged assisting the 
poorer members with the basic necessities of life. Young people in Morocco 
live at home and participate in social events arranged by the family until they 
are old enough to go to school, learn a trade, or pursue a career that may take 
them away from home. 
Traditionally, it is expected that male children will continue to contribute 
to the welfare of their families; hence, sons tend to remain in their family 
home after marriage and raise their own families within the extended fam-
ily structure. In Morocco, however, the sons are free to set up their own 
households and retain the family's name when the father dies. Although most 
people still conform to this tradition, the younger generations are gradually 
opting to live independently with their nuclear families. As it is in most parts 
of the world, kinship in Morocco is structured along patrilineal lines, the orga-
nization of a household based on male blood ties. 
LINEAGE 
A typical traditional family system retains a link between the present gen-
eration and past generations of members who often had lived under the same 
house or in a compound comprising several households whose members 
have common blood ties. A household consists of a man, his wife (or wives), 
and their children, including married sons, their wives, and their children. 
Other relatives such as unmarried daughters, widows, or divorcees are also 
accepted as part of the family. In other words, kinship relations, especially 
among people of Arab and African descent, follow a complex network of 
relationships linking many families to a common ancestor. Several studies 
have shown that among the Berbers the word aith, meaning "sons of," as 
encountered with "Aith Waryaghar," "Aith Tuzin," and "Aith Ammarth," 
implies that members of each of these local communities are connected by 
blood to one remote ancestor. In contrast with the practice in the United 
States, for example, where the nuclear family is at the center of family life, 
the Berbers of the Central Rif Mountains often identified themselves primar-
ily as members of their lineage (dharfiqth) comprising several families (ijujga; 
singular, jajgu).l Nonetheless, as a survey in 1978 showed, the "extended
family appeared to be uncommon in the Middle Atlas and in many other 
regions as well."2 Consequently, generalizations are hard to make. Cultural 
practices are neither rigid nor uniformly the same even among peoples of 
the same cultural geography. Cultural practices cannot be viewed exclusively 
from the standpoint of "African" or "Arab" or "Western" contexts but rather 
in their fluid and dynamic contexts. 

GENDER ROLES, MARRIAGE, AND FAMILY 
95 
In most Berber-Arab patrilineal communities, lineage members, or the 
extended family, can expect a share in inheritance of a deceased's property. 
This is in accordance with Islamic practices, which outline heirs in family 
property to include grandfather/mother, father/mother, and son/daughter. 
Men, however, enjoy inheritance rights over women, whose share of inheri-
tance often depends on the disposition and generosity of their male relations. 
Also, lineal relations are favored over collaterals (aunts, uncles, and cousins). 
In patrilineal family systems, as opposed to matrilineal, all children—boys 
and girls—belong to the father's kinship group, and married women adopt 
the family name of their husbands. In many Western societies today, there is 
a growing tendency for women, especially, among the successful profession-
als, to retaining their family names after marriage. In Morocco, this is hardly 
an issue because the married women are still supported financially by their 
husbands even when some of them may have sources of private income. 
MARRIAGE 
In all societies, marriage is an important social custom and will continue 
to be so in the future. Although marriage confers respect and status to single 
women and young men, its most important function remains for procreation, 
or reproduction. The institution of marriage provides society with a formal 
avenue through which new units of households are created, replenishing and 
reinvigorating aging networks of kinship and lineage systems. In Morocco, 
married couples will go to any length to ensure that their union is successful, 
which means having children of their own. Children are the fruits and the 
main purpose and joy of marriage. In most predominantly agrarian societies, 
including Morocco, large families are desired to provide sources of labor, to 
protect against external aggression, and to ensure social security and contin-
ued support for members in their old age. As soon as children start arriving in 
a family, divorce becomes very difficult because both partners become more 
tolerant of each other to protect the welfare of their children. 
Additionally, a marriage is not all about the couple; it brings families 
together into a new cooperative alliance. Therefore, the family plays a central 
role in the choice of a marriage partner through participation in the various 
social and religious rituals connected with the marriage process. The unre-
lenting intervention of elders in intrafamily schisms further attests to the 
larger rather than private nature of marriage practices in Morocco. 
Traditionally, most parents considered it their responsibility to choose 
spouses for their children. In a society where the sexes seldom interacted, 
marriage partners are linked through social contacts or through negotia-
tions involving mothers or even professional matchmakers. Fathers typically 

96 
CULTURE AND CUSTOMS OF MOROCCO 
are not openly involved in the negotiation and planning stages of weddings, 
but their consent is usually necessary. Although mothers take the initia-
tive, they first discuss in detail their plans and report to their husbands 
about progress in the mate selection and bridewealth (a payment from the 
groom's family to the bride's family) negotiations. The father's consent, as 
the head of his family, is crucial and cannot be ignored. Although parents 
negotiate marriages for their children, the groom's consent also comes into 
consideration before the commencement of wedding details. Traditionally, 
the bride-to-be plays a more passive role in the decisions, although this 
tradition is now changing. 
Endogamy, or marriage within the larger extended family, is common, "with 
the preferred marriage partner being the male's first cousin on the father's side 
{bint 'amm, or the father's brother's daughter)."3 In the central High Atlas 
region, for instance, marriages often involved parallel cousins or the children 
of brothers. By securing marriages with their own cousins, it is assumed that 
the men bring honor, respect, and protection to their families. In other places, 
such as the Rif, no specific marriage pattern or preference exists, but incestu-
ous relationships are taboo, and intermarriage is often negotiated between 
Bride in Marrakech. Courtesy of Valerie
Orlando. 

GENDER ROLES, MARRIAGE, AND FAMILY 
97 
families of similar social class. With an increase in Western-style education, 
contact with foreigners through travels, and the influx of foreign films and 
television programs, young people in Moroccan are gradually beginning to 
choose their own partners with minimal parental influence. 
Islamic law, in accordance with Quranic stipulation, allows men to marry 
as many as four wives. Such polygamous relationships, however, are only 
possible for the privileged because it is financially difficult to maintain a 
harem. All Moroccans are expected to marry as they come of age. Men nor-
mally marry before they are 30 years old, and women usually marry before 
the age of 18. Women older than 23 may experience great anxiety over get-
ting married. 
In contrast with the sacramental idioms of Christian matrimony, marriage 
in Islam is a civil contract (aqd), and the terms of agreement are more or 
less determined by the couple's family representatives. The contract stipulates 
the rules and guidelines that may not be violated. An important part of the 
contractual agreement is the requirement upon the groom's family to make a 
monetary payment to the bride's family. 
Bridewealth 
In most African and Middle Eastern societies, marriage is not considered 
legal without a negotiated bridewealth or dowry. Whereas the dowry is a 
personal debt to the bride alone, bridewealth is a payment from the groom's 
family to the bride's family and often involves a substantial sum of money. 
In Morocco, the payment of bridewealth is an important part of the wed-
ding process. The rationale for this practice is largely based on the enormous 
costs parents bear in raising a female child. The groom's family literally owns 
the bride after marriage, so the idea follows that a bride's parents deserve 
some form of monetary compensation during her wedding. This practice has 
been institutionalized as payment of bridewealth or dowry (dfoua). Often 
the amount involved is so large that it is paid in installments. Some families 
of the bride are hesitant to ask for the entire dowry until it is needed in the 
future.4 
Additionally, the bride's family responds with a kind of dowry with which 
the bride must enter her husband's home. This money is traditionally used 
to procure furniture and other household items. Although the woman can 
hardly initiate a divorce in most Muslim societies, in Morocco, she is permit-
ted to take all household belongings acquired with her father's sponsored 
dowry, including other items purchased thereafter. As the bridegroom stands 
to lose everything after divorce, this practice serves as a kind of security for 
wives against treacherous husbands. 

98 
CULTURE AND CUSTOMS OF MOROCCO 
Procedures and Ceremonies 
In Morocco, marriage is a ritual, and wedding ceremonies last days. The 
process, which combines traditional and modern aspects, remains the same 
throughout Morocco but has minor differences in organization across the 
regions. In Hadiddou Imilchil of southern Morocco, for instance, the process 
for the selection of marriage partners may involve either a family-to-family 
contact or participation in a traditional "wedding fair" where young people 
come together accompanied by their families to explore the possibility of 
meeting marriage partners. Once a potential bride has been identified, mar-
riage go-betweens (khattabat) are asked to visit the bride's family to estimate 
her manners, personal attitude, and appearance. They also make a preliminary 
estimate of the amount of bridewealth her family might demand. Usually, the 
search for a bride ends with a formal engagement (khutba or khitba), which
is the first step before marriage celebrations. Couples mark their engagements 
in diverse ways, depending on family and community traditions. 
The groom's family visits their potential in-laws to discuss the marriage 
plans and settle on a convenient date for the wedding. The preliminary dis-
cussions may take several visits, and the process may be terminated at any 
time. If everything goes according to plan, the settlement of dowry is usually 
accompanied by the formal signing of the marriage contract. On the arrival 
of the groom's family, the hosts welcome them with flowers, milk, and dates. 
The public celebration as determined by religion (whether Islam or Judaism) 
or cultural expectations then follows. 
In Morocco, marriage ceremonies are elaborate and necessary to legalize 
the wedlock. They assume different forms from family to family and region 
to region. The sociocultural festivities capture the personal, familial, social, 
community, and "material/economic life" of the people.5 
Among the Berbers, marriage ceremonies are part of the people's ritu-
als and value systems. The Berbers draw on natural customs and symbols 
to give meaning and interpretation to life. Originally, wedding ceremo-
nies lasted for seven days, and the costs of all the celebrations were borne 
entirely by the bridegroom's family. Because of the enormous financial stress 
involved, the weeklong marathon wedding festivities have been shortened 
in most places to three days (commonly called dhamghra). A day before the 
commencement of the public festivities, the bride undertakes a bathing 
ritual (nekachat) that is supposed to purify her body in readiness for the 
coming rite of passage. Then red and white flags are suspended, respec-
tively, on the roofs of the groom's and bride's family homes. For the groom, 
the red symbolizes fertility and strength. For the bride, the white represents 
her virginity and purity. 

GENDER ROLES, MARRIAGE, AND FAMILY 
99 
On the first day, a ceremony called "little henna" (r-hanni tamzzyant) is 
held, starting at the bride's home. Family members, kinsmen, neighbors, 
friends, and sometimes the entire village are invited for a day of feasting, 
dancing, and singing. Henna is a reddish brown dye obtained from leaves of 
the henna plant and it is used especially on hair. In the Berber tradition, the 
red dye is used on the body. The first-day rituals usually end with the henna 
ritual, which is primarily intended to protect the couple from evil, attacks 
from hostile spirits (djinns), or spells cast by enemies. At the bridegroom's 
home, the red henna dye is prepared and applied to the groom's hands and 
feet as well as to his wedding attendants (iwziren), whose special role through-
out the ceremonies is to protect the groom from dangers. At the bride's home, 
her younger sister prepares the henna dye, which is also applied to the bride's 
hands and feet as well as those of her special companions (dhiwzirin)L6 
The second day of celebration is called the "big henna" (r-hanni amggran). 
Like the first day's events, the big henna also starts at the home of the bride's 
parents. The celebration continues with eating, singing, and dancing, and 
both the bride and groom are smeared with generous amounts of the red dye. 
The bride in particular receives several layers of the dye to adequately prepare 
her for the impending journey to her new home the next day. This journey is 
considered to be crucial, and because it is a time when the bride is believed to 
be most vulnerable to fiendish attacks, all precautions are taken to ward off 
any unforeseen hazards. 
As the third and final day of festivities arrives, the bride departs to her 
husband's family house with fanfare. This ceremony is also marked with eat-
ing and dancing, commencing at the bride's home and ending with the final 
"night of entry" (lailat al-dukhla) held at the husband's family home. The 
journey begins on the evening of the last celebration after a group of men 
from the groom's home arrives to fetch the bride. They are welcomed with 
milk and dates, and the entertainment goes on until late in the night. 
In final preparation for the journey, the bride's relatives and friends care-
fully wrap the bride in a long, white cloth from head to toe in a similar way 
to how dead people are prepared for burial in most Muslim societies. A long-
tasseled handkerchief (tasebnath) is hung over a bent twig (qubbath) from a 
grapevine and attached to the bride's head. Her face is carefully covered with 
her veil, the handkerchief, and the white shroud. The white veil and shroud 
symbolize the bride's virginity as well as her expected total obedience and sub-
mission to her husband. The bridal procession, which is conceived as death, 
marks the bride's transition from unmarried to married life.7 
The bridal party departs after the bride's brother has performed his duty 
to carry his sister to a mule prepared for the journey. The bride's female kin 
and friends surround the bride and sing, dance, and jubilate. After the bride 

100 
CULTURE AND CUSTOMS OF MOROCCO 
is seated on the mule, her mother pours barley grains on her lap. The barley 
seed is associated with fertility, life, and special blessings (baraka). The bride 
is expected to carry the symbols of this blessing to her new home. As soon as 
the bride arrives at her husband's home, she spreads the barley seed in front 
of her new home, signifying that she is bringing prosperity and progress to 
the two households. Afterward, the bride's brother carries her into a chamber 
especially reserved for the wedding. Soon after, the groom enters the room to 
greet his new wife and to remove the handkerchief and the veil. 
Following the ceremonies of the last day, the couple is free to consum-
mate their marriage, supposedly for the first time. The focus of the first 
night of consummation is the expected proof of the bride's virginity, figu-
ratively referred to as the "spill of the blood." Because premarital sex is seri-
ously frowned upon, brides who are found not to be virgins are considered a 
great shame (hshuma) to both families. If the groom is denied the honor to 
deflower his wife, it is considered enough reason to take such drastic actions 
as cancellation of the marriage, beating of the bride, or even honor killing. 
This is only after an arbitration judge has determined the merit of the case, 
however.8 The spilling of virginal blood accomplishes the rite of passage and 
attests to the groom's potency. It confirms the roles of men and women in 
procreation and initiates the couple into the world of adulthood.9 For the 
next seven days after the third and final ceremony, the family of the bride is 
restricted from seeing her. 
Wedding ceremonies in the big cities also draw a large gathering of fami-
lies, friends, and acquaintances. One slight difference is that the choice of 
venues may be a popular holiday resort or hotel rather than the urban resi-
dential houses. Another difference is that whereas in the countryside there 
is often an open invitation for members of the village, attendance at most 
weddings in urban areas is strictly by invitation only. Also, although marriage 
involves the traditional wedding attire, the contemporary bride and groom 
might change clothes from the caftan for women and djellaba (or zellaba) for 
men to a white Western-style bridal gown and suit. Some couples may take a 
honeymoon instead of the traditional seven days of restricted visits that allows 
the couple some privacy to consummate their wedlock. The recent changes 
are aspects of the Western impact on wedding ceremonies in North Africa. 
Marriage Forms 
In accordance with Islamic injunctions, it is legal in Morocco for men to 
marry as many as four wives, depending on individual lifestyle and capability. 
In other words, polygyny—the marriage of one man to multiple women—is 
an accepted social practice. The Quran clearly stipulates, however, that a man 

GENDER ROLES, MARRIAGE, AND FAMILY 
101 
must be adequately prepared to treat each of his wives and children with 
fairness and justice before getting into multiple marriages. This means that 
the potential polygamist must make sure that he has the economic ability 
to care for his family and must show his wives equal love. Thus, contrary to 
popular assumptions, polygamy is strictly for the privileged and not a license 
for lascivious men to indiscriminately acquire wives. It is the responsibility 
of a husband in a polygynous household to provide his wives and children 
with decent accommodations, medical care, and clothing, as well as to meet 
his wives' sexual needs. Today, many educated women are rebelling against 
polygynous relationships, and among the new generation, men are begin-
ning to see polygyny as an expensive lifestyle they cannot afford. In this light, 
one can understand why polygyny may be legal but not widely practiced in 
Morocco today. Rather, monogamy is gradually becoming the new trend. 
Another type of multiple marriage is polyandry, the marriage between a 
woman and several men. Polyandry in Morocco exists only as a theoretical 
possibility. In most patriarchal societies, including Morocco, there is no pro-
vision for a woman to marry more than one husband without first separating 
from the first. 
DIVORCE 
For the Muslim husband, divorce involves a seemingly simple process of 
repeating the phrase "I divorce thee" three times in the presence of witnesses. 
This is not as simple as it often appears, however. Provisions may demand that 
the husband pronounce these words in stages over a considerable period of 
time during which arbitration is possible and the relationship may be saved. 
Over this period, paternal fathers, elders, family, and relations may meet to 
discuss issues and implore the husband and wife to reconsider their decision. 
It is rare for a woman to seek divorce from her husband because separation 
is seen in a very negative light, although it is not prohibited. Therefore, the 
couple must have good reason to entertain a divorce. Often the causes of sep-
aration include the inability of the husband to provide proper financial and 
material support for his wife (or wives) and children; adultery, especially on 
the part of the wife; and the inability of a wife to bear children, particularly 
male children. In any of these circumstances, a man may decide to acquire 
another wife or seek a divorce. When every effort to save a relationship fails to 
result in reconciliation, a local judge (qaid) may grant a divorce. If the judge 
finds the husband guilty of wrongdoing or maltreatment of his wife, he must 
pay a settlement that is part of the bridewealth and forfeit the furnishings of 
the house brought by his wife. Additionally, the treacherous husband may be 
required to pay his former spouse a maintenance allowance for three months 

102 
CULTURE AND CUSTOMS OF MOROCCO 
(sqaq). If the woman is found guilty, especially in the case of adultery, she 
forfeits the sqaq and household furnishings. 
After the separation, the law usually permits children of the couple to 
remain with their father. Some flexibility is allowed, however, to help reduce 
the psychological and physiological impact on minors. For instance, after 
divorce, children older than age two may either live with their father or with 
their mother until their father remarries. Those younger than two, especially 
girls, may remain with their mother, but they must return to their father 
when they come of age or when their mother remarries.10 
FAMILY AND GENDER ROLES 
Male-female relationships in most Muslim societies are patterned in a way 
that may be perceived as constituting separate subsocieties. In Morocco, how-
ever, this form of social organization has been gradually changing since the 
1990s. For instance, a 1993 study on the Zawiya of central Morocco revealed 
that coeducational public institutions, popular music, television, and travel 
to urban centers are gradually altering sexual attitudes and practices in these 
communities as the sexes come into closer contact.11 The importance of males 
in society is expressed primarily in the expectation of wives to bear sons. 
Failure on the part of wives to meet this expectation sometimes constitutes 
enough reason for the husband to either seek a divorce or embark on a polyg-
amous relationship. 
The attitude and role of women in society are largely informed by the peo-
ple's worldview, their customs, including prevalent economic, demographic, 
and political culture.12 In general, men enjoy a higher social status and appear 
to dominate the women in certain aspects of life. A stereotypical notion of a 
woman's role is to care for her children and the household. It is her respon-
sibility to shop, cook, feed, and educate the children while the man is away 
at work. Moroccan women maintain a clean house, and during their leisure 
time they may visit family members, friends, or attend prayers at the neigh-
borhood shrines or mosques. Even in the countryside, where Berber women 
share the agricultural duties with their husbands and do not wear restrictive 
veils, they are still obligated to conform to their primary responsibilities of 
childcare and food preparation. Also, Muslim women rarely accompany their 
husbands to social events outside the household, especially because they have 
so many responsibilities in the house to occupy their day. Whereas men live a 
much more unstructured life, women are expected, but not forced, to adhere 
to certain codes of behavior, especially before marriage. For instance, it is con-
sidered crude for young women to marry outside their race or faith, to travel 
abroad without obtaining parental consent, or to be unaccompanied late at 

GENDER ROLES, MARRIAGE, AND FAMILY 
103 
night. In Morocco, it is forbidden for the predominantly Berber-Arab women 
to be married to either French, Spanish, or Jewish men, but their men are free 
to marry outsiders. Unlike men, women are scolded for smoking in public. 
When a wife errs, it is also part of the culture for a man to beat her—an act 
considered abuse in Western societies. 
The notion of male domination is neither as simplistically assumed by out-
siders nor uniformly practiced. As a study notes, "a closer examination of the 
structure and operation of the household reveals the presence of a consider-
able measure of 'unassigned power' which women compete for and utilize to 
further their own needs and wishes."13 For instance, a woman's age and status 
within the household play an important role in her influence and decision 
making in society. Older women are highly respected and often enjoy the 
support of their children. They are honored and revered as wise, responsible, 
and trustworthy. Also, whereas Berber women may have more freedom in 
the countryside, some educated urban women enjoy relative respect and free-
dom than do their less educated cohorts. Similarly, uneducated men perform 
more traditional forms of labor than their educated counterparts. A 1997 
study by the International Food and Agricultural Development (IFAD) in 
the Taforalt-Taourist region of Oujda Province in eastern Morocco has shown 
that whereas women generally aspire to the lifestyle of a "rich woman," which 
implies not having to perform menial tasks such as weaving, water collection, 
and animal husbandry, men and women from the poorer households com-
promise on these issues in the interest of their families.14 
In the past, the public spheres of government, law, warfare, and trade used 
to be the exclusive domains of men. Today, government and commerce involve 
the active participation of women who serve as political delegates, ambassa-
dors, airline pilots, company directors, and royal advisors. Some women have 
established themselves as eminent scholars, world athletes, writers, publish-
ers, journalists, and activists. Also, through intrigue and exercise of feminine 
power, women sometimes get their way. Some wives may resort to witchcraft 
(shor or shur) or intrigue in an attempt to influence their husbands to love
them and not resort to polygamy. 
Patriarchal authority still dominates the social order in Morocco, but, 
overall, gender discrimination has lessened. Women are now free to pursue 
university education, and their career prospects have continued to expand. 
SOCIALIZATION 
One of the primary roles of Moroccan families involves the socialization of 
the younger members into certain dominant sociocultural values and practices. 
Most families in Morocco do not compromise the traditional expectations 

104 
CULTURE AND CUSTOMS OF MOROCCO 
shaped by the broad social forces of religion, language, gender, socioeconomic 
status, birth order, family, and community and such individual factors as toler-
ance, anxiety, imagination, and identification. Children are raised in the family 
to respect these traditions as sacred. Practices such as taking care of the elderly 
tend to guarantee continuities in terms of welfare and provide an avenue for 
a better and more secure future for all. Therefore, tradition inculcates in the 
younger members of the society the value that it is not only moral to respect 
and take care of the weak and elderly but it makes clear to the young that by 
respecting this practice, a future in which such a patronage will be extended to 
them is guaranteed. 
Families also stress the overarching importance of membership in a kinship 
group and identification of members with their immediate community. The 
aim is to prevent people from seeing themselves as individuals accountable 
only to themselves. The extended family offers members succor and protec-
tion in times of bereavement, hardship, and other trials of life. The younger 
members of the kinship group are therefore expected to remain close to the 
group and grow to a position where they will replace the departed elders and 
act as the patriarchs or guardians of the group. 
This position is preceded by different stages of development and matu-
rity. Therefore, adulthood can be marked by initiation ceremonies—namely 
birth, baptism or naming ceremony, circumcision, marriage, parenthood, 
and so on. For women, the transition to adulthood lies with marriage, 
which requires adequate preparation. As young children, girls are not dis-
criminated against, but with the onset of puberty, girls are separated from 
the boys—a precautionary step to safeguard the young women's virginity 
and to ready them for their future roles as mothers. As early as possible, 
mothers begin to educate their daughters in the art of home management. 
In most African societies, including Morocco, marriage is held as the crown-
ing moment of a woman's life. Therefore, adequate preparation is the norm 
rather than the law. Years before their suitors arrive, girls begin to partici-
pate in the wedding ceremonies of their older sisters, cousins, and friends. 
They internalize the procedures as they participate in the rituals of singing, 
dancing, and feasting that usually mark the beginning of married life. Early 
in their childhood, girls are also introduced to veiling as a proper way of 
dressing for the woman. Such traditional modes of dress add a measure of 
respect both to the woman and to her family. More importantly, Muslim 
girls are trained to perceive sex outside marriage as dangerous to the social 
order. Although marriage is conceived as the essential part of adult life, 
the seclusion of women serves to keep indiscriminate sexuality under con-
trol. The family rather than any formal institution educates children in this 
social culture. 

GENDER ROLES, MARRIAGE, AND FAMILY 
105 
As adults, the children join different male or female groups, occupational 
guilds, religious orders, and different professional careers in accordance with 
individual interests. Some of these professions may require special skills for 
memberships and therefore are not open to all. Again, the family is in the best 
position to advise its members on the best course of action toward attaining 
success in career goals. Therefore, occupational groups are important to chil-
dren and adults alike. High-status families expect their members to maintain 
the family honor through lofty aspirations and achievements. It is not uncom-
mon for poorer families to equally expect their members to overachieve. The 
idea behind all the pressure for conformity or overachievement is to preserve 
family honor. 
SOCIAL CHANGE 
From the beginning of European colonialism in 1912 to the end of colonial 
rule in 1956 and after, Morocco has seen much social change. With expansions 
in Western-style education, a new global cash economy, sophisticated bureau-
cracy, the emergence of new political demands, and increased opportunities 
for social mobilization, many people have started to reject the demands of 
communal life in favor of notions of individuality, and old family ties continue 
to break down. Also, as the government pushes its modernization agenda in an 
attempt to lower levels of illiteracy, unemployment, and poverty, the educated 
and younger generations increasingly opt to set up their own independent 
households upon marriage, free from parental and kinship controls. Other 
strong inducements of social change include television, radio and cassettes, 
books, films, travel, and, recently, the Internet. 
The Western-educated elite have been profoundly influenced by Western 
ideas so that many of them now view polygamy as an aberration. The urban 
environment, Western-style education, and modern economies tend to make 
monogamy the most common arrangement among the elite, especially as 
they desire, like their counterparts in other societies, to maintain a higher 
standard of living. For this group, the age has passed when the size of one's 
family served as a standard for measuring success in society. These days, what 
matters most is one's professional career. Moreover, other physical manifes-
tations of success, including the type of car (or cars) one drives, manner of 
dressing, or ownership of a successful business, palatial residential houses, and 
even one's connections to Europe or other Western countries, have become 
important to some of the younger generation. 
Another aspect of social change in Morocco can be observed in how wed-
ding celebrations have transformed in recent times. Traditionally, weddings 
in Muslim societies and African societies in general are marked with lavish 

106 
CULTURE AND CUSTOMS OF MOROCCO 
banquets and expensive dresses and adornments. As the economy experiences 
downturns, couples are making do with simple ceremonies. Also, it is no 
longer out of the ordinary for young people to live together after their formal 
engagement. In the past, a formal engagement ceremony came a year before 
the actual wedding. These days, especially in the urban centers, an engage-
ment may assume the place of the wedding itself, similar to what is practiced 
in the United States and Europe, thereby demonstrating that the bride's pre-
marital virtue is not an issue. Additionally, the expectation of female virginity 
is gradually changing as a result of increasing stress and anxiety over con-
formity. A recent study in the Zawiya area shows that there have been cases 
where couples who have been sexually active before their weddings either 
brought their own blood, cut themselves, or even sneaked in animal blood 
into the bedroom to display as a sign of virginity.15 
Another recent study noted, within households, professional working 
mothers are beginning to spend more time away from home. According to a 
Moroccan woman writer, a large number of women, especially those in the 
cities, now have freer access to higher education that was denied them in the 
past. As a consequence, these women tend to pursue different professional 
careers after their training.16 Such professions as law and journalism allow the 
women little time to raise large numbers of children. Although most Moroccan 
men, especially the less educated in the Western sense, still prefer to have a 
traditional housewife, marrying an educated wife with a growing career has 
become a source of prestige, especially among the Westernized elite. 
The most remarkable changes are those concerning the status of women in 
society. With the increasing voices of protest coming from Western-educated 
women who are also social activists and writers, women are beginning to 
participate more in activities outside the home. For instance, although most 
women still wear veils, others tend to dress more freely, including adoption of 
Western-style clothing. The majority who still adhere to the veil do so more 
out of tradition than by compulsion. Although Moroccan women appear to 
enjoy more freedom than do women in many other Muslim societies, there 
is still room for improvement in the quest to raise women's status and protect 
their rights. 
NOTES 
1. Roger Joseph and Terri Brint Joseph, The Rose and the Thorn: Semiotic Structures
in Morocco (Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 1987), 28; Ernest Gellner, Saints of the
Atlas (London: Weidenfeld and Nicholson, 1969), 66; David M. Hart, "The Tribe in
Modern Morocco: Two Case studies," in Ernest Gellner and Charles Micaud, eds., Arabs 
and Berbers: From Tribe to Nation in North Africa (London: Duckworth, 1972), 28.

GENDER ROLES, MARRIAGE, AND FAMILY 
107 
2. Harold D. Nelson, ed., Morocco: A Country Study (Washington, D.C.: American 
University Press, 1978), 118-119. 
3. Carolyn Fluehr-Lobban, Islamic Societies in Practice, 2nd ed. (Gainesville, 
University of Florida Press, 2004), 98. 
4. For more details, see Nelson, Morocco, 119. 
5. Robert Elbaz, "Toward a Comprehensive Socio-Cultural Theory of the Jewish 
Life-World in Morocco: The Jewish Traditional Marriage in Morocco," Extenza: Inter-
national Journal of Francophone Studies 7, no. 1 (June 2004): 95-101. 
6. Joseph and Joseph, Rose and the Thorn, 59-61.
7. Ibid., 60-61. 
8. M.E. Combs-Schilling, Sacred Performances: Islam, Sexuality, and Sacrifice 
(New York: Columbia University Press, 1989), 216. 
9. See Combs-Schilling, Sacred Performances, 206-207. 
10. Vanessa Maher, Women and Property in Morocco (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1974), 193-202. 
11. See Douglas A. Davis and Susan Schaefer Davis, "Sexual Values in a Moroccan 
Town," in W.J. Lonner and R.S. Malpass, eds., Psychology and Culture (Needham
Heights, MA: Allyn and Bacon, 1993), 225-230. 
12. Rachel Simon, "Between the Family and the Outside World: Jewish Girls in the 
Modern Middle East and North Africa," Jewish Social Studies 7, no. 1 (2000): 81-108. 
13. Amal Rassam, "Women and Domestic Power in Morocco," International 
Journal of Middle Eastern Studies 12 (1980): 171. 
14. International Food and Agricultural Development, Survival, Change and 
Decision-Making in Rural Households: Three Village Case Studies from Eastern Morocco 
(Rome: IFAD, 1997), 1-2. 
15. Davis and Davis, "Sexual Values," 226-229. 
16. Fatima Agnaou, Gender, Literacy, and Empowerment in Morocco (New York: 
Routledge, 2004). 

This page intentionally left blank 

7 
Social Customs and Lifestyle 
AMID A PLURALITY OF social customs and practices in Morocco are festivities 
that commemorate family events such as the birth of a child, circumcision, 
marriage, death, and the return of a member from a pilgrimage to Mecca 
(hajj). Major religious festivals and holidays include events marking the birth 
of Muhammad, the holy Prophet of God (or Eid el Mouloud), the end of 
Ramadan (Eid el-Seghir or Eid el Fitr), and Abraham's sacrifice of a sheep to 
God instead of his son (Eid el Kebir). Others are occasions that renew com-
munity bonds, sports and musical competitions, and commemorations of 
national unity such as Independence Day and Green March Day. Cultural 
lifestyles mirror the resilience of indigenous occupational practices and cul-
ture as well as emergent Western types of lifestyles rooted in the modern 
economy. 
Traditionally, Moroccans are gregarious, and friendships are best attested 
to in the existence of a diverse and pervading sense of religious and familial 
brotherhood. Dramatic salutations such as hugs, kisses, and prolonged hand-
shakes are manners through which people express their sense of hospitality 
and feelings. A visitor to the traditional open markets in Morocco may find 
the atmosphere charged with varied forms of activities and excitement— 
intellectual, sporting, and religious discussions, catcalls, commercial haggling, 
gossip and laughter, music of singers and dancers, intersections of prayers, 
chanting by magicians, acrobats, storytellers, snake charmers, circus monkeys, 
and frequent shouts of ceremonial greetings or obeisance (ahlan wa sahlan or 
assalaam). These aspects of customs and lifestyles reflect the diversity of the 
social setting and extensive knowledge of the people about their society and 

110 
CULTURE AND CUSTOMS OF MOROCCO 
the world around them. It is common to find Moroccans who consistently 
follow events around the world via the various modern channels of communi-
cation, including the radio, newspaper, television, cable networks, and Inter-
net media. Generally, school children in Africa, including Morocco, are taught 
more about the wider world than are their counterparts in the United States. 
Social and group (jama a) interaction is important whether as part of a reli-
gious, political, or cultural community. Generally, individualism gives way to 
family and community interests. Social gatherings are celebrated in a variety 
of ways within at least the minimum standards acceptable in Islam. What-
ever their background, Muslims, Jews, Christians, Arabs, Berbers, Africans, 
Europeans, and other groups in the country celebrate events with family, 
friends, and acquaintances. On such occasions, the hosts demonstrate their 
generosity with the provision of food, beverages, and music. 
SOCIAL RELATIONS 
Interpersonal relations follow a code of behavior that places emphasis on 
respect or dignity (karama), generosity (karim), honor (sharaf), sharing, and 
hospitality. Religious customs are of the utmost importance and influence 
day-to-day life. Ideally, the expectations of good morals and ethical standards 
of honesty are considered integral parts of interpersonal relationships. Due 
in part to the Muslim practice of feeling great responsibility for guests, the 
scarce resources of the desert environment, as well as the extraordinary respect 
of indigenous Africans for strangers, hospitality is so high in all regions of 
Morocco that it has become a central part of society. It is common for the 
country folk to invite strangers and acquaintances to their homes for lunch or 
dinner. At such occasions, the visitor is offered choice items such as meat and 
other delicacies that are not part of the family's everyday menu. If the stranger 
is a man, he should not expect the women of the house to join the males at 
the table, and the visitor is expected not to ask why. The visitor should not 
use the left hand to eat because that is considered offensive in the culture. 
In both Islamic and African cultures, the left hand is reserved for handling 
things considered unclean. Usually, meals are served at home from a commu-
nal plate. It is polite for visitors to take only what is immediately in front of 
them and to accept all that is offered. 
CEREMONIES 
Ceremonies in Morocco involve formalized series of acts set by ritual, 
protocol, or convention. Some of the everyday ceremonies are associated 
with rites of passage; others are connected with the people's belief systems. 

SOCIAL CUSTOMS AND LIFESTYLE 
111 
Through ceremonies, individual participants demonstrate their respect for 
conventional acts of politeness or social etiquette. As observers in the pre-
scribed ceremonial procedures, individuals are able to reaffirm their commit-
ment to others and to their customs. Ceremonies are full of action, songs, 
dancing, prayers, and merriment. 
In Morocco, the arrival of a child is celebrated with a lamb feast on the 
seventh day following the birth. It is usually an occasion for parents, grand-
parents, uncles, aunts, cousins, and other family and friends to come together 
and rejoice in the arrival of their newest member. Elaborate prayers are offered, 
and the lamb meal is part of the ritual to welcome the newborn to the soci-
ety. Often the child's name is selected to reflect either his or her family his-
tory and/or religious identity. For most parents, names such as Mohammed 
(or Muhammad), Essbai, Musa (Moses), Ali (Noble), Suleyman (Solomon), 
and Fatima (the Prophet Muhammad's daughter) are preferred. Long names, 
such as Abu Abdallah Muhammad Ibn Muhammad Ibn Abdallah Ibn Idris al 
Qurtubi al-Hasani (c. 1100-1165), the much-revered botanist and geographer, 
tell a deeper history of the bearer's family genealogies, religious identity, and his 
or her place of birth. In a patrilineal society, the child takes the first name of the 
father (e.g., Musa Ibn Essbai means Musa, the son of Essbai). 
In accordance with Abrahamic practices, the male infant is circumcised 
soon after birth. Although circumcision is not specifically mentioned in the 
Quran, most Islamic societies, like their African and Jewish counterparts, 
practice the removal of the foreskin of the penis at infancy. Although not 
widely practiced in Morocco, female circumcision takes the form clitoridec-
tomy, or excision of the clitoris, which can be done in infancy or at puberty. 
For the male, the circumcision ritual introduces the newborn into the culture 
and religion of his local community. For the female, it marks an important 
preparation for the adult role she will play as a married woman. As part of the 
initiation ceremony, a feast is held for the child, who is dressed in traditional 
clothes, and guests shower the baby with gifts and money. Although most 
children are circumcised at infancy, some parents may not observe this rite of 
passage until their children are four years or older. In this case, the observance 
coincides with the age when the boy is old enough to spend a little more time 
with his father and other adult males, and he may also accompany the fam-
ily elders to the mosque.1 Similarly, a girl who undergoes a clitoridectomy at 
puberty starts to spend more time in the company of her mother and other 
adult female members of the kinship group in preparation for her future 
married life. 
As in other Muslim societies, traditional Quranic education is a highly valued 
part of the developmental stages of life in Morocco. Until recently, the focus 
of education has been on the training of the learner to master recitation of the 

112 
CULTURE AND CUSTOMS OF MOROCCO 
Quran. The ability of the learner to complete the memorization of the Quran 
is considered a fundamental part of his or her upbringing and development. 
Such an occasion is marked with a weeklong celebration. The graduating stu-
dents, with their families, teachers, and friends, parade through their immediate 
neighborhood reciting prayers and hymns. As the procession passes, neighbors 
salute the students with gifts. Usually, the proud parents slaughter a sheep and 
prepare dishes for their family and friends. Today, Quranic education is still 
an important part of Moroccan life, but Western-style education has taken a 
position of preeminence because it best equips the individual with the skills to 
succeed in the modern economy. Therefore, some Moroccans now celebrate 
the graduation of their sons and daughters from colleges and universities with 
prayers of thanksgiving, banquets, music, and dances. 
Ceremonies that mark the transition to adulthood, such as a wedding, 
are observed as a community event. Marriage is one of the most important 
ceremonies in Morocco. It is the crowning of life expectations for the couple 
as well as their families and kin. Therefore, lavish weddings are still the norm 
rather than the exception. Because of individual differences in lifestyle, class, 
level of Western-influence, educational attainment, and family background, 
however, wedding celebrations vary. More of the younger generation are 
beginning to shy away from the traditional lavish marriage banquets, opting 
for a more moderate celebration. 
Funeral ceremonies (salatul janazah) mark the end of the life cycle of 
initiations or rites of passage. In the Islamic world, the dead (Al-Dafin) are 
given a simple and quick burial, often before sundown after they are pro-
nounced clinically dead. As a tradition, it is compulsory that a divine service, 
which is conducted outside the mosque, be held in honor of the dead for 
the eternal repose of his or her soul and those of all dead Muslims. The body 
is purified with ceremonial washing by an individual of the same sex, then 
it is wrapped in a shroud. An exception to this elaborate process of prepa-
ration is when the dead is considered a martyr. Martyrs are usually buried 
unwashed, and their bodies are not customarily wrapped in a white shroud. 
They are buried in the state in which they died as a testimony to their cause, 
because they expect a reward for their bravery and sacrifice. 
Burial in Morocco is both a family and a community affair. As the burial 
procession passes, prayers are recited, and sympathizers are expected to join 
the mourners in reciting the prayers and to help carry the corpse (at least to a 
certain distance) in the journey to its final resting place. Only the deceased's 
male relatives are expected to put the body in the grave, and the corpse is 
laid with its face positioned toward Mecca. A coffin may be used to carry the 
dead, but they body in not buried in it. The faithful continue to remember 
the deceased in prayers for several days, asking God (Allah) to be merciful 

SOCIAL CUSTOMS AND LIFESTYLE 
113 
upon his soul. Because Islam teaches of life after death, the mourning of the 
dead is often brief. As part of the emergent folk Islam in Morocco, ceremo-
nies for the dead are continued as saintly veneration of the Marabouts. In 
this context, life after death takes a different dimension with the notion of 
special blessings or rare divine favors (baraka) that are said to emanate from 
saints and noble men to whom certain local communities and neighbor-
hoods attach themselves. Baraka is part of everyday life, a concrete mani-
festation of God's will, and it is invoked to explain how some things occur.2 
For the Western-educated elite, however, this form of loyalty to local saints 
is becoming outdated. 
Other key celebrations that fall within the category of family events is 
the commemoration of the return of a member from the annual religious 
pilgrimage to Mecca, called the hajj. The journey to Mecca, in observance of 
one of the five pillars of the Islamic faith, often is an arduous task. Moroccans 
who can afford the costs of the journey join millions of pilgrims from more 
than 70 Muslim countries. The journey from Morocco across the Mediterra-
nean to Saudi Arabia via Cairo or Baghdad or even right through the Red Sea 
involve great distances and enormous dangers posed by storms, thieves, and 
possible political unrest in the countries along the way. In the past, pirates 
and robbers waylaid convoys of pilgrims. It is not unusual for people who 
traveled by camel or by boat to die. Today, the option of flying has drasti-
cally reduced the dangers of road and sea transportation, but the possibility 
of death by suffocation, trampling, or dehydration during the annual event 
in Mecca still confronts the pilgrims. Given these risks, the successful return 
of a member from the arduous but obligatory trip is an occasion for celebra-
tion and thanksgiving with family members, neighbors, and friends. Usually, 
the hosts provide food, drinks, and music, and prayers of thanksgiving are 
profusely offered on behalf of the returned pilgrim. After his return, the male 
pilgrims take thee title al-haji, and the female assume the title al-haja. 
CULTURAL A N D N A T I O N A L FESTIVALS 
Moroccans have diverse festivals and holidays embedded in religious values, 
national events, folklore, and popular culture. Usually, with the approval 
of the king, each of the big religious and national celebrations is observed 
with two days of holiday. The dates for most of these annual events are not 
fixed as they are in the Western calendar introduced by Pope Gregory XIII 
in 1582. This is because the lunar calendar or a cycle of agricultural harvests 
determines the dates. In Islam, religious holidays strictly follow the lunar 
calendar in which each month begins with the sighting of the new moon. 
Therefore, the various holidays do not fall on the same day each year. Despite 

114 
CULTURE AND CUSTOMS OF MOROCCO 
the fact that religious festivals are determined by the lunar calendar, civil life 
in Morocco is organized in accordance with the contemporary calendar, in 
which the weekend consists of Saturday and Sunday. Also, Moroccans do not 
consider Friday as a work-free day as the people do in most Islamic states, 
though the government and private businesses extend their lunch breaks to 
allow worshippers enough time to observe their Friday prayers. Moroccans 
celebrate their festivals with prayers and parades of gorgeous traditional dress, 
song, dance, good food, and drink. Unlike in most Islamic states, the prohibi-
tion of alcohol is not strictly enforced, and young people and others take their 
fill during some private and public parties. 
Among the most widely celebrated of the religious festivals in Morocco 
are Eid el Kebir (or Kabir or Eid el Adbha), Ramadan, Eid el Mouloud, 
Eid el Muharram, and the various festivals or mousseums, which include the 
popular annual horse-riding festival. These festivities are observed in accor-
dance with time-honored, prescribed rituals in the form of prayers, sump-
tuous feasts, music, dancing, parades, and fireworks. Eid el Kebir is one 
of the oldest and most significant religious festivals of the Islamic world, 
which comes around in late January or February or early March every year. 
It commemorates the story of Abraham's steadfast readiness to sacrifice his 
only son, Isaac (or Ishmael), as commanded by God. It is such an important 
festival that shops, restaurants, and other businesses close in honor of the 
occasion. Muslims around the world perceive Eid el Kebir as a period to 
demonstrate unflinching obedience and surrender to God, in keeping with 
Abraham's example, through acts of gift giving, maintaining promises, and 
making extra sacrifices. The festival falls during the same period that Mus-
lims observe the traditional pilgrimage to Mecca (hajj). On Eid el Kebir, 
some families who can afford it usually slaughter a sheep or ram for the cel-
ebration. Weeks before the celebration, the animals are conspicuously teth-
ered in every neighborhood. The head of the family leads in the sacrifice by 
turning the head of the animal toward Mecca before cutting its throat. This 
is in imitation of Abraham's injunction from God to substitute a sheep for 
the sacrifice of his son. The meat is meticulously prepared, and all parts of 
the animal are used in special dishes and barbecue. In accordance with the 
traditions of the Prophet, all the meat should be divided into three parts to 
share. A third is distributed to other families and friends as a gift. Another 
third is specifically reserved for the poor, and the family observing the feast 
keeps the remainder. 
The Eid el fitr (also called Eid el-Seghir or Eid-el-fetr) feast marks the end 
of Ramadan, which is similar to the Lenten period in Christianity.3 Because 
the date is determined according to the lunar calendar, the feast falls on a 
different day each year. In 2005, the Eid el Fitr will be celebrated on either 

SOCIAL CUSTOMS AND LIFESTYLE 
115 
November 1 or 4 (1st Shawwal). This date may change depending on when 
the moon is sighted. However, experts have established November 4 as the 
most likely day. This festival is typically observed within individual Muslim 
families. During the month of Ramadan, the ninth month of the Islamic 
calendar, the Muslims are enjoined to fast (saum) and to perform prayers. 
Ramadan marks the period during which the Quran was revealed to the 
Prophet Muhammad. By law, Moroccans are prohibited from any acts that 
imply open contempt of fasting, and it is usual to have a number of young 
people jailed for this infraction each year. During the month of Ramadan, the 
people are forbidden to eat, drink, smoke, chew gum, and have sex between 
sunrise and sunset. They are also prohibited from fighting, lying, and speaking 
ill of others and should avoid unnecessary arguments. At the end of this period 
of religious reflection and spiritual renewal, the people celebrate their success-
ful fulfillment of the difficult religious obligation with exchanges of felicita-
tions such as "Have a happy and blessed Eid-el-fitr" (or Eid-al-fitr Mubarak). 
The participants appear in new clothes, attend fairs, pay visits to friends and 
associates, enjoy sumptuous feasts, and share special prayers together. The Eid 
el fitr prayer, which begins shortly after sunrise, is held in large mosques or 
in an open field to allow for the participation of thousands of worshippers. 
At the end of the prayers, the people go home to break their fast, and after-
ward the celebrations begin. Most families who can afford it are expected to 
honor the Islamic obligation of giving material or monetary gifts to the poor.
Eid el Muharram (or Moharem) comes exactly three months after the end of 
Ramadan. Muharram marks the beginning of the Muslim New Year. It is equiva-
lent to the New Year's celebration in the Gregorian, or Western, calendar. Again, 
the date for the celebration is not fixed because of the variations in the lunar 
calendar, but it usually comes between February and March. For the majority 
Moroccan Muslims, the Sunni—those who adhere strictly to the teachings and 
traditions of the holy Prophet of Allah—the beginning of the Islamic calen-
dar is observed as a one-day event. The 1 Oth day of the month of Muharram, 
known as Ashura (or rawda-khan) is remembered as the day God saved the 
Prophet Moses (Musa) from Pharaoh (Fir awn). For the Shiites—those who 
see Caliph Ali, the Prophet Muhammad's son-in-law, as the rightful inheri-
tor of the Caliphate of Islam-Muharram is commemorated with a 10-day 
period of mourning for the death of Hussein (or Husayn), Ali's son, who was 
killed at the battle of Karbala in modern Iraq in 680 C.E. According to the 
Shiites, the killing of Hussein quashed the expectation that Ali's descendents 
would eventually lead the Muslim world. The Shiites observe Muharram with 
passionate expressions of grief in the form of plays, songs, beating of chests, 
and solemn processions that often involve individuals inflicting pain and inju-
ries on themselves. Additionally, some Shiites make a pilgrimage to Karbala,

116 
CULTURE AND CUSTOMS OF MOROCCO 
Iraq, where Hussein was killed. The 1 Oth and last day of Muharram marks 
the climax of the celebrations when the Shiites remember the actual date of 
Hussein's death. 
The annual Eid el Mouloud is usually held anywhere between May and 
June (depending on the lunar calendar) and commemorates the birth of the 
Prophet Muhammad. The festival is equivalent to Christmas in Christianity. 
In Morocco, the event is observed with a big show in the national capital 
Rabat-Sale (also known as Dar as Salaam) involving a candle-lit parade. 
Moroccans perceive Eid el Mouloud as a period of excitement and joy. It is 
celebrated with special prayers and visits to family, friends, and associates. 
During this period, the people demonstrate their hospitality by providing 
food and entertainment for their guests. 
From September to the end of October, a series of festivals, or mousseums 
(or ammougars), are observed across Morocco. The diverse mousseums serve as
one of the most popular tourist attractions in Morocco today. One of them, 
a typical Sufi festivity, is a neighborhood-based event in honor of the numer-
ous local Marabouts, or folk saints, whose tombs are found across the coun-
try. The celebrations are often held near the tombs of the individual saints. 
Some small mousseums, however, are occasions to observe special market days
or harvest periods such as the popular Goulimine market, which is held at 
the tip of the Sahara to the south. The Goulimine market is famous for its 
Saturday Tuareg camel market. The Tuaregs are better known as "Blue Men" 
because of their blue robes and bodies painted with indigo. The weekly mar-
ket provides the predominantly sedentary local population with an occasion 
for cultural expression as well as to buy and sell. It is also home to tricksters 
and the celebrated Guedra dancers, whose mesmerizing rhythms have often 
been featured in international films. 
Others festivities attract interest from far and near. A popular local event 
is the Berber Bridal Imilchil festival held annually around the third week 
in September near the burial site of Sidi Mohammed Maghani (also called 
M'aa-Al Ainine). The festival commemorates the life of the much-admired 
patron saint of the Ait Haddidou of the Atlas Mountains. The occasion draws 
various ethnic groups. The people come together to dance, sing, eat, and offer 
prayers to their patron saint, hoping that the special baraka that is believed 
to coalesce around his tomb will bring them special favors, including suc-
cess, healing, fertility, and good health. During the festival, the local Berber 
women adorn themselves in colorful traditional outfits and silver jewelry. The 
occasion, which was formally an exclusive family affair, presents unmarried 
women with a forum to find a possible spouse. The common belief is that all 
the marriages contracted at this festival are blessed by the patron saint, which 
means that they are happy and successful marriages. 

SOCIAL CUSTOMS AND LIFESTYLE 
117 
Some cultural celebrations have less intense religious significance. For 
instance, between June and July falls the annual weeklong national Folklore 
Festival (or Festival of Arts) held at the ruins of the sixteenth-century Badi 
palace of the Sa'adi dynasty (1550—1668).4 The arts festival has become one 
of the growing tourist attractions in Morocco, and it is graced by dancers, 
storytellers (hakawati), musicians, artists, acrobats, dancers, painters, crafts-
men, vendors, snake charmers, and fire-eaters, who all provide entertaining 
performances. Among other special attractions of the festival is a choreo-
graphed horse-riding spectacle or fantasia. This rich display of horsemanship 
originally was held in the town of Tissa, which lies about 46 kilometers north 
of Fes, but since 1976, it has been held annually in Meknes, also a neighbor-
ing town, lying to the south of Fes. The festivity, which is held in September, 
commences with a parade involving local women from the Zayaan region 
riding on horseback, followed by their men. Soon after the procession comes 
the so-called Festival of Gunpowder (Eid el Broud), which, as the name sug-
gests, involves explosions and gunfire. Meanwhile, the riders are organized in 
formations according to their individual rank, and no sooner has one wave 
of riders left than the next follows, thus displaying surging waves of galloping 
hooves. The rapid movement of horses is accompanied by the cries of rid-
ers and snapping orders from their leader until the whole show explodes in 
another blaze of gunfire from their homemade rifles, known as moukhahla. At 
the end of the riders' display, prizes are given for the best performers, followed 
by music and dancing in a large hall. 
Early October is a period of harvest, and the festival of the oblong-shaped 
dates (or festival of the desert fruit) is held in Erfoud, which lies to the east of 
Meknes. Here, approximately one million date palms of different varieties are 
harvested annually. The date is a popular delicacy in Morocco, and the local 
people who grow them rely heavily on the income they generate. It affords 
the people an occasion to celebrate their agricultural successes with family 
and friends. During the event, food is served and there are cultural displays 
of music and dance. 
In addition to religious and cultural festivals, Morocco has about four 
key secular holidays. They remind the people as a nation about their recent 
political history, including their freedom from European colonial rule and 
the controversial relationship with neighboring Western Sahara. Although 
Morocco regained independence on March 2, 1956, when the treaty of Fes 
ended, the sovereign nation was proclaimed with King Mohammed V emerg-
ing as the head of state, on March 3, 1956, in commemoration of the date 
Mohammed V changed his sultanate to a monarchy. Moroccans, however, 
usually observe their Independence Day on November 18. This day is set 
aside as a national holiday, in respect for the sacrifices made by their national 

118 
CULTURE AND CUSTOMS OF MOROCCO 
heroes and heroines toward freedom from French colonial rule. The second 
secular national holiday, known as Throne Day, marks the anniversary of 
King Hassan I Is accession to power in 1961. The celebration is observed 
on March 3. The third national day is Green March Day, which commemo-
rates November 6, 1975, when about 524,000 men and women voluntarily 
answered the call of their king to march into Western Sahara to claim it for 
Morocco at the end of Spanish colonial rule in the region. Today, that his-
toric march is perceived as a significant demonstration of Moroccan national-
ism. Reunification Day (although historically linked with Green March Day) 
is the fourth national holiday and commemorates Morocco's declaration of 
unity with Western Sahara on August 14, 1979. 
Old and new forms of cultural and national festivals are emerging to 
accommodate the dynamics of social change. In recent times, for instance, 
the ancient city of Fes has become the host of the Festival of World Sacred 
Music (Festival des musiques sacrees du monde). The annual festival allows 
the people the opportunity to listen to diverse musical traditions from around 
the world, including the sacred tunes from the Middle East and the West. 
This one-week event offers exhibitions, lectures, and intellectual and artistic 
performances, from Sufi dervishes of Turkey, Arab Andalusian music, Berber 
trance music, Celtic sacred beats, Christian gospel music, Hindustani chants, 
and the Morocco Philharmonic. 
AMUSEMENT A N D SPORTS 
Moroccans enjoy their sports and leisure activities. Some of their popular 
games and pastime activities include skiing, swimming, basketball, hunt-
ing, fishing, trekking, golf, and track and field. The most popular sport in 
Morocco, however, like in most African and European countries is football 
(soccer). The Moroccan national team, popularly called the Atlas Lions (Les 
Lions de l'Atlas), remains one of the most respected national teams from 
Africa, with a record of achievements. In the 1998 World Cup, for example, 
the Atlas Lions were the first African team to almost make it to the quarter-
finals. Morocco has produced world-class footballers who were also voted 
as African footballers of the following years: Mohammed Timouini (1985), 
Mustapha Hadji (1998), and Ahmed Faras (1975). The government's strong 
support of soccer is best attested to by its several but unsuccessful attempts 
to host the World Cup competition at a state-of-the-art stadium named after 
the late King Mohammed V, which was constructed in Casablanca in the 
mid-1990s. 
Morocco has produced world-class athletes. Among them is Hicham el 
Guerrouj, a world-class middle-distance runner who won two Olympic gold 

SOCIAL CUSTOMS AND LIFESTYLE 
119 
medals at the 2004 Athens Games in the 1,500 meters and the 5,000 meters. 
Guerrouj also won numerous gold medals at various world championships. For 
instance, he was the world record holder in the 1,500 meters at the 1998 world 
athletic championship. Additionally, he was named the International Associa-
tion of Athletic Federations (LAAF) athlete of the year for 2000 and 2002. In 
the 1980s, his countryman, Said Aouita, dominated all middle-distance com-
petitions. Aouita won a gold medal at the 1984 Los Angeles Olympic Games, 
and he was the overall winner of the LAAF Grand Prix series in 1985. In 1987, 
Aouita set world records in both the 2,000 meters and the 5,000 meters. Also 
at the 1984 Los Angeles Olympic Games, Nawal el Moutawakel, a world-class 
female runner, won a gold medal in the 400-meter hurdles. Her compatriot, 
Zahra Ouaziz, won a silver medal in the 5,000 meters at the 1999 World Cham-
pionships. Perhaps it is not astonishing that Moroccans have been successful at 
middle-distance runs because both Guerrouj and Aouita were veterans of the 
challenging international Sand Marathon (or Marathon des Sables), arguably 
the most difficult marathon in the world. In tennis, Younes al Aynaoui, Karim 
Alami, and Hicham Arazi were once ranked among the top 100 on the world 
men's tennis circuit. Aynaoui, probably the most successful of all Moroccan 
tennis players, made it to the quarterfinals of the 2000 Australia Open. 
Although there are other popular sports in Morocco, golf has serious 
patronage among Morocco's ruling elite. The late King Hassan II was widely 
known as a golfer, hence the wide popularity of the game. Many beautiful 
golf courses dot the country, such as that located at the Royal Dar as Salaam 
Golf Club in Rabat and Agadir. Three major international golf competitions 
are hosted in Morocco annually. These include the King Hassan II Trophy, 
the Moroccan Open, and the Mohammed VI Golf Trophy held at the Royal 
Dar as Salaam Golf Club. 
CHANGING LEISURE: CINEMA 
Morocco has always held a fascination for Western filmmakers, especially 
since the successful premiere of Casablanca in 1942. Going to movies is a 
popular pastime in this Muslim kingdom, and filmmaking is also a signifi-
cant art. Hamid Bennani, whose film Wechma debuted in 1970, is widely 
acknowledged as the pioneer of contemporary Moroccan cinema. Prior to 
the 1970s, adaptations of Egyptian melodramas, which succeeded European 
films in the 1960s, dominated the popular cinema in the country. With the 
appearance of Wechma in theaters, however, a new film movement known 
as "cinematic modernity" began. The movement emphasized the ideas that 
cinema should be for more than entertainment purposes. It also represents an 
art, a way of thinking, a culture, a means of explaining reality, an intellectual 

120 
CULTURE AND CUSTOMS OF MOROCCO 
pursuit, a form of writing based on signs, and using the environment and 
locations according to a new aesthetics. Cinematic modernity also aims to 
inform individuals about society and free them from superstitions, taboos, 
and authoritarian leadership. In this context, the filmmaker becomes "an intel-
lectual, as well as an observer of his political and historical time."5 These ideas 
inspired a number of impressive films produced in the 1970s and early 1980s, 
including Souheil Ben Barka's A Thousand and One Hands (Mains mille et 
une), Moumen Smihi's El Chergui, Ahmed El Mamouni's Days and Days (Des 
Jours et des jours), Hamed Bouani's The Mirage (Le Mirage), Jillali Ferhati's Les 
Poupees de Roseau, Abderhamane Tazi's Badis, and Daoud Aoulad-Syad's 
The Horse ofWind (Le Chevalde vent).6 In 1987, the government recognized the
film industry as a potential source of revenue with the establishment of the 
National Institute of Drama, Art and Cultural Entertainment (NIDACE) as 
the agency responsible for the promotion of the industry. 
Today, Moroccan cinema is breaking new ground as it continues to dramatize 
the social and political ills confronting the nation. Its ability to sustain a wider 
interest is anchored in the use of popular genres to depict current social problems. 
For instance, Saad Chraibi's Women and Women (Femmes... etFemmes), a melo-
drama about women's rights activism, has enjoyed great success in Morocco. 
Similarly, Abdelkader Lagtaa's Casablanca (Les Casablancais) depicts modern
Morocco's cities (particularly Casablanca) as places where people live in fear. 
The film portrays religious fundamentalism and political uncertainty as the 
principal sources of instability in society. Nabil Ayouch's Mektoub captures
the wide gap between the rich and poor by focusing on the crime and conflict 
that poverty generates in society. 
Although foreign films are also enjoyed by cinemagoers, those produced 
within the local cultural milieu particularly hold the most attraction for the 
people. Nonetheless, since the late 1990s, Morocco has become a hosting 
ground for popular film festivals. Among others, the annual Marrakech Film 
Festival (FIFM), usually held in December, attracts interest from Europe, the 
Americas, Africa, Asia, and the Middle East. The goal of the festival is both 
to celebrate the films of the previous years and to introduce new talent to the 
fast-growing industry. The FIFM affords foreign-based Moroccan filmmakers 
the opportunity to sample the success of their works at home. For instance, 
Hakim Belabbes's film The Threads is catching the interest of local film critics 
for it touch of realism. 
O L D AND NEW: VILLAGES AND CITIES 
Contemporary Morocco is a contrasting paradox of the old and new, vil-
lage life and city life, poor and rich, and educated and uneducated. Also, 

SOCIAL CUSTOMS AND LIFESTYLE 
121 
although the country was introduced to the international capitalist system 
and modern professional careers under French and Spanish colonial tutelage, 
the precolonial pursuits of pastoralism, farming, hunting, pottery, and other 
crafts are still very much part of everyday life. As the succeeding governments 
continue to make significant efforts to modernize and improve agricultural 
production in the kingdom, this sector of the economy has remained in the 
hands of the rural farmers. The Berbers of the Atlas region and the Tuaregs of 
the south are primarily cattle herdsmen or pastoralists and move from place 
to place. In the rural areas, living conditions vary a great deal. Whereas the 
nomadic herdsmen often live in tents made of wool or goatskin, some farm-
ers have their own houses. Generally the house is narrow and built in a more 
traditional manner, of stone or clay. Herdsmen are regulated to a lower status 
on the social hierarchy. 
Those who opt to live a European lifestyle are found mostly in the big 
cities such as Rabat, Fes, Casablanca, and Meknes. Urban life presents a 
contrasting view of old and new residential quarters. Whereas the older and 
more conservative people live primarily in the old quarters (old medina), 
the younger middle-class and successful business and political elite tend to 
occupy the more modern buildings and quarters (new medina). The elite 
are also known for their conspicuous consumption and lifestyles, including 
expensive cars, palatial homes, expensive clothes and jewelry, and expensive 
foods and drinks. 
Unlike in the past, it is fairly common to find young people at casinos, 
nightclubs, bars, and restaurants. In such towns as Marrakech and Agadir, 
modern nightclubs—some featuring erotic belly dancers—coexist alongside 
traditional modes of musical entertainment, such as folk dancing. These con-
trasting lifestyles express the continuing dynamics of social reordering going 
on in modern Morocco. 
Agencies of Change 
Given its strategic location between continents and cultures, Morocco has 
always been a dynamic society with cross-fertilization of cultural ideas and 
sociopolitical changes. European colonialism during the twentieth century, 
however, left a lasting legacy in the people's history. In the first four decades 
of the century, the impact of the various agencies of change, such as Western-
style education, cash economy, modern bureaucracy, new technologies, infra-
structures such as roads and railways, modern cities, hospitals, and so on, was 
kept at the best possible level within the terms of the Fes Treaty of 1912 that 
established French colonial rule. Toward the end of World War II, however, 
the Western presence produced a more pronounced and dramatic process of 

122 
CULTURE AND CUSTOMS OF MOROCCO 
change in Morocco. Those living in the countryside began to migrate to the 
big cities in search of new opportunities and a better quality of life. Not 
everyone who migrated realized their dreams, but a good number of them 
were engaged in the new war economy. The development of port facilities 
during the war, for instance, led to the creation of new employment oppor-
tunities, especially in the coastal cities. The founding of light industries such 
as textile and sugar mills, tobacco factories, and food-processing plants pro-
vided additional opportunities for young people. These modest expansions in 
the industrial and service sectors of the economy were not enough to meet the 
needs of increasing numbers of the unemployed, however. In the late 1950s 
when Morocco attained its independence, about 80 percent of the population 
lived in rural areas, but the figure in the early 1980s decreased to 56 percent. 
An impressive study on literacy, culture, and development concluded in 
the 1990s showed that although the desire for Western-style education was 
increasing over this period, there were not enough educated people to meet 
the demands of the changing economic structures.7 As a result of unemploy-
ment, several thousand were left to live in the misery of shantytowns, with 
an unsteady income, hunger, and poverty. In the midst of the unfortunates 
were successful businessman, entrepreneurs, and landowners living in palatial 
homes and luxurious apartments. Since independence, the governments have 
continued to search for a solution to the problems of unemployment, squalor, 
and illiteracy by creating more employment, expanding educational facilities, 
and creating new affordable housing options, especially in cities such as Casa-
blanca and Rabat. The increasing population of young people and declining 
sources of revenue, however, have played a part in limiting the government's 
capacity to completely resolve these persistent issues. 
Changing Economy and Values 
As the economy continues to undergo a process of liberalization and mod-
ernization, so, too, do old values held by the people. On the economic front, 
privatization of state-owned companies began in earnest in 1993, and in the 
first four years, 34 government-owned companies were sold to the public, 
including banks, hotels, transport, and mining. Given that Moroccans pur-
chased most of these companies, the middle class expanded and the num-
ber of shareholders jumped astronomically from 10,000 in 1993 to 180,000 
in 1995. Additionally, foreign investments contributed nearly DH 4 billion 
(about U.S.$476.6 million) to the economy by 1995.8 Although this initial 
opening in the economic sector continues to widen with a genuine support of 
the king, it leaves much to be desired. The much-expected privatization of the 
state-owned communication industry, for instance, is yet to be realized. 

SOCIAL CUSTOMS AND LIFESTYLE 
123 
With regard to gender relations, Moroccan women are gradually experi-
encing a little more freedom and liberty as stipulated by Article 8 of the 1996 
constitution. An observer of the recent changes noted that in the 1960s and 
1970s, very few women had any role in politics because gender issues were 
considered secondary by the conservative male ruling elite.9 This attitude is 
beginning to change, and Moroccans are steadily dropping some old customs 
and values. Since the 1980s, women have gained more power through emerg-
ing opportunities to pursue careers in government, academics, law, medi-
cine, and other fields. Among prominent positions recently held by women, 
Nawal el-Moutawakel, who won the gold medal in the 400-meter hurdles at 
the 1984 Olympic Games, served as secretary of State for youth and sports 
between 1997 and 1998. In contrast to practices in the past, the younger 
and more educated generation has increasingly turned its back on polygamy 
and adopted tastes for university education, desire for employment in gov-
ernment service, fascination with European fashion, memberships in social 
clubs, and patronage of nightclubs and massage parlors. In the past, these life-
style options were virtually intolerable in the society, but now the government 
is easing restrictions. Although large families are still desired by a significant 
portion of the population, the educated elite is increasingly opting for smaller 
and more manageable family sizes. 
Changing Political Culture 
In many ways, the recent socioeconomic changes on both the local and the 
global levels have also brought about new political pressures, thereby neces-
sitating some changes in national politics and state structure. Since the late 
1990s, when King Mohammed VI (who is seen primarily as a liberal) suc-
ceeded his father in office, the country has been going through a period of 
liberalization of state institutions. In fact, the political changes were part of 
the broader liberalizations King Hassan II had initiated before his death in 
July 1999. After repeated attempts on his life in the 1960s, 1970s, and 1980s 
by disgruntled elements in the country, in 1997 Hassan allowed elections 
for the House of Representatives for the first time in the country's history. 
Building on his father's example, in 2002 King Mohammed VI appointed 
a prime minister, Driss Jettou, to run the day-to-day affairs of government. 
Jettou was nonetheless under monarchical authority . In the 2002 election, 
more than 26 political parties vied for election. This was a promising effort by 
the government to get the people involved in the political process, but more 
are desired on the road to democratization as the new generation eagerly 
looks forward to a democratic government. This desire is best demonstrated 
by the sudden surge in the number of civil and political associations such 

124 
CULTURE AND CUSTOMS OF MOROCCO 
as the Democratic Confederation of Labor (Confederation democratique de 
travail, CDT), General Union of Moroccan Workers (Union General des 
ouvriers marocains, U G T M ) , Moroccan Employers Association (Associa-
tion Marocaine D'Employeurs, CGEM), National Labor Union of Morocco 
(Syndicat national du Maroc, U N M T ) , and Union of Moroccan Workers 
(Union des ouvriers marocains, UMT). These emergent groups may continue 
to apply pressure that will eventually bring about a full-blown democracy in 
Morocco. As an expert on Islamic societies stresses, "extremism flourishes in 
the absence of democracy."10 In an age of international terrorism, democ-
racy and human rights have crucial roles to play in curbing the rising tide of 
sectional cleavages and youthful radicalism in Morocco. 
NOTES 
1. Carolyn Fluehr-Lobban, Islamic Societies in Practice, 2nd ed. (Gainesville: 
University Press of Florida, 2004), 112. 
2. Dale F. Eickelman, Moroccan Islam: Tradition and Society in a Pilgrimage 
Center (Austin: University of Texas Press, 1976), 158. 
3. Ramadan may be literally translated as "the hot month." 
4. The Berber founders of the Sa'adi dynasty took control of the southern part 
of Morocco from the Portuguese under their leader Mohammed Al Mahdi around 
1550. In 1551, the leaders proceeded to take power in Morocco, making Marrakech 
their seat. It was during this period that the Badi palace, which was then one of the 
most exquisite architectural designs in history, was built. For details, see E. W. Bovill, 
The Golden Trade of the Moors (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1968), 167-168. 
5. See Hamadi Gueroum, "History of Moroccan Cinema," excerpts from the 
program of the 24th Festival of the 3 Continents, Nantes, France, November 24 
through December 5, 2002. 
6. For a recent discussion of these films, see Kevin Dwyer, Beyond Casablanca: 
M.A. Tazi, Moroccan Cinema, and Third World Filmmaking (Bloomington: Indiana 
University Press, 2004). 
7. See Daniel A. Wagner, Literacy, Culture, and Development: Becoming Literate 
in Morocco (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1993). 
8. C. R. Pennell, Morocco since 1830: A History (New York: New York University 
Press, 2000), 373-74. 
9. C. R. Pennell, Morocco since 1830: A History (New York: New York University 
Press, 2000), 348. 
10. Fluehr-Lobban, Islamic Societies in Practice, 7. 

8 
Music and Dance 
UNLIKE IN MOST CONSERVATIVE Islamic states in Asia and the Middle East, in 
Morocco, music, which is often accompanied by dance, is central to everyday 
life and inseparable from the context in which it is performed. Music pro-
vides a medium for cultural, historical, and aesthetic expressions. Music also 
serves as a source of relaxation and entertainment. No festival or celebration 
is complete without music and dance, and certain kinds of African music can 
be seen as "communal property whose spiritual qualities are experienced and 
shared by all."1 Musical groups entertain guests at birth, circumcision, and 
wedding parties and at concerts; provide pleasant distractions to mourners at 
funerals; and enliven religious processions. Like other Moroccan traditions, 
Moroccan music and dance reflect a rich mixture of Berber, Arab, Jewish, 
African, and European elements. This diversity underscores the enduring his-
torical adaptation of the indigenous and foreign genres of popular culture. 
In broad terms, experts have identified two types of Moroccan music: the 
various indigenous Berber varieties of music and performances that accom-
pany traditional rituals, community entertainment, religious or a social 
observance, or recreational events such as sporting competitions and the clas-
sical music that predominates in the northern regions of Tangier, Tetouan, 
Fes, Meknes, Kenitra, and Rabat. The origin of Moroccan music goes back 
to the Andalusian period, the era beginning with the Arab conquest and rule 
of southern Spain in the early eight century and lasting until the Arab expul-
sion from Europe in the late fifteenth century (c. 711-1492).2 Although this 
bipolar categorization provides a convenient analytical framework, it hardly 
explains the cross-fertilized and multidimensional nature of Moroccan music. 

126 
CULTURE AND CUSTOMS OF MOROCCO 
This chapter highlights the historical origins of the various genres, the types 
of performance, structural forms, repertoires, and events at which they are 
performed and how music and dance appear in the sociocultural milieu. 
MUSICAL GENRES 
The various genres of music and their recent adaptations may be under-
stood in terms of their audience and uses. It is not uncommon to encounter 
individuals singing for a variety of reasons. One may sing to reduce boredom 
or loneliness or even to express love, joy, aspiration, expectation, hope, sor-
row, or loss. Men and women sing to entertain their children, spouse, par-
ents, and friends or to amuse themselves when they are engaged in various 
recreational, domestic, and vocational activities. The aggrieved may sing to 
bemoan a perceived act of injustice or to express hatred. A professional musi-
cian may, at the request of a patron, either perform as a soloist or in a group 
for the pleasure of a king, special guests, or other participants at a private 
party or banquet. Storytellers, circus performers, acrobats, and magicians at 
market places in Morocco use music and dance to capture the attention of 
their audience as they make a living. For each of these occasions, different 
kinds of musical instruments may be played. These may range from crude 
instruments such as sticks, empty cans, bottles, and hand clapping, to rattles, 
guitars, cymbals, piano, and drums. 
The indigenous Berber culture is a repository of a variety of musical styles. 
Berber folk music and dance, which preceded the arrival of the Arabs in the 
late seventh century, accompany social ceremonies and rituals. They are per-
formed by both nonprofessional and professional musicians (known as imdy-
azn) in a way that usually involves the entire village in a collective celebration 
of art and aesthetics. Some of the best-known contemporary Berber musicians 
include Walid Mimoun and Ammuri Mbark, whose band, the Usman, is rec-
ognized as transforming Berber song without losing its authentic and original 
appeal. Of no less importance are the all-male Master Musicians from the 
town of Jajouka, whose brand of traditional music has attracted immense 
interest among the Berber-Arabs. As a marker of community membership, 
Berber music allows people to dramatically and emotively express their feel-
ings according to certain prescribed forms of behavior. Among the Berbers, 
music and dance serve as mediums for expressing forms of indigenous artistic, 
social, political, religious, and intellectual traditions and values, which also 
reveal adaptations from African ideas. 
The so-called classical music of Morocco (also found throughout North 
Africa) has its roots in Andalusian music nurtured in Seville, Granada, 
and Cordoba. This legacy is often attributed to the artistic creations of the 

MUSIC AND DANCE 
127 
legendary Baghdad native Hassan Ali Ben Nafi (best known as Ziriab or 
Zyriab), who fled his homeland in the ninth century to escape a malicious plot 
by his enemies. His artistic contribution, in spite of the centuries of adapta-
tions in Andalusia and North Africa, has endured as a melting pot of interna-
tional cultural elements, and the lyrics are in either classical Arabic or in the 
Andalusian tongue (Gharnati). The multifaceted songs (including religious and 
secular tunes) associated with this genre use a wide variety of instruments such 
as the tar (or tambourine); a funnel-shaped drum made of clay called darbuqa 
or darbouka; three types of stringed instruments—the violin (kemanjah), fiddle 
(rebab), and lute (oudh or oud), which has a larger, pear-shaped body; and other 
modern instruments such as clarinets, banjos, and pianos. Lyrics for the classi-
cal melodies are written in the most stylish and scholarly form of Arabic. Future 
musicians receive extended training at music schools in Marrakech and Rabat. 
Over the years, classical compositions have undergone extensive changes, 
including a simplified form of lyrics that use everyday Arabic to form a sub-
genre of the Andalusian original. The evolving variety is commonly known 
in Morocco as griha. Some experts have identified griha as part of the main-
stream popular culture because it typically deals with widely appealing themes 
of everyday life such as crime, immorality, religious bigotry, poverty, women's 
issues, wars, and adventure.3 The songs are accompanied by intricate dances. 
Generally, Moroccan folklore includes a variety of musical styles that serve as 
a repertoire of oral text. This form of artistic creation captures an aspect of the 
indigenous knowledge system and has also been adapted by some religious 
brotherhoods for ritual celebrations. 
Music for Storytelling 
Storytelling is an integral part of Berber life. Moroccan folklore is extremely 
diverse and varies from region to region. Each community—whether nomadic 
or sedentary—has its own rich supply of dramas, operas, musical works, specific 
skills, devices, and elements available for performance. Whether encountered 
in the indigenous (Berber), classical, or contemporary (modern) popular cul-
ture, the music is rich in historical accounts, legends, myths, heroic deeds, 
chronologies of dynasties and rulers, and important wars that inform the audi-
ence about values and the way people have lived. Whereas Adalusian music 
narrates the achievements or downfalls of the Moroccan people, its Berber 
equivalent uses the tambourine and reed flute to convey smooth-flowing 
stories in harmony with the percussion.4 Music as a form of indigenous Berber 
culture has been preserved by small bands of itinerant professional entertainers 
who offer their songs, tales, and poetry in marketplaces, at weddings, births, 
circumcisions, and occasions for monetary rewards. 

128 
CULTURE AND CUSTOMS OF MOROCCO 
Argan music of southern Morocco is a popular folk music that celebrates 
the people's culture and reminds the younger generation about their indig-
enous values. The seeds of the argania spinosa tree, locally called argan, are 
edible, and dark oil is extracted for medicinal purposes. It grows around the 
southwestern towns of Essaouira and Agadir. For the local people of Souss 
(or Sus), Tamanar, Immouzer, and Inezgane, the tree symbolizes endurance 
and the will to survive in the challenging desert environment and represents 
an intricate aspect of being a Berber, hence it occupies a central part of the 
people's folklore and everyday social life. Among other things, argan perform-
ers sing about their cultural tradition, common issues in their immediate 
and neighboring environment, and the incursion of foreign influences on 
the social order. Although this tradition goes back in time, the folklore is 
constantly being enriched by popular ideas, and new songs are composed 
and revised to reflect recent events on the national, community, or individual 
level. 
Another genre of music for storytelling is the quasida, which is a type of 
epic, a composition in the form of narrative verse, preserved in the local lan-
guage. The music celebrates events of exceptional interest such as the joys 
or misfortunes that have befallen the nation or the achievements of famous 
individuals. The quasida is similar to the popular eighteenth- and nineteenth-
century slow and sentimental English ballad.5 
Music and Dance for War 
Berbers have been known for their impressive and heroic achievements in 
battles, and traditional Moroccan music and dance include some genres that 
were originally performed in times of war. Examples include the ahidni, ghiayta, 
and taskioine dances. With the emergence of the modern state in Africa, such 
war songs and dances only exist as cultural remnants. Participants may include 
both the educated and uneducated, the religious and nonreligious, the rural 
and urban dwellers, and so on. In some communities, both men and women 
participate; in others, war dances are only for men. Traditionally, the men wore 
or carried such war paraphernalia as swords, knives, rifles, arrows, sharpened 
sticks, and amulets as they danced to a particular war song. Of the different 
types of this genre, the ahidni dance is the most celebrated. Dancers stand 
close to one another in a circle, and as they sing, they rhythmically clap their 
hands and stomp their feet in an aggressive and belligerent manner. 
Similarly, the ghiaytas war dance serves to provide soldiers with courage in 
preparation for a war and embodies a form of victory celebration. During the 
dance, the warriors, holding their rifles, move their bodies in response to the 
tune of pipes and the beat of drums. The performers shout rather than sing. 

MUSIC AND DANCE 
129 
They carry their rifles on their heads, mimic the movements of soldiers in real 
combat situations, and then pretend to shoot at enemies. Dancing in a circle, 
the performers aim their rifles to the ground, and at the command of their 
leader fire blank shots. Among the Haha people of the High Atlas region, a 
simple reed flute with seven-holes takes the melody, and the rhythm is made by 
clapping and stomping to give a commanding and enchanting effect. The male 
performers dance in an aggressive manner that shows masculine passion. 
The taskioine is another traditional warriors' dance exclusively for men. 
Wearing white tunics and turbans, with powder horns on their shoulders, the 
dancers respond to the beat of earthenware tambourines covered with skins. 
They make well-rehearsed sudden stops with aggressive stamping of the feet. 
Although the taskioine dance is more of a physical activity than an artistic 
performance, the aesthetic values are nevertheless present. 
Another traditional war dance involves acrobatic displays from the brother-
hood of Sidi Ahmed ou Moussa (or Hmaid ou Moussa, the saint ofTazeroualt, 
from the Anti-Atlas Mountains), who established a training center for acrobats 
at the village of Amizmiz near Marrakech. Originally, the young people of the 
area performed these exercises in preparation for their role as sharpshooters 
and archers. As traditional warfare gradually declined with the emergence of 
the modern nation-state in Africa, the young acrobats ofTazeroualt turned 
the skills associated with this traditional dance into a moneymaking circus. 
Some of the dancers have taken their talents overseas as entertainers in Europe 
and the United States. In the diaspora, the traditional elegant costumes with 
colorful embroidery have been largely retained. 
Religious and Ritual Music 
Although some types of Berber and Andalusian music were originally 
composed for religious worship and ritual ceremonies, they also may be 
played during secular events. Like most spirituals, sacred tunes of Morocco 
are usually soft melodies. The mandolin and the violin are some of the com-
mon instruments used in this type of music. Singing and clapping often 
accompany these instruments. Also included among this genre is the Sep-
hardic Jewish music of the diaspora. In Morocco, whereas the topical and 
entertaining songs of the Sephardim remain part of the popular culture, 
the spiritual tunes are an intricate part of religious and cultural celebrations 
among the Jewish communities of North Africa. 
The original Berber spirituals have been adapted and changed since the 
coming and spread of Islam in the Maghreb, even though some still have not 
been accepted and modified by (orthodox) Islam. For instance, the guedra 
dance from the southern region of Morocco has its roots in the pre-Islamic 

130 
CULTURE AND CUSTOMS OF MOROCCO 
Berber religious practices. The guedra belongs to the so-called Blue People— 
the Tuaregs—of Goulimine, the region of the Sahara that stretches from the 
northern fringes of Mauritania all the way to Algeria and Egypt.6 The guedra 
is, in fact, a type of local earthenware cooking pot that can be easily converted 
to a drum that produces a special sound. Stemming from their pervasive belief 
in the existence of spirits (djinns), the Berber women performers appear com-
pletely covered in a black costume that reveals only their heads as a precaution 
against fiendish attacks. As they kneel, the dancers move to a steady rhythm 
that conjures culture, drama, and aesthetics. The performance is total theater 
when dancers sing in their local dialect and the spectators respond with alter-
nating ecstatic and brief guttural cries. To end the performance, the dancers 
cast aside their veils before they dramatically fall on the ground. 
In the town of Tissint (or Tisint), which lies southward of Agadir in the 
Anti-Atlas region, men and women, completely dressed in indigo, perform a 
dance also known by the name tissint, which can be traced back to an indig-
enous religious rite. In this betrothal rite of passage, the use of daggers sym-
bolizes persistence, pursuit, and victory. The engagement ceremony requires 
potential suitors and young women of marriageable age to meet and organize 
themselves in circle. The participants dance to a rhythmic, fast-tempo tune 
performed by locals and nonprofessionals who clap, chant, and sing with 
friends and acquaintances. The participants, including their watchful chap-
erones, guardians, and parents, sit in a circle, creating a dance space at the 
middle. One by one, a girl leaves the circle to dance. Soon, a suitor, who 
proposes to her by holding up a dagger fastened around his waist with a 
cord, joins her. The dagger represents an offer of protection and an indica-
tion of the intent to take up spousal responsibility for the woman. The young 
man spins, making circles around the girl, withdraws, and comes nearer, until 
they are facing each other. The official betrothal is observed as soon as the 
potential bride allows her suitor to put the corded belt over her head. With a 
deliberately slow movement, the man goes down on his knees in front of his 
future spouse. This custom has survived despite the fight by Islamic conser-
vatives for its abolition. The tissint dance is among the original Berber folk 
dances that are favored by the Ministry of Culture for inclusion in the annual 
Marrakech Folk Festival. This official patronage has left the Tuaregs with the 
hope of retaining their cherished custom at least in the near future. 
Music for Guilds 
Certain genres of music are specifically produced by craftsmen's guilds. 
Among these are the malhun and dekka songs. Whereas the malhun, encoun-
tered primarily in poetry, is identified generally with the urban working 

MUSIC AND DANCE 
131 
class craftsmen's guilds, the dekka exclusively belongs to the craftsmen and 
merchants from Marrakech. The entertainers are not professional musicians. 
The instruments are different-sized earthenware drums. The ceremony starts 
with simple and rather solemn rhythms, then the tempo of clapping acceler-
ates. The percussion is cleverly orchestrated, and the chorus of men sings 
powerfully. The rhythm changes now and then in a well-rehearsed manner, 
creating a response that manifests in a resounding outburst of ecstasy and 
excitement. 
Musical Games 
Other forms of music and dance in Morocco are made to entertain par-
ticipants at traditional games and sporting competitions. This genre occupies 
a rightful place in the traditional folk music, which attracts tourists from far 
and wide. Among them is the familiar horse festival (or fantasia) of Meknes. 
One of the highlights of this exciting display of horsemanship is the music 
and dance session that brings the festival to a grand close. The participants are 
dressed in diverse and rich costumes, and the music style played reflects the 
rich tradition of the people. 
Music for Entertainment and Recreation 
Although all forms of music and dance entertain their audience, folk musi-
cians and dancers have an ensemble of traditions that are specially put together 
for amusement and relaxation. A good example is the awash (or ahwach) dance 
that has become a major attraction at the annual June Marrakech Folk Festival. 
The skillful dancers from the High Atlas valleys in the Ouarzazate area appear 
in sparkling costumes. As in most Moroccan dances, the women form a circle 
and men sit around a fire at the center, each of them holding a circular wooden 
tambourine called a bendir. The performance commences with a piercing cry 
that is quickly followed by drumbeats. As the tempo increases, the women 
pick up the chorus, moving their bodies slowly and then faster as their shoul-
ders touch until the final chorus. 
The ouais is another popular music style for entertainment and recreation. 
It may be described as an adaptation of indigenous lyrics with English ballet 
and Arab culture. The instruments used are a one-stringed fiddle (rebab or 
rbab soussi) and a number of small mandolins (guembris) sometimes with three
strings and made from a turtle shell. An instrumentalist who strikes a piece of 
cast iron lying on the ground provides the commanding rhythm. The danc-
ers add to the music with small copper cymbals attached to their fingers. All 
the dancers wear city clothes, including a traditional caftan, an embroidered 

132 
CULTURE AND CUSTOMS OF MOROCCO 
silk belt (dfina), and a cord adorned with beads woven around the head. The 
performers with their elegant steps create an uncommonly graceful spectacle. 
The music and dance of the Gnawas (or Gnaouas) of the High Atlas are 
of black African and Arab traditions. It is a typical trance music used by 
members of the Sufi brotherhood to attain mystical ecstasy. Members of 
the group, who claim descent from Sidi Bilal, the ex-slave from Ethiopia 
who became a highly respected caller to prayers (muezzin), include master 
musicians, drummers, intriguing-looking women, mediums, and others who 
a long time ago established their home in Marrakech and other southern 
regions. The West African slaves who arrived in North Africa in the six-
teenth century brought this genre to Morocco; consequently, the lyrics have 
components of Senegalese, Guinean, and Malian traditions. A lute (qsbah) 
with a long neck of African origin called the gimbri, double-iron cymbals 
(qaraqab), and a double-headed cylindrical drum (tbel or ganga) played with 
curved sticks are common instruments of the Gnawa music. Members of the 
brotherhood observe a nocturnal rite of ceremonious possession (deiceba), 
during which participants practice the dances of possession and trance called 
derdeba. A master musician accompanies his troupe, and a female medium 
usually leads the spirituals used to invocate saints and supernatural beings. 
The percussion for the ritual processions comes specifically from a lute drum 
with a low register (guembri) and castanets (qraqech). Drums are used only 
during the beginning stage preceding the rite of possession. This nighttime 
ceremony also includes an irreligious session intended solely for the entertain-
ment of members. Today, the tumblers of the Jemaa El Fna (or Djema el-Fna) 
in Marrakech have transformed Gnawa music and dance into a popular form 
of entertainment. The group retains the traditional large drums and wrought-
iron castanets and the cowry shells and glass beads that adorn the perform-
ers. These cultural emblems remind the people about the dance's historical 
origins. The Gnawa performers dance with much agility, and their dangerous 
acrobatics flow with the beat of the rhythm. 
The ahidou is one of the most celebrated Middle Atlas arts and is performed 
by elegantly dressed dancers of the Oulmes and Khenifra areas. The men and 
women form a large circle and dance to the tempo of the local tambourine 
(bendir). Unlike the daring acrobats of the Gnawas, the ahidou performers 
dance with simple modesty and grace, and the songs have poetic lyrics. The 
women wear blue cloaks (handiras) with white stripes. Married women and 
widows may wear a kind of henna in their hair called akidoud. Their exquisite 
costumes are completed with large ornaments made of yellow amber beads 
and silver. The men dress in long traditional clothes called burnooses and 
wear headgear or turbans. The ahidou concert is enthralling, and the dignified 
gestures have endured as the trademark of this group. 

MUSIC AND DANCE 
133 
The houara dancers of Inezgane are troupes made up of local men and 
one woman. It represents one of the most fantastic types of folk dancing of 
Morocco. In readiness for the ceremony that is deeply laden with sacred and 
secular meaning, the dancers and singers organize themselves in a circle with 
the men and the woman standing close to one another. The rhythm is pro-
duced with tambourines, and the performers sing cheerily to both spiritual 
and sacred songs. The men leave the circle alone or in pairs to dance. As the 
tempo of the music reaches a certain speed, the woman rushes to the center 
to join the men in the dance. The dances involve a lot of physical activity and 
elaborate steps. 
The shikhat are female singing groups whose performances have become a 
crucial part of most festive celebrations and private parties in Morocco. They 
entertain guests at marriage ceremonies, henna parties, and birth and cir-
cumcision celebrations. A troupe of performers is typically made up of three 
or four women and a couple of male members who play only a supporting 
role. Whereas the men play an assortment of small drums (the darbuka, 
the taarija, the bendir), the women sing, dance, and sometimes drum their 
feet on an overturned metal washbasin (aj-jafna). The male members of the 
troupe, numbering usually no more than three, are responsible for playing 
heavy instruments such as the fiddle (kamanja), drums, and a three-stringed 
small-bodied instrument known locally as the lotar. In a society where 
women are customarily expected to be modest in their behavior, the shikhat 
is considered by most committed Muslims as a risque form of entertainment 
because of the erotic movements of the dancers. A detailed study of the 
shikhat in Morocco reveals that although the female performers are widely 
perceived as an aberration of the ideal woman, they nonetheless represent 
the inner thoughts of the so-called "honorable women insofar as they are 
licensed in the performance context to publicize the private desires and dis-
appointments of the majority of Moroccan women."7 The performers fulfill 
this role not only by revealing women's private life in public celebrations but 
also by doing it in a vulgar manner. This form of performance can be seen 
an act of defiance in a society in which masculine power is paramount. To 
"express sexuality is ... an act of defiance."8 
Pop Music 
Popular music, or chaabi (Arabic for "popular"), traditionally performed 
in marketplaces in Morocco, encompasses diverse forms. It draws on many 
aspects of local, African, Arab, and Western styles, and the language of 
communication is mostly colloquial Arabic or Moroccan Arabic, widely 
spoken or understood by all. The modern form of the pop music evolved in 

134 
CULTURE AND CUSTOMS OF MOROCCO 
the 1970s with the appearance of Nass El Ghiwane, Jiljilala, Lem Chaheb, 
and Noujoum Ouazza as the stars of the new music generation. Among 
the most successful of the emergent artists is Ouazza, a talented singer and 
guitarist who played for a band called Lem Chaheb. He is credited with 
producing the most appealing lyrics of the North African pop music domi-
nant in the 1970s and 1980s. Most of the pop songs have an instrumental 
section (leseb) that allows the audience to join in singing and clapping. The 
music is produced with instruments ranging from indigenous ones such 
as lute and drum to modern ones such as the piano and electric guitar. 
Whereas Lem Chaheb and El Ghiwane have made themselves enemies of 
the government because of the intense political nature of their songs, Najat 
Aatabou, who rose to stardom with her album entitled Country Girls and 
City Women, is gaining popularity with her more nuanced comments on the 
erosion of family values and religious hypocrisy in society. 
Also among the contemporary North African music styles is rai, which 
originated in western Algeria but has wide appeal in Morocco. It can be best 
described as an amalgam of local and other Arab, African, and European 
styles. This eclecticism is best heard in the music of Mustafa Loumghari, who 
spent more than a decade of his life in the Netherlands. His debut album, 
Noujoum Amsterdam, was an instant success at private parties, social events, 
and on national radio. His subsequent album, The Mediterranean (Le Medi-
terranean), which he dedicated to the children of the world, further captured 
the intricate mix of multicultural lyrics in rai music. 
Other Hybrids and Music from Other Lands 
Although Western music is gradually making its entrance via foreign radio 
stations and satellite television, and young people patronize clubs owned 
by Westerners and local entrepreneurs, mainstream Western music, such as 
rap and hip-hop, has yet to gain a wide audience in this Muslim country. 
Other music from around the world is widely enjoyed in Morocco, how-
ever. A variety of sacred music is featured at the annual international Fes 
Festival of World Sacred Music. This festival attracts top sacred music artists 
from Europe, the United States, Africa, the Middle East, and other parts of 
Asia for a week of exhibitions and concerts. Hindu chants, Christian gospel 
songs, Sufi dervishes from Turkey and Uzbekistan, and Celtic chants are 
some of the most popular performances at the festival. These foreign spiritu-
als are joined by the rich flavors of Berber trance music and Arab-Adalusian 
and Sephardic spirituals in an enchanting mix of arts and cultural traditions. 
This celebration of music is also very popular among the ruling elite in 
Morocco. 

MUSIC AND DANCE 
135 
Other brands of foreign music found in Morocco include jazz and Egyptian 
music, although jazz is not popular. Jazz and Egyptian music have roots in 
Africa, and they represent other examples of foreign music that are gradually 
attracting popular patronage. Whereas jazz appeals to a medium-sized audi-
ence, Egyptian music, which attracts a larger audience, may be described as 
part of the diverse terrain of popular music found within the Arab-Berber 
North African social milieu. 
NOTES 
1. See W. Komla Amoaku, "Towards a Definition of Traditional African Music: 
A Look at the Ewe of Ghana," in Irene V. Jackson, ed., More Than Drumming 
(Westport, CT: Greenwood, 1985), 32. 
2. Andalusia is the Arabic word for Spain; hence, the term Andalusian denotes 
the era of Arab conquest and control of parts of Spanish land. 
3. See, for instance, Harold D. Nelson, ed., Morocco: A Country Study, 4th ed. 
(Washington, D.C.: American University Press, 1978), 140-141. See also Eugene 
Fodor and William Curtis, Fodor s Morocco 1973 (New York: David McKay, 1973), 
110-113. 
4. Fodor and Curtis, Fodor s Morocco, 111-112.
5. Ibid., 112. 
6. The Tuaregs are called the "Blue People" because of their use of indigo to 
color pieces of fabric. The deeper the color in the fabric, the more beautiful they 
consider the item of clothing and the higher the status of the wearer, because more 
was spent to get the richer color. 
7. Deborah A. Kapchan, "Moroccan Female Performers Defining the Social 
Body," Journal ojAmerican Folklore 107, no. 423 (winter 1994): 89. 
8. Lila Abu-Lughod, Veiled Sentiments: Honor and Poetry in a Bedouin Society 
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1986), 157. 

This page intentionally left blank 

Glossary 
aith. Berber word for "sons of."
alem (singular, oulem or alim). 
Pious scholars of the premodern Middle East. 
al-haja. Title for Muslim women who have performed the pilgrimage to
Mecca. 
al-haju 
Title for Muslim men who have performed the pilgrimage to 
Mecca. 
Allah. 
One and only God. 
Amaziah (or imazighan). Literally "free men"; the original name by which
the Berber people of North Africa identified themselves. 
baraka. Sign of divine favor, sanctity, or special blessing from God (Allah),
an attribute of holy men and saints of Morocco. 
Barbarus. 
Name by which the ancient Romans referred to the indigenous 
inhabitants of North Africa. 
ben (or bin). 
Arabic for "son of." 
besijf. Arabic for "sword." 
bidonville. Shantytown or slum neighboring a cosmopolitan area, often
created by poor immigrants. 
bled~el-makhzen. Part of Morocco under the control of the sultan.
bled-el-siba. 
Part of Moroccan land not firmly under the control of the sultan. 
Blue Men. 
Common name for Berber Tuaregs because of their gorgeous 
blue robes and tradition of body painting with indigo. 

138 
GLOSSARY 
burnoose. 
Hooded woolen cloak originally for men. 
caliph. 
Originally a successor to the Prophet Muhammad, but now one 
who rules a Muslim state. 
Casbah. 
Palace or fortress. 
chaabi. Arabic for "popular."
colon. 
French colonial settler in Morocco. 
dayyanim. Jewish rabbi-judge in Morocco.
dfoua. Arabic for "bridewealth or dowry."
dhimmis. Literally "protected people"; generic term for non-Muslims,
especially Christians and Jews living in predominantly Muslim societies. 
dirham (DH). 
Unit of currency in Morocco; as of May 7, 2005, U.S.$1 = 
DH 8.67320. 
djellaba (or zellaba). 
Short, hooded woolen cloak with wide sleeves for men. 
djinn (or jinn). 
Invisible spirits, including both benevolent and malevo-
lent, believed to be everywhere among the living. 
guembri. Small mandolin with three strings sometimes made from a turtle
shell. Some are a carved wooden piece covered with animal skin like a 
drum. 
hakawati. Arabic term for itinerant actors and entertainers, including
storytellers, acrobats, magicians, snake charmers, dancers, and preachers. 
Hegira (hejra). Flight of the Prophet Muhammad from Mecca to Medina 
in 622 C.E. following plans by his local leaders to kill him. 
henna. 
Dye of reddish brown color obtained from the henna plant; used 
prominently in Berber culture for body painting, especially during mar-
riage and other ceremonies. 
iblis. Satan or chief of the malevolent spirits or demons.
ihram. Seamless white garment often worn by male pilgrims at the holy
sites in Mecca but also won by others in all Islamic countries. 
Imam. 
Generally, a leader of prayer or a spiritual leader. 
imdyazn. Berber for a professional musician.
Istiqlal. 
Independence. 
jihad. 
Struggle or striving in defense of Islam; when this struggle assumes 
a violent dimension, it becomes a holy war, and such warriors are known 
as mujahids. 
Ka'aba. 
Small stone building in the court of the Great Mosque at Mecca 
that holds the black stone given to Abraham by the Angel Gabriel; it 

GLOSSARY 
139 
represents the "holy of holies" in Islam and lies at the heart of the annual 
pilgrimage (hajj) ceremonies. 
kemanjah. Violin.
ksar. 
Fortified section of the Casbah where loyal residents sought protec-
tion in the era of the Islamic invasions of North Africa and Spain; however, 
in the Sahara and Atlas Mountain regions, the word generally connotes 
fortified and walled villages. 
madrassa. 
School or college for Islamic education, often attached to a mosque. 
Maghreb. 
Arabic for "further west"; now denotes the region occupied by 
Morocco, Algeria, and Tunisia. 
mahr. 
Arabic term for "dowry." 
Marabout. 
Islamic holy man, especially belonging to the Sufi religious 
order, teaching at local levels. 
masjid. Arabic for "mosque," the Muslim place for public worship.
mdemma. Waist belt made of superior leather and fixed with satin strips
and gold embroidery. 
medina. 
Arabic for "town"; indicates the original Arab quarters in Moroccan 
towns. 
mellah (or mallah). 
Old Jewish residential quarters in Moroccan towns. 
Moores. 
Designation from which the name Morocco is derived. 
mousseums. Arabic for "festivals," especially the various religious and secu-
lar festivals in honor of a saint. 
objets d'envoi. French expression for prestigious objects that can serve as a
dignified image of its country of origin. 
oudh (or oud; Arabic qsbah). Traditional lute. 
qadi. Muslim judge or administrator of justice.
quid. 
Local chief or district administrator. 
qaraqab. Double iron cymbals.
Quarish (or Quraysh). 
The Prophet Muhammad's kinsmen, the family of 
Mecca. 
Quran. 
Islam's holy scripture (or "recitation") as revealed to the Prophet 
Muhammad. 
rai. 
Form of popular music in North Africa, best described as an amalgam 
of local and other varieties of Arab, African, and European styles. 
Ramadan. 
The ninth month of the Islamic lunar calendar, during which 
Muslims observe a thirty-day fasting period, one of the five pillars of Islam. 

140 
GLOSSARY 
rebab (or rbab soussi). 
One-stringed fiddle. 
ribat. Pledge or pact.
salaam. 
"Peace," and also a common greeting among Muslims. 
salat. Prescribed ritual prayer observed five times a day and one of the five
pillars of Islam. 
sawn. Act of fasting and one of the five pillars in Islam; usually associated
with Ramadan. 
Sephardi (plural, Sephardim). 
Ancestors of modern Moroccan Jews who 
arrived from Spain. 
shahadah. Article of faith, or "witness," and one of the five pillars of Islam
affirming that "there is no god but God, and Mohammed is the Prophet 
of God." 
sharia. 
Islamic code of civil and criminal law derived from the Quran and 
the Prophet Muhammad's teachings and examples. 
sharif (plural, shurfa). 
Descendants of the holy lineage who trace descent 
from the Prophet Muhammad. 
Shiites. 
Sect in Islam that shares the understanding that Ali, the son-in-law 
of the Prophet Muhammad, should be the successor to the Prophet. 
shor (or shur). Arabic for "witchcraft."
souk. 
Market often specializing in a product in the medina. 
Sufi. 
Order of the mystical dimension of Islam; especially a believer who 
deemphasizes material pursuits for direct spiritual encounter with God. 
Sunna. 
Tradition and custom of Mohammed; second in authority only to 
the Quran. 
Sunni. 
One who adheres to the traditions of the Prophet of Allah. 
sura. 
Chapter of the Quran. 
taarija. Tambourine.
ulema. 
Community of learned Islamic men. 
umma. Community of believers.
vizier. 
Highly ranked executive officer, often a provincial leader, in various 
Muslim countries. 
waqf. 
Special charitable gifts bequeathed in the form of endowments and 
dedicated in honor of God. 
zakat (or sadaqa). Almsgiving to the poor and the needy by Muslims; one 
of the five pillars of Islam. 
zelliges. Ceramic tiles.

Bibliographic Essay 
THERE ARE MANY BOOKS, essays, and monographs on the various subjects 
discussed in this book. Some are published in Morocco; others are printed 
outside the country. A good deal of these texts are published in English; how-
ever, the bulk of other materials is in French and Arabic and are therefore 
not always accessible to the English readers. I have included only a few of the 
most important secondary sources used. 
GENERAL 
Some of the various materials referenced on the culture and customs 
of the Middle East and Africa in general and Morocco in particular are 
Harvey E. Goldberg, ed., Sephardi and Middle Eastern Jewries: History and 
Culture in the Modern Era (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1996); 
I. William Zartman, ed.,Man, State, and Society in the Contemporary Maghrib 
(New York: Praeger, 1973); Carolyn Fluerhr-Lobban, Islamic Societies in 
Practice, 2nd ed. (Gainesville: University Press of Florida, 2004); Masudul 
Alam Choudhury, The Islamic Worldview: Socio-Scientific Perspectives (New 
York: Keegan Paul, 2000); Claudia Roden, A Book on Middle Eastern Food 
(New York: Knopf, 1972); Valerie K. Orlando, Of Suffocated Hearts and 
Tortured Souls: Seeking Subjecthood through Madness in Francophone Women 
Writing of Africa and Caribbean (Lanham, MD: Lexington Books, 2003); 
C. R. Pennell, Morocco since 1830: A History (New York: New York Uni-
versity Press, 2000); Rafic Boustani and Philippe Fargues, The Atlas of 
the Arab World Geopolitics and Society (New York: Facts on File, 1991); 
Mervyn Hiskett, The Course of Islam in Africa (Edinburgh: Edinburgh 

142 
BIBLIOGRAPHIC ESSAY 
University Press, 1994); Michael Brett, ed., North Africa: Islam and 
Modernization (London: Frank Cass, 1973); Stephane Bernard, The
Franco-Moroccan Conflict (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1968); 
Ernest Gellner and Charles Micaud, eds., Arabs and Berbers: From Tribe to 
Nation in North Africa (Lexington, Massachusetts: Lexington Books, 1972); 
William A. Hoisington Jr., Lyautey and the French Conquest of Morocco 
(New York: St. Martin's, 1995). 
INTRODUCTION 
For information on the history and other facts of Morocco, see the 
following: Dale F. Eickelman, Moroccan Islam: Tradition and Society in a 
Pilgrimage Center (Austin: University of Texas Press, 1976); American Uni-
versity Foreign Area Studies Division (FASD), Area Handbook for Morocco 
(Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1966); V C. Scott 
O'Connor, A Vision of Morocco (Garden City, NY: Doubleday, Page and 
Company, 1924); Harold D. Nelson, ed., Morocco: A Country Study 
(Washington, D.C.: American University Press, 1985); Wayne Edge, Global 
Studies: Africa, 11th ed. (Dubuque, IA: McGraw-Hill, 2006); Abdeslam M. 
Maghraoui, "Depolitization in the Arab World? Depolitization in Morocco, 
Journal of Democracy 13, no. 4 (October 2002): 25-32; Jean-Francois and 
James Paul, "Morocco's Bourgeoisie: Monarchy, State and Owing Class," 
MERIP Middle Eastern Report 142 (September-October 1983): 13-17; 
Clement Eleanor Hoffmann, Realm of the Evening Star: A History of Morocco 
and the land of the Moors (Philadelphia: Chilton Books, 1965); Pierre Parent, 
The Truth about Morocco, trans. Eleanor Knight (Flushing, NY: Moroccan 
Office of Information and Documentation, 1953); C.R. Pennell, Morocco: 
From Empire to Independence (Oxford, UK: One World, 2003); Mark I. 
Cohen and Hahn Lorna, Morocco: Old land, New Nation (New York: Prae-
ger, 1966); Frank H. Braun, "Morocco: Anatomy of a Palace Revolution 
that Failed," International Journal of Middle East Studies 9 (1978): 63-72; 
Uriel Dann, King Hussein and the Challenge of Arab Radicalism: Jordan, 
1955-1967 (New York: Oxford University Press in cooperation with the
Moshe Dayan Center for Middle Eastern and African Studies, Tel Aviv 
University, 1989); Paul Bowles, Morocco—Sahara to the Sea (New York: 
Abbeville Press, 1995); Annette Solyst, Timeless Places—Morocco (New York:
Friedman/Fairfax, 2000); David Hart, Banditry in Islam: Case Studies from 
Morocco, Algeria and Pakistan North West Frontier (Wisbech, UK: Middle 
East and North African Studies, 1987); Julia Clancy-Smith, ed., North 
Africa, Islam, and the Mediterranean World: From Almoravids to the Algerian 
War (Portland, OR: Frank Cass, 2001). 

BIBLIOGRAPHIC ESSAY 
143 
RELIGION AND WORLDVIEW 
On indigenous religion, Islam, and cosmology, the following works were 
consulted: Ira G. Zepp Jr., A Muslim Primer: Beginners Guide to Islam, 2nd ed.
(Fayetteville: University of Arkansas Press, 2000); Carolyn Fluehr-Lobban, 
Islamic Societies in Practice, 2nd ed. (Gainesville: University Press of Florida,
2004); Mervyns Hiskett, The Course of Islam in Africa (Edinburgh: Edinburgh 
University Press, 1994); Edward Westermarck, The Belief in Spirits in Morocco 
(Abo, Finland: Abo Akademi Press, 1920); M.W. Hilton-Simpson, "Some 
Superstitions Noted among the Shawia Berbers of the Auries Mountains and 
Their Nomad Neighbors, Folklore 26 (1915): 228-234; Roger Joseph and 
Terri Brint Joseph, The Rose and the Thorn: Semiotic Structures in Morocco 
(Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 1987); David Montgomery Hart, The 
Aith Waryaghar of the Moroccan Rif: An Ethnography and History (Tucson: 
University of Arizona Press, 1978); Richard F. Nyrop et al., Area Handbook for 
Morocco (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Press, 1972); Clifford 
Geertz, Islam Observed: Religious Development in Morocco and Indonesia (New
Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1968); Abdellah Hammoudi, The Victim 
and Its Masks: An Essay on Sacrifice and Masquerade in the Maghreb, trans. 
Paula Wissing (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1993). For religion and 
power in Morocco, the following were consulted: John P. Entelis, ed., Islam, 
Democracy and the State in North Africa (Bloomington: Indiana University 
Press, 1997); Rahma Bourqia and Susan Gilson Miller, eds., In the Shadow of 
the Sultan: Culture, Power, and Politics in Morocco (Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press, 1999); I. William Zartman, Morocco: Problems of a New 
Power (New York: Atherton Press, 1964); David Robinson, Muslim Soci-
eties in African History (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2002); 
H. Byron Earhart, ed., Religious Traditions of the World: A Journey through Africa, 
Mesoamerica, North America, Judaism, 
Christianity, Islam, 
Hinduism, 
Buddhism, China, and Japan (San Francisco: Harper, 1993); John Ruedy, ed., 
Islam and Secularism in North Africa (New York: St. Martin's Press, 1994). 
LITERATURE AND MEDIA 
Valerie K. Orlando, Nomadic Voices of Exile: Feminine Identity in Francophone 
Literature of the Maghreb (Athens: Ohio University Press, 1999); Winifred 
Woodhull, Transfigurations of the Maghreb: Feminism, Decolonization, and Litera-
tures (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1993); Andreas Flores Khalil,
The Arab Avant-Garde: Experiments in North African Literature (Westport, CT: 
Praeger, 2003); Mohammed Abu-Talib, "Drink to the Prophet," in Richard 
S. Harrel, William S. Caroll, and Mohammed Abu-Tatlib, eds., A Basic Course 

144 
BIBLIOGRAPHIC ESSAY 
in Moroccan Arabic (Washington, D.C.: Georgetown University Press, 2003); 
Paul Bowles, A Study of the Short Fiction (New York: Allen Hibbard, 1993); 
Roger Allen, The Arabic Literary Heritage: The Developments of Its Genres and 
Criticism (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998); Arthur Palmer 
Hudson, Folklore Keeps the Past Alive (Athens: University of Georgia Press,
1962); Zohra Mezgueldi, "Mother-word and French-Language in Moroccan 
Writing," Research in African Literatures 27, no. 3 (fall 1996): 1-14; Heidi
Abdel-Jaouad, "'Too Much in the Sons': Mothers and Impossible Alliances in 
Francophone Maghrebian Writing," Research in African Literatures 27, no. 3
(fall 1996): 15-33; Elias Canetti, The Voices of Marrakesh: A Record of a Visit, 
trans. J.A. Underwood (New York: Seabury Press, 1978); Norman A. Stillman, 
The Language and Culture of the Jews ofSefrou, Morocco: An Ethno linguistic Study 
(Manchester, UK: University of Manchester Press, 1988); Henry Munson Jr., 
Religion and Power in Morocco (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1993);
Harold D. Nelson, ed., Morocco: A Country Study, 4th ed. (Washington, D.C.:
American University Press, 1978); Edward Westermarck, The Belief in Spirits 
in Morocco (Abo, Finland: Abo Akademi Press, 1920); Edward Westermarck, 
Ritual and Belief in Morocco (London: n.p., 1926); Edward Westermarck, Wit 
and Wisdom in Morocco: A Study of Native Proverbs (London: Routledge, 1930); 
Ernest Gellner, Saints of the Atlas (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1969); 
Roger Le Tourneau, Fez in the Age of the Marinides, trans. Besse Alberta Clem-
ent (Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1961); Roger Joseph and Terri 
Brint Joseph, The Rose and the Thorn: Semiotic Structures in Morocco (Tucson:
University of Arizona Press, 1987); Said Hamdun and Noel King, Ibn Battuta 
in Black Africa (Princeton, NJ: Markus Wiener, 1996); Mahdi Agha Husain, 
"Manuscripts of Ibn Battuta's Rihla in Paris," Journal of the Asiatic Society of 
Bengal 20 (1954): 22-32; Mahdi Agha Husain, "Ibn Battuta, His Life and 
Work," Indo-Iranica 7 (1954): 6-13; G. H. Bousquet, "Ibn Battuta et les Insti-
tutions Musulmanes," StudiaIslamic*a2A (1966): 81-106; Driss Chraibi, Succes
sion ouverte (Paris: Denoel, 1962); Driss Chraibi, Le Passe Simple (Paris: Denoel,
1954); Driss Chraibi, The Simple Past, trans. Hugh A. Harter (Washington, 
D.C.: Three Continents, 1990); Driss Chraibi, Une Enquette Au Pays (Paris: 
Editions du Seuil, 1981); Abdelhak Serhane, Messaouda (Paris: Editions du 
Seuil, 1983); Abdelhak Serhane, Les Enfants des rues etroites (Paris: Editions du
Seuil, 1986); Abdelhak Serhane, Le Soleil des Obscurs (Paris: Editions du Seuil,
1992); Abdelhak Serhane, Lamour circoncis (Paris: Paris-Mediterranee, 2001);
Mohammed Zefzaf, Al-Mara wa al-warda [The Woman and the Rose] (Beirut: 
Al-Dar-al-Muttahida li al-Nashr, 1970); Ahmed Sefrioui, La Boite a Merveilles 
(Paris: Editions du Seuil, 1954); Ahmed Sefrioui, Le jardin des sortileges, ou,
Le parfum des legends (Paris: L'Harmattan, 1989); Ahmed Lemish, Shkun 
Trez Lma ...!? (n.p., 1994); Liat Kozma, "Moroccan Women's Narrative of 

BIBLIOGRAPHIC ESSAY 
145 
Liberation: The Passive Revolution?" in James McDougall, ed., Nation, Society 
and Culture in North Africa (Portland, OR: Frank Cass, 2003); Leila Abouzeid, 
Year of the Elephant: A Moroccan Woman s Journey towards Lndependence (Austin:
University of Texas Press, 1990); Leila Abouzeid, Return to Childhood {Austin: 
Center for Middle Eastern Studies, University of Texas, 1999); Leila Abouzeid, 
The Last Chapter (Cairo: American University Press, 2003); Amina El Bakouri,
Rdian Ydtika Lmadih (Rabat: Sais Midit, 2002); Touria Majdouline, Leaves of 
Ash (Rabat: Union of Moroccan Writers, 1990); Touria Majdouline, The Weary
(Oujda, Morocco: Dar al Jusoor, 2000); Daniel A. Wagner, Literacy, Culture, and
Development: Becoming Literate in Morocco (Cambridge: Cambridge Universit
Press, 1993); Annuaire Statique du Maroc [Annual Statistics of Morocco] (Rabat: 
Ministry of Communication, 1999, 2000); Abdelmajid Hannoum, Colonial 
Histories, Post-colonial Memories: The Legend of the Kahina, A North African Hero-
ine (Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann, 2001); Abdelmajid Hannoum, "Storytellers 
in Morocco," Mediterraneans (fall 1999): 189-194; Salah Moukhlis, "A History
of Hopes Postponed: Women's Identity and the Postcolonial State in the Year of 
the Elephant: A Moroccan Woman's Journey Toward Independence," Research
in African Literatures 34, no. 3 (fall 2003): 66-78; Ismail El-Outmani, "Prole-
gomena to the Study of the "Other" Moroccan Literature," Research in African
Literatures 2%, no. 3 (fall 1997): 110-122. 
ART AND ARCHITECTURE/HOUSING 
Wilhelmina Schripper, "The Verbal and the Visual in a Globalizing Context: 
African and European Connections as an Ongoing Process," Research in African
Literature31, no. 4 (2000): 139—154; Bogumil Jewsiewicki, Cheri Samba: The 
Hybridity of Art [V hybridite d un art] (Westmount, Quebec: Galerie Amrad 
African Art Publications, 1995); Richard E Nyrop et al., Area Handbook 
for Morocco (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1972); 
E. Gans-Ruedin, The Connoisseurs Guide to Oriental Carpets, trans. Valerie 
Howard (Rutland, VT: Charles E. Tuttle, 1971); Christine Mullen and Sarah 
Fez, eds., Objects as Envoys: Cloth, Imagery, and Diplomacy in Madagascar 
(Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution, National Museum of African Art 
in association with University of Washington Press, 2002); Daniel J. Schroeter 
and Vivian B. Mann, eds., Morocco: Jews and Art in a Muslim Land (London:
Merrell, 2000); James McDougall, ed., Nation, Society and Culture in North 
Africa (Portland, OR: Frank Cass, 2003); Katarzyna Pieprzak, "Citizens and 
Subjects in the Bank: Corporate Visions of Modern Art and Moroccan Iden-
tity," Journal of North African Studies 8, no. 1 (2003): 131-154; Nnamdi Elleh, 
Architecture and Power in Africa (Westport, CT: Praeger, 2002); Hsain Illahiane,
"The Break-up of the Ksar: Changing Settlement Patterns and Environmental 

146 
BIBLIOGRAPHIC ESSAY 
Management in Southern Morocco," Africa Today 48, no. 1 (2001): 21-48; 
Roger Joseph and Terri Brint Joseph, The Rose and the Thorn: Semiotic Structures
in Morocco (Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 1987); Dale E Eickelman, 
"Is There an Islamic City? The Making of a Quarter in a Moroccan Town," 
International Journal of Middle East Studies 5 (1974): 274-294; Lawrence Rosen,
"Muslim-Jewish Relations in a Moroccan City," International Journal of Middle 
East Studies 3 (1972): 435-449; Hans Seligo, Morocco, trans. G.A. Colville 
(Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1966); Philippe Ploquin and Mohammed-Allal 
Sinaceur, La Mosquee Hassan LL [The Hassan II Mosque], (Dremil-Lafage, 
France: Editions D. Briand, 1993); Ariella Amar, "Moroccan Synagogues: 
A Survey," The Israeli Review of Arts and Letters \§6 (February 1999), 1-6; Daniel
J. Schroeter, The Sultan s Jew: Morocco and the Sephardi World (Stanford, CA: 
Stanford University Press, 2002); Susan Gilson Miller, "Watering the Garden of 
Tangier: Colonial Contestations in a Moroccan City," in Susan Slyomovics, ed., 
The Walled Arab City in Literature, Architecture and History: The Living Medina 
in the Maghrib (Portland, OR: Frank Cass, 2001), 25-50. 
CUISINE AND TRADITIONAL DRESS 
Catherine Hanger, World Food: Morocco (Victoria, Australia: Lonely 
Planet, 2000); Paula Wolfert, Couscous and Other Good Food from Morocco 
(New York: Harper and Row, 1973); May Ellen Roach-Higgins, Joanne B. 
Eicher, and Kim K. P. Johnson, eds., Dress and Identity (New York: Fairchild, 
1995); Hanna Goodman, Jewish Cooking Around the World: Gourmet and 
Holiday Recipes (Philadelphia: Jewish Society of America, 1969); Roger 
Joseph and Terri Brint Joseph, The Rose and the Thorn: Semiotic Structures in 
Morocco (Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 1987); Claudia Roden, A Book 
of Middle Eastern Food (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1972); C.R. Pennell, 
Morocco since 1830: A History (New York: New York University Press, 2000);
Helen Mendes, The African Heritage Cookbook (New York: Macmillan, 1971); 
Harold D. Nelson, ed., Morocco: A Country Study, 4th ed. (Washington, 
D.C.: American University Press, 1978); Edmondo De Amicis, Morocco: 
Its People and Places, trans. Maria Hornor Lansdale (Philadelphia: Henry T.
Coates, 1897); Susan Ossman, Picturing Casablanca: Portraits of Power in a 
Modern City (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1994); Susan Ossman, 
Three Faces of Beauty: Casablanca, Paris, Cairo (Durham, NC: Duke University
Press, 2002). Daniel J. Schroeter and Joseph Chetrit, "The Transformation of 
Eassaoira (Mogador) in the Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries," in Harvey 
E. Goldberg, ed., Sephardi Middle Eastern Jewelries: History and Culture in the
Modern Era (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1996); Mounia Bennani-
Chraibi, Soumis et rebelles: lesjeunes au Maroc (Casablanca: Edition le Fennec,

BIBLIOGRAPHIC ESSAY 
147 
1994), 89-100; Henry Munson, Religion and Power in Morocco (New Haven, 
CT: Yale University Press, 1993). 
GENDER ROLES, MARRIAGE, AND FAMILY 
Sheila K. Webster, "Women, Sex, and Marriage in Moroccan Proverbs," 
International Journal of Middle Eastern Studies 14 (1982): 173-184; Roger 
Joseph and Terri Brint Joseph, The Rose and the Thorn: Semiotic Structures in 
Morocco (Tucson, University of Arizona Press, 1987); Ernest Gellner, Saints of 
the Atlas (London: Weidenfeld and Nicholson, 1969); David M. Hart, "The 
Tribe in Modern Morocco: Two Case studies," in Ernest Gellner and Charles 
Micaud, eds., Arabs and Berbers: From Tribe to Nation in North Africa (London: 
Duckworth, 1972); Robert Montagne, The Berbers: Their Social and Political 
Organization, trans. David Seddon (London: Frank Cass, 1973); Harold D. 
Nelson, ed., Morocco: A Country Study (Washington, D.C.: American Univer-
sity Press, 1978); Carolyn Fluehr-Lobban, Islamic Societies in Practice, 2nd ed.
(Gainesville: University of Florida Press, 2004); Vanessa Maher, Women and 
Property in Morocco (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1974); Robert
Elbaz, "Toward a Comprehensive Socio-Cultural Theory of the Jewish Life-
World in Morocco: The Jewish Traditional Marriage in Morocco," Extenza: 
International Journal of Francophone Studies 7, no. 1 (June 2004): 95-101; 
M. E. Combs-Schilling, Sacred Performances: Islam, Sexuality, and Sacrifice 
(New York: Columbia University Press, 1989); Douglas A. Davis and Susan 
Schaefer Davis, "Sexual Values in a Moroccan Town," in W.J. Lonner and 
R. S. Malpass, eds., Psychology and Culture (Needham Heights, MA: Allyn and 
Bacon, 1993); Rachel Simon, "Between the Family and the Outside World: 
Jewish Girls in the Modern Middle East and North Africa," Jewish Social Stud-
ies 7, no. 1 (2000): 81-108; Amal Rassam, "Women and Domestic Power in 
Morocco," International Journal of Middle Eastern Studies 12 (1980): 171-183; 
Hillary Mayell, "Thousands of Women Killed for Family 'Honor,'" National 
Geography News, 12 February 2002, 1-2; International Food and Agricul-
tural Development, Survival, Change and Decision-Making in Rural House-
holds: Three Village Case Studies from Eastern Morocco (Rome: IFAD, 1997); 
Fatima Mernissi, Doing Daily Battles: Interviews with Moroccan Women, trans. 
Mary Jo Lakeland (New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 1989); 
Fatima Agnaou, Gender, Literacy, and Empowerment in Morocco (New York: 
Routledge, 2004); Eltigani E. Eltigani, "Changes in Family-Building Patterns 
in Egypt and Morocco: A Comparative Analysis," International Family Plan-
ning Perspectives 26, no. 2 (June 2003): 73-78; Jamila Bargach, Orphans of 
Islam: Family, Abandonment, and Secret Adoption in Morocco (Lanham, MD: 
Rowman and Littlefield, 2002). 

148 
BIBLIOGRAPHIC ESSAY 
SOCIAL CUSTOMS A N D LIFESTYLE 
Roger Joseph Jr., Rituals and Relatives: A Study of Social Uses of Wealth
in Morocco (Ann Arbor, MI: University Microfilms International, 1979); 
Carolyn Fluehr-Lobban, Islamic Societies in Practice, 2nd ed. (Gainesville: Uni-
versity Press of Florida, 2004); Dale F. Eickelman, Moroccan Islam: Tradition 
and Society in a Pilgrimage Center (Austin: University of Texas Press, 1976); 
E. W Bovill, The Golden Trade of the Moors (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
1968); Hamadi Gueroum, "History of Moroccan Cinema," excerpts from the 
program of the 24th Festival of the 3 Continents, Nantes, France, Novem-
ber 2002; Kevin Dwyer, Beyond Casablanca: M.A. Tazi, Moroccan Cinema, 
and Third World Filmmaking (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2004); 
Daniel A. Wagner, Literacy, Culture, and Development: Becoming Literate in 
Morocco (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1993); 1998; C. R. Pennell, 
Morocco since 1830: A History (New York: New York University Press, 2000).
Music AND DANCE 
For an interesting introduction to African traditional music, see W. Komla 
Amoaku, "Towards a Definition of Traditional African Music: A Look at the 
Ewe of Ghana," in Irene V Jackson, ed., More Than Drumming (Westport,
CT: Greenwood, 1985). Valerie K. Orlando, "From Rap to Rai in the Mixing 
Bowl: Beur Hip-Hop Culture and Banlieue Cinema in Urban France," Journal 
of Popular Culture 36, no. 3 (winter 2003): 395-415. For specific studies 
on Moroccan music, see the Paul Bowles Moroccan Music Collection AFC 
1960/001, comp. Michelle Forner (Washington, D.C.: Library of Congress, 
1994); Josef Pacholczyk, review: "The Pan-Islamic Tradition: Music of 
Morocco by Philip Schuyler," Ethnomusicology 19, 1 (January, 1973), 154-55; 
Harold D. Nelson, ed., Morocco: A Country Study, 4th ed. (Washington, 
D.C.: American University Press, 1978); Eugene Fodor and William Curtis, 
Fodor s Morocco 1973 (New York: David McKay, 1973); Deborah A. Kapchan,
"Moroccan Female Performers Defining the Social Body," Journal of American 
Folklore 107, no. 423 (winter 1994): 82-105; Deborah A. Kapchan, Gender 
on the Market: The Revoking of Tradition in Beni Mellal, Morocco (Philadelphia: 
University of Pennsylvania Press, 1996); Lila Abu-Lughod, Veiled Sentiments: 
Honor and Poetry in a Bedouin Society (Berkeley: University of California Press, 
1986); Abdelkabir Khatibi, LaMemoire Tatouee (Paris: Editions Denoel, 1971); 
Bernard Lortat-Jacob, Musique et Fetes du Haut-Atlas [Music and Festivals of
the High Atlas] (Paris: Mouton, 1980); David Prescott Barrows, Berbers and 
Blacks: Impressions of Morocco, Timbuktu, and the Western Sudan (Westport,
CT: Negro Universities Press, 1987). 

Index 
Aatabou, Najat, 134 
Abdullah, Musa Ibn, 13 
Abouzeid, Leila, 49-50, 54; Works: 
The Last Chapter, 50; Return to 
Childhood, 50; Year of the Elephant: 
A Moroccan Woman's Struggle towards 
Independence, 49 
Abu-Talib, Mohammed, 39, Al, 53 
Adornments, 88 
African Union (AU), 17 
Africanus, Leo, 43-45, 54 
Agurram (agurramen), 26. See also 
Brotherhoods 
Alami, Karim, 119 
Alaouites, 15, 32. See also Alawi 
Alawi, 15. See also Alaouites
Alem, AA. See also Alim 
Algeria, 1, 3, 7, 14, 130, 134; border 
dispute with Morocco, 17; popular-
ity of babouche in, 87; popularity 
of films made in, 52; restoration of 
relationship with Morocco, 17 
Al-haja, 24, 113 
Alhaji,2A, 113
Ali (Caliph), 22,115 
Alim, AA. See also Alem 
Al Istiqlal, as a political party, 46; as a 
weekly newspaper, 46 
Al mamlaka al Maghribia, 1. See also 
Morocco 
Almohad dynasty, 14, 36, 68, 72; 
pre-Almohad, 35 
Almoravids, 14, AA; domination of 
southern Spain, 14; dynasty 
of the, 14 
Andalusia, 44. See also Spain 
Aouita, Said, 119 
Arabic, 1, 5-8; classical/standard 
Arabic 7; colloquial Arabic; 7; con-
stitutionally designated as the official 
language of Morocco, 18; dialects, 
6; as a language, 5; literature in, 45; 
as a marker of identity, 7; Moroccan 
Arabic, 7 
Arazi, Hicham, 119 
Architecture, 8, 14-15, 57-59, 64-65, 
71; Arabic architecture, 8; architec-
ture in Moulay Idriss, 71; fortress-
like forms of, 66; Hispano-Moorish 
architecture, 65; Merinid architecture, 

150 
INDEX 
68; traditional architecture, 65; 
Western-style architecture, 7A 
Ark of the Covenant, 69 
Art: as handicrafts, 59; objects, 63; 
objets d'envoi, 63; weavers, 60; 
zelliges, 58 
Aziz, Abdel el, 16 
Baboosh, 61 
Babouche (babouj), 87 
Baraka, 27, 29, 32-33, 113, 116; as 
part of everyday life, 113 
Barka, Souheil Ben, 120 
Batutta, Abu Abdallah Ibn, 44-45, 
54; Works: Ibn Battuta in Black 
Africa, 45; Travels in Asia and Africa 
1325-1354, 45 
Berbers, 3, 5-7, 11-14; adoption of 
Islam, 13; as Afro-Asiatic speakers, 
11; as Amazigh (Amaziah) Berbers, 
3,5, 11; art forms, 58, 65-66; 
known as Barbarus by Romans, 
6; claim to be of European 
descent, 5, 12; distinct characteris-
tics of, 6; early acceptance of 
Christianity, 12; lack of cohesive 
identity, 7; languages and dialects, 6; 
religion and belief systems of, 
22, 25-30, 32-33, 36-37; romantic 
poems composition of, 43; social 
organization, 6; target of French 
colonial education, 46; Tuareg 
Berbers, 116 
Beverages, 83 
Bisteeya, 78, 80 
Bouani, Hamed, 120 
Bowles, Paul, 40 
Bread, 78-80, 82-83, 85; as sacred 
food, 78; special bread tagella, 79. 
See also Ksra 
Brotherhoods, 26; networks of, 32. See 
also Agurram 
Bulgha, 61 
Burnoose, 86-87, 132 
Byzantine, as successor to 
Roman rule, 12 
Caftan, 87, 100 
Carthage, 11, 35; plundered and laid 
waste by Rome, 11 
Casablanca 1, 5, 8-9, 39-40, 44, 53, 
60, 64, 67, 72-74; chief port city, 1;
existence of bidonvilles existence in, 
9, 31, 74, 88-89; population density 
5, 8, 31, 74; terrorist suicide attack 
on Jewish Synagogue, 36; as title of 
Humphrey Bogart's film, 1,119 
Casbah, 65-66, 72-73 
Castilians of Spain, 16 
Catholic Church, 1, 14, 32, 34; 
hounded by vandals, 34. See also 
Roman Catholic Church 
CCM (Center for Moroccan 
Cinema), 52 
Ceuta, 2-3, 11, 16; wrestled from 
Ottoman control by the 
Portuguese, 16 
Chaheb, Lem, 134 
Charitable gifts, 24 
Chraibi, Driss, 47, 54; Works: An Inves-
tigation with the Country, A7; Open 
Succession, A7; The Simple Past, A7 
Christianity, 12, 21-22, 30, 33-36, 
46; acknowledged as the basis of the 
Muslim faith, 34; Berber version 
of Christianity, 12; as an imperial 
religion, 12; as a minority religion in 
Morocco, 34; restricted to European 
migrants, 35; as state religion in 
Morocco, 12 
Cinema, 119-20 
Cities, 8-9, 26, 31, 34-35; big cities 
with Christian congregations, 
34-35; coastal cities, 26; medina 
section of, 9; mellah section of, 9; 
religious observances in, 26, 32 
Couscous, 79 

INDEX 
151 
Democratic Confederation 
of Labor, 124 
Dhittawin tdaffanain, 26 
Djej emshmel, 81 
Djellaba, 85-88, 100 
Djinniyas, 28 
Djinns, 26-29, 36, 42, 99; antidote for, 
29; forms of 100 
Eddine, Mohammed Khair, 48 
Education, 8; literary level, 8; male-
female literary ration, 8; percentage 
of school enrollment, 8; western 
education and influence, 31,46 
Egypt, 52,73, 130 
Eid el Kabir, 24, 109, 114 
Eid el Mouloud, 109, 116 
El Bakouri, Amina, 50, 54 
Elbaz, Andre, 64 
El Moutawakel, Nawal, 119, 123 
Evil eye, 26, 36, 42. See also Dhittawin
tdaffanain
Fassi, Abd el Krim, 46, 67 
Fassi, Allal al, 11,46 
Fes, 5, 11, 14-15, 17, 29, 31-32, 34, 
36, 39, 44, 49, 60, 62, 67-69, 
71-74, 80, 84; architecture and 
housing in, 71-73; built by Sultan 
Abu Said, 68; emergence of an 
independence movement in, 17; 
having oldest and largest Jewish 
quarters, 68; particularly known for 
its wooden cribs, 62; popular for 
hosting world-class writers, 39, 44 
Festivals (major): cultural, 117, 
120; national, 113, 118; religious, 
109, 114 
Fran, 79 
French, 2, 4, 6-8, 10, 16-18, 77-78, 
87-88; colonial influences in 
Morocco, 18, 77-78; colonial 
rule, 88; end of colonialism, 7, 87; 
establishment of vineyards, 84; 
introduction of pastries, deserts, ice 
cream etc., 77; as official language in 
Morocco, 6 
Geertz, Clifford, 40 
Gellner, Ernest, 40, 43, 54 
General Union of Moroccan 
Workers, 124 
Ghellab, Abdelkarim, 46 
Ghiwane, Nass El, 134 
Granada, 16 
Great Dress, 87-88 
Green March Day, 17, 109, 118 
Guerrouj, Hicham (Olympian), 
118-19 
Hadji, Mustapha, 118 
Hafid, Moulay, 16 
Haim, Ben, 64 
Hajj, 22, 24 
Hakawati, 41, 117 
Hassan II (king), 2, 10, 17-18, 123; 
declaration of state of emergency, 
17; establishment of constitutional 
monarchy, 17; human rights record, 
2; known as a golfer, 119; ruled, 2; 
succeeded his father, 18 
Hatseira, Abu, 35 
Holy men, 30; government attitude 
towards the saints, 31; as patron and 
protector saints, 31; and saints, 30 
Hzam, 60
Mis, 28 
Idrissi dynasty, 13-14 
Ifriquiya, 13. See also Tunisia 
International Association of Athletic 
Federations (IAAF), 119 
International Food and Agricultural 
Development (IFA), 103 
Islam, 13-14, 21, 42, 44-45, 47; 
adoption as a state religion in 
Morocco 21; belief in spirits, 
28; coming of, 13; influence in 
Morocco, 18; meaning of, 21; 

152 
INDEX 
relevance of in society, 51; Shia and 
Sunni sects, 13; urban and rural 
forms of, 26; worldview, 21-25 
Ismail, Mulay, 42 
Jettou, Driss, 10, 123 
Jewish: communities, 25-37; commu-
nity ceremonies, 62; villages, 6 
Jews, 2, 6, 12, 15-16, 34-36, 71, 83, 
87, 110; favored by the Vandals in 
Morocco, 34; as the first to take 
to European textiles, 88; Jewish 
women, 64; indigenous Jews, 2; 
influx of 15; introduced to Western 
paintings, 64; as the largest Jewish 
Community in the Arab world, 35; 
mass exodus of 69; Moroccan Jews, 
6, 35; Spanish Jews, 35 
Jihad 25; meaning of, 25 
Judaism, 6, 11-12, 35 
Kdaba, 24 
Kahina, legend of, 42 
Khaldun, Ibn, 43-44 
Khatibi, Abdelkarim, 46 
Ksar, 66 
Ksra, 78 
Lemish, Ahmed, 49, 54. Work: Who 
embroidered the water...!?, 49 
Les Lions d I Atlas (Atlas Lions), 118 
Libya, 1,24,35,87 
Lineage, 94 
Loumghari, Mustafa, 134 
Lyautey, Louis-Hubert Gonzalve, 16 
Maghreb, 1, 11, 15, 41, 44. See also 
Arabic dialects 
Majdouline, Toura, 50, 55. Works: 
Leaves of Ash, 50; The Weary, 50 
Mali Empire, 45 
Marrakech, 7, 9, 14-15, 41, 61-62, 
69-70,79-80,96, 129, 131; the 
annual Marrakech Film Festival 
(FIFM) in, 41, 120; mellah in, 69; 
national and regional museums in, 
62; night clubs in, 121; as the rocky 
city of Azrou, 61; synagogues in, 36. 
See also Marrakech 
Marriage, 93-94, 133; bridewealth, 97; 
ceremony of the "little henna," 99, 
133; as a civil contract, 97; divorce, 
101—2; endogamy practice of, 96; 
formal engagement, 98; functions 
of, 95-96; gender roles, 95, 97, 
102; male-female relationships, 103; 
marriage forms, 100-102; procedure 
and ceremonies, 98-100; role of 
parents in, 95-96; seclusion of 
women, 104; sex-rules, 104 
Marx, Karl, 21 
Mbark, Ammuri, 126 
Mdemma, 60 
Mealtime: breakfast (futo), dinner 
(asha), lunch (yada), 82 
Mecca, 23-24, 32 
Mechoui, 78, 85 
Medina (Arabian city), 24, 64, 67-71; 
"new medina," 73 
Meknes, 5, 15, 31 
Melilla, 2-3, 11 
Mellahs, 6, 9, 36, 64-65, 68-69, 75 
Merinid dynasty, 14-15 
Mimoun, Walid, 126 
Mohammed, ben Al Hassan V (king), 
2, 10, 18, 51,67, 119; appoint-
ment of a prime minister, 10, 123; 
change of sultanate to monarchy, 
117; depolitization program, 2, 10; 
establishment of Maghreb Arab 
Press—MAP, 51; mausoleum, 67; 
succession to the throne, 2, 10, 18, 
123; stadium, 118 
Moors, 15; Arabs of mixed parentage, 
5; as Latin word for Mauretania, 11; 
Moors that fled Spain, 15 
Moroccan Employers Association, 124 
Morocco: known as Al mamlaka 
al Maghribia, 1; angling for 

INDEX 
153 
membership in the EU, 2-3; Arab 
conquest of, 26; as bled al makhzen, 
A; classical music of Morocco, 
126; coming of Islam into, 13—16; 
cultural issues, 18; early history, 
10-13; economy, 9-10; first consti-
tution written, 17; geography and 
climatic conditions, 3-5; govern-
mental system of, 10; joined Arab 
League, 17; languages of, 6-8; as le 
Maroc utile, A; peoples, 4-6; sacred 
tunes of, 129; under colonialism, 2, 
16-18; under Spanish colonialism, 
118; as world's largest exporter of 
cannabis, 2 
Moukhahla, 117 
Muhammad, Prophet, 22-25; lifetime 
practices, 22. See also Sunna 
Museums, 62 
Music: Andalusian, 125-27, 129; 
Celtic chants, 134; and dance 
128-29; as entertainment and recre-
ation, 131; and games, 131; genres, 
127-28; other hybrids of, 134; pop 
music, 131, 133-34; Sephardic 
spirituals, 134; stars of the new 
music generation of Morocco, 134; 
traditional or folk, 125-26, 128-29, 
131-32; warfare, 129 
Nafi, Hassan Ali Ben, 127 
Nafi, Sidi Uqba ben, 13 
National Labor Union of Morocco, 124 
National Union of Popular Front 
(Union Nationale des Forces Populai-
res, UNFP), 46
Newspapers and Magazines, 50; Al 
Anbaa, Assahra, Le Matin, 51 
Nusayr, Musa Ibn, 13 
Organization of African Unity (OAU), 
17. See also African Union (AU) 
Ottomans, 16 
Ouazza, Noujoum, 134 
Pan-Arabic consciousness, 6 
Polisario, 17 
Popular cuisine, 78 
Portugal, 4, 14 
Protectorate Treaty, 16; terms of, 121 
Quaranic rituals, 41 
Quarish, 14 
Quran, 7-8, 44-45, 61; teachings of 
the, 25 
Rabat, 1, 5, 8-9, 11, 14, 31, 34, 36, 
49,60,67, 121-22, 125, 127, as 
capital city, 1, 72-7A; founding of, 
73; golf club in, 119; Rabat-Saleh, 
116; regional museums in, 62 
Radio-Television Marocaine (RTM), 
52-53 
Ramadan, 23-24, 30, 115; month of, 
23-24 
Rif Mountains, 2-4; cultivation of 
cannabis in, 2 
Roman Catholic Church, 34; Roman 
Catholic Church in Marrakech, 14 
Romans, 5, 11-12; administration 
of Rabat, 11; establishment of 
colonies in Morocco, 11; 
introduction of the camel, 12; 
Roman city of Volubilis, 68 
Rugs, 60-61; rugs made in Rabat, 73 
Sa'adi dynasty, 15 
SADR (Saharan Arab Democratic 
Republic), 53 
Safi, 9, 62; as pottery capital of the 
world, 62 
Salat, 22-23 
Satan, 24, 28 
Sawn, 22 
Sefrioui, Ahmed, 49, 54. Works: The 
Box of Miracles, 49; The Garden of 
the Magic Spells or the Perfume of the 
Legends, 49 
Sephardi, 6 

154 
INDEX 
Serhane, Abdelhak, 40, 47-48, 54; 
won the Literary Prize of the Free 
Radio, 48. Works: Children of the 
Narrow Streets, 48; First Draft, 48; 
The Love to Circumcise, 48; Sun of 
the Obscure Ones, 40, 48 
Shahada, 22-23 
Shaifa, 33
Shiites, 22, 115 
Signpost of Truth, A6 
Smihi, Moumen, 120 
Social change 49, 105; agencies of, 
121; marriage and, 105-6; political 
culture and, 123-24; social customs 
and, 118, 121-23 
Socialization, 22, 40, 103-5 
Social relations, 110 
Souffles, 48 
Souks, 67 
Spain, 2-3, 10, 12-16, 44, 65-66, 73; 
dispute with Morocco, 2; establish-
ment of enclaves in North Africa, 
15-16; reconquest of Arab con-
trolled land, 6; terrorists train bomb-
ing of, 2; under king Ferdinand V 
and Queen Isabella I, 16. See also 
Andalusia; Castilians of Spain 
Spices, 81 
Storytellers, 41, 117, 126. See also 
Hakawati
Sufi, 32. See also Holy men
Sunna, 22; believed to have the most 
charisma and holiness, 33; descen-
dants of, 67; as messenger of Allah, 
23; his recognition of the existence 
of gods, 30; his revelation, 23 
Sunni sects, 13 
Synagogues, 36 
Tajine, 79-82, 85 
Tangier, 3-4, 8-9, 11, 39-40, 44, 52, 
60, 62, 67, 75-7A; derived from 
Latin word Tingis, 11; landmark, 67; 
as a popular travel destination, 8—9; 
as a Roman colony, 12 
Tawhid, 22-23 
Taza, 5, 11, 13 
Tazi, Mohammed A., A6 
Television, 40, 51-53; first station 
opened, 51; 2M-TV, 53 
The Aqlam, A6 
The Speaker, A6. See also The Aqlam 
Tunisia, 1,7, 11, 13-14, 87. See also 
Ifriquiya 
Turban, 87 
Ulama, 44 
Umma, 24, 33 
Union of Moroccan Workers, 124 
UNODC (United Nations Office on 
Drugs and Crime), 3 
Vandals, 12 
The Voices ofMarrakesh, A1 
Wafabank, 64 
Waqfi 24. See also Charitable gifts 
Wattasid, 15,44 
Westermarck, Edward, 28, 37, 43, 54 
Western calendar, 113 
Western Sahara, 2, 3, 16-17, 51, 
53; annexation of, 2; claimed by 
Morocco, 16-17, 51; National Radio, 
53; Sahara Arab Democratic Republic 
(SADR), 53; self-determination/ 
referendum of, 17; under Spanish 
control, 16 
Wolfert, Paula, 78 
Women (Moroccan): alienation, 
26; attire, 25; female authors, 
49; love for gorgeous-looking 
clothes, 6; older women, 
103; participation in prayers 
inside mosques, 23; pregnant 
women, 23; quest for 

INDEX 
155 
social change, 49; urban 
middle class women, 31 
World Sacred Music, 118 
World War I, 73 
World War II, 46, 51,83, 121 
Yasin,AbdAllabBib,44 
Zakat, 22, 24; pious endowments as a 
form of, 24 
Zawiya, 106 
Zefzaf, Mohammed, 47-48, 54. Work: 
The Woman and the Rose, 48 
Zelliges, 58, 71 
About the Author 
RAPHAEL CHIJIOKE N J O K U is Assistant Professor of African History at 
the University of Louisville, Kentucky, and an adjunct at Indiana University 
Southeast. 

Recent Titles in 
Culture and Customs of Africa 
Culture and Customs of Nigeria 
Toy in Falola 
Culture and Customs of Somalia 
Mohamed Diriye Abdullahi 
Culture and Customs of the Congo 
Tshilemalema Mukenge 
Culture and Customs of Ghana 
Steven J. Salm and Toy in Falola 
Culture and Customs of Egypt 
Molefi Kete Asante 
Culture and Customs of Zimbabwe 
Oyekan Owomoyela 
Culture and Customs of Kenya 
Neal Sobania 
Culture and Customs of South Africa 
Funso Afolayan 
Culture and Customs of Cameroon 
John Mukum Mbaku 

