Syria
A Survival Guide to Customs and Etiquette 
CultureShock!
Coleman South

A Survival Guide to Customs and Etiquette 
CultureShock!
Syria
Coleman South

This 4th edition published in 2011 by:
Marshall Cavendish Corporation
99 White Plains Road
Tarrytown, NY 10591-9001
www.marshallcavendish.us
First published in 1995 by Times Editions Pte Ltd, reprinted 1996, 1997, 1998; 2nd 
edition published in 2001; 3rd edition published in 2008 by Marshall Cavendish 
International (Asia) Private Limited.
Copyright © 2008, 2011 Marshall Cavendish International (Asia) Private Limited
All rights reserved
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system 
or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, 
photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the prior permission of 
the copyright owner. Request for permission should be addressed to the 
Publisher, Marshall Cavendish International (Asia) Private Limited, 1 New 
Industrial Road, Singapore 536196. Tel: (65) 6213 9300, fax: (65) 6285 4871. 
E-mail: genref@sg.marshallcavendish.com
The publisher makes no representation or warranties with respect to the 
contents of this book, and speciﬁ cally disclaims any implied warranties or 
merchantability or ﬁ tness for any particular purpose, and shall in no event be 
liable for any loss of proﬁ t or any other commercial damage, including but not 
limited to special, incidental, consequential, or other damages.
Other Marshall Cavendish Ofﬁ ces:
Marshall Cavendish International (Asia) Private Limited. 1 New Industrial Road, 
Singapore 536196  Marshall Cavendish International. PO Box 65829, London 
EC1P 1NY, UK  Marshall Cavendish International (Thailand) Co Ltd. 253 Asoke, 
12th Flr, Sukhumvit 21 Road, Klongtoey Nua, Wattana, Bangkok 10110, Thailand 
 Marshall Cavendish (Malaysia) Sdn Bhd, Times Subang, Lot 46, Subang Hi-Tech 
Industrial Park, Batu Tiga, 40000 Shah Alam, Selangor Darul Ehsan, Malaysia
Marshall Cavendish is a trademark of Times Publishing Limited
IISBN 13: 978-0-7614-5880-7
Please contact the publisher for the Library of Congress catalog number
Printed in Singapore by Times Printers Pte Ltd
Photo Credits: 
All black and white photos by the author. Colour photos from Photolibrary. 
 Cover photo: Photolibrary
All illustrations by TRIGG

ABOUT THE SERIES
Culture shock is a state of disorientation that can come over 
anyone who has been thrust into unknown surroundings, away 
from one’s comfort zone. CultureShock! is a series of trusted 
and reputed guides which has, for decades, been helping 
expatriates and long-term visitors to cushion the impact of 
culture shock whenever they move to a new country.
Written by people who have lived in the country and 
experienced culture shock themselves, the authors share all the 
information necessary for anyone to cope with these feelings 
of disorientation more effectively. The guides are written in a 
style that is easy to read and cover a range of topics that will 
arm readers with enough advice, hints and tips to make their 
lives as normal as possible again.  
Each book is structured in the same manner. It begins 
with the first impressions that visitors will have of that city or 
country. To understand a culture, one must first understand the 
people—where they came from, who they are, the values and 
traditions they live by, as well as their customs and etiquette. 
This is covered in the first half of the book. 
Then on with the practical aspects—how to settle in with 
the greatest of ease. Authors walk readers through topics 
such as how to find accommodation, get the utilities and 
telecommunications up and running, enrol the children in 
school and keep in the pink of health. But that’s not all. Once 
the essentials are out of the way, venture out and try the food, 
enjoy more of the culture and travel to other areas. Then be 
immersed in the language of the country before discovering 
more about the business side of things. 
To round off, snippets of basic information are offered 
before readers are ‘tested’ on customs and etiquette of the 
country. Useful words and phrases, a comprehensive resource 
guide and list of books for further research are also included 
for easy reference.

CONTENTS
Preface  vi
Acknowledgements  ix
Map of Syria  x
Chapter 1
First Impressions 
1
Coming in for a Landing  
2
Damascus: Streets and Sidewalks  4
Damascus: Other Curiosities  
12
Chapter 2
Overview of Land 
and History 
15
A Geography Lesson 
16
The Population  
19
History 
20
Ancient History 
20
History Under Islam 
24
20th Century History 
26
The Government and Ba’ath 
Party  
31
The Economy 
35
Government Support vs 
Opposition 
40
Uncertainty About the Future 
45
Chapter 3
People 
47
The Syrians 
48
Social Intensity 
50
Attitudes About Life 
53
Family Orientation 
55
Group Thinking 
58 
Other Characteristics 
60
Religiosity 
64
Bedouins and Villagers 
70
Families and Women 
72
Jobs and Other Opportunities 
for Spouses 
72
Children 
75
Miscellaneous 
77
Foreign Women in Syria 
78 
Chapter 4
Socialising with 
the Locals 
84
At a Syrian Home 
85
Other Socialising 
88
Some Precautions 
93
Behaviour Between Women 
and Men  
95
Chapter 5
Settling In 
96
Finding a Home 
98
The Contract and Payment 
108
Utility Charges 
109
Things to Bring with You 
111
Domestic Help 
112
Urban Transportation 
113
Dealing with Bureaucracy  
117
Legal System 
121
Money and Banking  
121
Shopping for Basics 
125
Other Home Products 
and Services 
133
Health and Medical 
135
Miscellaneous 
137
Chapter 6
Food and 
Entertainment 
139
Dining Out 
140
Chapter 7
Enjoying the 
Culture/Travel 
147
Seeing and Being Seen 
148
Shopping  
148
Cinema, Theatre, Concerts, 
Galleries 
151
Odds and Ends 
156
Things Not Available 
161
Holidays and Celebrations 
161
Domestic Travel 
163

Getting Around  
173
Lodging  
176
Regional Travel 
177
Group Travel 
182
Chapter 8
Learning the 
Language 
183
Differences in Usage  
185
Other Differences 
187
Some Useful Words and 
Expressions 
190
Body Language  
195
Arabic Dialects and Other 
Languages 
196
Chapter 9
Doing Business in 
Syria 
200
Economic and Related 
Situations  
201
Social Aspects of Doing 
Business 
209
Chapter 10
Fast Facts 
214
Famous People 
218
Places of Interest 
219
Culture Quiz 
220
Do’s and Don’ts 
234
Glossary 
237
Resource Guide 
245
Further Reading 
254
About the Author 
259
Index 
260

vi
PREFACE
In the early 1990s I finished an M.A. in TESOL (Teaching 
English to Speakers of other Languages) with the specific intent 
of living and teaching overseas—a mid-life career change. I got 
my first job teaching English overseas in Damascus and began 
searching both the local public library and the library at my 
university for up-to-date information about Syria and found 
next to nothing. My university had 17,000 students and the 
metro area of the public library had over a million people, yet 
what little printed material I could find about Syria was either 
terribly dated or written by ex-CIA staffers who had served 
time there; and all of it was political or historical material that 
told nothing of what to expect as a resident of modern Syria, 
how to behave, what I should take with me, etc. The purpose 
of this book is to help others going to Syria for the first time 
with not only cultural information, but with information about 
daily living there. 
It is assumed that the reader knows little or nothing about 
Syria, and even those who have lived in the Persian Gulf states, 
Israel, Turkey, or other countries of the region, are in for some 
surprises in Syria. There’s no other place like it, not even 
Jordan or Lebanon. While living there, I often got the feeling 
that I resided in a living museum, yet there’s a certain vitality 
of life that seems as new as it is timeless. Syria does things in 
its own way and in its own time. This book should help not 
only those who plan to live in Syria, but also those who plan 
to travel in the country, containing as it does some intimate 
information that is not included in the few travel guides one 
can buy for Syria.
There’s one rather substantial caveat, though: I am 
Caucasian and thus my personal experiences with Syrians 
reflect that. Why is that important? Because sadly, Arabs in 
general and Syrians along with the rest of them, can be racist, 
basing their prejudice primarily on skin colour and secondly on 
country of origin. Arab culture seems to have a totem pole in 
which White Westerners are at the top with Arabs being nearly 
equal or slightly below them; at the absolute bottom are Black 
Africans, with lighter-skinned Blacks from Western countries 
being just slightly above the Africans. Those who typically do 
the lowest-level jobs in rich Arab societies such as servants, 

vii
nannies, maids, road workers, etc. (Sri Lankans, Filipinos/as, 
Bangladeshis and Pakistanis) are also near the bottom of this 
social totem. Similarly, darker-skinned Hispanics and Chinese, 
Koreans or Japanese (many of whom may be mistaken as 
Filipinos/as or Southeast Asians) will also likely not be treated 
as well as I was by many Syrians, but they seem to put the 
lighter-skinned people from eastern Asian groups up higher 
on their totem pole. When I was in Damascus, I knew a Black 
American student who actually got spit at a couple of times 
and had insults hurled at him from passing cars. He also had 
trouble finding a place to live as most landlords/rental agents 
didn’t want to rent to him. On the other hand, a Japanese 
acquaintance who was quite light-skinned seemed to be 
treated similarly to me. I hate to make broad generalisations 
such as this one and to accuse a whole group of people of 
such negative characteristics (and of course, not all Syrians 
will react negatively to you), but it was not uncommon for 
those of darker skin to have unpleasant experiences with some 
Syrian people based on their skin color. This may, however, 
have changed for the better in recent times.


ix
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I want to thank my friend Samer of Damascus for his assistance 
and information plus the many nameless Syrians from whom 
I learned so much about their culture, beliefs and way of life. 
I also want to thank the Marshall Cavendish staff in general 
and specifically the editors Sylvy Soh and Melvin Neo for their 
assistance at various stages of this revision.

x
MAP OF SYRIA
SYRIA
DAMASCUS
MEDITERRANEAN SEA
IRAQ
TURKEY
JORDAN
LEBANON

‘We’re not in Kansas anymore, Toto.’
—Dorothy, in The Wizard of Oz
FIRST IMPRESSIONS
CHAPTER 1

2 CultureShock! Syria
I WAS TALKING WITH A YOUNG SYRIAN FRIEND about the peculiarities 
of Syrian Arab Airlines (or just Syrian Air, as it’s usually 
called), and he laughed and said, “Well, there’s only one 
Syria, so there’s only one Syrian Air!” There’s only one Syria 
summarises more than you can imagine unless you’ve lived 
or travelled in Syria for a while, for the uniqueness of the 
place will strike you immediately.
COMING IN FOR A LANDING
As you ﬂ y into  Damascus, one of the ﬁ rst oddities you might 
notice is that regardless of where the aircraft enters Syrian 
airspace, it travels far inland, then approaches  Damascus 
from the east. This means that even though  Damascus is only 
a few minutes by air from the Mediterranean, you’ll travel 
over land for about an hour before you touch down.
There are various explanations for this. One is that the 
Syrians—surrounded by less-than-friendly nations—simply 
do not allow air trafﬁ c anywhere over the capital city. The 
 airport is 32 km (20 miles) from the city and surrounded by 
military installations. This way, the  government will be better 
protected from potential enemies both internal and external. 
At any rate,  Damascus may be the world’s only capital city 
with no air trafﬁ c overhead. In nearly three years there I did 
not see or hear commercial aircraft more than a few times. 
Imagine endless blue summer skies with never a jet contrail 
in sight; it’s a strange feeling.

3
First Impressions
Customs
Be prepared to spend up to 40 minutes or so going through 
several passport checkpoints. At one of those points, one 
of the landing cards you ﬁ ll out is stamped and returned 
to you along with your passport. Make sure you keep it: if 
you try to leave the country without it, you’ll be hassled and 
probably end up paying a “fee”, which varies depending on 
the customs agent you encounter at the time. After you’ve 
cleared the ﬁ rst window, you pass through a gate where 
another branch of the  government can look at your passport, 
then on to the baggage claim area. Damascus International 
Airport is old but has had some renovation. The arrival hall 
and baggage carousels are still old and worn, however. If 
you have a lot of luggage, a baggage cart will cost you about 
50 Syrian pounds (SP, but also called lira for some reason 
unknown to me), which is roughly US$ 1. After you load it, 
you head for the customs inspection counter.
If you’re lucky, the customs people will just wave you on 
through—at least that’s what I’ve experienced on most of my 
trips to Syria. If not, they probably won’t search your luggage 
thoroughly. What they look for primarily are electronics and 
drugs. If they ﬁ nd electronics, they may want a customs tax. 
The ﬁ rst time I came through, only one large trunk (out of 
seven pieces of luggage) was inspected. A boom box stereo 
was in it and several agents examined it, consulting among 
themselves for a while before giving it back to me saying, “OK, 
this time.” They asked what was in another large box (a guitar 
and cassette tapes) and then waved me on. They seem to be 
particularly accomodating to visitors from Western countries 
and willing to make their entry as easy as possible.
Leaving the Airport
After you leave the customs area and enter the lobby, you will 
get your ﬁ rst taste of Syrian variety. People of nearly every 
colour and mode of  dress will be in a human crush awaiting 
arrivals. The  airport is often busy and crowded (an estimated 
3.6 million visitors went through it in 2008), and most users 
are from the Middle East and North Africa, it seems, so you 
will see great variety of costume and appearance.

4 CultureShock! Syria
Unless someone is there to pick you up, taxi drivers will 
approach you from every direction saying, “Taxi?” and before 
you even accept an offer, one of them is likely to grab your 
cart and start wheeling it out. You should ask for the fare, 
and not pay more than about 500 SP or the equivalent 
of US$ 10 for a ride to the city (you can often bargain for 
300–400 SP). 
If no taxi driver approaches you, or if you don’t want to 
haggle over price, go to one of the rental car windows or to 
the taxi stand and ask for a taxi to  Damascus, but bargain 
with them, because they will 
want two to three times as much 
as a regular city taxi—often in 
hard currency. Karnak, Syria’s 
national bus system, also travels 
from the aiport to the bus centre 
in an area called Baramkeh, but 
that’s not a reasonable option if 
you have lots of luggage.
If no one is meeting you, it might be wise to exchange a 
little foreign currency at the  airport; the rate is the same as 
at the bank, and it will give you some local cash for food and 
taxi fare. There’s an ATM for cash withdrawals and several 
exchange bureaus in the exit lobby.
DAMASCUS: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
The road to  Damascus from the  airport is usually not 
crowded and is lined on both sides by trees. But as soon as 
you reach the edge of the city, the peacefulness will end. 
Many people told me that Cairo had the noisiest and most 
disorderly trafﬁ c in the world; but I spent a week there 
and saw or heard nothing worse than what I did every day 
in central  Damascus. The trafﬁ c deﬁ nes chaos and din. 
Trafﬁ c  police are stationed at every major intersection that 
has a trafﬁ c light; otherwise, most drivers would ignore 
the signals, barrelling through a red light with their horn 
blaring and lights ﬂ ashing to say, “Look out, I’m coming 
through!”
Watch Your Bags
Before you get to the taxi, one 
or more of the luggage boys 
who work for tips may grab your 
cart, take it to the taxi, and load 
your things into it—with extreme 
carelessness if you don’t demand 
otherwise. Don’t pay them more 
than about 25 SP.

5
First Impressions
Trafﬁ c
There are thousands more vehicles than the city has room 
for, and they come at each other from every conceivable 
direction, including the wrong way on one-way streets and on 
the wrong side of two-way streets. Not a street in  Damascus 
is straight for long, and few of them meet at right angles; 
the busiest intersections are trafﬁ c circles much like in Great 
Britain, except these are not British drivers.
The cars, trucks,  buses, pedestrians, antiquated Chinese 
 bicycles, horsedrawn carts, motorcycles, donkeys saddled 
with bags of vegetables and micro-pickups all weave a 
choreography that makes the head spin. Vehicles drive within 
a few centimetres of each other and completely ignore any 
lanes marked on the roadway; yet amazingly, this jumble 
creates relatively few serious accidents. On the other hand, 
you seldom see cars that have travelled these wicked streets 
for long without nicks, dents and scratches.
Another factor in the general  trafﬁ c confusion is the 
raging noise. To begin with, many vehicles have no mufﬂ ers. 
Then, Syrians honk their horns at everything and nothing. 
(Former Monty Python member Michael Palin, commented 
that Egyptian horns were hooked to both brake and gas 
pedals—an appropriate description of Syria, as well.) When 

6 CultureShock! Syria
you’re walking the streets or sidewalks, the din actually 
hurts, and I often had to cover my ears. No matter where 
you cross the street, drivers will beep at you; if a man sees 
a scarﬂ ess woman he considers attractive, he beeps (this is 
especially true of taxi drivers); if they think another driver is 
even thinking about pulling in front of them, they toot their 
horns; and before a trafﬁ c light ever has a chance to turn 
green (the lights here go from red to yellow, then to green) 
the blare of horns is deafening. To say that this culture loves 
auto horns is an understatement. I have heard blasting car 
horns attached to motorcycles and even  bicycles. Many of the 
 buses and cars have special high-decibel or musical horns. 
Some play whole stanzas of popular music, some sound 
like sirens, and others play bizarre selections of seemingly 
random notes. I’ve even heard a Jingle Bells horn and one 
that played a medley of Christmas music! To live in this racket 
can be maddening, but it is entertaining at times.
First Stop
Syria has precious few mid-range  hotels, so you’ll probably 
either be staying at a ﬂ op house or a US$ 250 per night (and up) 
luxury hotel, although there is now a youth hostel, as well. 
Pix from page 18 old book
The luxury Cham Hotel on the Cote Azur of Syria, north of Latakia.

7
First Impressions
When choosing a hotel, keep in mind that the lobbies are 
usually much more luxurious than the rooms. Ask to see 
your room before agreeing to it. Unless you have a residence 
 visa, you must pay for your room in hard currency or credit 
card:  hotels with ratings of two stars and up will not accept 
local currency
There are several four- and ﬁ ve-star  hotels in  Damascus: 
Sheraton; Dedeman Hotel (formerly Le Meridien); several 
units of the Cham (pronounced Sham), a Syrian chain; 
Fardoss Tower Hotel; Sahara Touristic Complex; and a brand 
new Four Seasons Hotel. The Omayyad Hotel is also decent 
and less expensive than those mentioned previously, but 
most of the others are dives—dirty and bug-infested. Only 
the one-star joints will accept Syrian currency.
Syrians
In the morning, you hit the streets to look over your 
surroundings. If you are in a conservative part of the city, 
you’ll see women covered in black from head to toe—even in 
veils and gloves. You’ll see men in caftans and various head 
wraps. You’ll see some people dressed in casual western styles 
—blue jeans, T-shirts and Nikes. A peculiarly Damascene 
fashion for women is a plain white scarf tucked into a stylish 
raincoat—even in the blazing heat of summer! There are 
shops that specialise in these raincoats. 
All these people will jostle you, run into you, and stare 
holes through you; a few may ask you in English,  French 
or German where you’re from. All the while, the trafﬁ c 
will besiege you with its din, pungent smells will invade 
your nostrils, and the exhaust fumes will choke you. But in 
summer, on the few quiet streets, you’ll be delighted by the 
sound of cooing doves and the scent of pine and jasmine.
Street Safety
Be careful about crossing streets here. You must pay attention 
to the delicate choreography among vehicles and pedestrians. 
Pedestrians who hesitate, showing their intention to stop for 
oncoming vehicles then deciding to walk, might get hit. I was 
nudged by   taxis twice during my ﬁ rst week. There seems 

8 CultureShock! Syria
to be no pedestrian right-of-way; vehicles won’t stop for 
you unless you’re actually in front of them. Also, cars often 
drive with their lights off at night so they can ﬂ ash them at 
pedestrians and other drivers. The only two trafﬁ c rules I’ve 
been able to discern are: drive and walk offensively (the 
most aggressive driver or pedestrian wins the right-of-way); 
and whoever is in front has right-of-way, regardless of how 
he or she got there.
Narrow winding streets are a common feature that can be found in the old 
walled city of  Damascus.

9
First Impressions
Also, there is little parking allowed on the streets, so 
cars are parked on most sidewalks, forcing pedestrians 
into the streets. As a pedestrian, you should be wary of 
many hazards other than trafﬁ c. For example, holes in the 
streets and sidewalks are usually unmarked—even at night; 
an Irish neighbour who was here with the UN fell into a 
hole and broke her ankle. Another danger is that pipes and 
trees are often chopped off a few inches above the surface 
at any point in the sidewalk. The third is that rubble from 
new construction and renovation lies everywhere and you 
might stumble over a chunk of masonry the size of your 
leg. Yet another hazard: the circular curbs protruding from 
many sidewalks enclose spaces for trees, but some of them 
have no trees and are therefore less conspicuous. A ﬁ fth 
danger is caused by low-hanging branches, wires and signs; 
I have even seen Syrians run into these hazards. Finally, 
the pavement tiles are often broken, missing or just very 
uneven. During daylight hours, it’s easy enough to watch 
for all these things, but the problem is that at night only a 
few main thoroughfares are well lit.
Appearance
If you arrive in summer, the sunlight will be intense, white, 
burning. In winter, the wind could be biting, the sky and 
air gray. Regardless of the quality of light, you’re likely to 
notice—if you are in tune to such things—that most of 
 Damascus is not what one could call beautiful, even though it 
is captivating and has some visually redeeming qualities. This 
has not always been the case. In his three-volume series The 
Venture of  Islam: Conscience and History in a World Civilization, 
Marshall G.S. Hodgson says (of the period from 1250 to 
1503): “Some cities, such as  Damascus… were especially 
famed for their beauty, (both) natural and artiﬁ cial…”
First of all, the city is overwhelmingly brown, beige and 
tan, as is the mountain beside it (except in spring, when some 
greens and yellows pop up from the ground). Although the 
people and their  dress are colourful, the height and density 
of the buildings are such that they overpower the splotches 
of colour with their drabness.

10 CultureShock! Syria
The majority of structures built since  World War II are 
simply big square concrete boxes, stuccoed with what 
looks like unpainted mud and topped with forests of old TV 
antennas of every size and shape, leaning at all angles—
although many of these are increasingly being replaced by 
satellite dishes. There is little architectural distinction here: 
one cannot usually differentiate an apartment building 
from a  government ofﬁ ce, an embassy, a school or an 
ambassador’s residence. The city has a wealth of ancient 
structures, but sadly, most are in poor condition, many of 
them disintegrating. Those that are better kept are still drab 
and often dirty. 
Another unsightly element is garbage. There aren’t enough 
rubbish bins (and existing ones have no lids), so refuse in 
plastic bags is placed along curbs and sidewalks for daily 
pickup. The city’s abundant wild cats feed on the food scraps, 
strewing the garbage everywhere. Most Syrians throw their 
trash everywhere. Many streets and sidewalks, despite almost 
daily cleaning, are scattered with waste of all kinds.
There are some aesthetic bright spots, however. One is 
the large number of trees and ﬂ owering shrubs in the newer 

11
First Impressions
parts of town. Jasmine is everywhere and scents the air on 
summer and autumn evenings. There are also a fair number 
of orange and ﬁ g trees, spicy-smelling pines, eucalyptus 
trees and various other sorts of greenery. Grapevines are 
abundant. The parks, too, are nicely designed and kept up, 
and show the vitality of city life on warm evenings—ponds, 
fountains, geese, ducks,  children’s playgrounds, ﬂ owers and 
paths. Unfortunately, most of the parks except the biggest 
one—Tishreen—have ‘lawn  police’ who keep people from 
lounging on the grass: they want you to stay on the paths 
or benches.
An exception to the underwhelming  architecture is in 
some of the mosques, a few historic buildings, and—in the 
newer areas of town where most foreigners and wealthy 
Damascenes live—new and recently renovated buildings. 
Most of this new construction and renovation is lovely, with 
golden-toned, hand-hewn stone exteriors. Also, decorative 
windows, doors, railings and columns are built from stone, 
nice woodwork or elaborate metalwork. 
An example of the elaborate new  architecture that Syrians seem to favour.

12 CultureShock! Syria
The newer mosques in particular are outstanding in their 
simple aesthetics and geometric designs. Their minarets 
have a unique Syrian design, those in neighbouring Islamic 
countries being noticeably different. An exception in 
embassy design is the embassy of the United Arab Emirates, 
a magniﬁ cent piece of neo-Arab  architecture—the essence 
of graceful simplicity. And while the presidential palace 
(euphemistically named the People’s Palace and built around 
20 years ago on a hilltop overlooking the city) resembles a 
series of concrete boxes put together for a manufacturing 
plant, it can still be said that the Tishreen Palace is lovely.
DAMASCUS: OTHER CURIOSITIES
As you walk or cruise  Damascus, there are other things that 
might strike you. One is that virtually every shop and ofﬁ ce 
has at least one likeness—usually a photograph—of the late 
President   Hafez al-Asad as well as the current President 
 Bashar al-Asad displayed; some have several. In  government 
buildings, every room will have one or more: for example, 
one small ofﬁ ce area of the post ofﬁ ce on Abu Romaneh 
Street has ten photos of the late president and nine of his 
son! This isn’t always a sign of love, admiration or loyalty: 
it’s expected. Their images on banners and statues can also 
be seen all over the city and throughout Syria, some statues 
dominating entire hills.
In 1994, when  Hafez’s eldest son Bassel al-Asad died, 
his images and photos outnumbered those of his father. 
Bassel’s photos are displayed everywhere. Syrians seem to 
be mourning him still. Some will readily tell you about what 
a great man he was and how he genuinely cared about the 
Syrian people. With his dark aviator glasses and beret, Bassel 
looked a bit like the late South American revolutionary leader 
Ernesto ‘Che’ Guevara. 
When I ﬁ rst arrived in  Damascus in 1992, there was 
virtually nothing that resembled the commercialism of 
the West—no European, American or Japanese company 
names, no car dealerships, no junk food joints, nothing that 
even resembled a department store or supermarket, and 
no advertising billboards. It seemed to me like a different 

13
First Impressions
planet. In 1991, however, a new private investment law had 
just been instituted to liberalise private business, and things 
slowly began to change. Now there are some franchises 
such as KFC showing up, so can MacDonalds, Starbucks 
and 7-Eleven be far behind? The small shopkeeper, usually a 
family operation, is the standard here, and nearly all shops 
specialise in only a few items; there are even  souks that 
specialise (see the section on Shopping in Chapter 6). The 
shops that are called ‘Super Markets’ are generally about 
the size of a convenience store in the United States and 
usually have less variety. 
Something that may disturb you until you grow used 
to it is the military presence, although it seems a bit 
less overpowering now than it did under  Hafez. Every 
 government building, embassy, consulate, ambassador’s 
residence, foreign school or cultural centre, and the homes 
of  government ofﬁ cials have guard shacks out front and 
at least one soldier with an AK47; the more important 
ones have two or three soldiers as well as security people 
with pistols tucked in their belts. You simply cannot avoid 
the military presence in central  Damascus, but except for 
occasionally making lewd remarks or noises at passing 

14 CultureShock! Syria
women, they are non-threatening. I like to think of them 
as at least token protection from murderous religious 
and political factions. In reality, however, their ubiquitous 
presence owes as much to pragmatism—a way to use an 
idle army—as to anything else.
Another thing that will certainly catch your attention if 
you’re unfamiliar with Mediterranean and Arab culture are 
the displays of physical affection among men. They not only 
hug and kiss each other’s cheeks when greeting or saying 
goodbye, but some kiss each other’s lips. Additionally, young 
boys, old white-haired men, and all ages in between walk 
around arm-in-arm or holding hands. Having grown up in the 
western United States where physical closeness among males 
usually comes either in ﬁ ghting or homosexual contact, I 
was bafﬂ ed by all this at ﬁ rst. I thought it was blatant 
homosexuality and was astonished that such a sexually 
repressive culture would tolerate it. Now I realise that you 
can simply take it at face value: men here are affectionate 
with each other, and they show it in the same manner they 
have for generations. And, it’s far more pleasant than the 
macho posturing one sees in so many other places.

‘Every cultured man belongs to two nations: 
his own and Syria.’
—from a Syrian tourist brochure
OVERVIEW OF LAND 
AND HISTORY
CHAPTER 2

16 CultureShock! Syria
A GEOGRAPHY LESSON
Modern Syria (officially, the Syrian Arab Republic or SAR) was 
once part of a larger area that included what are now the 
countries of Syria,  Jordan,  Lebanon and  Israel. This area has 
been called the Levant, Greater Syria and Bilad ash-Sham (the 
Arab name) and is still often referred to as the Levant.
The country of Syria is shaped some what like a triangle 
with irregular sides. You can drive from any border to any 
other in less than a day. Although it covers only 185,185 sq km
(71,481 sq miles) Syria’s strategic location has a historical 

17
Overview of Land and History
importance to both Middle Eastern and Western civilisations 
far out of proportion to its size.
There are about 145 km (90 miles) of Mediterranean 
coastline and one island, called Arwad, just off the coast at 
 Tartus. The island was an independent kingdom called Aradus 
in the days of the Phoenicians and contains many historical 
structures as well as a marina. Its inhabitants depend mostly 
on  fishing for their livelihood.
Geography, vegetation and weather in Syria are quite varied. 
They range from mountains to steppes, from lushness to 
bareness and from moderate to extreme temperatures. Two-
thirds of Syria is  desert or steppe, as it is often called.
The western band of the country where most of the 
people live is less than 160 km (100 miles) wide and has a 
 climate similar to other Mediterranean countries. Looking 
at it from the west, there is first a green coastal plain where 
temperatures range between 21–32°C (70–90°F) in summer 
and 10–21°C (50–70°F) in winter. It is always rather humid 
at the coast, where annual rainfall averages about 97 cm 
(38 inches). Beside the plain is a range of limestone 
mountains, which are cooler in summer and colder and often 
snow-covered in winter. Between this range and the next one 
is a drier but still fertile valley, called the Gharb Depression, 
which was a marsh in ancient times.
Next comes a range of dry mountains. The climate here 
is hotter in the summer and colder in the winter than in the 
western range. The narrow strip of land along the eastern 
slopes of this range is where the largest cities are, and the 
climate varies quite a bit from south to north. For example, 
the average rainfall in  Aleppo (north) is about 47 cm 
(18.5 inches) per year, while it is only 23 cm (9 inches) in 
 Damascus, farther south. The rainfall again increases near 
 Jordan. The temperatures along this strip range from over 
38°C (100°F) in summer to below freezing in winter.
The area east of the populated strip, with the exception 
of some mountainous land along the Turkish border and 
the irrigated land along the three main rivers, is high steppe 
and  desert—not drifting sand dunes as in the Sahara, but 
rocky land. The Syrian Desert covers most of  Jordan,  Iraq 

18 CultureShock! Syria
and northern  Saudi Arabia as well. It is different from North 
American deserts, which support a profusion of life. There 
is little vegetation other than sparse clumps of short grass 
in the late winter and early spring and the greenery in a few 
oases. The grass of the  desert and steppes, however, supports 
Bedouin sheep and goats as it has for millennia.
The triangle of land northeast of the Euphrates and Al 
Khabur Rivers is called al Jazeera (island in Arabic) and is not 
as dry as the central  desert, getting about 25 cm (10 inches) of 
annual rainfall. While most of the central  desert is 762 metres
(2,500 feet) or more above sea level, the Jazeera’s elevation 
is around 366 metres (1,200 feet). This was once part of 
ancient Mesopotamia.
The  desert in south-central Syria is an ancient volcanic 
area, covered by rough lava flows and dotted with cinder 
cones. Some of this land has been painstakingly cleared of 
lava rock so it can be used for agriculture.
According to many older residents in  Damascus, the 
weather has been changing. According to them, in the 1980s, 
the summers were rarely hot for more than a few days at a 
time. But the winters of 1991–1992 and 1992–1993 were the 
worst in half a century, and the summer of 1993 saw more 
than three consecutive months of daytime temperatures 
above 35°C (95°F). Recent summer temperatures have also 
been quite hot, most likely as a result of global warming.
Syria has several rivers: the Euphrates, the Al Balikh, the 
Al Khabur, the Barada and the Orontes. The latter is the only 
north-flowing river in Syria, travelling through Turkey on 
its way to the Mediterranean. The coastal mountains have 
numerous small streams, some of which flow only during 
winter and spring, and the southwestern portion of the 
country also has small streams.
Syria has only two natural lakes. The biggest of these is 
Arram, which fills the crater of an extinct volcano in the Golan 
Heights. The other is Lake Mzerib, northeast of Der’a, near 
the border with  Jordan. The country’s largest body of water is 
Lake al-Asad, formed by the Tabaqah Dam on the Euphrates 
near  Aleppo. Other lakes (all formed by dams) are Qattina, Al 
Rastan, Karma, Baloran and Karn. Until a few decades ago, 

19
Overview of Land and History
the Barada filled two lakes east of  Damascus. Now the river is 
completely consumed for drinking water and irrigation.
There are a few oases, the biggest and best known is in 
Tadmor, by the ruins of the Roman city of  Palmyra. This was 
the source of life for that ancient city.
THE POPULATION
Syria’s  population has grown dramatically. At the end of the 
Ottoman empire it was about 200,000; in 1972, there were 
about 4.5 million people; in 1993, more than 13 million; 
as of 2000, there were about 17 million; and the CIA World 
Factbook estimate for 2010 was almost 22.2 million. This 
makes it one of the fastest growing countries in the world 
and one that is quickly running out of housing, water and 
places to grow food.  Damascus, the capital, has grown from 
around 300,000 inhabitants a few decades ago to about 2 
million in 1993 and as much as 3.5–4 million as of 2007 
(for some reason, reliable figures for individual city/district 
population are hard to come by).
As of 2010, an estimated 35.8 per cent of the population 
was under 15 years of age, while only about 3.7 per cent was 
over 65 years of age—truly a culture of youth. As is the case 

20 CultureShock! Syria
all over the Middle East and North Africa, population growth 
is straining the fragile ecology and  economy of the area with 
pollution, garbage, crowding and demand for nonexistent 
jobs and water.
Despite these and other problems, Syrians are notorious 
for their friendliness and hospitality, and they seem to 
particularly like North Americans. They are almost manic 
socialisers and quite hyperactive, especially the young. They 
seem to like extreme things: foods that are either extremely 
sweet or sour, lots of jewellery, highly decorated houses, 
bright  clothing, glitzy cars and lots of noise. Music and food 
form the main part of their social activities.
HISTORY
Syria has a rich and diverse  history. The coast and the 
 Euphrates River area have remnants of civilisations from 
as long as 7,000 years ago. Some structures built by the 
Romans, early Arabs,  Ottomans and  French are still in use. 
Until around the 29th century before the present (BP) the 
area had two mostly separate histories: eastern and western. 
In this chapter we will give only the barest possible outline 
of Syria’s immense and involved history.
ANCIENT HISTORY
The West
The first known settlers on the coast were groups who had 
just begun to evolve from hunters and gatherers to sedentary 
people. They used the flint and obsidian tools found in Ugarit, 
on the north Syrian coast. They also left some statues of 
fertility goddesses but no containers of any sort.
A thousand years or so later, settlers here began using soft 
primitive pottery. During the 4th and 5th millennium BP, 
ceramics in elegant shapes, painted with geometric designs, 
began to appear. Similar pottery has been found all across 
northern Syria. For the next 2,000 years, pottery technology 
improved, and during the third millennium BP, copper work 
came into existence.
The history of the area becomes a little clearer with the 
Canaanites, who moved onto the coastal plain and the 

21
Overview of Land and History
seaward side of the coastal mountains of what is now  Israel, 
 Lebanon and Syria. These people were called Phoenician by 
the Greeks. This name simply referred to all the peoples of the 
area, although none of them called themselves by that name, 
being composed of many disparate tribes, as they were.
The Phoenicians were the first great seafarers of the 
Mediterranean, establishing colonies and trading with people 
all around the Aegean Sea. It was during their time that the 
already ancient settlement at Ugarit was given its name. The 
Phoenicians developed and improved iron tools, and had the 
first royalty that wore purple robes. The dye for the robes 
came from a mollusc unique to the Mediterranean shores of 
Syria. The first known kings were Niqmadou and Yaqaroum. 
During the 36th century BP, the Egyptians invaded and 
conquered parts of Syria, but left the Canaanite kingdom 
intact; the two groups were friendly.
The earliest known writing in this area has its source 
in the reign of Niqmadou II (about 3360–3330 BP). The 
writing, using a cuneiform alphabet, tells a great deal about 
the customs and institutions of the coastal people. Clay 
tablets discovered at Ugarit and at Ebla, south of  Aleppo, 
show that the Canaanite kingdom included a large chunk 
of what is now northwestern Syria, and speak of extensive 
diplomatic activity to safeguard the kingdom from the 
advance of both the Egyptians and the Hittites, invaders 
from the north. Eventually, war and political intrigue became 
increasingly common among the peoples at this end of the 
Mediterranean, and Ugarit was finally destroyed around the 
end of the 34th century BP. The city never rose again, but 
during the 26th and 25th centuries BP, Greek fishermen built 
dwellings atop the tell (a mound concealing one or more 
ancient settlements) and named the place Leukos Limen.
Around the end of the 34th century BP, about the same 
time as the Israelite migration into Phoenicia, another Semitic 
people known as the Aramaeans settled east of the coastal 
mountains. Their kingdom became known as Aram and 
eventually covered a large part of what is now Syria. From 
their capital in  Damascus, they developed extensive overland 
trade with Asia. 

22 CultureShock! Syria
The Aramaeans adapted the Phoenician alphabet for use 
with their own language,  Aramaic, which eventually became 
the official language of the Persian empire. This is the language 
Christ spoke, and it is still spoken today in and around  Maalula. 
It is also used in the liturgy of the  Syrian Orthodox Church.
Aram prospered for hundreds of years, and completes the 
separate history of western Syria.
 Maalula, a mostly Christian village north of  Damascus. There is both a 
monastery and a convent here, and the  Syrian Orthodox Church, which uses 
the ancient  Aramaic langauge in its liturgy, began here.
Visitors at a cave chapel at  Maalula.

23
Overview of Land and History
The East
At the same time the Phoenicians were thriving, the 
ancient Sumerians (of what is now southern  Iraq) spread 
northwestward into what is now eastern Syria and northern 
 Iraq, eventually occupying most of the land between and 
around the Euphrates and Tigris Rivers. The area is often 
referred to as Mesopotamia, the Fertile Crescent and 
Babylonia. The people became known as Babylonians. Mari, 
an archaeological site on the  Euphrates River near  Iraq, has 
turned up evidence of settlers as far back as those in Ugarit 
—7,000 years ago.
While the Babylonians spread throughout the Fertile 
Crescent, the Assyrian civilisation was developing on the 
northern Tigris River. The Assyrians, from which Syria got its 
name, were as well known for their military conquests and 
brutality as the Babylonians were for their accomplishments 
in science, the arts and religion.
In the 45th century BP a group of Semitic people under a 
leader known as Sargon conquered Babylonia and established 
a kingdom called Akkad. A short time later, Akkad fell to Guti 
barbarians from the Zagros mountains (between modern 
Turkey and Iran). In the 40th century BP, Amorites conquered 
the region. Then the Assyrians took over Babylonia in the 
35th century. By 3300 BP, they had occupied most of what 
is now Syria. In the 31st century BP, the Aramaeans drove 
them back, reclaiming most of their former empire. 
Common History
In the 29th century BP, the Assyrians returned and conquered 
all of Syria, ending the separate historical development. This 
empire did not last long, though: in the 28th century BP, 
the area was conquered by the Babylonians under King 
Nebuchadnezzar. A hundred years later, Syria became part 
of the Persian empire. Then, in 2333 BP, Alexander the Great 
conquered it and it remained a Hellenistic outpost until it 
became part of the Roman empire in the 22nd century BP.
It took time for the Romans to establish themselves 
throughout Syria, but once they did, it became a major part 
of the Eastern Roman (Byzantine) empire for hundreds of 

24 CultureShock! Syria
years. Of all Syria’s conquerors, the Romans left the largest 
number of remains: cities, amphitheatres, temples and forts 
throughout the country. Three Roman emperors came from 
Syria. The best-known was perhaps Philip (1763–1758 BP). 
His birthplace of Shahba, south of  Damascus, has ruins of a 
Roman theatre and baths and a museum of well-preserved 
mosaic floors. The other two emperors came from Homs 
(called Emesa at that time), 160 km (100 miles) north of 
 Damascus: Alexander (Lucius) Severus (1814–1796 BP), and 
Elagabalus (1789–1785 BP).
HISTORY UNDER ISLAM
After  Prophet Mohammed’s death, his followers were divided 
over who should lead them. The Shi’ites argued that it had 
to be a family member of the prophet, and chose Ali, his 
nephew. The majority of followers, the Sunnis, wanted to 
appoint Caliphs to rule in his place. Immediate animosity 
developed between the two groups and continues today, 
Halebiyeh on the  Euphrates River marked the easternmost outpost during 
Roman times.

25
Overview of Land and History
although now the disputes are as much political, social 
and economic as they are religious. In addition to the split 
between the Shi’ites and Sunnis, there were conflicts between 
clans struggling for political and religious power. 
The  Omayyads were initially the strongest of these clans 
and ruled the Arab empire from Syria, between the mid-28th 
and mid-29th centuries BP. They were less dogmatic than 
other  Muslim groups and more socially and politically 
oriented. Then, as now, the main opponents of Arab rulers 
were those who considered themselves pious Muslims fighting 
secularisation: these people wanted Islamic principles to be 
encoded as the law of the land. They were predominantly 
Shi‘ites from what is now southern  Iraq and Persia (Iran). 
If you would like to hear a case of repeated history, there’s 
this: in The Venture of  Islam: Conscience and History in a World 
Civilisation, the author states that the Persians, impressed 
with their own piety, passed a death sentence upon the 
 Omayyads and others they thought were heretics!
The  Omayyads left their mark in the lovely  Omayyad 
Mosque in  Damascus. This was built 1,400 years ago and 
incorporates ruins of the Cathedral of St. John, which in 
turn was built over the remains of a Roman temple. The 
 mosque is one of the oldest in the world and is still in use. 
It contains a sepulchre that Muslims believe holds the head 
of John the Baptist.
The conflict between the   Omayyads and other groups 
was not only religious; it was also between rural and urban 
power. Under the  Omayyads, for the first time in the 
Middle East, political administration, education, intellectual 
pursuits and other aspects of city life were more highly 
valued than was rural life. The continuing conflict between 
rural and urban, Sunni and Shi’ite, and the clans finally 
overpowered the  Omayyads around the middle of the 8th 
century. The Babylonians conquered the area then and 
intentionally neglected the coastal area, which fell under 
 Egypt’s control. 
From 900–1,000 years ago, Greater Syria developed 
many local principalities and emirates, and this political 
fragmentation allowed the invading  French  Crusaders to take 

26 CultureShock! Syria
over much of northern and western Syria. The  Crusaders 
came in waves, building mighty hilltop fortresses that still 
stand. Part of the battle here was for Jerusalem—one of the 
holiest cities in  Christianity,   Islam and  Judaism. Eight hundred 
years later, the battle still rages, politically and otherwise, for 
control of Jerusalem.
Despite their success on the coast and in the mountains, 
the  Crusaders had little impact on central and eastern Syria. 
Near the end of the 8th century BP, the last of them were 
expelled by the famous Saladin (Salah al-Din, in Arabic) and 
by the Mamluks from  Egypt, who then colonised Syria.
Approximately 200 years later, the Turkish  Ottomans 
conquered the area and have probably had the strongest 
influence on modern Syria. For one thing, they brought a 
certain amount of material success to the land. For another, 
they were Sunni Muslims like most Syrians. They also allowed 
local administration by Arabs who were at least nominally 
loyal to them. These administrators were wealthy landowners 
with deep roots in cities such as  Damascus and  Aleppo.
The  Ottomans ruled until the end of  World War I, about 400 
years, which brings us to the turbulent 20th century. In order 
to understand the conflicts in this area, it is important to know 
a little about the background of the conflicting factions. 
20TH CENTURY HISTORY
Christian groups have always played a prominent role in Syria, 
especially in the mountainous west and north. When the 
Meccans ( Muslim  Omayyads) first arrived, they stayed in the 
lowlands and deserts where the climate was more like home. 
Various Christian groups, perhaps fearing persecution from 
the Muslims as well as conflicts with other Christians, moved 
farther into the mountains, forming separate communities. In 
later years, minority sects of  Islam did the same: Alawites in 
northern Syria, Druze in southern Syria and  Lebanon, Shi‘ites 
in what is now southern  Lebanon. Under the Mamluks, non-
 Muslim groups were given some autonomy. The  Ottomans 
expanded the autonomy, creating what was called the Millet 
system: Jewish and Christian communities had their own 
governments within the empire.

27
Overview of Land and History
The  French Mandate
The Syrian connection with France is important for several 
reasons. First, there were the  French  Crusaders. Then, as far 
back as the mid-16th century, the  Ottomans had given the 
 French commercial privileges in Syria. These were known as 
Capitulations and increased as time went by; they included 
the  French as protectors of the Levant’s Roman Catholic 
communities and the Russians as protectors of Greek 
Orthodox communities.
After the Turks were driven out of Syria in  World War I, 
France and England bargained hard with each other for 
the spoils. It was a case of absolute political, religious and 
economic self-interest. This, combined with ignorance of 
the cultures involved, allowed Greater Syria to be chopped 
into pieces with little consideration for social or religious 
commonalities within the new countries.
 Lebanon was proclaimed a “country” in 1920. This 
land, which had been a significant part of Greater Syria 
for thousands of years and which contained a multitude 
of religious communities, had little to recommend it for 
statehood. But the  French wanted to protect the Maronites 
(Roman Catholics who practise Eastern Orthodox rites), who 
were in the majority there at that time. No consideration was 
apparently given to the potential for devastating conflicts in 
the new country. Thomas Friedman, in his book From Beirut 
to Jerusalem, compared the Maronites’ Phalangist political 
and military party to the Roman Catholic Mafioso in Italy. 
The  Muslim groups, particularly the Shi‘ites, grew faster than 
the Christian population and began to resent the minority 
Christian domination. Then, Palestinians, who were driven 
out of their homeland by the Zionists, moved into the fray, 
using southern  Lebanon as a base to fight the  government 
of  Israel. The rest is bloody modern history.
Modern Syria also has a fragmented population, but 
not as badly fragmented as that of  Lebanon. It has a clear 
majority of Sunni Muslims, and the proportion of various 
groups has remained stable over the years. There are 
Kurds concentrated in the northeast, Armenians in the 
north and northwest, a few Shi’ites in the south, Alawites 

28 CultureShock! Syria
in the northwest, and Druze in the southwest. There are 
a few  Jews, mostly in  Damascus and  Aleppo, and a few 
predominantly Christian communities—most notably 
 Maalula (the ancient village north of  Damascus where 
 Aramaic is still spoken) and Armenian villages along the 
northwestern border with Turkey.
The Sykes-Picot Agreement of May 1916 divided the Levant 
between Britain and France, and Syria and  Lebanon went 
to France.  Iraq (including what is now Kuwait), Transjordan 
and Palestine went to Great Britain. The Balfour Declaration 
(British) of 1917 promised the European  Jews a homeland 
in Palestine without regard for the Arabs who had lived there 
for millennia. 
Despite the fact that the League of Nations didn’t approve 
this partition until 1923, France took over Syria and  Lebanon 
in 1920. The League mandate promised both countries 
a constitution within three years and stated that these 
documents be formed in consultation with local leaders and 
with agreement of the countries’ citizens. Yet  Lebanon’s 
constitution was created in Paris and implemented in 1926 
with no local consultations. Syria did not have a constitution 
until 1930. When the elected Syrian Constitutional Assembly 
prepared a draft constitution,  French authorities objected to 
several articles, including one that called for the reuniting of 
Syria,  Jordan, Palestine and  Lebanon. When the Assembly 
refused to change the articles, the  French High Commissioner 
dissolved the body, then later implemented the constitution 
with the articles annulled.
Another  French violation of the mandate came in, allowing 
Turkey to annex the lush northwestern corner of Syria (called 
the Alexandretta and also the Hatay Peninsula) in 1938.
The essence of the mandate’s weakness is summed up 
by Professor Ziadeh in Syria and  Lebanon (1968) as follows: 
“The mandate gave France complete domination over Syria 
and  Lebanon’s foreign affairs, judiciary system, economic 
life and development and supervision of education and 
social welfare. The spirit of the mandate system put France 
under obligation to 'train' the people in these matters, but 
the mandatory power instead regarded Syria and  Lebanon 

29
Overview of Land and History
as an area of exploitation, where  French capital,  French 
colonial expansion, and  French culture should be developed. 
The interests of the people themselves were a matter of 
secondary importance.”
Syria rebelled against  French rule during 1925–1927, but 
was crushed by superior military power, including a  French 
bombardment of  Damascus.
Things came to a head again during  World War II. The 
Vichy  government of France allowed the Germans to use 
airfields in Syria, en route to  Iraq. Since the British were 
in  Iraq, this caused fighting on Syrian soil between  French 
and British forces, as well as between British and German 
forces. Germany had political designs on the Levant (mostly 
to drive the British out of  Iraq, which made the Germans 
popular with the Arabs), and as the war drew on, the Soviet 
Union and the United States began to question what should 
happen in the Middle East. Negotiations were held, treaties 
were signed and the British took control of most  French 
positions in Syria.
Then in June of 1945, Article 78 was adopted by the new 
United Nations. It stated that members of the organisation 
could not be placed under the trusteeship of another. On 7 June 
that year, the Arab League declared that the  French and British 
forces in the Levant violated their countries’ independence and 
sovereignty, based on the UN article. Britain protested that it 
was only there to maintain the new countries’ independence, 
but both the United States and the Soviet Union declared that 
neither France nor Britain should be there. (In fact, the United 
States had recommended that Syria be made a constitutional 
monarchy after  World War I, a suggestion rejected by Britain 
and France.) Finally, after a lot of wrangling and hostilities, 
 French troops left Syria on 17 April 1946, and  Lebanon on 
31 December the same year. In Syria, 17 April is observed as 
Evacuation Day, a national holiday celebrated with fireworks, 
parades and other special events.
Independence
When a country—a collection of disparate cultures, 
really—achieves independence for the first time, it faces 

30 CultureShock! Syria
overwhelming problems, and the new countries of the 
Levant had more than they could handle. One was that part 
of geographic Syria had been given away by the Americans 
and British to Europeans—the Zionist  Jews of Europe. Moving 
in next door to the new  Muslim Arab states were people 
whose explicit goal was to take back the Holy Land from the 
Arabs. There was almost immediate fighting, as anyone with 
knowledge of the area might have foreseen.
Also, the economies were weak. While  Lebanon had been 
both developed and plundered by the  French, Syria had only 
been plundered. Few roads or railroads were built under the 
 French mandate, and the remaining land and its climate 
made most of the new state of Syria unable to support a 
lot of human habitation. Despite millennia of being part of 
advanced empires, Syria was still mostly pastoral.
These difficulties and others resulted in a series of military 
coups from the beginning of independence. Pan-Arabism 
(the belief that all Arab people should be part of one nation-
state), an idealistic concept to most Arabs since the 19th 
century, found an outlet in the union of Syria and  Egypt in 
1958. The new country was called the United Arab Republic. 
But  Egypt’s much larger population, military strength and 
Gamal Abdul Nasser’s force of personality completely 
dominated Syria; the union lasted only until 1961, when 
Syria reestablished an independent  government. Then in 
the mid-1960s a group of dissident military officers came 
to power through the growing and powerful  Ba’ath Party, a 
Pan-Arab party in Syria and  Iraq. This coup ended hundreds 
of years of domination by outsiders and—during the last 
few centuries—the Sunni landowners loyal to them: the new 
military officers were peasants from minority sects, and the 
 Ba’ath Party itself was strongly socialistic.
From the beginning of independence, socialism appealed to 
many Syrians. For one thing,  Islam appeals to the lower strata 
of society in part because it is egalitarian; the religion has no 
hierarchy. For another, many were tired of the aristocrats who 
had cooperated with the  Ottomans for centuries, enhancing 
their own wealth and power. The  Ba’ath Party was founded 
by two men—one Christian and one  Muslim. In the newly 

31
Overview of Land and History
formed nationalism, the uniting factor was not religion but 
being an oppressed Arab. The socialist nature of the new 
party shows in its founding congress statement (1947) that 
“The Arab woman enjoys all the rights of citizenship. The 
party struggles to raise up woman’s level…” This was a truly 
radical concept in Arab culture, which for thousands of years 
had considered women as little more than the property, 
servants and sexual playthings of men.
The country’s new leader was too dogmatic for  Hafez al-
Asad, the Minister of Defence, who had a more pragmatic 
approach to politics. In 1970, he and troops loyal to him 
(mostly from his clan and religious group, the Alawites) 
surrounded Parliament and took over the country in a 
bloodless coup. He held power until his death in 2000.
THE GOVERNMENT AND BA’ATH PARTY
In 1971, Mr  Hafez al-Asad (asad means lion in Arabic) was 
elected president by an assembly of his choosing, and 
launched what is called the Correctionist Movement. This 
movement claimed that al-Asad’s immediate predecessor, 
Salah Jadid—a fellow Alawite whom al-Asad had helped 
put into power, had erred in his unbending support for 
communist-type collective farms, an  economy run completely 
by the national   government and support for the Palestinian 
struggle in  Israel at the expense of Syria’s own wellbeing. The 
Correctionist Movement was to ‘correct’ these mistakes.
On 10 June 2000,  Hafez al-Asad died after holding power 
over Syria for three decades. He was given a lavish state 
funeral. His son, Dr  Bashar al-Asad, an ophthalmologist, 
was promptly named the country’s new president. Just 36 
years old when appointed, he remains popular with many 
Syrians for his progressive views, which he balances with 
a strong sense of Syrian pride and tradition. The President 
received his higher education in the United Kingdom and 
probably owes his contemporary views about  government 
and his country’s role in the world at least in part to this 
Western education. 
During his first year in office, Bashar made several 
sweeping changes, including the release of hundreds of 

32 CultureShock! Syria
political prisoners and allowing political parties (other than 
the  Ba’ath Party) to publish. He also tolerated—for a time, 
anyway—a group of democracy advocate intellectuals’ request 
for political and economic change, which is something his 
father would not have done. Traditions die hard, though, and 
in a country where there are powerfully entrenched military, 
bureaucratic and secret  police forces, changes occur slowly. 
For example, soon after his appointment, Bashar made many 
liberalising moves, creating what is now called the ‘ Damascus 
Spring’. Emboldened and given hope by the new atmosphere, 
democratisation and liberalisation advocates began operating 
openly, and several were elected to the National Assembly, 
where they pushed for a more democratic society with civil 
rights. The democratic movement gained momentum rapidly, 
obviously scaring the  government, and Riad Saif and nine 
other activists were arrested and jailed for several years by 
a conservative backlash. Four of the defendants were just 
released in January of 2007, several months before the official 
completion of their sentences, and Mr Saif—a member of 
Parliament at the time of his arrest—has become a powerful 
emblem for those who wish to see democracy in Syria. 

33
Overview of Land and History
In an interview with Kevin Sites of In the Hot Zone, he had 
this to say: “Before prison we were very tolerant of the regime, 
maybe too tolerant, maybe even a little naïve. We thought, 
‘Mr. Asad is this civilised man, this doctor—we have to help 
him move Syria from an authoritarian regime to a democracy 
as he will seek equal rights for everyone’.” He says he no 
longer believes that, yet he believes the  government will now 
allow him to continue operating as he did before. Why? “They 
are forced to,” he says. “Otherwise what is the cost of putting 
Riad Saif in prison? If they take me to prison again then I'll be 
a real hero.” In other words, the momentum seems to have 
been set, and only a massive, brutal repression—something 
very unlikely to happen—could kill it.
Government Structure
Syria’s present constitution was established in 1973, and 
gives the president almost total control of the country. 
Ostensibly, his term of office is seven years. The  Ba’ath Party 
is essentially an organ of the  government and is committed 
to indoctrinating the country’s youth about the glory of the 
Party and the ‘wise and historic leadership’ of President  Hafez 
al-Asad and his successor.
The  government is composed of several bodies and 
offices. A prime minister and a cabinet of around three 
dozen members (the number varies from time to time) are 
appointed solely by the president. The People’s Assembly 
debates laws and directives proposed by the  government, 
discusses cabinet programmes, approves the nation’s budget 
and approves the nomination from the Ba’ath party of the 
president. It also has the power to override presidential 
vetoes by a two-thirds vote, but that has never happened 
—perhaps for the same reason that no one has ever run 
against the president (according to official  government 
statistics,  Hafez received 99.9 per cent of the vote in 1991). 
The Assembly, however, is the closest thing the country has to 
a democratic institution. All adult citizens can vote, and one-
third of the candidates for the Assembly need not be from 
the  Ba’ath Party. Quite a few of them are women. Although 
the constitution requires that the president be a  Muslim, 

34 CultureShock! Syria
there are no religious qualifications for the Assembly. The 
constitution does require at least half the Assembly members 
to be workers and peasants. An Assembly term of office is 
four years.
In Spring 2007, during the national elections for the 
Assembly, Syrian cities were covered with posters and slogans 
of candidates; they were even plastered on the sides of the 
city  buses. The candidates (2,000 of them for just over 200 
seats!) gave speeches and shook hands all over the country. 
On the surface, it appeared to be similar to any election in 
any Western democracy and was described as being ‘free and 
democratic’ by the  government and Ba’ath Party. However, 
opposition groups boycotted it, calling it a ‘farce’. Why? For 
one thing, two-thirds of the members must be from the Ba’ath 
party; for another, the assembly can propose no laws and has 
no say in foreign policy; and perhaps most important of all, 
political dissidents who were jailed in the past can neither 
stand for office nor vote—although they were released from 
prison, they’ve been stripped of their civil rights. Of course, 
 Bashar al-Asad has been nominated by the party for a second 
seven-year term (the only candidate from any party) and 
one of the first tasks of the new Assembly will be to approve 
his nomination. Although the election may be a farce to us 
Westerners, one can look at it this way: only a decade ago, it 
would have been unimaginable for the  government to allow 
open opposition and to release political prisoners.
Local governments in Syria are divided into 13 provinces 
plus city administrations, but these are in all ways 
appendages of the national  government. This sort of central 
control is common to countries of the Middle East. The Arab 
countries never developed the kind of semi-independent 
city and provincial governments that exist in Europe, despite 
the attempts of the Greek and Roman empires to establish 
that tradition.
Military
All young men are required to register for the draft when 
they turn 18. Then, at the age of 19, the conscription begins. 
There are only a couple of official ways out of this. One is 

35
Overview of Land and History
that an only son cannot be drafted; another is for the young 
men who leave Syria to work in the Persian Gulf (it is called 
the Arabian Gulf here), earning up to ten times the salary 
they would in Syria. These are allowed to skip the draft by 
payment of a ‘fee’ which can range up to the equivalent of 
US$ 5,000. And of course, in a land where wealth and power 
has many privileges not available to those less fortunate, that 
wealth and power can “buy” a son’s way out of the mandatory 
service, even though it’s not an official policy. 
Syria has an army, an air force and a small navy, which 
is only a defensive coast guard. It also has the presidential 
guard, which is under the command of a member of al-Asad’s 
family and is a separate force. 
Young women may also volunteer for military service, 
although not for combat. There are separate training 
academies for female cadets.
The  Ba’ath Party
The Party (officially called Ba’ath Arab Socialist Party) is headed 
by a 21-person Regional Command—also, of course, chaired 
by President al-Asad. There are many organisations under the 
Regional Command: the Revolutionary Youth Organisation; the 
Union of Students; the Women’s Organisation; the Peasants’ 
Federation; the General Federation of Trade Unions; groups 
for journalists, electrical engineers and just about every 
other pursuit. The army, with its draft system, is a source of 
indoctrination through a special military branch of the Party.
THE ECONOMY
Reliable figures about the Syrian   economy are less hard 
to come by than they were in the past. However, official 
 government data is still questionable as it often does not 
match that of the World Bank, the IMF and other international 
economic organisations. Also, the  government—despite 
recent attempts to become more open—is autocratic and 
secretive. Despite this, general information from the past is 
historical fact, and a fairly clear picture is emerging of Syria’s 
current economic direction.
Under the new leadership, Syria’s  economy is undergoing 

36 CultureShock! Syria
a slow but sure transformation for the better. Several changes 
enacted in the private sector, for example, have helped 
boost the  economy. These include easier trading procedures, 
a wider availability of industry opportunities for private 
companies, simpler foreign exchanges, greater access to 
foreign markets and less  government intervention in general. 
Additionally, more young Syrians are pursuing educations 
abroad and are returning better-equipped to deal in the new 
global  economy.
Economic Changes
From the time of the coup in the mid-1960s until the mid-
1980s, Syria’s  economy was highly centralised. All utilities, 
transportation systems and industries were owned and 
operated by the  government. Small merchants, craftsmen, 
professional people, farmers, shepherds and landlords 
were free to operate their own means of livelihood, but 
with  government-mandated price controls. Under al-Asad, 
farms were not collectivised and private property was not 
banned.
After the dissolution of the Soviet Union—Syria’s longtime 
patron, Syria began to move away from its strong central 
economic control. Investment Law No. 10, a 1991 directive 
of the president’s, liberalised economic restrictions and 
encouraged private investment in certain areas. The govern-
ment, however, remained the country’s banker and still 
remains its utilities and petroleum manager. The  government 
also still heavily subsidises public transportation, sets prices 
on fuel as well as bread, lamb and other basic foods, and 
operates many heavy industries. 
With the ever-increasing liberalisation of the  economy, 
Syria appears to be following a development path similar 
to that of other countries such as China and Vietnam, in 
which many are becoming very rich and the middle class is 
growing, but many at the bottom social-economic levels are 
falling behind and becoming resentful of the wealth they see 
growing around them.
Since Syria has been and is still somewhat marginalised 
by the West—particularly the US, it has turned largely to Iran, 

37
Overview of Land and History
Turkey and other Arab countries for outside investments. 
Economic ties with Iran have never been stronger, epitomised 
perhaps by a new Iranian auto manufacturing plant (the 
first in Syria), a new public transport system to replace the 
aging mini- buses that have been in use for nearly 15 years, 
a new oil refinery and a joint bank. There is, however, some 
serious concern among many Syrians—including many in 
the  government—about the side effects of this economic 
assistance and investment by Iran: namely, Iran’s apparent 
attempt to increase the influence and number of Shi’a 
Muslims in the country. Many new Shi’a mosques have been 
built, and according to one  government official, some Sunni 
Muslims have converted to Shi’ism. Even a group of religious 
scholars in  Saudi Arabia has recently cautioned the Syrian 
 government about the possible inroads of power Iran could 
gain in this way. 
Despite the economic liberalisation, the  government 
(bureaucracy, military, etc.) still consumes about three-
quarters of the country’s budget. However, the  government 
has recently announced that it will not be recruiting new 
employees as it has in the past, so some attrition will be 
taking place in the near future.
Currency and Jobs
The unit of currency is the Syrian pound (SP), also sometimes 
called lira. It comes in paper denominations of 5, 10, 
25, 50, 100 and 500 pounds and coins of 1 pound and 
25 and 50 piastres (100 piastres per pound). The official 
currency exchange rate as of 2010 was around 47 SP per 
US dollar. The rate, however, has fluctuated over the past 15 
years from a low of around 45 SP per US dollar in the early 
1990s to as high as 58 SP in recent years. Many foreign 
residents take advantage of a black market, in which US 
dollars and other hard foreign currency are exchanged at a 
considerably higher value than the official. 
With few exceptions, Syrians are able to pursue a variety 
of livelihoods. One exception is that only the top students 
are allowed into medical school, then the next highest level 
of students into engineering. Once a Syrian completes 

38 CultureShock! Syria
medical school, he or she most often continues studies and/or 
internships in the United States or Europe. Another exception 
is that an engineering graduate must work five years after 
graduation for the  government (for about 3,500 SP per 
month) before going into private practice or working outside 
the country. In practice, however, family and social pressure 
as well as economic reality often dictate what career a young 
person pursues, despite the official freedom of choice.
Although the disparity between rich and poor is much 
less pronounced in Syria than it is in  Egypt, Mexico or even 
the United States, most foreigners are baffled by how well 
so many Syrians live on unbelievably meagre salaries. The 
average monthly salary of most workers and professionals 
(without a private practice) range from around 1,500 SP for 
a janitor to 5,000 SP for a geologist who has been on the 
job for 30 years. This is the equivalent of about US$ 30–100. 
University professors fare only a little better, and even cabinet 
members’ salaries are incredibly low by Western standards. 
Yet a modest two-bedroom apartment in  Damascus 
costs several hundred US dollars a month to rent and the 
equivalent of US$ 100,000 or more to buy. So how do Syrians 
survive economically?
There are several ways. First, the  government has rent 
control laws that help established families afford their living 
quarters; an apartment that could be rented to a foreigner 
for more than US$ 1,000 per month might cost a long-time 
Syrian tenant the equivalent of a few dollars per month. Then, 
families with money assist their  children for most of their 
lives, or at least until the  children earn enough.
Third, nearly everyone works at several jobs. An example: 
my best friend in Syria worked as an electrical engineer for 
the  government in the morning, a European company in the 
early afternoon, then operated his video rental store until 
9:00 pm or so. The routine is repeated every day except 
Friday—the official Syrian weekend. Millions of Syrians 
follow a similar pattern. 
A fourth means of economic survival is black market 
activity. It sometimes seems like huge numbers of city 
people participate in unofficial currency exchanges and/or 

39
Overview of Land and History
smuggling. Finally, families pool their incomes and young 
people rarely leave home before  marriage. Some even live 
with parents for several years after  marriage. With a little 
family inheritance, maybe a small shop and a half-dozen 
salaries, they survive.
Crops and Exports
Syria is self-sufficient in most basic foods. It produces a large 
amount of chicken and lamb and some beef. Its primary 
vegetables and fruits are chickpeas, lentils, tomatoes, potatoes, 
onions, cucumbers, cabbages, beans (both dried and green), 
squash, eggplants, artichokes, peas, corn, parsley, lettuce, 
melons, peaches, pears, apples, figs, dates, grapes, olives and 
pistachios. The southwestern area of the country near the 
Jordanian border might be called the nation’s breadbasket, 
since this is where most of the wheat is grown. A new crop—
tobacco—has been introduced into this fertile area to augment 
the wheat, melons, corn, prickly pears, pomegranates and 
abundance of grapes already produced here.
Some of Syria’s abundant produce at a fruit and vegetable stand in the 
Friday market.

40 CultureShock! Syria
Syria’s primary exports are oil, cotton (grown mostly 
around the Euphrates and in the north) and wheat. There 
are also a growing number of import-export businesses 
that export such things as food and industrial products and 
Syrian-made  clothing.
GOVERNMENT SUPPORT VS. OPPOSITION
Class Conflict
Many wealthy Sunnis, especially those with generations-old 
roots in  Aleppo and  Damascus, think of the  government 
people as peasants. In the 1960s, these established families 
lost their power, and new laws were established to aid the 
working class.
This conflict is noted in many books written about Syria, 
and I experienced it when invited for dinner one evening 
at the home of a wealthy older couple. These folks were 
world travellers whose large, elaborate home was filled with 
furniture, art, curtains and chandeliers from the United States, 
Europe and Southeast Asia. The woman was of Turkish 
descent, but had been born in Syria; the man was from an old 
Damascene family and had grown up in a classic Damascene 
home in the old walled city. Both are Sunni Muslims.
For a half hour, our host talked bitterly about the 
destruction of  Damascus by the ‘farmers’ who were 
in charge of the  government. He described how lovely 
 Damascus had been when he was a child a half-century 
before: how clean the Barada River was, how safe and clean 
the city was and how everyone knew and trusted each 
other. Then he decried the mass movement into the city 
of farmers who were accustomed to the filth of the farm 
and brought it with them to the city; how the  government’s 
greed for income had overloaded the city with cars (tariffs 
on cars used to go up to 256 per cent; a Mercedes that 
cost an American US$ 60,000 cost a Syrian the equivalent 
of more than US$ 200,000 in the 1990s), destroying its 
peacefulness and requiring the elimination of many trees 
and flowers to broaden the streets; how the farmers and 
soldiers who ran the  government had simply become a 
new class of aristocrats with their extravagant apartments 

41
Overview of Land and History
and European luxury cars; and how anyone with political 
power could get away with anything: he could injure or 
kill someone in a traffic accident, for example, and the 
traffic  police and civilian witnesses would be afraid to do 
anything about it. 
The sad thing is, what this man said bears a lot of truth: 
I heard the same thing from other Syrians and saw some 
of it myself every day. There are many, many shiny new 
Mercedes and BMWs on the streets of  Damascus. It’s been 
said that the  government, in return for loyalty, buys luxury 
cars for its top dogs, even though  electricity is off for hours 
every day outside  Damascus and  government salaries are 
too low to even live modestly on.
Corruption
A second element feeding discontent with the  government 
is  corruption. Corruption in autocratic states is really no 
news; in Syria its brazenness can be shocking. It ranges 
from petty bribery such as paying a traffic cop to avoid a 
ticket to payoffs that allow big-time smuggling.
While driving on the Mediterranean coast with a Syrian 
friend, I asked him who owned an extravagant villa along the 
road. He replied, “A big-time smuggler.” “How could someone 
be so openly successful in such a venture?” I asked, baffled. 
He said that since the  government had little hard currency to 
buy imports, it tacitly allowed smuggling. Creative smugglers 
load donkeys with contraband in the mountains of  Lebanon 
and send them across the border to Syria. In the 1990s, if 
one drove from the city of Homs to the Syrian coast, where 
the road parallels (and is only a short distance from) the 
northern border of  Lebanon, sellers of contraband stood 
alongside the highway peddling their goods. 
A taxi ride from  Damascus to Amman in  Jordan is an 
unusual experience for several reasons, but smuggling is 
a main attraction. Before leaving  Damascus, the drivers 
might ask each passenger to take one carton of cigarettes 
( Jordan’s entry limit) and may hide a dozen or so under the 
wheel wells, in seat-back chambers, under the seats, etc. Even 
though the Jordanian customs agents often tear incoming 

42 CultureShock! Syria
cars apart to search for contraband, they seem reluctant 
to inconvenience non-Arab visitors, so they are often less 
thorough in searching   taxis with foreign passengers. On the 
return trip, the taxi driver might want some of your floor or 
seat space for a large bag of lemons or limes. At the border, 
the driver will hand a customs agent a wad of SP, sometimes 
in full view of the passengers, for allowing him to bring in the 
contraband. Cigarettes are much cheaper in  Lebanon than 
in  Jordan; lemons and limes are much cheaper in  Jordan 
than in Syria.
Another form of  corruption takes the form of blatant 
bureaucratic dishonesty. I knew Syrians who had ordered and 
paid for phone lines 10, 15, even, 18 years before and did not 
have them. Students told me about people who ordered and paid 
for cars 10 or more years ealier when they cost much less than in 
the 1990s, but still didn’t have their cars. If they did receive their 
orders so many years later, they would have had to pay much 
more (tariffs had increased dramatically) or simply lose their 
original investments. The phone problem has been alleviated 
to some degree, though, by the use of cell phones, which are 
becoming increasingly common in Syria, and cars are now 
easier to import and have dramatically reduced import tariffs.
 Religion and Bloody Rebellion
The strongest element of hatred for the  government was 
at one time religious. Many Sunni Muslims thought the 
Alawites were heretics. It is a small sect, limited mostly to 
the coastal mountains of northern Syria, is very secretive, 
and is usually thought to be more Christian than  Muslim, 
despite the fact that it is an ancient offshoot of Shi’ism. 
Although in the early 1990s there were many Sunnis in the 
inner circle of power, 10–15 years earlier both orthodox 
Sunnis and the radical fundamentalists were disgusted that 
secularists had taken over a country with 1,200 years of 
Islamic  government. In  Islam,  government is not separated 
from any other part of life, but Syria’s  government under 
the  Ba’ath Party is explicitly secular.
From 1976 to 1978, assassinations of  government and 
Party people by  Muslim extremists were aimed at the 

43
Overview of Land and History
Alawites and Iraqis (who were in Syria as part of the Pan-
Arab  Ba’ath Party) involved in the al-Asad  government. 
After a brief respite the attacks began again in 1979 and 
escalated. Cadets at an artillery school in  Aleppo were 
gunned down; the offices of Aeroflot Airlines were attacked; 
a Soviet diplomat was assassinated; and a car bomb near 
the centre of  Damascus killed and injured dozens of people. 
The  government was brutal in its attempt to put down the 
rebellion but was not successful until Hama.
In 1980,  Hafez al-Asad was the target of an attack with 
machine-guns and grenades. A bodyguard was killed and 
the president was injured. Then the next year a bomb went 
off at the prime minister’s office, killing nearly two dozen 
people. This called for war, and the president’s younger 
brother, Rifaat, was in charge of it. The city of Hama, about 
200 km (125 miles) north of  Damascus, was a stronghold of 
fanatic fundamentalist Muslims (primarily the Sunni  Muslim 
Brotherhood), so that’s where the  government hit.
Troops first attempted to ferret out the well-armed 
radicals, but were trapped and massacred. After nearly 
a month of these deadly raids, they went all out against 
the anti- government forces. Tanks encircled the city and 
blasted their way in, killing everyone in front of them 
and levelling much of the city. After the tanks withdrew, 
bulldozers came in and levelled the rubble, burying 
thousands of bodies along with it. When the rebuilding 
started, it was on top of the remains. The  government 
made no attempt to hide the massacre, apparently hoping 
that knowledge of it would strongly discourage any other 
such challenge. 
No one knows for sure how many people were killed, but 
Thomas Friedman, in his book From Beirut to Jerusalem, 
claims Rifaat boasted that 30,000 or more perished in the 
devastation. Despite the massacre, Friedman claims that 
even moderate opponents of al-Asad’s background and 
policies felt that such action was better and less destructive 
in the long run than for Syria to become another  Lebanon; 
the Lebanese civil war was raging at that very time and 
ravaged that country for more than a decade.

44 CultureShock! Syria
Repression
Syria has a terrible human rights record. Middle East Watch 
and Amnesty International both report that the country 
still has many political prisoners, and torture is common. 
In recent years the  government has been trying to clean up 
its image and many political prisoners have been released. 
The  government will now also tell the US Embassy whether 
or not a certain person is in prison and give the details of 
conviction, health status, etc. But there are still thousands 
in jail, many of whom have never had a trial. Those that get 
tried in the State Security Courts are doomed before the trial 
starts because they cannot consult with an attorney or their 
families and the courts do not operate in any internationally 
acceptable manner. While people are not usually hung or 
shot for opposing the  government, torture is reported to be 
routine, and the condition of Syrian prisons is dreadful; it’s 
quite common for prisoners who are not in good health to 
die while serving time.
Perhaps the worst part of the situation is that families are 
often not allowed to visit their relatives in prison. I know 
Syrians who have relatives that have been incarcerated for 
a dozen years, but no one in their families has ever seen 

45
Overview of Land and History
them. The only information they get is secondhand, via 
other people who are able to visit family members in jail. In 
a culture where family is supreme, refusing family visitation 
is psychological torture.
The Positive Side
Most Syrians seem philosophical about their  government, 
frequently joking about it. Also, recent changes, such as the 
new leadership of President  Bashar al-Asad, appear to have 
made many Syrians feel happier as well as more secure and 
optimistic about their country’s future.
The country has been stable for more than 25 years, and 
people seem to have a considerable amount of freedom, 
even when it comes to grumbling about the  government. 
Jewish  children can study Hebrew and Armenian  children 
learn their ancestral language and their history, for example. 
These things were not allowed ten years ago. 
The country also seems to have formed a sense of 
nationhood for the first time in its almost 50 years of 
independence. The majority of people have never known 
another  government and have been indoctrinated in school, 
university, military and on the job by the Party. It also means 
that a unique culture has had time to gestate, particularly in 
the cities, where most people live. Many Syrians remember 
 Lebanon and its devastation. They may have learned the 
value of compromise from that disaster.
UNCERTAINTY ABOUT THE FUTURE
Despite President  Bashar al-Asad’s early success and popularity, 
Syria’s political future still remains somewhat uncertain. 
With the periodically escalating tension between  Israel and 
Palestine, Syrian peace talks with  Israel have also essentially 
come to a standstill. Bones of contention plague both sides. 
A few years ago,  Israel threatened to attack Syria and 
 Lebanon if these countries did not handover the Lebanese 
Shi’ite  Muslim guerrillas who took three Israelis prisoner in 
October 2000. Syria and  Lebanon, on the other hand, are 
demanding a complete withdrawal of Israeli troops from the 
Golan Heights, a request that Israel continues to deny.

46 CultureShock! Syria
Then, in 2006,  Israel attacked  Lebanon, and the 
resulting turmoil engulfed Syria, as it supports the Hezbolla 
fighters who provoked the attack. Recently, however, both 
Syria and  Israel have said they are ready to intiate peace 
talks again.
The lopsided success of the  economy could also be a 
problem. A handful of people are becoming wealthy while 
most others suffer: rents have climbed dramatically and 
general inflation is increasing while wages have not even 
kept pace with prices, much less given the average Syrian 
a better life. There also seems to be some resentment 
toward the newly wealthy, who are usually in favour with 
the  government and love extravagant displays of wealth 
and prestige. Luxury cars are everywhere while most people 
cannot afford a car at all.

‘All mankind is divided into three classes: 
those that are immovable, those that are moveable, 
and those that move.’
—Arab proverb 
PEOPLE
CHAPTER 3

48 CultureShock! Syria
THE SYRIANS
One who has no good for his family has no good for any 
other.
Marriage is fate and destiny. (Meaning: It is not necessary to 
marry the one you love.)
Halime returned to her old habit. (Human beings can’t change 
themselves, and if they try they will fail.)
Throughout its lifetime, the tree never reached its God. (Don’t be 
too ambitious; be content with what God has provided.)
What has been written on the forehead, the eye will see. (What 
has been ordained by God will happen sooner or later.)
Whoever marries my mother will be my stepfather. (I will obey 
and respect anyone who has higher status or is more 
powerful than me, no matter who he is.)
Feed the mouth, the eye will be shy. (If you tip someone, he 
will not hinder your business.)
—Old Arab proverbs
At least two things make Syria a truly special place in which 
to live. One is the abundance of deserted historical and 
archaeological sites; the other is the people.
Syrians seem to be a bundle of contradictions, making them 
simultaneously fascinating and frustrating. While they are 
verbally polite, they have no qualms about pushing in front of 
you in line, jostling you so that you drop what you’re trying to 
carry, or terrorising pedestrians when they drive; while some 

49
People
taxi drivers and shopkeepers offer you goods and services 
gratis as a welcome, a lot of others cannot be trusted for a 
minute; while most Syrians go out of their way to be hospitable, 
they honk their horns incessantly, play blasting music, and talk 
in loud voices outside your bedroom window at midnight or 
6 am; and the same man who might surreptitiously fondle a 
non-Arab woman in a crowded  souk will usually be polite and 
helpful if a woman asks for help or directions.
Syria’s unique blend of civilisations and empires has 
produced a culture that seems not to be completely Arab 
(although most Syrians consider themselves Arab), not quite 
European (although the educated, urban Syrians seem more 
southern European than Arab), yet certainly not eastern Asian 
or African. With their long, rich history, their strong position 
in the Middle East, and a fairly high rate of literacy, Syrians 
think of themselves as the cream of the Arab world. They are 
proud, rarely beg, and are never obsequious. They generally 
scorn what they call the Gulfies—people from the oil-rich 
Arab countries—as nomads who lived in goatskin tents until 
they struck it rich through no effort or ability of their own, 
and whose cultural heritage is feeble compared to Syria’s; 
they disdain Egyptians for being obsequious and (they claim) 
willing to do anything for money; and they generally think 
of most other north Africans as backward.
Despite these common attitudes, they show no arrogance 
or condescension toward most Westerners, and they make 
extra effort to welcome and help visitors from the West. 
Strangers often asked me if I was  French, English, German, 
Spanish or Russian; when I told them I was American, they 
usually responded with a warm welcome and wanted to 
know what I was doing there, how I liked Syria, whether or 
not I had  children, etc. When I responded positively about 
the hospitality of Syria, their faces lit up. They are proud of 
that characteristic.
It is not uncommon for a shopkeeper to close up his or 
her shop (there are a few women-operated shops) and walk 
you several blocks to show you where you can have a key 
made or buy a fan. Also, if you present shopkeepers with 
larger currency than they have change for or if you don’t 

50 CultureShock! Syria
have enough cash for your purchase, they’re likely to give you 
the item you want and say, “Bukra, ma’alish” (tomorrow, no 
problem). This is true even if they’ve never seen you before. 
When you do return to pay them, they act so pleased. My 
former partner bought a pair of gold earrings and was short 
about 4,000 Syrian pounds (about US$ 80). The shopkeeper 
said, “That’s OK. Go ahead and take them and bring the 
money next week.”
SOCIAL INTENSITY 
One thing a visitor to Syria notices quickly is the energy put 
into personal relationships. It’s obvious on the streets and in 
homes, schools and offices. When Syrian friends greet each 
other, their hellos and goodbyes take a while. They ask about 
each other’s families—work, school and health—and where 
are you going and when are you going to come visit us? 
Then they say goodbye several times with various blessings 
on each other. When they learn English, these habits come 
through in the new language, and they’ll ask you how you are 
two or three consecutive times. If you wish to endear yourself 
to Syrians, learn and use the expressions they use, even if 
you don’t speak much Arabic. Even a surly  government 
employee or taxi driver often becomes cordial if you greet 
him with the right expressions. 
To stand on a street corner or sit in a park and watch the 
energy put into social intercourse can be both entertaining 
and enlightening for people from cultures that lack such 
an attribute. If you’ve spent time in other Mediterranean 
cultures, you’ll see similarities here.
Personal Space
Along with social intensity comes the physical closeness 
described in Chapter One: embracing, kissing and holding 
arms or hands among the same genders. Syrian friends touch 
each other constantly. Even engaged young lovers and older 
married people sometimes walk arm-in-arm or hand-in-hand, 
although this isn’t nearly as common as physical contact 
between the same genders. The concept of husband and 
wife as best friends seems to be a foreign one.

51
People
This culture of closeness causes discomfort for some 
expatriates from places such as the United States and 
northern Europe, where personal space is revered. If you 
walk the streets and  souks of Syria, you are allowed no 
personal space. Suppose you’re walking down a nearly 
deserted sidewalk three metres wide while a Syrian is 
walking toward you. Not wanting to crowd, you veer off to 
one side to give both parties plenty of space. The Syrian will 
often veer toward you and may actually brush up against 
you. No malice or challenge is involved; young women, old 
men and  children all do it. It appears to be pure force of 
habit, an apparent desire to be close to people. In fact, if 
you are a woman walking through a crowded  souk, a local 
female who recognises that you are a foreigner might even 
gently grab your elbow and guide you through the dizzying 
maze of people—even though she is a complete stranger. 
Once you get used to this affinity for smaller personal space, 
it is really quite nice at times.
A student once told me an old Arab proverb: “Where there 
are no people, there is hell.” Syrians, with few exceptions, do 
not like to be alone and my students couldn’t comprehend 
why I enjoy hiking in wilderness areas away from people.

52 CultureShock! Syria
Staring
This is another aspect of intensity that bothers many 
foreigners (especially women). In this culture, it is not a 
challenge for one man to stare at another as it might be in 
some other cultures. Nor is it considered rude for men on the 
street to stare at a woman, even if she’s with another man. It 
is often the intensity and duration of the look that is upsetting. 
The peculiar thing is, if you stare back, the ‘offender’ won’t 
look away and may actually start up a conversation. 
The farther a non-Arab visitor travels from the centre of 
 Damascus, where most foreigners live, the more he or she 
is the object of intense scrutiny. Along the  Euphrates River, 
for example, rental cars are noticed a half kilometre away, 
and everyone near the road—in cars, on foot, on a donkey 
or working the fields—becomes your audience. You might 
hear whistles or greetings or questions called out to you. To 
walk down the street in Deir ez-Zor or  Palmyra is to feel as if 
you are the main attraction in some kind of freak show. This 
was true for both my Black and Chinese friends as well. If you 
A child in the village of Bursa stares curiously at the photographer.

53
People
spend much time in a shop, natives will gather around the 
door to look, some of them trying to talk to you in their often 
limited English,  French or German. Foreign women, as one 
might expect in a macho culture, receive the most attention 
from men, but also a lot from Syrian women. 
Personal Questions
Another lack of personal space is less tangible. The Syrians 
are terribly curious about foreigners and ask a lot of personal 
questions. They don’t understand if you are reluctant to 
answer them, particularly questions about families. For a 
woman to tell a Syrian that she doesn’t want to get married 
or to have  children is to see a look of incomprehension. For a 
man to admit he’s had a vasectomy elicits the same response. 
To tell them that your college-age  children live alone back in 
your hometown is baffling to them.
ATTITUDES ABOUT LIFE
Syrians love to laugh and joke, eat and talk and dance. They 
love noise—loud music, hand clapping, car horns, loud 
voices—and few of them I’ve discussed this with like peace 
and quiet at all. The younger ones have a tremendous amount 
of energy, even when in their mid-20s; to spend a day on an 
outing with young Syrians is exhausting.
The Role of Fate
A fatalistic sense of humour comes through clearly in Syrian 
political comments, which mostly take the form of jokes. I 
heard many al-Asad ( Hafez) jokes, and rumour had it that 
he even enjoyed some of them.
In this culture, fate is everything, and is reflected in the 
constant use of insha’allah, which roughly means if Allah wills 
it, whenever talking about the future. Many Arabist scholars 
have noted the determinism of  Islam, and reading the 
Koran confirms it. This ‘culture of fate’ shows up in various 
ways. One is that time is not monitored and schedules are 
not adhered to as they are in the time-manic United States 
or Japan. Being on time does not matter because whatever 
is going to happen is going to happen anyway! I like this 

54 CultureShock! Syria
characteristic when I have a time commitment, but it’s not 
so pleasant when I’m the one waiting. 
Don’t Try to Compete with Allah!
Things made in Syria simply don’t work most of the time, 
and when they’re repaired, they don’t stay repaired. There 
seems to be limited commitment to quality workmanship 
and even less to excellence. This is even true of most 
 handicrafts. You can buy a beautiful handmade brass teapot, 
for example, but not be able to use it because it won’t pour 
straight or it leaks; you can buy gorgeous  clothing, but it 
will show its age very quickly; carpenters and stone masons 
create lovely and elegant arches and woodwork, but the 
doors and windows are likely not to work well and you 
might pull electrical outlets from the wall when you unplug 
appliances; a painter will spend days meticulously painting 
plaster scrollwork on a ceiling, but leave windows covered 
with paint runs and wide swaths of brush marks. When 
you buy a bottle of fresh-squeezed fuwaakee (a blend of 
strawberry or raspberry, apple, banana and orange juices), 
the juice-shop boys will make sure the container is filled 
to the brim, but it’ll likely be full of stems, seeds and too 
much pulp.
Some Syrians and expats I’ve discussed this with lay the 
blame on decades of socialism with guaranteed incomes 
and make-work jobs from the  government. This may be a 
consideration, but I think it’s a minor one. While the I’m-
going-to-get-paid-no-matter-what attitude exists in some 
sectors of the  economy, Syrians are generally hardworking 
people, seemingly without much taste for Western levels 
of comfort. There is almost no drunkenness (an apparent 
problem in many former communist countries; certainly a 
problem in Western countries) and most Syrians work at two 
or three jobs to survive. I think the cause lies in a  Muslim 
ideal that striving for excellence is sin, because only Allah is 
perfect. While living there I did a great deal of shopping for 
local products and noticed quite clearly that the quality of 
the  handicrafts made by Muslims generally was not as good 
as those made by Christians or  Jews.

55
People
My Experience with Syrian Quality
Here’s a first-hand illustration of Syrian quality: When living in my 
first apartment in  Damascus, the braided hose from the water heater 
sprung a leak, so I called the rental agent who immediately sent his 
son over to repair it. The guy looked at the broken hose and told 
me that he had replaced it only a few months before. He said it was 
made in Syria, and that was typical of Syrian quality. He left and 
returned with a hose that looked for all the world like the one he 
was replacing, but he told me it was made in Germany, cost several 
times as much as the comparable Syrian hose, but would last much 
longer with no problems.
FAMILY ORIENTATION
Families are the centre of life in Syria, and this orientation 
shows up in many ways. One of the first questions a foreigner 
gets asked is “Are you married?” Another is “Do you have 
 children?” If the answer to both questions is “Yes,” the Syrian 
will want to know all about your family. If your  children are 
unmarried and younger than their mid-20s, Syrians will 
usually be shocked if you left them in your home country. 
People there can’t fathom  children leaving home at the tender 
ages of 18, 19 or 20 (unless, of course, they are married), 
and they often make clear their belief that they are better 
parents than most Westerners. They point to things such as 
drug use, teenage pregnancy and suicide, and street kids as 
evidence that this is so. I’ve found that many young people 
cannot imagine leaving home when they’re teenagers. Some 
of them complain about lack of privacy and about  family 
pressures but generally seem to think it’s for the wellbeing 
of everyone. And putting ageing parents in a nursing home 
(there are none in Syria) is anathema to them.
Getting married and having  children is usually life’s top 
priority. Children are so important (especially sons) that fathers 
and mothers traditionally change their names after the first 
son is born. Suppose they name the son Yassar: the father 
becomes Abu Yassar—literally father of Yassar—and the 
mother often becomes Umm Yassar—mother of Yassar. 
If no sons are born, the mother usually identifies herself 
as the mother of the firstborn daughter; fathers rarely do 
this, however.

56 CultureShock! Syria
Schoolchildren in  Tartus. Having  children is a Syrian’s top priority.
Family orientation is more than just tradition, though. 
While there is some child abuse and  children are punished 
harshly at times, I noticed a lot of affection displayed between 
siblings and between  children and parents.
Deaths in the Family
When someone dies, there are three days of mourning during 
which time friends, relatives and neighbours visit the family. 
In  Muslim homes, the family is expected to feed all these 
people. Close women relatives wear black for months after 
the death. After this period of time, they can start wearing 
black and white. For very traditional families, it may be a 
year or longer before the women can wear colours again; I 
had a friend whose mother had died nearly two years earlier, 
and she had only just begun to add a little colour to her still 
mostly black attire. For less traditional families, the mourning 
time is still at least several months. 

57
People
If an older woman’s husband dies and she is unlikely to 
remarry, she may wear black for the rest of her life. These 
traditions are similar in both Christian and  Muslim families. 
A woman who does not fulfil certain minimum mourning 
traditions is criticised for not having loved the deceased. Of 
course, there are no such expectations of men.
When a  Muslim dies, neither embalming nor cremation 
is allowed, so the person is buried within hours, without 
clothes and wrapped in a shroud, but can be buried only 
during daylight hours. Christian and Jewish families follow 
their own traditions for death.
The Darker Side of Family
These are mostly positive factors about families, but there are 
negative elements as well, which most Syrians don’t admit to 
but which sometimes showed up in my students’ journals.
One problem is unhealthy control of family members by 
a domineering father or a frustrated mother who can wield 
power only over her  children. Many times young people who 
are deeply in love are refused their families’ permission to 
marry because of a difference in social class or just because 
the mother of one dislikes the loved one. I became friends 
with an American woman (whose father was Egyptian) 
and a Syrian man whose mother wanted him to marry a 
particular Syrian woman. The man’s mother made life so 
miserable for the couple that the young woman returned 
to the United States while the man stayed in Syria to work 
in his father’s business. Few  children, no matter how old, 
will defy their parents’ wishes.
Another negative side—and 
this is more serious—is the 
tremendous population growth 
caused by a family-is-all-that-
matters attitude. If creating your 
own family is the main reason for 
existence, and if manhood and 
motherhood are proven through 
producing lots of  children, then 
the more  children you have the 
A fellow teacher received a 
journal from a female student 
who said she wanted only to die. 
She wanted to study in France, 
but her conservative father 
refused to even consider it. After 
his death she felt a ray of hope, 
only to have it quashed by her 
oldest brother who, according 
to tradition, took over control of 
the family and also refused to 
approve her request.

58 CultureShock! Syria
better. Syria and other countries of the Middle East have 
some of the highest birth rates in the world in a land that 
is mostly  desert, and the problems caused by this growth 
are obvious in daily life: water and  electricity shortages, 
shortage of living quarters despite new construction 
everywhere, rising prices, and severe pollution.
Many educated Syrians see the problem, but most still 
want to have three or four  children, if only they could 
afford it.
 GROUP THINKING
Syrians generally do not like to stand out from the crowd. 
First of all, they are clannish: immediate family first, then 
clan or village (sometimes these are about the same), 
religion next, and only then the individual. The variety in 
modes of  dress might belie this conformity at a glance, but 
it is really part of it: they  dress like their group. 
There are many manifestations of this uniformity. One is 
that few Syrians are either fat or skinny. Another is that they 
dislike confrontations or scenes, especially with foreigners. 
I’ve seen a customs officer, a traffic cop or just a guy on the 
street back down when confronted by an angry Western 
woman with a loud voice. My former wife and I walked past 
groups of soldiers guarding an entrance to a building who 
made ‘kissey’ noises or muffled sexual comments. When I 
stopped, turned around and yelled Shu? (“What?” in Arabic), 
they invariably backed down and said something like, “Oh, 
hello,” or just acted chastised. 
Another group-think characteristic that becomes obvious 
is the attitude about food. Most Syrians simply do not 
like anything but their own cuisine, and it shows in the 
restaurants: they are overwhelmingly Syrian, and those 
that describe themselves as  French, Italian, etc. are mostly 
poor imitations. If it isn’t hommus, flat bread and kabob, 
it isn’t real food to them, it seems. See Chapter 6 for more 
on Syrian food preferences, which can be a problem when 
you invite them to dine with you at your home.
Yet another result of group-think is the general lack of 
creativity in the lives of Syrians. Although there are a few 

59
People
artists and galleries, the work was a bit too uniform for me, 
a bit too much influenced by older European or American 
work.  Islam’s ban on representational art has left an artistic 
vacuum compared to the West or to Eastern Asia, I think. 
Syrian artisans make some truly beautiful  handicrafts, but 
the patterns, designs and colours are mostly geometric 
and set by tradition. Mosque design and classical Arabic 
calligraphy are also beautiful, but without innovation, as a 
rule. (One notable exception to this is in the  clothing made 
in Syria. It has an amazing profusion of colours, designs 
and motifs.) 
Perhaps the most obvious sign of tradition over creativity 
is in naming  children. Nearly every  Muslim family in 
Syria that has a son names that son Mohammed. This is 
done not only out of respect for the Prophet, but because 
it’s felt that it brings good fortune to the family and the 
son. Many Mohammeds use 
their middle names for a little 
distinction. Perhaps as many as 
three quarters of the Syrian men 
are named Mohammed, Ahmad, 
Khaldoun, Khaled, Yassar, Imad, 
Samer or one of a half-dozen 
other common names. 
My perception was that strong group mentality, combined 
with social intensity, also keeps most Syrians from being 
reflective. The picture I got from my students was that deep 
thinking, asking the big questions about life, even reading 
and writing, are less important than being socially oriented, 
keeping up appearances and sticking with tradition. This 
obviously hasn’t always been the case because the Arabs 
of early  Islam excelled in the sciences, math and other 
intellectual areas—even in art.
Some modern Arab scholars lament their people’s 
enslavement to tradition at the expense of innovative 
and creative thinking. They also criticise the sentiment 
that only a return to what is perceived as the grand 
and glorious days of early  Islam will find solutions to all 
of life’s problems.
Who’s Mohammed?
I’ve had classes in which half 
the males were Mohammed or 
three of them were Ahmad or 
Samer. There seems to be slightly 
more variation in female names, 
though.

60 CultureShock! Syria
OTHER CHARACTERISTICS
Here are some other Syrian characteristics I noticed.
Mode of Dress
It would be difficult to find greater variation in  dress than 
in Syria. Being a blend of cultures as it is, having every 
sect of  Islam, both Eastern and Western  Christianity, and 
disparate tribes from one corner of the country to the 
other, the  clothing is often a treat for the eyes. A young 
woman wearing a white scarf and a raincoat walks down 
the street with her best friend—another young woman 
in tight blue jeans, with booming hair, heavy makeup 
and loads of jewellery. A father in caftan and kafeeyeh (a 
wrapped cotton headdress) might be walking along with 
his sons who are in blue jeans and T-shirts printed with 
English expressions on the front. A grandmother covered 
in black from head to foot might be with her granddaughter 
who’s wearing colourful Syrian fashions and earrings the 
size of small chandeliers. On the other hand, many wealthy 
and educated Syrians  dress similarly to Europeans or 
Americans. To add to this mix, every village and tribe of 
 Bedouins seems to have its own particular patterns, styles 
and colours of  clothing. 
One item that perhaps symbolises not only Middle Eastern 
 dress, but  Muslim  dress in general, is the head wrap; and 
in Syria, there is an endless variety of materials, colours, 
textures, patterns and styles of wrapping for both men and 
women. They range from elegant and gorgeous to torn, 
dirty or sun-bleached.
Middle- and upper-class Syrian women, especially the 
younger ones, tend to wear long hair in a quite fancy 
manner—usually permed. Conversely, the young men 
almost always have closely-cropped hair, but are also very 
dressy. Few of them wear blue jeans and running shoes, 
for example.
Some things you will rarely see in Syria: bare legs above 
the calf, bare shoulders or upper arms, shorts on adults 
(men or women), miniskirts, short hair on women and girls 
and long hair or earrings on men.

61
People
Physical Characteristics
Although most Syrians have light brown skin, dark brown 
eyes and black hair, there is surprising variety in physical 
attributes. They range from blonde hair and a pearly 
complexion to a dark chocolate skin colour and jet black hair. 
Quite a few Syrians have blue or pale gray eyes, although 
these usually have dark hair—I’ve only met a couple who 
have both blonde hair and blue eyes. Red hair and light 
brown hair is also common, sometimes accompanied by 
pale, freckled skin but brown eyes.
As is the case in most countries that have mixed colour, 
the lightest-skinned people dominate the top socio-
economic positions and the dark-skinned people the lower 
ones. Government officials, business owners and models 
used in TV commercials are almost uniformly light-skinned 
and often European in appearance, while construction 
workers, janitors, garbage haulers and street cleaners are 
predominantly dark-skinned.
I think Syrians—especially the younger ones—are among 
the most physically beautiful people in the world, with soft, 
rounded facial features, gentle eyes and beautiful hair and 
A Syrian man entertaining his friends at a picnic.

62 CultureShock! Syria
skin tone. There is a distinct Syrian look, although I can’t 
quite pin it down. For example, I could usually distinguish a 
Syrian from other Arabs, particularly those from North Africa 
or the Gulf countries.
Political and Sexual Innocence
In part because the autocratic  government has kept tight 
control of the citizens, Syrians seem politically naive by 
Western standards. Few of them have travelled outside the 
country. Most news has traditionally been either spoonfed 
by the  government-owned news agency or reviewed and 
censored in the form of international newsmagazines and 
newspapers. Until recently, there have been few foreigners 
in the country—tourism is barely developed (a blessing, if 
you compare it to  Egypt, for example) and there are still 
a limited number of foreign businesses with a noticeable 
presence in Syria.  Damascus has more than 40 embassies, 
but most foreigners in the capital live in only a few areas 
of the city. All of these things create a social and moral 
atmosphere that somewhat echoes the United States during 
the 1950s, I felt. 
Gender segregation and lack of dating creates sexual 
naivete—and powerful sexual preoccupation. Men aged 
25 to 30 giggle over words like butt, panties and bra or 
over dirty jokes that are tame by present-day standards in 
the West. Grown men here often behave sexually like pre-
adolescents in the United States.

63
People
An exception to this innocence, however, is the sense of 
 government distrust among the population. Although things 
seem to have opened up compared to the  Hafez era, still, 
no one knows for sure who works for the Mukhabarat (the 
secret  police), so people are cautious about criticising the 
 government to other Syrians they do not know well. This 
seems to be less true now than in the past, though, and 
many Syrians openly express their opinions to foreigners 
they trust. 
Cynicism as we know it in the West is conspicuously 
absent. People here seem to have no taste for the sardonic. 
They expect little good from their governments and they 
usually get it. In Western democracies, on the other hand, it 
seems many of us expect everything from our governments 
and are endlessly disillusioned.
A bird and egg  souk; birds are about the only household pet Syrians like.

64 CultureShock! Syria
Pets
Syrians generally do not seem fond of animals. Although 
a few people have pet cats and dogs, the house creatures 
of choice are caged songbirds. In warm weather the cages 
spend most of their time outside on balconies. Many shops 
also have songbirds. The birds create delightful bits of melody 
around parts of the cities.
At the same time, Syria has a serious problem with wild 
cats, which feed on the ubiquitous garbage. These pathetic, 
scruffy creatures are everywhere and are generally reviled 
by the locals, who kick or throw rocks at them.
Not Wanting to Disappoint
Suppose you ask for directions to go someplace. It seems that 
few natives will just say they don’t know; they want to help 
you and be hospitable. So they’re as likely as not to give you 
inadequate or wrong directions. I was on a trip to a monastery 
in the  desert with a group of students, and the driver of the 
van did not know the way. In the town nearest the monastery 
he asked for directions three different times before we were 
finally guided in the right direction, this time by someone 
who hopped into the van with us to show us the way!
Another form of this peculiarity is that when you ask 
shopkeepers if they have a certain product or maybe some empty 
cartons, they will frequently say, “Maybe tomorrow”—even if 
they don’t know for sure when they’ll have what you want.
 RELIGIOSITY
Although Syria has a large assortment of religious groups, 
most of them share a strong belief in God and a heavy 
religious influence in their lives.  Muslim, Christian or Jew, 
Syrians’ greetings, goodbyes and many other common 
expressions refer to God, thank Him for everything and leave 
the future up to divine providence. 
The most common response when you ask someone how 
he or she is, is al Hamdulla which literally means, Thank 
Allah! The chapter about language gives several greetings 
and goodbyes in Arabic that mention God, and even when 
they speak another language, Syrians translate these into 

65
People
the new language: God bless you, God-willing, Thank God, 
God be with you, etc. Although I suspect that some of this 
is tradition without real feeling, I can hardly imagine people 
(other than a few fundamentalist Christians) in the West using 
similar expressions.  Religion is part of everyday life here, and 
it seems most people wear their beliefs proudly and with no 
self-consciousness.
Approximately 10 per cent of Syria’s population is Christian, 
primarily Syrian and Armenian Orthodox. There are a few 
Roman Catholics and even fewer Protestants. Only a few 
hundred  Jews remain.
The remainder of the population is  Muslim, and about 82 
per cent of that is Sunni  Muslim. Most of the 16 per cent that 
is not Sunni is Alawite or Druze—groups that have branched 
off from mainstream  Islam. There are also a relative handful of 
Shi‘ites and Ismailis. All of these groups seem to live together 
in relative harmony, although I sometimes detected somewhat 
hostile feelings among some groups while I was living there.
 Islam means submission to Allah. Muslims believe that the 
religion is not a new one but a continuation of  Judaism and 
 Christianity with Mohammed being the last of the prophets 
and the Koran (the  Islam holy book) superseding all other 
revelations from God. In the Koran, Muslims,  Jews and 
Christians are all referred to as ‘Children of The Book’.
Unlike  Christianity, where virtually all sects have an official, 
universal leader (the Pope, for example),  Islam has none. Each 
 mosque has its holy man—called a sheikh—who holds his 
position as spiritual guide and Friday lecturer by virtue of 
his study of  Islam and his perceived piety.
The Koran and the teachings of and examples set by the 
Prophet guide every aspect of  Muslim life. Everything from 
 government and commerce to daily routines are covered. The 
most prominent religious principles, called the Five Pillars of 
 Islam, are as follows:
1. Shahada :The declaration that there is only one God and 
that Mohammed was his last prophet.
2. Salat: Prayer five times daily—at sunrise, midday, 
afternoon, sunset and evening. Prayers are prescribed 
in both form and content.

66 CultureShock! Syria
3. Zakat: An annual tithe of two and a half per cent of 
earnings above basic necessities. This money is used to 
build and maintain mosques and help the poor.
4. Sawm: Fasting during Ramadan, the ninth month of the 
Islamic year. During the fast, most Muslims do not eat, 
drink (even water), smoke, or have sex from before dawn 
until after sunset. It begins and ends—according to the 
instructions of the Koran—when one cannot distinguish 
a white thread from a black thread in natural light. 
The sawm also allows those who are travelling during 
Ramadan to fast at some other time. The purposes of 
the fast are to purify the soul and body and focus one’s 
attention on God. In Syrian cities, the beginning and end 
of the fast are marked by cannons firing.
5. Hajj: The pilgrimage to Mecca, with a stop in Medina 
to pay respects at the Prophet’s grave. This is required 
at least once in a lifetime, but only if the person has 
the financial means to do so. Some Muslims make 
the pilgrimage many times, and others pay for poorer 
friends and relatives to make the trip. The official time 
for the hajj is during days seven to ten of the 12th month 
of the Islamic year.
 Islam is a complete guide for living. Some examples:
 No  alcohol or illegal drugs are to be used.
 Men and women who are not members of the same 
family are forbidden to touch each other.
 A woman receives half the amount of inheritance a man 
receives. 
 In a dispute or court, the testimony of two women 
equals that of one man.
 Muslims are supposed to eat with the right hand.
 The left hand is to be used for bathroom functions, 
which in the days of the Prophet meant wiping oneself 
with a handful of sand; thus the rule about eating with 
the right hand.
 A man must squat as a woman does to urinate.
  
Muslim can neither be embalmed nor cremated and is 
buried naked except for a shroud.

67
People
Line Cutting
One Syrian behaviour that I found extremely irritating is 
the refusal of most Syrians to queue up and wait their turn. 
Line-cutting is the rule, and the intruders ignore even the 
most reviling comments from the few people who wait in 
an orderly fashion. Sometimes the guards (when there’s a 
semblance of a queue, there are usually guards) will shoo 
the violators back from the front of the line—the favourite 
place to cut in—but the persistent ones simply sidle in a little 
way back, pretending they were there before and are only 
returning to their rightful spots. You can combat the line-
cutters by simply refusing to allow them to crowd in front 
of you; of course, they may just go farther ahead and find 
someone who won’t stop them from cutting in.
Lack of Environmental Consciousness
One of the most disturbing habits prevalent in Syria is the 
handling of garbage. Syrians, educated and uneducated, rich 
and poor alike, drop their waste everywhere.
While most homes are spotlessly clean and educated 
people are often quite self-conscious about their personal 
appearance, the streets and sidewalks are a mess. You see 
freshly scrubbed and meticulously dressed people walking 
down the street eating corn on the cob or ice cream from 
plastic dishes or drinking a can of soda. When they finish, 
they pitch the refuse aside with no self-awareness at all. 
Add this behaviour to that of the wild cats strewing garbage 
everywhere, and you can see the problem.
Everywhere you travel in Syria, even in the farthest 
reaches of the  desert mountains, you will see garbage stuck 
in the ground, under rocks or on bushes. Farmers plough 
the ground and multi-coloured bags look like exotic flowers 
when viewed from a distance. 
Maybe millennia of surviving 
the harshness of the  desert has 
bred contempt, rather than 
appreciation, for nature. I’ve 
encountered few Syrians who 
have such appreciation, even 
Wherever the Mediterranean 
coast is not cleaned daily, 
there’s a mess of plastic refuse, 
dirty diapers, paper plates, you 
name it. The locals lie around on 
the beaches among the trash, 
seemingly oblivious to it and drop 
their own wherever it lands.

68 CultureShock! Syria
though the better educated ones are beginning to see a 
connection between the environment and the support of 
life. I’ve never heard a Syrian comment about the awe and 
beauty of a magnificent sunset or raging winter storm; they 
seem mostly oblivious to such things, focusing instead on 
people and social life.
While the  government has the army planting trees 
throughout the country, the green belts around the major 
cities are being depleted by immense population growth, 
and surface water everywhere is undrinkable, unfit even for 
irrigation (but is used for it anyway, creating the intestinal 
problems mentioned elsewhere in this book). Mines and 
quarries in the deserts and mountains devastate large areas 
of topsoil, and the tailings are piled around the sites, creating 
thousands of hectares of dead and ugly land.
The Syrian ignorance of nature can be astounding. 
Students often asked me if I wasn’t afraid of wolves and 
bears when I went hiking in the mountains. The only thing 
they can apparently equate genuine wildlife with is the 
vicious half-wild Bedouin dogs of the  desert and the street 
cats of the cities.

69
People
A Nature’s Tale
A fellow teacher once showed his class photos he had taken of an 
elk and some buffalo in Yellowstone Park (U.S.). The elk was nearly 
up against his car, and the students could not understand why he’d 
get so close to such a big, scary creature. The buffalo were shedding 
their winter coats, and one student asked why they looked ragged. 
The teacher explained about winter and summer coats on wildlife, 
how they needed the heavy fur and wool to survive the harsh winters 
but would shed it to be more fit for hot summer weather. The next 
question left the teacher momentarily speechless: the student asked 
how they took those coats off in the summer—did people help them 
do it? He was not joking.
Class and Racial Consciousness
As I mentioned before, there is social and economic 
discrimination between light- and dark-skinned people. While 
there is no violent racism in Syria as there is in the United States 
and Europe, I detected a general feeling of superiority among 
lighter-skinned Syrians. This comes through in comments and 
jokes. Blacks, particularly Africans, are not generally liked or 
respected, nor are the  Bedouins, even though they are the 
original Arabs whose ancient cultural elements are still a 
big part of modern Arab life. Also, there are quite a few Sri 
Lankans and Indians there who work as servants, nannies and 
houseboys for foreigners and wealthy Syrians, and I often heard 
derogatory jokes about them among my students. It became 
clear to me that Caucasian Westerners receive friendlier 
treatment than do people who are darker-skinned.
 Class consciousness is also very real. The neighbourhood 
they live in, whether they live on the top or bottom floor, 
what kind of car they drive (if any), and whether they wear 
Syrian or American and European fashions are all elements 
that place a Syrian in socioeconomic categories. It is often 
very difficult for young people who fall in love across these 
lines to marry each other, at least with family blessings. 
It is not enough to have a lot of wealth; they must show it 
in the right ways to assure their acceptance into the class they 
aspire to. There is little socialising between upper and lower 
classes as there might be in Canada or the United States, and 
the lower socio-economic classes seem humble and accept 
their ‘place’—perhaps the culture of fate again. 

70 CultureShock! Syria
Manual labour of any kind is usually thought beneath the 
dignity of anyone in the upper classes. The rich do not spend 
time puttering around in the garden, doing repairs around 
the house or making things by hand, and wealthy Syrians 
have little desire to own any of the beautiful  handicrafts made 
in Syria; they prefer something made by a machine in the 
United States or Europe, with a high price.
BEDOUINS AND VILLAGERS
No description of Arab people can be complete without 
discussing  Bedouins—the original Arabs—and villagers.
 Bedouins
Like indigenous people throughout the world, the  Bedouins’ 
traditional lifestyle has changed a great deal, and will probably 
disappear soon. This will not be the result of imperialism 
or colonialism as it has been with most other indigenous 
peoples, but from the encroachment of modern living with its 
intrusive electronics, transportation and commercialism. The 
people who are helping force them into modern civilisation 
are the city Arabs.

71
People
In The Middle East magazine, an elderly Bedouin was 
quoted as saying: “Fifty years ago there were no cars or 
trucks, only camels; … people lived on barley, bread, dates, 
yogurt, burghal (bulgur) and dried pomegranate seed. We 
were living on the bounty of God. We were happy... I’d like 
an easier life, with a nice house, a warm bath, central heating 
and all; but in the city I wouldn’t be able to afford more than 
a sandwich and a pack of cigarettes.”
Another Bedouin talked about the difficulty of life as a 
 desert nomad: “Bitter water. Dust. It’s hot in summer, cold 
in winter. Scorpions. We have to go 20 km (12.4 miles) to 
find drinking water. What kind of life is this?”
Although those who still follow a nomadic life continue to 
live in the traditional black goatskin tents, other elements 
have changed irreversibly. If you travel through the  desert 
and steppe during the spring when grazing is good there, 
you will see these tents everywhere; and parked beside 
most of them is not a camel, but a large sheep-hauling truck 
and maybe even a generator. Many tents have lights and 
television sets that run off either the generator or a truck 
battery. Children are often bused to school in a village.
Population growth and climate change have also con-
tributed to the demise of traditional Bedouin life. Better health 
care has increased the life span at the same time that less 
land is fit for grazing or growing barley, and young  Bedouins 
often end up in villages or cities where they farm or work at 
construction or street cleaning.
Despite the gradual elimination of the nomadic lifestyle, 
many elements of this ancient culture live on (if in modified 
form) in the daily lives of most Arabs: strict segregation of 
genders; arranged marriages; clannishness; submission to a 
strong and autocratic leader; belief in harsh punishments; a 
strict code of honour; and warm hospitality.
If you hike in the  desert,  Bedouins will often want to talk 
to you and may invite you to their tents for tea. The  children 
sometimes beg, especially around population centres or 
places such as  Palmyra where tourists regularly show up, 
but otherwise are just infinitely curious about foreigners. If 
you want to please the  children (who tend sheep and goats 

72 CultureShock! Syria
even when they are quite young), bring pens and candy; they 
seem to want these most. If they ask for bon bon or boom 
boom they mean candy; if they ask for qalam or alam they 
mean a pen. One young boy tending his flock near the ruins 
in  Palmyra walked a couple of kilometres to bring a lamb to 
me to hold and pet. I took his picture holding the lamb, then 
gave him a pen and 25 SP. He was elated.
Villagers
Although more and more people from villages are finishing 
high school and even attending college, basic village life in 
Syria hasn’t changed a lot over the centuries. Villages don’t 
have the wealth the cities do, there are relatively few cars, and 
ancient Arab cultural attributes are more noticeable than in 
the cities. These things are particularly true of  desert villages 
and those along the  Euphrates River.
Most Syrian villages have  electricity, indoor plumbing, 
schools and clinics, but these things are not universal. Still, 
Syria’s  government has done a better job providing basic 
services to villages and rural people than governments have 
in many other developing countries.
The houses in the smallest villages are simple adobe-type 
huts of one or two rooms, while bigger villages and small 
cities also have a lot of apartment buildings. There are few 
camels in Syria. The most common work animal is the 
donkey, followed by the horse or mule.
FAMILIES AND WOMEN
Although Syrian  women have a higher legal status than do 
their sisters in most other Arab countries, the attitudes and 
behavior that many men in Syria exhibit toward women is 
a fact that women and their families must deal with almost 
daily—thus the inclusion of women in the heading.
JOBS AND OTHER OPPORTUNITIES 
FOR SPOUSES
One of the stipulations of a Syrian visitor’s  visa is that you 
must not accept employment. The reality is, though, that 
various kinds of work are available.

73
People
Paid Employment
If you or your spouse have obtained work in Syria via an 
embassy, oil company or school, your whole family can 
get iqaamas (residence visas) through your employer’s 
sponsorship. If you arrive without a job, your visitor’s  visa is 
good for six months. During this time, if you can get a job 
teaching in one of the foreign cultural centres (American, 
British, Spanish,  French, German or Russian) or at an 
international school (American,  French or Pakistani) or at a 
company, your employer can help you get iqaamas. 
The American Language Centre and the British Council 
school teach English to adult Syrians, the  French Cultural 
Centre teaches  French and Arabic (the latter in  French, 
of course), the Spanish centre gives Spanish lessons, the 
Russian centre teaches Russian, and the German (Goethe) 
centre teaches both German and Arabic (the latter in 
German, of course).
If you have a residence  visa, you can accept just about 
any type of work available. For example, a fellow teacher 
who had worked as a graphic arts designer in the United 
States, did graphic design consulting for a company that 
produces business forms, cards and calendars.
The most flexible type of work is private language 
teaching. The demand for English tutors is strong, not only 

74 CultureShock! Syria
among Syrians, but among expats of other native language 
groups who want to improve or maintain their English 
proficiency. Native English speakers I know have tutored 
 children of UN families, spouses of diplomats and even 
ambassadors. The going rate is around 400–800 Syrian 
pounds (US$ 8–15) per hour for an experienced tutor. 
This is as much as a local-hire teacher without a Master’s 
degree currently gets paid at the American Language Centre 
or British Council school, and you don’t have to attend 
meetings, create, revise or give tests, substitute for absent 
teachers and so on. Establishing the contacts necessary for 
tutoring takes time, but notices placed on bulletin boards at 
language schools, cultural centres and Syrian universities 
may soon bring more students than you can handle. The 
American Language Centre and British Council school also 
keep lists of tutors for referral.
Volunteerism
Aside from paid employment, there are opportunities for 
volunteer work in cultural centre libraries, various charities, 
archaeological excavations and historical restorations. 
These things take time to discover, and contacts with the 
international community will help you. Examples: the 
associations of American, British and Canadian women 
hold charity bazaars and the American Women of  Damascus 
(AWD) has a library staffed by volunteers.
Educational Opportunities
There are several options for learning languages in  Damascus. 
You can learn Spanish,  French, German and Russian at their 
respective cultural centres, and you can find tutors for Italian, 
Turkish and other languages.
People who are fluent in Arabic can sign up for university 
classes, or just observe classes with permission from the 
professors or invitations from students. Some expats I knew 
took Arab history classes at the University of  Damascus. 
Cultural centres and embassies (including the Arab Cultural 
Centre in Mezzeh) occasionally sponsor lectures from Arab 
and Fullbright scholars.

Drink vendor dressed in traditional attire. 
These vendors roam the streets with their 
water containers strapped to their back.

b
Rush hour trafﬁ c in Damascus. There are more cars 
in the city than the roads can handle, and it can be 
dangerous if you are not used to how the locals drive.

c

d

e
These waterwheels at Hama are 
known as Noria. They are 20 metres 
high and date back to the 13th century.

f

g
Muslim men in prayer at the Umayyad 
Mosque in Damascus. The mosque is one of 
the largest and oldest in the world, and as 
such holds great architectural importance.

h
Two men smoking hookah outdoors. Narghile 
is the more commonly used term for this form 
of tobacco smoking in which the smoke is 
cooled and ﬁ ltered by passing it through water.

75
People
CHILDREN
There are many advantages to raising   children in Syria: 
violent crime is rare in general and even rarer directed against 
 children; illegal drugs are scarce;  alcohol is not ubiquitous or 
easy for teenagers to get; and if you live in  Damascus, the 
 children will make friends from around the world and can 
learn several languages as they grow up. For these reasons, 
plus the fact that adults keep their eyes open to what goes 
on in their neighbourhoods, it’s difficult for adolescents to 
get into serious trouble.
Education
One thing that is not a bargain is  education for expat  children. 
Although they can attend Syrian schools if they hold iqaamas, 
only one foreigner I knew has tried this and she found the 
quality of the schools unacceptable. This is to be expected 
in a system that still uses outdated educational methods 
and in which the teachers’ monthly pay is about enough for 
a week’s groceries. A further disadvantage is that although 
your  children will learn Arabic with native fluency, they will 
not develop their own native language skills.
The alternatives to Syrian schools are mostly expensive. 
The  Damascus Community School (DCS) seems to be the 
school of choice for both wealthy Syrians (about 45 per cent 
of the students are Syrian) and many diplomatic personnel. 
This is an American-accredited K-12 school with curriculum, 
activities and teaching methods similar to those in the United 
States. The drawback is cost: annual tuition at this time is 
over US$ 10,000 per student plus several hundred US dollars 
for testing and registration fees. 
There are two other schools in which English is the language 
of instruction: the Pakistani International School and a private 
Syrian school called Rodaat Al Ashbaad. The Pakistani school 
has two campuses: for primary levels, near the Canadian 
Embassy in Mezzeh, and for secondary levels, near the 
Australian Embassy, also in Mezzeh. The annual cost is 
the equivalent of about US$ 3,000 per student. The Syrian 
school is located in a new village several kilometres outside 
 Damascus, but  buses shuttle the  children to and from 

76 CultureShock! Syria
points near their homes. This school has a better reputation 
among expats than the Pakistani school. The annual tuition 
is equivalent to US$ 2,000 per student at this time, plus a 
small charge for bus transportation.
 If you wish to have your  children educated in a  French 
system, the  French school is located in the outskirts of Mezzeh. 
The costs vary depending on whether you are a citizen of 
France, Syria or another country. For families without  French 
citizenship, the grade school costs 8,000 SP (US$ 160) per 
semester per student, and the high school about 21,000 SP 
(US$ 420) per student each semester. Parents I knew who sent 
their  children there were impressed with the school.
One more option is to educate your  children at home if 
someone in the family has the time, training, ability and 
inclination. Whether you do this or send them to school, 
you may be able to negotiate with your employer to cover 
educational expenses.
Parks, Playgrounds and Other Activities
Syrian cities—particularly  Damascus—have many parks, 
and more vacant land is being turned into parks. Each park 
has a playground, and unlike some Western cities where 
you would never let  children out of sight or even enter a 
park after dark, these are not concerns here. During hot 
summer nights, people hang around the parks until 11 pm 
or later, with  children running free and having fun; elderly 
couples sit and chat; and young lovers steal a few minutes 
away from the prying eyes of society.
In addition to the amenities in public parks,  Damascus 
Community School has a track, a gymnasium, a playground, 
a tennis court and a football field for the use of its students 
and teachers and their families, as well as for teachers at the 
American Language Centre and their families.
Syrian schoolchildren get out of school in the early afternoon 
and spend a great deal of time playing outdoors during good 
weather. As do  children everywhere, they accept playmates 
from other countries with openness and curiosity.
Fortunately or unfortunately, depending on your viewpoint, 
teenagers have little Western-style entertainment here. The 

77
People
cinemas show mostly violent films—kick boxing and martial 
arts are Syrian favourites, and the people who attend are 
overwhelmingly young, lower-class males. There are few 
places to play billiards, few video game parlours or carnival-
type rides, and bicycle riding can be deadly in the chaotic, 
high-speed traffic and narrow, crowded streets.
 Shopping for Children
There are multitudes of stores that sell  children’s  clothing, 
toys, and books in various languages (mostly Arabic, English 
and  French). The  clothing generally looks quite European or 
American but is less expensive than in the West. Some toy 
shops sell modern toys such as Lego, frisbees, etc., although 
the selection of Western toys and games is still a bit limited.
Child Care
Notices posted in the language schools, foreign cultural 
centres and embassies sometimes advertise for teenage 
 children of expats or adult expat women who will babysit. Sri 
Lankan, Indian or Filipina nannies are inexpensive, and some 
can be hired for daytime duties only, others as live-ins.
MISCELLANEOUS
Here is other information that might be important to you.
Religious Activities
Although Syria is overwhelmingly  Muslim, the tradition of 
 Christianity is strong in the western part of the country: 
this is the land of Abraham, of St. Paul and other early 
Christians, and there have been stable and cohesive Christian 
groups from the begining. Freedom of religious expression 
is uninhibited, including for  Jews, and there are numerous 
churches and synagogues in the western part of the country. 
 Damascus, for example, has the historic St. Anthony’s Roman 
Catholic Church (its bell tower stands only a few metres from 
the minaret of a  mosque—a symbolic juxtaposition) near the 
Cham Palace Hotel. There is also a Roman Catholic church 
affiliated with and behind the Italian Hospital on Salheeyeh 
Street. Others include a Greek Catholic church on Abu 

78 CultureShock! Syria
Romaneh Street, a Greek Orthodox church on Talay Al Foudda 
Street and the church of St. John beside the Swedish Embassy, 
just off Abu Romaneh Street. The latter has Protestant services 
as well as Anglican Catholic (Episcopalian) masses. There are 
also numerous smaller churches in the eastern part of the old 
walled city (the Baab Tooma and Baab Sharqee areas) as well 
as in the large neighbourhood north of Baab Touma.
Although few Jewish expats come to Syria,  Damascus has 
more than 20 synagogues and  Aleppo a dozen or so more. 
If you are  Muslim, of course, you will find a  mosque almost 
literally on every block.
Birth Control
The secular  government of Syria encourages small families, 
unlike the  government of  Saudi Arabia, for example, which 
actively encourages large families.
There is a family planning agency in  Damascus on Abu 
Romaneh Street, beside the Mercedes dealership and the 
Syria-Saudi Company. Birth control pills and information 
are available here. Also, most pharmacies sell condoms and 
other birth control devices.
FOREIGN WOMEN IN SYRIA
There are a few single Western  women in the Middle East, 
but most women here are with families. All of them are 
guaranteed more attention than they want.
Dealing with Syrian Men
Anyone who has lived or travelled extensively around the 
Mediterranean or the Middle East is aware of the common 
attitudes and behaviours of the local men, particularly toward 
foreign women. In Syria, a foreign woman will simply never find 
indifference from most men or boys: their behaviour ranges 
from chivalrous to crude, depending on the circumstances and 
the person. While young men throughout the world whistle 
at, leer at, and make sexual comments to attractive young 
women, males here do not seem to discriminate much based 
on either age or appearance. The good news is that Syria is 
less this way than some other countries in the area.

79
People
Unwelcomed Looks
A Chinese friend who is now a citizen of Sweden and has lived most 
of her life in Europe described her anger at the leering way Syrian 
men look at her: “They look at me as if I’m cheap and that makes me 
angry—I’m not cheap.” Another Swedish woman told of her time in 
Kuwait, how most Kuwaiti men would look away when she passed 
them on the street (a common reaction to foreign women in the rich 
Gulf countries). Thus, it was a real shock for her when she arrived in 
Syria and felt eyes burning through her.
For an older woman, the unwanted attention most often 
comes as intense staring and mumbled comments, often even 
when she is with a man. For young women, the attention 
is more ardent and includes leering, sexual comments and 
groping or unwelcome bodily contact. 
Two things are baffling about this behaviour: it seems 
almost subconscious, habitual and unpremeditated; and even 
a woman 40–50 years old who the males find attractive is an 

80 CultureShock! Syria
object of rapt attention, often by boys young enough to be 
her grandchildren. I knew several middle-aged women who 
dressed conservatively, yet constantly suffered comments, 
kissing noises, and keen scrutiny from males ranging from 
grade school boys to men in their 30s: “Hello, come talk to 
me!” or “You’re beautiful!” or “I love you, I love you!”
Syria has a great deal to offer the foreign observer, including the ancient 
walled city of  Damascus (above), but women are advised to observe a few 
simple rules;  dress conservatively, walk around in the day if alone and avoid 
crowded places.

81
People
The things that will bother you are not the looks or 
comments you don’t understand but the kissing noises 
made at you, the comments you do understand and the 
fondling. Nearly every foreign woman I know who lives 
here has been groped. If someone does touch you in a 
sexual way, defend yourself: kick him in the groin, hit him 
and scream at him; not only will he usually slink away in 
humiliation, but someone is likely to come to your rescue. 
Groping women is not legal in Syria.
The examples of sexual harassment seem endless, but 
there is good news: rape is rare; the percentage of males 
who actually grope is small; many local men are both 
embarrassed by and apologetic about such behaviour and 
will come to your rescue; and there are ways a woman 
can protect herself. One is to avoid crowded places such 
as the  souks unless you’re with your husband or a male 
friend, and it’s best if he walks behind you. Another is to 
ignore all comments, pretending the guys simply don’t 
exist. A third is to avoid eye contact with all men you don’t 
know well, again pretending they don’t exist. Even in a 
shop, where the shopkeeper is unlikely to be friendly in an 
unacceptable way, it is best to be businesslike and brief in 
your exchanges. Finally, don’t take   taxis or walk around at 
night by yourself. These are things the Syrian women do 
for their own protection.
As infuriating as this behaviour is, it might help to 
understand its origins and causes. There have been volumes 
written about women in Arab and Islamic societies, and this 
is no treatise on the issue, but think of these facts. For more 
than 2,000 years Arab culture has considered women inferior 
to men, and often worthless as 
 children. For hundreds of years 
before  Islam, female  children 
were routinely buried alive, 
women who gave birth to girls 
instead of boys were beaten, 
killed or—if they were lucky—
just humiliated by their husbands 
and families.
Being Friendly
If you are a woman who is 
naturally gregarious and cordial, 
particularly with people who are 
friendly to you, you must break 
that habit with Syrian men; 
some will simply misinterpret 
your friendliness as either sexual 
looseness or possible romantic 
interest in them.

82 CultureShock! Syria
When  Islam came along, it forbade these practices, but 
still relegated women to an inferior status, and the old ways 
died hard. The Koran states that men are superior to women 
because they are stronger (and for this reason are required 
to protect and support their families); that the testimony of 
two women is required to match that of one man (women 
are believed to be too emotional and too easily influenced); 
that women should receive only half as much inheritance 
as men (since, unlike men, they are not required to earn 
a living or support the family, and what women do bring 
to a  marriage, or earn during one, belongs to them alone); 
that the servants of Allah will be served by and married to 
beautiful young virgins when they go to heaven; that, as 
a last resort a man may beat his wife if she disobeys him; 
and that a woman can have only one husband while a man 
can marry four women plus his slave girls, divorcing any 
of them at will.
Add this cultural and religious background to the socially 
enforced separation of men and women, and the male 
behaviour and lack of respect for women is not surprising. 
Most people are virgins until  marriage, which is often at 
25–30 years of age, and most social and any physical 
contact between young men and women considered normal 
in the West is not allowed. Basically, only the wealthy, 
westernised youth can find outlets—albeit secretly—for 
their hormonal impulses, and these sometimes include 
same-sex activities.
It is worth remembering that the Bible itself, in the 
writings of the misogynic St. Paul, considers women to 
be inferior, tells them to obey their husbands and not to 
speak in church. Also remember women’s status in the 
United States and Europe less than a century ago and the 
binding of girls’ feet in China. Syrian women today enjoy 
more freedom and respect than Western women did less 
than a century ago.
Dealing with Local Women
Now some good news. Syrian women love gossiping, but 
most of them are affectionate and friendly with foreign 

83
People
women. They are not only interested in your very different 
lives, but it is almost as if thousands of years of repression 
has created a sisterhood of protection and love. There are 
some exceptions to this, times when you may sense hostility 
from (usually) older and conservative women, but this is 
rare. Most Syrian women you have contact with will treat 
you almost as part of their families.

‘Have you heard the story of Abraham’s honoured guests? 
They went in to him and said “Peace!”
“Peace!” he answered and, seeing that they were strangers, 
betook himself to his family and returned with a fatted calf. 
He set it before them, saying: “Will you not eat?” ‘
—from the Koran
 SOCIALISING WITH 
THE LOCALS
CHAPTER 4

85
Socialising with the Locals
Hospitality in the Arab world is as old as Abraham. Visitors 
here are often surprised at the invitations they receive to visit 
the homes of Syrians they barely know or to have tea with 
a shopkeeper or a stranger in a village. This characteristic is 
not only religious in origin, but is ingrained in the Arab code 
of honour. Honour, in various forms, is critical to Arab people, 
and to be inhospitable, even to enemies, causes dishonour. 
In The Arab Mind, the author says hospitality “… is a noble 
trait, exhibited proudly even by the poorest Bedouin, and 
impressive even in the modified and reduced form in which 
one encounters it among Arab city folk.”
AT A SYRIAN HOME
In stark contrast to the dirty and garbage-strewn streets, 
the interiors of most Syrian homes, especially of the middle 
and upper classes, are spotless. One rarely sees dust or 
fingerprints.
Styles and Furnishings
There really is not a typical Syrian home. The styles of 
decoration and furniture as well as the size of the home vary 
widely between social classes, Muslims and Christians, and 
traditional and modern attitudes. If there is a most common 
decor, however, it is the gaudy Louis XIV style. Despite the 
 French presence here for so many years, you can’t find a 
good cup of brewed coffee or decent bottle of local wine 

86 CultureShock! Syria
anywhere; but in the 18th century  French embellishment of 
furniture and  architecture, the Syrians found something they 
could really latch onto. Ceilings tend to be high and sculpted 
with plaster, which is then sometimes painted in a variety 
of colours; elaborate wallpaper is common in older homes; 
furniture is highly decorated, upholstered with multi-coloured 
fabric and the wooden framework often gilded. 
The chandeliers and other light fixtures are what truly 
stamp a place as Syrian. Many chandeliers are oversized for 
the rooms they light, sometimes hanging down to below 
head-level and, seen from the streets at night, often filling an 
entire window. The brass frames are smothered with multi-
faceted glass that brings to mind the opulence of a  French 
palace. Other lamps and light fixtures tend to be equally 
overpowering: brass floor lamps shaped like palm trees; 
table lamps glazed in pearlescent black or white with flowers, 
dolphins or other decorations in brass-covered relief. All of 
this ornateness usually rests on colourful  French, Turkish or 
Persian carpets and multi-coloured stone floors. 
Many of the newer houses and those recently renovated 
lean toward modern European styles, accented with some 
Syrian glitz. At the other end of the age spectrum lie the one-

87
Socialising with the Locals
time grand houses of the old walled city. These are hundreds 
of years old, each built around a courtyard with a fountain 
and a private garden of grapevines, citrus, eucalyptus and 
other trees and flowers. The ceilings range between three 
and six meters (10 and 20 feet) high, the better to keep 
rooms cool during scorching summer days. Sadly, most of 
these have deteriorated badly and/or been chopped up into 
smaller houses or rental rooms.
Being a Good Guest
So you’ve been invited home for tea, lunch or dinner by 
a Syrian you don’t know well. It is a faux pas to decline 
an invitation unless circumstances make it impossible to 
accept. And unless the invitation is clear, it would be wise 
to fish around for whether or not your spouse or  children 
are also invited. 
It is common and acceptable to arrive a little later than the 
specified time, except during Ramadan (the Islamic month 
of day-long fasting) when those who have fasted dive into 
their evening meals with a vengeance. Arrive a little early 
for dinner feasting during this month. 
Do not bring food or drink as a gift for the hosts. Nothing 
is expected, but flowers are about the only acceptable gift. 
Don’t be offended if they simply disappear—they’re probably 
displayed in another part of the house.
The furniture is almost always arranged in a recognisable 
pattern, whether chairs, sofas or cushions on the floor: the 
perimeter of salons is filled with places to sit. This reflects 
the nature of Arab socialising, where everyone sits in a 
circle of talk.
In the more traditional homes, the women and girls sit 
more or less at one end while the men and boys sit at the 
other. If there is more than one 
salon, the genders may separate 
completely. In less traditional 
homes, there seems to be no 
definite seating pattern, although 
the guests usually sit together 
facing the hosts.
Bringing Gifts
Do not bring food or drink as a gift. 
Nothing is expected, but flowers 
are about the only acceptable gift. 
Don’t be offended if they simply 
disappear—they’re probably 
displayed in another part of the 
house.

88 CultureShock! Syria
Tea or coffee (and perhaps alcoholic beverages in a non-
 Muslim home) and hors d’oeuvres can last a long time. Then, 
if you’re staying for a meal, don’t expect to leave for about 
two hours at lunch, three hours or more at dinner. Meals, 
especially those eaten with friends or visitors, are a major 
source of social life and entertainment.
When the meal is served, the hosts usually tell you where 
to sit. While traditional Muslims do not eat with their left hand 
(the Koran says to use that one for toilet functions), few of 
the Syrians I knew would be offended if you used your left 
hand. It would be considerate to point out that you simply 
cannot do it with your right one. However, never use your 
left one to pass anything to others. The only other thing to 
remember is to eat slowly, because you will be pressured to 
eat and eat until everything on the table is gone—this is a 
tradition. If you simply can’t, you must graciously say, “No, 
thank you” several times, or say daeema, to get your host to 
stop feeding you.
Let the hosts guide the conversation so as to avoid touchy 
subjects; they will always have many questions for you 
anyway. The hosts appreciate questions about their families: 
number of  children and grandchildren, ages, where they 
live, and if they have relatives living abroad. But if your 
hosts are conservative Muslims, don’t be too inquisitive 
about female members of the family. Inquiries about work 
(cautiously, though, if someone works for the  government) 
are acceptable, as are general questions about Syria.  Israel 
(still usually called Palestine) is a touchy subject. If the hosts 
bring it up, be cautious about your response, particularly if 
you aren’t sure about their religious or political views. Your 
comments about the Syrian  government should either be 
neutral or positive. If the wrong person perceives you as being 
harshly critical of the  government, your  visa and residency 
permit could be endangered.
OTHER SOCIALISING
An invitation to someone’s home is the most common form 
of socialising, but you’re likely also to be invited to lunch or 
dinner with a group. It’s difficult to say no to an invitation: 

89
Socialising with the Locals
Syrians are quite persistent. If you must decline an invitation 
once or twice, you will probably have to accept the next one 
to avoid blatant rudeness. Do not expect to be invited to go 
to a play or movie, on a Sunday drive or to various other 
activities; in Syria a meal or tea/coffee and snack is nearly the 
sole form of socialising, except among young single people 
who just ‘hang out’ on Thursday evening or—if they’re males 
—go to a movie with their peers.
Women commonly invite other women to tea, coffee or 
lunch and expect them to come alone; men do the same 
with other men. A couple of the men in one of my classes 
asked if I wanted to go out for dinner. In my naiveté I also 
assumed an invitation for my partner at that time, with the 
whole class going. The following day one of the men and one 
of the women in the class approached me and asked if my 
wife could come also, so my female students could come. 
They didn’t want to miss out on the fun but apparently didn’t 
plan on going unless my wife went. On the other hand, a class 
of younger students wanted to take me to a special place in 
the country for lunch. It was clear from the beginning that 
both males and females would be going. My wife couldn’t 
make it, but I didn’t let them know that. When I showed up 
alone, most of them were disappointed.
Syrian university students making their favourite food—kabobs—at a picnic.

90 CultureShock! Syria
In Public Places
If you’re invited to a party, there will usually be no  alcohol, 
but there will be plenty of sweets, loud music, singing and 
dancing, and the men will be quite forceful in persuading 
their guests (male and female) to get up and dance. Despite 
the image most Westerners have of the erotic Arab belly 
dancer (a myth from The Arabian Nights) Arab women will 
not dance in front of men; the young men are the ones 
who get up and belly dance, sometimes even on table 
tops, imitating the breast-jiggling of real belly dancers. 
It’s quite comic, and they relish it, laughing hysterically 
at each other. This is done in restaurants, on picnics, in 
the classroom, in the parks, and just about any other 
place they ‘make a party’. There is a special lap-held drum 
that is commonly used outdoors in lieu of taped or live 
music. The dancing is also accompanied by fervent hand 
clapping and occasionally by the high-pitched voice and 
rapid tongue clicking that is an ancient vocal expression 
of Arab women.
Whatever invitation you receive, your hosts will refuse to 
accept a contribution for the food. It is futile to try to pay but 
shows politeness, anyway.

91
Socialising with the Locals
At Your Home
Most Syrians are accustomed to dropping in on friends and 
family unannounced, even late at night. Most seem to be 
sensitive about doing the same to foreigners, but it does 
happen. For this reason, I rarely let my students know where I 
lived. If you have contact with a lot of Syrians who know your 
phone number, many of them will call you at all hours, often 
inviting themselves over on a moment’s notice. If you value 
your privacy and solitude at home—the only place you can find 
such things in this culture—you must perform a balancing act 
between showing politeness and appreciation for their good 
intentions and protecting your own emotional well-being.
You may wish to invite some Syrians to your home for 
dinner or lunch (breakfast is usually not a social event for 
Syrians). Most people eat lunch around 2 to 3 pm and dinner 
around 8 to 10 pm and socialise for several hours before, 
during and after the meal.
It is difficult to know what to serve your guests, so it would 
be a good idea to feel them out for what types of food they like 
or would be willing to try. Some may want to try Western-style 
home cooking, while others do not like much of anything but 
Syrian cuisine (or the Syrianised versions of such things as 
pizza, hot dogs and hamburgers), and you cannot compete 
with their own home versions of their own food. I have found 
Damascenes in particular to be extremely particular about their 
food. I’ve watched them pick around at a fresh roasted turkey 
or excellent lasagna as if they’re trying to find something they 
can call food! I’ve heard students complain about the Syrian 
food at a restaurant in a rural area or village, saying that it 
doesn’t have enough of this or that, and how much better 
 Damascus’ food is. The best advice I can give about cooking 
for Syrian guests is not to assume they will like something, 
even if you think it is succulent; don’t be disappointed if they 
don’t rave about it or want second helpings.
Dress
Syrians, for the most part, really   dress up for social occasions. 
If you wear blue jeans and a T-shirt you will stand out. 
Whether you go out to lunch or dinner or to someone’s home, 

92 CultureShock! Syria
you will be underdressed in blue jeans. However, there’s a 
noticeable difference between the manner of  dress for men 
and women, with women generally wearing high-heeled 
shoes (always and everywhere), lots of jewellery and dressy 
 clothing. Men, on the other hand, most often wear slacks, 
long-sleeved shirts or sweaters and black leather shoes.
 Cultural Tolerance
One of the most wonderful things about Syrians is that they are 
quite open toward and accepting of the differences between 
themselves and Westerners. Any behaviour or manner of 
 dress that is unusual to them will be the topic of humourous 
or puzzled discussion. But the talk won’t be malicious, nor 
are you likely to be rejected for your behaviour as long as it’s 
in good faith. They seem to be in tune with your intentions.
Welcome to My Building
A young student told me of her welcoming visit to an American 
couple who had recently moved into her building. A large bouquet 
of flowers in hand, she knocked on their door. The man came to 
the door and said, “Yes?” and my student proceeded in her limited 
English to welcome them to Syria. He took the flowers with a “Thank 
you” and put them in a vase while she stood in the open doorway. 
At about the same time, the man’s wife came into the living room 
and greeted my student briefly, then said, “Thanks for the flowers. 
We have to go now.” With this, they both headed out the door, past 
the young Syrian, without finding out who she was, offering to have 
her back when they would be home or any other civility. The young 
woman bore no apparent hostility toward the people but was baffled 
by their behaviour. I assured her that such behaviour was not typical 
of all Americans, especially those who live abroad.
Syrian hospitality can be overwhelming at times: some 
people practically ‘adopt’ you, showering you with gifts and 
invitations. Even Syrians who criticise the foreign policies 
of Western governments graciously accept citizens of such 
countries—especially Americans—as part of their own family. 
They recognise people as separate from their governments—
something a lot of Americans could do a much better job of. I 
have been invited to stop and have tea with a peasant family 
while walking through a village, struggling to communicate 

93
Socialising with the Locals
in my limited Damascene Arabic; Bedouin  children have 
invited me to their tents or tiny huts for tea when they saw 
me hiking in the  desert; as I was walking through an oasis 
in the  desert, an old man on a bicycle stopped and without 
saying a word handed me pieces of candy, then rode on; and 
people I barely know in  Damascus have given me a standing 
invitation to visit their homes at any time.
SOME PRECAUTIONS
Because Syrians are so accepting, and because they are in 
tune with your intentions, there are few taboos. But respecting 
their cultural sensitivities will endear you to them and help 
fight negative stereotypes about Westerners.
Manner of Dress
Although Syria has no official  dress code, most people, 
Christian or  Muslim,  dress (sexually) modestly. In particular 
they do not expose much flesh. You may wear shorts and 
T-shirts walking around the streets of  Damascus,  Aleppo or 
ancient ruins (although you will draw  attention to yourself); 
but when you go to a Syrian’s home or out with a Syrian 
group, it is wise to  dress modestly: no shorts, no sleeveless 
or strapless tops, exposed bellies, etc. It’s unlikely your hosts 
will react negatively to you, but it may offend them.
Alcohol
Nearly every kind of alcoholic beverage is available in Syria, 
although only a few shops and restaurants sell it. In fact, 
some of the local beers are quite delicious and unbelievably 
inexpensive—try  Damascus’ own Barada beer. Most Christians 
and even some Muslims drink a little, but drunkenness is 
rare—in fact, people found drunk in public are often jailed 
overnight. If you go to a  Muslim home, the hosts are not likely 
to offer you an alcoholic drink, and they will often apologise 
for not being able to do so. If you go to a restaurant with 
Muslims and the restaurant serves  alcohol, they might let 
you know they won’t mind if you order a drink; a few will 
even have one themselves. But if you imbibe, moderation is 
required. If you get drunk, you will offend your hosts.

94 CultureShock! Syria
Sexual Jokes, etc.
In a group of men only, or of women only, sex is a favourite 
topic, and moderately dirty jokes are enjoyed, especially by 
men. But avoid making such jokes or even discussing sexual 
topics in mixed company. It is likely to embarrass and offend 
everyone. Likewise, terribly explicit sexual jokes or toilet 
humour may be offensive, even in an all-male group.
 Footwear
Shoes bear a special significance in the Arab world. To begin 
with, they must be removed before entering a  mosque. This 
practice stems from the story of God telling Moses at the 
burning bush to remove his shoes because he was standing 
on holy ground.
The custom extends to most traditional homes as well, 
and street shoes are removed as soon as anyone enters. 
The family wears ‘house shoes’—slippers or sandals—that 
never touch the ground outside. In older houses there are 
even sandals used only for the toilet. The reason is that the 
squat toilet in older homes, a ceramic toilet bowl set into 
the floor, has no cistern to flush it. It is ‘flushed’ by using 
a small hose, and the flushing keeps the floor in the small 
room wet. Thus the need for ‘toilet shoes’. New homes have 
regular flushing tanks—although the toilets may still be the 
squatting kind—and most even have bidets.
Since shoe soles carry such significance for uncleanness, 
they also carry some social taboos. One is that you never put 
your feet on a footstool, coffee table or desk when an Arab is 
in the room with you. Showing the bottoms of your shoes will 
cause social discomfort because it’s quite insulting in Arab 
culture. Likewise, do not cross your legs with one ankle or calf 
on the other leg, because this also exposes one sole. To put 
your shoes on furniture (lying on a couch or bed with your 
shoes on, for example) is, of course, also not acceptable.
It is humiliating and an insult to hit an Arab with the 
bottom of a shoe. A friend in Syria told me a story about a 
Syrian woman who, weary of being harassed by men on the 
streets, began carrying an old shoe in her purse. Whenever 
a man grabbed or touched her or made lewd noises or 

95
Socialising with the Locals
comments to her, she smacked him on the head or shoulder 
with the shoe, thus publicly humiliating him.
BEHAVIOUR BETWEEN WOMEN AND MEN
A foreign man who is accustomed to touching female friends 
at home must be cautious here. Despite the fact that Middle 
Eastern and Mediterranean men (a minority, certainly, but 
a sizable minority) are infamous for their crudity toward 
foreign women, often grabbing women’s buttocks, breasts 
or crotches whenever they think they can get away with it, 
it is absolutely unacceptable for a foreign man to touch an 
Arab woman, regardless of how innocent the intent. Don’t 
even expect to shake a woman’s hand unless she makes 
the first move (which, by the way, is common among 
younger, educated women). The odd thing about this is 
that in crowded public spaces, you can come into nearly 
full-body contact with the opposite gender, and it isn’t even 
acknowledged; women often brushed up against me as if I 
weren’t there; in fact, one time in a post office, I was nearly 
knocked over by an older woman who banged full into me 
with her breasts! I was quite shocked and didn’t know how 
to react, but she acted as if I weren’t even there. The only 
touching that seems to be taboo is with the hands.
While touching seems to be the only restriction on 
men, vis-à-vis Arab women, Western women must behave 
formally with Arab men. I, for example, can be verbally 
friendly to a Syrian woman, and there is no implication 
that I’m trying to ‘get close’ to her. But a Western woman 
who is at all friendly or even makes eye contact with men 
on the street will make those men think she ‘desires’ them. 
It takes no encouragement whatsoever for an Arab man to 
make passes at a Western woman; and if she responds in any 
manner that’s perceived as accepting, the man automatically 
thinks he has a ‘chance’ with her. This is a sad and sorry 
situation but is as old as civilisation here and one must learn 
to cope with it.

‘… wherever he laid his hat was his home …’
—Papa Was A Rolling Stone by The Temptations
 SETTLING IN
CHAPTER 5

97
Settling In
LIVING IN SYRIA CAN BE UNCERTAIN and trying at first. Even if you 
have a car and speak Arabic fairly well, you cannot help 
but notice the amount of time and effort day-to-day living 
requires.  Shopping for things you want is like hunting and 
gathering, and dealing with the bureaucracy can baffle 
and frustrate a newcomer. Just about anything you could 
accomplish quickly and efficiently at home (in Western 
countries, at any rate) usually takes much longer in Syria 
and presents one obstacle after another. After a while, 
you learn where to find most of your shopping needs and 
how to take shortcuts. The information in this chapter is 
predominantly for  Damascus, since that is where most of 
Syria’s foreign residents live. 
There’s a lot of the ‘rolling stone’ in expatriates. And one 
nice thing about Syria— Damascus in particular, since that’s 
where more than 90 per cent of the foreign residents live—is 
the variety of places to lay your hat. If you’re a single person 
kicking around the Middle East, maybe studying Arabic, you 
can live on the cheap by finding a room with a Syrian family 
(most commonly in the old city) for as little as the equivalent 
of US$ 100 per month. On the other hand, if you have a 
sizable family and want to live like aristocrats, replete with 
live-in servants, you can do so cheaper than in any Western 
country, although that seems to be changing rapidly.
Despite the fact that most young people in the cities have 
to live with their parents until well into their twenties or 

98 CultureShock! Syria
thirties, there is no shortage of rental units for foreigners. 
In fact, this is one reason young people often cannot leave 
home: landlords can rent a decent apartment to someone 
from Germany, the United States or Japan for many times 
what they could to a Syrian. Also, rent controls make it 
nearly impossible for a landlord to evict someone, foreign 
or native. 
Expats from Western countries, however, usually find 
rents that, although outrageous by Syrian standards, are 
much lower than what they might pay at home for a similar 
unit, so they tend not to bargain very hard. They are also 
here for a limited time, after which the landlord can increase 
the rent. For these reasons, landlords and the house rental 
agents who serve them often refuse to rent to Syrians, 
preferring instead the wealthier and less troublesome 
temporary foreign residents.
FINDING A HOME
Unless you work for an embassy or a company that makes 
 housing arrangements for you, you will need to deal with a 
house agent. They are ubiquitous in areas where foreigners 
live, but before you contact one, ask your embassy, company 
or other trusted expats for recommendations; the honesty of 
many agents is questionable, just as it might be in the West. 
It would be particularly wise to avoid those with elaborate 
offices or those who drive new luxury cars. I had dealings 
with several agents and the most trustworthy ones I found 
didn’t even have cars—they showed apartments by taxi.
Location
Some foreigners prefer to move into old neighbourhoods 
with an authentic traditional atmosphere. If you do this, you 
may find less apartment selection, fewer amenities, and 
more noise, but you will also save considerably on your rent 
and experience more cultural immersion.
If you want more of the comforts of home, a larger and 
more elaborate apartment, and more contact with the 
international community, the main neighbourhoods to 
consider in  Damascus are Abu Romaneh, Rawda, Malki, 

99
Settling In
Mouhajerine and Mezzeh (a suburb on the southwest edge 
of town). These are where you will find most embassies and 
UN offices, most foreigners and the widest variety of goods 
for sale. Apartments in these areas range from traditionally 
Syrian to elaborately modern and palatial.
If you live on or near a busy street, the noise will keep 
you awake if your bedroom windows face the street. Vehicles 
without mufflers, blaring horns, loud voices, the air horns 
used by heating oil salesmen and propane peddlers banging 
on metal containers are unavoidable anywhere in the city but 
are louder and more relentless on busy streets. If you must 
have peace and quiet, your only options in  Damascus are 
Mezzeh (if your house is off the highway) and Dummar—a 
housing project to the northwest that is sometimes just called 
‘the project’. But these are not viable options unless you have 
a car and don’t mind spending a lot of time commuting.
Home heating oil delivered by a horsedrawn tanker in an old quarter of 
 Damascus.
Pix from page 106

100 CultureShock! Syria
Another thing to consider about location is that you 
are more likely to get burglarised if you live in an area 
full of expats than if you live on a less-travelled street in 
a neighbourhood with few foreigners and a stable Syrian 
population.
Price and Amenities
 Damascus has higher rents than other cities in Syria, although 
they are generally lower than in North American or European 
capitals (a fact that seems to be changing rapidly). Along with 
tourism, the increase in oil exploration and production, the 
vast number of refugees from  Iraq, and increasing wealth 
has come a steady rise in rents. During 1991–93, rental 
charges increased around 25 per cent annually. This was not 
so much due to a housing shortage but rather to a get-what-
the-market-will-bear mentality that had developed among 
house agents and landlords. 
Dishonest Housing Agents
A Mauritanian man I knew who worked for a housing agent in 
 Damascus railed about the dishonesty of many Syrian agents: “Most 
agents jack up the rent asked by the landlord and split the increase 
with the landlord. They know they can ask just about any amount 
and the embassies will pay the price.” Landowners and house agents 
have some of the highest incomes in Syria. A recently renovated, two-
bedroom, top-floor apartment I rented for 30,000 SP (US$ 600) per 
month—because I refused to pay more—was rented before me by a 
Japanese man for 50,000 SP (US$ 1,000) per month. To him the rent 
was low by Tokyo standards, while to me 50,000 SP was too high.
If you want a basic apartment and are willing to live 
in older areas of the city, you can still find small, decent 
apartments for less than US$ 500 per month at this time, 
but that may change soon. If you are willing to live in a room 
in a centuries-old house in the old city, you may get by for 
less than US$ 100 however, and may be able to share some 
of your host family’s meals. 
At the other extreme, a large, newly renovated apartment 
with lots of amenities in a desirable area (particularly Abu 
Romaneh and Mezzeh) can cost you well over US$ 2,000 per 

101
Settling In
month. According to my Syrian friend, housing prices have 
gone up quite dramatically since the turn of the millennium—
in some cases by as much as 50–60 per cent, and real estate 
agents say they’ve increased around 40 per cent in only the 
past two years, so you should be prepared to bargain hard. 
This dramatic increase is perhaps not so much because 
of the whatever-the-market-will-bear mentality, though; 
according to recent reports from the US Associated Press, 
the UN Refugee Agency and other sources, more than half 
of the two million plus Iraqi refugees fleeing civil war, crime 
and the invasion forces in their homeland are in Syria—with 
the largest number in  Damascus. In fact, the UN Refugee 
Agency states that those refugees make up nearly 5 per cent 
of Syria’s population! According to reports from  Damascus, 
some whole neighbourhoods—for example, the Jarramana 
suburb of  Damascus and the al Yarmouk Palestinian refugee 
camp—which itself has become a sprawling suburb of 
the capital—have become dominated by Iraqi refugees so 
that only Iraqi Arabic (a dialect quite different from that of 
 Damascus) can be heard in some areas. Also, around 150,000 
Lebanese fled into Syria when  Israel invaded that country 
in 2006. There are complaints among much of the affected 
Syrian population that all these refugees have driven the price 
of real estate up by as much as 300 per cent in the past few 
years. It seems dubious to me that refugees who had to flee 
their homeland with little more than the clothes on their back 
and the cash in their pockets could be responsible for any 
dramatic increase in housing prices, but the sheer numbers 
have no doubt had some effect.
Most two- or three-bedroom units have a full bath and 
another room with an Arab toilet (a toilet bowl set into the 
floor) and a sink and mirror outside the toilet room. The 
biggest, most expensive units often have servants’ quarters.
Before renting an apartment, there are many things to 
look over and negotiate. Landlords are usually willing to 
make a lot of commitments in order to get you on a year’s 
lease; but once you’ve signed and paid, their attitudes can 
change dramatically. (And don’t forget that it’s common 
to require three to six months’ rent in advance, so be 

102 CultureShock! Syria
prepared to dish out a big chunk of cash up front.) Here are 
some things to look for.
Paint and Water Leaks
Top-floor apartments, unless they have sloped roofs, are 
notorious for leaking during winter rains. Leaks are easy 
to spot on ceilings and upper walls, and if you move in 
after the rains start, the problem cannot be fixed until the 
following summer. 
Conversely, lower-floor apartments have problems with 
moisture in the walls that erodes the masonry and paint so 
badly that a freshly painted wall can look diseased within a 
few months. If you see signs of serious bubbling, blistering, 
or peeling—even under a fresh coat of paint—insist on 
having the problem repaired at its source before moving in. 
My first bottom floor apartment had such a severe moisture 
problem in one wall that paint wouldn’t stick and the 
plaster fell off. The owner did not want to tear out the wall 
to get to the root of the problem, so I moved out.
Plumbing
Most plumbing systems here are antiquated and probably 
did not work well to begin with. One serious problem in 
ground-floor apartments is sewer backups; another is foul 

103
Settling In
odours, especially during cold weather when the house is 
closed up. Also, water pressure may be weak. My top-floor 
apartment had so little pressure that the shower couldn’t 
be used. This happens sometimes when the water storage 
tank is only a few metres above the shower head. Also, 
some drains don’t work well. Most tend to plug up easily (in 
some older buildings you can’t throw tissue into the toilet 
bowls), and if you pull the plug quickly from a full bathtub 
or a sink full of soapy dishwater, the water may back up 
through the floor drain.
All apartments should also have a kitchen faucet that brings 
in fresh water from outside for drinking. Except for water 
from rooftop tanks (the tanks may not be clean), tap water 
in  Damascus is drinkable, fresh and sweet. It comes from 
springs in the mountains and is lightly treated with chlorine. 
Make sure the apartment has an operating water storage tank 
for those times in late summer and autumn when there are 
water cuts. If you have water stored, you can shower, cook 
and wash clothes if the main pipeline is turned off; without 
it, you’ll suffer during the hottest time of the year.
 
Electrical
Regular blackouts in many areas outside the capital make 
special electrical equipment desirable. For many years, 
 electricity was off everywhere in Syria for several hours a 
day. Although this problem seems to have been fixed in 
 Damascus, the rest of the country still suffers blackouts at 
least occasionally. 
Before renting an apartment, it’s best to check with 
a reliable source to determine if your location has 
uninterrupted electrical service. If it does not, you should 
insist on one of two systems to reduce this inconvenience. 
The cheapest one is a battery system that gives you some 
lights and outlets for fans, radios, stereos, televisions and 
small appliances while the main current is off. When the 
 electricity is restored the batteries automatically recharge 
and the only maintenance required is adding distilled 
water to the cells every few months. The system is easy to 
install and you will be glad to have it, especially for a fan 

104 CultureShock! Syria
in the summer and lights on 
dreary winter days. You cannot 
use hairdryers, refrigerators, 
air conditioners or washing 
machines on these batteries.
The more expensive option 
is a gasoline- or diesel-powered 
generator. Some newer upscale 
buildings have these for all units, 
but they can be added to almost 
any apartment. The advantage 
over the battery system is that 
all outlets, lights and appliances (except A/C) work with the 
generator. 
Even when the  electricity is on, the voltage sometimes 
fluctuates dramatically—particularly in the evening for 
several hours after darkness falls and in the hottest parts 
of summer when most people are using A/C units; it 
often gets so low that a washing machine won’t spin and 
your heating system won’t work if the stove or boiler has 
electronic ignition. This seems to be worse on upper floors 
because the lower floors use up most of the buildings’ 
voltage. (One theory is that in older buildings the power 
lines come in at the bottom and floors are hooked to it 
successively, so when lower floors are using a lot of power 
and the incoming voltage is low anyway, the line is drained 
before it gets to the top floors.) An easy and simple solution 
is a voltage stabiliser. 
Syria’s voltage is 220, so you might also ask the landlord 
or house agent to provide you with a 220-volt to 110-volt 
transformer if you’re coming from North America. These 
are inexpensive but are heavy and bulky, so you won’t 
take it with you when you leave. The small plug-in type 
transformers you can buy in the United States and Canada 
are likely to burn out if you use them for kitchen appliances 
or hairdryers.
Finally, look for safety hazards in the wiring. It seems there 
are either no electrical building codes or no enforcement 
of codes, and wires often hang loose everywhere. It is also 
Stabilisers
Syrian-made stabilisers are 
cheap, but may not be depen-
dable; my Syrian-made unit 
bounced to 300 volts the first day 
of use and burned out the VCR. 
Even with it, the  electricity still 
fluctuated between 180 and 220 
volts. A Japanese or Taiwanese 
model costs around US$ 200, 
but is more dependable. If 
you use a computer at home, 
a dependable stabiliser is a 
must.

105
Settling In
not uncommon for outlets, lights and light switches to 
be in a shower or tub area where one wrong move could 
electrocute someone.
Furnishings and Kitchen Utensils
All apartments are furnished, but there are often big 
differences in the quality and quantity of provisions. Some of 
the furniture is dirty and uncomfortable. Again, if you want 
something changed, make sure it’s done before you pay 
a deposit. Most landlords and rental agents I encountered 
offered everything from new kitchen cabinets to new 
furniture of my choice. Take advantage of this desire to have 
you as a tenant—especially if the rent asked for is high and 
you can’t negotiate them downwards.
Telephone
Most apartments have telephones, although some are shared 
with other parties. If a telephone, particularly a private line, 
is important to you, don’t take the landlord’s word that he/
she can get one for you if there isn’t already one in the 
unit. Also, make sure it’s in and operating before you take 
the apartment; it still may take years to get a phone line. 
On the other hand, some sources say there are more than 
8 million cell phone users in Syria, and the price of the 
cell phone and service is not notably higher than it is in 
Western countries, so a land line in your house may be of 
moot value. I highly recommend getting a cell phone, and 
many Westerners use theirs to keep in contact with home, 
thus avoiding the regular hassles involved with long-distance 
calls from land-based lines.
Heating System
Examine the heating systems. Older and smaller apartments 
often have heating oil (called mazott) stoves (sobia) that make 
you cosy and comfortable when you’re near them, but cold 
if you aren’t. In small apartments this is no problem, but a 
single sobia will not warm a large apartment well. The stoves 
are generally Syrian-made, inexpensive and work fairly well, 
so insist on another if you think there’s a chance you’ll need 

106 CultureShock! Syria
it: winters in Syria can be quite cold. Some newer sobias have 
electrical ignition (a good reason to have a voltage stabiliser) 
and fans. These keep several rooms toasty warm, but more 
distant ones are cold.
A more common type of heating in new and refurbished 
buildings is hot water central heating. This also uses 
mazott to heat the water, is ignited electrically and keeps 
the house an even temperature throughout. For either kind 
of heat, find out where your mazott storage tank is and 
how full it is when you move in. Don’t accept having to 
buy your heating oil a little at a time from a neighbour or 
landlord as they may not be around when you run out. In 
a large apartment, 500 litres will last a couple of months 
when the weather is moderate. The problem is that it 
may take several days to get the oil if it’s an especially 
cold winter. There is also sometimes a mazott shortage 
in January and February.
If your apartment is not blasted by direct summer 
sunlight and is not on the top floor of a building, you can 
probably get by without air-conditioning, but it is nice, 
especially if you have trouble sleeping when it’s hot. In late 
summer and early autumn, it does not cool down a lot at 
nights. If you live on a top floor and/or have large windows 
that face the afternoon and evening sun, I recommend 
air-conditioning—Syrian summers get very hot. The last 
August I lived there, the daytime temperatures were over 
40°C (104°F) for several weeks, and the nights cooled down 
only to the lower 30s. The air is intensely dry, however, 
so even a large fan can cool you during the middle of the 
night. Basically, what you need for cooling depends on your 
body’s tolerance for extreme, dry heat.
Time of Power Outages
Regular, daily blackouts seem to be a thing of the past now, 
at least in  Damascus. But the situation could change for 
the worse again. Find out if your apartment will be without 
 electricity regularly, and if so, find out the usual times. In 
the past, the most common times were from 7–8 am until 
10 am–noon and from 1–2 pm to 4–6 pm, although in 

107
Settling In
neighbourhoods where few foreigners or wealthy Syrians 
live, it may be longer. In all neighbourhoods it is common 
for the time to change unannounced.
Windows and Screens
Mosquitoes are a terrible nuisance from late summer until the 
first cold period, usually in late November or early December. 
For this reason, make sure that at least some windows have 
screens (without holes) or you’ll be devoured when you 
most need to keep your windows open. Even with screens, 
you may have mosquitoes, but an electric repellent that is 
available there will keep them away while you sleep.
If your apartment is on or near the ground, make sure 
all windows lock. If they’re especially easy to reach, ask 
for protective bars—they could save you from a burglary; 
although rare, they do happen. My top floor apartment was 
burglarised while I was away for several days, and I lost 
a couple thousand US dollars cash, a couple of expensive 
watches and some irreplaceable jewellery. Even one of the 
cabinet ministers in the mid-90s suffered an attempted 
burglary while he had a large chunk of cash in his house.

108 CultureShock! Syria
Satellite TV
Although Syria doesn’t yet have cable TV, it does have satellite 
systems. The dishes cost around US$ 100–200 as of 2005, 
and you may be able to negotiatefor your rental agent or 
landlord to purchase one for you if your apartment doesn’t 
already have one. After you get the dish, you pay a fairly low 
monthly charge for numerous channels. Without a dish, your 
choices for TV are pretty severely limited.
THE CONTRACT AND PAYMENT
Most landlords want a one-year contract, but the standard 
contract states that if your  government requires you to leave 
the country before its completion, you are entitled to a pro-
rated refund. But what if your landlord says he/she does 
not have the money for a refund? The norm at this time is 
to sign a one-year contract but to pay for only three or six 
months at a time. This gives you leverage on the landlord 
for needed repairs, which there will be. Broken or exploding 
water heaters, water storage tanks with split seams, clogged 
drains, water leaks, broken appliances and smoking stoves 
are all common.
Insist on a contract signed by the landlord before you 
pay; never make a handshake agreement. Also, investigate 
the agreed-upon repairs and improvements and make sure 
they are completed to your satisfaction before you pay. A 
Canadian woman who lived in  Damascus paid a deposit 
of several hundred dollars for the landlord to buy some 
promised furniture for an apartment; when she moved in, 
the furniture had not been purchased and she was unable 
to get her deposit back.
Immediately after you move in, it’s wise to have your 
outer door locks changed and not give your landlord or 
house agent a key.
Some landlords want tenants to pay hard currency. This 
is unwise because it still may mean two trips out of the 
country for each payment: one to deposit your cheque 
and another, two to three weeks later, to get the cash. (At 
this time—although the situation may change with new 
banking regulations and competition—you cannot exchange 

109
Settling In
Syrian pounds (SP) for hard currency within the country.) 
Also, if you take advantage of unofficial exchange rates 
during the winter when they are highest, you can benefit 
by paying in pounds. Whatever your mode of payment, 
get a receipt (in English, if you don’t read Arabic) with all 
the pertinent information.
UTILITY CHARGES
Electricity bills come regularly about every two months. If 
your usage is light, the average payment should be around 
1,000–2,000 SP (US$ 20–40) per month for a family with a 
two- or three-bedroom apartment, 500–800 SP (US$ 10–16) 
per month for a single person with a small apartment and 
no airconditioning. Heavy airconditioning use can drive the 
cost higher, of course.
Landlords generally pay the water bills because they’re so 
low: about 20–30 SP monthly.
Telephone bills generally come several months after the 
calls are made, which creates a serious problem for Syrians 
who rent to foreigners. It is common for them to require 
either a letter of guaranty from your employer or embassy 
or a deposit of several thousand pounds before allowing you 
international phone service. If you can do neither of these, 
you may be able to use your telephone for local calls only. 
International calls are expensive, running around 125 SP per 
minute, and the rate climbs after the first 20 minutes. Lower 
rates are in effect from 2 am to 7 am.
Making International Calls
From most telephones you can dial your own international 
calls, but if you have trouble getting through, the international 
operators (143 or 144) will help you. Most of them speak limited 
English and/or  French.
Ovens and stoves operate almost exclusively from bottled 
propane (called ghaaz), which at this time costs around 
200 SP each. The ghaaz sellers cruise the streets in their 
micro pickups, banging on the cans and calling out, “Ghaaz, 

110 CultureShock! Syria
ghaaz! Ghaaz, ghaaz!” For a single person who does little 
cooking at home, a bottle may last a year; for a family who 
does a lot of cooking, perhaps only a month. At any rate, 
it’s a bargain. Some newer stoves have an electric burner 
and broiler as well. This is beneficial if your gas runs out 
just as you’re starting to prepare breakfast or have guests 
coming for dinner and cannot find a gas peddler. Oven 
temperatures are not easy to regulate and seem uneven 
from one unit to another.
The price of heating oil is regulated by the  government, 
and it increased the price in 2002 at the same time that 
it raised most  government workers’ salaries by 20 per 
cent. The new price is about 8.45 SP (roughly US$ 0.16) 
per litre. Get a recommendation from someone you trust 
before filling your tank; if you don’t, you may be charged 
for more than you get or end up with watered-down mazott 
that won’t burn well.

111
Settling In
Appliances You Won’t Find
Clothes dryers, microwaves, automatic dishwashers and 
garbage disposals are still rare in Syria. Those that exist are 
generally imported by embassies and a few wealthy Syrians 
for their own use. You hang your clothes up to dry, heat 
your food conventionally and take your trash to the nearest 
dumpster, which may be as far as two blocks away.
THINGS TO BRING WITH YOU
Apartments in the cities are pretty well outfitted, and you 
can negotiate for things you need. There are some things, 
though, that are either not available or very expensive and 
not likely to be provided by the landlord.
Kitchens
You can buy most small kitchen appliances here except 
 French coffee presses, percolators, coffee bean and spice 
grinders, and waffle irons; the drawback is that any 
imported items are very expensive. If you use such things, 
it’s best to bring them with you.
Handmade glass bowls, glasses and cups are a Syrian 
specialty and unbelievably cheap. You can have the glass 
blowers make anything you want for next to nothing. Also, 
landlords are expected to furnish completely functional 
kitchens. You may not care for the styles provided, but 
kitchen equipment is heavy and difficult to pack; it may be 
cheaper and easier to buy dishes, pots and pans there if you 
can’t persuade your landlord to provide them.
Towels and Linens
Beds vary in size from singles and cot-styles to king-size. 
Some have sets of springs under a mattress, some are futon-
style mattresses over boards and others are just a foam pad 
on a board. If soft pillows are essential for your comfort, bring 
your own. Your own sheets from home may not fit your bed 
in Syria, and you can have a set of sheets made for half what 
they would cost in North America or Europe. Specify that 
they should be fitted sheets—giving clear instructions—if 
that is your preference.

112 CultureShock! Syria
Don’t expect to find conveniences like bath washcloths. 
I haven’t seen one anywhere from eastern Syria to Greece, 
or from Turkey to  Jordan and  Egypt. Towels are easy to find, 
however, and if they aren’t thick and absorbent, at least 
they dry quickly.
 DOMESTIC HELP
You can hire nannies, housekeepers, live-in servants 
and houseboys inexpensively. There are many Indians, 
Pakistanis, Sri Lankans and Filipinas/os who are here for 
those jobs, and they are generally dependable, honest and do 
a decent job. You can hire a Syrian woman as a maid, cook 
or housekeeper for approximately half of what you’d pay a 
foreigner, but she will only speak Arabic. Having domestic 
help is a status symbol few diplomats and wealthy Syrians 
do without. 
There is no shortage of domestic help in Syria. One can 
simply check with other expats or wealthier Syrians to find 
several people looking for domestic work. Some will only 
clean, others will cook and clean and iron, and yet others 
will take care of  children; some will live in, while others will 
work only a set number of hours. Most diplomatic personnel 
and wealthy Syrians have live-in or full-time help, while the 
less wealthy may simply have someone come to clean and 
iron once or twice a week. You shouldn’t have to pay more 
than a few hundred SP per hour for Indians, Filipinas, Sri 
Lankans, or Pakistanis who come to clean periodically, and 
Syrians generally charge even less.
While most of the domestics are honest (any foreigner who 
gets caught stealing would be deported immediately), there 
are some things to be careful of. One is that the foreign help 
may use your telephone to call their families in their home 
country without your permission or knowledge. One family I 
knew discovered US$ 600 worth of phone calls to Sri Lanka. 
Another common problem is petty theft that can add up to 
something substantial over time. While it’s highly unlikely that 
any domestic help would steal such things as computers, VCRs 
or televisions, some may take small things or small amounts 
of cash now and then, thinking you’ll never notice.

113
Settling In
Another problem that’s unrelated to honesty is a lacka-
daisical attitude about time and commitments. Your domestic 
may promise to come at 12 noon every Wednesday, for 
example, but rarely come on time or, worse yet, not come 
regularly and not call to let you know he/she won’t be there 
and why. This seems to be true of all domestics there, 
whatever their nationality.
Domestic help should not be paid in advance, although 
some will try to get you to do so. Those who come periodically 
are generally paid after each session, while those who live 
in or work full-time are usually paid either once or twice per 
month—normally around US$ 200–300 per month. Full-
time and live-in help normally have only one day off each 
week and two weeks to a month of vacation each year. The 
vacation varies a great deal, depending on the nationality of 
the employers and what they are accustomed to. There seems 
to be no custom of bonuses for domestic help, but small gifts 
or cash for birthdays, Christmas (for Christian domestics) or 
Eid (for Muslims) are greatly appreciated. Domestic helpers 
also appreciate donations of used  clothing or household 
items you no longer want. Even if they can’t use the items or 
don’t want them for themselves, they always seem to know 
others who are in need of them.
If you have a full-time or live-in servant, that person should 
be responsible to supervise any part-time or occasional 
domestic help you have. The former also commonly do 
grocery shopping and run all kinds of errands, and most 
domestic help can baby sit  children for a night out or pets 
for several days or weeks if you’re away. 
Hiring domestic help is painless: it’s most often done 
informally, with no paperwork or  government reports. Firing 
foreign workers is also quite easy since domestics are not 
covered by the country’s employment laws that make it so 
difficult to fire regular Syrian employees.
URBAN TRANSPORTATION
Despite extensive public  transportation, getting around can 
be tedious and time-consuming, although that seems to be 
less so now than a couple of decades ago and will likely be 

114 CultureShock! Syria
even better in the future with 
the new transportation systems 
that are being introduced.
Taxis
Public transportation in Syria is 
very cheap. You can go nearly 
anywhere in  Damascus or  Aleppo 
for less than 50 Syrian pounds 
(SP), and a ride in the central part of a city rarely costs more 
than 20-30 SP, including a tip. 
But there are drawbacks to using   taxis. Simply getting 
one during rush hour is often difficult—as it is in any 
major city anywhere in the world. They are also small and 
uncomfortable for tall or large people (all seem to be Japanese 
or Korean mini-cars). Make sure the driver resets his meter 
when he picks you up. If he refuses, get out and catch another 
one—he probably intends to overcharge you. In fact don’t 
be surprised if when you get to your destination the fare 
your driver charges is more than what is on the meter. If 
this happens, simply give him the fare on the meter plus a 
reasonable tip. Carrying small change will help you to avoid 
being overcharged in this manner.
Buses
At this time, there are two types of in-city  buses:  government-
operated  buses and privately run mini vans. 
A ride in  government-operated  buses costs only a few 
pounds per person. It’s an interesting experience to ride 
these, as you’ll see a big variety of people on them. There are 
several drawbacks though. Buses are usually packed during 
rush hour, with people hanging out of the doors, and even 
though smoking is banned, the rule is ignored. Another is 
that schedules are not published, and those posted on each 
bus are seldom reliable. Unless you are quite proficient at 
reading Arabic, you can’t tell where the bus is headed: bus 
numbers and destinations are only in Arabic.
The ubiquitous new mini vans are privately owned and 
the standard fare is now only a few pounds for most in-
Airport Transfers
A company called Transtour, 
which uses a fleet of Volvos, 
will pick you up promptly at any 
hour for a ride to the  airport and 
charges about the same fare as 
regular   taxis. For dependable 
pickup service, call the Transtour 
office in the Sheraton Hotel and 
schedule the time and place.

115
Settling In
city rides. They are stricter about the no-smoking rule, 
won’t accept riders they don’t have seats for and are more 
dependable time-wise. Mini  buses will also stop almost 
anywhere along their routes to pick you up or drop you 
off, much as a taxi would. They also travel between cities 
and the surrounding villages. The biggest drawback again 
is that numbers and destinations are printed only in Arabic, 
although it’s easier to ask the driver where he’s headed than 
it is on the big transports.
Giving directions to a taxi driver and understanding 
the destination of a bus can be difficult because there are 
no addresses, only neighbourhoods and landmarks, and 
sometimes building names. Besides, many streets are known 
by their old names (pre-1970), not by the names you see on 
city maps.
Your Own Vehicle
If your employer provides your transportation, consider 
yourself fortunate. Cars bought in Syria are prohibitively 
priced for most people due to tariffs of up to 150 per cent 
(down from the 256 per cent of the early 90s). Also, the 
supply is limited, although increasing as new importers set 
up business. These things make even old cars expensive: a 
1983 Colt or other small Japanese model, in good shape, 
may cost double what the car cost new. Kept long enough, 
automobiles have become a genuine investment here, always 
increasing in value. However, after the tariff was reduced, all 
cars immediately lost about half their previous value, enraging 
Syrians who had just recently bought cars.
There are several things to consider before buying a vehicle. 
One is that parking in the cities, particularly  Damascus, is 
a major problem. There are no parking garages and little 
on-street parking. Also, it is nerve wracking to drive in the 
chaotic Arab city traffic—and you can be certain that your 
car will at least get scratched or dented. If you are unlucky 
enough to have an accident, it often takes weeks or even 
months for repairs.
On the other hand, if you live in the central city, you can 
get around most of the time on foot. 

116 CultureShock! Syria
The good news for those aspiring to drive their own cars 
is that auto insurance is not expensive by American or 
European standards; and you can probably recoup most of 
the price of the vehicle when you sell it.
There are several ways to go about buying a car. If you 
want a new one, there is a duty-free auto sales area at Adra 
where the  government sells new vehicles without the usual 
tariffs. You must be sponsored by your employer in order 
to buy here, and your employer will be a co-owner of the 
vehicle. The bureaucratic process requires letters from 
your employer to the Ministry of Culture and the Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs. Once you get the vehicle, you take it to 
the Ministry of Transportation (at the east end of Baghdad 
Street) to register, pay fees and get a license.
The process for a used car is less tedious, but perhaps 
riskier. You find a local party who wants to sell one, negotiate 
a price, then have the party go through all the necessary 
procedures with you, including paying the taxes and 
legitimately transferring ownership. Currently, you can buy a 
junker (a 1970 American land yacht, for example) for around 
100,000 SP (about US$ 2,000, including taxes). Newer, more 
dependable cars may cost more than 500,000 SP.
Auto Parts, Accessories, Repairs
Immediately east and southeast of the Karnak bus station 
in the Baramkeh area of  Damascus is an auto  souk that 
includes tyre shops and repair shops. Other repair shops are 
scattered throughout the perimeter of  Damascus and on the 
outskirts of all cities and larger villages. These mechanics 
are masters at keeping the 30-, 40-, 50-, and even 60-year-
old vehicles that populate the streets and highways of Syria 
running and so no doubt have excellent skills.
Bicycles
For the brave souls willing to risk life and limb on the streets 
of cities,  bicycles are an option. You won’t yet find many 
high-tech Japanese, American or  French brands, though; 
the majority are heavy old Chinese-made clunkers with 
one speed and one colour: black. You can occasionally find 

117
Settling In
a Chinese-made ten-speed or three-speed, but they are 
also quite heavy. The price is attractive, however: a used 
one may only cost around 2,000 SP. A bicycle  souk near Al 
Maghribeeyeh Circle sells bikes, parts and accessories and 
does repairs. There is also a difficult-to-find bicycle  souk in 
the old city.
Fridays, especially in the morning and during the 
afternoon siesta, are good days to cycle in the city because 
traffic is light.
DEALING WITH BUREAUCRACY
Syria’s history as a nation has been dominated by socialism, 
which has created a massive  bureaucracy and all the rules and 
procedures necessary to feed the monster. No task is simple 
when dealing with the  government: you go to one desk, pay 
your fee of a few Syrian pounds and pick up an application; 
then you buy several stamps (all  government documents 
require stamps); make photocopies of your passport and 
letter from your employer; take your completed application 
to a different office for a signature; take the assortment of 
papers back to a different desk; and so on…
Government office hours are generally from 8:30 or 9 am 
to 1:30 or 2 pm, Saturday through Thursday. Few clerks in 
these offices speak anything but Arabic, although they usually 
understand a few English,  French or German words. If you 
have something critical to attend to and your Arabic is not 
strong, it’s best to take an interpreter with you.
Iqaamas
If you work here, even for a few months, it’s advisable to 
get a residence  visa ( iqaama). The main advantage is that 
it gives you the same in-country hotel rates that Syrian 
nationals get, which is about a quarter the tourist rate. This 
means you can go to  Palmyra, for example, and stay at the 
lovely Zenobia Hotel, on the edge of the ruins, for 500 SP 
(US$ 10) per night!
The first step for an  iqaama is to get an AIDS test at a 
 government health office. In  Damascus this is in a neigh-
bourhood known as Zeblatanee, about halfway between 

118 CultureShock! Syria
Abbaseeyin Circle and Baab Touma. You pay in the basement, 
go to the second floor for the test, then return two days 
later (after noon) for the results. Take the certificate to the 
passport and immigration office, pay for an application, 
go through the usual stamps and signature routines, then 
wait for several months. The AIDS test now costs 500 SP 
(US$ 10) per person, and every member of your family must 
have one except babies. Until you get your  iqaama, you will 
have a receipt for your application stapled in your passport. 
Unfortunately, however, this receipt will not give you the 
resident hotel discounts, and you also may have trouble 
getting an exit/return  visa to travel out of the country before 
you get your  iqaama.
Post Office
The Syrian postal service is notoriously unreliable and 
censored as well, although recent attempts to emphasise 
service may slowly change some of that. While living there, 
I sent several letters and manuscripts out of the country that 
never made it to their destination. Also, two boxes of gifts 
mailed from the United States never arrived and two letters, 
also from the United States, vanished.
The advantage of using the Syrian post office for 
international mail is the cost: a letter to another Arab country 
costs less than US$ 0.20 and a letter to Europe costs only 
A stay at the lovely Hotel Wadi beneath Krak de Chevalier on the hill costs 
very little if you have an  iqaama.

119
Settling In
about double that. For any critical mail, however, use your 
country’s diplomatic pouch service or a courier service. The 
latter is reliable and fast (72 hours), but quite expensive by 
Syrian standards—at least 800 SP (US$ 16).
If you wish to send anything other than regular mail 
through the Syrian postal system, you must take the empty 
box and its contents (including the stuffing and wrapping) to 
the central post office and allow customs officials to inspect 
it. They will then watch you pack and seal it for shipping 
and put a tag on it. Then you take it to a special window for 
mailing. Do not ship anything irreplaceable this way; use a 
courier service or shipping company.
For incoming packages, you go to the same post office 
and open the carton for official inspection. Check with your 
local post office before coming to Syria for a list of restricted 
or forbidden in-bound items. There is no door-to-door mail 
delivery in Syria: to get mail you need your own PO box or 
the use of your employer’s, your embassy’s or a friend’s.
The Police
Whenever you move into new living quarters you must 
immediately register with the  police. It is best to have your 
house agent or landlord assist you with this, so you register 
at the appropriate  police station. The cost is minimal. If they 
do not offer you a yellow card with their stamp on it, request 
one—it’s your proof that you have registered.
Pedestrians can cross the street anywhere, even against 
red lights, and the  police ignore them (although in the 
early 1990s, there was a crackdown on jay-walkers, and 
some folks actually spent a night in jail for it). Unless you 
drive you won’t have any dealings with the traffic  police. 
If you do drive, their presence at most major intersections 
is intended to maintain order. Pay attention to their traffic 
directing attempts. Few streets or highways in Syria have 
posted speed limits, and those that exist are totally ignored. 
About the only way you’ll get stopped for speeding is if 
you’re caught going outrageously fast. It seemed that no 
matter how fast I drove on the highways, most other traffic 
outpaced me.

120 CultureShock! Syria
The laws in Syria, however, favour those not driving, 
and the driver who hits a poor man’s donkey and kills it 
or injures a pedestrian or cyclist is considered at fault and 
must pay damages. In the event that you are accused of 
a crime or are victimised by a burglar, rapist or thief, you 
will have to deal with the crime  police. It’s best to contact 
your embassy’s security section first and let them make 
the initial contact with the  police. Each branch of the  police 
has its own special functions. For example, the homicide 
branch actually investigates all violent crimes and major 
thefts. Except for a pistol tucked into their belt, these  police 
officers are indistinguishable from other men on the street; 
they wear no uniforms or other visible identification. Police 
procedures are obscure and baffling, all the more so if your 
Arabic is limited.
As a rule, non-Arab foreigners in Syria are allowed quite 
a bit of leeway by the  police, whether they’re driving or 
involved in any other daily activity. The two things most likely 
to get a visitor in trouble are drug-related activities and harsh 
criticism of or activity against the  government. Possession of 
or dealing in drugs will definitely land you in jail, and activity 
against the  government will get you deported. Religious 
proselytising is also illegal, although I know of no one who’s 
been arrested for this activity.
The Secret Police (Mukhabarat)
This is a massive organisation whose mere mention makes 
most Syrians uncomfortable. No one is sure who works 
for the organisation or is an informer. The Mukhabarat 
has numerous branches, two of which deal primarily with 
foreigners. They investigate non-Syrians who apply for visas 
and iqaamas, and some teachers at the American Language 
Centre assume there are informers in most classes. However, 
there were only two cases in the then eight-year history of 
the ALC in which the school was asked to explain why a 
teacher had said or done something.
A wise person will be cautious about what he or she says 
about two subjects:  Israel and the Syrian leadership. Although 
I’ve heard stories of the Mukhabarat trying to trap foreigners 

121
Settling In
with pointed questions, it has never happened to me nor to 
anyone I know. The new  government is trying to improve 
its image in the world, and does not hassle foreigners, 
particularly those from Western countries.
 LEGAL SYSTEM
Syria’s system of justice is based on the  French model. 
To hire an attorney, you must go to the Ministry of Justice 
and sign a power of attorney authorising him or her to 
represent you. Lawsuits and other civil cases may take years 
to settle. If you need an attorney, contact your embassy for 
recommendations; most lawyers speak English or  French. 
Legal fees like most other expenses in Syria, are unbelievably 
low by Western standards: I hired an attorney to represent 
me in a lawsuit with a rental agent, and his retainer fee was 
only 1,000 SP (about US$ 20).
 MONEY AND BANKING
Until the turn of the millennium there were no Western-style 
or private banks in Syria. The Commercial Bank of Syria (CBS) 
is a division of the  government (banking was nationalised 
decades ago), and each branch has different functions. You 

122 CultureShock! Syria
need to go to one branch for a home loan, another for a 
savings account and yet another to cash a cheque. There are 
few chequing accounts in Syria, and some people here do 
not really understand what a cheque is. Unlike most other 
Arab countries, Syria has a cash  economy. However, the CBS 
has recently embarked on a programme to make it more 
user-friendly and service-oriented, reducing the red tape and 
amount of time involved in completing transactions. There are 
also an increasing number of ATMs, and the bank is paying 
more interest on deposits than before. It has also issued a new 
Visa card that can be used for foreign currency.
There are, however, other options for banking in the major 
cities as there are an increasing number of foreign banks in 
Syria such as the Bank of  Jordan and a new Islamic Bank 
(headquartered in the Gulf). The  government has issued 
licenses for 10 new banks and expects to continue the 
process of opening up the banking system. You can also find 
international banks in both Beirut and Amman. 
Currency Exchange
The fact that you cannot officially get foreign currency in 
Syria is a hassle, and you can withdraw only Syrian pounds 
at the ATMs. If you get paid in Syrian pounds and have no 
funds outside the country, you may have a problem paying 
bills at home or travelling to other countries because the 
pound is not worth much outside Syria.  Lebanon and  Jordan 
will convert some pounds to their own currency or US 
dollars, but usually at an unfavourable exchange rate. (You 
may also be able to spend Syrian currency in  Lebanon.) 
Therefore, unless you get paid at least in part with foreign 
currency, make sure you have enough in a bank account 
outside Syria for debt payments and travel. You have to pay 
for air fares with hard currency unless you have an  iqaama 
and can prove to the Commercial Bank that you get paid 
with pounds.
Few foreigners exchange funds at the official rate, 
because one can do it unofficially and gain 10–20 per cent. 
Cheques from embassies, national cultural centres and 
large companies operating in Syria are easily converted 

123
Settling In
to pounds either officially or unofficially, but cash gets 
a better exchange rate. You might also have to get an 
official stamp from your embassy on the cheque; this is 
not a guarantee, but Syrians (especially the CBS) seem to 
view it as such. Once a merchant gets to know and trust 
you, you can sometimes use personal cheques drawn 
on foreign banks. Be careful about unofficial exchanges, 
though. It’s still not entirely above board, and some expats 
have been cheated by strangers on the street. Know your 
moneychanger well.
It’s best not to convert more hard currency to pounds 
than you need for short periods of time because if you need 
to trade it back for hard currency, you’ll have to do it on the 
black market at an unfavourable rate. Bringing a supply of 
American one- and ten-dollar bills, for example, is a good 
idea. Most Syrians are happy to deal in US dollars. They come 
in especially handy in the  souks.
Credit Cards
American Express, Visa and Mastercard are accepted by four- 
or five-star  hotels, travel agencies and a few merchants who 
concentrate on sales to foreigners. Their primary use is to pay 

124 CultureShock! Syria
for luxury  hotels and airline tickets, but note the following: 
if you have an  iqaama but pay for your hotel with plastic, 
you will be charged an exchange rate that is approximately 
a quarter the official rate. This means that a room costing 
2,000 SP in cash (about US$ 40) will cost about US$ 150 
on your card. On the other hand, if you charge your airline 
tickets, you will get a discount from the cash price because 
the airlines have to convert cash payments to Syrian pounds 
at the official rate and want to avoid that. It’s worth having 
a major card for this reason alone.
Local Bank Accounts
You may start either a Syrian pounds account or a hard 
currency account at the appropriate branches of the 
Commercial Bank as well as most of the new private banks. 
However—and this is important—if you deposit it in the CBS, 
you must declare the currency you want to deposit when 
you enter the country; if not, the bank will only allow you to 
withdraw pounds. You will be charged a fee every time you 
withdraw funds from the hard currency account, also, and 
you may not get regular account statements. 
Only one expat I knew opened such an account, and she 
was unhappy with it because of the one per cent withdrawal 
fee and irregular statements. 
The main method of keeping currency for both Syrians and 
foreigners has always been home hiding places or money belts 
worn under  clothing, although that seems to be changing—at 
least for some foreigners and sophisticated Syrians—because 
of the new banking options. An additional drawback to 
banking your personal funds is the amount of time required for 
transactions; most branches are open only from 9 am to 1 pm, 
and it can take an hour to cash a cheque or withdraw funds. 
These things are changing with the opening of the banking 
system, but there's still nothing approximating the number 
and quality of banking services available in the West.
Foreign Banking Options
As mentioned above, you have two viable alternatives for 
banks out of the country:  Lebanon and  Jordan. Beirut is close 

125
Settling In
to  Damascus and has dozens of banks (some international) 
with Western-style services. Banking in Amman,  Jordan, 
requires a two-day trip unless you take a service taxi before 
7 am because the banks there close around noon and it’s a 
4- or 5-hour trip, thanks to the border crossing. Amman has 
a branch of Citibank as well as other foreign banks. 
It is wise to bring a fair amount of cash to Syria unless your 
embassy or employer will cash cheques for you. Traveller’s 
cheques are accepted by most  hotels and travel agents, but 
you will have trouble using them elsewhere.
 SHOPPING FOR BASICS
The nature of retail sales in Syria makes finding your daily 
needs time-consuming, but a bit less so than in the past 
because of some Western-style grocery stores that have 
opened. Some imported products can be found, but they 
often require a search and are expensive.  Shopping hours 
are from around 9 or 10 am until 2 or 2:30 pm, then again 
from around 5 or 5:30 pm until 8, 9 or even 10 pm.
The majority of shops are  Muslim-owned and are generally 
closed Fridays; Jewish shops are closed Saturdays and 
Christian shops on Sundays. Despite the general close down 
during the daytime on Fridays, a fair number of shops are 
open Friday evenings. There are also the options of Souk 
Al Jumaia (literally Friday Market) and the Baab Tooma and 
Baab Sharqi areas (baab is the Arabic word for gate) of the 
walled city. The latter two are predominantly Christian areas 
where shops are open on Fridays.
Some Sample Costs
You can live quite inexpensively unless you buy a lot of 
foreign products. For example, if you eat primarily local 
cuisine, you can get by on very little, as food prices are 
subsidised by the government, although this is changing 
too. Prices of selected local products, at this time, in Syrian 
pounds are given below:
 large rounds of fresh flat bread (each combined with 
hommus, fool or other dips large enough for one meal per 
person); 2-3 SP

126 CultureShock! Syria
 a half kilo each of hommus, mtabbal (an eggplant, yogurt 
and garlic dip) and fool (beans eaten for breakfast), enough 
for two meals for a small family; 60 SP
 a large loaf of  French bread; 7 SP
 a whole roasted chicken, hot and ready to eat; 150 SP 
stuffed with rice and peas; 180 SP
 one kg of skinned, deboned chicken breast; 170 SP
 a falaafel sandwich (similar to a vegetable burrito); 20 SP
 a shaawarma (similar to a burrito with chicken/lamb); 30 SP
 locally brewed beer (half litre bottle); 20 SP
 one kg of tomatoes (in season); 20 SP
 one kg of potatoes or onions; 40 SP
 one kg of summer squash (in season); 15 SP
 a Syrian-made shirt or blouse; 800 SP and up
 Syrian-made snacks; 600–900 SP 
 a Syrian-made coat; 1500 and up SP
There are a couple of things regarding prices you 
should be wary of. One is that even though the majority 
of shopkeepers are honest, there are those who try to 
overcharge foreigners. This is especially true for things 
without posted prices. Check prices in other shops, ask 
before you buy and pay attention to the change you 
get. The second price consideration is that items sold 
in bulk at large  souks are quite a bit cheaper than the 
same product sold packaged at the fancier expat-oriented 
stores (and are fresher and of better quality as well). The 
local  souks are the best way to go, for price, freshness 
and atmosphere.
Grocery Needs
Most of the locally grown produce is succulent in season. 
Peaches, cantaloupes, plums, tomatoes, cucumbers, pears, 
grapes and others are drenched with juice and have intense 
flavour. Chicken here is also very good and has little fat. 
Beef is not as good as in North America, and the lamb you 
buy from the butcher is not usually as tender and tasty as 
what you get in a restaurant. Lamb is the meat staple, and 
more expensive than beef or chicken. 

127
Settling In
The least expensive place to buy local food and household 
products such as laundry detergent and toilet tissue is in the 
small, ubiquitous neighbourhood markets. Many imported 
products are also available, but cost many times what 
they do in the export countries. For example, 500 grams 
of oatmeal imported from England costs over 175 pounds 
(US$3.50) at this time. A bar of Swiss chocolate costs the 
equivalent of US$3–4. The primary reasons for the price 
disparity between local and imported goods are heavy 
 government tariffs on legally imported items, a robber-
baron attitude on smuggled imports and price controls 
imposed on basic Syrian products, but not on imports. 
If you wish to buy imported items, you generally have to 
shop at markets in the areas where most foreigners live—
Abu Romaneh, Malki and Mezzeh. In the Abu Romaneh 
area, Nora, Badar, Sammar, Happy Family and Reddies 
groceries are sources; in Malki, a shop commonly called 
“the German Store” has many imports, including alcoholic 
beverages. In Mezzeh, most markets sell imported goods. 
Nora Grocery sells beer, wine, liquor, pork and fish—the 
latter two frozen.

128 CultureShock! Syria
Crackdowns on smuggling make the availability of 
imported items unreliable. Sometimes things such as 
oatmeal and brown sugar can be found everywhere, but 
then disappear for days or weeks. With the liberalisation 
of the  economy in general and the import/export business 
specifically, there will no doubt be an increasing array of 
foreign goods to buy in the future, but no doubt prices will 
remain quite high.
Specialisation
Shops in Syria sell a narrow range of goods and are often 
clustered into special  souks. You go to a grocery store for 
packaged goods, a fruit stand for peaches and apples, a 
vegetable stand for carrots, one butcher shop for chicken 
and another for beef, etc. There are four different types 
of bakeries: one bakes only flat bread, a Syrian staple; 
another bakes baguettes and sandwich rolls; a third creates 
elaborately decorated European-style pastries; and the 
fourth makes Syrian specialities—dense, rich confections 
with heavy use of pistachios and sesame seeds. You 
can find pork only at butcher shops in predominantly 
A street-corner vendor selling a favourite Syrian treat—unripe almonds. 
They are very sour, and are eaten with salt.

129
Settling In
Christian areas or at some 
grocery stores that cater to 
the expat community—or you 
can buy a whole pig from a 
Christian farmer! Even such 
things as turkey are available 
if you ask around. One year for 
Thanksgiving, a group of fellow 
teachers got together, found a turkey farmer, bought a 
turkey from him, and had a feast. It was, unequivocally, 
the tastiest and most tender turkey I’ve ever had!
In addition to larger shops, there are many street-corner 
kiosks that sell candies, toiletries, magazines, newspapers, 
etc. In some neighbourhoods you can buy fresh local produce 
from the farmers who trek through with their donkeys or 
horsedrawn carts, calling out their goods such as potatoes, 
pistachios, radishes and parsley. Buying all you can this way 
will save even more on your grocery bills, and it is convenient 
to have home delivery. There are juice shops everywhere, 
and 1.5 litres of freshly squeezed juice costs between 
70 and 150 SP (US$1.40–3), depending on the type of fruit 
and the season.
In the central part of Damascus, Souk Al Jumaia in the 
Sheik Muhiddeen neighbourhood is a good place to buy 
bulk spices, herbs, dried beans, coffee and tea. The prices 
of fruits, vegetables and meats here are also the cheapest in 
 Damascus, and the place is ripe with Arab character. 
The area around Marjeh Circle and between there and 
Souk Al Hamidiyah are also good central shopping areas. 
And of course, the grand  souk of the Arab world itself—
Al Hamidiyah—has about every product you can find in Syria. 
Although the area officially called Souk Al Hamidiyah is only 
one street and its immediate side streets, the entire walled 
city is basically one giant  souk.
The main daily shopping area for foreigners and 
wealthier Syrians in the central city is the Sha’alan area. 
This roughly fills the space between Mahdi Ben Baraki 
Street on the north, Maysaloun Street on the south, Abu 
Romaneh on the west and Salheeyeh Street on the east. 
A Rich History
A hundred years ago, the area 
now known as Sheik Muhiddeen 
was an old village on the side 
of Mt Qassion, separated from 
 Damascus. It has mosques and 
other buildings that are centuries 
old, narrow, winding passages 
and colourful people. 

130 CultureShock! Syria
Here one can find the biggest selection of both imported 
and local products, although prices are often higher than 
at the  souks previously mentioned.
Some Difficult Items to Find
Here are some common Western food and household goods 
that are difficult or impossible to find, and if available are 
very expensive. If you need any of the non-perishables, bring 
them with you: 
 aspirin (bottled) 
 bacon 
 barley 
 basil 
 broccoli 
 cat litter 
 cereals (hot) 
 cheeses (hard) 
 chocolate chips 
 decaf coffee  
 corn syrup  
 cornmeal 
 cranberries 
 ear plugs (you’ll need these
 grains (rolled) 
 if noise keeps you awake)
 granola and muesli 
 ham 
 hair spray (pump type) 
 maple syrup 
 molasses 
 Pepto Bismol or similar 
 pet foods 
 antacid (good for diarrhoea)
 poppy seeds 
 prepackaged meals 
 prunes 
 puddings 
 pumpkin 
 sage 
 seafood (good quality) 
 sandwich meats (fresh)
 sausage (except local 
 
breakfast type) 
 spray starch 
 tampons 
 vitamin C tablets
If you have freezer space or the motivation for canning, 
it’s worth preserving good summer produce for the leaner 
months of late winter and early spring when fruit and 
vegetable selection is poor, prices are high and the quality is 
not comparable to that of summer and autumn.
Other Options for Groceries
If you work for an embassy, you may have a commissary 
loaded with products from home. If not, you can buy almost 
anything in Beirut that you can in the West.  Lebanon is 

131
Settling In
definitely the best shopping option for things not available 
in Syria.
 Jordan also has much more available than it did 10 years 
ago, and an alternative in Amman is Safeway International. 
You can find several, though not all, of the products listed 
above at Safeway, and some imported items are cheaper 
than in Syria. If you live in  Aleppo or Latakia, you can trek 
to Antakia in Turkey to find a wider selection of goods.
Food and Health Considerations
For me, one of the worst things about living in Syria was 
the often tainted food. Most Westerners—even people who 
have lived here and elsewhere in the Middle East for years 
—get occasional bouts of amoeba, worms, fungus or some 
combination of these. The reasons are the use of human 
wastes for fertiliser, and of contaminated surface water for 
irrigation and washing, and a general lack of consciousness 
about food hygiene. For eample, it is common to see large 
sheets of flatbread, hot from the oven, laid out to cool on 
dirty walls, fences and even steps.

132 CultureShock! Syria
Eat Fresh!
Avoid eating raw greens unless you soak them in bleach water (1–2 
tablespoons of chlorine bleach for each gallon of water) for at least 
20 minutes, then in fresh water for the same amount of time. 
Drying parsley, mint, cilantro and other such herbs in 
the sun is also effective. Soak all fruits and vegetables in 
bleach water for 10–15 minutes, then in fresh water for 
the same amount of time before refrigerating them. Eggs 
are also dirty and should be washed with soapy water 
before using. Also, don’t eat meat raw or rare; Syria is not 
the place for sushi or steak tartar, even if you could find 
them! A Syrian speciality that is exceptionally good is called 
kibbeh, made with either raw or cooked lamb. Avoid the 
raw variety. Flour is sometimes contaminated with insect 
and/or worm eggs (especially during late summer) and 
so should be kept refrigerated; it is wise to always sift or 
screen it before use. Wash the tops of cans before opening 
them. And finally, pick through all bulk items such as dried 
beans, rice, raisins and nuts for various indigestible items 
and occasional insects.
A basket  souk in  Damascus.

133
Settling In
OTHER HOME PRODUCTS AND SERVICES
Specialisation is the rule with other products as it is with 
groceries. Paint shops don’t sell electrical tape, electrical 
shops don’t sell hammers and shops that sell door locks 
and screws don’t sell paint. There is a special area in Souk 
Al Hamideeyeh for kitchen cookware. Mahdi Ben Barakee 
Street, near Arnoos Square, has kitchen and household shops 
that sell such things as vacuum cleaners and appliances, 
as does the street between the Parliament building and Al 
Maghribeeyeh Circle, where the palatial Commercial Bank 
headquarters is located. 
The latter street and its side streets also have numerous 
hardware, paint and electrical shops. The major  souk for 
electrical products (voltage regulators, fuses, fans, etc.) is 
near Marjeh Square. If you need tape, there is even a tape 
 souk south of Souk Al Hamidiyah! Again, Sha’alan has a fair 
selection of most home products, but usually at higher prices 
than other locations.
Clothing, Linens, etc.
The biggest selection for modern  clothing in central  Damascus 
is in Sha’alan, Al Hamra Street, Salheeyeh Street and Marjeh 
Square. Tablecloths are everywhere—they’re a Damascene 
speciality, but good towels, sheets and pillowcases are hard 
to find except at the fancier stores that cater to foreigners. 
Locally made  clothing is inexpensive, but generally of poor 
to moderate quality with the possible exception of Syrian-
made denim products, which are heavy and well-made; 
I’m still wearing a denim shirt I bought there 14 years ago! 
Syrian shoes are very inexpensive but of poor quality and 
not available in long or narrow sizes. Despite the tremendous 
amount of cotton and number of sheep raised there, wool and 
cotton sweaters, cotton shirts (other than denim and  dress 
shirts) and wool slacks are difficult to find. Most  clothing 
seems to be made of rayon, called ‘viscose’.
Computers
You can buy an increasing range of computer equipment but 
may have to pay a bit more than in Europe or North America. 

134 CultureShock! Syria
If you need a computer, it might be best to buy the smallest, 
lightest package you can before moving to Syria. In the past, 
you also needed to bring batteries, print cartridges and any 
other accessories you might need for a computer, but that 
has changed. It still, however, might be wise to bring one of 
each accessory with you so you won’t have to find a shop 
under pressure that sells your brand.
The  Internet
By Western standards, it is not exactly easy to get online 
in Syria, but the  Internet has become more popular and 
accessible throughout the country. In 2000, for example, 
only about 7,000 Syrians could access the  Internet. 
However, that figure had skyrocketed to more than 
240,000 by 2002. A 2007 look at a website called Arab0.
com showed several dozen computer, data and information 
processing companies in Syria—a dramatic increase of 
such companies over just a few years before. Additionally, 
there are now numerous Syrian blogs, although some 
have access blocked or restricted by the  government. The 
number of  Internet cafés is growing all the time and usage 
of a terminal costs only 50 SP per hour. The number of 
providers in Syria is limited, however, so it is expensive 
to have your own; and at home, most connections are still 
dial-up, although this may change soon. Also, don’t expect 
high-speed downloads! You can surf the web in  Internet 
cafés or in larger public spaces such as  Damascus’ Assad 
Public Library and the Public  Internet Hall. Syria is so 
intent on bringing its people up-to-speed with technology 
that the country even offers free computer training at 
about 100 locations. 
Satellite TV
If you are a TV watcher, you will be much happier in Syria 
than you would have been over 10 years ago: at that time, 
there were only two channels available, both run by the 
 government. But now, as mentioned earlier in this chapter, 
if you have a satellite dish, you can pay a monthly fee 
of around 1,300 SP and up for numerous international 

135
Settling In
channels. The dish will cost you between US$ 100 and 
US$ 200 unless you can negotiate for your rental agent or 
landlord to provide one.
 HEALTH AND MEDICAL
The cost of medical treatment in Syria may be the cheapest 
in the world. Pharmacies sell many prescription medications 
over the counter, so if you have a prescription from home 
and need a refill or know what you need, you can often just 
go to a pharmacist and buy it.
Insurance
If you want health insurance and can find an insurance 
company that sells portable policies (one that reimburses 
you for treatment in another country), I recommend it only 
for major medical procedures with a large deductible—
something to help you in case of open-heart surgery or 
some other major medical requirement. I have not found 
an insurer in the United States that sells such policies, even 
with a deductible of several thousand dollars, but some 
British firms do. If you are American, before you buy, make 
sure the international policy covers medical treatment in 
the US too; some policies exclude treatment there because 
of the exorbitant medical costs.
A teacher I know who paid hefty premiums for three years 
never exceeded his annual deductible, even with the birth of 
a child and a family of six. I decided to forgo health insurance 
for myself and never regretted the decision.
Common Ailments
The most common illness affecting foreigners is amoebic 
dysentery, with intestinal worms perhaps running a close 
second. Colds and bronchitis are common, even in the heat of 
summer. Hepatitis is not as common, but still a problem, and 
a brief outbreak of cholera in the summer of 1993 was quickly 
stemmed, with the  government designating specific clinics 
and hospitals for treatment to stop a potential epidemic.
If you have respiratory problems, they could be 
exacerbated by the often dirty air (usually in late summer 

136 CultureShock! Syria
and the coldest days of winter when there is no wind); but 
I have a strong allergy to dust as well as a moderate case 
of asthma and was bothered by neither—never even had 
to take any medicine for either while living there. The air 
quality in  Damascus is growing worse, however, due to 
increasing industrialisation and number of automobiles. The 
biggest problems are dust during the long, dry summers, 
and soot from the kerosene heaters in the winter. Because 
of the intense dryness though, there’s no problem at all 
with dust mites, so if you have an allergy for those, there 
is no need to worry about that.
Medical Costs
The average doctor’s consultation fee at present costs only 
a few hundred pounds; a two-night stay for dysentery at the 
most expensive hospital in town cost me around 9,000 SP 
(US$ 180), and this included the doctor’s fees and medicine. 
An ambulance ride costs only a few dollars. A bottle of 
Syrian-made cough syrup and a box of Syrian-made cough 
drops together costs less than 100 SP (US$ 2). Some doctors 
and pharmacists recommend imported medicine that costs 
several times more than an equivalent Syrian brand, but 
I have found little difference between local and imported 
varieties. Profit motive may be the main reason for pushing 
imported medicines, although educated Syrians in general 
have little faith in products made there.
Doctors and Dentists
There is no shortage of doctors in Syria: it seems there is one 
on nearly every block. Most have completed either medical 
studies or internships in the United States or Europe, 
and based on my experience, are as competent as North 
American doctors. They all speak a second language, usually 
English or  French, and have office hours that roughly match 
those of businesses in general: from 8 or 9 am to 2 pm or so, 
then in the evening from around 5 pm until around 8 pm, 
Saturday through Thursday. Although dentists are not as 
plentiful as medical doctors, there are enough, their fees 
are low, and most of them also have Western training.

137
Settling In
Hospitals
Most foreigners go to Shami Hospital, the newest and 
most modern facility and the one recommended by most 
Western embassies. It is the most expensive in town, but 
still costs only a fraction of what similar hospitalisation 
would cost in the United States. The Italian hospital 
is older and specialises in surgery. It is clean, seems 
fairly well equipped, offers good quality care and is less 
expensive than Shami. There is also a well-equipped 
hospital affiliated with  Damascus University Medical 
School. There are small hospitals all over the city and 
even though they tend to specialise, you won’t be turned 
away in an emergency.
For more complete medical information contact your 
embassy nurse or your employer.
Pre-arrival Inoculations
If you will be living in the cities in western Syria, you should 
get hepatitis A and B injections as well as update your polio 
and tetanus shots. Typhoid inoculation is also wise. Check 
with a travel clinic for more complete information.
MISCELLANEOUS
Laundry
There are many dry-cleaning and laundry shops where 
you can have clothes, carpets and other fabrics cleaned 
inexpensively. Be careful about valuable carpets and 
expensive  clothing until you find a cleaner you can trust. 
Some expats take valuable fabrics to hotel cleaners because 
they think they do a better job.
Hairdresser
Barber shops and beauty salons are ubiquitous, and those 
that cater to foreigners and wealthy locals are often highly 
decorated, brightly lit and comfortable. Barbers and 
hairdressers usually do a good job, but a woman may have 
trouble getting them to do a simple job—they’re accustomed 
to creating the elaborate hairstyles that so many young 
Syrian women seem to prefer. The cost at fancy shops is 

138 CultureShock! Syria
generally less than 500 SP (US$ 10). For men who wear their 
hair short and aren’t fussy, barbers in the simpler shops 
used by most locals give decent cuts for around 100 SP.
 Pets
If you bring a pet, you will have trouble finding food and cat 
litter. The only pet food that seems to be readily available is 
canned cat food at around US$1 per can. There are also not 
many veterinarians. Another problem with pets, especially 
larger dogs, is that there are no natural outdoor areas where 
they can roam. If you bring a cat that spends a lot of time 
outdoors, it might pick up diseases from and be terrorised 
by the cities’ wild cats. I recommend leaving your pets at 
home with trusted friends or family. If you do bring them 
and have domestic workers, those workers can ‘baby sit’ the 
pets when you travel; this seems to be a common practice 
among embassy personnel.
The Physically Challenged
For those folks who may be wheelchair bound or who 
have other physical handicaps, life in Syria will likely not 
be pleasant. First, many older buildings have no elevators. 
Second, curbs have no ramps. Third, no toilets are equipped 
to assist the handicapped. And finally, crossing the street just 
about anyplace—even with a cane—would amount to suicide 
for a sight-impaired person. 

‘There is no love sincerer than the love of food.’
—George Bernard Shaw 
 FOOD AND 
ENTERTAINMENT
CHAPTER 6

140 CultureShock! Syria
SOCIALISING IS THE MAIN FORM OF ENTERTAINMENT for both Syrians and 
expats. Lunch and dinner with friends or extended families 
are often major social events, with restaurants full until after 
midnight, particularly on Thursday evenings (the ‘weekend’ 
in Syria is Friday).
DINING OUT
There is nothing that I would call ‘gourmet’ cooking in 
Syria; the local food is good but simple. There are countless 
restaurants, and most of them specialise in Syrian cuisine, 
serving food that ranges from just OK to wonderful. The 
number of stars displayed does not seem to indicate 
anything about quality, only price: I found that a five-star 
place usually served no better food than one with two-stars 
but may charge a lot more. Recently, though, some new 
restaurants serving foreign cuisine have opened, so the 
choices have expanded a bit.
You will find roughly the same items on the menus (if there 
are menus) in nearly all restaurants that serve Syrian food. 
The basics are kabob (grilled lamb) or shishtaoo (chicken), 
kibbeh (a delicious meat pie made with ground lamb, bulgur 
and seasonings), boorak (a cheese-filled pastry), various dips 
made from beans, seeds, yogurt, eggplant and hot peppers, 
the flat bread to eat the dips with, and various kinds of 
salads, including tabouleh, a Middle Eastern speciality. Many 
restaurants also serve yalanji (grape leaves stuffed with 

141
Food and Entertainment
a spiced mixture of ground lamb and rice). The menu is 
essentially the same for breakfast, lunch and dinner, although 
there are a few things such as fool (fava beans cooked in oil, 
lemon juice and garlic, then topped with yogurt) and fatteh 
(a concoction vaguely similar to hot breakfast cereal) that 
are eaten only for breakfast. 
In addition to whatever you order for lunch or dinner, 
you get a tray of pickles, olives and some raw vegetables. 
The Syrians always have tea or Arabic coffee after they eat. 
A meal that expands your belts to breaking point ranges in 
cost from 100 to 500 SP (US$ 2–10) per person, depending 
on the restaurant and what you drink. A few restaurants 
serve fish, but it is quite expensive and often not very fresh, 
except along the Mediterranean coast.
Only a few restaurants serve  alcohol. Most teenagers will 
like this: soda drinks are immensely popular and Syrians 
drink them at all meals—even breakfast. The generic name 
for all soda here is ‘cola’, whether it’s orange, strawberry or 
lemon-lime. If you order ‘soda’, you’re likely to get a plate 
of grilled liver, since that’s the Syrian word for liver!
Syrians love food that is either intensely sweet or sour. The 
country has one of the highest per capita consumptions of 
sugar in the world, and you may find the soft drinks to be 
the sweetest you’ve ever tasted. Even Coke, Pepsi and 7-Up 
that is bottled under license here is sweeter than it is in 
Greece, just a few hundred kilometres away. Syria’s own 
brands are sweeter yet. The traditional Arab sweets, too, are 
so sweet they burned my palate. Conversely, the pickles are 
the sourest I’ve ever eaten. The natives also eat plain yogurt 
by the bowl and have a favourite drink, called simply leban 
(the Arabic word for yogurt) made from yogurt with a little 
water, salt and garlic added. Syrians eat a great deal of yogurt, 
believing it is good for the stomach. They also feel that garlic 
is an aid to health and digestion and can overcome stomach 
infections. Garlic, incidentally, is one of the main seasonings 
in Syrian cuisine, and it’s used in copious quantities.
Here are some recommendations for excellent Syrian 
cuisine: Orient Club, across from the new Four Seasons 
Hotel—some people think that it offers the best traditional 

142 CultureShock! Syria
cuisine in the city; Abu al’Izz Restaurant in the ancient Souk 
Al Hamidiyah—old, dripping with atmosphere and often 
has live music; Nadil, near Baab Sharqi; Spicy, on the Abu-
Romaneh side of Jisr al-Abiad—homemade-style Arab food; 
Haretna, Baab Touma area—great mezze (a group of dipping 
sauces for flat bread) and kabobs, and trendy and fashionable 
as well; and finally, for fish, there’s a place called Bourj el-
Roos that is quite rustic but cooks probably the best fish in 
 Damascus—cheap, too.
Aside from Syrian cuisine, which varies a little by region, 
there are an increasing number of good restaurant choices. 
The Cham and Sheraton Hotels in  Damascus have a Chinese 
and an Italian restaurant, respectively, but prices are nearly 
the same as what you’d pay in the United States or Europe, 
and the food is not great, in my opinion (but I think that’s 
true of hotel food nearly everywhere). The luxury  hotels have 
breakfast and lunch buffets. Some buffets are good, others 
not so special, but all are expensive. 
There are several cafés that make fairly decent pizzas 
(although nothing like what you’d find in New York or 
Chicago), hot dogs and hamburgers, although I found them 
all to have a sweetness that seemed a bit out of place in such 
food. These places are most common in neighbourhoods 
where foreigners live and tourists go. 
Several restaurants in  Damascus bill themselves as  French, 
but most I’ve tried serve food that’s mediocre or worse: I’ve 
tried chicken cordon bleu at two of these, and it was the 
worst I’ve ever eaten; escargot at one was dry, tasteless and 
as rubbery as an old tire. The only things that make most 
of these restaurants  French are the black-tie  dress, the aloof 
attitude of the waiters and the high prices. One exception is 
a place in  Damascus called Sindiana, on Mahdi Ben Baraki 
Street across from Subki Park. The food here is very good, 
but it’s not for people on a tight budget: a meal with hors 
d’oeuvres and wine or imported beer can run the equivalent of 
US$ 20–30 per person. This would not be much for similar 
quality in North America or Europe but a whole family could 
have an excellent Syrian meal for the same price. Along with 
the hotel restaurants, Sindiana is an expat favourite.

143
Food and Entertainment
Syrians relaxing over a water 
pipe at a typical cafe in the  souk.

144 CultureShock! Syria
Here are some recommendations for non-Syrian cuisine 
and drinks: Sharia Medhat Pasha, at the turn to Baab 
Kisan—some folks think it serves the best pizza and pasta 
in  Damascus, although service is often less than good and 
there’s no menu, but just ask for whatever Italian dish you 
want and they will most likely be able to prepare it; Scoozi 
in Abu Romaneh—European-style café with great service; Il 
Circo in the Four Seasons—best wine selection and seafood 
in  Damascus, but priced accordingly; Nadi al Sharq, Indian 
cuisine, and some say the best in  Damascus; Vienna Café 
near the Cham Palace Hotel, opposite the Adidas store—
makes dark bread sandwiches and apple strudel, among 
other things; Inhouse Coffee, a chain at the  airport and other 
locations—great European-style coffee; Taj Mahal—Indian, of 
course; and The Swiss House—Swiss-style food, obviously. 
In restaurants serving Syrian food, service is normally 
good, although waiters do not hang around your table. They 
put no pressure on you to hurry your meal, and when you 
want dessert, tea, coffee or the bill, you usually have to signal 
for the waiter. 
Although dining out is enjoyable, especially in the summer 
when you can eat under the stars, there’s a certain amount of 
Russian roulette involved. If you 
eat at restaurants regularly, you’re 
bound to pick up occasional 
amoebas or worms; this happens 
a lot to some people, only rarely 
to others. You can lessen your chances of getting sick by 
avoiding restaurants that look dirty or whose waiters and 
cooks look like they spend little time on personal hygiene. 
Also, I recommend avoiding those with filthy toilets and 
washrooms.
It’s best to avoid uncooked greens and lightly-cooked or 
raw meat. Order your salads without lettuce and do not eat 
tabouleh except perhaps in late winter and early spring, after 
winter rains have flushed the soil. Also avoid the chopped 
mint and parsley garnishes sprinkled on most dishes. If you 
know you’re susceptible to stomach infections, do not eat any 
raw vegetables or fruit you have not cleaned yourself.
Paying Up
To ask for your bill say, “al hesab, 
min faddlak.”

145
Food and Entertainment
A reasonable tip in Syria is around 10 per cent, although 
some Syrians tip less. It is also important to tip the bus boys. 
They don’t share the waiter’s tip, even though they do most 
of the work—waiters often only take your order, supervise 
the bus boys and assistants, give you your bill, and collect 
your money. Ten or fifteen pounds is an adequate tip for 
the bus boys.
Fast Food
There are now a handful of fast food franchises, including 
KFC (American fried chicken), Dunkin Donuts and a Finnish 
burger joint called Hezburger, the latter in the suburb of 
Dummar. No doubt there will be more to come, but many 
foreign residents are not happy with the invasion. There are 
delicious, cheap and (with the exception of the ice cream) 
healthier versions of Syrian ‘fast food’: 
 shaawarma sandwiches made with lamb or chicken
 falaafel sandwiches
 juice shops that sell mixtures of milk and banana, 
 
strawberry, or other juices by the glass
 ice cream parlours that sell a multitude of pastries 
 
and ice cream treats
In areas where many foreigners live, there are also small 
cafés that sell Syrian-style (usually strangely sweet) hot dogs, 
hamburgers and pizzas to eat in or take out.

GEO MAGAZINE: What does it take to be a good traveller?
PAUL THEROUX: Courage. Curiosity. Travellers have to be 
alone. They have to take risks. And they have to be among 
things vastly different from those they have come from. 
You see, a lot of people who travel are only looking for an 
idealised version of home. They travel to ﬁ nd home with 
better food, home plus more sunshine, home plus easier 
parking, home plus no crime, home plus the possibility of 
romance… They’re not looking for the foreign, the strange, 
the really outlandish… There have always been explorers, 
and there have always been vacationers. The explorer has the 
instinct to be the ﬁ rst person to see something, or the last.
ENJOYING THE 
CULTURE/TRAVEL
CHAPTER 7

147
Enjoying the Culture/Travel
COMPARED TO MOST OF THE WORLD’S CAPITALS,  Damascus does not 
offer much in the way of the type of leisure activities that 
most Westerners are used to. If you are accustomed to regular 
artistic variety—everything from art to opera, music and 
cinema—life here will be a big adjustment, although there 
are more of these things available now than there were 10 
years ago. Other Syrian cities have even less to offer. Still, 
if you look for and appreciate what there is, you can enjoy 
yourself. You can begin by not comparing lifestyles there to 
those in the West.

148 CultureShock! Syria
SEEING AND BEING SEEN
When Syrians walk around the streets and parks at night 
—something they do in hordes during nice weather—they 
wear their best  clothing. Even conservative  Muslim women 
often wear fashionable scarves and dresses. Young people 
parade around for a potential  marriage partner, and the 
general milieu makes watching the locals an interesting 
pastime. People are also likely to strike up a conversation 
with you, maybe even invite you for tea or something to eat. 
In the summer, ice cream shops are particularly ‘hot’ places, 
much like the old soda shops in the United States.
 SHOPPING
For most foreigners and for Syrians who have money to spend, 
this is a favourite pastime. For the locals, it is also part of night-
time socialising; for people from the West, just experiencing 
the big  souks is endlessly fascinating, often making the 
handicraft bargains one finds a secondary benefit.
A perfume shop at Souk Al-Hamidiyah; take note of the classical Damascene 
 architecture with bands of different-coloured stone.

149
Enjoying the Culture/Travel
 Jewellery
Gold and silver work is about the cheapest and most 
extravagantly designed anywhere. Meticulously filigreed 
bracelets, earrings, teaspoons and cocktail forks cost little 
more than the price of the gold or silver itself.
Handicraft Specialties
There are a number of   handicrafts unique to Syria, if not 
in general appearance, at least in their particular patterns 
and details.
Brass and copper plates, bowls and pitchers are common 
and often lovely. The copper work is fast disappearing, 
though: it was a tradition of the dwindled Jewish population. 
The pieces are in high demand and prices are rising. Brass 
work, however, is still plentiful and relatively inexpensive.
Carpets, both old and new, locally made and imported 
from other countries of the region, are abundant. Bedouin 
carpets, in particular, are unbelievably cheap if you buy them 
in the  desert. A caveat, though: be careful about cleaning 
them or getting them wet, as the dyes are sometimes not 
colourfast. One carpet I bought in the  desert was totally 
ruined by massively bleeding colors when it got rained on!

150 CultureShock! Syria
In big  souks you can find traditional garments such as 
dresses, capes, jackets and various sorts of gowns (for both 
men and women) with a big variety of embroidery. Tablecloths 
and pillowcases with unique Damascene designs are now 
made by machines but are still striking and inexpensive. 
There is a special brocaded fabric known as damask, named 
for  Damascus; you can buy this by the yard, and have a tailor 
(also inexpensive) make whatever you want with it.
Another Syrian specialty is mosaic woodwork. There 
are two basic types: one uses thin layers of assembly-line 
veneers; the other has each piece of wood, bone or mother-
of-pearl cut and set by hand. The latter are more costly than 
veneered pieces but are still a very good buy.
There is wide variation in the quality and design of 
mosaics. Some workmanship is crude, while some is very 
nice. Some inlays only have different-coloured woods, while 
others contain bone or mother-of-pearl (most of it artificial). 
You can find boxes of every shape and size, trays, tables, 
game boards ranging from lap-size to large table-top models, 
and even desks made from mosaic.
Yet another  Damascus speciality is handblown glass. 
Across the street from Baab Sharqi is one glass factory; 
another is in the handicraft  souk mentioned earlier. Both 
factories (‘factory’ is a bit misleading—these are small 
shops) make glass in three different colours: cobalt blue, 
green and amber-brown. Each colour is produced for a 
month, another colour for another month, etc. The objects 
range from small tea glasses (the traditional way of drinking 
tea) and small bowls to large, garishly painted vases, light 
fixtures and water pipes for smoking called ‘hubble bubble’. 
In between are various sizes of bowls, glasses, cups, ashtrays 
and decorative pieces. You can either buy off the shelf or 
specify what you’d like, and they’ll make it for you. I had a 
half-dozen tea glasses specially made; they were ready the 
next day and cost the equivalent of US$ 0.50 each.
 Finally,  antiques are available, some extraordinarily 
wonderful, some interesting, others just old. But again 
the prices are low compared to items of similar age and 
quality in North America or Europe. You can find things 

151
Enjoying the Culture/Travel
ranging from miniature filigreed birds to Bedouin knives 
and jewellery to large pieces of furniture inlaid with silver 
and mother-of-pearl.
 Bargaining
Prices on food items are usually not negotiable, but you 
can bargain on  handicrafts. Most merchants expect it. This 
Middle Eastern way of business almost resembles a game 
of wits, such as chess or checkers. Although it involves 
some drama and quick thinking, it is always a friendly 
exchange—another way to promote social interaction and 
cooperation. Once you get a feel for the going prices on 
things, you’ll be able to tell which items have reasonable 
prices and which prices are too high.
CINEMA, THEATRE, CONCERTS, GALLERIES
 Cinemas
Except for an occasional good Hollywood production (usually 
appearing a year or two years after its United States release) 
cinemas here are the haunting grounds of rowdy young men 
watching Egyptian soap operas or super-violent American 
and Asian movies. When a good film appears, it’s usually 
been cut, often poorly, by the censors. An exception to this 
situation is the international film festival, in late October 
and early November, and the usual showings at the Cham 
Palace Hotel cinema. The festival films are shown at both 
Cham Hotel cinemas, the Al Hamra Street Theatre and a 
couple of other locations. The movies at the festival are 
predominantly from the region—India to North Africa and 
southern Europe—and most have either English or  French 
subtitles, while the usual fare at the Cham Hotel cinema is 
Western films of the same kind and quality you might see at 
a large cineplex in the US—although several months later.
Music
 Music is an integral part of Syrian life. It sets the mood in the 
background to almost every situation. As you travel through 
the country, you will hear a range of Middle Eastern tunes 
in the  souks, cafés and various businesses. In the morning, 

152 CultureShock! Syria
you will most likely hear the slow, sleepy sounds of popular 
musicians, while the more hectic afternoons call for livelier, 
more percussive beats
Although Syria ostensibly protects intellectual property, 
pirating of brand names in general, music and video in 
particular, are widespread. Audio and video tapes, CDs  and 
DVDs in Syria are often pirated. Those whom this does not 
offend ethically take advantage of the situation to build 
their music library. Some shops buy good quality tapes 
or CDs and record onto them from compact discs, selling 
the copies for less than 200 SP, and the sound quality is 
excellent. (Remember, however, that no royalties are paid to 
the copyright owners. It’s also worth bearing in mind that, 
should customs inspectors in the U.S. or European countries 
find the bootleg discs or tapes, they will likely confiscate 
them.) Just about all popular music in the Western world and 
from Arab musicians is available. Alternative rock is rare and 
blues and jazz selections are limited, however.
Some shops sell traditional Arab music instruments 
—including handmade ones—as well as electric guitars, 
modern drums, etc.
Video Cassettes, DVDs and CDs
An NTSC VCR from North America will be of little use in 
Syria, since the videos used there will not play on them. 
Get a multi-system VCR from  Lebanon (mine, an Akai that 
played NTSC, Pal and Mesecam tapes, cost around US$ 300) 
and hope you land an apartment with a TV that will also 
accommodate other systems. DVDs have not yet replaced 
videos to the extent they have in the West and Japan, but 
their presence is increasing. Again, though, DVDs have ‘area 
codes’ that make them unplayable in machines not made 
for those codes, so if you take a DVD player, make sure it 
has the capacity to play all codes—or at least those of the 
Middle East and Europe.
If you work for the US Embassy, American Language 
Centre or  Damascus Community School you can check 
out tapes and DVDs from the extensive library stocked by 
USIS (US Information Service); if you work for the Canadian 

153
Enjoying the Culture/Travel
Embassy, you can get those from their Chimo Club; the 
Australian Embassy also had them available. You can also 
rent local videos (Pal system) and DVDs for the equivalent of 
about US$ 0.50 each. Before you jump for joy, I must tell you 
that they are often copied from copies which were copied 
from copies who knows how many times, making the quality 
of both sound and picture poor. Still, they’re a bargain, and 
as with many other things in Syria, you’ll adjust.
Live Theatre
Except for an occasional international school production, 
theatre is sparse: it is not at all part of traditional Middle 
Eastern culture. Syria, however, has two national theatre 
groups, and a large and lovely new national theatre has been 
built in  Damascus. This will hopefully improve the choices for 
live performances. Live shows are also held at the Al Hamra 
Street Theatre.
Concerts
There are quite a few concerts, ranging from classical 
European and classical Arab to American jazz and Indian 
music. These are performed at the cultural centres (including 
the Arab Cultural Centre in Mezzeh), at the Al Hamra Street 
Theatre, at the Asad library, in hotel ballrooms and at 
the new performance hall at the Ebla Cham Hotel about 
halfway between the  airport and  Damascus. For information 
regarding concerts, keep your eyes open for notices posted 
in schools, embassies and cultural centres. The Syria Times, 
Syria’s English language newspaper, often gives notices 
of art exhibitions and dance and musical performances. 
Concerts are sometimes sponsored by an embassy and you 
can ask to have your name added to the list of people who 
receive invitations. It helps if you can read Arabic, because 
performances not geared toward the expat community are 
often advertised only in Arabic.
The Syrian National Symphony performs two annual 
concerts at the Ebla Cham performance hall. Get information 
about and tickets for these from the Conservatory of Music 
near Al Omayyad Circle.

154 CultureShock! Syria
 Art Galleries
Although the arts in Syria are anything but avant garde, 
there are several shops in the Sha’alan area of  Damascus 
that sell paintings and drawings. They have some nice work, 
some of which catches the essence not only of  Damascus, 
but of Arab culture and place in general. Prices are low by 
Western standards. Also there is a painter named Nazir who 
has his own shop (in the city’s Jewish quarter) jammed full 
of his paintings, which range from so-so to very nice; some 
are quite traditional, others unusual, but most all include 
some form of human heads. His prices are very low. He 
also makes all his own paint, brushes, paper, etc. “as a link 
to artists of the past”, he says.
 Mustafa Ali’s Gallery is also located in the Jewish quarter 
of the Old City. He’s an internationally known Syrian 
sculptor who is trying to turn the dilapidated buildings of 
the Jewish quarter into a bohemian art district. Head north 
from Straight Street, running through the Old City, and locals 
can guide you to this area.

155
Enjoying the Culture/Travel
In addition to the commercial galleries,  Damascus has 
several public galleries, most of them centrally located. 
Exhibitions change frequently and include artists from the 
region and sometimes Europe. Check the Syria Times or the 
galleries for information. The various countries’ cultural centres 
also occasionally sponsor art and photography exhibits.
Other Performances
Suppose you’re walking home late one night, and you hear 
the sounds of a drum, clapping and chanting male voices. 
You look for its source and see a man or two leading the 
chants, white skullcaps on their heads, standing on the 
shoulders of others who are walking in circles. You have just 
encountered a traditional  Muslim wedding party. While the 
men are doing this ritual in the street, the women are in a 
nearby restaurant or home dancing, singing and feasting. 
When the women finish eating the men will eat, and the 
party will last most of the night.
Each September an international festival is held in  Bosra, 
in its amazingly well preserved Roman amphitheatre. The 
The still-used Roman amphitheatre in Bosra seats 15,000 people.

156 CultureShock! Syria
festival runs every night for approximately three weeks and 
has many international folk dance and music groups. If you’re 
there during the day (hotel rooms are hard to find, since  Bosra 
is a small town), you can also witness rehearsals. There are 
also occasional folk dance and music festivals in  Palmyra, 
 Aleppo and other cities. 
Finally, just prior to the  Bosra festival, there is a regional 
festival of sports, music, dance—just about everything—at the 
sports city north of Latakia on the Mediterranean coast.
ODDS AND ENDS
When entertainment is limited, you can sometimes find it 
in places you wouldn’t think of at home.
Enjoying the History and Culture
When you live in a country with such a broad variety of 
cultures and immensely rich history, learning about and 
enjoying these things seems as natural as eating. 
 Damascus is possibly the oldest continuously inhabited 
city on Earth; it’s so old that its earliest date of settlement is 
not known, but it was mentioned in Egyptian writing around 
seven millennia ago as Damashq—its present name in Arabic. 
 Aleppo was established around 5,000 years ago, and Latakia 
was built in the 24th century BP by the Greek Seleucos Nicator. 
 Damascus and  Aleppo in particular have vast numbers of 
interesting buildings, remains and diverse neighbourhoods: 
the  Omayyad Mosque, Azem Palace (an Ottoman treasure), 
museums and  souks are only the best known. 
Some of the neighbourhoods of Syrian cities look as they 
did hundreds of years ago except for the motor vehicles and 
some Western  dress. A perceptive person will delight in the 
variety of the oldest neighbourhoods, whether Christian, 
 Muslim or Jewish. A good pair of walking shoes and a desire 
to lose yourself in other worlds are the only requirements for 
hours of enjoyment. The ability to read and speak Arabic even 
moderately will enhance the experience, helping you read 
signs and dates on buildings and talk to the local residents 
whose families may go back hundreds of years in the same 
spot—even the same house.

157
Enjoying the Culture/Travel
Another thing I highly recommend—although not enter-
tainment, as such—is to learn about  Islam and experience 
some of it first hand. With the great antagonism that has 
in some ways always existed between ‘the  children of the 
book’ (as Muslims call themselves, Christians and  Jews), and 
the more recent escalation of that antagonism, it would do 
people of all three religions good to not only learn more 
about the others but to experience some of them. For 
example, I attended Friday prayers at two different mosques 
while living in Syria, one of them the grand  Omayyad 
Mosque, the other at a Shi’a  mosque where the attendees 
were predominantly Iranian. The latter particularly left a 
great impression on me for the fervency with which they 
prayed. Anyone can attend prayers, but unless you are 
 Muslim and know the routines and etiquette, I recommend 
not doing it alone so as to avoid making serious faux pas and 
thereby increasing the misunderstandings and suspicions 
among us. In both cases, I asked  Muslim acquaintances if 
they would mind my going along with them to experience 
Friday prayers at those mosques, and in both cases, they 
were both surprised and delighted that I had asked. In 
the Shi’a  mosque, I detected what I perceived as some 

158 CultureShock! Syria
hostility toward my presence (although my reading could 
have been wrong), but no one was rude or threatening to 
me in any way. At the  Omayyad Mosque, I not only didn't 
feel any hostility, but after the service, several people 
approached me and asked if I was  Muslim, and if not, why 
was I there, where was I from, etc. When I (with the help 
of some interpretating from the acquaintance I was there 
with) told them that, no, I was raised as a Christian but 
wanted to experience the  Muslim way of worship and try 
to understand their beliefs more, their responses were all 
very positive and welcoming.
The Media
Until January 2001, all Syrian  media was strictly controlled 
by the  Ba’ath Party. In November 2000, President  Bashar al-
Asad gave political parties the right to publish in an attempt 
to further loosen the  government’s authoritarian hold. In 
January 2001, the Communist party’s Sawt al-Shaab (People’s 
Voice) became the first newspaper in 30 years not printed 
by the Ba’ath party or  government. 
In spite of this major step toward freer speech, however, 
the paper will probably not challenge the leadership since the 
Communist party is part of the National Progressive Front, a 
group of seven parties dominated by the ruling Baa’th Party. 
Still, it is an important first step and a telling gesture.
There are several Arabic language newspapers available 
from most countries of the Middle East. The Syria Times 
used to be predominantly filled with propaganda about the 
wonderful leadership of President al-Asad, but it recently 
has increasing news from international presses, some sports 
and information about local artists and artistic events, and 
other valuable info. It also lists emergency phone numbers 
and other miscellaneous information. 
Foreign newspapers such as the International Herald 
Tribune, The New York Times, The Wall Street Journal and 
Le Monde are available as well as magazines such as Time, 
Newsweek and others from Britain and France. All of these 
are several days old when they hit the newsstands, and 
occasionally have pages removed if the material is considered 

159
Enjoying the Culture/Travel
either too sexually explicit (an article about Madonna was 
cut from one magazine and one about  Israel from another), 
critical of Syria or favourable to  Israel.
For TV, there’s an option of a satellite dish and programmes. 
Check the info in Chapter 5 for that.
There are  a few radio channels available in AM, FM, medium 
wave and short wave, but most of these are Arabic stations 
with little or no variety. You can pick up Voice of America, the 
BBC, and a few other outside channels if you are in certain 
locations and have a medium and short wave receiver.
 Bars and Clubs
Although there are only a handful of bars or nightclubs in Syria 
(almost all of them in  Damascus), the Canadian and British 
diplomatic personnel have clubs that are open to expats 
who work for their embassies or for foreign businesses or 
cultural centres and have iqaamas. Syrians are not allowed 
nor are foreigners who are domestic employees. You must 
be invited by a British expat to go to the Pig and Whistle 
on Tuesday nights, and the Chimo Club (Canadian) is open 
every other Friday evening. These clubs open around 5:30–
6 pm and close before 10 pm. In addition, there is a place 
called The Night Club in the Sha’alan area that has live 
Arabic music, and a club called The Piano Bar near the 
entrance to Baab Sharqi. The latter admits only couples.
Believe it or not, there are genuine burlesque clubs in 
 Damascus. One, called The Crazy Horse Club, is near the 
Cham Palace Hotel and across from the Syrian military 
officers’ club. There is another, called The Chicken Club, near 
by. These clubs are open all night, and are rumoured to be 
pick-up spots for prostitutes.
Some other recent additions to clubs are: Mar Mar, near 
the Bakri baths in Baab Touma—the owner performs with 
his own funk band regularly; Domino, a bar and café in 
Baab Touma, the heart of the Christian centre in the Old 
City—becomes a disco after 11 pm; Backdoor, at the Barada 
Sports Club in Mazrah—a trendy dance hall for R&B and 
Arab pop, with an entrance fee of 1,000 SP, a fortune by 
Syrian standards.

160 CultureShock! Syria
Exercise
Expats can work out at a health club called Club al-Droubi in 
Abu Romaneh (a block from the Saudi Embassy) and another 
in Mezzeh. The major  hotels also have health clubs, and the 
Cham Hotel has the only bowling alley in Syria.
The Hash House Harriers sponsors several events each 
month (usually on Fridays) for running, hiking and camping in 
addition to some social activities. The  Damascus Community 
School compound has a running track that can be used by 
its teachers, teachers at the American Language Centre, and 
employees of the American Embassy before 8 am and after 
3:30 pm on school days and all day on weekends. 
It is not safe to run or cycle on most streets in Syrian 
cities, except on Fridays, because of the traffic and the road 
and sidewalk hazards, but there are areas in the mountains 
around Bludan and  Maalula as well as in the  desert where 
you can hike. Don’t get close to military installations, though, 
and carry a few large stones to chase off the unpredictable 
half-wild dogs if you’re in the  desert.
During the summer, you can cool off in a number of 
swimming pools. Most are on the outskirts of the city and cost 
only 150 SP (US$ 3) or so to use. The pools at the Sheraton 
and Meridien Hotels in  Damascus are also open to the public, 
but cost around 400 SP (US$ 8); they are favoured by rich local 
young people and foreigners who can afford the US$250-a-
night rooms. You can purchase health club memberships at 
most luxury  hotels.
The cities have several old—some ancient—Turkish baths, 
some with masseuses, but of course, for men only.
Expat Organizations and Cultural Centres
The associations for American, British and Canadian women 
have libraries and video cassette access, and sponsor 
entertainment such as lectures, folk dances and musical 
performances. The American Women of  Damascus (AWD) 
meets monthly from September to June; subgroups of this 
organisation for gardening, cooking and other interests meet 
whenever the group decides. Foreign cultural centres also 
have libraries and sponsor musical events and lectures.

161
Enjoying the Culture/Travel
THINGS NOT AVAILABLE
If you’re an avid golfer, hunter, or fisherman, you will be 
disappointed: Syria offers none of the above. Although some 
Syrians hunt animals in the  desert or birds just about any place 
outside the cities, foreigners cannot carry guns. The only golf 
course is a tiny one for guests at the Ebla Cham Hotel.
HOLIDAYS AND CELEBRATIONS
Most  holidays are quite subdued. There are lots of  government-
related holidays, the big ones sometimes accompanied by 
fireworks exploded on Mt. Qassioun. Some have parades, 
military aircraft buzzing the city and party speeches, but the 
celebrations seem staged.
Christmas is celebrated in the Christian communities, 
and there are two Easters—one for Eastern, one for Western 
Christians. These days of Christian celebration are also official 
holidays with schools and  government offices closed, but 
most shops open.
The Two Eids
The truly big celebrations are Islamic: the two three-day 
holidays called Eid. The first, Eid al-Fitr, immediately follows 
the fast during the Islamic month of Ramadan. During 

162 CultureShock! Syria
Ramadan, you may be invited to eat with a  Muslim family 
and experience the evening meal, called iftar, that breaks 
the day’s fast. 
Food is set on the table in vast quantities (none of them 
have eaten or even drunk water since dawn), and the family is 
seated and ready to attack the food at the broadcasts from the 
minarets that mark the end of the day’s fast. Once the eating 
starts, no one says anything for a while, and unlike the regular 
meals that often drag on for an hour or more, the food is gone 
in minutes! Most men and even quite a few women visit the 
mosques for the special prayers after iftar every evening. 
After Ramadan ends, Eid al-Fitr begins, and people gorge 
themselves on special foods, stay up all night and spend all 
their spare time visiting extended families and friends. It is 
a custom for  children to get money from their uncles. For 
a poor uncle in a typically large Syrian family, this can be a 
problem! There are also carnival-type rides set up in large 
parks for kids, and young people ride horses and go-carts in 
and around some parks.
The second Eid, called Eid al-Adha, is celebrated in about 
the same manner and follows the traditional end of Hajj, the 
pilgrimage to Mecca. The night before this feast begins there’s 
a buzz of activity everywhere and great excitement in the air. 
The  souks and shops stay open until midnight, and practically 
everyone stays out late shopping for special foods and gifts. 
Don’t be surprised if you see a camel’s head and sheep’s 
testicles—considered delicacies—displayed in the butchers’ 
stalls. It is a happy time. People are in good spirits and you will 
hear a great deal of laughter, joking and sometimes women’s 
singing. Women get their hands hennaed in the courtyards 
of the mosques, while men huddle in groups to discuss the 
day’s events and  children run and play everywhere. The 
mosques are also crowded with the faithful.
During this feast, Muslims who can afford to do so, 
traditionally slaughter an animal and donate its meat to the 
poor. If you are out on this day, you will probably cringe as 
you see many sheep, lambs and goats awaiting their fate. On 
the first morning of the feast, the sidewalks in some areas 
are often stained with blood.

163
Enjoying the Culture/Travel
Most Westerners are spared the reality of where their meat 
comes from, but in the Middle East, it’s all out in the open. 
During both Eids, almost nothing is open,  government or 
private, the streets are nearly deserted night and day (except 
around the parks), and it is the only time the city streets are 
peaceful and quiet. It is also difficult to find daily needs during 
Eid, although some Jewish and Christian shops are open. It’s 
best to stock up on basic needs before the holidays begin.
The dates for Eid are determined by lunar criteria and so 
occur at different times in each Islamic country and each 
year. Even though it is officially only three days, if those days 
fall mid-week some shops, schools and embassies close for 
the entire week. People who can afford to do so often leave 
town for a week.
If you decide to travel anywhere in an Islamic country 
during either Eid, make sure you have reservations. Rental 
cars vanish as quickly as  hotels,  buses and local airlines fill 
up. Whatever transportation is available during this time will 
probably cost you two or three times as much.
 DOMESTIC TRAVEL
For many of us who live or have lived in Syria, being able 
to travel in the country and region is one of our greatest 
joys. Even people who are familiar with the area’s history 
are surprised at the ancient treasures they can find, many 
of them unfamiliar even to most Syrians. The country has 
more than 200 historical and archaeological sites from as 
far back as 7,000 years ago and most are within a day’s 
trip from  Damascus. And unlike Europe,  Egypt and Turkey 
where ruins are overrun with tourists, sometimes roped 
off for protection from wear and tear or vandalism, all but 
the most well-known sites in Syria are usually deserted, 
although not quite as much as they were in the past. This isn’t 
a guide book, but I want to point out some highlights.
Eastern and Central Syria
Following the  Euphrates River from the Iraqi border in the 
southeast to the dam near  Aleppo in the north, you’ll find 
remnants of several different civilisations. 

164 CultureShock! Syria
At Doura Europa, the remains of a city built 2,500 years 
ago by Alexander the Great on the Euphrates near  Iraq, my 
partner and I saw one lone backpacker from Switzerland 
and one couple from elsewhere in Europe. It was just us, 
the fantasy of history and a sandstorm blowing in from  Iraq 
that turned the sky yellow and added to the mystique of the 
experience.
We spent a full day climbing and exploring Halabeeyeh, 
the ruins of a Roman outpost on the Euphrates north of Deir 
ez-Zor, and saw no one except a couple of shepherds on 
surrounding hills; the only sounds were those of the wind, the 
distant tinkling of sheep bells and the thump-thump-thump 
of irrigation pumps on the river. Shards of pottery were 
everywhere, ranging in age from Roman to early  Muslim.
South of Raqqa, on the Euphrates in north-central Syria, 
are the ruins of an ancient walled city a long way off the 
highway but with a serviceable road leading to it.
The entrance arch and grand promenade at  Palmyra.

165
Enjoying the Culture/Travel
In the central deserts there are ruins of Arab castles, some 
that you must drive across roadless  desert to reach (make 
sure you rent a four-wheel drive if you plan to go to these). 
These, too, are virtually deserted except for an occasional 
Bedouin and his sheep. The best preserved of these is called 
the Eastern Palace and is about halfway between  Palmyra and 
Deir ez-Zor. The most magnificent ruins in this part of the 
country are those of  Palmyra, the Roman city that was last 
ruled by Queen Zenobia, who was Syrian and is a heroine to 
most Syrian women. For me, there is something surrealistic 
and intriguing about this place and what I call “the valley 
of the dead”—a valley northwest of  Palmyra where Roman 
aristocrats were buried in caves and funerary towers, a few of 
which are still in fairly good condition. On the southern edge 
of the ruins is an oasis (the source of water for  Palmyra) where 
you can walk between the winding adobe walls surrounding 
date and olive groves that are centuries old. And on a hill 
overlooking the Roman ruins are the ruins of a 12th or 13th 
century Arab castle that you can tour for a small fee—with 
a local Bedouin guide.
The far northeastern corner of the country does not hold 
as much visible historical interest but is culturally diverse. 
This is the Kurdish area of Syria, and some enclaves of people 
here speak the ancient language of Syriac.
In addition to the historical wonders of the  desert, the 
steppe and the Euphrates, cultures and  handicrafts are quite 
diverse, and noticeably different than in the cities to the 
west. Deir ez-Zor has the largest  souk in eastern Syria, and 
the prices are lower than those in  Damascus. In Tadmor, the 
 desert town at  Palmyra, shops sell both new and antique 
Bedouin goods; but look around before you buy, because 
the prices vary quite a bit from shop to shop.  Palmyra is the 
most popular and well-known tourist site in Syria. 
You might notice that people along the Euphrates are less 
cordial than those in  Damascus, but some are still friendly. 
Most people here are quite dark-skinned and wear a wide 
variety of clothes—especially the women. More women 
also wear veils and cover their heads than they do in the big 
cities to the west.

166 CultureShock! Syria
The  desert people are mostly  Bedouins whose insulated 
culture goes back thousands of years and who will find you 
as fascinating as you find them. In the spring the steppes 
and deserts are dotted with the rectangular, black goatskin 
tents of the  Bedouins.
The Population Centre Corridor
Along the main highway between  Jordan and Turkey, there 
is a vast array of interesting sites.  Bosra, in the south, has 
perhaps the world’s best-preserved Roman amphitheatre, 
an impressive structure that seats 15,000 people and is still 
used regularly. It is even more special with the  Muslim citadel, 
about 900 years old, built around it. 
A  Muslim village was constructed at the same time as the 
citadel among the ruins of the Roman city surrounding the 
coliseum. Pieces of columns and other debris from Roman 
structures were incorporated into the walls of the  Muslim 
town. It is still inhabited and mostly unchanged for the last 
half-dozen centuries, creating alluring juxtapositions. There 
is a  mosque, for example, built with columns taken from the 
The sculpture garden above the Roman amphitheatre in  Bosra.

167
Enjoying the Culture/Travel
Giant water wheel at Hama.

168 CultureShock! Syria
Roman amphitheatre, remains of a rare round cathedral, and 
the remains of a church in which the priest purportedly told 
Mohammed that he would be the next prophet.
Some way north of  Bosra is the village of Shahba, the 
birthplace of Philip, a Roman emperor from 1763–1758 BP. 
Here are more Roman ruins, including some well-preserved 
mosaics in a museum.
North of Homs is the city of Hama with its giant old water 
wheels on the Orontes River. Near Hama is what’s left of 
Apamea, a third century Greco-Roman city that had half a 
million inhabitants. Near  Aleppo are ghost towns, the remains 
of the Roman road that ran from Turkey down to the Red Sea, 
and Ebla, a tell discovered in 1974 with records of human 
habitation from 4500 BP.
Atop a hill in  Aleppo is an enormous citadel that helped the 
Muslims defend their territory from the  Crusaders. ( Aleppo 
is called Haleb in Arabic—a variation of the word for milk, 
so named because Abraham purportedly milked his goats 
on the hill where the citadel now stands.) This is Syria’s 
second-largest city and is full of other interesting things to 
see and do, including a great  souk (12 kilometres or 7 miles 
under one roof) that sells its own distinctive  handicrafts, a 
huge  mosque and a good museum.
Along this north-south route there is much more than 
ruins to see. Near Der’a on the Jordanian border there are 
waterfalls, one of which disappears into a spectacular, rugged 
canyon. The area in the southeast of Syria is also heavily 
volcanic in origin, and there are vast fields of lava rock and 
numerous cinder cones.
North of  Damascus are several monasteries, convents, 
and predominantly Christian villages with lovely churches. 
Sydnaya, the largest and most beautiful of the convents, sits 
high on the side of a  desert mountain, with a village wrapped 
around its base. You can stay overnight here for a token charge 
and enjoy the dramatic view across the  desert.  Maalula, an 
ancient Aramaean village north of Sydnaya, has caves where 
early Christians hid, and many older people here still speak 
the language Christ spoke. Some houses built on the cliff in 
this town incorporate some of the caves as rooms.

169
Enjoying the Culture/Travel
In  Maalula, some houses incorporate the caves in which the 
early Christians lived. 
Pix from page 178
The convent at Sydnaya, in the mountains north of  Damascus.
Pix from page 179

170 CultureShock! Syria
Art gallery in cave at 
monastery of Marmoosa.

171
Enjoying the Culture/Travel
In the  desert northeast of Nabk, about 113 km (70 miles) 
from  Damascus, is a small monastery called Marmoosa that 
you must walk about 2 km (a little more than a mile) to reach. 
It has a spectacular setting, built as it is on the foundation of 
a Roman guard tower at the opening of a canyon that drops 
precipitously to the  desert floor. Overnight guests are welcome 
here for a small donation of food or cash or some volunteer 
work in excavation and restoration. The monastery’s chapel 
was built 1,300 years ago, and its frescoes were painted 
in the 11th century, then the structure was abandoned for 
hundreds of years. Father Paulo of Marmoosa, originally from 
Italy, speaks fluent Arabic and good English. The isolation 
of this place is wonderful, especially after living in a noisy 
city. You can sit outside in the evening, watch the sun set 
across the  desert valley, then enjoy an astounding display 
of stars after dark. The accommodations are rustic, the food 
basic, but the experience cannot be equalled. It also features 
a unique gallery—in a cavern—of a series of paintings that 
illustrate a story about the death of a group of people here 
in ancient times.
The Coast and Mountains
When it’s hot and humid at the coast, and hot and dry in the 
 desert, the coastal mountains are a welcome retreat. There is 
actually a double spine in this range, with the westward one 
being lusher, wetter and cooler than the one to the east.
Multiple ruins exist along the coast and in the mountains, 
mostly Crusader castles. One of the world’s oldest sites of 
civilisation is just north of Latakia: Ugarit, called Ras Shamra 
in Arabic. The tell here contains several layers of successive 
civilisations. The last pre-Arab dwellers were Greek fishermen 
who some 2,000 years ago built a small  fishing village atop the 
mound, apparently oblivious to what lay beneath them. One 
of the world’s earliest alphabets—one that used cuneiform 
symbols—was discovered at this site, as well as Egyptian 
hieroglyphics and Sumerian, Hittite and Babylonian texts. 
Ugarit has only been partially excavated but is an interesting 
place to spend a day. The museums in  Damascus and  Aleppo 
contain some of the treasures found here.

172 CultureShock! Syria
A ancient funerary tower in a 
valley north of  Palmyra.

173
Enjoying the Culture/Travel
The best-known and best-preserved crusader castle 
guarded a gap in the coastal mountains between what is 
now Homs and  Tartus on the Syrian coast. Its  French name 
is Krak des Chevaliers, its Arabic name Qalaat Al Hosn. It is 
massive. North of here are several other castles, each with 
its own distinction.
Many of the mountain villages are lovely places where 
you can have lunch and enjoy the natural beauty; some of 
them have crafts markets where you can find things unique 
to that particular village or area. Also, the terraced hillsides, 
olive orchards and extensive vineyards provide an aura of 
bucolic timelessness.
The farther north you travel in the mountains, the higher 
and lusher they become. Kassab, in the far northeastern 
corner, sits in mountains that seem more like northern 
Greece than the Middle East. This area is predominantly 
Armenian-Syrian, descendants of Armenians who came 
to hide from Turkish purges. This is a rural area of apple 
orchards, grapevines, wild figs, pomegranates and thick pine 
forests. The culture is quite different from the rest of Syria, 
and there are obvious clues to that difference: most of the 
people do not look Arab; signs are written in both Arabic and 
Armenian; and there are many churches and monasteries but 
few mosques. Syria’s most beautiful and cleanest coastline 
is also near here.
GETTING AROUND
You can get by with public transportation anywhere in Syria, 
but in the central and eastern parts, a car is desirable; bus 
and taxi service is limited and it is possible to get stranded 
in remote places.  Damascus has dozens of rental agencies 
including a few international franchises such as Budget, Avis, 
Hertz and Eurocar, all with branches at the  airport. Rental 
costs are similar to anywhere in the world, ranging from 
around US$ 30 (sub-compact) to US$ 80 (luxury) per day. 
(NOTE: You cannot take a Syrian rental car out of the country.) 
All you need to rent a car is your passport, an international 
driver’s licence, and a cash or credit card deposit of 
US$ 500–1,000 or as much as 50,000 SP (US$ 1,000). Before 

174 CultureShock! Syria
you rent, find out what form of payment the agency requires; 
some will only accept hard currency or credit card, even if 
you have an  iqaama. 
Gasoline stations are quite difficult to find inside the cities 
—there are still no private oil companies, no rotating Shell 
or Union 76 signs, but they are plentiful along the major 
highways in the western part of the country. If travelling 
through the  desert or steppes, you may not see one for a 
hundred kilometres or more. In rural areas, though, you 
can always ask around (in Arabic)—as I once had to do 
while driving along the northern coast—and will usually 
find someone with containers of gas who will sell you some 
gasoline (banzine in Arabic). Prices are regulated by the 
 government—currently around 25 SP per litre—so don’t be 
conned into paying more, unless you want to pay a bit extra 
for bothering a local resident. If you stop at a fuel pump that 
does not have a working gauge, ask for a specific number 
of litres, then only pay for that amount.
When driving, you must follow the rules of the open road. 
Syrians drive anywhere and everywhere on the highways, 
just like they do the cities, so don’t assume you can drive 
absentmindedly on divided highways—you might meet 
a loco taxi driver coming over a rise, headed the wrong 
way on your side of the road. Also, it is not rude to honk 
your horn or flash your lights before you overtake another 
vehicle: in fact, it is expected that you will announce your 
intention of passing, and you may have to do so to get a 
driver to pull over. Likewise, if someone comes flying up 
behind you with lights flashing and horn honking, move 
over quickly—this is also expected. Finally, driving at dusk 
and dawn is maddening as few drivers turn their lights 
on until complete darkness. This means coming over a 
hill and finding yourself nose-to-tail with a slower-moving 
vehicle sans lights, or nose-to-nose with an oncoming driver, 
passing in your lane with no headlights. Drivers apparently 
think it is safer to drive with lights off, constantly flashing 
them to announce their presence. The highway between 
Homs and  Damascus at night resembles an endless string 
of migrating fireflies!

175
Enjoying the Culture/Travel
If you do not drive or prefer to be driven, the cheapest 
transportation option is the  government-operated intercity 
bus system called Karnak, named after the famous Egyptian 
temple in Luxor. You can travel from one end of the country 
to the other for nearly nothing, and the  buses are reasonably 
comfortable, provided you can put up with cigarette smoke 
thicker than the proverbial London fog. Unlike the general 
Arab disregard for time, however, Karnak is on schedule 
most of the time.
Another option is an intercity taxi, called service taxi, 
which is only a little more expensive than Karnak, and you 
must try one at least—they provide an unequalled cultural 
experience. The cars are big and old American land yachts, 
many so banged up and pathetic-looking you wonder how 
they make it between cities, but they do. It is rare to see 
them broken down, so Syria must have some of the world’s 
best mechanics to keep these dinosaurs running—parts 
have not been made for 1952 DeSotos for many years. 
The main drawback to the service   taxis is that they do not 
leave until the car is full—five passengers plus driver, so you 
cannot count on being where you want at a specific time. 
You can pay fares for five and have the cab to yourself, 
though, if you choose.
Only a few years ago, Karnak and service   taxis were the 
only choices for in-country travel. But with Syria opening to 

176 CultureShock! Syria
the outside world and the country’s growing awareness of its 
historical heritage, tourism is developing. This shows in the 
increasing number of private  buses, some of which operate 
regular service between cities, as well as group charters. 
Prices vary but are still relatively inexpensive, and the private 
 buses are newer and more comfortable than the Karnak 
fleet. Some are even smoke-free.
Finally, Syrian Air flies between most cities, and is also a 
bargain, in-country. A flight from  Damascus to Latakia can 
be as low as 600 SP, about US$ 12 for a 320-km (200-mile) 
flight. You should also fly Syrian Air while you’re here; it’s the 
service taxi of the air, and an experience you’ll never forget. 
None of the usual regulations about seatbelts, seat backs and 
smoking are enforced, and you might feel as though you’re 
part of a comedy movie about an airline rather than actually 
on a real one. Despite this mode of operation, the airline has 
a good safety record.
LODGING
If you are particular about cleanliness and comfort in your 
 hotels yet do not want to spend a fortune on a room, you will 
have to adjust your attitude one way or another. Most  hotels 
are either five-star places with some of the highest prices in 
the world (a minimum of US$ 250 for a double room during 
the high season from late May to early October) or dirty, 
noisy places with little or no hot water, uncomfortable beds, 
inadequate bedding, rock-hard pillows and bath towels the 
size of large dinner napkins. There are only a few exceptions 
to these extremes. 
The good news is that if you have an  iqaama, you can stay 
at the luxury  hotels for about a quarter of what a tourist must 
pay. This still means the equivalent of US$ 80 (but in local 
currency) at the Cham Hotel in Latakia for a seaside room 
during peak season. The best deal is to avoid the peak season. 
Off-season rates for a seaside room then range from 1,200 
to 1,800 SP (US$ 24–36). Also, the small, inexpensive  hotels 
in the mountains seem to be cleaner and more comfortable 
than those in the cities or  desert. One more thing to consider 
is that the cheapest  hotels often have no generators, which 

177
Enjoying the Culture/Travel
means no lights, heat or fan for several hours each day if the 
 electricity is off.
 REGIONAL TRAVEL
Because of its central location, Syria is a good base for travel 
to southern and eastern Europe, North Africa, southeastern 
Africa, central Asia and the Middle East. Flights out of 
 Damascus are not as plentiful as they are from most cities 
this size, but they are adequate, and flights to any of these 
places take at most a few hours.
Visas
Whenever you enter Syria, you must complete duplicate 
information cards, one of which is stamped by customs 
and given back to you. Do not lose the card, because you 
must turn it in when you leave the country. If you don’t 
have it, you will be delayed and often charged 100–200 SP. 
I stapled mine inside my passport because the passport and 
immigration (P&I, called hejera wa jwazaat in Arabic) office 
lost it a couple of times.
Syria also requires an exit  visa: if you are a resident you 
cannot leave the country without one. The good news is that 
you can usually get it in a day or two through any P&I office. 

178 CultureShock! Syria
You first need a letter from your employer or sponsor in the 
country, then you go to the P&I office (in  Damascus there 
is one centrally located near the  Damascus University Law 
School and Karnak bus station in the neighbourhood called 
Baramkeh). Here, at a little office two doors south of the main 
entrance, you buy a few stamps, go to the third floor and pay 
10 SP for an application, complete the application, go to the 
fourth floor for a signature and return the application with 
your passport and sponsor’s letter to the third floor. If you do 
this early enough (usually before 10 am), you can sometimes 
pick it up around 1 pm the same day. At the latest, it should 
be ready the next day. The office will hold your  iqaama until 
you return to the country, so your first task after returning 
should be to go to the P&I office, show them your passport, 
and retrieve your  iqaama.
Customs
My experience with customs officials both entering and 
leaving has been mostly positive. They seem to allow visitors 
from the West to enter with a minimum of hassle. But 
sexually explicit materials will get you in trouble if they’re 
spotted, and illegal drugs will land you in jail. In the mid-
1990s, a young American woman served a five-year prison 
sentence for attempting to bring in drugs.
You must deal with customs not only when you arrive, 
but any time you leave the country. Border crossings by land 
are time-consuming, because you must stop for customs in 
Syria, then again in Turkey,  Jordan or  Lebanon. The customs 
agents are mainly interested in the amount of currency 
you are leaving with (don’t tell them you have more than a 
couple of hundred Syrian pounds or any large amounts of 
hard currency), illegal drugs or antiquities. In the latter, they 
most often look for antique carpets and mosaics, so if you 
have new ones, you may have to do some convincing that 
the items are not  antiques. It helps to have a receipt.
The Middle East
 Jordan and  Lebanon are closest to Syria. Folks who go to 
 Lebanon do so primarily for the metropolitan amenities of 

179
Enjoying the Culture/Travel
Beirut, the most European city in the Levant.  Jordan’s capital 
Amman is a fairly new city with lovely modern  architecture 
and is spread out over seven hills. Compared to  Damascus, 
it is quite clean and full of open spaces, but because of its 
relative newness as a metro area, has little of the historical or 
cultural interest that  Damascus offers. Nationwide, however, 
 Jordan does contain many historical sites, the wonder of Petra 
(an ancient city carved into multicoloured sandstone cliffs), 
the magnificent Wadi (canyon, in Arabic) Rum with its exotic 
cliffs and isolation, and the resort of Aqaba on the Red Sea. 
The mountains of southern  Jordan are rugged and exotically 
beautiful. There are also resorts on the Dead Sea.
Entrance Visas
Both  Jordan and  Lebanon require entrance visas, but you can get 
one for  Jordan at the border crossing. It costs 10 Jordanian dinars 
(about US$ 14) for nationals from most countries.
Visiting  Israel is also a possibility via  Jordan—the only 
Arab country of the Levant from which you can do so at 
this time. Since  Jordan and  Israel have signed a peace 
agreement, it’s quite easy to travel between them. The 
main border crossings are on the road between Amman and 
Jerusalem and between the ‘twin’ cities of Aqaba ( Jordan) 
and Elath ( Israel) on the Red Sea. Most Westerners don’t 
need a  visa to enter  Israel—only a passport. 
At any rate,  Jordan is the only country of the Levant 
at this time that will definitely allow you entry if you 
have an Israeli stamp in your passport. Make sure Israeli 
customs does not stamp your passport if you want to enter 
another Arab country again without a hassle or rejection 
(they can stamp a separate piece of paper that you keep 
in your passport while in  Israel, then toss out before 
returning to Syria). Once when I was at the border crossing 
to Turkey, a group of young people had travelled by bus all 
the way from Istanbul (a very long two-day trip), only to 
be refused entry to Syria because they had Israeli stamps 
in their passports.

180 CultureShock! Syria
Going to other Arab countries on the Peninsula is a bit more 
difficult. You cannot get a tourist  visa to  Saudi Arabia, and 
you must be sponsored by someone who lives in the other 
Gulf countries or by a hotel there. Air fares to and from Gulf 
countries are also expensive. For example, a round trip flight 
between  Damascus and Dubai costs nearly as much as an 
off-season ticket between  Damascus and New York—about 
three times as far away.
There are two countries on the Arabian peninsula you 
can easily get a tourist  visa for: Yemen and Oman. Yemen 
is the ancient land of the queen of Sheba and a fascinating 
combination of African, south Asian, and Arab cultures 
and unique  architecture. It is also a rugged, mountainous 
country with cool temperatures in the highlands, despite 
its proximity to the equator. The Yemenis, like Syrians, are 
friendly people who are interested in outsiders. Oman is an 
exotic place with gorgeous landscapes and sea and friendly, 
multi-cultural people.
North Africa (the Maghreb)
The easiest country in this area to visit is  Egypt. A  visa is 
necessary, but you can get one upon arrival at the  airport. 
A flight from  Damascus to Cairo takes around two hours, to 
Luxor or Aswan about an hour longer. There are other routes 
of entrance to  Egypt, as well. One—to the Sinai—is via Aqaba 
in southern  Jordan. You can go to the Egyptian consulate in 
Aqaba to get a  visa, then take a ferry to the southern tip of 
the Sinai or to the Red Sea coast. The other is a nearly two-
day trip via ferry from Latakia to Alexandria.
Other countries of the Maghreb require visas in advance, 
and these can be obtained at their respective embassies in 
 Damascus. Your choice of airlines to these destinations is 
limited.
Southeastern Africa
A few expats in Syria travel to places like Kenya, Botswana 
and other countries of eastern Africa. Flights are relatively 
expensive, but much cheaper than they would be from just 
about any place else, and Africa is full of natural wonders. 

181
Enjoying the Culture/Travel
You can also visit Madagascar and Mauritius easily. It’s wise 
to check into local conditions at your intended destination 
before taking off, however. Also make sure you have every 
necessary inoculation.
Central and Southern Asia
People from many Western countries are either forbidden or 
discouraged by their governments from entering Iran or are 
not welcomed by the fundamentalist regime. Despite this, 
and despite Teheran’s apparent support of violent Islamic 
radicals, the country seems to be a safe place to travel. As 
an American, I wouldn’t go there, but an Australian friend 
who did was treated well and enjoyed his visit. An entrance 
 visa is required.
The former Soviet republics in central Asia are not far away, 
but transportation to them is limited and the safety of some 
is questionable at this time because of civil unrest. There are 
also still few visitors’ facilities in most of these countries. If 
the countries of the region become more stable, they will 
be interesting places to visit—many of them are complete 
unknowns to the rest of the world.
Turkey, although mostly in Asia, feels more like Europe 
than Asia or the Middle East, particularly around the coastal 
regions. It is a fascinating, huge country, and one that is 
full of historical and exotic places. Turkish people also tend 
to be quite friendly and accepting, and even though the 
percentage of its  Muslim population is much greater than 
that of Syria, the atmosphere is quite different in numerous 
ways. One place I highly recommend to visit is Cappadocia, 
a vast area of weathered volcanic ash formations where early 
groups of people carved houses and churches into the 
cliffs and even entire underground cities. If you have read 
Tolkien’s The Hobbit, you might think this the perfect setting 
for the story. The ‘Turquoise Coast’ as the central Turkish 
Mediterranean coastline is called, is also spectacularly 
beautiful, with many interesting areas. Turkey is only a few 
hours by bus or air from Syria, and is far less expensive than 
most of Europe. And then, of course, there are the world-
famous Turkish carpets. My partner and I spent nearly two 

182 CultureShock! Syria
weeks in Turkey, traveling first by bus from Syria then by 
the great, convenient Turkish bus system along most of the 
Turquoise Coast, and the total cost—including two carpets 
we bought was only about US$ 1,500.
Europe
Greece and Italy are only two to four hours away by plane, 
Cyprus only an hour’s flight or a day-long ferry ride from 
Latakia. At the farthest reaches of western Europe, the British 
Isles and Scandinavian countries can be reached in five or 
six hours.
Eastern Europe, still a travel bargain, although generally 
with fewer amenities than western Europe, is very close. Sofia 
(Bulgaria), Bucharest and Budapest are within three hours 
by air, the Czech and Slovak Republics and Poland an hour 
or two more. Most countries in eastern Europe still require 
entrance visas, and these should be obtained before buying 
your ticket. There should be no trouble getting one, but it 
could take a while.
GROUP TRAVEL
It seems that at least once a year, someone from an 
international school or embassy organises a group tour to 
some part of Turkey, Syria or  Jordan. Try to find out about 
these, because not only do they make travel less expensive, 
they are a good way to meet other expats. Also, if you do 
not know the area well you will discover and see things in a 
tour that you might miss if you go by yourself.

‘Arabs love ﬁ ne and sonorous words for their own sake, 
and care for poetry and rhetoric more than the other arts… 
Through language and imagination again there enters an 
ethical system which exalts the heroic virtues: loyalty to 
friends, family, tribe; the sense of personal and family 
honour; hospitality; the magnanimity of the strong 
man (sic) who does not always insist on his rights.’
—Albert Hourani, Arab historian
LEARNING THE 
 LANGUAGE
CHAPTER 8

184 CultureShock! Syria
THE ARABIC LANGUAGE IS ANCIENT—its roots go back thousands of 
years; and because of its holy status in the Koran, it has 
probably changed less over the last thousand years than 
any other major language; think of English from the nearly 
incomprehensible Chaucer to Shakespeare to modern 
American English, and realise that during a period several 
hundred years longer than that, standard Arabic (at least 
in written form) has not changed at all. The differences 
between Arabic and English are so vast that even native 
speakers of each who become proficient in the vocabulary 
and grammar of the other have difficulty with the opposing 
rhetorical styles. These styles are more than superficial: 
they are at the heart of the cultural gulf and the often 
incompatible views of life that divide Arabic- and English-
speaking peoples.
Because Arabs have a rich oral tradition, the spoken 
word is supreme. Raphael Patai, in his book The Arab Mind, 
claims that the oral mastery of even illiterate  desert and 
village Arabs is extraordinary, and that their eloquence in 
their native language makes the English of the average 
American seem like a “series of disjointed grunts”. This 
love of and superlative use of language is obvious in that 
most Arabs—even many who are uneducated—can still 
function to some extent in foreign languages; and virtually 
all educated Arabs excel in foreign languages.

185
Learning the Language
DIFFERENCES IN USAGE
The groups that use English as their main language have 
developed the linguistic and cultural values of understatement 
(particularly in the British variety), scientific precision, use 
of logic, and brevity. In other words, say what you mean 
clearly, using as few words as possible. Groups whose primary 
language is Arabic, on the other hand, have developed the 
cultural and linguistic values of overstatement, exaggeration, 
repetition and emotional appeal.
Emotions
In The Arab Mind, the author says: “… no language I know 
comes even near to Arabic in its power of rhetoricism, in 
its ability to penetrate beneath and beyond intellectual 
comprehension directly to the emotions and make its 
impact upon them. In this respect, Arabic can be compared 
only to music. For speakers of English, the effect their 
language has on them is very different from that of great 
music. Yet the speakers of Arabic react to both language 
and music in a basically similar manner, except that their 
reaction to the language is probably deeper, more intense, 
and more emotional.”
Another Arab scholar, Edward Atiyah, claims that Arabs 
are more swayed by words than by ideas, more by ideas 
than by facts. While educated native English speakers might 
be impressed and their thinking influenced by an eloquent, 
logical argument in English, an Arab—often the educated as 
well as the illiterate—will most often be impressed and won 
over by powerful emotional arguments. My own experience 
of teaching students from all over the world has shown me 
that this is true; Arabs seem to be very emotional people 
with language, whether their own or others they learn.
These divergent emotional aspects of the two languages 
create a communication barrier. While an educated native 
English speaker usually has little respect for an emotional 
appeal, branding it as demagoguery or a sign of weak thinking, 
an Arab feels that the cool, detached, fact-filled arguments of 
a Westerner mark the person as cold and unfeeling.

186 CultureShock! Syria
Hyperbole and Repetition
The difference in discourse style becomes vividly apparent 
when trying to teach Arab students how to write in a style 
suitable for American business and academia. Their verbose 
and repetitive writing is often overwhelming. I have read 
multi-page essays that say the same thing over and over, in 
slightly different ways. As an example, here is an excerpt 
from a book—written in English—by Dr. M.S.R. Al Booty, 
an Islamic scholar, entitled This Is  Islam: An Introduction 
Towards Understanding the Roots: Who Am I? Why? and: 
Where to?
“Some of these fascinated Westernised people harked to 
a few of those Calls and rushed to those Islamic readings, 
concentrating on these sides—as economics and legislation 
—which interest them, but—till now—I have not learned 
that anyone of them admired the branches of  Islam, and 
this admiration led him to the doctrinal roots and origins, 
and turned, later on, from the ideological admiration of the 
Islamic system to the mental and heart admiration of the 
doctrinal Islamic facts.”
Some Arabist scholars believe that a subdued or 
understated response from a native Arabic speaker means 

187
Learning the Language
little or no commitment or assertion. So if a native English 
speaker makes a firm but subdued commitment or assertion, 
it is perceived by an Arab listener as weak or doubtful. One 
scholar declared that Arabs are forced by their culture to 
overstate and exaggerate in all communication or risk being 
misunderstood.
Overstatement is also used for politeness. If you say 
marhaba or ahlan (hello) to a Syrian, the answer will usually 
be marhabtain or ahlain (two hellos) or ahlan wa sahlan (hello 
and welcome). In other words, the response must outdo the 
initial greeting, goodbye, etc.
Words in Lieu of Action
Another characteristic of Arabic that is mostly foreign to 
English speakers is the use of verbal threats without action, 
and this may magnify conflicts between Arabs and others. 
For years, Arab politicians have made threats that they not 
only could not keep, but had no intention of keeping. This 
is “sabre rattling” at its finest, but if they talk about doing 
something, they are unlikely to carry out the action. The 
problem is, people from a culture where idle threats are not 
often made perceive the verbal threat as a prelude to action, 
and act accordingly.
Patai says: “… the verbal statement of a threat or an 
intention (especially when it is uttered repeatedly and 
exaggeratedly) achieves such importance that the question 
of whether or not it is subsequently carried out becomes of 
minor significance. There is no confusion between words and 
action, but rather a psychologically conditioned substitution 
of words for action.”
OTHER DIFFERENCES
In addition to the functional differences in Arabic and English, 
there are significant structural (grammatical) and phonetic 
(sound) differences.
Time Sense and Verbs
English verbs denote very specific senses of time. With a 
few specific exceptions, past means past, present conti-

188 CultureShock! Syria
nuous means present, and so on. But Arabic verbs, although 
they are more regular than those in English, are quite hazy 
about time; the basic forms are the perfect (past) and the 
imperfect (non-past). In the Koran, Allah is sometimes 
described as doing something simultaneously in both the 
past and future, and Mary the mother of Jesus appears to 
be a contemporary of Mary the sister of Moses in places. 
Arab historians and biographers, too, have often been hazy 
about the specific time or duration of an event, according 
to some scholars.
This apparent disregard for time and chronology shows 
in day-to-day living among Arab people. In Syria, for 
example, even such modern operations as bus lines and 
airlines operate almost as if the stated schedules or times on 
tickets are not terribly important. Arabs in general seem to 
worry little about time (or age) and Syrians seem more that 
way to me than do the Jordanians or Lebanese. Because of 
modern industries this characteristic seems to be changing 
a bit among younger people.
Another grammatical curiosity of Arabic vis-à-vis English 
is that Arabic does not use a present-tense form of the verb 
‘be’, or ‘copula’, as it is called in linguistics. For example, 
in English I would say “I am a teacher” or “I am tall.” But 
in Arabic I say Ana modarress (a double ‘r’ is trilled as in 
Spanish) or Ana taweel—literally “I teacher” and “I tall”.
Nouns and Adjectives
Nouns in Arabic have either male or female gender, as they 
do in the Romance languages. This is the easy part. The more 
difficult things are that: 1) there are verbal nouns, and 2) 
nouns have three different forms—which sometimes seem 
unrelated—when used with numbers. There is one form for 
one and 11 or more of something (mara, one woman, for 
example); another form for two of anything, which is simply 
the first noun with -ain (masculine) or -tain (feminine) added 
(maratain, two women); and a third form for three to ten of 
something (tlaat niswaan, three women).
Arabic uses no nonspecific articles (a, an), but most 
common nouns take the specific article ‘al’, which does 

189
Learning the Language
not change for gender. Adjectives, however, need gender 
agreement with the nouns they modify, and the forms of 
some (such as colours) seem unconnected to each other: 
aswad (masc. black) and soda (fem. black), for example. To 
complicate matters, colours are often the names of food 
in the Syrian dialect: aswad is one word for eggplant, soda 
is a word for liver, and bayd, a variation of feminine white, 
is used for eggs.
Linguistic Sexism
In English, the infinitive is ‘to’ plus a verb; in Arabic, it is the 
same form as used for third person ‘he’ in the past tense: 
‘he ate, he slept, etc’. Words with associated meanings in 
Arabic use the same root consonants. One such root is the 
same for little boy,  children in general and giving birth. Also, 
the word commonly used for son (ibn) is different from that 
used for male child (walid), while both daughter and girl child 
are described by the same word, bint. Verb endings, too, are 
different, depending on whether one is speaking to a male, 
a female or a group.
The Script
Arabic is written and read from right to left and shares its 
script with Farsi, the language of Iran. There are no capital 
letters, but many letters change form considerably depending 
on where they appear in a word—beginning, middle or 
end. In addition, there are several different styles of writing 
in which some letters are shaped quite differently from 
others.
There are two major difficulties with reading modern 
standard Arabic without a large vocabulary, even if one 
knows the script well. One is that the marks indicating 
short vowels and double consonants are not used. Without 
these symbols, it’s often difficult to know what word you’re 
reading. Imagine, for example, reading English with all short 
vowel sounds omitted: pen, pin, pan and pun would all be 
spelled ‘pn’! The second difficulty is that word boundaries are 
difficult to decipher because there are no spaces separating 
words as there are in English. Thus, without a fairly strong 

190 CultureShock! Syria
vocabulary knowledge, one doesn’t know where one word 
ends and the next begins.
Pronunciation
Several Arabic sounds have no equivalent in English or most 
other major languages. This alone makes it more difficult 
for an English speaker to learn than European languages 
are. Another difficulty in pronunciation is presented by the 
consonant clusters that often start words. Examples: BteHki 
(you speak), bmeshi (I walk), zbeeb (raisins) and tmaneh (eight). 
Each consonant in these clusters is pronounced without a 
detectable vowel sound between them. Several other Arabic 
sounds vary slightly from their English counterparts. Finally, 
there are both single and double consonant sounds and 
single and double vowel sounds; this means that if one does 
not hold the sound long enough or too long, a completely 
different word will be uttered.
SOME USEFUL WORDS AND EXPRESSIONS
The words overleaf are written as they should be pronounced. 
Some of the words and/or pronunciations are unique to Syria 
or even  Damascus. When two of the same consonants 
appear together, you must pronounce both: tammam is 
pronounced ‘tam-mam’, not ‘ta-mam’ as it would be in 
English. Also, ‘h’ sounds (there are two: ‘h’ represents an 
English-type sound, while ‘H’ represents a heavier ‘h’ sound) 
are pronounced no matter where they come in a word, 
except in the ‘kh’ and ‘gh’ combinations, which represent 
individual Arabic letters.
Greetings, Goodbyes, Miscellaneous
marHaba or ahlan
Hello
sabaH al khair
Good morning (or early 
afternoon)
sabaH an noor
response to sabaH al khair
masa al khair
Good evening.

191
Learning the Language
Greetings, Goodbyes, Miscellaneous
masa an noor
response to masa al khair
as salaam aleeikom
God’s peace be with you (a 
greeting)
yaiatik alaiafee
A greeting and goodbye to 
someone who is working; 
may God keep you able to 
work
maia salaameh
Goodbye (literally, with 
peace); to a person leaving
tammam or kwayyis
Good. Fine. I agree.
min faddlak
Please; usually after a 
request (to a man)
min faddlik
Please; usually after a 
request (to a woman)
shukran
Thank you.
aiafwan
You are welcome; also 
“Excuse me.”
naiam or eh
Yes
laa
No
biddee
I want … 
maa biddee
I don’t want … 
fee
There is/are.
fee?
Is/Are there?
maa fee
There isn’t/aren’t.
addaish?
How much?
kem?
How many?
ana assif
I’m sorry (from a man).
ana asfee
I’m sorry (from a woman).
maialish
No problem. It’s OK.
hadha
this
Ismee ——
My name is ——.
hown
here
hineek
there

192 CultureShock! Syria
Greetings, Goodbyes, Miscellaneous
al yassar
left
al yameen
right
dooghree
straight
Days, Time
Sunday
al aHid
Monday
at tnayn
Tuesday
at tlaata
Wednesday
al arbaia
Thursday
al khamees
Friday
al jumaiah
Saturday
as sabt
a day
yom
a week
isbooa
a month
shaHr
a year
saneh
today
al yom
tonight
al layla
yesterday
mbareh
tomorrow
bukra
a minute
daeea
an hour
saaia
Numbers
zero
sufr
one
waHd
two
itnayn
three
tlaateh
four
arbaia
five
khamseh
six
sitteh
seven
sabaia 

193
Learning the Language
Numbers
eight
tmaneh
nine
tisaia
ten
aiashara
Common Signs & Words
Exit
Mah-raj
Entrance, for car
Mad-ha-loos’say-ar-rot
pedestrian 
Mad-ha-loo-l’sot
Open
Maf-too
Closed
Moog-lak
Toilet
Mir-had or Too- wah-let
Toilet paper
Wrah-lak too-wa-let
Woman
Mah-rah
Man
Rah-jool
Customs
Joom-ruk
passport
ja-wahs’sfar
 visa
tah-see-rah
Bus
Bas
Taxi
Taxi
Train
Kee-tar
Stores and Businesses
bakery
mah-bajz
bank
mahs-reef
bookstore
mak-tah-bah
grocery
doo-kah-noo l’bak-kal
jeweler
jah-ha-ree
market
sook (souq)
news stand
koos-koo l’jah-rah-eed
pharmacy
sigh-dah-lee-yah

194 CultureShock! Syria
Stores and Businesses
post office
mak-tab bah-reed
restaurant
mah-tam
shoemaker
al-hadd-dah
supermarket
supermarket
travel agency
mak-tah-boo s’see-ya-ha
credit card
bit-ah-kah-too lee-still-aff
traveler’s check
seek see-yah-hee
price/rate
seer
fax
te-le-fax
letter
ree-sah-la
stamp
tah-bee-yoo l’ bar-eed
postcard
bit-ak-kah bar-eed-ah
Food
bread
khubz
flour 
taHeen
milk
Haleeb
Accommodation Terms
hotel
foon-dook
balcony 
ball-kon
bathroom 
ham-mam
bathtub 
bon-yoh
blanket 
bah-tahn-nee-yah
breakfast 
foo-toor
camping 
tah-yeem
to clean 
naz-za-fa
change of linen 
tab-dee-loo l’bah-yah-dat
dinner
ah-sah
fan
meer-wah-ha-too t’tah-wee-yah

195
Learning the Language
 BODY LANGUAGE
When Syrians talk to each other, they stand close and use 
lots of hand gestures, much like the stereotype of Italians. 
They tend to speak loudly as well. Such characteristics 
are likely to make a newcomer think a fight is imminent, 
but this is not the case. Even what in the West would be 
considered an aggressive stance—standing close and leaning 
toward another person—is normal and not an indication of 
aggressive behaviour there. 
There are several head movements that a visitor to Syria 
should understand. A quick upward movement of the head 
with raised eyebrows, often accompanied by closed eyelids 
and a click of the tongue means ‘no’. A downward nod to 
one side means ‘yes’. A movement of the head from side 
to side, often accompanied by a puzzled look, means ‘I 
don’t understand’ or ‘I didn’t hear you’. If you wag your 
head from side to side to say no or move the head up, 
raising the eyebrows slightly to mean something like ‘I’m 
sorry, I didn’t catch what you said’, you are likely to be 
misunderstood.
Hand gestures here are similar to those in some other 
countries around the eastern Mediterranean. 
 A common gesture is the palm turned upward, the 
fingertips together forming a tent over the palm; the 
hand and forearm pumps up and down, arm flexing at 
the elbow. The listener is asked to wait until the speaker 
is finished.
 Another is palms up and open, arms out to the side and 
raised as if to catch raindrops. This is the ‘What’s going 
on here?’ pose that’s used a lot in traffic.
 Opened hands drawn quickly above the shoulders, 
palms facing the other person sends this message 
‘That’s my point’ or ‘That’s my excuse’.
 Brushing the open palms together quickly as if to clean 
off dirt means ‘I’m finished with it (you)’ or ‘I wash my 
hands of it (you)’.
 If you’re in a crowd at a vegetable stand and the 
shopkeeper looks at you, gives a quick sideways wag 

196 CultureShock! Syria
of his head and pivots his hand, palm up at about chest 
level, he’s asking what you would like.
 Another common gesture is touching the right hand to 
the heart and sometimes to the forehead when meeting 
friends by chance. This shows affection and fondness 
for the person. Using this gesture while saying No 
(turning down an invitation, for example) somewhat 
softens the blow of rejection.
 ARABIC DIALECTS AND OTHER LANGUAGES
Although standard written Arabic (both the classic and 
modern forms) is the same throughout the Middle East, 
colloquial dialects are far more diverse than are worldwide 
English dialects; so much so, in fact, that a Damascene 
has trouble understanding an Egyptian, and an Omani 
and Moroccan can understand very little of each other’s 
spoken language.
Dialects
The dialectical differences are not only in pronunciation 
and intonation—great as these often are—but in the use of 
different words. An older Syrian woman told me that when 
she visited Morocco and went to a vegetable  souk, nearly 
every item had a name different from that used in Syria. Also, 
the Egyptian dialect is notorious for using a lot of words that 
are different from other dialects.
Even from city to city within Syria, there are noticeable 
variations, and the greater the distance, the greater the 
difference. I could communicate fairly well in Amman, 
 Jordan, about 320 km (200 miles) from  Damascus, but 
in Aqaba (on the Red Sea) I can barely do so. If you only 
learn the Damascene dialect you will have some trouble 
communicating in Deir er-Zor (on the  Euphrates River). In 
fact, a report in http://www.ethnologue.com lists no less than 
SIX major Arabic dialects within Syria. This is complicated by 
the fact that there are at least nine other ancient languages 
still spoken by small groups within the country.

197
Learning the Language
Other Languages
The most popular and widely spoken foreign language in 
Syria is English, with  French perhaps a close second. After 
English and  French is German, then Russian. Most educated 
people speak at least a little of one of these—students in 
high school are required to study either English or  French 
for a couple of years, and a fair number can converse in 
several different languages. 
If you stay in  Damascus and work around English speakers, 
you can generally get by with only a survival level of Arabic. 
But other cities seem to have fewer English speakers, and 
rural areas and villages have few people who speak anything 
but their own dialect of Arabic. To put it another way, this 
is not Europe, where most educated people speak several 
languages. Taxi drivers, bus drivers and clerks in  government 
offices rarely speak anything but Arabic, and the residue of 
 French occupation shows in  government forms and signs 
that are often printed in both Arabic and  French.
Another communication problem for visitors is that most 
natives who speak English do not speak it very well. The 
differences between Arabic and English discussed earlier 
in this chapter account for some odd usages of words and 
grammar as well as pronunciations that are often difficult 
to understand. Most Syrians I know who speak English as 
clearly as, say, the average educated German, are those 
who either learned it in childhood or have lived for several 
years in an English-speaking country.
Other ancient languages are still alive in Syria. In 
 Maalula and the surrounding area (an hour’s drive north 
of  Damascus)   Aramaic—the language of Christ—is still 
spoken. In the far northwestern corner of the country the 
Armenian language is so common that signs are in both 
Arabic and Armenian and Armenian  children learn their 
ancestral language along with Arabic. There are a few 
speakers of Syriac (one of the original languages of Syria) 
and of Kurdish in the northeastern part of the country. Some 
 Jews can speak or at least read Hebrew.

198 CultureShock! Syria
Learning Arabic
If you want to study Arabic, you have numerous options.
Arabic Language Center (ALC) of The Language 
Institute at  Damascus University
Established in 1995 (Arabic), 2002 for 12 other languages; very 
well-equipped and uses modern teaching techniques. Cost around 
US$ 300 per month. 
Contact: Rahaj Ajouka
Office of Registration & Students’ Affairs
 Damascus University
Mezzeh Highway Fayez Mansour St.—Campus of Humanities
Phone: 392-5843 (In  Damascus)
Fax: 212-0164 (In  Damascus)
Email: inquiries@arabicindamascus.edu.sy
Arabic Teaching Institute for Foreigners in Mezzeh
Two sessions annually with four levels, each about six months 
in duration, that cost US$ 400 at this time, books not included. 
Classes tend to be quite a bit larger than those at the ALC. 
Classes meet 3.5 hours daily (afternoons only), five days 
each week (no Friday or Sunday classes). All students, from 
beginners through advanced, are taught in standard Arabic—
a problem, obviously, if you speak and understand none. 
In addition to the regular classes, there are conversation and 
newspaper reading classes. 
Contact:
Dr Hazem Alwani
PO Box 9340, 
Mezzeh-Villat Sharkiyah
 Damascus, Syria 
Phone: 613-2646 (In  Damascus)
Private Classes
This option most used by foreigners, it seems, is a private 
tutor. Many Syrians will give you private lessons for prices 
ranging from about 250–750 SP per hour. Check around 
with expats who have had experience with tutors to find 

199
Learning the Language
a good one, or visit the following websites: http://www.
tolearnarabic.com/learnarabic/aboutus.html or http://www.
arabeskstudiesindamascus.com.
 Damascus Community School
This is an option for  children at a K–12 school sponsored by 
the US State Department. One of the Syrian teachers here 
usually offers Arabic lessons at various levels during the 
autumn term. Located in the Abu Romaneh area. Telephone: 
333-7737 (In  Damascus)
Two other options—if you are fairly fluent in  French or 
German—are at the  French Cultural Centre and the German 
Goethe Centre. Whichever way you choose to learn the 
language, you will have a lot of opportunity to practice. 
Syrians appreciate your attempts to communicate in their 
language and will help you all they can.

‘In the transnational  economy the goal is not 
proﬁ t maximisation. It is market maximisation. 
And trade increasingly follows investment.’
—Peter F. Drucker, The New Realities
 DOING BUSINESS 
IN SYRIA
CHAPTER 9

201
Doing Business in Syria
ECONOMIC AND RELATED SITUATIONS
The United States Embassy commercial section classifies Syria 
as a “middle income developing country”. Although poverty 
exists there and only a few people are wealthy, the number 
of middle- and upper-class people has grown quite noticeably 
since the early 1990s, and signs of wealth are continually 
increasing. Real economic growth rates are a bit tricky to 
pin down, as the Syrian versions differ a lot from those of 
the World Bank, the IMF and European and North American 
estimates, but as the effects of the global financial crisis were 
felt in Syria, the country’s growth rate slowed to 1.8 per cent 
in 2009. Exports increased from about US$ 2.5 billion in 2005 
to around US$ 14 billion in 2008, only to go down to US$ 10 
billion in 2009. However, manufacturing, banking, tourism 
and other private industries funded by both foreign and Syrian 
sources are increasing, especially for basic products such as 
medicines,  clothing and household goods.
As I mentioned earlier, Syria has been under a socialist 
system since its independence. Until recently, only small 
farms and shops were private operations. The state-run 
industries have had to import heavy equipment and raw 
materials, but except for necessities, there were few imported 
goods and no foreign business operations. From the 1960s 
until the disintegration of the Soviet Union, most imports 
(except cars) came from the USSR under a bilateral trade 
agreement it had with Syria.

202 CultureShock! Syria
This has changed, opening possibilities for new imports, 
joint ventures, and construction projects. Investment law 
#10, put into effect in early 1991 and amended in 2000 to 
further open the country for private investment, liberalises 
some currency restrictions, gives tax holidays of 5–7 years 
and other incentives for certain private investment. 
The Negatives
The Syrian  government and Chambers of Commerce as well 
as some industrial and commercial sectors are trying hard to 
lure foreign investments and in doing so paint a rather rosy 
picture of how great the business and social environment are 
becoming in Syria. And while it’s true that many new laws, 
rules and directives have made the situation for foreign (as 
well as Syrian) investors better, there’s still a long way to go 
in creating a system in which things operate openly and as 
they are supposed to. So first, let me start with some of the 
negative factors.

Abu Shady, last of the traditional Syrian storytellers. 
He performs at the Al Nawfara Cafe in Damascus’ 
old city, telling stories from ages past.

b
The Western Gate of Souq Al-Hamidiyya, 
the largest souq in Syria. It is located in 
Damascus, next to the Citadel.

c

d
The Citadel which stands at the centre of 
the old city of Aleppo in Northern Syria. 
This castle is considered one of the oldest 
and largest of its kind in the world.

e

f
A woman storing ﬂ at bread. This 
two-layered ﬂ at bread is the most 
commonly consumed bread in Syria.

g
A man selling unripe almonds in Damascus. 
Almonds are considered a treat in Syria, 
and are often eaten with salt.

h
A man of the whirling dervish order performing. 
The order was established in the 13th century 
by the mystical suﬁ  poet Jelalauddin Rumi.

203
Doing Business in Syria
The International Trade Center of the UN Comtrade 
division conducted a survey of numerous businesses 
operating in Syria to determine what most saw as the main 
problems in doing business there. Fourteen factors were 
listed and respondents were asked to choose the five most 
problematic. The rankings are as follows, in descending order 
of importance:
 Inefficient  government bureaucracy
 Access to financing
 Corruption
 Inadequately educated work force
 Foreign currency regulations
These five were followed closely by:
 Inadequate infrastructure
 Restrictive labour regulations
 Tax regulations
 Poor work ethic in national work force
In addition to these, the commercial section of the British 
Embassy notes the following problems (with the caveat that 
the situation, in most cases, is improving): problems getting 
bid and performance bonds returned upon completion of a 
project; governments having a poor record of payment; and 
import duties being high, creating a problem for profitable 
sales of manufactured products.
For US-based companies or individuals, the situation 
has added problems, namely, that the US  government 
discourages doing business in Syria. In addition to listing 
Syria as a country that supports terrorism and the Central 
Bank of Syria (CBS) as a money-laundering institution, in 
2003, President Bush and the then right-wing Congress 
created the Syrian Accountability and Lebanese Sovereignty 
Act (SAA), which severely restricts products that can be 
exported to Syria and requires case-by-case licensing for 
most. (In 2005, there were 277 license applications from 
American businesses, of which only 173 were approved.) US 
banks have also severed connections with the CBS, making 
it very difficult for American businesses or individuals using 
bank accounts in the US to transfer funds between the two 

204 CultureShock! Syria
countries. In fact, all the US-based oil companies appear to 
have withdrawn from Syria, and the US embassy commercial 
section openly states that it does not encourage investments 
or doing business with or in Syria.
The Positives
The aforementioned problems aside, however, most 
 government and commercial sectors do sincerely want to 
develop an effective climate for business. 
The UN’s View
In June 2005, Syria… adopted the Tenth Five Year Plan 2006–2010. 
This plan highlights the greater expected role of the Syrian private 
sector in both economic activity and decision-making.
Decision makers are aware of the new requirements of open market 
 economy and the need for competitive business environment… as 
well as investment-friendly legislation and administrative frameworks. 
As a result, more than half of the 80 laws and 80 legislative decrees 
issued in 2005 and 2006 have been targetted toward modernising and 
promoting the business environment…. Other big steps were taken 
with respect to modernising the physical and technical infrastructure 
(ports, the increasing number of customs clearances and modern 
industrial cities) and increase in budget allocated for higher education 
and health sector. 
— From Dimashikiyyah, N. ‘Increasing the Role of the Private Sector’. 
UNDP Business Development Programme,  Damascus.
Also, despite remaining obstacles to an efficient and 
effective business climate, an increasing number of countries 
and their business/industrial sectors appear to be successful 
in Syria. Countries of the EU have increasing presence; 
France has a bilateral trade agreement with Syria; the 
UK, in a joint venture with Syria, is developing a US$ 337 
million tourist project on the coast at Tartus; Japan and 
Russia have increasing presence and investments in the 
country; Syria has a free trade agreement with other Arab 
countries and is working toward one with Turkey; and Iran is 
building Syria’s first car manufacturing plant and making a 
multitude of other investments in the country as well.
Banking, too, has changed considerably with 10 new 
private banks licensed, most of which can handle letters of 
credit, currency exchanges and transfers, etc.

205
Doing Business in Syria
Getting Started
The key sectors for investment as of 2007 appear to be oil and 
gas exploration and tourism, although any projects that hire 
Syrian workers and use Syrian raw materials are encouraged. 
Also, in most cases, joint ventures with the  government or 
Syrian businesses are desired, and a recent change in the joint 
venture ownership law changed the requirement for joint 
ventures to be owned at least 51 per cent by Syria, allowing 
majority ownership (51 per cent) by outside investors. The 
country has also established seven free zones in which 
investments are particularly liberalised and encouraged. 
These are:  Damascus; Adra (25 km north of  Damascus); 
 Damascus International Airport (now fully occupied, but to 
be expanded); Allepo, Syria’s second-largest city; Tartus (on 
the coast, near  Lebanon); Latakia (on the coast in the north); 
and Dera’a (on the border with  Jordan).
If you decide you want to start a business or extend 
your existing business to Syria, these are the registration 
requirements for a private incorporated company in 
 Damascus (from the World Bank):
 Step 1.Get forms for articles of incorporation from 
the Ministry of Economy and Trade. Cost: 250 SP; 
Time to complete: about a day
 Step 2. Deposit initial capital (minimum of 3 million SP
—about US$ 60,000) in bank and get a statement. No 
charge; about a day
 Step 3. Apply for commercial registration with the Ministry 
of Economy and Trade. No charge; about 14 days
 Step 4. Submit the company’s bylaws to the Court of 
First Instance; have company’s books stamped. No 
charge; about a day
 Step 5. Pay the stamp tax at the tax office. 0.5 per cent 
of capital; about a day
 Step 6. Open a financial record for the company at the 
Tax and Financial Department of the  government. 
No charge; about a day
 Step 7. Make payment to Syrian bar association.
 
10,500 SP; about a day

206 CultureShock! Syria
 Step 8. Return to court to complete incorporation.
 
104 SP; about a day
 Step 9. Visit Commercial Registry office with signed 
copies of articles of incorporation; 50 SP; about 1 day
 Step 10. Register for taxes; no charge; about 14 days
 Step 11. Register with Social Security Organisation.
 
20 SP; about a day
 Step 12. Have a company seal made; 500 SP; about 
three days
And, of course, in addition to those requirements, you must 
hire an attorney for your own protection and assistance with 
the myriad local laws and procedures. The wisest thing to 
do would be to contact the commercial section of your own 
country’s embassy and have them assist you throughout the 
process, get recommendations for local attorneys, etc.
The preceding is for setting up a business in Syria. 
However, the way many Western companies operate in 
Syria is via a registered Syrian agent. The agent should be 
registered with the Companies Department of the Ministry 
of Economy and Foreign Trade.
Licensing is another way for companies to do business 
in Syria but without having to cope with all the difficulties 
of actually operating a business within the country. For 
example, Canada Dry soft drinks are popular there but are 
not bottled or sold by the company or its subsidiaries: it is 
done by a Syrian company under licence to Canada Dry. 
Another example is a company in  Aleppo that manufactures 
medicines under licence to the  French pharmaceuticals 
company Rhone-Poulenc Rorer. In these licensing 
arrangements, the outside companies receive royalties 
for the use of their brand names, expertise, research and 
recipes. But poor or irregular quality control is a potential 
problem.
Although potential enterprises are unlimited in principle, 
businesses are more likely to be approved if they:
 maximise the use of local resources 
 create local jobs
 boost Syrian exports

207
Doing Business in Syria
 utilise advanced technologies, and
 assist the  government in achieving its development plans
The  government prefers joint ventures, which receive 
5-7 year tax holidays. The number of local employees and 
managers are negotiated at the time of licensing. The Ministry 
of Supply has the authority to set prices and profit margins 
for products sold locally.
Law No 10 allows foreign enterprises the same tax and 
foreign exchange benefits as the locals. Additionally, it 
allows foreigners to repatriate capital after five years (or six 
months, if the project fails due to something beyond the 
investor’s control—a nebulous qualification) and to transfer 
hard currency profits annually. Also, foreign employees are 
allowed to repatriate 50 per cent of their earnings and 100 
per cent of any severance pay they receive.
Land ownership laws are complex, and only Syrians 
are allowed to own real estate. However, no expropriation 
of private business has occurred since the 1960s, and 
new investment laws contain strong protection against 
 government seizure. 
Property, contractual rights and intellectual property 
rights are protected by the country’s constitution, and the 
 government accepts international arbitration of investment 
disputes between foreign investors and the state if the 
investment agreement includes such stipulation; if it does not, 
local courts have jurisdiction. Syria is a member of the Paris 
Union for the International Protection of Industrial Property. 
Patents are issued for 15 years, trademarks for 10 years. The 
reality is, though, that numerous rip-offs of copyrights and 
trademarks exist, mostly in the forms of pirated audio/video 
cassettes, CDs and DVDs, as well as computer software. Nearly 
all Syrian home videos/DVDs are bootleg copies, as are nearly 
all music tapes/CDs and a great deal of computer software. 
At various times, the  government has raided computer shops 
and confiscated pirated programs, but after the heat dies 
down, they are still available. In 2002, Syria signed onto 1967 
Stockholm Convention on Intellectual Property Rights and in 
2004 became a member of the World Intellectual Property 

208 CultureShock! Syria
Organisation. However, despite occasional crackdowns on 
violations in these areas, abuse is still rampant.
There are no private trade unions in Syria, but most 
workers belong to one of the official  government unions, 
organised under the General Federation of Trade Unions 
(GFTU). In the private sector, this organisation monitors 
compliance with laws relating to employees’ health, safety 
and pay. There are minimum wage and minimum age laws. 
Currently, the absolute minimum age is 12, with parental 
permission required for  children under 16 to work. Children 
are not allowed to work at night.
Standard working hours for office staff who do not serve 
customers directly are often from 8 or 9 am until 2, 4 or 5 pm.
Most businesses are open to the public from 8, 9 or 10 am 
(depending on the type of business) until around 2 pm. They 
open again around 4–5 pm and remain open until 8, 9, 10 
or even 11 pm.

209
Doing Business in Syria
SOCIAL ASPECTS OF DOING BUSINESS
As with ordinary socialising, there are few taboos in doing 
business with Syrians. The difficulty some Westerners 
(particularly North Americans) might have will more likely be 
caused by the ‘all business’ demeanour that is often admired 
in the hard-driving business person in the West. In this part 
of the world, such a person seems somehow cold-hearted, 
and if you are perceived that way, you may have difficulty 
getting a Syrian’s business.
Having the best price or best merchandise when trying 
to make a sale does not matter as much as the personal 
relationship you develop. Remember, in this culture, your 
contacts are everything. Before you try doing the hard sell on 
a Syrian, get to know the person, eat and drink tea together 
and talk about your families. 
Decisions are made slowly here, and if your negotiations 
fall on the cusp of a holiday (particularly Eid), you will not 
get a decision until well after the holiday is over. This is often 
true even if you are the buyer. Most Syrians won’t bend over 
backwards to get your business, regardless of how much you 
are in a hurry. Here are some other specifics to note.
 Greetings
Business greetings are generally a little less ebullient than 
personal greetings, although the manner will depend on how 
well the people know each other. As a rule, the handshake has 
pretty much replaced more affectionate hellos and goodbyes. 
Handshakes here are quite limp by American standards, with 
no hand pumping; big grins that expose your rear molars 
should also be restrained since Syrians don’t smile a lot 
(laugh, yes, but there is a difference).
If you are a man and get to know a male business associate, 
he may or may not hug you and blow a kiss by both cheeks 
upon greeting. If he does not, you might endear yourself to him 
by initiating the action: it will make him feel like you are kin. 
If you are a woman dealing with a female business 
associate, all your hellos and goodbyes will likely be a hug 
and kisses on both cheeks, possibly starting with your first 
meeting. Business associates of opposite genders will not hug 

210 CultureShock! Syria
but will almost always shake (momentarily hold would be a 
more apt description) hands. If you are a man dealing with 
a scarved woman, however, you may want to let her take 
the lead just in case her beliefs will not allow her to touch a 
man who is not her relative.
Meetings
Syria has no corporate climate as do Western countries. 
Until only a few years ago, any business larger than a small 
family operation was owned and operated by  government 
ministries. Endless political and hierarchical meetings were 
the rule, with narcoleptic people sitting and appearing to 
listen to a leader talk about the glories of the Party and the 
country’s leadership and how much they—the ministry or 
company— were doing for the Syrian people.
Group meetings are not as common as in the West, and 
when they are held, they are generally not democratic, 
consensus-building meetings, but are conducted by some-
one who is unquestionably ‘in charge’. This is a strong 
characteristic of Arab culture, whether in the Persian Gulf, the 
Levant or North Africa. Even if leaders are not respected or are 
hated, they will be shown respect by their subordinates.
Appointments
Suppose you have an appointment with a Syrian business 
person to either buy or sell or just explore the possibilities. 
Promptness is not important. You may rush around in a 
panic, thinking you are going to be late, only to arrive 10 
minutes late and find your contact person either not there 
yet or also just arriving. Part of this attribute is cultural, 
but it is logistical as well: city traffic sometimes crawls and 
catching a cab or bus can take time. 
If you show irritation at a Syrian’s keeping you waiting, 
it will not advance your cause. It is also common for 
appointments to cancel on you, at the last minute and more 
than once. Some of these time-related characteristics are 
beginning to change, but cultural change takes time and 
Syrians will, I hope, never be like Americans or Japanese in 
their slavery to the clock.

211
Doing Business in Syria
Dealing with Local Staff
The Party-backed labour unions and  government regulations 
favour the worker over the employer. Punctuality is likely to 
be a problem but could be overcome by incentives. You’ll 
have trouble firing a Syrian worker simply because he or she 
is always late to work, does poor quality work or is absent 
from work a lot. There must be serious grounds for dismissal, 
such as blatant dishonesty or criminal activity.
Another point worth remembering is that Syrians are 
not accustomed to democracy in any form. If you are the 
manager who likes to lead by consensus, your wanting to 
include your employees in the decision-making process may 
be perceived by them as a lack of knowledge, leadership or 
control on your part. This is not to say that you cannot train 
them in this way and make them feel like an integral part of 
the business, but move slowly and let them know that you 
are the leader and expect them to follow—even if a decision 
was made by committee. There is a certain ‘law of the  desert’ 
at work here, however subconscious it might be, that will 
rush in to fill a perceived power vacuum: strong leaders are 
feared and/or respected, while weak ones will be deposed 
or taken advantage of.

212 CultureShock! Syria
Manner of Dress
Except for politicians and owners of a few large businesses, 
business  dress in Syria is decidedly casual. Even rich house 
rental agents and men who own tourist businesses usually 
wear slacks and only slightly dressy shirts. During hot 
weather, office  dress ranges from blue jeans and T-shirts to 
slacks and  dress shirts for men and from scarf and raincoat 
to glitzy blouses, skirts and lots of jewellery and make-up 
for women. When the temperature drops, both genders 
often wear sweaters and/or outer jackets—even leather 
coats. The main exceptions I’ve noticed are five-star hotel 
employees and some tour guides, who often wear uniforms 
or blazers.
Payments Due
While some Syrians pay what they owe promptly, it is 
common for most to take a long time to pay. In cases like 
this, you must be persistent or you are not likely to get 
paid at all. A fellow teacher there did some graphic design 
consulting work for a new business forms company and 
was not paid for about two months; the owner just kept 
apologising but said he did not have enough money yet. 
I helped a former student and his partner complete a 
dealer application packet from Chrysler Corporation. The 
agreement was that they would call me back when they 
had all the information completed and a final letter for 
me to proof. But they never called, and when I called my 
student a month or so later I got a nervous response about 
not being quite ready yet—obviously a lie. I waited for 
another month and called him again, telling him they could 
take whatever time they wanted as long as they paid me 
for the time I had already given them. He did pay me and 
was terribly apologetic about it, but I am sure he would do 
the same thing again—he admitted the last time I called 
him that they had not only sent the application off but had 
been rejected!
It is just culturally acceptable to take a long time to pay 
your debts, and I have found that requiring payment in 
advance is the best solution to the problem. This payment 

213
Doing Business in Syria
problem holds true for both the private and public sectors, 
and is often worse in the public sectors because of massive 
bureaucracy.
 Baksheesh
This is a word that to Arabs means tip, but those tips could 
be either tips or out-and-out bribery, based on Western 
definitions. If you represent a Western company that does not 
allow you to ‘buy’ business, you may have trouble competing 
against others who have no compunction about doing so. 
Personal relationships can mean a great deal here, but if a lot 
of money is at stake and—more importantly—a  government 
ministry or agency is involved, greasing the right person’s 
palm may be a prerequisite to doing business. Do not be too 
eager, however, to offer such a thing; you may encounter 
people who will be offended by your suggestion.

FAST FACTS 
CHAPTER 10
‘We can have facts without thinking but we 
cannot have thinking without facts.’
—John Dewey

215
Fast Facts
Official Name
Syrian Arab Republic (Al Jumhuriyah al Arabiyah as Suriyah 
in Romanised Arabic); Syria for short 
Capital
 Damascus 
National Anthem
Guardians of the Homeland (Homat el Diyar in Romanised 
Arabic). It can be heard at http://www.nationalanthems.info/
sy.htm
Time (timezone)
UTC + 2; 7 hours ahead of New York City; daylight savings 
time early April to late October.
Telephone country code
963 
Land
Syria borders Turkey on the north,  Iraq on the east,  Jordan on the 
south,  Israel,  Lebanon and Mediterranean Sea on the west (145 
km/90 miles of coastline, not counting the Hattey Peninsula, 
now under control of Turkey). It is shaped like an irregular 
triangle; mostly semi-arid and  desert plateau with a narrow 
coastal plain and two ranges of mountains in the west.

216 CultureShock! Syria
Arable land: 24.8 per cent
Irrigated land: 13,300 sq km 
Area
Land: 185,180 sq km (71,500 sq miles). Including the Golan 
Heights; just a bit larger than the US state of North Dakota
Water: 1,550 sq km (598 sq miles)
Highest point
Mount Hermon—2,814 m (9,232 feet)
Lowest point
Near Lake Tiberias—200 m (656 feet) below sea level
Major rivers and lakes
Rivers: Euphrates, al Balikh, al Khabur, Barada, Orontes
Lakes: Arram, Mzerib (natural); al Assad (formed by dam) 
 Climate
Desert and steppe: hot, dry, sunny summers (June to August) 
and chilly, rainy winters (December to February); temperature 
ranges from below freezing in winter to over 40°C (104°F) 
in summer; dust storms and sand storms common.
Coast and mountains: warm somewhat humid summers 
and cold weather with rain, snow or sleet in winter; 
temperature ranges from around 10°C (50°F) in winter to a 
little over 30°C (86°F) in summer.
Natural resources
Hydropower, petroleum, phosphates, chrome and manganese 
ores, asphalt, iron ore, rock salt, marble, gypsum
Population
22 million (2010 est.)
Life expectancy: Male, 72, Female, 76
Literacy:
Female, 73 per cent; Male, 86 per cent (2004 est.)

217
Fast Facts
Ethnic groups
Arab, 90.3 per cent; Kurds, Armenians and other, 9.7 per cent
Religions
 Muslim, 90 per cent (Sunni 74 per cent; other 16 per cent)
Christian, 10 per cent
Jewish, relative handful, mostly in  Aleppo
Language and dialects
Six dialects of Arabic, plus nine other languages, including 
Kurdish, Armenian,  Aramaic and Circassian. Basic English 
and  French are widely understood in cities.
Government
Nominal republic with authoritarian regime; military and 
secret  police strong 
Administrative divisions
14 provinces (called governorates) which are subdivided into 
60 districts (further divided into sub-districts), plus dozens 
of cities, towns and villages
Currency
Syrian pounds (SP), also called lira; 2010 US$ exchange rate, 
roughly 47 lira per US$ 
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) 
US$ 100.7 billion (2009 estimate)
Agricultural products
Produce: wheat, barley, cotton, lentils, chickpeas, olives, 
sugar beets
Meat/dairy: beef, mutton, eggs, poultry, milk 
Industries
Petroleum, textiles, food processing, beverages, tobacco, 
phosphate rock mining, cement and oil seeds crushing, car 
assembly

218 CultureShock! Syria
Exports
Products: crude oil, minerals, petroleum products, fruits 
and vegetables, cotton fiber, textiles,  clothing, meat and live 
animals, wheat
Amount: US$ 13 billion (2009 est.)
Main partners:  Iraq, Germany,  Lebanon, Italy, France,  Egypt, 
 Saudi Arabia (2008 data)
Imports
Products: machinery and transport equipment, electric power 
machinery, food and livestock, metal and metal products, 
chemicals and chemical products, plastics, yarn, paper
Amount: US$ 13.1 billion (2009 est.)
Main sources:  Saudi Arabia, China, Russia, Italy,  Egypt, UAE, 
Turkey, Iran (2008 data) 
Ports and harbours
Banyas, Latakia 
 Airports
With paved runways: 29; Without: 75
International: 1
Heliports: 7 
Railways
One main system with 2,052 km (1,275 miles) of track
 FAMOUS PEOPLE
 Ibrahim Hanano: leader of revolution against  French 
occupation
 Michel Aflaq: co-founder of Pan-Arab Ba’ath Party
 Salah al Din al Bitar: co-founder of Pan-Arab Ba’ath Party
   Hafez al-Assad: could be called the ‘father’ of modern 
Syria; one of longest-ruling leaders in the modern world
  Farouk al Sharaa: diplomat and Foreign Minister from 
1984; currently Vice-President; highly respected for his 
diplomacy 
  Carlos Menem: the 50th president of Argentina, born to 
Syrian immigrants in Argentina

219
Fast Facts
  Asalah Mostafa Nasri—currently popular female singer
  Duria Lahham—Syrian actor famous and popular 
throughout Arab world
  George Wassouf—long-time popular singer in Syria and 
 Lebanon
  Sabah Fakhri—long-time popular singer from  Aleppo
  Zakaria Tamer—famous writer of Arabic-language short 
stories and  children’s stories
Places of Interest
Too numerous to mention in this space; refer to the 
chapters on settling in and travel as well as any good travel 
guidebooks.

220
CULTURAL QUIZ
It is, of course, not possible to prepare a person for every 
social situation in an unfamiliar country where actions and 
reactions may differ dramatically from those to which the 
visitor is accustomed. Flexibility and cultural awareness is 
always necessary. This quiz is designed to help readers only 
in the more common situations they might encounter.
SITUATION 1
You are walking on a crowded sidewalk or in a crowded souk 
and children push up against you, old women bump into 
you, and someone gets out of a car, bumping you with the 
car door. You should:
 yell at the people so they can hear you above the din.
 adjust your attitude and accept the jostling as something 
you can’t change.
 stay away from crowded places in future.
 just show your displeasure with a “dirty” look.
The Best Choice
Response  will do no good at all; few Syrians speak your 
language, and they are accustomed to yelling and talking 
loudly in public. Response  will also be lost on them, since 
the manner in which you look at someone has little social 
significance.  is only possible if you have a servant who 
can do all your shopping for you since souks and streets are 
crowded whenever shops are open. Physical closeness and 
lack of personal space are part of Arab culture, so  is the 
only viable solution; after a while you’ll barely notice it.
SITUATION 2
You are travelling in Syria and see a group of women in 
colourful clothes walking alongside the road, each with a 
bundle or container balanced on her head. You think this is 
a great photo opportunity. You should:

221
Culture Quiz
 stop the car quickly, jump out and snap a picture before 
they look away.
 drive stealthily up behind them and get a shot when they 
turn around.
 forget it.
 ask if you can take their photo.
The Best Choice
Choices  and  are bad. Most traditional Muslims are 
averse to photographing women, and if you try to be sneaky 
you might offend them.  is a realistic choice (particularly if 
you’re a man), but you might later wish you had the snapshot. 
The best action is ; if a woman asks their permission, 
some may indicate “No,” but others may not mind. It is not 
necessary to speak to do this—all you need to do is point to 
your camera and ask your question with your face.
SITUATION 3
You are sitting in your office with your feet on your desk, 
talking to a Western co-worker. A Syrian co-worker walks in 
to talk to you. You should:
 acknowledge him or her, get the new conversation over 
with, and continue with your Western co-worker.
 wave with your feet, then talk to the person.
 ignore the Syrian and continue your first conversation 
until it’s finished.
 take your feet off the desk and acknowledge the co-worker 
who has just entered.
The Best Choice
The only one of these that is completely unacceptable is . 
The bottoms of shoes represent filth to Syrians, and to wave 
with your shoes or in other ways that draw attention to your 
soles would be a sort of mockery. You could do  or , but 
both would show some disrespect (or cultural ignorance) 
because of your feet. The most acceptable choice is .

222 CultureShock! Syria
SITUATION 4
You’re a Western man with a female Syrian co-worker or 
student. She’s vivacious and wears lots of make-up, jewellery 
and tight clothes. She’s also very friendly to you, stands close 
when she talks to you (which is often), and you know she’s 
affectionate because she’s always hugging and kissing her 
female friends and walking with them arm-in-arm. All this 
makes you think she’s attracted to you, and you decide to:
 ask her to go to dinner with you.
 tell her you like her and ask her if she wants to talk about 
the two of you.
 reach out and grasp her hand or arm when she’s talking 
to you.
 ask one of her friends if the young woman is interested 
in you.
The Best Choice
Sorry. There is no best choice here, but  and  are the 
worst.  might get you in trouble in any number of ways 
(and scare her as well), and  wouldn’t be allowed by her 

223
Culture Quiz
family. Her affectionate behaviour with her female friends 
is no indication at all that she’ll do the same with you.  
would create gossip and speculation that would overwhelm 
you in no time.
If you are genuinely interested in the woman and know 
her fairly well,  is probably all right. If her appearance is 
as described here, she’s certainly not a conservative Muslim 
so she might be receptive if she really does like you. But be 
careful; many Syrians dream of Western passports whenever 
they see a Westerner who’s a potential mate. You might be 
a real ‘catch’ for her and her family.
Unless you are interested in possible marriage to the 
woman, just accept her friendliness but push no further. This 
is not a dating culture, and young people (even in their 20s) 
are usually not even allowed to be alone with a girlfriend or 
boyfriend until they’re engaged. If you do get involved with 
a Syrian woman and take away her virginity, you may ruin 
her chances of getting married. If she gets pregnant by you, 
you could be in real trouble.
SITUATION 5
You’re a woman with a male Syrian student or co-worker who 
pays a lot of attention to you. He asks personal questions 
and eventually invites you to his home. You should:
 say you’d love to and arrange a time.
 say you’d like to but that your fiancee wouldn’t like it 
(whether or not you have one).
 ask him what the occasion is and whether there will be 
other guests; if so, whom?
 apologise, but tell him you don’t know him well enough 
yet.
The Best Choice
The best response depends on what you want. Choice 
 would be a mistake. I don’t like to make sweeping 
generalisations, but to most Syrian men,  would imply that 
you’re either attracted to him romantically or one of those 
‘loose’ Western women they see all the time in the movies 

224 CultureShock! Syria
there—one date, and you’re in bed with a man. Even if the 
man is fairly enlightened and knowledgeable, he’s still likely 
to wonder about your ‘morals’ if you eagerly accept. If you 
would like to go and are interested in him romantically,  is 
possible if for no other reason than it lets him know you’re 
uncomfortable about the social acceptability of such an 
invitation.  would be realistic if you do like him—again, 
this isn’t a dating culture. If you don’t want to go and want 
to avoid further invitations and unwelcome pursuit,  is the 
best answer. For this to work, though, you’d better always 
act as if it’s true and keep a distance between you and all 
Syrian men.
SITUATION 6
You’re a Western woman walking down the street of a Syrian 
city and you pass a couple of young men you don’t know. 
One of them says “Hello” to you and asks (in English) where 
you’re from. You should:
 return the greeting, tell him where you came from, and 
stop to chat.
 look at him but don’t respond.
 say “Hello” and continue walking.
 pretend you heard nothing.
The Best Choice
This is a difficult one because you’re in another country 
and, as a guest, don’t want to be rude. But you must protect 
yourself and your reputation (the latter may sound a bit 
old-fashioned, but is true there). The best choice is , even 
though this may seem unnecessarily rude; this is exactly 
what a Syrian woman would do. Choice  is all right, but 
why even look at him? It will probably only encourage him, 
and  would do so even more. Choosing , of course, would 
be the worst possible thing to do. It would only confirm a 
negative perception of Western women and might get you 
a lot of harassment and attempts to get physical with you. 
Give them an inch…

225
Culture Quiz
SITUATION 7
You’re a woman walking in a souk, and you feel a hand 
brush across your buttocks, or worse yet, grab a buttock, 
breast or your crotch. You should:
 turn around, figure out who did it, scream as loudly as 
you can and attack the greaseball with your purse, fists, 
feet or anything else within easy reach.
 ignore it and move away quickly.
 find the man who did it and ask him why.
 find a police officer and tell him.
The Best Choice
The first choice is the only good one. Even though many 
men here do such things (particularly to Western women) 
others are embarrassed by the behaviour and the culprit 
himself is likely to feel humiliated if you attack him. If you 
are in a crowded place, there’s almost no chance he’ll fight 
back, and someone else is likely to come to your assistance. 
The worst choice is ; it will only encourage him to do it 
more often.  would be patently stupid and  is unlikely 
to accomplish anything at all. Even if the cop understands, 
he’s not likely to do anything about it; even if he is willing 
to try, the molester will have vanished by then.
SITUATION 8
You drop off your suit at a dry-cleaner’s and ask to have it the 
next night. You return the next evening when the proprietor 
said he’d be open, but the shop is closed. You wait for half 
an hour, and finally the adolescent son of the owner opens 
the shop. You’re still learning Arabic, don’t speak it well, and 
he doesn’t understand a word of your native language. You 
have a date with a group to go to a concert in less than an 
hour. You should:
 chew him out in your best Arabic, ask him where the hell 
his father is, and demand your suit immediately.
 ask him if any of his neighbours speak English, get a 
translator, and let him know assertively but politely that 

226 CultureShock! Syria
you must have the suit, and tell him you’ll wait for it.
 tell him you will come back in half an hour to get it.
 find out when his father will be in and sit down and 
wait.
The Best Choice
 is the worst choice because time is not urgent in Syria, 
‘telling someone off’ who didn’t keep a promise is of little 
value, and you can’t do it effectively anyway in a language 
you barely know. You’re more likely to say something 
completely wrong and either insult the young man or utterly 
confuse him. Remember that he ‘only works there’ and that 
his father runs the shop. Choices  is likely to work only 
if you’re lucky. If you come back in half an hour, the suit 
might still not be there; all sorts of shops send part of their 
work out to others when they’re too busy for the job. As for 
, the father might either arrive much later than his son 
expects or not at all. The only choice that is likely to work 
is . At any rate, if you sit down to wait, the young man 
will do your work first or call the shop that has your suit 
to expedite it. He’ll probably serve you tea while you wait, 
and instead of making an enemy you will have maintained 
a relationship that will probably be better in the future. 
Personal relationships count for more than anything else 
in Syrian culture.
SITUATION 9
You receive a notice that you have a package waiting for you 
at the post office and you arrive half an hour before closing 
time. You can’t speak Arabic very well and you can’t read it 
at all, so you stand in the shortest line you see. When you 
get to the window and show the clerk your notice, he speaks 
rapidly and motions for you to go to another window. You 
go to this window and wait in line for a long time. After your 
turn comes, the clerk walks off for a few minutes, comes 
back and starts to close his window, points at the clock which 
now says it’s five minutes after closing time, and tells you 
to come back tomorrow. You should:

227
Culture Quiz
 say “Please,” and offer him 50 or 100 lira.
 cause a scene and demand your package, telling him 
you’ve been waiting for 35 minutes already.
 demand to see his boss.
 just walk away, cursing to yourself.
The Best Choice
What many expats (and some Syrians) would do in this 
situation is . Hourly workers there earn less than enough 
to buy groceries for a family, and low-level government 
employees make less than most. You may run into a 
similar predicament when you’re trying to get an exit visa 
or complete some other bureaucratic procedure. Instead of 
viewing the socio-economic phenomena of ‘tipping’ people 
to do their jobs with moral indignation, you’ll be better 
off, get more accomplished in less time, and experience 
less frustration overall if you accept it as part of a culture 
that’s very different from your own. Choice  will get you 
nowhere, make you look foolish, and make an enemy of 
someone you may have to deal with regularly in the future. 
 might work, depending on whether or not his boss is on 
the job and what kind of a person he is, but you may get 
the same answer from him: “We’re closed now, come back 
tomorrow.” And  will only raise your blood pressure for 
you still have to come back tomorrow!
SITUATION 10
Someone you don’t know well has invited you over for 
dinner. You’re so impressed with the hospitality that you 
think you should take some kind of gift. An appropriate 
gift would be:
 a bottle of expensive French wine you picked up on your 
last trip out of Syria.
 nothing.
 some of the chocolate chip cookies you just made so you 
can show them a favourite North American treat.
 a bouquet of flowers.

228 CultureShock! Syria
The Best Choice
Choice  is acceptable, but  is an appreciated gesture. 
 and  would be the worst thing to do because 1) if they’re 
Muslim, a gift of alcohol will be anything but appreciated 
and 2) any gift of food or drink taken to someone’s home 
implies that you think your hosts’ food and drink will not be 
good enough. The cookies are a good idea when you have 
Syrians to your home for a meal or treat, however.
SITUATION 11
A Syrian you know has invited you to his or her home twice 
and you’ve been unable to accept because of previous 
engagements, being out of town, or some other valid 
reason. The person invites you for a third time and you’ve 
just bought tickets for a concert that night. The best thing 
to do is:
 tell the person about the concert and ask if he or she and 
family would like to go along with you.
 accept the invitation and give the tickets to someone 
else.
 say you’re sorry again but just can’t make it.
 ask if you could come over the following evening.
The Best Choice
To some extent, this depends on how you feel about your 
would-be host. If it is someone you like and you feel badly 
about bowing out on the first two invitations,  is your 
answer (concert tickets are cheap anyway). If it’s someone 
you’re not fond of and don’t want to get any closer to,  
is the correct action; it may puzzle the Syrian, but you 
probably won’t receive any more invitations. Neither  
nor  are viable choices unless it’s someone you know 
extremely well and who is not terribly traditional. Invitations 
aren’t something you negotiate.

229
Culture Quiz
SITUATION 12
You’ve come to know a Syrian fairly well, and he asks you 
con fidentially what you think of the country’s leadership. 
The best response is:
 to be honest if you don’t like the government.
 tell him you think they’ve done a good job of bringing Syria 
into the modern world, even if you don’t believe it.
 tell him you don’t know enough about it to discuss it.
 tell him you hate politics and don’t even think about it 
unless you have to.
The Best Choice
Choices ,  and  are all realistic, and there’s some truth 
to .  should be avoided unless your honest feelings about 
the government are positive. The danger here is not so 
much that you will get into trouble as that your comments 
will be heard by the wrong person and your friend might 
get into trouble.

230 CultureShock! Syria
SITUATION 13
You receive an invitation to the wedding of a Syrian friend. 
You want to go, of course, but it’s during your vacation and 
you plan on being out of the country. What should you do?
 Apologise profusely but explain that you’re going to be 
out of town at that time.
 Rearrange your plans to accommodate the wedding.
 Tell him/her you really want to come and ask if the date 
could be changed.
The Best Choice
Unless you’ve already bought non-refundable plane tickets, 
there’s only one acceptable response in that culture—. If 
you’ve already bought tickets, then  is acceptable.  is 
a joke, of course, given the amount of time, planning and 
the involvement of both families that go into a wedding. 
Remember, there is no event as revered and as eagerly 
anticipated as a wedding, so to miss that of a good friend 
would be interpreted as lack of caring and respect. You 
would also miss a unique cultural experience that is worth 
a sacrifice.
SITUATION 14
A Syrian you’ve made friends with drops by unexpectedly 
at a time when you’re really not in the mood to entertain 
and it is clear that he or she expects to be invited in. What 
should you do?
 Exchange pleasantries at the door, excuse yourself, and 
ask your friend to drop back at another specific time.
 Invite your friend in for tea, have a chat, then ask her to 
come back again sometime.
 Invite your friend in for tea, have a chat, then ask him to 
call you before dropping by the next time.
 Tell the person it would be better to phone before 
coming by.

231
Culture Quiz
The Best Choice
This happens a lot when Syrians know where you live (they 
do this to each other regularly). Even though most are aware 
that such visits are not common in your culture, they may 
think you won’t mind if you’ve become friends. Although  
would be good cultural information for Syrians, it’s simply 
too rude and would make your friends think you disliked 
them. The other three choices would all be acceptable, 
depending on your circumstances at the time. Excusing 
yourself at the moment but asking visitors to return later 
(at a specific time) will take the edge off your apparent lack 
of warmth in not inviting them in. You may get more than 
you bargain for if you pick  since the visitor might take 
you at your word and really drop by any time and all the 
time, unannounced. I think  is the best action, because it 
extends hospitality yet gives your friend a gentle hint that 
you prefer not to have people drop in unexpectedly.
SITUATION 15
You try to cross a street, and cars come at you from all 
directions, refusing to allow you to get across. What really 
bothers you, though, is that they all honk their horns at you. 
You find this so rude, you:
 give them the middle-finger salute.
 run across the street at the first slight break in traffic.
 step in front of an oncoming car, holding your hand up 
in a ‘stop’ command.
 wait until the street is clear.
The Best Choice
If you consistently follow , although it may be the safest 
action, you will spend most of your waking hours waiting to 
cross streets. The gesture in  ‘giving someone the finger’ 
is not used here (but it is understood, thanks to American 
movies and TV programmes) and may get you into a 
fight.  is all right, but you might throw off the ‘aim’ of 
a driver: people here don’t run across streets, and most 
drivers are amazingly accurate at driving toward you as 

232 CultureShock! Syria
you walk across the street, passing only inches behind you. 
This leaves  as the best choice, because your signal to 
the driver will almost always be honoured. Remember, the 
one in front (pedestrian or vehicle) has the right of way, if 
only for a moment.
SITUATION 16
You are driving on the four-lane, divided highway between 
Damascus and Homs, in the inside lane, passing several 
slower-moving vehicles. You are going quite fast, but another 
car comes flying up behind you, riding on your rear bumper 
and flashing its lights. You noticed it when it was still a quarter 
of a kilometre back, and its lights were flashing then, too. 
You decide to:
 teach the jerk a lesson for his rudeness and refuse to pull 
over, staying beside one of the vehicles you’re passing.
 the same as above, but also give him the finger.
 pull over, even though you haven’t finished passing the 
vehicles, and let him by.
 ignore him and continue in the passing lane until you’re 
past the string of vehicles, then pull over.
The Best Choice
The only thing worse than  would be ! I know of people 
who tried  and ended up getting beaten for refusing to let 
someone pass. One of the unwritten rules of the road here 
is that you let drivers pass when they beep their horns or 
flash their lights, or both. The best action is , although 
you can probably get away with  as long as you don’t take 
too long.
SITUATION 17
You’re walking into a government building, embassy or 
foreign cultural centre, and the soldier guarding the entrance 
stops you, says something in Arabic you don’t understand, 
holds out a hand with the palm up and draws the outside 
edge of his other hand in a cutting motion across his wrist. 
He is indicating that:

233
Culture Quiz
 he wants baksheesh to let you in.
 your hand will be cut off if you steal anything.
 he wants to see your passport.
 he wants your ticket to enter.
The Answer
Although  is a common expectation here, baksheesh isn’t 
asked for in such an obvious way.  isn’t correct: Syria 
doesn’t apply Islamic law that requires this punishment. Even 
if you needed a ticket to enter a building or compound, the 
soldier wouldn’t be the one collecting tickets, so  is wrong. 
This gesture is used to ask for your passport. You can also use 
it in a restaurant when you see your waiter across the room 
and want your bill. A similar gesture, but with the edge of 
a hand drawn across the inside of the elbow, means a large 
piece of paper or a notebook.

234
DO’S AND DON’TS 
DO’S
 Dress modestly. Neither sex should wear shorts or 
sleeveless shirts. Women should wear a long skirt or loose 
pants and long-sleeved shirts. You should also bring a 
long scarf to cover your head in mosques. Although 
you do not need to go veiled all the time, some women 
will feel more comfortable if they wear a veil in certain 
situations or neighbourhoods. Men should also dress 
modestly. Jeans are okay, but keep in mind that most 
Syrian men dress up.
 Do your best to learn a few words in Arabic (See 
Chapter 8), especially if you’ll be in the country for several 
months or longer. They will go a long way in making some 
friends and in making your stay more pleasant. 
 Learn to read Arabic numbers. It is fairly easy and will 
make your time in Syria much easier and more pleasant, 
especially where money matters are concerned. Practice 
by reading license plate numbers (which also have 
Western equivalents) while you are riding the bus or 
service taxi.
 Carry small treats for children, such as pens, candy and 
key chains, when visiting Syria’s more popular tourist 
attractions. Syrian children are generally sweet and well-
behaved, and these small trinkets cross language barriers, 
and make the kids very happy.
 Remember that Islam forbids the consumption of alcohol. 
Public drunkenness is generally frowned upon, so if you 
do take a drink, do so in moderation. If you want to get 
smashed, do so in the privacy of your own home.
 Avoid eye contact with men you do not know personally if 
you are a woman. Arab men sometimes interpret (albeit 
wrongly) glances by Western women to be invitations for 
sex or hints that they desire the men. 
 Ignore any lewd comments that local men might make if 
you are a woman. If a man touches you inappropriately, 
however, you should raise a commotion and draw attention 

235
Do’s and Don’ts
to him or call for the police. Chances are the people nearby 
will come to your rescue.
 Make sure to tip busboys and assistants in restaurants. 
They do not get a share of the waiter’s tip, even though 
they do just as much work. A 10 per cent tip for waiters 
is fine, and a few Syrian coins will suffice for the busboys 
and assistants.
 Take extra care when crossing the street, especially in 
larger cities like Damascus and Aleppo. Pedestrians do 
not have Western-style right of way in Syria.
DON’TS
 Be loud or do anything to stand out in public—unless 
you’re the victim of a crime or groping. Syrians prefer 
blending in to standing out. In fact, if you are harassed, 
making a scene usually causes the offender to back off 
out of embarrassment.
 Sit with the sole of your shoe facing someone. This is 
considered very bad behaviour throughout the Arab 
world, since the sole of the shoe is considered one of the 
dirtiest places. Always sit with both feet on the floor. 
 Cross your legs or ankles or place your feet on tables or 
footstools. When seated on the ground or floor, sit in such 
a manner that your soles are hidden.
 Eat or shake hands with your left hand. It is considered 
unclean in Arab countries, since the left hand usually is 
reserved for toilet activities.
 Get into conversations about politics or national issues 
with strangers. They could be the Mukhabarat (secret 
police). To avoid trouble, it is best to give noncommittal 
answers to any questions from strangers and always with 
a positive spin.
 Refuse an invitation to a cup of tea if you can help it. If 
you do, you will certainly miss out on the opportunity 
to gain a first-hand look at Syrian life and culture. If you 
must refuse (which is usually considered impolite), put 
your hand over your heart while you decline to show that 
no harm is meant. You might need to repeat this gesture 
several times.

236 CultureShock! Syria
 Take anyone’s photo without first asking for their 
permission. (This rule applies in every country, but it bears 
repeating.) This is especially true for photos of women.
 Throw toilet paper in the toilets of most old buildings. It 
will clog their plumbing systems, since Syrian pipes are 
generally too narrow to accommodate paper. Instead, 
toss the paper in the small wastebaskets placed near 
the toilets for this purpose. 
 Sit next to a member of the opposite sex whom you do 
not know. On a bus, for example, if the only available 
seat is next to a woman, it would be more culturally 
acceptable to stand. 
 Bring food or beverages as a gift when you are invited to 
eat at a Syrian’s home. If you do so, they will think that 
you anticipate that their food will taste bad. Above all, 
never bring a bottle of wine or alcohol, since Muslims 
do not drink alcoholic beverages! It is acceptable not to 
bring anything. If you do wish to bring a gift, bring a small 
bouquet of flowers.
 Be insulted or put off if someone stares at you. It is quite 
acceptable behaviour for Syrians to stare. Even when 
you wear modest clothes and demonstrate the most 
impeccable manners, you will probably be stared at and 
attract attention. 
 Engage in public displays of affection, like hand-holding, 
hugging or kissing, with your spouse or boyfriend/
girlfriend. This is frowned upon in Syria. On the other 
hand, public displays of affection between members of 
the same sex are quite acceptable.

237
GLOSSARY
Al Assad, Lake
Syria’s largest body of water, 
formed by Tabaqah Dam on 
Euphrates near Aleppo
Al Hamdulla
most common response to 
greeting of “How are you?” 
meaning praise Allah!
Al Jazeera
triangle of land northeast of 
Euphrates and al Khabur Rivers; 
meaning island
Alawites
Muslims originally from 
mountains of northwestern 
Syria with somewhat mysterious 
beliefs and rites
Alexandretta
northwestern corner of Syria 
given to Turkey by French; 
also called Hatay Peninsula
Arab coffee
boiled with coffee grounds and 
powdered cardamom at bottom 
of pot; served in demitasse with 
lots of sugar; dense and strong
Arabian Gulf
what Arabs call the Persian Gulf
Aramaeans
one of the first known groups of 
Semitic peoples to settle east of 
coastal mountains
Arram, Lake
one of only two natural lakes 
in Syria; fills crater of extinct 
volcano in Golan Heights
Arwad
Syria’s only island; ancient 
Phoenician base
Assyrians
ancient peoples from eastern 
area; Syria named from them; 
were well known for military 
conquests and brutality

238 CultureShock! Syria
Baab
Arabic word for gate; part of many 
names for areas of old cities
Babylonians
ancient peoples from what is 
now a part of Iraq; Babylon is 
the ancient name of Baghdad
Baksheesh
tip or bribe; line of distinction 
obscured in Syrian culture
Ba’ath Party
socialistic Pan-Arab party in 
Syria and Iraq; founded by one 
Christian and one Muslim man; 
Syria’s only viable political party
Bedouin
original nomadic Arabs
Bukra, insha’allah
“Tomorrow, maybe”; common 
response when answer to 
inquiry is unknown
CBS
Commerical Bank of Syria
Caliph
top leader of early Islam (Sunni), 
after death of Mohammed
Canaanites
ancient peoples who moved onto 
coastal plain and seaward side of 
mountains of Levant; essentially 
beginning of area’s known history
Children of The Book
Muslim expression for 
themselves, Jews and Christians
Cola
used by Syrians to mean any 
type of soda pop
Correctionist 
Movement
Hafez al-Assad's name for his 
coup and following government; 
claimed that al-Asad’s immediate 
predecessor erred in support 
for communist-type collective 
farms, economy run completely 
by national government and 
support for Palestinian struggle 
at expense of Syria’s own well-
being; movement to ‘correct’ 
these mistakes

239
Glossary
Crusaders
French Catholics who travelled 
to Levant with intent of taking 
back Jerusalem for Christianity; 
slaughtered many men, women 
and children in their quest
Damashq
Arabic name for Damascus
Druze
offshoot Muslim group in 
southern Syria and northern 
Jordan
Eid al-Adha
festival following traditional end 
of Hajj (pilgrimage to Mecca)
Eid al-Fitr
festival immediately following 
the end of Ramadan
Euphrates 
main river in Syria (in east); 
shared by Turkey, Syria and Iraq
Falaafel sandwich
Arab-style vegetable burrito
Fatteh 
concoction vaguely similar to hot 
breakfast cereal
Fejera wa jwazaat 
Arabic name for passport and 
immigration (P&I) office 
Fertile Crescent
name for Mesopotamia; area 
between Tigris and Euphrates 
Rivers from mountains of the 
north to the Persian Gulf
Five Pillars of Islam 
five beliefs/practices essential to 
practice of Islam
Fool
fava beans cooked in oil, lemon 
juice and garlic, topped with 
yogurt; eaten for breakfast
Free Zones 
areas in Syria where investments 
are particularly liberalised and 
encouraged
Gharb Depression 
valley between coastal and 
inland mountains

240 CultureShock! Syria
Hajj 
one of Five Pillars, pilgrimage 
to Mecca with stop in Medina to 
pay respects at Prophet’s grave; 
required at least once in lifetime 
if person has financial means; 
some make pilgrimage many 
times, others pay for poorer 
friends/relatives to make trip; 
official time is during days seven 
to ten of the 12th month of the 
Islamic year
Haleb 
Arabic name for Aleppo
Hatay Peninsula 
northwestern corner of Syria 
given by French to Turkey; also 
called Alexandretta
Hittites 
ancient peoples who invaded 
Syria from north; from what is 
now area of Turkey
Hommus 
dipping paste made from chick 
peas, tahini (sesame paste), 
lemon and garlic
Iftar
evening meal that breaks day’s 
fast during Ramadan
Insha’allah 
most common expression used 
when Arabs talk about future 
plans; meaning Allah willing
Investment Law 
No.10 
put into effect in early 1991 
and amended in 2000; begins 
to change Syria’s centralised 
economic control
Iqaama 
residency permit
Kabob 
spiced, minced lamb pressed 
into weiner shape on a skewer
Kafeeyeh 
men’s headdress with either red 
and white or black and white 
pattern; made world-famous by 
Yasar Arafat

241
Glossary
Karnak 
Syria’s intercity bus system
Kibbeh 
meat pie made with ground 
lamb, bulgur and seasonings
Kurds 
group of people without own 
homeland; living area covers 
parts of northern Syria, Iraq, 
Iran and southern Turkey
Leban 
Arabic word for both yogurt and 
a drink made from yogurt
Levant, the
area that is now Syria, Lebanon, 
the Alexandretta (part of Turkey), 
Palestine, Israel and Jordan; also 
sometimes called Greater Syria
Lira
another word for Syrian pound
Mamluks
Egyptians who partially 
colonised the Levant after the 
Crusaders were driven out
Mesopotamia
area between the Tigris 
and Euphrates Rivers from 
mountains of the north to what 
is now Persian Gulf; also called 
the Fertile Crescent
Mt. Qassioun
small mountain against which 
Damascus snuggles on the 
east side
Mtabbal
eggplant, yogurt and garlic dip
Mukhabarat
the secret police
Mzerib, Lake
one of only two natural lakes in 
Syria; northeast of Der’a, near 
border with Jordan
Omayyads
initially strongest of Arab clans 
after death of Mohammed; 
started and ruled Arab empire 
from Syria; less dogmatic than 
other Muslim groups and more 
socially and politically oriented

242 CultureShock! Syria
Ottoman empire
empire of the Turkish Ottomans, 
extending from Arab Peninsula 
to Europe and North Africa
Pal
type of video system used in 
Syria; Pal and NTSC (North 
American) tapes will not play on 
machines intended for the other
Palmyra
ruins of ancient Rome in the 
central desert of Syria
People’s Assembly
nominal legislative body of 
Syrian government
Phoenicians
first great seafarers of 
Mediterranean, so named by the 
Greeks, although they didn’t call 
themselves that; name simply 
referred to all peoples of the area 
Piastres
100 piastres per Syrian pound
Ramadan
annual month-long fast required 
by Islam
SAR
Syrian Arab Republic; Syria’s 
official name
SP
Syrian pounds; also sometimes 
called lira
Salah al-Din
Arab famous for driving French 
Crusaders out of Levant 
with assistance of Mamluks 
from Egypt
Salat
One of Five Pillars: prayer five 
times daily—at sunrise, midday, 
afternoon, sunset and evening. 
Prayers prescribed in both form 
and content

243
Glossary
Sawm
One of Five Pillars: fasting 
during Ramadan, ninth month 
of the Islamic year; no food, 
drinks (even water), smoking, 
or sex from before dawn til 
after sunset; begins and ends—
according to the instructions of 
the Koran—when one cannot 
distinguish white thread from 
black thread in natural light; also 
allows those travelling during 
Ramadan to fast at other time; 
purposes of fast are to purify 
soul and body and focus one’s 
attention on God; in Syrian 
cities, beginning and end of fast 
are marked by cannons firing.
Service taxis 
intercity taxis
Shaawarma
Arab chicken or lamb burrito-
type food
Shahada
One of Five Pillars: declaration 
that there is only one God and 
that Mohammed was his last 
prophet
Sheikh
leader of a mosque, so 
chosen because of his Koranic 
scholarship and perceived piety
Shi’ites, Shi’a
Muslim minority that argued that 
after death of Mohammed the 
new leader had to be a family 
member of the prophet; chose 
Ali, his nephew; in perpetual 
conflict with Sunni
Soda
Syrian word for liver
Souk
traditional Arab market place; 
very lively with lots of scents 
and sounds

244 CultureShock! Syria
Sumerians (of what is 
now southern Iraq)
ancient peoples who eventually 
moved into what is now Syria
Sunnis
Muslim majority who wanted 
to appoint Caliphs to rule in 
Mohammed’s place after his 
death; in perpetual conflict with 
the Shi’a
Syrian Desert
covers most of Jordan, Iraq and 
northern Saudi Arabia as well
Tabouleh
traditional Middle-Eastern salad 
made with parsley, bulgar wheat, 
cucumbers, tomatoes, green 
onions, lemon juice and olive oil
Ugarit
area of ruins in northwestern 
Syria where one of first-known 
alphabets was discovered
United Arab Republic 
(UAR)
union of Syria and Egypt from 
1958 until 1961
Yalanji
grape leaves stuffed with spiced 
mixture of ground lamb and rice
Zakat
one of Five Pillars: annual tithe 
of 2.5 per cent of earnings above 
basic necessities; money used to 
build and maintain mosques and 
help the poor
Zionist Jews
European Jews whose explicit 
goal was to take back the Holy 
Land from Arabs; believed God 
gave them that land 

245
RESOURCE GUIDE
EMERGENCIES AND HEALTH
Emergency Numbers
 Ambulance 110
 Fire 113
 Police 112
Damascus
 Electric power repairs. Tel: 222-3887 
 International operator. Tel: 143/144
 Local operator. Tel: 147 
 Red Crescent (Middle Eastern Red Cross). Tel: 333-1441 
or 333-0755.
Hospitals/Medical Services
Damascus
 Shami Hospital. Tel: 373-5090/1/2/3/4/5 or 373-4925/6/7
 Italian Hospital Tel 332-9404 or 332-6030/1 
Aleppo
 Ummal al-Najilt Pharmacy Near entrance of Baghdad 
Station. Open 24 hours. Tel: 225-1478.
HOME AND FAMILY
Schools
 Damascus Community School
 
Tel: 333-7737 or 333-0331/2
Budget Hotels 
Damascus 
 Hotel Al-Majed 29 Ayar Street, behind Cinema Alsofara. 
 
Tel: 232-3300. 
 Sultan Hotel Moussallam Baroudi Rd, west of Hejaz 
Railroad Station. Tel: 222-5768. 
 Grand Ghazi Hotel Furat Avenue. Tel: 221-4581. 
Aleppo 
 Ramsis Hotel Baron Street. Tel: 211-1102. 
 Hotel Al-Raoudah Al-Maari Street. Tel: 233-896. 

246 CultureShock! Syria
 Beit Wakil Sissi Street. Tel: 221-7169, 211-8169 or 
211-7083
MANAGING YOUR MONEY
Insurance
If you want health insurance, you should either procure it in your 
country of origin before travelling to Syria or buy an international 
policy through a Western insurance company after you arrive.
Cash
The Syrian pound is the official currency. Traveller’s cheques 
are generally only accepted at 3-star hotels, travel agencies, 
rental car agencies and a few larger shops. It is also useful to 
bring US$ 1 and US$ 10 bills, especially for shopping in the 
souks. More companies accept credit cards now, but some 
charge an extra fee to process a transaction using one.
Banking
Damascus
 Commercial Bank of Syria Martyr’s Square/Hejaz Railway 
Station/Youssef al-Azmeh Square. 
Aleppo
 Commercial Bank of Syria Baron Street. Open daily 
except on Fridays, from 8:30–1:30 pm.
Exchanging Money
Damascus
 American Express Small alley off Fardous Street, in a Sudan 
Airways office. Tel: 224-6500, 222-3708 or 222-1756
 Nahas Travel (Thomas Cook) Fardous Street. 
Aleppo 
Exchange booths are located at Kouwatli and Bab al-Faraj 
Streets. Open daily except Fridays, from 8 am–7:30 pm.
Borrowing Money
You can borrow money from the Commercial Bank of Syria. 
Check at branches for current rates. If you need to borrow 
a small amount of money, it is much easier to get a cash 
advance from a credit card. Also, there are numerous new 

247
Resource Guide
private banks, but each has its own lending policies, so check 
with several and compare.
ENTERTAINMENT AND LEISURE
Restaurants
Damascus
 Abu al’Izz Restaurant In Souk al Hamediyah; dripping with 
atmosphere and often has live music. Tel: 221-8174.
 Bourj al-Roos Rustic, serves great fish; inexpensive, too. 
 Haretna Baab Touma area. Great mezzeh and kebobs. 
Trendy and fashionable as well. Tel: 544-1148. 
www.haretna.net
 Il Circo In Four Seasons Hotel. Tel: 339-1000. Italian 
food in comfy surroundings, great service and great wine 
selection; serves good seafood. 
 Nadi al Sharq Next to Amideast. Indian cuisine, maybe 
best in Damascus. 
 Nadil Near Bab Sharqi. Spicy. On Abu Roumaneh side of 
Jisr al-Abiad—homemade Arab food 
 Narcissus Palace Old City. Located in an old Damascene 
house built in 1735. Great shish kebabs. Tel: 543-1205 or 
541-6785.
 Old Damascus Restaurant Behind the Citadel. Tel: 221-8810.
 Orient Club Across from Four Seasons Hotel. Tel: 245-9225. 
Great traditional cuisine. 
 Reef Restaurant Abu Roumaneh Street. Tel: 333-2830 or 
333-1973.
 Sharia Medhat Pasha At the turn to Baab Kisan. Good 
pizza and pasta, although some don’t like the service. 
 Scoozi Maysaloun Street, Abu Roumaneh. Tel: 333-2410 
or 331-0511. Bright European café with fantastic service. 
www.scoozi-sy.com 
 Umayyad Palace Around corner from Umayyad Mosque. 
Tel: 222-0826.
Aleppo
 Al Andalib Baron Street. Tel: 222-4030. 
 Beit Wakil Sissi Street. Tel: 221-7169 or 224-7083. 
Wonderful decor, great food and service. They also have 
a beautiful hotel. 

248 CultureShock! Syria
Cafés
Damascus
 An-Nawafara Turn right at Umayyad Mosque wall, take the 
first right and the café will be on your right. Tel: 543 -6813. 
Single women should feel at ease here. 
 Café la Terasse Between Baab Sharqi and Ananias 
mansion.
 Inhouse Coffee A chain at the airport and other locations. 
Great European-style coffee. Tel: 333-6039. 
 Vienna Café Near Cham Palace, turn opposite Adidas store. Dark 
bread sandwiches and apple strudel, among other things.
Aleppo 
 Patisserie Mousattat Next to exchange booth on Baab al-
Faraj Street. Tel: 212-747. Gooey Middle Eastern pastries.
Shopping Districts
Damascus
 Old City. Souq al-Hamidiyah Near Umayyad Mosque, this 
souk sprawls for blocks. Make note of where you enter.
Aleppo 
 Souq ash-Shouna Located near base of the Citadel. Seven 
miles of souks! Different items are located on different 
blocks, i.e. gold, rugs, spices, etc.
Nightspots
Damascus 
 Backdoor At Barada Sports Club in Mazrah. Trendy dance 
hall for R&B and Arab pop. Entrance fee of 1,000 SP. 
 Domino Bar and café in Baab Touma. Becomes disco after 
11pm. 
 Piano Bar Near Café la Terasse, between Baab Sharqi and 
Ananias mansion. Tel: 543-0375. 
 Mar Mar Near Bakri baths in Baab Touma. Owner performs 
with own funk band regularly. 
Bookshops
Damascus
 Librairie Avicenne One block south of the Cham Palace 
Hotel. Tel: 221-2911. 

249
Resource Guide
 Librairie Universelle Port Said and Basha Streets. 
 
Tel: 230-0744.
Aleppo
 Librairie Said Qostaki Homsi and Litani Streets.
Music
Music is a part of café life in Damascus. You also can attend 
all kinds of performances at Damascus’ Al Hamra Street 
Theatre. Check in the English language Syria Times for 
current listings.
Dance
Dance—except for men spontaneously dancing alone or 
with each other—is not a huge component of Syrian life. 
You can see traditional Syrian dances, whirling dervishes 
and acrobatic sword dances at the Umayyad Restaurant 
in Damascus. Although it is a bit touristy, it gives you a fun 
flavour of the culture and Syrian spirit and enthusiasm—all 
while you stuff yourself with scrumptious Syrian cuisine.
Alternative Lifestyles
Homosexuality is illegal in Syria and even imposes a prison 
sentence. If you are gay, keeping a low profile is a good 
idea if you want to avoid trouble while in Syria. 
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
Country and City Telephone Codes
 Country code: 963 
 City codes:  
 
 
Aleppo  
21 
Damascus  
11
 
Hama  
33 
Homs  
31
 
Lattakia  
41 
Palmyra 
34
Telephone Service
The telephone office is located one block east of Hejaz 
Railway on An-Nasr Avenue. It is open 24 hours. You can 
buy Easycomm phonecards at the post office.

250 CultureShock! Syria
Internet Facilities and Cafés
Damascus
 Public Internet Hall Muhajrine neighbourhood 
 Assad National Library (run by the Ministry of Culture) 
 Zoni Internet Service Tel: 232-4670
 Sky Net Badawi and Janan Bldg near Al Hamra Road. 
Tel: 331-2372.
Post Offices
Damascus 
 Said al-Jabri Ave 
 
Open daily from 8 am–7 pm. Tel: 221-9000. 
Aleppo 
 Square across Kouwatli Street
 
Open daily from 8 am–5 pm. Also offers a fax service.
Newspapers and Magazines
A variety of Arabic newspapers are available. A Communist 
newspaper, Sawt al-Shaab (People’s Voice), Syria’s first non-
governmentally controlled paper, was introduced in January 
2001. For English-language papers, there is Syria Times. 
The Middle East, International Herald Tribune, Le Monde, 
Der Spiegel and Newsweek can also be found in most larger 
towns and cites.
Television
 Syrian Broadcast Service 
 
English news runs on Syria 2 at 10 pm. 
 British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC)
 Turkish TV can be seen in some northern towns. Jordanian 
TV is available in the south. Satellite TV recommended.
LANGUAGE
The official language is Arabic but some people speak French 
or English.
Language Institutes and Classes
 Arabic Language Center (ALC) of The Language Institute at 
Damascus University. Mezzeh Highway Fayez Mansour St.

251
Resource Guide
—Campus of Humanities. Tel: 392-5843. Fax: 212-0164. 
E-mail: inquiries@arabicindamascus.edu.sy
 Arabic Teaching Institute for Foreigners Jadet ash-Shafei 3, 
Meezeh-Villat Sharqiyyah. Tel: 222-1538.
GENERAL COUNTRY INFORMATION
Appliances and Utilities
The electrical system is nominally 220 volts (but often less 
in reality) and 50 cycles. North America uses 60 cycles. 
This difference makes most North American appliances run 
more slowly here, so if you bring any electrical items with 
you from North America, make sure they can run with both 
50 and 60 cycles.
Necessities and Documents to Bring
All foreign citizens need a visa, available in Syrian consulates 
outside of the country. You can also sometimes get them 
at border crossings and airports. Visas are valid for up to 
15 days. Always bring photocopies of your passport, credit 
cards and other important documents in case they are lost or 
stolen. If you have any evidence of an Israeli stamp in your 
passport, you will not be allowed in Syria.
Consider bringing:
 Small packets of tissue paper (toilet paper is not always 
available in public restrooms)
 Contraceptives other than condoms (difficult to buy in Syria)
 An extra flat sheet (Some hotels do not provide top sheets)
 Any medicines you might need. Make sure they are in the 
original prescription bottles.
For Women
Women should bring tampons, since they are hard to 
come by and expensive. Also, bring a veil so you can visit 
mosques, long-sleeved shirts and long skirts. If you are single 
or travelling alone, wearing a wedding band (real or faux) 
is a good idea.

252 CultureShock! Syria
Pre-Entry Vaccinations 
Though none are required, consult with your doctor 
before leaving. He may recommend booster shots. Getting 
inoculations for hepatitis A and B and typhoid, however, is 
probably a prudent idea. If you are entering Syria from sub-
Saharan Africa or any other area that has been infected, you 
may need to get a vaccination for yellow fever.
EMBASSIES IN SYRIA
 Australia  Consular services for Australian citizens provided 
by Canadian embassy in Damascus. 
 Canada Lot 12, Autostrade Mezzeh. Tel: 611-6692 (24 hrs). 
Email: dmcus@international.gc.ca 
 France Ata Al-Ayyoubi Street. Tel: 339-0200. 
 Germany Abdulmunen Al-Riad Street, corner Ebla Street. 
Tel: 379-0000. 
 Great Britain Mohammed Kurd Ali Street, Kotob Building. 
Tel: 339-1513 or 339-1541 (consular)
 Italy 82 Al-Ayyoubi Street. Tel: 333-8338. 
 Japan 3537 Sharkasiya, Aljala’ Street, Abu Romaneh. 
Tel: 333-8273 or 333-2553.
 USA 2 Al-Mansour Street, Abu Romaneh. Tel: 3391-4444 
(After hours: 3391-3333)
Government Internet Web Sites 
 http://www.visit-syria.com. 
 http://www.syriatourism.org. 
General/Tourist Advice Bureaus and Websites
 http://cafe-Syria.com
 
The ultimate web resource for those who want to learn 
more about Syria. It features the latest news, cultural, 
travel, historical and technological information on Syria.
Damascus
 Tourist Office
 
29 Mai Avenue. Open daily from 9 am–7 pm. 
 Ministry of Tourism
 
Near Takiyyeh as-Salaymaniyyeh Mosque. 
 
Open from Saturday–Thursday, from 9 am–2 pm.

253
Resource Guide
BUSINESS INFORMATION
Business Organisations
 Federation of Syrian Chambers of Commerce. 
 
Mousa Bin Nusair Street, opposite Meridian Hotel, 
 
PO Box 5909, Damascus. Tel: 333-7344 or 331-1504. 
 
Fax: 333-1127. www.fedcommsyr.org. 
 
Email: syr-trade@mail.sy
 Aleppo Chamber of Commerce. 
 
Extension of the Central Bank, PO Box 1261, Aleppo. 
 
Tel: 223-8237 or 223-8236. Fax: 221-3493.
Career Services
 Future Corp
 
Kouwalti Street, PO Box 2402, Latakia, Syria. 
 
Tel: 240-7777. Fax: 230-7777. 
 
Email: info@futurehrs.com
Legal Matters
It is best to avoid trouble, since Syrian legal matters are 
not always handled expeditiously, clearly, and in accord 
with international standards. The country houses many 
political prisoners who have no say over their fates. Amnesty 
International has condemned the country for its numerous 
human rights violations. If you find yourself in trouble, you 
should try to hire a private attorney and consult your country’s 
embassy.

254
FURTHER READING
Good books on Syria (translated into English) are difficult to 
come by, unless you live near a university that has a good 
Middle Eastern studies programme. Most libraries seem 
to have only a few titles specifically about Syria, most of 
them quite outdated or written by ex-CIA operatives in 
Syria or other United States government programmes. 
Needless to say, the latter are not the most reliable sources 
of information in view of the decades-long animosity of 
the US government toward Syria, the general ignorance 
of Americans about life in the Middle East (particularly in 
Syria), and the general American attitude that Israel wears 
the white hat and Syria wears a black one. 
The following books give the best, most complete picture 
of Syrian history, culture and life that I have been able to 
find. Websites, however, are perhaps the best source of up-
to-date info about the country, so I have included quite a 
number of those that I found both useful and interesting.
BOOKS
The Hidden Face of Eve: Women in the Arab World. Al Saadawi, 
Nawal. Translated by Sherif Hetata, foreword by Irene L 
Gendizier. Boston: Beacon Press, 1982.
 Ms Al Saadawi was raised in an upper-class Egyptian 
family, became a feminist and successful medical 
doctor, and eventually headed the Egyptian Ministry 
of Health. In this book she gives a brief history of the 
brutality practised on women in the Middle East both 
before and after Islam, including an account of her own 
clitoridectomy (commonly referred to by the euphemism 
‘female circumcision’). She also does not spare the views 
of women preached and practised by Christianity and the 
West in general. She has written several books, most of 
them not translated into English, and her ‘radical’ view 
that women are as capable as men and should be in 
all positions of leadership and her continuous criticism 

255
Further Reading
of male hegemony in all areas of life have cost her her 
government position and a prison term.
Her views are Marxist, and she recommends 
collectivisation and other centralised controls that 
have since disintegrated in the former communist and 
heavily socialised countries. Despite this, most of her 
observations are poignant, and she writes predominantly 
from experience and first-hand knowledge, not a sterile 
academic perspective.
Monuments of Syria: A Historical Guide. Burns, Ross. London: 
I.B. Tauris & Co. Ltd., 1992.
 If you’re an amateur archaeologist or simply want to enjoy 
many of the historical wonders of Syria, this book is a must. 
Road maps of the country are not very accurate: they do 
not show all the roads and villages, and the symbols they 
use for sites of historical and archaeological interest are 
only approximate. Because of this and the fact that road 
signs are scarce or illegible on all but major roads, it’s not 
uncommon to spend an entire day looking for something 
you thought you could find in an hour or two. Monuments 
not only shows accurate routes to out-of-the-way ruins and 
dead cities, but it gives historical detail about each. Most of 
Syria’s ruins are never seen by anyone except the native 
villagers or Bedouins who live near them. Some remains 
are even incorporated into village houses or are used as 
living quarters for villagers or nomads.
Trends and Issues in Contemporary Arab Thought. Boullata, 
Issa J. New York: SUNY Press, 1990.
 This book looks at broad, modern issues in Arab life, 
giving detailed descriptions of the views of many modern 
Arab scholars, selected by the author to represent the 
widest possible spectrum of contemporary Arab thought. 
Boullata gives as much time and space to the views of 
those who claim the only hope for the salvation and 
advancement of Arab culture is a return to the ‘good old 
days’ of early Islam as to those who wish to separate 
religion from government. One point all the scholars cited 

256 CultureShock! Syria
agree on is that Arabs should not simply try to imitate the 
West; they all appreciate the uniqueness of their culture 
and wish to make scientific and economic progress in a 
manner consistent with their traditions.
The author also discusses the problems of intellectual 
freedom in autocratic Arab states and the often vast 
intellectual gulf between the Arab masses (most of whom 
live in poverty or near-poverty and are illiterate or barely 
literate) and the relative handful of Arab scholars.
The Venture of Islam: Conscience and History in a World 
Civilisation, Parts I, II, & III. Marshall, G S Hodgson. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1974.
 This is an encyclopedic study of the history of Islam. 
Although Syria per se is not discussed extensively, there 
are many references to it. The important point is that a 
prerequisite to understanding any Arab country requires 
knowledge of Islam and its development, teachings and 
influence on its culture. The writing style is academic, 
and I doubt that most people would want to sit down 
and read it like a novel; but it is a good reference source 
and selective readings of the work will increase your 
understanding of Arab culture in general.
Syria and Lebanon. Ziadeh, Nicola A. Lebanon: Librairie du 
Liban, 1968.
 Although this book is quite old, it gives an Arab’s pers-
pective on the historical development and domination 
of the Levant (with focus on Syrian and Lebanon), and 
therefore provides a valuable insight into Syrians’ views 
of their part in Western history. Unlike most accounts 
of history read in the West, it is a perspective of those 
who have been dominated rather than the view of the 
colonisers.
WEBSITES
News
 http://www.syriadaily.com/
 http://www.cafe-syria.com

257
Further Reading
 http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/middle_east/country_
profiles/801669.stm
 http://www1.albawaba.com/en/country/Syria
 http://www.topix.net/world/syria
 http://www.syria-today.com
Government
 http://ec.europa.eu/external_relations/syria/index_en.htm
 http://www.gksoft.com/govt/en/sy.html
 http://www.hrw.org
 http://amarji.blogspot.com/2007/03/dying-of-old-
damascus.html
 http://www.cbssyr.org/
Economy
 http://www.dci-syria.org/
 http://www.syria-report.com/
 http://www.doingbusiness.org/ExploreEconomies
/?economyid=183
History, Culture, Food, etc.
 http://lexicorient.com/e.o/syria.htm
 http://www.damascus-online.com/damascus
 http://www.oldamascus.com/home.htm
 http://www.worldstatesmen.org/Syria.html
 http://www.ameinfo.com/syria/
 http://almashriq.hiof.no/base/syria.html
 http://lcweb2.loc.gov/frd/cs/sytoc.html
 http://www.syriagate.com/
 http://www.talesmag.com/rprweb/the_rprs/mid_east/syria.
shtml
 http://www.ethnologue.com/show_country.asp?name=Syria
 http://www.nytimes.com/2006/08/29/world/middleeast/29syria.
html
 http://almashriq.hiof.no/syria/900/910/919/damas/old-city/
abu-el-izz.html
 http://www.musicalmissions.com/syria.html
 http://www.theworldly.org/ArticlesPages/Articles2006/
July06Articles/DamascusFoods.html

258 CultureShock! Syria
 http://www.travelpod.com/travel–photo/technotrekker/
overland05/1143018240/26-lunch.jpg/tpod.html
 http://www.travelpod.com/travel–photo/technotrekker/
overland05/1143018240/25-bus.jpg/tpod.html
 http://www.arabeskstudiesindamascus.com
Travel
 http://www.lonelyplanet/com/syria
 http://www.visit-syria.com/
 http://www.syriatourism.org/
 http://www.jordanjubilee.com/travelme/tosyria.htm
General
 http://www.ou.edu/ssa/general_info.htm
 http://www.syriaonline.com
 http://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-
factbook/geos/sy.html
 http://www.al-bab.com/arab/countries/syria.htm

259
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Coleman South was raised in the western part of the 
United States and lived there until his early 40s, when he 
moved to Damascus, Syria. He earned a bachelor’s degree 
in psychology in 1973, then worked in various occupations 
and professions over the next 17 years. He has always had a 
great desire to travel and live abroad, so in 1990 he left the 
bank where he was a vice-president and began work on a 
master’s degree to teach English as a second language. 
He has taught English in the United States and Syria, and 
has lived in Japan for more than 12 years and is Associate 
Professor of EFL at a university in southern Japan. He has 
also travelled in nearly 20 European, Middle Eastern and 
other Asian countries, and most of North America.
Coleman has written and published an illustrated book 
on Syria (Cultures of the World: Syria), another of the same 
on Jordan (Cultures of the World: Jordan—recently revised), 
another on US-Japanese comparative culture for Japanese 
students, a cultural guide for international students studying 
at the university where he taught in the United States, 
numerous travel and professional (English teaching) articles, 
poetry and short stories

260
INDEX
A
alcohol 66, 75, 90, 93, 141 
Aleppo 17, 18, 21, 26, 28, 40, 43, 
78, 93, 114, 130, 156, 163, 168, 
171, 206, 217, 219
antiques 150, 178
architecture 11, 12, 86, 148, 179, 
180
art galleries 154–155
Asad, Bashar 12, 31, 34, 45, 158
Asad, Hafez-al 12, 13, 31, 33, 43, 
53, 63, 218
B
Ba’ath Party 30, 32, 33, 35, 42, 
43, 152 
baksheesh 213
bargaining 151 
bars and clubs 159–160
bedouins 30, 32, 33, 35, 42, 43, 158 
body language 195–196 
bureaucracy 117–121
Bosra 155, 156, 166, 168
C
characteristics 58–70
children 11, 38, 45, 49, 51, 53, 55, 
56, 57, 58. 59. 72, 74, 75–77, 81, 
87, 88. 93, 112, 113, 157, 162 189, 
197, 199, 208, 219
Christianity 26, 60, 65, 77
cinemas 151
class consciousness 69–70
climate 17–18, 216
clothing 20, 40, 54, 59, 60, 77, 92, 
113, 124, 133, 137, 148, 201, 218
corruption 41-42
Crusaders 25, 26, 27, 168
cultural tolerance 92, 93
D
Damascus 2, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 12, 14, 
17, 18, 19, 21, 22, 24, 25, 26, 28, 
29, 32, 38, 40, 41, 43, 52, 55, 62, 
74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 80, 81, 91, 93, 
97, 98, 99, 100, 101. 103, 106, 108, 
114, 115, 116, 117, 124, 129, 132, 
133, 134, 135, 136, 142, 144, 147, 
150, 152, 153, 154, 155, 156, 159, 
160, 163, 165, 168, 169, 171, 173, 
174, 176, 177, 178, 179, 180, 190, 
196, 197, 198, 199, 204, 205, 215
desert 17, 18, 58, 64, 67, 68, 71, 72, 
93, 149, 160, 161, 165, 166, 168, 
171, 174, 176, 184, 211, 215
doing business 200–213 
domestic help 112–113 
dress 3, 9 , 58, 60, 91–92, 93, 133, 
142, 156, 212
E
economy 20, 31, 35–40, 46, 54, 
121, 127, 200, 204 
education 75–76,
Egypt 25, 26, 30, 38, 62, 111, 163, 
180, 218
electricity 41, 58, 72, 103, 104, 
106, 107
Euphrates River 20, 23, 24, 52, 72, 
163, 196
F
family 55–58
famous people 218–219
ﬁ shing 17, 171
food 139–145
French 7, 20, 25, 27, 28, 29, 30,49, 
53, 58, 73, 74, 76, 77, 85, 86, 109, 
111, 116, 117, 121, 125, 136, 142, 
151, 173, 197, 199, 206, 217, 218
G
government 2, 3, 10, 12, 13, 27, 29, 
20, 31–35, 36, 37, 38, 40, 41, 42, 
43, 44, 45, 46, 50, 54, 62, 63, 65, 
68, 72, 78, 88, 108, 110, 113, 114, 
116, 117, 120, 121, 122, 127, 134, 
135, 158, 161, 163, 174, 175, 197 
202, 203, 204, 205, 207, 208, 210, 
211, 213
greetings 209–210
H
handicrafts 54, 59, 70, 149–151, 
165, 168
health 134–137
history 20–31
holidays 161–163
hotels 6, 7, 123, 125, 142, 160, 
163, 176
housing 98–110

261
Index
I
Internet 133–134
iqaama 117, 118, 122, 123, 174, 
176, 178
Iraq 17, 23, 25, 28, 29, 30, 100, 
164, 215, 218
Islam 9,25, 26. 30, 42, 53, 59, 60, 
65, 66, 81, 82, 157, 186
Israel 16, 21, 27, 31, 45, 46, 88, 101, 
120, 159, 179, 215, 216
J
jewellery 149
Jews 28, 30, 54, 65, 77, 157, 197
Jordan 16, 17, 18, 28, 41, 42, 111, 
122, 124, 130, 166, 178, 179, 180, 
182, 196, 205, 215
Judaism 26, 65
L
languages 183–199
Lebanon 16, 21, 26, 27 28, 29, 30, 
41, 42, 43, 45, 46, 122, 124, 130, 
152, 178, 179, 205, 215, 218, 219
legal system 121
M
Maalula 22, 28, 160, 168, 169, 197
marriage 39, 82, 148
media 158–159
money and banking 121–125
mosques 25, 65, 77, 78, 94, 157, 
166, 168
music 151-153
Muslims 25, 26, 27, 30, 33, 42, 43, 
45, 54, 56 57, 59, 60, 64, 65, 66, 
66, 78, 88, 93, 125, 148, 155, 
156, 157, 158, 161, 162, 164, 166, 
181, 217
O
Omayyads 25, 26
Ottomans 20, 26, 27, 30
P
Palmyra 19, 52, 71, 117, 156, 164, 
165, 172
pets 137–138
police 4, 11, 32, 41, 63, 119, 120, 
217
population 19–20
R
religion 42, 65
religiosity 64–66
S
Saudi Arabia 18, 37, 78, 180, 218
settling in 96–138
shopping 77, 97, 125–134, 148–151
socialising 84–95
souks 13, 49, 51, 63, 81, 116, 117, 
123, 126, 128, 129, 132, 133, 
143, 148, 150, 151, 156, 162, 165, 
168, 196
Syrian Orthodox Churh 22
T
Tartus 17, 56, 173
trafﬁ c 5–6
transportation 113–117
airports 218
bicycles 5, 6, 116
buses 5, 6, 34, 37, 75, 114, 163, 
175, 176
taxis 8, 42, 81, 114, 175
travel, domestic 163–177
travel, regional 177–182
V
visa 7, 72, 73, 88, 117, 118, 180, 
181, 193
volunteerism 74
W
women 72–74, 78–83

For more information about any of these titles, please contact any of 
our Marshall Cavendish ofﬁ ces around the world (listed on page ii) 
or visit our website at: 
www.marshallcavendish.com/genref
Argentina
Australia
Austria
Bahrain
Beijing
Belgium
Berlin
Bolivia
Borneo
Brazil
Bulgaria
Cambodia
Canada
Chicago
Chile
China
Costa Rica
Cuba
Czech Republic
Denmark
Ecuador
Egypt
Finland
France
Germany
Great Britain
Hawaii
Hong Kong
India
Ireland
Italy
Jakarta
Japan
Korea
Laos
London
Malaysia
Mauritius
Morocco
Munich
Myanmar
Netherlands
New Zealand
Pakistan
Paris
Philippines
Portugal
Russia
San Francisco
Saudi Arabia
Scotland
Shanghai
Singapore
South Africa
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sweden
Switzerland
Syria
Taiwan
Thailand
Tokyo
Travel Safe
Turkey
United Arab 
Emirates
USA
Vancouver
Venezuela
Titles in the CultureShock! series:

