Introductory Human Physiology  
 
© Copyright Emma Jakoi 
 
 
 
1
CV 4. CENTRAL REGULATION    
Emma Jakoi, Ph.D. 
 
LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
      1.  Describe the reflex control of blood pressure (BP).  
      2.   Explain how baroreceptors (pressure sensors) control BP. 
      3.   Explain how other sensors such as the cardio-pulmonary receptors and blood volume 
 
receptors can control BP.   
      4.   Describe central control of blood pressure in response to hypertension, hypotension 
 
and strenuous exercise. 
 
CENTRAL CONTROL OF BP 
The reflex arc that controls blood pressure on a minute to minute basis involves the central 
nervous system (Fig 1). The main integrating center is located in the brain stem (medulla 
oblongata) in an area known as the medullary cardiovascular control center (MCCC). The 
primary function of the MCCC is to maintain a constant mean arterial pressure (MAP) for 
adequate perfusion of the organs, in particular brain and heart. Sensory input comes from 
peripheral sensory receptors sensitive to stretch (baro-receptors) and to volume (cardio-
pulmonary) sensors. The output from the MCCC alters the sympathetic and parasympathetic 
tone of the body to regulate cardiac output and total peripheral resistance. [Recall that MAP = CO 
x TPR]  
 
 
 
Figure 1. Reflex loop regulates cardiac output.  
 
 
 
Cardiac & systemic 
pressure sensors 
       Medullary 
Cardiovascular Centers (MCC) 
Sympathetic NS            Parasympathetic NS 
Adrenal medulla 
Epinephrine      Norepinephrine 
Increased HR & SV 
CO 
Acetylcholine 
Decreased HR 
Arterial Pressure 

Introductory Human Physiology  
 
© Copyright Emma Jakoi 
 
 
 
2
BARORECEPTORS REFLEX  
Baroreceptors are mechanoreceptors located in the walls of the carotid artery and aorta. When 
blood pressure increases, these sensors are stretched and action potentials are sent to the MCCC. 
Efferent output from the MCCC is relayed by the parasympathetic nervous system resulting in 
slowed heart rate and lower cardiac output thereby lowering blood pressure. Concurrently there is 
a decrease in MCCC output to the sympathetic nervous system which innervates blood vessels 
and the heart. Lowered sympathetic tone causes vasodilation and decreased contractility of the 
ventricular myocardium. Again blood pressure is reduced. 
 
Conversely, if blood pressure falls, then the firing from the baroreceptors decreases. This leads to 
increased output of the MCCC to the sympathetic nervous system and decreased output to the 
parasympathetic system. Consequently heart rate, contractility and TPR increase thereby 
increasing MAP. 
 
The baroreceptors are not the only mechanism for modulating blood pressure. Inputs from other 
peripheral receptors include:  
 
 
(1) arterial chemoreceptors which are activated by low blood oxygen levels. These 
receptors integrate the cardiovascular system with the respiratory system. Integration occurs in 
the medulla oblongata by the MCCC and the center that controls breathing. This integration is 
dynamic such that if more oxygen is needed by the tissues, then both cardiac output and breathing 
is increased. 
 
 
(2) hypothalamus (brain region) which controls body temperature by regulating the 
sympathetic tone of the vascular beds in the skin. 
 
 
(3) kidney which regulates fluid volume by responding to hormones such as atrial 
natriuretic factor (ANF) which increases fluid loss in urine and vasopressin which reduces 
fluid loss in urine (see discussion below).         
 
ORTHOSTATIC HYPOTENSION 
The baroreceptor reflex functions whenever you rise from a prone position. When you are lying 
down, blood is evenly distributed throughout the circulation and gravitational pull is equally 
applied along the body axis. However, on standing, gravity causes a shift in the blood volume 
such that it pools in your legs. Consequently there is less blood returning to the heart at the 
beginning of the next contraction. This decrease in venous return reduces cardiac output and 
MAP. This reflex is known as orthostatic hypotension.  In the normal person, orthostatic 
hypotension decreases baroreceptor firing leading to an increase in sympathetic tone. 
Concurrently, parasympathetic activity decreases. The baroreceptor reflex causes a rapid increase 
in TPR and CO returning MAP to normal.  
 
HYPOTENSION DUE TO HEMORRHAGE 
With loss of fluid volume due to hemorrhage (volume depletion), the baroreceptors decrease their 
activity (Fig 2).  The end result is to increase TPR, CO and MAP.  
 
There are two hormones that act during hemorrhage to correct for the loss of blood volume, 
vasopressin from the pituitary (brain) and renin from the kidney which leads to the production of 
angiotensin II. Both vasopressin and angiotensin II are potent vasoconstrictors. These two 
hormones will act to increase TPR (hence venous return). Vasopressin acts directly on the kidney 
to increase the reabsorption of water from the urine thereby increasing blood volume. 

Introductory Human Physiology  
 
© Copyright Emma Jakoi 
 
 
 
3
 
Figure 2. Response to volume depletion activates multiple effectors including the sympathetic 
nervous system (SNS) and hormones (aldosterone, antidiuretic hormone (ADH) and angiotensin 
II (ANGII)].  
 
EFFECT OF EXERCISE 
Baroreceptors will reset during strenuous aerobic exercise such as running and swimming. Under 
these conditions, baroreceptors act as if MAP decreased. They decrease their firing which 
increases sympathetic drive to increase CO and HR. TPR also decreases due to local signals 
that cause vasodilation of the capillaries in the working skeletal muscle and skin. Consequently, 
MAP increases slightly because the rise in CO is offset by the drop in TPR.   
 
Pre-exercise level 
Aerobic exercise  level 
CO = 5 L/min 
CO = 20 L/min 
HR = 70 bpm 
150 bpm 
20% flow to muscle 
increased flow to muscle 
(vasodilation) 
TPR = basal  
Decreased due to vasodilation in 
skeletal muscle 
MAP = basal 
Slightly increased 
 
CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE 
Sustained hypertension (>140/90) will cause the baroreceptors to reset their set point higher 
with subsequent down regulation of their activity. Without input from the baroreceptors, the 
MCCC interprets the high blood pressure as normal.  
 
Is this a problem? Yes. Hypertension is a risk factor for cardiovascular disease. Afterload 
increases and with increased pressures the endothelium lining the blood vessels may be damaged. 

Introductory Human Physiology  
 
© Copyright Emma Jakoi 
 
 
 
4
This condition leads to atherosclerotic plaques. In addition, MAP must increase to maintain CO 
constant at a higher TPR. The heart muscle responds to increased afterload by hypertrophy 
(growth) which thickens the ventricular wall. With time, this response in the left ventricle fails to 
meet demand and the CO of the two ventricles is no longer matched, pulmonary edema ensues. 
Why? What happens to SV with high afterload and lower contractility?  Fluid in the interstitial 
space of the lung interferes with oxygen exchange resulting in less oxygen in the arterial blood 
perfusing the heart. This damages the myocardium and the contractility of the left ventricle is 
compromised further (Fig 3). This leads to heart failure.   
 
Figure 3. Normal and weak hearts exhibit increased ejection volume (stroke volume) with 
increased end diastolic volume (filling) of the left ventricle.    
 
Heart failure can also occur in the right ventricle due to hypertension within the lung vasculature. 
Failure of the right heart to maintain normal CO leads to an accumulation of blood in the 
systemic veins, increased capillary filtration, and edema. 
 
There are two common treatments for heart failure.  
(1) Reduce afterload by administering a diuretic which cause more fluid loss from the kidney and 
thus lower blood volume. 
 
(2) Administer a Ca++ blocker. Why? Blood vessels will dilate when Ca++ is unable to enter the 
vascular smooth muscle which reduces TPR and hence MAP. If needed, a beta adrenergic agonist 
is given to sustain adequate CO.   
 
One other target is angiotensin II, a homeostatic response triggered by the kidney. Drugs called 
ACE inhibitors are given because they inhibit the enzyme that converts angiotensin I to the 
active vasoconstrictor, angiotensin II, in the blood stream. The end result is a decrease in TPR. 
What will happen to CO when resistance is decreased?  
 
KEY CONCEPTS 
• 
Cardiac output is matched with tissue blood flow by maintaining constant mean arterial 
blood pressure (MAP). 
• 
Baroreceptors act as short term regulators of arterial blood pressure by providing sensory 
information to the cardiovascular center in the medulla (MCCC). Autonomic outflow 
from the MCCC maintains blood pressure constant. 

Introductory Human Physiology  
 
© Copyright Emma Jakoi 
 
 
 
5
• 
Hemorrhage leads to reduced CO (hypotension) as a result of reduced ventricular EDV. 
The normal compensatory response to hemorrhage is vasoconstriction of arteries and 
capacitance veins and increased cardiac contractility and heart rate.   
• 
Hypotension can also result from a sudden postural change or prolonged quiet standing 
(orthostatic hypotension). The compensatory response is stated above for hemorrhage.  
• 
Failure of the left heart to maintain normal CO leads to an accumulation of blood in the 
lungs which inhibits gas exchange. 
• 
Failure of the right heart to maintain normal CO leads to an accumulation of blood in the 
systemic veins, increased capillary filtration, and edema. 
• 
Compensation for decreased arterial pressure caused by heart failure includes increases in 
HR and TPR, vasoconstriction of veins, and retention water by the kidneys. 
 
 
QUESTIONS 
 
1. Fred has newly diagnosed hypertension. His doctor prescribed an angiotensin converting enzyme 
inhibitor (ACE inhibitor) and instructed him to return for a follow up in three months.  
  
A. What are two effects of angiotensin II?  
 B. What does the ACE inhibitor do?  
 
2. When a baroreceptor activity decreases due to a decrease in blood pressure _____. 
 
A. sympathetic activity increases. 
 
B. cardiac output increases. 
 
C. peripheral resistance decreases. 
 
D. A and B  
 
E. B and C  
 
3. John donated 1 liter of blood to the Red Cross. In response, the baroreceptors  ____ their firing. 
 
A. increased  
 
B. decreased 
 
C. no effect  
 
4. Predict the effect of aging on baroreceptor activity. 
 
A. resets to higher set point 
 
B. resets to lower set point 
 
C. activated chronically 
 
D. inhibited chronically 
 
E. remains unchanged 
 
ANSWERS 
1. A. Vasoconstriction as well as the release of aldosterone (from the adrenal) leading to water 
 
reabsorption by the kidney (i.e., concentrated urine). 
    B.  Prevents conversion of angiotensin I to angiotensin II by the angiotensin converting enzyme 
 
(ACE).   
2. D. is correct. 
3. B. resulting in an increase in sympathetic activity  
4. A.  baroreceptors will reset to a higher set point. 

