Introductory Human Physiology   
  
© Copyright Emma Jakoi 
 
 
 
-  - 
1
 
CV 1.  HEART ELECTRICAL ACTIVTY  
Emma Jakoi, Ph.D. 
 
 
LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
1. Describe the conduction system of the heart 
2. Explain spontaneous electrical activity (pacemaker) in cardiac muscle. 
3. Explain action potentials of ventricular cardiac muscle. 
4. Explain the cardiac conduction system, pacemakers, and regulation of heart rate by the 
autonomic nervous system.  
5. Explain the ECG and its correspondence to the cardiac action potential (AP).  
 
EXCITATION IN CARDIAC MUSCLE  
The cardiovascular system transports blood containing oxygen, carbon dioxide, nutrients and 
wastes, between the environment and the cells of the body. It consists of a heart (pump) and 
blood vessels which deliver nutrients to the tissues (arteries) and ferry waste products away from 
the tissues (veins).   
 
The heart is a muscular organ (Fig 1) which can contract in a rhythmic manner without direct 
stimulus from the nervous system. Each heart beat begins with the flow of ions across the plasma 
membrane of the cardiac muscle cell. This current is generated in specialized cells called 
pacemaker cells. The impulse from the pacemaker cells flows in a unidirectional manner through 
out the heart via specialized conducting tissue (Fig 1) and into the heart muscle. The electrical 
impulse results in mechanical contraction of the cardiac muscle through a series of intracellular 
events involving calcium.   
 
Figure 1.  Electrical conduction within the heart starts at the sinoatrial (SA) node and passes 
sequentially to the atriaventricular (AV) node, Bundle of His, left and right bundle branches, and 
the Purkinje fibers. So the electrical activity moves from the base (A-V junction) to the apex (tip 
of ventricle) distant from the atria and then sweeps up the sides of the ventricles towards the base.  
 
PACEMAKER CARDIAC MUSCLE CELLS 
Pacemaker cells have the unique property of being able to generate action potentials 
spontaneously (i.e. without input from the nervous system).  They can generate an action 
potential because their resting membrane potential (- 60mV) is unstable.  Because the membrane 

Introductory Human Physiology   
  
© Copyright Emma Jakoi 
 
 
 
-  - 
2
potential never "rests" it is called a pacemaker potential.  This potential exists because the 
pacemaker cells have unusual channels that are permeable to both Na + and K+.  These channels 
are called If channels.  The "f" is derived from the fact that they were originally called "funny" 
channels because the If channels are Na+ channels with unusual properties. When the If channels 
opens, the influx of Na+ exceeds the efflux of K + and the net influx of positive charges slowly 
depolarizes the cell.  As the membrane potential becomes more positive, the If channels close 
and the Ca++ (L and T) channels open transiently, which further depolarize the cell.  When the 
threshold potential is reached, a burst of Ca++ L channels open, more Ca++ rushes in, and a steep 
phase of depolarization occurs (Fig 2).  At the peak of the action potential, K+ channels open, K+ 
rushes out of the cell and the cell repolarizes.  
 
Figure 2. Slow action potential has 3 phases (0, 3 and 4).   
 
The pacemaker cells set the rate of the heart beat. They are anatomically distinct from the 
contractile cells because they have no organized sarcomeres and therefore do not contribute to the 
contractile force of the heart. There are several different pacemakers in the heart but the sinoatrial 
node (SA) is the fastest. In normal hearts, the SA node is the pacemaker. The other conduction 
tissue (AV node, bundle of His and Purkinje fibers) will take over as pacemakers in disease states 
according to their speed of depolarization (AV > bundle of His > Purkinje fibers).   
 
Heart rate (HR) can be modulated by autonomic nervous stimulation. Increased parasympathetic 
stimulation of muscarinic receptors on the heart slows the firing of the SA node. Parasympathetic 
stimulation does so by delaying the closing of K+ channels (efflux). The increased K+ efflux 
further hyperpolarizes the cells and slows the opening of the If channels. In contrast, sympathetic 
stimulation speeds heart rate by shortening the time to threshold. Sympathetic stimulation 
increases Na influx via the If channels and closes the K channels.     
 
Myocardial contractile cells are tightly linked to one another by intercalated disks, specialized 
adhesive junctions, which ensure transmission of force from one myocardial cell to an adjacent 
cell.  The cells also contain gap junctions that facilitate transmission of electrical impulses from 
cell to cell. Myocardial contractile cells have a resting membrane potential of approximately -85 
millivolts (mV).  Depolarization occurs when the permeability to sodium (PNa +) increases, and 
sodium flows into the cell (Phase 0, Fig 3).  As the membrane potential reaches about +20 mV,   
 
 
 
 
 

Introductory Human Physiology   
  
© Copyright Emma Jakoi 
 
 
 
-  - 
3
 
 
Figure 3. Fast action potential of cardiac contractile cell has four phases 0-4.  
 
the voltage gated sodium channels inactivate. The muscle cell begins to repolarize as K+ leaves 
the cell through open voltage gated K+ channels (Phase 1).  At this membrane potential, voltage 
gated Ca++ channels open causing the action potential to flatten as the K+ efflux balances the 
Ca++ influx. The plateau (Phase 2) ends when Ca ++ channels close and K+ efflux exceeds Ca++ 
influx. In Phase 3, K+ efflux repolarizes the muscle cell. The resting membrane potential is 
maintained by the activity of the Na-K ATPase (Phase 4).   
 
ELECTROCARDIOGRAM (ECG also known as EKG)  
The electrical activity of the heart can be recorded by the electrocardiogram (ECG).  Electrodes 
placed on the surface of the body can measure electrical activity of the heart because the fluid of 
the body is a good conductor.   
 
An ECG recording is the sum of all of the electrical potentials generated by all the cells of the 
heart at any instance in time.  Each deflection (wave) of the ECG represents either depolarization 
or repolarization of the specific parts of the heart.  Because depolarization occurs before 
mechanical contraction, the waves of depolarization can be associated with contraction and 
relaxation of the atria and the ventricles.     
 
A typical ECG recording and the waves are shown below (Fig 4).  The P wave corresponds to 
depolarization of the atria.  The QRS complex corresponds to depolarization of the ventricles.  
The T wave corresponds to repolarization of the ventricle.  Why is repolarization of the atria not 
seen?  
 

Introductory Human Physiology   
  
© Copyright Emma Jakoi 
 
 
 
-  - 
4
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. ECG corresponds to the contractile myocyte action potential. Phases 0 and 1 are the 
QRS complex. Phase 2 is the ST segment. Phase 3 is the T wave.  
[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:Agateller]. 
 
ELECTRICAL ACTIVITY PRECEEDS CONTRACTION 
In the heart, electrical activity (depolarization and repolarization) proceeds in a sequential 
manner. The initiation for a heart beat arises in the pacemaker cells of the sinoatrial (SA) node 
located in the right atria. From the SA node, the wave of depolarization moves through both atria 
(P wave), resulting in atrial contraction.  The impulse then passes through the intranodal 
pathways connecting the SA node with the atrioventricular node (AV node).  At the AV node the 
impulse slows allowing the atria to contract before the ventricles depolarize. The impulse then 
passes from the AV node through specialized conducing tissue known as the Bundle of His.  The 
Bundle of His branches (left and right) within the septum that separates the ventricles and then 
into the Purkinje fiber system, which carry the impulse through the ventricular walls (QRS 
complex).  This specialized conduction system ensures that the ventricles contract in a 
synchronized fashion and results in a contraction that begins at the apex (tip) of the heart. This is 
important because blood is ejected through the valves (pulmonic and aorta) that are located at the 
base of the heart (at the A-V junction).  
  
Heart rate and rhythm can be obtained from the ECG.  Heart rate is calculated from peak to 
peak of the QRS complex (i.e., from R wave to R wave).  A normal resting heart rate is 60-100 
beats per minute.  Rates faster than this are called tachycardia; slower rates are bradycardia.    
 
 
A normal heart rhythm occurs at regular intervals and includes a P wave, QRS complex, and T 
wave.  An irregular rhythm is called an arrhythmia. Arrhythmias can occur if there is an extra 
beat, a missed beat, or a condition known as fibrillation, when the atria or ventricles are 
contracting in an uncoordinated fashion.  
 
Problems within the electrical conductance system can change the ECG. For example:    
 
1. No P waves are evident, if the SA node fails to fire.   
 
2. P waves occur independently of the QRS complex, if there is a complete block of 
conductance through the AV node. In this condition, ventricular depolarization is driven by 
pacemakers within the ventricle (either the Bundle of His or the Purkinje fibers).     
 

Introductory Human Physiology   
  
© Copyright Emma Jakoi 
 
 
 
-  - 
5
KEY CONCEPTS 
1. The heart is a muscular organ which can contract in a rhythmic manner without direct stimulus 
from the nervous system because of the activity of pacemaker cells. The action potentials of the 
pacemaker and contractile cells of the heart differ. The pacemaker cells have an unstable resting 
membrane potential. In the heart, the SA node is the fastest pacemaker cells and sets the rate of 
beating. Other pacemakers are found within the electrical conduction system and include the AV 
node, bundle of His and Purkinje fibers. 
 
2. Heart rate is determined by the input from the parasympathetic (PNS) and sympathetic (SNS) 
nervous systems. PNS activity slows heart rate; SNS speeds heart rate. At rest the normal heart 
rate is 70-80 beats per min. 
 
3. The ECG is the sum of the electrical activity of the entire heart. The P wave correlates to atrial 
depolarization. The QRS complex correlates to ventricular depolarization. The T wave is the 
repolarization of the ventricles. Rhythm is determined by the SA node.  
 
4. Disease of the electrical conduction system in the heart is manifested by change(s) in the ECG. 
 
 
QUESTIONS 
1. What portion of the ECG would change if there is a delay in the conduction between the SA 
node and the AV node?  
2. Will the ECG change when heart rate increases?  
 
 
 
ANSWERS 
1. PR interval increases. 
2. Increased sympathetic drive to the heart increases heart rate. This will be cause a decrease in 
the R-R interval, Q-T interval, and P-R interval.   

