 
DANCE 
ANATOMY
Jacqui Greene Haas
Human Kinetics

 
Haas, Jacqui Greene, 1958-
  Dance anatomy / Jacqui Greene Haas.
       p. cm.
  ISBN-13: 978-0-7360-8193-1 (soft cover)
  ISBN-10: 0-7360-8193-3 (soft cover)
 1.  Dance--Physiological aspects.  I. Title. 
  RC1220.D35H33 2010
  612’.044--dc22
                                                            2009045722
ISBN-10: 0-7360-8193-3 (print)   
 
ISBN-13: 978-0-7360-8193-1 (print)   
Copyright © 2010 by Jacqui Greene Haas
All rights reserved.  Except for use in a review, the reproduction or utilization of this work in any 
form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including 
xerography, photocopying, and recording, and in any information storage and retrieval system, is 
forbidden without the written permission of the publisher.
This publication is written and published to provide accurate and authoritative information relevant 
to the subject matter presented. It is published and sold with the understanding that the author and 
publisher are not engaged in rendering legal, medical, or other professional services by reason of their 
authorship or publication of this work. If medical or other expert assistance is required, the services 
of a competent professional person should be sought.
Acquisitions Editors: Judy Patterson Wright, PhD, Laurel Plotzke Garcia; Developmental Edi-
tors: Amanda Eastin-Allen, Cynthia McEntire; Assistant Editor: Laura Podeschi; Copyeditor: Jan 
Feeney; Permission Manager: Martha Gullo; Graphic Designer: Fred Starbird; Graphic Artist: 
Kim McFarland; Cover Designer: Keith Blomberg; Photographer (for illustration references): 
Peter Mueller; Photo Manager: Neil Bernstein; Visual Production Assistant: Joyce Brumfield; Art 
Manager: Kelly Hendren; Associate Art Manager: Alan L. Wilborn; Illustrator (cover): Jennifer 
Gibas; Illustrators (interior): Fran Milner, Jennifer Gibas; Printer: Courier Corporation 
Human Kinetics books are available at special discounts for bulk purchase.  Special editions or book 
excerpts can also be created to specification.  For details, contact the Special Sales Manager at Human 
Kinetics.
Printed in the United States of America  
10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1
The paper in this book is certified under a sustainable forestry program.
Human Kinetics
Web site: www.HumanKinetics.com
United States: Human Kinetics
P.O. Box 5076
Champaign, IL 61825-5076
800-747-4457
e-mail: humank@hkusa.com
Canada: Human Kinetics
475 Devonshire Road Unit 100
Windsor, ON N8Y 2L5
800-465-7301 (in Canada only)
e-mail: info@hkcanada.com
Europe: Human Kinetics
107 Bradford Road
Stanningley
Leeds LS28 6AT, United Kingdom
+44 (0) 113 255 5665
e-mail: hk@hkeurope.com
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Australia: Human Kinetics
57A Price Avenue
Lower Mitcham, South Australia 5062
08 8372 0999
e-mail: info@hkaustralia.com
New Zealand: Human Kinetics
P.O. Box 80
Torrens Park, South Australia 5062 
0800 222 062
e-mail: info@hknewzealand.com
E4776

 
iii
Preface 
v
Acknowledgments 
viii
C H a p t e r 1 tHe DanCer in 
 
 
Motion  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 1
C H a p t e r 2 spine  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 13
C H a p t e r 3 ribs anD breatH  .  .  .  .  . 33
C H a p t e r 4 Core  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 51
C H a p t e r 5 sHoulDer GirDle 
 
 
anD arMs .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 73
C H a p t e r 6 pelvis anD Hips  .  .  .  .  . 101
C H a p t e r 7 leGs .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 125
C H a p t e r 8 anKles anD Feet  .  .  .  . 145
C H a p t e r 9 WHole-boDy traininG 
 
 
For DanCers .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 169
Exercise Finder 
191
About the Author 
195
Contents

 

 
v
preFaCe
D
ance is an extraordinary display of physical skill that can convey both raw 
energy and charming delight. Chiseled poses, innovative choreography, 
and striking images are the hallmarks of the art form. As a dancer today, you 
are truly fortunate. The opportunities to perform in competitions, Broadway 
shows, and professional ballet companies readily exist if you are strong and 
talented. Dance represents impeccable balance, intense muscular control, 
grace, rhythm, and speed. What could be more exciting than to be chosen by 
the artistic director to perform a leading role? But you must be mentally and 
physically fit in order to compete in this high-performance market. The need 
to impress audiences has never been more evident; extreme choreography 
sells tickets and wins competitions.
Dance schools, studios, and academies are busy places. Classes, rehearsals, 
performances, and competition schedules are overwhelming. You are working 
harder than ever and doing your best to understand every correction given. 
Your instructors are inundated with teaching technique, musicality, and tricky 
choreography as well as marketing their business. Sometimes the details of 
technique class can get overlooked. Dance technique has been passed down 
over the years with very little anatomical analysis. This tradition might have 
worked for generations, but in order for you to have an edge over other danc-
ers today, you must understand basic anatomy and receive the most proficient 
training.
Each combination at the barre and in the center must have a definitive 
purpose. The barre work is not just a series of pliés and tendus but an orga-
nization of your body. Technique class should emphasize the development of 
muscular strength to control and protect the joints. You need to understand 
the actions of the muscle groups that create the various combinations of dance 
positions. For example, the muscles that create extension of a joint must con-
tract throughout the whole range. If you are not sure which muscles create 
the extension, how can you possibly execute that combination effectively? 
You will continue to overrecruit the wrong muscles, either building bulk or 
causing an overuse injury.
Dance Anatomy will assist you in discovering more efficient ways of improv-
ing technique. You will enhance your movements by knowing exactly which 
muscles contract to create the action. This book has more than 100 illustra-
tions of exercises that give you a visual understanding of anatomy. You will 
see inside every tendu, passé, and arabesque to help you improve your lines.
Each chapter addresses a key principle of movement to help you improve 
performance. Chapter 1 is the foundation of the book; it highlights three 
beautiful positions of dance showing the entire body and the musculature. 
This chapter also emphasizes the importance of having a basic understanding 
of how your body works through descriptions of anatomy, movement planes, 
and muscular actions.

 
vi 
preface
Chapters 2 through 8 have been organized moving through the body from 
the center out. Chapter 2 addresses spinal alignment and placement—where 
it all begins. The spinal curves and all movements of the spine are addressed. 
Specific exercises are devoted to placement of the spine. The exercises in this 
chapter are not meant to be challenging; they are meant to educate you on 
muscular awareness and its role in supporting the spine for better alignment.
Chapter 3 focuses on the anatomy of breathing. It’s common for dancers 
to breathe with the upper chest, creating tension and early fatigue. The illus-
trations show how the diaphragm, the lungs, and the ribs work together to 
provide more oxygen to your body and improve stamina. The five exercises 
in this chapter emphasize the details of breathing during various movements; 
they are meant to encourage quality of upper-body movement and reduce 
upper-body tension.
Chapter 4 details the role of the core musculature in dance movement and 
presents exercises that develop strength in the core. The quadratus lumborum 
and the iliopsoas also work together with the abdominal layers to provide stabil-
ity for the spine. A basic dance class might not address all layers of abdominal 
muscles and their importance in enhancing technique, so supplemental core 
conditioning work is almost always necessary for dancers.
Chapter 5 details the musculature of the shoulders and arms; the exercises 
will help you improve your port de bras and lifting skills. Chapter 6 focuses 
on strengthening the pelvis for optimal hip rotation. The exercises in chapter 
7 focus on elegance and power of the legs.
The majority of dance injuries occur at the ankles and feet, so chapter 8 
emphasizes conditioning for the lower legs. There are 26 bones and 34 joints 
in the foot, thus creating multiple movement possibilities. These small joints 
are responsible for weight transfer, push-off, and landings. Without sufficient 
strength in these joints, alignment and technique will be compromised. Chapter 
8 has detailed exercises for strength, alignment, balance, and flexibility of the 
lower legs, ankles, and feet.
Chapter 9 presents exercises that involve multiple areas of the body. In 
addition to strengthening, these exercises promote your body’s ability to work 
as a unit to accomplish your positions and movements.
To benefit from the exercises in this book, you must develop an effective 
conditioning program that takes into consideration your changing cycles of 
classes, practices, and times of layoff. This may be a whole new concept for 
you, but the goals here are to limit the volume of ineffective training and 
improve the quality of effective training. Planning a supplementary condition-
ing program to enhance your technique is discussed in chapter 1.
To progress as a dancer, you need to be organized and precise in the over-
all appearance of your movement. Your body must have definitive direction 
within the space that you are using. The various imaginary planes mentioned 
throughout Dance Anatomy can help you establish detail in your lines and 
make the execution of the choreography clear and concise. If your movement 
is clean, it will be more rhythmic and musical. Whether you are competing in 
front of a panel of judges, performing on stage, or taking a technique class, 

 
preface 
vii
the judges, audiences, and instructors want to see power, clean lines, and a 
musical precision.
This book will answer your questions about achieving better turnout, a 
higher développé, a more flexible cambré, and a better arabesque. All of the 
exercises provide instruction on proper breathing techniques, education on 
recruiting the core muscles for improved placement, and important safety 
tips. The lists of muscles in the exercises are accompanied by detailed illustra-
tions that highlight the muscles in the dance positions. You can actually see 
the relationship between the exercise and the dance position; this applies to 
all forms and styles of dance.
The exercises in Dance Anatomy will help you put more practical thought 
into your dance work without compromising the beauty of the art form. You 
can use this text as a tool for understanding corrections and the mechanics 
of your own body movements. You will benefit and continue the process of 
refining your physique and improving technique for that moment when the 
director picks you for the leading role!

 
viii
aCKnoWleDGMents
F
or Bob and my beautiful daughters, who, through their love and patience, 
teach me love and patience; for my beloved parents and one of my sisters 
who will never see this book, I’m sorry it took me so long; and for my other 
sweet sister, whose creativity and gentleness completes our family.
The dance medicine field has scores of talented health care professionals 
devoted to research and continuing education just for dancers. Their wisdom 
teaches me what I know today and what I will learn tomorrow.
We have different gifts according to the grace given us. If doing what you 
love is a gift, then I am blessed with gifts. My sincere gratitude to the many 
dancers I enjoyed working with during this process:
Adi Almeida, Ballet De Espana
Ally Garcia, McGing Irish Dancers
Andrea Lankester, North Carolina School of the Arts
Andrew Hubbard, Exhale Dance Tribe
Annie Honebrink, Otto M. Budig Academy of Cincinnati Ballet
Anthony Krutzkamp, Cincinnati Ballet
Bonita Brockert, National Dance Council of America
Calvin Thomas, Jr., Ballet Austin
Cervilio Miguel Amador, Cincinnati Ballet
Danielle Betscher, Just Off Broadway
Dawn Kelly, Cincinnati Ballet
Diamond Ancion, School for Creative and Performing Arts
Eugene Brockert, Dance, USA
Heather Walter, Wellington Orthopedics
Jill Marlow Krutzkamp, Cincinnati Ballet
Joseph Gatti, Ballet De Espana
Katie Chal, Louisville Ballet School
Kristi Capps, Cincinnati Ballet
Laura Tighe, McGing Irish Dancers
Marisa Gordon, Dance, Etc.
Zach Grubbs, Cincinnati Ballet

 
1
C
h
a
p
t
e
r
1
the dancer in motion
M
otion is defined as any physical movement or change in position. But, 
when you watch a dancer in motion, it is much more than physical 
changes in position. It is a vibrant visual art of brief images created by strength, 
balance, and grace. The aesthetics of this art form can never be sacrificed by 
scientific analysis. But learning basic movement principles will allow your body 
to move effectively and safely. We use illustrations of three dance positions—
the jazz layout position, the attitude derrière position, and the split jump—to 
demonstrate movement principles in this chapter. These are shown in figures 
1.1, 1.2, and 1.3.
Figure 1.1 The jazz layout position.
Figure 1.2 The attitude derrière position.

 
2 
Dance anatomy
Bones, Joints, and Skeletal Muscles
To understand movement, you need to have a basic understanding of bones, 
joints, and muscles. They are the building blocks that provide you with the 
ability to create human motion. Your body is an amazing evolving gift of energy 
and information. Knowing how to organize the building blocks will give you 
fresh energy and enhance your skills as a dancer.
Bones
You have 206 bones in your body; they provide support and serve as levers 
for your muscles. Some bones provide protection for your internal organs, 
and some bones are responsible for producing red blood cells. You have long 
bones, short bones, and flat bones throughout your body that play a role in 
movement.
Movement operation involves the use of leverage. A lever is a rigid bar 
that moves a fixed point when effort, or force, is applied to it. The effort 
is used to move a resistance, or load. So, in your body, your joints are the 
fixed point, the bones are the levers, and the effort is the muscle contrac-
tion. For example, look at figure 1.1 of the jazz layout position. Focus on 
the gesture leg: The hip joint is the fixed point, the hip flexors are the effort 
by their contraction, and the femur (thigh bone) is the lever. Your muscles 
are attached to the bones by tendons, and the bones attach to each other 
by way of strong ligaments.
Joints
Joints are where two bones meet. You need to be familiar with several types 
of joints, but ball-and-socket, hinge, and gliding joints are the main types dis-
cussed in this text. All movement occurring at the joints have specific names, 
most working in pairs. The pairings typically describe movement in the same 
plane but work in opposite directions. For example, flexion at the knee would 
Figure 1.3 
The split jump.

 
the Dancer in motion 
3
represent bending of the knee; extension at the knee would represent straight-
ening of the knee (table 1.1).
The hip and shoulder joints are described as ball-and-socket joints. One 
end of the bone is rounded, and the end of its meeting bone is cup shaped. 
In the hip, for example, this is important information for improving turnout 
and développé; we explore this concept further in chapter 6. The hip joint has 
a deeper cup than the shallow shoulder joint. Look closely at figure 1.2—the 
standing (supporting) leg’s hip joint shows how the femoral head fits into the 
acetabulum. Visualize how movement occurs at this joint; it has rotational 
action as well as flexion and extension.
Gliding joints are made up of bones in which both ends are relatively flat; 
they allow for very little movement. For example, the point where each rib 
meets the spinal vertebrae is a gliding joint, as in figure 1.3. Notice how there 
can be very little movement where the vertebrae and the ribs meet. This is 
significant for understanding the lack of good flexibility throughout the mid-
spine (thoracic) region, which is covered more in chapter 2.
A hinge joint is a bone with a slight concave end meeting a bone with a 
convex end. The knee would be described as a hinge joint. When the knee 
flexes and extends, it allows movement primarily in one plane. As you will learn 
later in this text, the knee does have a slight rotational movement as well. But 
focus on figure 1.1—the supporting leg is showing flexion of the knee while 
the gesture leg is showing extension of the knee.
Table 1.1 Joint Movements
Action
Movement
Example
Flexion
Bending, folding of a joint
Hip flexion: front of hip bends 
with grande battement devant
Extension
Straightening of a joint
Elbow straightens when in a 
push-up position
Abduction
Moving away from center
Arms in à la seconde: moving 
from alongside the body to 
second position
Adduction
Moving toward center
Assemblé: legs coming together
External rotation
Rotating outward
Turnout: grande plié in second 
position
Internal rotation
Rotating inward
Shoulder joint internally rotates 
to place the hand on the hip
Plantar flexion
Pointing the foot
Relevé, en pointe
Dorsiflexion
Flexing the foot
Rocking back on heels, lifting 
forefoot

 
4 
Dance anatomy
Skeletal Muscles
Skeletal muscles initiate skeletal movement; they are composed of connective 
tissue partitions containing muscle cells, fibers, and numerous nerves. When 
the nerves are stimulated by your brain, a chemical reaction occurs, causing 
the muscle to contract. Each muscle has an origination point on a bone and an 
insertion point on a bone. Basically, on contraction, the muscle fibers shorten 
and have a tendency to pull both ends into the middle.
How muscles react to stimuli depends on their characteristics. There are 
basically two types of fibers in each muscle: slow twitch, or type I, and fast 
twitch, or type II. Slow-twitch fibers contract slowly and have a high resistance 
to fatigue. They are used primarily for placement and posture as well as aerobic 
activities. The fast-twitch fibers contract quicker and have a low resistance to 
fatigue. They can produce more power than slow-twitch fibers. Petit allegro, 
or short anaerobic movements, use primarily fast-twitch fibers. Most ballet 
dancers have a higher percentage of slow-twitch fibers, while dancers who 
have a more muscular or bulky look will have a higher percentage of fast-twitch 
fibers. No matter what your dance intensity level is, the slow-twitch fibers will 
be recruited first, followed by fast-twitch fibers.
All of your muscles have the capability of contracting, or creating tension, 
in various ways. Dynamic contraction is described as any type of tension on a 
muscle where the length of the muscle changes. This would certainly create 
movement at the joint. The two types of dynamic contractions are concentric 
and eccentric. Concentric contraction is typically a shortening of a muscle to 
create the movement, and eccentric contractions involve lengthening of the 
muscle. During pointe tendu, as the leg moves away from your center and your 
foot points, the calf muscles shorten, creating a concentric contraction. As your 
foot returns to the starting position, the calf muscles begin to lengthen. During 
that return phase, the calf muscles work eccentrically. The significance of this 
comes into play especially when landing from jumps. The eccentric contraction 
of the muscles will help to decelerate your body against gravity on landing. 
While you work so hard to build strength and power to jump higher, you also 
need to work on control to reduce the risk of injury and to make your return 
phase smooth and coordinated.
Another type of contraction that creates tension on the muscle but does not 
change the length is an isometric (also called static) contraction. An isometric 
contraction means equal length—the muscle fires, creating tension, but there 
is no joint movement. So, as you execute a relevé in first position and hold, the 
hold phase is an isometric contraction of all of the muscles in the legs. They 
contract concentrically to elevate you and then hold isometrically.
As your muscles contract to produce movement, various muscles work 
together to achieve the goal. All dance movements are carefully controlled 
because the muscles work so well together. Skeletal muscles are divided into 
four distinct categories: agonists, antagonists, synergists, and stabilizers.
• Agonists. The muscles that contract to produce the movement are the 
movers, or agonists. The ones that are the most effective in making that move-

 
the Dancer in motion 
5
ment happen are the primary movers. For example, the action of pointing 
your foot is created by the gastrocnemius and soleus muscles as the primary 
movers, but other muscles, called the secondary movers, assist.
• Antagonists. The muscles that oppose the primary movers are called 
antagonists. They somewhat relax and lengthen while the prime movers are 
working, but other times they can contract with the prime movers and provide 
a cocontraction. Now, as you might imagine, the agonists and the antagonists 
are located opposite of each other. Look at figure 1.2, and focus on the gesture 
leg in attitude derrière. The agonists are the hamstring and gluteal muscles 
that activate to move the leg to the back into hip extension. The antagonists 
are the hip flexors, or the muscles along the front of the hip and thigh. They 
are on a stretch while the movers contract. Now, imagine a grande plié in 
second position. As you are coming up, the quadriceps (agonists) are working 
to straighten the knee, but the hamstrings (antagonists) can contract as well, 
providing a cocontraction and better support for your knee joint.
• Synergists. Synergist muscles can be confusing, so let’s break things down. 
Muscles that are considered synergists have two functions: They can promote 
the movement or they can neutralize the movement. What is so important for 
you to know is that the synergist muscles fire to help you define your move-
ment. They can counteract any unwanted directional force. So, in figure 1.2, 
focus on the right arm. When you forcefully lift your arm by flexing at the 
shoulder joint, what helps to keep the humerus (upper arm) bone from sepa-
rating away from the scapula (shoulder blade)? A small muscle hidden under 
the pectoralis major called the coracobrachialis displays synergistic qualities by 
contracting to assist in controlling the movement of the humerus in relation 
to the scapula. Although the primary movers get all the credit, the synergists 
help the agonists with establishing smooth and coordinated movement.
• Stabilizers. Muscles that are able to fixate a joint are called stabilizers. 
This is important and will be reviewed repeatedly throughout this book and 
its exercises. Stabilizers serve as anchors; they are able to hold a joint firm in 
order for other movement to occur. In figure 1.2, what is holding the spine 
stable? The abdominals are contracting to stabilize the spine; without that 
contraction, the momentum and strength of the gesture leg moving backward 
would cause the spine to collapse. You are working so hard on the leg that is 
creating most of the movement that you forget about the importance of the 
muscles that create stability and hold you firm in order for that movement 
to occur.
Movement Planes
Motion means changes in position; motion is created by force. For you, the 
coordinated efforts of body and mind create the force. So, let’s begin by focus-
ing on the efforts of your body and become familiar with some anatomical posi-
tions that are used in the text. When a muscle contracts, it produces movement 
at the joint, and the joint is the connector between the bones—easy enough, 
right? Dance moves you in all different directions, patterns, and shapes.  

 
6 
Dance anatomy
You can better understand these 
movements by dividing the body into 
three imaginary planes: frontal (ver-
tical), sagittal, and transverse (hori-
zontal), which will be described soon. 
Learning challenging choreography 
and executing the movement with 
beautiful lines come from a better 
understanding of how your body 
moves in space. Look at figure 1.4 
showing these three planes within 
your body. These planes correspond 
to three dimensions in space.
Now, because you can change 
your orientation within space and 
your arms and legs can change 
position, it’s important to organize 
positional directions of movement 
and refer to your body in a standard 
anatomical position, as in figure 1.5. 
That position is facing front, feet 
comfortably parallel, arms by your 
sides, and the palms of your hands 
rotated to face front. From this posi-
tion, all directional body movements 
can begin from a starting point and 
all anatomical terminology has a 
starting point (table 1.2).
Frontal plane
Sagittal plane
Transverse plane
Figure 1.4 The three planes of movement.
Figure 1.5 Standard anatomical position.

 
the Dancer in motion 
7
Now, continue to visualize your standard anatomical position with 
various imaginary planes within yourself. You are divided into upper 
and lower halves by a transverse plane, equal right and left portions by 
a sagittal plane, and front and back portions by a frontal plane. So, for 
example, when moving your arms from en bas through first to high fifth 
position, you are moving within your sagittal plane. That movement 
has a purpose—it’s working within an imaginary plane to high fifth effi-
ciently, with no deviation and with no incorporation of other movement.  
When you cambré to the side, you are moving in the frontal plane, moving 
directly to the side without any other inefficient movement, as if you are side 
bending along an imaginary pane of glass. In various hip-hop movements, the 
hips rotate in and out—that movement describes each hip moving along the 
transverse plane. The same would apply when twisting from the waist: Your 
trunk moves along the transverse plane. Look at figure 1.3, the split jump.  
Table 1.2 Anatomical Position and Directional Terminology
Term
Definition
PosiTionAl TErMinology
Anatomical position
Standing with feet and palms facing front
Supine
Lying on the back
Prone
Lying facedown
DirEcTionAl TErMinology
Superior
Above or toward head
Inferior
Below or toward feet
Anterior
Front side or in front of
Posterior
Back side or in back of
Medial
Closer to the median plane or toward midline
Lateral
Farther from the median plane or toward side
Proximal
Closer to root of limb, trunk, or center of body
Distal
Farther from root of limb, trunk, or center of body
Superficial
Closer to or on surface of body
Deep
Farther from surface of body
Palmar
Anterior aspect of hand in anatomical position
Dorsal (for hands or 
feet)
Posterior aspect of hand in anatomical position; top 
aspect of foot when standing in anatomical position
Plantar
Bottom aspect of foot when standing in anatomical position
Reprinted, by permission, from K. Clippinger, 2007, Dance anatomy and kinesiology (Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics), 18.

 
8 
Dance anatomy
In which plane are the legs moving? The frontal plane. If one leg were slightly 
more forward, the movement would not produce the clean line that you strive 
for. You would need to continue to repeat that split jump until you got it cor-
rect. The repetition and overrehearsing due to lack of understanding of where 
the legs should be could lead to an overuse injury.
Mindful Connections
Your mind plays an intense role in dance anatomy and improvement in tech-
nique. Imagining moving faster or lifting your legs higher is part of being a 
dancer in motion as well as understanding primary muscle movement. Visualiza-
tion can also be a tool for helping you dance more effectively. How many times 
do you practice the act of développé? How many times do you feel gripping in 
the thigh and anxiety because you are unable to raise the leg higher? Imagine 
what it would be like to know which muscles need to contract, lengthen, and 
stabilize without gripping. Imagine your leg elevating higher without anxiety. 
This is using your mind along with physical ability.
Visualization
Visualization, imagery, and mental simulation are terms used to describe 
creating a picture in your mind without doing the physical activity. There are 
many kinds of imagery, but for this text let’s focus on basic visualization skills 
to improve performance. You can use simple positive images and focus on 
maintaining a calm center to release unwanted tension. Visualize exactly what 
you want your body to do and keep your thoughts positive. Eric Franklin is 
a master at visualization; I love his term seed imagery—planting an intuitive 
thought and letting that image grow to increase performance. When you 
repeatedly train your actions (as you do in class and rehearsal), you induce 
physiological changes and increase accuracy. Take a little time every day to 
find a quiet spot, close your eyes, and just listen to yourself breathe. Now, 
imagine the dancer you want to be, and see yourself moving with ease. Focus 
on how clean your lines are. Continue to visualize how much control you have 
with every combination you perform. You can see it in your mind, you can 
hear the music playing, and you can feel your body executing the sequences 
with detail. Now, all you have to do is do it! Let everything else go, and focus 
on your technique. You are training the relationship between your mind and 
your muscles. They must work together to help you reach your goals.
Tension Relief
Your state of mind will definitely influence the outcome of your work. If you 
prepare for a pirouette with tension in the upper body, stress about having to 
execute two, and anxiety about losing your balance, how on earth can you 
turn? Visualize beautiful multiple turns around a firm but calm center and 
breathe! Dance your way into the pirouette, enjoy turning, release the fear, 
use rhythm to help you, and turn!
Research continues to look at the proven connection between stress and 
injury. You seek perfection and you push yourself beyond your limits. Dance, 

 
the Dancer in motion 
9
like any other sport, requires intense levels of training and conditioning to 
maintain the highest level of physical performance. When you allow competi-
tion anxiety or fear of failure to overwhelm your mind, you lose the ability to 
cope, and you put yourself at risk of getting hurt. When you can’t maintain 
motivation, you create disruptions in attention, lose momentary awareness, 
and put yourself at risk for an acute injury. All of these stressors can also lead 
to hesitation, weakness in balance skills, and unwanted muscle tension.
The best dancers keep a healthy, positive conversation going within 
themselves to create motivation and encouragement. This inner dialogue 
can reduce tension and create an ease in your movement. Remember, you 
are building a healthy connection between mind and body. Accept yourself 
and love dancing—it’s that easy! Be firm and tell yourself that it’s possible. 
Unfortunately, you might be full of criticism and doubt; if you love to dance 
and want to improve, you must stop the negativity and dissatisfaction with 
yourself. Stay away from telling yourself you cannot do something or that 
some movement is too hard.
Dance-Focused Exercise
There is a distinct relationship between each exercise and the illustrations in 
these chapters. Throughout the exercises, visualize ease and balance in your 
neck as well as stability throughout your center, and allow those skills to carry 
over in your technique. For example, when performing the exercises for your 
legs, visualize ample joint mobility, not tension, in your hips. Remember to 
keep the images positive and brief. After practicing visualization skills during 
the exercises, send those brief images through your mind before classes, 
rehearsals, and performances. Notice how your skills improve; notice how 
you work more effectively with less gripping in your muscles. Keep using 
positive visualization skills. They are exercises of the mind and they require 
practice. Don’t let negative thoughts creep back in and ruin your technique. 
Each chapter has a section called Dance-Focused Exercise guiding you on 
applying these skills to the exercises in that chapter.
Cardiorespiratory Benefits
Although dance-specific exercises are the focus of this book, the benefits 
of cardiorespiratory fitness cannot be overlooked. More and more medical 
research on dance documents that dancers’ cardiorespiratory capacities are 
similar to the capacities of other athletes in nonendurance sports. Rehearsals 
and performances last for only brief periods; this type of exercise is referred to 
as anaerobic training. Aerobic training is required for improving cardiorespira-
tory health because it improves blood circulation and the supply of oxygen to 
the cells. Aerobic training increases heart size, which allows a larger volume 
of blood to be pumped through the body. Cardiorespiratory fitness allows 
for better transportation of oxygen and an increase in endurance levels. High 
cardiorespiratory endurance reduces physical and mental fatigue, which can 
also lead to injury. You can improve your cardiorespiratory endurance by 
training on an elliptical machine, treadmill, or stationary bike or swimming 
three or four times a week.

 
10 
Dance anatomy
Conditioning Principles
You should be familiar with some principles in order to define and enhance 
your conditioning plan. Not only are you improving muscular strength, but 
you are also increasing strength in the tendons and ligaments.
• Principle of overload. If you want to increase strength, you must continue 
to work the targeted muscle group past your normal load. The exercises are 
executed at maximal contraction throughout the entire range of motion. Typi-
cally, this type of training uses fewer repetitions and more resistance, and it 
works your muscles to fatigue.
• Principle of reversibility. This refers to the fast loss of strength when 
the conditioning stops. In order to maintain your fitness level, continue with 
dance-specific conditioning at least four times a week if you are not danc-
ing because of a layoff or holiday break. (Conditioning takes the form of the 
exercises presented in this book.)
• Principle of specificity. This relates to conditioning the dance-specific 
muscles that you need for improving your technique. In order for conditioning 
to be effective for dance, you must target and engage the muscles needed for 
dance as if your exercises were a dance!
• Alignment. All repetitions must be repeated without sacrificing alignment, 
core control, or proper breathing. Your goal is to work effectively. If you feel 
your alignment beginning to falter, stop, reorganize, and then start again. As 
you perform each exercise, emphasize the main muscle movement but notice 
how it affects your entire body.
• Warm-up and cool-down. Each conditioning session should begin with a 
basic warm-up to increase blood flow, accelerate your breathing, and slightly 
raise body temperature. The exercises will be more effective if you are warmed 
up. Take 10 minutes to include the exercises from chapter 2 to get centered 
and then add some low-level jogging in place. A sufficient cool-down after 
conditioning allows the body to return to its resting state. This can be approxi-
mately 10 minutes and can include the breathing exercises from chapter 3. You 
can also include some gentle stretching, which will reduce muscle soreness.
Each exercise has a specific goal, but all exercises require control through 
the full range of the movement. Avoid initiating the movement with your 
momentum and then allowing gravity or loss of awareness to finish the move-
ment. Begin each exercise with slow, precise control and maintain that control 
through the exercise.
Your warm-up, cool-down, and exercise program should take approximately 
50 minutes. Each chapter allows you to work with specific muscle groups to 
enhance the intensity and deepen your awareness. Keep your mind focused 
on safe skeletal alignment, which is emphasized throughout this book.
Agreeing on a conditioning program with specific durations, repetitions, 
sets, and intensities is next to impossible because opinions vary among the 
experts. For the purpose of this text, repeat each exercise 10 to 12 times for 

 
the Dancer in motion 
11
three sets, unless otherwise stated. But, this may require some practice to 
determine your personal needs. If you are trying to build strength, you must 
execute maximal muscle contraction through the entire range of motion and 
overload the muscle in a progressive manner. Some of the exercises in this 
book use resistance bands or small weights for progressive resistance, but the 
goal is to maintain excellent alignment. You can slowly add resistance when 
the alignment is secure and the exercise is no longer challenging. Quality of 
movement is the emphasis.

 

 
2
C
h
a
p
t
e
r
13
Spine
Y
our spine is able to create multidirectional movement that gives you the 
ability to execute various dance styles with fluidity and ease. Your spine 
can portray a resilient elastic look that might be needed for various contem-
porary combinations, or it can have a rigid and more stable, but elegant, look 
for partnering skills. Ballet posture may call for your spine to be strong but 
display a majestic and lifted look. It all depends on placement, balance, and 
organization of the muscle contractions. To improve body placement, you 
need a healthy balance of muscle action to support proper alignment of your 
spine. This chapter introduces muscles associated with optimal placement of 
the spine. Dance can put an enormous amount of stress on your back, espe-
cially in the segments that have the most mobility. Learning to use the entire 
spine and balance stability and flexibility can improve your performance skills 
and reduce your risk of injury.
Your axial skeleton is made up of the skull, spinal column, ribs, and sacrum. 
In anatomy, axial refers to anatomical direction; in the skeletal system it refers 
to your bones being aligned vertically along a longitudinal axis. What you need 
to remember is to move against the resistance of gravity, meaning that you 
need to create length, or axial elongation, within your spine while incorporat-
ing stability around the spine for placement and support.
Spinal Column
Your spine is a column of 33 strong bones called vertebrae that connect the 
skull, shoulders, ribs, hips, and legs; it is the center of your skeleton. The ver-
tebrae also surround and protect the spinal cord, which transmits the impulses 
that control all voluntary and involuntary movements. The vertebrae are 
connected by small, fluid-filled sacks of tough, fibrous cartilage called discs, 
which allow for vertebral support as well as a small amount of cushioning. 
The discs help to absorb shock, especially when you perform jumping and 
lifting movements. The combined movement between all of the vertebrae 
creates the flexibility through the spine as a whole. While a large cambré 
(back-bend) type movement can be gorgeous, the tendency is to overextend 
in the neck and the lower back without trying to incorporate any effective 
movement through the thoracic spine (midback). Transmitting forces equally 
will allow the entire spine to work for you. Using only the neck or lower back 
will cause added physical stress in those specific areas and eventually tighten 
and weaken the rest of the spine. This is particularly significant in the lower 
back; if forces like gravity and compression are transmitted only through the 

 
14 
Dance anatomy
lower spine, then you overwork that portion of your spine, putting yourself 
at serious risk for fractures, soft tissue damage, and disc degeneration.
The vertebrae cannot stand upright alone; they are supported by an elabo-
rate system of ligaments. The major connecting ligaments are the anterior and 
posterior longitudinal ligaments. These ligaments are continuous bands that 
run down the front and back of the spine. Basically, all vertebrae have common 
structural patterns: a body, the vertebral foramen, a spinous process, and two 
transverse processes (figure 2.1). The body area of the vertebrae bears the 
weight of the body above it, the foramen creates the space for the spinal cord, 
and the processes are sites for various muscle and ligament attachments. The 
point at which each process meets the next process creates a gliding joint called 
a facet. At these small joints the vertebral processes are flat and each surface 
must slide smoothly against the other when you twist or bend. Injury to these 
small facet joints is usually produced by repetitive, uncontrolled movements 
that create asymmetry. When these small joints do not glide smoothly, your 
movement becomes limited and rigid. This causes pain and eventual compen-
sations. While executing the upcoming exercises, visualize this smooth sliding 
effect between all vertebrae and incorporate it with control.
Vertebral
body
Superior
costal facet
Facet joint
Facet joint
Facet joint
Transverse
process
Superior 
articular
process
Spinous
process
Vertebral
foramen
Inferior 
articular
process
Intervertebral
disc
Figure 2.1 The structure of the vertebrae.

 
spine 
15
Cervical spine
Lumbar spine
Sacral spine
Thoracic spine
Spinal Regions
Your spine has three main sections: the cervical area, the thoracic area, and the 
lumbar spine and sacrum. Take a moment to notice all of the regions in the 
spine in figure 2.2 and how the vertebrae stack up so neatly. Excellent spinal 
health is dependent on maintaining the gentle, natural curves designed for 
balance and postural stability.
Figure 2.2 The three regions of the spine: cervical, thoracic, and lumbar 
and sacral regions.
Cervical Spine
The neck, or cervical spine, has seven vertebrae, along with ligaments, tendons, 
and muscles. It supports your head, which can weigh approximately 14 pounds 
(about 6 kg). The cervical vertebrae are labeled as C1 through C7. The neck 
area is relatively flexible and fragile because the vertebrae are slightly smaller 
than other vertebrae. The first two vertebrae are quite interesting. C1 is called 
the atlas (Atlas supporting the heavens from Greek mythology); it is literally a 
bony ring that is responsible for carrying the skull. C2 is called the axis; it has 
a small, bony projection that rises into the ring of C1, thus creating a pivot 
for rotation to occur between the atlas and axis. This creates movement for 
nodding and rotating the head. Physical tension throughout the cervical spine 
can limit efficient movement for spotting during turning. Think about your head 
being centered and balanced on top of C1 and C2. If your head is balanced, 

 
16 
Dance anatomy
the neck muscles that control the movement can work with ease. Any time 
your head moves outside of this balanced state, the opposing muscles of that 
movement are responsible for overworking to try to maintain alignment. Head 
placement is an important addition to the aesthetics of all upper-body poses 
and choreography.
Thoracic Spine
As you continue down the spine, the size of the vertebrae increases. The 
thoracic spine contains 12 large vertebrae, T1 through T12. The ribs have 
attachments along the sides of the vertebrae in this region. The increasing 
size of the vertebrae with the added attachments of the ribs creates the lack 
of flexibility and mobility in this area, notably called the thoracic cage or rib 
cage. The principle of executing movement along the entire spine will continue 
to create mobility throughout the thoracic region. All of the exercises in this 
chapter are designed for you to focus on axial elongation in all movement 
planes, moving in the longest possible arc.
Lumbar Spine and Sacrum
Your lumbar, or lower-back, region has five vertebrae (L1 to L5) and is a 
more flexible area in comparison to the thoracic region. This region takes on 
the most stress. It is important to remember that the lower segments of the 
spinal column have the ability to move more in extension than rotation, which 
can create a shear force—meaning the vertebrae can slide in an anterior and 
posterior pattern, creating an unnecessary excessive sliding or shearing-type 
motion. This unsupported movement can eventually wear down the discs 
and cause weakness in the ligaments, significantly increasing your risk of 
lower-back injury. Basic spine education, awareness of body placement, and 
the ability to apply abdominal strengthening work to your spinal movements 
will reduce the risk of lower-back injuries.
There is also greater movement between the last vertebra and the sacrum. 
The sacrum is triangular in shape and is composed of five fused vertebrae (S1 
to S5). It takes on the load of the upper body, transferring it to the pelvic girdle. 
Knowing that the lower spine has more flexibility in extension and takes on 
more of the load, you must understand the benefits of core and lower-back 
strengthening to improve your body placement and reduce the risk of injury. 
We introduce the importance of the core musculature in the upcoming Neutral 
Spine section, but we will discuss this principle in more detail in chapter 4.
Muscular Balance
This section introduces the muscles that play a role in correct placement of the 
spine, and we continue to elaborate on them throughout the rest of the text. 
The primary muscles along the front of the spine are the rectus abdominis, 
which runs from ribs 2 to 5 to the pubic bone, and the internal and external 
obliques, which also connect your ribs to your pelvis. The deepest of the 
abdominals is the transversus abdominis, which is primarily a postural muscle 
and very important for spinal stability. The deep transversus abdominis con-

 
spine 
17
nects the lower ribs 7 through 12 with the pelvis; its fibers run horizontally. 
Another muscle associated with spinal placement is the iliopsoas muscle; 
it has a direct connection with your lower spine, pelvis, and femur (thigh) 
bone. Weakness or tightness of the iliopsoas can create instability in the lower 
region of your spine. (This muscle will be discussed further in chapter 6.) The 
hip flexor isometrics exercise on page 26 helps you locate and contract this 
muscle without causing instability in your lower back.
The posterior aspect of the spine is supported by the sacrospinalis (also 
known as erector spinae) and the deeper multifidi muscles, which run from the 
pelvis to the base of the skull. The deep multifidi muscles are also extremely 
important for improving body placement—on contraction they provide trunk 
control and spinal stability by providing gentle compression along the spine.
At this point, we introduce the pelvic floor of the body, which provides a 
strong base of support for the lower spine and pelvis. While more discussion 
on this follows in chapter 3, note that the pelvic floor attaches at the base 
of the pelvis and sacrum, which is located at the bottom of your spine. The 
ischial squeeze exercise on page 30 educates you on engaging these muscles 
and using them for improved placement.
Along the sides of the trunk are the quadratus lumborum muscles run-
ning from the last rib to the iliac rim and the lower spine along its way. This 
muscle helps you side bend and extend your lower back, but when it is tight 
it can elevate the pelvis or cause hip hike, especially with high kicking-type 
movements. A healthy balance of strength and flexibility along all sides of the 
spine provides the needed support for attaining well-aligned body placement.
Neutral Spine
Your spine is capable of flexion, extension, side bending, rotation, and vari-
ous combinations of all of these movements, thus giving you the ability to 
perform any type of choreography. Four curves within the sagittal plane play 
a significant role in body placement (figure 2.3). In the cervical and lumbar 
areas, the curve is concave (it moves in a forward motion), whereas the 
thoracic and sacral curves are convex (they move in the opposite direction). 
Your intervertebral discs cushion your vertebrae within these curves. Chang-
ing the curves as a base for your placement causes undue stress on the discs 
and unnecessary muscle activity to maintain this misalignment.
Excellent body placement skills come from creating strength and stability 
along the spine while keeping the natural curves intact. This is known as 
neutral posture, neutral spine, or neutral pelvis. Dancing with axial elonga-
tion while maintaining the natural, neutral curves creates less stress on the 
discs and vertebrae. You know that challenging choreography requires you 
to move your spine in all directions and combinations of all directions, but a 
strong dancer can control the spine through the challenging movements. The 
locating neutral exercise on page 20 is focused on assisting you in locating 
the natural neutral pelvis position.
In looking at your body from the side, you should be able to draw an 
imaginary line from the middle of the ear down to the lateral malleolus, or 

 
18 
Dance anatomy
ankle bone, without any deviation. This is called a plumb line (figure 2.3). As 
the plumb line passes down, it would move through the center of the shoul-
der, through the center of the greater trochanter at the hip, and down to the 
knee. From there, the plumb line would continue to the lateral malleolus, 
again with no deviations. You should also be able to secure this alignment 
with the legs parallel or turned out.
Unfortunately, some dancers have difficulty maintaining a neutral or natural 
position of the lower back. The lumbar spine might slightly extend, creat-
ing lordosis (an excessive curve in extension). There are various reasons for 
lumbar lordosis. One is abdominal weakness, which leaves the lower spine 
unsupported, causing the lower back to arch. Another reason could be that 
the posterior spinal muscles are tight and short, which pulls the lower spine 
into an arched position. Or the iliopsoas muscles are tight and short, which 
also pulls the lumbar spine into this lordotic position.
Figure 2.3 The four curves of the spine and the plumb line.
Cervical
curve 
Thoracic
curve 
Lumbar
curve 
Sacral
curve

 
spine 
19
Dance-Focused Exercise
While executing the following series of exercises, remember to work with 
axial elongation. It is important to let the cervical spine be an extension of 
the thoracic spine. For example, the exercises that involve flexion of the 
spine should allow the cervical spine to finish the arch that the midback has 
initiated. Look at trunk curl isometrics on page 24. There should not be an 
excessive bend in the neck to try to force the upper back to move more. The 
same principle of axial elongation comes into play when the spine is required 
to move into extension. The neck should be a beautiful continuation of the 
arch that the midspine is creating.
Now, take a look at the neutral spine model and notice how the spine 
stacks up; be aware of your alignment. The gentle curves of the spine are 
intact and supported. The head balances on top of the cervical spine with 
ease. Notice the balance between the muscles along the front and back of 
the spine. Think about how the deep multifidi gently compress your spine to 
give support. The quadratus lumborum situated on both sides of the lower 
spine keeps a healthy balance between the ribs and the pelvis. If you can 
visualize the iliopsoas connecting the lower spine to the thighs and the pelvic 
floor activating to stabilize the base of the spine, you have begun to develop 
improved placement. By incorporating balance, you actually will need less 
overall muscle action and have created an excellent workplace in which your 
spine can function.

 
20
Locating Neutral
Execution
1.  Begin by standing with legs and arms in first position. Create a lifted 
quality through your spine; gently engage the low abdomen and visu-
alize the plumb line.
 2.  As you inhale, lift the ribs, release your abdominals, and gently rock 
the front of your pelvis forward, arching the lower back and moving 
into an anterior tilt. Notice the tightness in the upper and lower back 
and the looseness in your abdominals.
Iliopsoas
Erector 
spinae
External 
oblique
Rectus
abdominis
Internal 
oblique
Gluteus
maximus
posterior pelvic tilt.
Start 
position.
Anterior pelvic tilt.

 
21
3.  As you begin to exhale, reverse the tilt and tighten through the 
abdominals; try to flatten the lower back and engage the gluteus 
maximus. Notice how the front of the hips tightens and how the front 
of your chest drops.
 4.  Now return to a neutral position, visualizing the plumb line and gently 
lifting through your waist. There is balance between the abdominals 
and the spinal muscles and a renewed lengthened feeling in the spine.
 5.  Now, as you inhale, move into your anterior pelvic tilt. As you exhale, 
move into your neutral position. Emphasize abdominal contraction 
and the external obliques to move into neutral. Repeat this 10 to 12 
times.
Muscles Involved
Anterior pelvic tilt: Iliopsoas, erector spinae
Posterior pelvic tilt: Rectus abdominis, internal oblique, external oblique, 
gluteus maximus
Dance Focus
Let this exercise help you work 
through your center and notice 
the changes that occur along 
your spine. In knowing that the 
lower portion of your spine has 
more flexibility, you must be 
aware of activating the abdomi-
nal muscles to have control of 
your pelvis and spine in a more 
natural, neutral position. Instruc-
tors can look for the anterior iliac 
bones and pubic bone aligned 
along the frontal plane and know 
that every dancer has different 
natural curves along the spine; 
the contraction of the abdomi-
nals helps to maintain and sup-
port the curves. Visualize how 
the external oblique musculature 
connects the ribs and the pelvis. 
Keep that connection working 
when your leg needs to move 
to the back—this will help to keep your pelvis and lower back from overex-
tending. All styles require three-dimensional hip and pelvic movement, but 
control of those movements is one of the keys to technical improvement.

 
22
Leg Glide
External 
oblique
Transversus 
abdominis
Multifidi
Execution
1.  Lie on your back with arms in first position. (Note: In the illustration, 
the arms are placed in a position to make viewing the abdominals 
more visible.) Locate your neutral pelvic alignment and bring one 
leg at a time to 90-degree hip flexion and 90-degree knee flexion 
(90/90). Align your knees with your hips.
 2.  Inhale to prepare. As you breathe out, deepen the abdominal contrac-
tion and let one leg glide away from you at approximately 60 degrees. 
Allow your knee to fully extend. Focus on anchoring your abdominals 
to your lower back and allow no movement of the pelvis. Feel the 
deep transversus abdominis and external obliques firing to help stabi-
lize your pelvis.
 3.  Inhale to bring the leg back to your starting position. Repeat the 
sequence with the other leg. As you exhale, focus on flattening your 
abdomen to anchor your pelvis; reemphasize deep abdominal con-
traction, not the hip flexors. Practice this 10 to 12 times on each leg.
 4.  As your leg moves away from your center to extend the knee, notice 
the movement of your legs occurring along your sagittal plane and 
actively increase the abdominal contraction to resist pelvic movement.
 
 
SafetY tip Maintain stability in your lower back. If you find 
that it is too difficult to hold your lower back in a stable neutral 
position, do not take the legs as low; try it again with the legs 
extending higher. You may lower the legs when your back is 
stable.

 
23
V a r I at I o n
Rotated Leg Glide
1.  Begin with your legs at 90/90, and turn out both thighs.
 2.  On exhalation, again deepen the abdominal contraction and lower 
one leg to approximately 60 degrees as you extend your knee. 
Maintain turnout and reemphasize leg movement only, not pelvis 
or spinal movement.
 3.  Inhale on the return, and 
focus on deepening the 
abdominal contraction 
while maintaining hip turn-
out. Repeat this exercise 10 
to 12 times on each leg.
Muscles Involved
Transversus abdominis, external oblique, multifidi
Dance Focus
This exercise emphasizes the point that it is 
not about how many abdominal exercises 
you can perform; it’s about using the strength 
of the abdomen to improve your technique. 
Irish dance requires intense trunk control 
in a neutral position in order to maintain a 
stable position. Focus on the deep transversus 
abdominis along with the deep multifidi to give 
you double support. This is a cocontraction, 
the anchor you need before all arm and leg 
motion. Remind yourself that only your legs 
are moving, not your pelvis or your spine! That 
same principle applies to jumping combinations. 
Visualize your navel moving toward your spine 
for added support; put your energy into your 
abdominal muscles, not tension into your neck 
and shoulders. Take a moment to practice a 
few small jumps in place. Feel the core muscles 
bracing your spine, and feel the external 
obliques working to connect your ribs and your 
pelvis. Relax and enjoy the ride! For teachers, 
this is a tool to help students move from their 
centers with less stress to their spines. Instructors 
must be able to feel it, explain it, and teach it.

 
24
trunk Curl isometrics
Rectus
abdominis
Rectus
abdominis
Execution
1.  Lie on your back with knees bent and feet flat on the floor and arms 
by your sides. Inhale on the preparation and exhale as you engage 
the rectus abdominis to curl your trunk until the bottom edges of the 
shoulder blades lift off the floor. Gently glide the chin toward your 
Adam’s apple, and allow your arms to reach for the backs of your 
thighs.
 2.  Place your hands behind your thighs and hold an isometric contrac-
tion. Emphasize moving the entire thoracic spine into a curl, and allow 
the spinal muscles to support that curling effect. Keep the sacrum firm 
on the floor; do not use the hip flexors.
 3.  Hold this position and feel the strength of the abdomen. With control, 
breathe in and slowly return to the floor, emphasizing the eccentric 
contraction of the rectus abdominis. Move along your sagittal plane, 
curling as much as possible through your upper back on the way up 
and uncurling on the way down. Work with control. Count to 4 for 
each action; repeat 10 to 12 times.

 
25
 
 
SafetY tip as you execute your abdominal contraction, allow 
your neck to be an extension of your spine. try to avoid extreme 
flexion in your neck.
Muscles Involved
Rectus abdominis
Dance Focus
When thinking about using the 
rectus abdominis, rely not only on 
the look that this muscle provides 
you (six-pack abs) but also its 
responsibilities. You know that 
this muscle flexes your trunk, so it 
also can help with added mobility 
in your stiff thoracic spine. If you 
are executing a contraction in 
modern dance, visualize how the 
rectus abdominis connects your 
ribs to your pubic bone; maintain 
that visualization as the muscle 
creating a concentric contraction 
to curl your spine. As you extend 
your spine by performing a 
cambré back or an arabesque, it 
engages eccentrically to support 
and provide a lifting effect for 
your spine, which will enhance 
your movements. Using the rectus 
abdominis effectively will help to 
increase your core strength and 
decrease overuse of the hip flexor muscles. Since the abdominals are located 
in your center, let all of your movement radiate from this point. This is 
where your body placement finds improvement.

 
26
Hip flexor isometrics
Execution
1.  Lie on your back with both legs bent and feet on the floor. Coordinate 
a small pelvic tilt by engaging the lower abdominals and maintain that 
slight tilt throughout the exercise.
 2.  Focus on the deep iliopsoas to contract and elevate the thigh toward 
the same shoulder with slight turnout. Maintain leg height just above 
90 degrees.
 3.  Press against the thigh with one hand to perform an isometric con-
traction of the iliopsoas. Hold for 4 to 6 counts and then relax. Repeat 
only 4 times to focus on location of the muscle.
Muscles Involved
Iliopsoas
Iliopsoas

 
27
Dance Focus
This exercise is a simple 
isometric contraction to help 
you visualize, locate, and 
contract the iliopsoas. This is the 
assistance you need to lift your 
legs higher than 90 degrees. 
As this muscle contracts, do 
not allow the activation of 
the muscle fibers to pull your 
lower back into an arched 
position. Allow the abdominals 
to contract as well to keep 
the pelvis from wanting to tip 
forward. Visualize the muscles 
that run vertically along the 
back of your spine, lengthening 
and stretching as the iliopsoas is 
contracting. Release the tension 
in the upper body and send the 
energy down to the iliopsoas. 
If you need to, close your eyes 
and visualize the origin and 
insertion. Knowing that this 
muscle connects your lower spine to your femur, imagine pulling your femur 
closer to your spine, not your spine to your femur. This image will create 
more awareness of spinal alignment and help to lift your legs higher.
V a r I at I o n
Hip flexor Neutral
1.  Repeat the main exercise. While maintaining the deep iliopsoas 
contraction, bring your pelvis into a more neutral position. This is 
challenging! While maintaining control, slowly begin to lengthen the 
abdominals to slightly roll the pelvis back to neutral. Maintain the 
contraction of the iliopsoas.
 2.  On reaching neutral and still feeling the contraction of the iliopsoas, 
relax and repeat the exercise another 4 times.
 
 
SafetY tip avoid overextending in the lower back as you 
move into neutral. Move with control.

 
28
Multifidi
Spinal Brace
Execution
1.  Lie on your front with a small pillow placed under your waist for sup-
port and your elbows bent with your hands under your forehead.
 2.  Inhale to prepare. On exhalation, feel the abdominals tightening and 
lifting toward your spine; allow the pillow to give you added support. 
Isometrically contract the small, deep musculature along your spine. 
Visualize the deep multifidi intertwining along your spine like thick 
rubber cords. Gently contract along the spine, as if to hover over the 
pillow.
 3.  Hold that position as you inhale. With a strong exhalation, continue 
the deep spinal contraction and slowly move your spine into a slight 
extension by lifting the upper back. Allow your spine to move into 
a slight long arch position; emphasize localized, effective movement 
between each vertebra.
 4.  The deep spine multifidi muscles contract to support and initiate a 
small amount of extension along with a cocontraction of the abdomi-
nals. This provides significant support and security for your spine. 
Hold for 4 to 6 counts. On exhalation, slowly return with control. 
Repeat 10 to 12 times.
 
 
SafetY tip avoid extreme extension in your neck. Maintain 
abdominal support for stability in the lower back.

 
29
Muscles Involved
Multifidi
Dance Focus
Let this small, detailed exercise help you feel 
the power and strength of the spine to secure 
your placement. Visualize the small, deep 
multifidi gently compressing or hugging your 
spine as if to brace it. Although larger muscles 
create extension of your spine, use this exercise 
to emphasize a secure, braced spine. Without 
the power of the multifidi and coordinating 
efforts of the abdominals, your spine would 
collapse under the pressure that dance motions 
create. This is key to understanding placement 
and stabilization of the spine before any 
movements occur with the arms or legs. This 
will give you excellent placement skills and 
the needed length for axial elongation. It also 
distributes the forces evenly. All movement of 
the arms and legs should be initiated by the 
contraction of the deep transversus abdominis 
and the deep multifidi muscles.
V a r I at I o n
Side Hover
1.  Repeat the main exercise. Continue to engage the deep abdominals. 
Organize your spine to move into a slight lateral (side) bend with 
inhalation along a lengthening arc.
 2.  Hold this position for 4 counts. Visualize the deep stabilizing muscu-
lature along the spine and the added security of the deep quadra-
tus lumborum connection 
between the ribs and the 
pelvis. (You will learn more 
about the quadratus lum-
borum muscle in chapter 
4.) Return to your starting 
position; exhale and ease 
back down. Repeat to the 
other side and alternate 
for a total of 4 times on 
each side.

 
30
ischial Squeeze
Pelvic floor 
muscles
Pelvic floor 
muscles
Execution
1.  Seated on a stool or chair, with legs and hips slightly turned out, rock 
the pelvis side to side to locate the ischial tuberosities along the lower 
portion of your pelvis (the sit bones). Return and locate your neutral 
alignment while seated. Check to make sure you are not in a posterior 
pelvic tilt or overextending the lower back with an anterior tilt. Rest 
your crossed arms in front of your body and gently inhale.
 2.  As you exhale, engage the pelvic floor muscles and pull the sit bones 
together. Try to organize this muscle contraction with your exhala-
tion. Visualize the muscles of the pelvic floor shortening, allowing the 
sit bones to pull toward each other. Notice how your spine gently lifts 
with this supportive contraction.

 
31
3.  Relax and feel the muscles eccentrically lengthen. Repeat the exercise 
again; as you begin to experience this contraction, try to visualize the 
pubic and coccyx bones pulling together as well. Repeat 10 to 12 
times.
Muscles Involved
Pelvic floor muscles
Dance Focus
Within all of your creative dance motions, 
you probably never think about using 
the pelvic floor muscles. If you notice 
where the pelvic floor is located, you will 
understand the significance of its abil-
ity to form the basin of support for your 
pelvis. During technique classes, chore-
ography, and rehearsals, there is hardly 
ever a mention of these muscles, so take 
a moment to understand this exercise and 
its relationship to placement. This is an 
excellent exercise for emphasizing body 
awareness; if it doesn’t come right away, 
zero in on the sit bones and visualize the 
basin shrinking. The movement is very 
small and fine, but small shifts can lead 
to large supportive changes. We continue 
with pelvic floor musculature in chapter 
6, but use this exercise as the introduction 
and become familiar with the lift and sup-
port that it provides.

 

 
3
C
h
a
p
t
e
r
33
ribs and breath
E
ven though breathing is the natural process of bringing oxygen into the 
lungs, most dancers are unclear about exactly how to breathe! Okay, you 
know how to breathe, but can you use your breath efficiently to reduce tension 
and improve core strength? How many times do you receive cues to pull your 
tummy in and up? Typically, you will suck your belly inward, throw your ribs 
and chest upward, and elevate your shoulders. Now you have increased the 
tension in the upper body and have actually made it more difficult to breathe! 
How can you possibly move with ease and grace? Breathing is part of dance 
and movement. If you’re instructing a class, you might want to add breath-
ing exercises into the dance combinations. You could choreograph breathing 
into the exercises with the music so the dancers become more aware of their 
breathing patterns. This organized, rhythmic breathing can be a great tool for 
instilling better breathing habits.
Breath Anatomy
Breathing consists of two phases: inspiration, the period when oxygen flows 
into the lungs, and expiration, the period when carbon dioxide leaves the 
lungs. Every part of your body needs oxygen. Oxygen allows cells to release 
needed energy for the muscular work of dancing. Both phases can be either 
passive or forced. While reading this book, you are probably unaware of your 
breathing. At the beginning of your warm-up or technique class, you focus on 
organizing your body and are unaware of your breathing mechanism. These 
are examples of quiet, passive breathing. Holding a beautiful balance in relevé 
would require passive, quiet breathing as well.
The active process of inhalation and exhalation is a more forced act of 
breathing. This can be described as deeper breathing and uses more muscu-
lature for inspiration and expiration. You may find yourself breathing deeper 
while executing jumping combinations or when the choreography requires 
more challenging muscle work. Organizing the process of breathing will reduce 
tension in the upper body, improve oxygen flow to your muscles, and engage 
your core muscles. All of the exercises in this chapter will help you organize 
your breathing.
Your lungs are soft, spongy, elastic organs that provide the passageway for 
air. They are surrounded and structurally supported by your ribs. This chapter 
is not about overanalyzing every detail of the respiratory muscles, but an 
overview of this process can assist you in becoming a better dancer. Some of 
the muscles we focus on first are the diaphragm, the transversus abdominis, 
and the pelvic floor muscles.

 
34 
Dance anatomy
The diaphragm is the most important muscle of the respiratory system. As the 
primary mover, it is a large, dome-shaped muscle that lies within the rib cage 
(figure 3.1). It might help to visualize an open parachute inside your rib cage. 
All of its muscle fibers run up and down, which determine how it contracts. The 
diaphragm is attached to the lower end of the sternum (chest bone), the lowest 
six ribs, and the spine. This muscle is responsible for causing the three-dimensional 
shape changes in the thoracic and abdominal cavity. As you inhale, the diaphragm 
contracts, moves downward, and flattens out. This contraction allows the lungs 
and ribs to expand a small amount in all planes, which increases the volume of 
the thoracic cavity. This expansion moves your ribs in a three-dimensional pattern.
The abdominal wall is made up of four layers; the deepest of the layers is 
the transversus abdominis muscle, which supports your trunk like a corset. 
The transversus abdominis muscle fibers run horizontally—the diaphragm 
weaves into the fibers of the transversus abdominis. On forced exhalation, 
the transversus abdominis muscle begins to contract, increasing abdominal 
pressure. Typically, forced exhalation can help you on the downward phase of 
some movements by enhancing the control of the landing. Try a slow grande 
battement (high kick); inhale on the preparation and into the leg lift; then 
actively exhale on the way down. Notice how the exhalation supports the 
downward phase—you have more control over your leg. The importance of 
the abdominal wall in supporting the spine and core is discussed in detail in 
chapter 4. But remember that forced exhalation has a direct relationship with 
the deep transversus abdominis muscle contracting.
Several layers of muscles support the pelvis, which are also involved in forced 
exhalation; they connect between the ischium (sit bones), the pubic bone, 
Lung
Sternum
Diaphragm
Figure 3.1 
The diaphragm.

 
ribs anD breath 
35
and the coccyx (tailbone). These muscles are the pelvic floor muscles. Visual-
ize a diamond shape—the sit bones along the side points of the diamond and 
the pubic and coccyx bones along the front and back points. During forced 
exhalation, the muscles that align and attach along the points of the diamond 
engage, pull together, and provide support for the position of the pelvis. This 
muscular contraction becomes more apparent while practicing the breathing 
plié exercise (page 48). Now, when practicing efficient breathing with plié, 
the upward phase of the plié coordinates the exhalation with engagement of 
the deep core and the pelvic floor.
Diaphragm Movement
Do you wonder why you are so fatigued after performing certain types of 
choreography, and do you come to the conclusion that you must keep practic-
ing to build up stamina? How can you build up stamina if you are not getting 
adequate oxygen? Very simply, on inhalation, the lungs and ribs widen, the 
diaphragm moves downward, and the abdominal muscles lengthen (it’s okay 
to let your tummy relax a little). On exhalation, the diaphragm moves upward, 
the ribs return, and the abdominal muscles contract or shorten. There is more 
emphasis on a three-dimensional movement of the lungs and ribs to provide 
adequate space for oxygen to enter.
If your stamina is in question, you have probably been rehearsing with 
upper-chest breathing or shallow breathing while trying to hold your belly in. 
With upper-chest breathing, air enters only the top of the lungs, which raises 
your center of gravity. If your chest is too high, you will find it harder to bal-
ance and have difficulty with freedom in the shoulders. You have created a 
leaner look for the moment but have reduced the ability of your diaphragm 
and lungs to work properly—thus, limiting oxygen intake!
The diaphragm also has muscle attachments to the iliopsoas, which is the 
powerful hip flexor muscle. By aggressively sucking your tummy in, you also 
limit the efficient movement of the diaphragm and iliopsoas, which can create 
unwanted tension in the hip joint. The iliopsoas muscle is composed of two 
muscles: the iliacus and the psoas major.
• The iliacus originates along the iliac crest and inserts into the femur.
• The psoas major originates along the lumbar vertebrae and the 12th 
thoracic vertebra and inserts into the femur.
The balance of these two muscles is extremely important for dancers. The 
iliopsoas connects the spine and pelvis to your legs. A healthy balance between 
strength and flexibility will help you achieve leg height above 90 degrees and 
can decrease lower-back pain. When elevating your leg, allow the inhalation 
to create a lengthening feeling through the spine and the exhalation to create 
a deep contraction of the abdomen so the hip joint is free to move with ease.
With any forward cambré position, the flexion action deep in the front of 
the hips compresses the abdomen and brings the diaphragm toward your 
head, so efficient breathing must occur more in the back of the rib cage. Feel 

 
36 
Dance anatomy
as though you are breathing more into the back of the lower ribs to provide 
adequate space for taking in oxygen. Tension in the hip joint will cause labored 
breathing, which limits oxygen flow.
Muscle Action
Other muscles also work during respiration (figure 3.2). The external inter-
costals lie between the ribs. On inhalation, they contract to open the ribs and 
bring the sternum forward. Because of the shape of the ribs, they move in a 
lateral, anterior, and posterior direction to widen the chest. Visualize how a 
curved bucket handle is raised. The scalene and sternocleidomastoid muscles 
in the neck, along with the pectoralis major muscle of the chest, can raise the 
ribs even more. They do have other jobs, but these muscles activate, elevating 
the ribs during inspiration.
• The scalene muscles originate along the cervical vertebrae and insert 
into the first two ribs.
• The sternocleidomastoid muscle originates on the sternum and clavicle 
and inserts into the temporal bone (jaw).
• The pectoralis major originates at the clavicle, sternum, cartilage of ribs 
1 to 6, and external oblique and inserts into the humerus bone.
Because these muscles are so involved in inspiration, can you see how over-
activating these muscles can create tension in the upper body? When lifting 
your arms overhead in any dance position, think about elongating axially with 
the inhalation and widening with the rib cage, not elevating the rib cage. By 
emphasizing the lateral rib movement, you will create mobility throughout 
your thoracic spine and freedom in the shoulders.
You have learned that during the active process of forced expiration, the 
deep abdominal wall contracts along with the pelvic floor. But the intercostal 
muscles within the ribs, the latissimus dorsi in the back, and the quadratus 
lumborum also engage to depress the ribs. Get into the habit of using your 
exhalation to release superficial tension but increase deep abdominal tension. 
You certainly don’t want your audience to see you fighting with tension, 
panting heavily, and gasping for air. Your audience wants to see incredible skill 
without physical exhaustion. Think of your diaphragm floating up and down 
within the movement of the ribs, not creating tension in your jaw, neck, and 
shoulders. Visualize the lungs moving softly so the ribs can be flexible. When 
exhaling throughout all of the exercises in this chapter, focus on relaxing the 
neck and shoulders but increasing the abdominal pressure.
Two other layers of the abdominals are the internal and external oblique 
muscles. As you will learn in chapter 4, the oblique muscles play a significant 
role in supporting your trunk and improving basic body placement in dance. The 
internal oblique muscles have fibrous attachments to the internal intercostals, 
and the external oblique muscles have fibrous attachments within the external 
intercostals, again emphasizing the relationship between breathing and the 
core. Twisting dance movements involve the oblique muscles: The upper body 

 
37
Internal intercostals
Scalenes
Sternocleidomastoid
Rectus abdominis
External oblique
Internal oblique
Transversus abdominis
Pectoralis major
Serratus anterior
Diaphragm
Iliopsoas
External intercostals
Erector spinae
Quadratus lumborum
Trapezius
Latissimus dorsi
Figure 3.2 Muscles that work during respiration: (a) front; (b) back.
a
b

 
38 
Dance anatomy
is rotated in one direction against the resistance of the lower body holding in 
the opposing direction. To make this twisting of the torso more effective, you 
must maintain freedom in the shoulders and hips; otherwise it will be too dif-
ficult for the diaphragm, abdomen, and ribs to move for breathing. Although it 
is next to impossible to choreograph breathing into every dance step, practice 
using the active (forced) exhalation when you need control. Inhale on the 
preparation and exhale on the movement.
Remember the discussion about the gliding joints? They involve the ribs and 
their attachments to the spine. There is typically very little movement along the 
midspine; you want to improve the mobility at these joints to release tension. 
Use the inhalation to assist you in lengthening through your spine through all 
planes of movement. The lengthening effect gives you more space between 
vertebrae and incorporates a small amount of movement along the rib attach-
ments. Let the exhalation phase occur deep within the abdomen and pelvic 
floor to ground your pelvis and support your spine.
Nasal Breathing
Nasal breathing refers to inhalation and exhalation through the nose. Many 
yoga exercises emphasize breathing through the nose. Some Pilates exercises 
are based on inhaling through the nose and exhaling through the mouth. 
The Alexander technique uses a combination of nasal and mouth breathing, 
especially in training singers. Inhaling through the nose does help to filter 
the air, and exhaling through the nose helps to control the amount of carbon 
dioxide leaving your body. Exhaling through the mouth might help you focus 
more on deep abdominal contraction. Sometimes when you are short of 
breath, it might help to exhale through your mouth. It is important for both 
singers and swimmers to be able to maintain a healthy balance of nasal and 
mouth breathing. For the purpose of this text, some exercises use both pat-
terns. Excellent breathing techniques can aid in the execution of your dance 
movements and provide a pleasing quality to your upper body. You can train 
your lungs and ribs to move more efficiently and limit tension in various joints 
by practicing the following exercises. Use the exercises in this chapter as part 
of your daily warm-up as well as part of your cool-down.
Dance-Focused Exercise
Before proceeding to the exercises, take a moment to practice inhaling: 
Widen through the ribs laterally; on exhalation, feel the ribs returning along 
with a deep abdominal supportive contraction. Each time you inhale, expand 
through the ribs and lungs with minimal movement in the upper chest. When 
you exhale, feel tension leaving the neck and shoulders. Now, practice this 
breathing style while lying down, seated, and standing just to change your 
base of support. Try this in front of the mirror and focus on your neck and 
the top of your shoulders. Are they elevating (meaning you are adding more 
muscle tension)? You want minimal upper-chest movement and freedom in 
the neck and shoulders. Look in the mirror to see your ribs moving laterally. 

 
ribs anD breath 
39
Let your chest feel weightless and your neck be long and free. Try a few arm 
movements; inhale as the arms go up, and exhale as they return. Think of the 
smooth movement in the shoulders separate from the widening movement 
of the lungs and ribs.

 
40
Sternocleidomastoid
Diaphragm
Scalenes
External 
intercostals
Internal 
intercostals
External 
oblique
Internal 
oblique
Transversus 
abdominis
Execution
1.  Lie faceup with knees bent and feet on the floor and arms at your 
sides with palms up. Locate your neutral position. On inhalation 
through the nose, slightly relax the belly, feel the ribs opening and 
widening, and visualize the diaphragm moving downward. Continue 
to expand through the middle of the chest and the back of your ribs. 
Inhale for a slow count of 3; hold on the count of 4. Do not allow 
your upper chest to lift or your spine to extend.
 2.  With forced exhalation through the mouth, feel the ribs returning, 
the midchest relaxing, and the diaphragm elevating. Feel your deep 
abdominal muscles contracting and remember to release tension in 
the back of your neck. Feel as though you are gliding your shoulders 
down toward your hips. Exhale for a count of 4. Repeat the exercise 6 
times.
 3.  You can also try this with one hand on your ribs and one hand on 
your chest. Focus on lateral rib movement without upper-chest move-
ment; continue to relax the neck, jaw, and throat.
inhale.
exhale.
Lateral Breathing

 
41
Muscles Involved
Inhalation: Diaphragm, external intercostals, 
scalenes, sternocleidomastoid
Exhalation: External oblique, internal 
oblique, transversus abdominis, 
internal intercostals, latissimus dorsi, 
quadratus lumborum
Dance Focus
For visual help with moving the ribs in a more 
lateral direction, you can try this exercise while 
sitting or standing in front of a mirror. You can 
also try this with a partner: Place your hands 
on the back of your partner’s ribs. When your 
partner inhales, feel the ribs moving into your 
hands; on your partner’s exhalation, gently press 
into the ribs to assist with the returning of the ribs.
Feel less restriction in your neck and chest; let 
your spine move because of the antagonistic efforts of the diaphragm and the 
abdominals. Use your breathing with jumping combinations. Practice small 
jumps with rhythmic breathing: two small jumps with inhalation and two small 
jumps with exhalation. You might want to inhale at the top of a larger jump 
for an added lift and finish with the exhalation for support and control of the 
landing. Notice how the breathing makes you feel lighter. Remembering your 
breath and using it effectively will help you move with fluidity and depth.
inhale.
exhale.
V a r i at i o n
Lateral Breathing With Resistance
1.  Take a resistance band and 
wrap it around your ribs from 
the back; cross it in the front 
and hold the ends with your 
hands. You may try this while 
seated or standing. Repeat the 
same breathing cycle, but on 
inhalation, widen the rib cage 
into the resistance of the band.
 2.  With forced exhalation, actively 
pull the band to assist the rib 
cage in retracting. Working with 
the band allows you to advance the inhalation technique to improve 
lung capacity. Focus on deep breaths, movement of the diaphragm, 
and activation of your deep abdominals. Repeat 6 times.

 
42
Breathing With Side Bend
Internal 
intercostals
Internal 
oblique
Transversus 
abdominis
External 
oblique
Diaphragm
Execution
1.  Begin while seated with legs comfortably crossed in front and hands 
placed by your sides. Locate your neutral position. Inhale through the 
nose; lengthen through your spine on exhalation through the nose. 
Engage the core musculature; gently slide the right hand along the 
floor and bend laterally directly along your frontal plane. Keep both 
ischium firmly on the floor. Allow your left arm to lift overhead, main-
taining width through the chest. Your head may remain facing the 
front or may be gently turned toward the direction of the bend.
 2.  Gently rest the right elbow on the floor, continuing to lift through 
your center. Do not collapse into the elbow. Hold for a breath cycle. 
Feel the lower ribs of the left rib cage opening wide as you inhale. Be 
aware of the difference between the left rib cage’s expansion and the 
right’s compression.
 3.  With forced exhalation, feel the left rib cage pulling together and the 
diaphragm lifting. Engage the deep transversus abdominis and oblique 
muscles while moving in the longest possible arc. Return back to your 
seated starting position. Repeat 2 to 4 times each side.
 
 
 
SafEty tip try to avoid letting the neck collapse. Maintain 
axial length and support.

 
43
Muscles Involved
Exhalation: Diaphragm, internal intercostals, transversus abdominis, 
external oblique, internal oblique
Dance Focus
Allow yourself the privilege of moving 
smoothly through various planes, trust-
ing the flexibility and stability that your 
respiratory system provides for you. As 
you bend your trunk to the side, notice 
how the top of the lung lifts and the 
bottom slides downward. Let this prin-
ciple of internal elasticity give you more 
fluidity throughout your upper body 
and more mobility through your tho-
racic spine. Moving from your center 
will have more meaning for you when 
you can feel freedom in your move-
ments. Each time you inhale, allow the 
air to fill the entire portion of the lungs. 
As you continue to increase your lung 
capacity and breathe more comfortably, 
you will find that you actually have 
more mobility in your lateral bends. 
With each exhalation, notice how the 
abdominals can anchor your pelvis and support your spine. Remember to 
emphasize moving along the longest arc through the entire range of the 
side bend.

 
44
Breathing With port de Bras
External 
intercostals
Diaphragm
start position.
arms in  
second position.
Execution
1.  Stand comfortably in a wide second position. Focus on neutral align-
ment and provide a firm base for your balance. Before beginning, feel 
the arms lengthening by your sides and a sense of relaxation around 
your neck and shoulders. Neatly stack your spinal curves on top of 
each other and feel a gentle lift through your waist.
 2.  As you begin to inhale through your nose, open your arms to second 
and continue to lift them to high fifth. Feel the rib cage expanding 
with air. When the arms are overhead, focus on the weight of the 
arms moving down the spine to release tension in the neck and shoul-
ders.

 
45
3.  Hold that position briefly and notice how relaxed the back of your 
neck is. Exhale through your nose as you bring the arms down by 
your sides, allowing the lungs and ribs to return. Repeat this 4 to 6 
times; inhale 4 counts and exhale 8 counts.
 
 
 
SafEty tip avoid overextension in the neck, which com-
presses the cervical discs; just let your neck be an extension of 
your spine.
Muscles Involved
Inhalation: Diaphragm, external intercostals
Dance Focus
While this is a very basic breathing 
exercise, the key is to coordinate the 
lifting of your arms with effective 
inspiration. This is what will give your 
upper body a light, lifted feel with-
out tension surrounding your neck 
and shoulders. When you breathe in, 
fill the lungs with oxygen and feel 
the rib cage expanding and the dia-
phragm gliding downward—this will 
allow the lungs to move with ease 
and flexibility. Visualize the external 
intercostals contracting to expand 
your ribs so your upper chest will not 
elevate. Notice a gentle mobilization 
where your ribs meet your spine; this 
will improve your thoracic mobility 
and spinal alignment. Inhale through 
your nose and imagine your arms 
floating up as your ribs swell. Exhale 
through your mouth when the arms 
float back down. Repeat this 4 to 
6 times. Do not allow your spine to 
move into extension; this will cause 
your chest to elevate, your tension to increase, and your alignment to suffer. 
As breathing and lifting the arms without tension become easier, add relevé 
and then repeat with jumps and leaps.

 
46
thoracic Extension
 
External 
intercostals
Execution
1.  Center yourself comfortably on your hands and knees. Align your 
shoulders over your wrists and your hips over your knees. Practice 
several lateral breathing patterns. Remember to release tension in the 
neck.
 2.  As you begin to inhale, create an arch through your entire spine. 
Think about lengthening and moving in a long arc; just allow your 
head to follow. Don’t overextend in the neck. Feel the abdominals 
being stretched as you expand through the lower ribs. Inhale through 
the nose for 4 counts.
 3.  On exhalation through the nose, reverse the arch and move into 
your starting position. Repeat this 6 times and focus on lengthening 
through the spine and widening through the ribs. Let all the segments 
of your spine move equally.
 
 
 
SafEty tip avoid overextension in the lower segments of the 
spine.
Muscles Involved
Inhalation: External intercostals (stretching of abdominal wall)

 
47
Dance Focus
Most of the time, inhalation should 
occur with back-bend positions. But, as 
you might have noticed, it is difficult to 
breathe if you are trying to hold your 
abdominals tight. So, to keep your lower 
back safe, you must use the entire spine; 
allow the abdominals to stretch and the 
chest to expand laterally. Let your inhala-
tion help you extend your spine in that 
long arch position. Allow the tightness of 
the abdominals to create pressure against 
the abdominal cavity; this will give your 
spine the needed support. Remember to 
feel your weight into your legs; secure 
yourself by feeling stable in the lower 
spine and pelvis. Feel as though you are 
breathing into the spaces between your 
ribs, allowing them to expand. You will 
begin to notice you actually do have 
more three-dimensional range of motion 
in your chest.
V a r i at i o n
trunk Extension
 1.  Repeat this exercise of your upper-
back extension in a standing posi-
tion with one hand on the barre for 
balance and the other in a high fifth 
position.
 2.  As you inhale, widen through your 
chest. Lengthen and extend the 
spine, creating a long arch and 
moving evenly. Do not raise your 
shoulders and create tension in your 
neck; continue to feel the abdomi-
nals stretching. Your pelvis remains 
directly over your legs and feet.
 3.  On exhalation, control the move-
ment on the return and again feel 
lengthening through the spine. 
Repeat 4 to 6 times.

 
48
Breathing plié
Transversus 
abdominis
Diaphragm
Pelvic floor 
muscles
Transversus 
abdominis
Diaphragm
Pelvic floor 
muscles
Execution
1.  Stand in a firm turned-out second position with arms by your sides. 
Locate your neutral position. On inhalation through the nose, move 
into demi-plié while still focusing on axial elongation. Balance your 
weight evenly throughout your feet. The pelvis remains in a neutral 
position, and there is an eccentric lengthening of the pelvic floor.
 2.  With forced exhalation through the mouth, begin the upward phase. 
As the lungs and ribs return, engage the deep abdominals and feel the 
pelvic floor contracting. Visualize the ischium pulling together as well 
as the coccyx and pubic bone pulling together.

 
49
3.  At the top (completion) of the plié, hold for 3 seconds and focus on 
neutral spine placement and an isometric contraction of the pelvic 
floor. Repeat 4 to 6 times. Allow the rhythm of the breathing with the 
plié to energize your body.
Muscles Involved
Exhalation: Diaphragm, transversus abdominis, pelvic floor muscles
Dance Focus
Plié is so commonly used in all dance 
styles but may be the most overlooked 
motion you perform on a daily basis. 
It prepares you for relevé and for 
jumps, and it is the transition move-
ment between steps. Without a pliable 
plié, you are left with choppy, rigid 
traveling steps. Visualize your three-
dimensional movement of the thoracic 
spine with inhalation as you begin 
your plié. Maintain axial length along 
your spine and organize your breath. 
Allow the inhalation to prepare your 
body and the exhalation to anchor 
your lungs, abdominals, and pelvic 
floor. The upward phase engages the 
pelvic floor and deep abdomen to give 
you the firm base to take off for pirou-
ettes, jumping combinations, or relevé 
en pointe. Try to coordinate the inner 
thigh muscles’ contracting as the legs 
begin moving together; this contrac-
tion will add more support for your 
pelvis. A firm yet smooth plié with 
smart breathing will secure your pelvis and lower spine. Your hips will be 
free to turn in or out without constriction. The quality of all of your move-
ment will improve.

 

 
4
C
h
a
p
t
e
r
51
core
A
ll movements in dance are generated from your torso, which is your 
foundation. A firm foundation promotes postural awareness and spinal 
stability. Your goals are to move through space creating the most challenging 
and interesting dance steps with ease, right? Achieving these goals requires 
strong trunk muscles. One of the most basic movements in dance is the 
plié—whether it is performed parallel, turned in, or turned out, it requires 
coordination of breath and core strength. When choreography requires your 
torso to move off balance, the strength of your center keeps your spine from 
collapsing. Anytime you need to extend your spine while jumping, your core 
musculature must brace your spine for protection. All aspects of dance can 
challenge the spine. When you prepare for movement, core activation allows 
for more control of your movements.
Abdominal training is so popular now, but as a dancer, do you really know 
how to use the abdominal muscles to help your technique improve? It’s not 
just about performing daily crunches; it’s about understanding the anatomy 
of your center and coordinating the action of the muscles that make up your 
core. The muscles of the core that contract to stabilize your spine continue to 
receive a lot of attention with regard to injury prevention and care of the spine. 
Numerous medical studies prove the connection between the cocontraction 
of the trunk muscles and a reduction in back injuries. All of these muscles are 
responsible for excellent posture and a toned waist. It is important for you to 
strengthen these muscles and apply that strength to your movement, meaning 
learn how to dance from your center!
For spinal support, you need to create this cocontraction of the trunk muscles, 
which means engaging the transversus abdominis, obliques, pelvic floor, and 
multifidi. Your core musculature has been described in various ways and has 
multiple titles: center, trunk, abdomen, midline, powerhouse, spine stabilizers, 
torso, and abdominal wall. But each title has no significance if you are unable 
to apply core strength to your dancing.
Core Anatomy
Basic anatomy tells us that the muscles that make up the abdominal wall, 
beginning with the deepest, are the transversus abdominis, internal and exter-
nal obliques, and rectus abdominis (figure 4.1). When these muscles contract, 
they provide security for your spine and spinal curves.
The deep transversus abdominis contains fibers that run horizontally. This 
layer can be difficult to feel and contract, but it can give you that flat-belly look.  

 
52 
Dance anatomy
Figure 4.1 The four 
layers of abdominal muscles.
Try to visualize the transversus abdominis muscle as a corset providing a brace 
effect while you dance.
The internal oblique is a thin layer of muscle located along the side of the 
trunk. When this muscle contracts, it pulls you into a side bend or rotation 
on that same side. This action accentuates side cambré movements, twisting 
motions, and jazzy pelvic isolations. The external oblique muscle is the most 
superficial and the larger of the two obliques; the fibers run in the opposite 
direction. When the external oblique muscle is contracted, its primary action 
is flexing the spine and bending to the side, but it also contracts in spinal rota-
tion from the opposite side. Your oblique muscles help your ribs feel connected 
to your pelvis. If you feel like you are dancing with your ribs up, think more 
about the diagonal fibers of the oblique muscles shortening to funnel the ribs 
in and downward.
The linea alba is a fibrous structure that runs down the center of your abdo-
men; it separates the right and left rectus abdominis. The superficial rectus 
abdominis is the long, flat muscle that is actually divided into four sections, 
giving it that washboard effect. This is an important trunk flexor—again, it is 
significant in a modern contraction or when rolling up from cambré forward. 
Remember that the walls of the abdomen have no bony reinforcements, but the 
layering and directional changes of the fibers combined create great strength.
Basic anatomy also tells us that the deep multifidi muscles run along the 
posterior aspect of the spine providing spinal support for each vertebra, while 
the more superficial erector spinae muscles provide support when the spine 
extends (figure 4.2). The multifidi and the deep transversus abdominis have a 
higher percentage of type I (slow-twitch) muscle fibers, which makes them so 
effective for stabilization and posture control. The erector spinae muscles, when 
tight, contribute to the anterior (forward) tilt of your pelvis. Both multifidi and 
erector spinae have numerous attachments along the entire spine, some of the 
ribs, and the sacrum, creating a detailed arrangement of intertwining soft tissue 
External 
oblique
Internal 
oblique
Rectus
abdominis
Transversus
abdominis

 
core 
53
structures that provide spinal security. These deep posterior core muscles can 
provide stability with fine coordination movements as well as larger forceful 
movements. So, anytime you perform small, fast (petit allegro) footwork or 
large, sweeping (grande allegro) combinations, there should be an organized 
contraction of the deep spinal musculature that allows for spinal support. When 
combined, these muscles primarily make up the core. In figure 4.2, the gluteus 
medius and minimus have also been included due to their importance in help-
ing to maintain a stable pelvis, which is also important for your placement and 
dance skills. There is more discussion on this topic in chapter 6.
The muscles lining the deep pelvic region have a significant role in centering, 
pelvic stability, and postural awareness. Several muscles make up this area, 
but for this text they are combined and described as the pelvic floor (figure 
4.3). The pelvic floor consists of several strong muscles within the bones of 
the pelvis; visualize a basin as we continue exploring the anatomy of this area. 
The pelvic bones are made up of two strong hip bones, each consisting of an 
ilium, ischium, and pubic bone. This basin of bones is enclosed at the front 
by the pubic symphysis, or joint, and in the back by the sacrum, down to the 
tailbone (coccyx). While performing various seated floor exercises, notice the 
two bones that you are sitting on; some jazz dancers call them the booty bones. 
These two sit bones are at the base of the ischium. Now, you have formed a 
diamond shape with the bones of the basin—the pubic bone in the front, the 
sit bones along the sides, and the tailbone in the back. The muscles that line 
this basin are layered for added strength and can tighten or stretch. Return 
for a moment to the very first exercise (locating neutral) in chapter 2 (page 
20). Extend your lower back and move your pelvis into that forward (anterior) 
tilted position. Then begin to move your pelvis into your neutral position and 
visualize the diamond shape shrinking. Continue to practice this, engaging the 
pelvic floor. Feel the deep security of the lower portion of your trunk.
Gluteus
minimus
Multifidi
Erector
spinae
Quadratus
lumborum
Gluteus
medius
Figure 4.2 Core muscles 
on the back of the body.

 
54 
Dance anatomy
Fascia can also play a part in awareness of the trunk. Fascia is the superficial 
tissue lying just under the skin, which anchors the skin to the underlying organs 
and allows the skin to move freely. Fascia can help protect the deeper body 
tissues from heat loss and functions as a shock absorber. The thoracolumbar 
fascia is the membrane of fibers that covers the muscles of the back. It has 
connections to the core muscles, ribs, vertebrae, and sacrum. Some studies 
report that the fascia can create tension in coordination with abdominal contrac-
tion, which would help to create control for your spine. But if the abdominal 
muscles are weak and inactive, this tension of the fascia will pull your lower 
spine into extension, leaving your spine vulnerable to injury. The unsupported 
extension of the spine along with the tension of the thoracolumbar fascia can 
create tightness in the lower back.
The iliacus and psoas combine to form the iliopsoas, which connects your 
spine to your pelvis and femur, also significant in maintaining balance, strength, 
and flexibility for your center. The iliopsoas originates in the lumbar spine and 
ilium before inserting into the lesser trochanter of the femur. It works together 
with the core musculature and the pelvic floor to provide postural control.
Role of the Core in Dance Techniques
Every dance technique requires intense control, which is provided by core 
strength. Consider the incredible technique of Irish dance. These dancers must 
hold the spine firm throughout all of their combinations. Their trunk placement 
must be intensely secure so they can move their legs and feet with incredible 
speed. In Irish or any other form of dance, the technique is demanding and 
injury can keep you from training and competing. Include core conditioning 
into your dance training to improve body placement and reduce risk of injury.
We know that ballroom, social, or partner dance is fluid and beautiful to 
watch, but it is also quick and powerful. The male partner needs to know 
where the female dancer’s center is at all times. The swing, waltz, and salsa, 
to name a few, require extreme coordination. Both dancers need to hold their 
waists firm to provide stability for the pelvis for the quick footwork and chal-
Figure 4.3 
Muscles of the pelvic floor.
Coccygeus
Iliococcygeus
Levator ani muscles:
Pubococcygeus
Puborectalis
Piriformis

 
core 
55
lenging partnering movement. Strong core musculature provides for a safe and 
efficient lift in the upper spine. Once the upper back begins to move safely 
into extension, a more effective spiral in the spine can be executed. Ballroom 
encompasses all forms of social dancing: folk, Latin, and vintage dancing. This 
field is also highly competitive. The contestants are judged not only on footwork 
and style but on posture, body alignment, and speed. Knowing what we know 
about deep core strength, wouldn’t a series of exercises designed to improve 
posture and body alignment help to improve the efficiency of the rehears-
als? Even the noncompetitive social dancers will benefit from core training to 
improve their skills. Being centered and maintaining postural control will have 
long-term positive effects for anyone who enjoys social dancing.
Take a moment to look at the modified swan exercise on page 68. This 
exercise gives the female partner that beautiful placement of the spine and 
focuses on gentle thoracic extension. There is an elegant lift in the chest with 
a long arch through the midback.
Modern choreography requires more tricky and creative jump combinations 
as well as challenging movement patterns for the spine. Without the ability to 
compact the core against the spine, the movement will be sloppy and weak. 
Landing from these nontraditional jumping steps will create injury risks if the 
spine and pelvis are unprepared. With extreme choreography, dancers must 
now take their bodies to the extreme and their conditioning to the next level. 
While some dancers can execute modern contract-and-release styles with ease, 
other dancers need to practice more with spinal and pelvic stability in mind. 
Specific exercises in this chapter can help you engage core musculature while 
putting the spine in more nontraditional lines. Look at the variation to the 
oblique lift exercise (page 63) as well as the trunk twist (pag 70); both exercises 
focus on nontraditional movement with muscular support for the spine. The 
focus is on abdominal bracing while working in various planes and patterns.
Even if you are not interested in a career in professional ballet, you are 
probably required to take ballet technique classes as part of your training. If 
you enjoy watching ballet and take a couple of beginner ballet classes each 
week, you still need control for your spine. While other styles of dance are 
more grounded, classical ballet gives the illusion of a lifted, light, and airy 
quality. Ballet is based on various styles—Vaganova, Cechetti, Balanchine, and 
Bournonville—but the foundation stems from five basic positions with the legs 
turned out. This alone requires centering and abdominal control. For danc-
ers of all ages who perform ballet, a strong center is extremely important for 
placement, turns, jumps, landing from jumps, and, of course, pointe work. We 
have Marie Taglioni to thank for being one of the pioneers in creating ballet 
movement en pointe! Ballet calls for extreme joint motion and torso control. Go 
back to our plumb line from chapter 2—alignment is crucial for spinal control 
and injury prevention. Once the alignment is learned, then strengthening can 
be emphasized.
As with all dance styles, the movement can be divided into phases: prepara-
tory, ascending, flight, descending, and landing. The ascending phase usually 
engages muscles in a concentric-type contraction; the flight phase should have 

 
56 
Dance anatomy
a “lift, hold, and hover” look, requiring extreme core strength and isometric 
contraction. The descending phase requires an eccentric contraction; some 
of the muscles lengthen but still support the movement while landing. This 
eccentric contraction and control on the descending phase are important for 
reducing injuries. Some studies show that landing from a grande jeté can create 
a force up to 12 times your body weight. This is why control is the key, and 
control comes from the core.
Breathing With the Core
Remember that breathing plays a significant role in strengthening the torso. 
On forcing air out of the lungs, you begin applying intra-abdominal pressure. 
You need the forced exhalation when you execute a difficult task. Each time 
you perform some type of a high kick (grande battement), exhale and engage 
the core. While practicing a turning combination, inhale on the preparation 
and exhale on the turn; you will feel more security along your spine. While 
executing a series of small jumping exercises, breathe comfortably but use the 
rhythm of the combination to keep the balance between the inhalation and 
the exhalation. The better you get at holding your torso firm, the easier the 
breathing will be.
While executing the various exercises in this chapter, notice the breathing 
cues. With each exercise, the deeper you breathe, the more the abdominal 
muscles work. Remember to inhale through the nose and use the forced exha-
lation principle to engage the deep stabilizers; this will promote security for 
your spine. Try exhaling through your nose for most of the exercises, but if you 
seem to be fatiguing and need to exhale through your mouth, that’s fine too.
Dance-Focused Exercise
You can certainly perform the following exercises in the progression given. Be 
sure to notice the detail of the anatomical drawings and visualize the muscle 
fiber arrangements; these will help you understand the bracing effect the core 
has on your spine. Think about where the muscles attach and how that area 
provides steady support for your placement. You want to build up strength to 
withstand any force that dance might put on your spine. Contract your core 
muscles with deep intensity.
This first exercise, described in the sidebar on the following page, is meant to 
be used as a deep abdominal warm-up while you visualize the bracing effects 
of your core. The core strengthening exercises continue on the following pages; 
use this abdominal bracing exercise to prepare for the rest of the series.

 
core 
57
Abdominal Bracing
1.  Lie on the floor faceup with knees bent and feet comfortably placed on 
the floor in parallel. Arms can be by your sides.
2.  Feel lengthening through your spine, but relax through the base of your 
neck. Locate your neutral position. Inhale through the nose to prepare 
while widening through the ribs and lungs.
3.  On forced exhalation, begin to contract the deep abdominals as if you 
were tightening a corset, but maintain neutral position.
Practice this several times and then repeat it while seated and while stand-
ing as well. Remember that the spine and pelvis do not move while you learn 
to isolate your abdominal muscles. This is a basic isometric contraction of the 
abdominals; the muscles tighten but do not necessarily change shape. Visualize 
the horizontal fibers tightening as you engage your abdomen (see the illustra-
tion on page 52). Remember to tighten the corset without throwing your ribs 
and chest up. Various terms like stability, cocontraction, and bracing can be 
misleading because you might associate those terms with a stiffening feeling 
along your spine. The word stiff is not a word that most of you want to be asso-
ciated with! But this exercise is quite the opposite. Remember that improving 
deep core strength will actually enhance controlled movement of your spine. 
Your jumps will dramatically improve because you have more security along 
your spine. You will then be able to use the power in your hips and legs to fly.

 
58
Side Bend
 
External 
oblique
Quadratus 
lumborum
Internal 
oblique
Rectus 
abdominis
Execution
1.  Lie on the floor with knees bent and feet placed hip-width apart on 
the floor. Gently rest your arms by your sides. Inhale slowly to pre-
pare.
 2.  On exhalation, feel axial elongation. Engage your abdominals to raise 
your trunk slightly. Begin to move into a left side bend, staying along 
your frontal plane. Your trunk should slightly hover over the floor. 
Move as far as you can without hiking the right hip; really feel the last 
rib pulling toward your left hip.
 3.  Inhale and return to the center with control. Put the same amount of 
effort into the side bend as you do on the return. Exhale to continue 
to the other side. Repeat 8 to 10 times each side, working up to 3 sets 
of 10 repetitions.
 

 
59
 
 
SAfety tip Move in a long arc to provide more space for the 
discs. This will avoid compression along your spine and reduce 
the risk of overuse in any one segment.
Muscles Involved
Rectus abdominis, external oblique, internal oblique, quadratus lumborum
Dance Focus
It’s very easy to perform a side bend without effort because gravity will 
help you to lean over, especially if you are flexible. To perform a secure 
and aesthetically pleasing cambré 
side, let the oblique muscles and 
the quadratus lumborum initiate 
the movement; actually feel the 
muscles contracting to pull you 
into a side bend. This provides the 
support you need but also pre-
pares you for the next movement, 
depending on the choreography. 
Think about lengthening through 
your spine before you cambré. If 
you allow gravity to drop you into 
the side bend, your muscles are 
not toned; your spinal joints take 
the stress. It will take more effort 
to activate your muscles for con-
tinuation of the movement, but by 
then you’ll be behind the music! 
After practicing this exercise, stand 
and perform a series of side bends 
first slowly and then quickly. 
Notice how ready your muscles 
are. Notice the lift in your trunk, 
and notice the tone in your waist.

 
60
trunk Curl
Rectus 
abdominis
External 
oblique
Execution
1.  Lie on the floor with knees bent and feet placed hip-width apart on 
the floor. Position your arms in ballet first position. (This can also be 
done with your arms across your chest, by your sides, or on your 
shoulders.)
 2.  On exhalation, contract your rectus abdominis muscle to curl your 
trunk 45 degrees off the floor. Stabilize your pelvis; your sacrum must 
stay on the floor. Focus on the upper body moving into flexion; your 
chin gently comes toward your Adam’s apple.
 3.  Hold this position for 2 or 3 counts and visualize your rectus abdomi-
nis muscle fibers shortening. Elevate yourself enough so that your 
shoulder blades are off the floor. Think about curling throughout your 
upper spine.
 4.  Inhale on the controlled return; do not allow gravity to drop you to 
the floor. Reorganize and repeat 8 to 10 times. Remember to feel the 
trunk moving toward a stable pelvis. As you get stronger, repeat 6 full 
sets of 10.

 
61
 
 
SAfety tip Avoid pulling with the neck and overusing the hip 
flexors. Trying to lift your trunk higher than 45 degrees will acti-
vate the deep hip flexors, decreasing the abdominal contraction. 
Overuse of the hip flexors can cause overextension of the lower 
spine and is associated with increased risk of lower-back injury. 
Do not increase your repetitions unless you are able to maintain 
control and alignment.
Muscles Involved
Rectus abdominis, anterior fibers of the external oblique
Dance Focus
The firm center emphasized in this chapter is 
not only important for injury prevention, but 
it is also quite appealing. But remember that 
you are doing this work to improve your dance 
technique. Strength in the rectus abdominis can 
also provide you with more thoracic mobility. 
The stronger this portion of your trunk is, the 
more range of motion you will have in your 
upper body. If you perform choreography that 
requires you to flex your trunk but maintain a 
neutral position of the pelvis, you will need to 
visualize the attachments along the fifth, sixth, 
and seventh ribs as well as the sternum pulling 
and shortening vertically to round your spine. 
If you are required to hold that position and 
possibly lift a prop or a partner, you will need 
even more strength and muscle tone. Allow 
this muscle to provide power for trunk flexion 
as well as eccentric length for the back of your 
spine. Don’t allow the movement to compress 
your spine; think more about your spinal mus-
cles lengthening and pushing you along.

 
62
Oblique Lift
 
Rectus 
abdominis
External 
oblique
Internal 
oblique
Execution
1.  Lie on the floor with your feet raised off the floor so that the knees 
and hips form a 90-degree angle. Place your arms in a basic ballet first 
position. Establish your neutral position and relax the back of your 
neck. Check that your ribs have not opened, causing your upper back 
to extend.
 2.  As you exhale, curl your trunk as you did in the previous exercise. Add 
rotation to the left, moving your waist along your transverse plane. 
Continue lengthening through the spine, opening through the shoul-
ders and chest. Allow your left arm to move along the outside of your 
left thigh and your right arm to move in between both legs. Focus on 
the oblique muscles elevating and rotating your trunk.
 3.  Hold that rotation. Reemphasize the pelvis anchoring to the floor. As 
you inhale, slowly return to starting position with control. Repeat on 
the other side. Perform the movement 8 to 10 times on each side; 
work up to 3 sets of 8 to 10 on each side.
 
 
 
SAfety tip Avoid twisting the pelvis, which can cause you to 
lose stability in the lower segments of the spine. Twisting of the 
pelvis lessens the oblique contraction and increases the possibil-
ity of arching or extending the lower spine.

 
63
Muscles Involved
Rectus abdominis, external oblique, internal oblique
Dance Focus
All of your turning movements require 
power through your torso; strength 
throughout the obliques assists you 
in accomplishing more refined turns. 
Modern choreography involves a lot 
of floor work with lateral and rota-
tional motions; fall-and-rise techniques 
also need support from the oblique 
muscles. Jazz warm-ups that focus on 
isolations will be more effective if the 
obliques are strong. Each time you per-
form this exercise, focus on that navel-
to-spine principle; this will give you the added support for the lower seg-
ments of your spine as well as a toned waist. Think back to your plumb line 
posture; the oblique muscle fibers are in an excellent position to assist with 
proper alignment between the thoracic region and the pelvis. They tend to 
be overlooked because you give the rectus abdominis so much attention. 
Balance your exercise program to challenge all of the core muscles.
V A r i AT i O n
Advanced Oblique Lift
1.  Lie on your left side. Slightly bend the knees and hips. Extend the 
left arm along the floor overhead. Rest your head on that arm; the 
right arm lies along your side. Locate your neutral position; do not 
tuck the pelvis.
 2.  As you exhale, begin to lift and rotate your trunk. Allow your left 
arm to sweep along the floor so both arms can reach over the top 
leg. Your trunk will rotate to the right and flex. Do not let your 
top hip hike. Maintain that anchored 
pelvis with knees on the floor.
 3.  Hold that position for 2 to 4 
counts. Focus on the oblique 
fibers shortening to pull you 
up. Inhale and slowly return 
to starting position with 
control. Repeat 10 to 12 
times on each side.

 
64
Side Lift
Transversus 
abdominis
External
oblique
Internal
oblique
Multifidi
Erector spinae
Quadratus lumborum
Execution
1.  Lie on your right side with your legs extended and stacked on top 
of each other. Your upper body is raised but supported by your right 
elbow. Allow the right forearm to be placed forward and your left arm 
rest on your side. Focus on your core; feel your center and your bal-
ance. Keep the shoulders down.
 2.  Inhale to prepare. As you exhale, pull the right shoulder blade down; 
activate your trunk muscles and elevate your hips. Focus on your 
center; work within your frontal plane to locate your balance. Main-
tain this position for 2 to 4 counts.
 3. As you inhale, return to the starting position with control. Do not 
allow gravity to drop you to the floor. Feel your navel pulling in 
toward your spine for security.
 
 
 
SAfety tip Avoid sinking into the shoulder joint of the sup-
porting arm. Maintain a lifted feeling in your trunk as you press 
the supporting shoulder blade down.

 
65
Muscles Involved
Transversus abdominis, external oblique, internal oblique, quadratus 
lumborum, erector spinae, multifidi
Dance Focus
This is an excellent exercise for your 
entire core and really focuses on a firm 
foundation. You have changed your 
base of support and need more bal-
ance skills to maintain control. Any 
contemporary style that requires floor 
work will have a steady and power-
ful look if you are able to maintain 
security in your center. As you execute 
this exercise, visualize the various fiber 
arrangements within the abdominals 
all around your spine, and feel them 
deeply contracting to sustain a secure 
spine. Visualize your deep multifidi 
firing to maintain stability along each 
vertebra. Remember the principle of 
axial elongation while maintaining an 
intense contraction of the abdominals. 
Imagine that you are being lifted by a 
partner in this pose. You would need 
to maintain an intense contraction to 
provide a solid structure for your part-
ner to lift. The timing, coordination, 
and strength between you and your 
partner would make it an amazing 
move.
When you execute this exercise, other muscles activate, especially the 
lower trapezius muscles. Those muscles help you maintain stability around 
your shoulder blades. This is discussed in chapter 5.

 
66
Coccyx Balance
 
Execution
1.  Lie on the floor with knees bent and feet placed hip-width apart on 
the floor. Place your arms in first position along your sides. Organize 
your trunk to find your neutral position; inhale to prepare.
 2.  As you exhale, feel the deep transversus abdominis muscle engage, 
then allow a small posterior pelvic tilt. Raise the trunk and the knees 
at the same time while you extend the arms forward.
 3.  Locate your center; balance the movement with the hip flexor action 
and the abdominal contraction; feel lower-back stabilization. Inhale as 
you hold for 4 counts.
 4.  On exhalation, slowly return to starting position with control. Reem-
phasize abdominal contraction to protect the lower back. Repeat 8 to 
10 times.
 
 
 
SAfety tip Perform this exercise only if you have very strong 
abdominals. if you have weak abdominal muscles, the hip flexors 
will overpower the movement and pull the lower back into exten-
sion.
Transversus 
abdominis
External 
oblique
Rectus 
abdominis
Iliopsoas
Internal 
oblique

 
67
Muscles Involved
Iliopsoas, transversus abdominis, rectus abdominis, external oblique, internal 
oblique
Dance Focus
A beautiful balance between 
abdominal control and hip 
flexor strength can help you 
defy gravity. The legs can feel 
so weighted in an exercise like 
this that you end up struggling 
to execute, maintain, and com-
plete the movement. The resis-
tance that the legs provide can 
pull on your lower spine, put-
ting you at risk for injury; plus, 
the movement loses aesthetic 
quality. You want to build a coordinated foundation in your trunk. Dance 
does not allow you to focus only on one muscle group at a time; it is a col-
laboration of all muscle groups. You provide the timing of the collaboration. 
As with all challenging dance patterns, don’t let your momentum control 
the movement. Organize your power because you must return or move into 
another position with control. Truly understanding the benefits of control 
will allow you to have the amazing quality of defying gravity.
V A r i AT i O n
Advanced Coccyx Balance
1.  Beginning in the same starting position, inhale to prepare.
 2.  On exhalation, engage the deep abdominals. Activate a small pos-
terior pelvic tilt and elevate the trunk and legs together.
 3.  Allow both knees to 
extend. Locate your bal-
ance and reemphasize the 
firm center and lower-
back control. Inhale for 4 
counts.
 4.  On exhalation, return to 
the starting position with 
control. Do not collapse 
and allow gravity to pull 
you to the floor.

 
68
Modified Swan
Multifidi
Pelvic floor
muscles
Erector
spinae
Quadratus
lumborum
External
oblique
Internal
oblique
Start position.
Execution
1.  Lie facedown on the floor. Arms rest on the floor with shoulders and 
elbows at 90 degrees. Legs are extended along the floor, slightly 
turned out, and just wider than your hips. Lengthen through your 
spine; gently squeeze the lower buttocks and sit bones.
 2.  As you inhale, begin to lift your upper body along your sagittal plane 
while keeping the arms along the frontal plane, maintaining the 
90/90 position. Feel extension equally throughout the entire spine. 
Try to lift the sternum off the floor. Hold for 4 counts.
 3.  On exhalation, continue the axial elongation and return to starting 
position with control. Reemphasize abdominal support and contrac-
tion of the pelvic floor. Repeat 8 times.
 
 
SAfety tip Lengthen through the back of the neck to avoid 
overextending the neck and possibly causing strain. remember to 
allow movement to occur along all spinal segments, not just the 
lower back and neck.

 
69
Muscles Involved
Erector spinae, multifidi, pelvic floor muscles, quadratus lumborum, external 
oblique, internal oblique
Dance Focus
Spinal extension is seen among 
all dance styles. The Swan Queen 
shows off her effortless spinal 
flexibility, as does the advanced 
jazz dancer with the signature 
layout. The key is timing and 
axial elongation. Before you 
move into any type of spinal 
extension, remember to elongate 
through your entire spine; feel as 
though you are growing taller. 
Visualize the long, deep multifidi 
firing for deep control and the 
erector spinae muscles firing to 
help you extend your spine. The 
strength in your abdominals will 
also brace and support your spine 
along the front of your body. 
This is a beautiful preparation for 
arabesque. Visualize the upper 
segments of your spine having 
individual movement in exten-
sion and a beautiful lift in your 
chest to create this long arch. Always keep in mind that the breathing will 
help you. Inhale as you extend, feeling the abdomen lengthening and the 
diaphragm moving down. You will be surprised at how much more range of 
motion you can attain. Let the exhalation help you on the return by reem-
phasizing abdominal anchoring and support from the pelvic floor. You are 
set; your foundation is secure and you are ready to show off your effortless 
spinal flexibility.

 
70
trunk twist
Quadratus 
lumborum
External 
oblique
Internal 
oblique
Gluteus
medius
Gluteus 
medius
Multifidi
External 
oblique
Erector 
spinae
Internal 
oblique
Side bend.
rotation.
Execution
1.  Stand with your legs slightly turned out. Arms and shoulders are in 
the 90/90 position. Locate your neutral position, creating axial elon-
gation.
 2.  With inhalation, lift through the center and move into a right side 
bend along your frontal plane. Visualize movement throughout the 
entire thoracic spine.
 3.  Continue into upper-body rotation with extension. Let your waist 
move along your transverse plane, opening the left shoulder. Allow 
your head and neck to follow. Maintain width through the chest and 
shoulders.
 4.  With control, exhale. Engage the abdominals to reverse the move-
ment and return to starting position. Repeat on the other side for a 
total of 4 to 6 repetitions on each side.

 
71
 
 
SAfety tip reemphasize lower-back support throughout the 
entire exercise to protect the lower segments of your spine.
Muscles Involved
Side bend: External oblique, internal oblique, quadratus lumborum
Rotation: Multifidi, erector spinae, external oblique, internal oblique
Stability: Gluteus medius
Dance Focus
Let this movement broaden your 
awareness. Don’t just focus on 
how far you can bend to the side; 
focus on the articulation through 
every vertebra in your spine. 
While moving your trunk side-
ways to the right, you also have 
to stabilize your pelvis so your hip 
doesn’t hike on the left side. In 
jazz warm-ups, you are required 
to create isolations, separating 
body sections from others. This 
exercise promotes that similar skill. 
In ballet, the grande cambré en 
rond requires effective movement 
through your upper back and 
stabilization through the pelvis. 
Remember your planes of motion; 
stay within your frontal plane as 
you move to the side. So many 
times you have a tendency to let 
your lower back arch, open your 
ribs, and move forward off the 
frontal plane. Visualize the four layers of your abdomen and the various 
directions of the muscle fibers creating your brace. The movement becomes 
more challenging when your add rotation with extension. Now you are 
moving along your transverse plane; notice how clean and organized the 
movement is when you visualize your planes and elongation through the 
spine and chest. Notice the beautiful curve your spine is creating.

 

 
5
C
h
a
p
t
e
r
73
shoulder girdle  
and arms
A
ll forms of dance require efficient arm work for power, aesthetics, balance, 
and momentum. Your arms are vital for turns and changes in direction. 
Teachers and choreographers may tell you, “Isolate your arms from your shoul-
ders” and “Keep your shoulders down,” but do you really understand those 
cues? The focus of this chapter is efficiency of movement within the shoulder 
complex through scapular stability. Once you understand the coordination of 
arm movement with the upper body, your shoulders will be more secure so 
your arms, elbows, and wrists can move freely with style and grace.
The shoulder joint is an intricate and very mobile joint, and the muscle 
control is just as intricate. The elbow and wrist allow for even more detailed 
movement to create fluidity when you move your arms from one position to 
the next. Strengthening the muscles that control the shoulder will help you 
move more from your center. Male dancers need this control for lifting, and 
female dancers need it for coordinated movements. Even though the majority 
of injuries that you sustain are lower-extremity injuries, the shoulder should 
not be forgotten and deserves its own share of the attention.
Bony Anatomy
The bones that make up the shoulder complex are the clavicle (collar bone), 
scapula (shoulder blade), and humerus (upper arm). The humerus continues 
down to the elbow joint where it meets the radius and ulna. The radius and 
ulna continue down to meet the carpal (wrist), metacarpal (hand), and pha-
langes (fingers). See figure 5.1.
The clavicle bone of the chest forms a joint at the medial portion where it 
meets the sternum. The outer end of the clavicle meets a small bony protrusion 
called the acromion process of the scapula. The clavicle bones together create 
a beautiful line across the front of the sternum and are clearly seen through 
the skin. This is typically where instructors will guide you to open the front of 
the chest, the remarkable sensation of presenting yourself to the audience.
The scapula is the triangular-shaped bone that glides along the back of your 
ribs. It has a shallow socket where the humerus bone inserts; this is called the 
glenoid cavity. The scapula has an anterior surface (which lies against the ribs) 
and a posterior surface (which has a slightly elevated portion called the spine). 
The end of the spine of the scapula becomes the acromion process. There is 
one other bony protrusion called the coracoid process, which is important for 
its numerous muscle attachments. The scapula itself is an amazing bone; it has 
numerous muscle attachments and functions as an anchor for your shoulder.

 
74 
Dance anatomy
Radius
Ulna
Humerus
Scapula
Clavicle
Sternum
Ribs
Scapula
Clavicle
Humerus
Radius
Ulna
Ribs
Figure 5.1 Bones of the shoulder complex: (a) front; (b) back.
Key Joint Motion
Although there are several joints related to the shoulder complex that can 
create movement, our focus is on two joints in particular: the scapulothoracic 
joint (where the scapula meets the thoracic spine) and the glenohumeral joint 
(where the humerus bone meets the glenoid cavity). In its position against 
the ribs, the scapula can elevate, depress (travel downward), abduct (move 
away from the center), and adduct (move toward the center). This bone can 
also curve upward or move in a downward rotational pattern. You have seen 
winging of the scapula—this is created by the inside corner of the scapula 
protruding outward, giving the upper back a look of having small wings. Some 
young, lean female dancers with minor muscular imbalances will display this 
winging of the scapula. This happens because of muscle weakness and the 
entire scapula not lying in contact with the rib cage.
The glenoid cavity is a ball-and-socket joint that is held together by strong 
muscles. This is a relatively strong joint, but it has a shallow cavity—only 
one-third to one-fourth of the humeral head fits snugly into the cavity. The 
glenohumeral joint is capable of flexion and extension in the sagittal plane, 
abduction and adduction in the frontal plane, and internal and external rotation 
in the transverse plane. This joint can also move in horizontal abduction and 
a
b

 
shoulDer girDle anD arms 
75
adduction. Since the glenohumeral joint is not very deep, stability is important 
for reducing your risk of injury.
Take a moment to lift your shoulders up and down. Visualize the move-
ment occurring at each scapula and the ribs. Move your arms to your sides 
and down again along the frontal plane. Visualize the scapular movement 
as it lies on the ribs. Rotate your humerus bone within the glenoid cavity; 
note the range of motion at this joint. The muscles that create movement 
at the glenohumeral joint connect between the humerus and the scapula. 
The muscles that allow movement to occur around the scapula connect 
between the scapula and the humerus, sternum, clavicle, spine, and ribs. 
Strengthening the muscles that attach around the scapula will improve 
upper-body placement and shoulder alignment and allow the forces of 
energy and extreme range of motion to be distributed more efficiently 
through the glenohumeral joint. This will give you better control and help 
you move more from your center. The basic warm-up that each dance tech-
nique requires is not enough for shoulder stability. This is why there are so 
many shoulder exercises included in this chapter; use them for warm-ups 
and for strengthening.
The joints between the humerus and the ulna and between the humerus 
and the radius work together as a hinge joint. A hinge-plus-rotary move-
ment occurs where the lower ends of the radius and ulna meet the carpal 
bones. This allows for pronation (moving the palm down) or supination 
(moving the palm up). For some dancers, hyperextension at the elbow 
(excessive movement past extension) occurs when the arm and forearm 
are in a straight line. Hyperextension can create stress on the ligaments, 
especially when falling on an extended elbow. It’s important for you to bal-
ance the strength between the elbow flexors and extensors to help control 
the motion at the elbow joint. This principle also comes into play with the 
numerous bones in the wrist. The scaphoid bone in particular is at risk for 
injury during a fall and is difficult to see on an X-ray. Balancing flexibility and 
muscle tone along the forearm provides the beautiful fluidity needed for an 
elegant port de bras, creative contemporary arm work, strong partnering 
skills, and gesturing movements.
Muscle Mechanics
The beauty and style of your port de bras come from balanced and powerful 
shoulder musculature. You know how inspiring it is to create unique designs 
with your arms, but do you know how to create the designs? Again, under-
standing which muscles activate will give you a better understanding of that 
movement. A better understanding means more quality and less quantity of 
movement.
Rotator Cuff
To understand the mechanics, let’s break down the two primary joints that 
create movement within the shoulder. The glenohumeral joint is stabilized 

 
76 
Dance anatomy
by four deep muscles called the rotator cuff muscles (figure 5.2a). They are 
the supraspinatus, infraspinatus, teres minor, and subscapularis. Their attach-
ments connect the humeral head with the scapula and allow for stability, some 
rotational movement, and abduction. The supraspinatus, infraspinatus, and 
teres minor work together to create an amazing force that keeps the shoulder 
joint secure so each time you lift your arms, your humerus bone will not pinch 
against the acromion. If the rotator cuff muscles are weak, the force will be 
ineffective in creating security for your shoulder joint. This chronic pinching 
produces pain and swelling and can lead to a condition called impingement 
syndrome.
Scapula
You have learned that the scapula moves in many planes. When the humerus 
begins to move, it rises first, followed by the scapula. For example, when lift-
ing your arm into forward flexion, you have approximately 45 to 60 degrees 
of glenohumeral movement before the scapula begins to move. When lifting 
your arm to the side, you have about 30 degrees of glenohumeral movement 
before the scapula moves. The ratio of glenohumeral movement to scapula 
movement is 2 to 1. Your shoulder blade and upper arm must work together 
within this ratio to keep the humerus bone from pinching against the acro-
mion. If the muscles that connect to the scapula are weak, the scapula will 
be ineffective in its job of creating control for your shoulder joint. If you work 
on strengthening the following muscles, the scapula will have a better chance 
of being the anchor for your arm movements.
Specific muscles play an essential role in upper-body placement and are 
responsible for anchoring the scapula and creating efficient movement (figure 
5.2a). The trapezius muscle originates at the base of the skull; all cervical and 
thoracic vertebrae insert on the lateral clavicle, upper acromion, and upper 
scapular spine. The trapezius is divided into upper, middle, and lower segments. 
If the upper trapezius is stronger than the other two segments, the shoulders 
will elevate, creating tension, imbalance, and fatigue. This tension can throw off 
jumps, turns, and balancing combinations. The lower and middle segments of 
this muscle are responsible for bringing the shoulder blades down and inward, 
creating balance. When you need to pull your shoulders down, think about 
gliding the scapulae down. When you are turning, lifting a partner, holding 
props, or raising your arms, you can still think about gliding the scapulae down.
The levator scapulae and the rhomboid are muscles located under the tra-
pezius. They originate along various cervical and thoracic vertebrae and insert 
into the inside edge of the scapula. Because of the attachment location, these 
muscles can elevate the scapula and create downward rotation. The serratus 
anterior muscle connects ribs 8 and 9 to the scapula, and the pectoralis minor 
connects ribs 2 through 5 to the scapula (figure 5.2b). The levator scapulae 
and rhomboid also provide significant movement for the scapula. The wing-
ing scapula is related to weakness of the serratus anterior and lower trapezius 
muscles.

 
77
Subscapularis
Sternocleidomastoid
Levator scapulae
Trapezius
Infraspinatus
Teres minor
Teres major
Supraspinatus
Rhomboid major
Rhomboid minor
Anterior view
Posterior view
Pectoralis minor
Serratus anterior
Figure 5.2 (a) Muscles of the scapula and rotator cuff. (b) Muscles of attachment.
a
b

 
78 
Dance anatomy
Glenohumeral Muscles
The muscles that connect the humerus bone to the trunk are responsible for 
the larger dynamic movements of your arms. The pectoralis major is the large 
muscle in the front of your chest that connects the sternum, clavicle, and 
various ribs to the humerus bone (figure 5.3a). The pectoralis major can pull 
your arms forward and together. In almost all turning combinations, the arms 
will be pulled inward by the pectoralis major. This will generate some of the 
coordinated power for the turn.
Coracobrachialis
Middle deltoid
Anterior deltoid
Pectoralis major
Latissimus dorsi
Middle deltoid
Posterior deltoid
Teres major
Figure 5.3 Glenohumeral muscles: (a) front; (b) back.
a
b
The deltoid muscle divides into three sections: anterior, middle, and pos-
terior. Each prospective section creates movement to the front, side, or back. 
Hiding under the pectoralis major and anterior deltoid is the coracobrachialis, 
a small muscle but still capable of producing shoulder flexion and adduction.
The latissimus dorsi is the large muscle of the back that connects the humerus 
to the last six vertebrae of the thoracic spine, the five lumbar vertebrae, the 
ilium, the sacrum, and the lower three ribs (figure 5.3b). This muscle creates 
adduction, internal rotation, extension, and humerus depression. Now you 
can see how significant each muscle of the shoulder complex is, and you can 
understand how important it is to balance the strength and flexibility of the 
muscles that create all of the detailed and elaborate movements that dance 
choreography will put you through.
Arm Muscles
The elbow joint can flex and extend; it is controlled by specific muscles that 
create those movements. The biceps brachii flexes the elbow and connects 
the scapula with the radius bone (figure 5.4a). The triceps extends the elbow 

 
79
Brachialis
Biceps brachii
(long head)
Biceps brachii
(short head)
Triceps
brachii
(long head)
Triceps
brachii
(medial head)
Triceps
brachii
(lateral head)
Flexor carpi
radialis
Flexor carpi
ulnaris
Palmaris 
longus
Pronator
teres
Brachioradialis
Extensor carpi
radialis longus
Extensor carpi
radialis brevis
Extensor
digitorum
Anconeus
Extensor carpi
ulnaris
Figure 5.4 Muscles of the upper arm: (a) biceps; (b) triceps.
Figure 5.5 Muscles of the forearm: (a) flexors; (b) extensors.
a
b
a
b

 
80 
Dance anatomy
and the shoulder; it connects the scapula and upper humerus with the ulna 
bone (figure 5.4b). The biceps and triceps both have more than one originat-
ing attachment referred to as heads. The biceps has two heads of attachments 
and the triceps has three heads of attachments. Hiding under the biceps is the 
brachialis; it connects the lower humerus with the ulna.
The forearm musculature allows for pronation and supination as well as 
flexion and extension of the wrist (figure 5.5). Strengthening these various 
small muscles is important for some of the extreme choreography. In some 
cases, you are asked to stand on your hands, lift other dancers, and fall on your 
hands. Forearm strength is important for holding props and partnering skills. 
Many of the various styles of couples dancing require coordinated movements 
of the hands and the forearms. The exercises in this chapter will stabilize the 
shoulder, elbow, and wrist.
Carriage of Arms
In classical ballet, carriage of the arms is termed port de bras, but in every 
dance style carriage of the arms completes the movement. All classical ballet 
port de bras should move with fluidity but must incorporate scapular stability. 
When the arms move up into a high fifth position, the anterior deltoid and the 
pectoralis major are the primary movers; the scapula must stabilize and move in 
an upward rotational pattern, not elevate. The serratus anterior and the lower 
trapezius must activate to allow the balanced movement of the scapula and 
humerus. You have a tendency to lift the arms with limited control, allowing 
the humerus and scapula to elevate and, in turn, overusing the upper trapezius 
muscles. Remember your 2-to-1 ratio; think about stabilizing the scapula and 
engaging the lower trapezius and serratus anterior; then allow the humerus 
to move freely. This strategy is universal for all dance technique and training. 
The contemporary jazz movements that occur in hip-hop choreography would 
require the same 2-to-1 principle.
Irish dancers, again, dance primarily with the arms planted neatly at their 
sides. Their upper bodies must be secure; their scapulae must be anchored to 
their posterior ribs. Since the elbows are fully extended, the triceps must be 
strong. To keep the arms securely at their sides, the pectoralis major must hold 
firm in an isometric contraction. All of the scapular muscles are contracted to 
stabilize the shoulder blades.
Traditional modern dance takes the arms past their normal range of motion. 
Your arms will be expected to perform in flexion, extension, internal and 
external rotation, and variations of all of these positions. Let’s examine what 
happens when you move your arm and shoulder into extension. The posterior 
deltoid and the latissimus dorsi contract and the scapula needs to rotate down-
ward and adduct slightly; therefore, the rhomboid and lower trapezius need 
to contract. Now you can see how important it is to strengthen the muscles 
throughout the upper body.

 
shoulDer girDle anD arms 
81
Dance-Focused Exercise
In most cases, as a dancer, your serratus anterior, rhomboid, and lower tra-
pezius muscles have a tendency to be weak. A lot of exercises in this chapter 
have additional repetitions to improve your strength. Do not increase the 
repetitions if you are unable to maintain excellent form. Focus on the align-
ment of the shoulder joint and ease in the neck and upper shoulders. Use the 
breathing patterns from chapter 3 to incorporate your core into the exercises. 
When breathing, remind yourself to move the ribs in a three-dimensional 
pattern. Once you begin to feel stronger, you will find yourself working more 
efficiently from your center. Your instructors will also see improvement in how 
you incorporate corrections from their cueing.
When you receive a cue similar to “Isolate your arms from your shoulders,” 
remember that your scapula has numerous muscular attachments that allow 
for control so that the humerus, elbow, and wrist can move freely. When you 
hear “Get your shoulders down,” focus less on the upper trapezius and focus 
more on the lower trapezius, serratus anterior, and rhomboids. If you are 
struggling with what to do with those winging scapulae, focus on exercising 
the lower trapezius and the serratus anterior.

 
82
External and Internal Rotation
 
Infraspinatus
Teres minor
external rotation: 
start position.
external rotation: 
finish position.
Subscapularis
internal rotation: start position.
internal rotation: finish position.

 
83
Execution for External Rotation
1.  Sit in a chair. Elbows are flexed at 90 degrees and by your sides. Your 
forearms are forward with palms facing inward. Hold an elastic band 
taut in both hands. Inhale to prepare, and glide the shoulder blades 
down.
 2.  On exhalation, begin to externally rotate your arms against the resis-
tance of the band, keeping your elbows snug against your waist. Hold 
for 2 to 4 counts and feel the strength within your shoulder joint. 
Open the front of the chest.
 3.  As you inhale, slowly return with control, keeping the shoulder blades 
down. Repeat 12 times, working up to 3 sets of 12.
Execution for Internal Rotation
1.  Use the same starting position as for external rotation, but reverse the 
resistance band, having the resistance coming from the outside. Inhale 
to prepare, keeping the shoulder blades down.
 2.  As you exhale, pull inward against the resistance of the band. Hold 2 
to 4 counts, maintaining elbows at the waist.
 3.  Inhale to return with control. Repeat 12 times, working up to 3 sets of 12.
Muscles Involved
External rotation: Teres minor, 
infraspinatus
Internal rotation: Subscapularis
Dance Focus
Dance classes alone may not provide 
enough strength for the rotator cuff. 
Extra conditioning will improve the 
workings of this joint. While shoulder 
injuries are not the most common in 
dance, when they occur you will need 
treatment, rest, rehabilitation, and 
improvement in technique, which will 
put your career on hold. The glenoid 
humeral joint is already weak because of its shallow cavity. If you are flex-
ible in this joint as some dancers are, then it is even more important to 
improve joint stability. Loads placed on the shoulder in various styles of 
dance can be intense; partnering and lifting require strength in all ranges of 
shoulder motion. You might also be required to fall onto your hands, taking 
full body weight on the arms. When executing any dance movement where 
stress is placed through the shoulder, visualize the deep rotator cuff muscles 
creating a firm brace for protection. This will allow stability in the shoulder 
joint without sacrificing the fluidity needed through the upper body.

 
84
Serratus 
anterior
Trapezius
Rhomboid
Scapula
Wall Press
Finish position.
Execution
1.  Stand facing a wall. Lean into the wall with hands wide at shoulder 
height; elbows remain straight. Reemphasize core control, and inhale 
to prepare.
 2.  On exhalation, press against the wall while maintaining straight 
elbows. Allow both scapulae to move around the rib cage as if the 
outside edges are trying to pull to the front of your body; the upper 
back may round slightly.
 3.  As you inhale, allow the shoulder blades to move back and together. 
Movement occurs within the scapular region. Repeat 10 to 12 times, 
working up to 3 sets.
Muscles Involved
Protraction: Serratus anterior
Retraction: Rhomboid, mid- and lower trapezius
Dance Focus
In looking at this movement, you might think that this is important only 
for male dancers. But actually, weakness in the serratus anterior can cause 
scapular winging. Weakness in the rhomboid and lower trapezius muscles 
can cause rounded shoulders; both of these misalignments occur frequently 
in female dancers as well. If you are an instructor, this information can help 
start position.

 
85
you provide important feedback. 
By visualizing how the scapula 
works as it moves along the rib 
cage, you will be able to help your 
students with exercises to reduce 
the winging and rounded shoul-
ders. It can be so confusing for 
dancers to understand corrections 
on pulling their shoulders down 
when they are not sure what 
muscles to use. Focus on sliding 
the scapulae down and inward as 
if you wanted to drop them into 
opposite back pockets. Once you are comfortable with that movement, 
widen through the chest and visualize the scapulae lying against the ribs. 
Think about moving only the scapulae forward and back, not the spine, 
similar to jazz isolations during warm-ups. You are separating the scapulae 
from your spine. Always let your breathing help you.
V a r i at i o n
Modified Push-Up Plus
1.  Begin in a basic push-up position with the knees on the floor. 
Engage core musculature to create stability along your spine. Wrists 
should be aligned directly under your shoulders. Glide your scapu-
lae downward toward your 
hips.
 2.  Inhale to prepare, maintain-
ing trunk stability. On exha-
lation, feel as though you 
are pushing the floor away, 
engaging the serratus ante-
rior and pulling the scapulae 
into protraction around your 
rib cage. Keep the elbows 
softly locked.
 3.  As you inhale, let the scapu-
lae move back and try to 
pinch them together, empha-
sizing shoulder retraction. 
Maintain trunk stability, and 
repeat 10 to 12 times.
start position.
Finish position.

 
86
Port de Bras
Anterior 
deltoid
Pectoralis 
major
Teres major
Latissimus dorsi
Execution
1.  Stand firmly with legs hip-width apart, feet either parallel or turned 
out. Hold small hand weights in both hands. Locate neutral position 
of spine and pelvis.
 2.  Move the left arm toward a high fifth position while moving the right 
arm into shoulder extension. Emphasize scapular stability. Your head 
and gaze can follow the top arm. Breathe comfortably throughout the 
movement.
 3.  Hold for 2 to 4 counts. Feel width through the upper chest. Return 
with control and repeat on the other side at least 12 times.

 
87
 
 
SAfEty tIP organize your placement to maintain a stable 
spine for safety. While executing arm movements, avoid lifting 
the chest and extending in the lower back.
Muscles Involved
Shoulder flexion: Anterior deltoid, pectoralis major
Shoulder extension: Pectoralis major, latissimus dorsi, teres major
Dance Focus
Basic ballet emphasizes stylized arm 
positions isolated from the shoulders. 
The upper back is secure with a light, 
lifted effect. The scapula separates 
from the shoulder joint, emphasiz-
ing the stable body placement. As 
the shoulder moves forward, notice 
the activation of the anterior deltoid 
and the pectoralis major, not the 
upper trapezius, which will cause your 
shoulder to lift. As the arm moves 
down from high fifth, gravity pro-
vides the majority of the assistance; 
but as your arm moves behind your 
body, the shoulder extensors con-
tract. Epaulement provides even more 
awareness by slightly twisting the 
trunk to give the carriage of the arms 
even more dimension. Regardless 
of the changing movement through 
the trunk, the arms maintain their 
elegance by emphasizing scapular 
stability. As the arm moves down and to the back, there will be slight inter-
nal rotation in the joint. Allow this to occur gently and feel smooth and easy 
movement in the joint.

 
88
Biceps Curl
Biceps 
Brachialis 
Brachioradialis 
Execution
1.  While kneeling on your right knee, hold a small hand weight in your 
left hand and rest your elbow on your left thigh. Inhale to prepare.
 2.  As you exhale, flex the elbow, holding steady in the upper arm. 
Reemphasize scapular stabilization.
 3.  Hold for 2 to 4 counts. Focus on the fibers of the biceps shortening, 
then return slowly with control to starting position. Repeat 10 to 12 
times, working up to 3 sets. Start with a light weight and gradually 
add weight as you get stronger.

 
89
 
 
SAfEty tIP Do not hyperextend the elbow, which places 
added stress on the small ligaments within the joint. Maintain 
firmness in the wrist, and avoid hyperextending the wrist and 
causing strain in the hand and forearm.
Muscles Involved
Biceps brachii, brachialis, brachioradialis
Dance Focus
The action of elbow flexion is used 
often in various dance movements. 
Partnering, lifting, falling to the 
floor, resistance work with another 
dancer, and pantomime move-
ments require various movements 
involving elbow flexion. Strength 
in the biceps protects the elbow 
from hyperextension injuries but 
also creates assistance in various 
shoulder flexion movements. Hold-
ing another dancer is challenging, 
especially when her body weight 
is completely supported by the 
anterior muscles of the shoulder 
and forearm. For the partner car-
rying the weight, it is extremely 
important to be able to use the 
biceps muscles in coordination with 
shoulder stabilization to reduce 
risk of injury. Weakness within this 
muscle will cause faulty alignment 
and overuse of other structures. 
For some women who have added 
mobility within the elbow joint, muscle strength of the biceps combined 
with the elbow extensors will create more security for the joint and reduce 
the risks of injury caused by hyperextension in the elbow.

 
90
triceps Pull
Triceps
Execution
1.  Stand with erect posture in a short lunge with legs parallel or turned 
out. Hold a small hand weight in each hand. Arms are along your 
sides but slightly extended from the shoulder.
 2.  Flex the elbows as you inhale. On exhalation, extend the elbows to 
continue past the body without fully locking the elbow joints. Hold for 
2 to 4 counts; feel the strength and contraction of the triceps from the 
scapulae, through the upper portion of the humerus, and to the back 
of the elbows.
 3.  Return to starting position with control. Maintain scapular stabiliza-
tion. Isolate the humerus during the movement to emphasize shorten-
ing of the triceps muscle fibers. Repeat 10 to 12 times, working up to 
3 sets. Again, start with light weights and slowly increase the weight.
 
 
SAfEty tIP Do not hyperextend the elbow; remember to use 
the muscles to support the elbow joint. Hyperextension will 
increase stress on the joint ligaments.

 
91
Muscles Involved
Triceps brachii
Dance Focus
The triceps muscle plays a significant 
role in elbow support; it’s involved 
in shoulder extension and adduction 
as well. The triceps will help you 
in the upward phase of push-
ups, guiding the elbow into safe 
extension. Numerous contemporary 
combinations use the elbow extensors 
to assist you in raising your body 
from the floor. The traditional Irish 
dance posture must incorporate firm 
elbow extension to maintain security 
of the elbows with the arms by their 
sides. Weakness in this area allows 
the elbow to bend and move during 
the challenging and quick footwork of that style. Remember to visualize 
the three attachments (the upper humerus, the scapula, and the elbow) to 
create stability for the upper arm.
V a r i at i o n
triceps Kickback
1.  You can do this exercise 
with the upper body in a 
flat-back position, legs in a 
short lunge for a firm base, 
and arms by your sides. This 
will add the resistance of 
gravity along with the hand 
weights.
 2.  Inhale as you flex the elbows, 
keeping the arms by your sides. 
Allow no movement along the 
humerus bones.
 3.  Exhale as you extend the elbows, 
isolating the contraction of the 
triceps. Hold for 2 to 4 counts and 
return slowly with control. Repeat 10 
to 12 times, working up to 3 sets.

 
92
Vs
Levator 
scapulae
Trapezius
Serratus 
anterior
Pectoralis 
major
Execution
1.  Sit in a chair with erect posture in a neutral position. Arms are by your 
sides; palms face the front while holding hand weights. The move-
ment will occur along the frontal plane.
 2.  As you inhale, begin to lift the arms to the sides into a high V posi-
tion. Emphasize scapular stabilization, widening through the chest. 
Feel axial elongation through the movement. Remain stable in the 
pelvis.
 3.  Hold at the top of the movement for 2 to 4 counts. Reemphasize the 
scapulae gliding down and inward toward your hips. Return slowly 
with control on the exhalation. Repeat 10 to 12 times, working up to 
3 sets.

 
93
 
 
SAfEty tIP Maintain your neutral erect posture. resist 
extending or arching through your spine, which means you have 
lost core control. Practice elevating your arms without lifting 
through the chest and ribs. Maintain a strong connection with the 
oblique muscles and the rim of your pelvis as your arms go up. 
if lifting the arms without spinal extension is too difficult, try it 
with no weights and exhale as the arms go up. Since inhalation 
can elevate your chest and facilitate spinal extension, try exhaling 
as the arms go up.
Muscles Involved
Upward phase: Middle deltoid, supraspinatus, serratus anterior, trapezius
Downward phase: Pectoralis major, rhomboid, levator scapulae
Dance Focus
This is such a beautiful movement, and 
it is seen in all styles of dance. You can 
perform this movement with jumps, on 
relevé, or with a partner—it’s always 
invigorating. Freedom in the shoulder 
joint gives this arm movement such 
grace. Focus your energy on the scapulae 
stabilizing with coordinated upward rota-
tion so the shoulder joints can move with 
less effort. Maintain placement through 
your center to show off the ability to 
isolate the shoulders from the trunk. On 
the upward phase, feel width through 
the shoulders without tensing the neck 
and overusing the upper trapezius. As 
you begin to bring the arms down, resist 
gravity and feel the strength through the 
upper back. Reemphasize deep inhala-
tion on the upward phase and exhala-
tion on the downward phase. Practice 
without hand weights while jumping as 
the arms move up—this is where you 
must control your placement and avoid 
arching your spine. Let your arms glide 
upward, keeping you in the air as if you 
could float over the stage.

 
94
Trapezius
Rhomboid
Levator 
scapulae
Rowing
Execution
1.  While seated on the floor with erect neutral posture, secure a long 
resistance band around both feet with legs extended out in front. 
Cross the band and hold it in your hands; elbows are extended with 
arms in front of you.
 2.  On inhalation, pull against the resistance of the band with elbows 
bending at shoulder height and reaching to the back. Feel the scapu-
lae pulling together. Widen through the chest and maintain a firm 
center.
 3.  Hold for 2 to 4 counts. Reemphasize scapular adduction, then with 
exhalation slowly return to starting position. Repeat 10 to 12 times, 
working up to 3 sets.
 
 
 
SAfEty tIP resist spinal extension. as the arms row back, 
reemphasize core control to maintain a stable spine. isolate the 
middle and lower trapezius, not the upper trapezius.
start position.

 
95
Muscles Involved
Retraction: Trapezius, rhomboid, levator scapulae
Dance Focus
Moving the arms behind the body is 
common in dance; again, maintenance 
of scapular control is key to resisting 
injury. Freedom in the shoulder and 
stability in the upper body allow for 
fluidity in all the styles of dance, espe-
cially jazz. As the shoulder blades move 
into retraction, let this open the front 
of the chest and resist compensation 
from the trunk. Remember that you are 
isolating the muscles that create this 
action, so hold your core firm. Vary the 
speed of the rowing to simulate varying 
tempos; this will create more challenge 
for efficient scapular movement as well 
as efficient body placement. Your arms 
will function more effectively when 
you have a firm and balanced upper 
body. When you have a strong feeling 
of awareness in the ability to perform 
rowing without compensation, increase 
the resistance of the band to give you more of a challenge. For a variation, 
you can repeat this with the elbows pulling back closer to the sides of your 
body, emphasizing the lower trapezius muscles. This movement through 
your chest and shoulders really shows off your strength and flexibility. Allow 
your lungs to truly move in a three-dimensional pattern; you will feel so 
empowered.
Variation: rowing with 
elbows tight to the body.

 
96
Plank
 
Pectoralis 
minor
Trapezius
Serratus 
anterior
Triceps
Pectoralis 
major
Execution
1.  Begin on your hands and knees. Walk your arms out slowly, main-
taining control through your center, until your knees fully extend and 
shoulders align directly over the wrists to plank position. Toes remain 
in a high relevé position on the floor.
 2.  Maintain lift in the waist. Feel the scapulae gliding down toward your 
hips. Lengthen through the spine and keep your head in alignment 
with the spine.
 3.  Hold this position, breathing comfortably, for a count of 5. Feel the 
security in your shoulder joints and the muscles surrounding the scap-
ulae. Slowly walk back to hands and knees with control. Repeat 5 to 
10 times.
 
 
SAfEty tIP this exercise is advanced and requires firm con-
trol in your center. Gravity will pull your lower back toward the 
floor, causing extension in your spine, which can be harmful. 
avoid arching throughout the spine; rest and reorganize if you are 
unable to maintain safe, secure placement.

 
97
Muscles Involved
Shoulder flexion: Anterior deltoid, pectoralis major
Elbow extension: Triceps brachii
Scapular depression: Lower trapezius, pectoralis minor, serratus anterior
Dance Focus
This is a very challenging 
movement requiring strength 
throughout the shoulder complex 
and the core. As you continue 
to gain strength and flexibility, 
your physical demands increase 
as well. Feel the deep stabilizing 
muscles along your back 
hugging your spine for support; 
remember the bracing effect the 
abdominals provide for stability. 
Defy the gravity pulling you to 
the floor; push the floor away 
with your hands to feel strength 
through your forearms. The 
front fall used in some modern 
techniques requires firm upper-
body strength and control as well 
as core strength. There should 
be a moment where the body is 
almost suspended in air, before 
the hands and arms meet the 
floor. Without strength in the shoulder region, the front fall will resemble 
an unfortunate accident involving an unstable fall! Remind yourself that 
technique class may not give you the needed strength for the shoulders, so 
make time to condition your upper body.

 
98
Reverse Plank
 
Triceps
Rhomboid
Trapezius
Teres 
major
Latissimus 
dorsi
Execution
1.  Sit with your legs extended out front. Slightly lean back on your 
hands, fingers facing forward. Elbows are in a soft but secure position 
aligned over your wrists. Inhale to prepare.
 2.  On exhalation, actively pull the scapulae downward and engage your 
abdominals as you lift your hips to align with the legs. Continue to 
feel axial elongation and shoulder and scapular stability. Hold for a 
count of 5.
 3.  As you inhale, slowly return to the floor, resisting gravity. Maintain 
control and placement. Repeat 6 to 8 times.
 
 
 
SAfEty tIP Do not allow elbow hyperextension or knee 
hyperextension. Maintain a strong isometric contraction through-
out your biceps and triceps to avoid overuse of the small elbow 
ligaments. Maintain a strong isometric contraction with the ham-
strings and quadriceps to avoid overuse of the ligaments in the 
knee joints.

 
99
Muscles Involved
Elbow extension: Triceps brachii
Shoulder extension: Teres major, latissimus dorsi
Scapular adduction: Middle and lower trapezius, rhomboid
Dance Focus
Creative poses like this are exciting and stimulating for audiences because 
it’s just not your typical dance move! Executing challenging skills where 
the body weight is bearing down into the wrists and hands can be difficult 
without significant strength in the upper body to share the load. Think 
about distributing the forces throughout the entire hand and forearm to 
resist straining the wrist. Push the floor away with the hands to feel more 
power in your forearms. As your body begins to elevate, allow the scapulae 
to move down to provide more upper-body security; this is typically a 
weak area in many dancers. You might feel a wonderful stretch across 
the anterior aspect of your shoulder joint; this is the eccentric pull of the 
biceps, pectoralis major, and anterior rotator cuff. Don’t forget to breathe; 
you may need to focus your breath through the upper rib cage because of 
the downward pull of the scapulae and the eccentric lengthening of the 
abdominals.

 

 
6
C
h
a
p
t
e
r
101
pelvis and hips
D
ance requires unusual repetitive movement around the hip joint; that 
movement demands extreme control. Fast and fancy hip movement is the 
signature for spicy Latin dance. Modern dancers have the strength and agility 
to work their hips in all planes while shifting weight and still maintaining bal-
ance. Tap dancers can move their feet and legs with impeccable speed while 
the pelvis holds steady. Ballet dancers show off the height of the développé by 
maintaining strength and flexibility in their hips. All dancers need to understand 
how the forces of leg movement are distributed through the hip joints and 
pelvis. Each dance style requires the thigh to work in parallel and internally 
and externally rotated positions at various times. Understanding how your 
pelvis works in coordination with your legs can enhance your technique. Your 
goal is to achieve the desired movement of your legs without losing control 
of your pelvis.
This chapter focuses on understanding pelvic alignment and femur (thigh) 
movement. Your pelvis is powerful when organized and balanced. All core 
musculature inserts into the pelvic region, and most muscles of the thigh 
originate from the pelvic region—this is quite a powerful intersection! Think 
about it: Your body’s core musculature inserts into the pelvic region, and your 
leg muscles begin at the pelvis. Your pelvis is the link between your trunk and 
your legs.
You must learn to move from your center, and your pelvis is the base of 
your center. It is made up of the ilium, ischium, and pubic bones on each side 
(figure 6.1). The sacrum is discussed as part of this group as well because it 
connects the spine with the pelvis. The sacrum is wedged in between the two 
pelvic bones at the base of the spine. Your center of gravity actually lies just 
in front of your sacrum. To maintain a balance on one foot, you must main-
tain your center of gravity in a vertical line that passes through your foot to 
the floor. Visualize your pelvis and sacrum located over your standing leg for 
security in balancing.
Along the side of the pelvis is the acetabulum, or deep hip socket. This is the 
cuplike socket where the head of the femur (thigh bone) inserts. Your femur 
is the strongest and longest bone in your body. This deep hip socket allows 
your femur to lift forward, or extend back into arabesque. The acetabulum 
also allows your thigh to battement to the side as well as turn in or out. The 
head of the femur angles downward, forming the neck; then it creates two 
bony prominences: the lesser trochanter and greater trochanter. The lesser 
trochanter is located medially and the greater trochanter is located laterally. 
Both of these prominences are important because of the muscles that attach 

 
102 
Dance anatomy
at these points. These muscles help create pelvic stability for your standing leg 
as well as dance movement for your gesture leg.
Before we continue with alignment and muscles, let’s get familiar with the 
term hip disassociation. This term means isolating movement at the hip, sepa-
rate from the pelvis or spine. Try to tighten the gluteus maximus muscle, and 
maintain that tightness while you kick your leg to the front. What happens? 
It’s next to impossible to get any height out of the thigh as long as the muscles 
of your buttocks remain tight! Now, try it again and lengthen the muscles of 
your buttocks as the leg goes up. So, if you understand the principle of the 
core musculature inserting into the pelvic region and leg movement starting at 
the pelvic region, then imagine moving your thighs at the hip joint only. Think 
about executing a large fan kick; an extremely stable pelvis allows the working 
leg to relax in the socket to produce fluidity and greater range of motion. The 
hip joint can better absorb forces that might be harmful to the lower spine.
When you kick (battement) your leg to the front, the anterior muscles 
contract and the posterior muscles release and lengthen eccentrically. Think 
back to the discussion of concentric and eccentric muscle work in chapter 1. 
Concentric contraction describes shortening of the muscle with contraction, 
and eccentric contraction describes lengthening of the muscle fibers but main-
taining strength and muscle tone. When you kick your leg to the front, the 
gluteus maximus and the erector spinae in your lower back can be trained to 
lengthen eccentrically while you engage your core to maintain lower-back and 
pelvic stability. Hip disassociation is the ability to isolate movement at the hip 
joint independent of your pelvis and spine.
Pelvic Link
You already know that the majority of your injuries occur in the lower extrem-
ity. If these injuries are not acute (occurring suddenly), then they are related to 
faulty technique. Faulty technique usually occurs from poor alignment in the 
Ilium
Pubis
Acetabulum
Femur
Ilium
Sacrum
Pubis
Ischium
Coccyx
Figure 6.1 Bones of the pelvis: (a) front; (b) back.
a
b

 
pelvis anD hips 
103
lower spine and pelvis. The iliopsoas muscle is the magic link that connects the 
lower spine and pelvis with the femur. The psoas connects the lower spine to 
the femur at the lesser trochanter; the iliacus connects the pelvis to the femur 
at the lesser trochanter (figure 6.2). Weakness and tightness can result in mis-
alignments of the lower back and pelvis, which then trickle down to the legs. 
For example, the iliopsoas crosses over the hip joint and can cause snapping 
as the leg comes down from développé or grande battement. The snapping 
usually occurs when the iliopsoas tendon moves over the head of the femur 
or the lesser trochanter; it can produce pain and can develop into an injury 
that needs to be assessed by a physician. Maintaining strength with turnout 
throughout the entire range of motion allows the iliopsoas to function in a 
position that reduces the snapping. Maintaining flexibility can also help keep 
the tendon from snapping. Typically, the iliopsoas is tight and weak.
The iliopsoas muscle is the major hip flexor; it flexes your hip so you can lift 
your leg above 90 degrees. Visualize the location of the iliopsoas as it travels 
from the lower spine to the inside of your upper femur. Imagine the muscle 
fibers shortening, bringing the femur closer to your trunk. You know that in 
order to compete, audition, or simply get better as a dancer, you have to get 
your legs up in the air! There is nothing more frustrating than fighting with 
your thighs to get your legs up above 90 degrees. (More on that problem in 
chapter 7.)
Since the iliopsoas originates on the anterior aspect of the lower-spine ver-
tebrae, when it is tight it will pull your lower spine into extension, which tilts 
the front of the pelvis forward. Even if you understand the concept of trying 
to hold your pelvis in a neutral position, the movement is next to impossible 
because your iliopsoas is tight. Dancing in this anterior pelvic tilt and lower-
back arch creates inactivity of the abdominals as well as the adductors (inner 
thigh muscles). This anterior tilt position of the pelvis also causes tightness in 
the lower-back musculature and creates that shear force against the vertebrae. 
This book focuses on dance-specific exercises, but the hip flexor stretch in this 
chapter (page 122) is an important addition. This stretch can be done daily. 
Try it after your warm-up to encourage effective movement through your hips 
before you start your center work. Remember your plumb line from chapter 2 
and your core work from chapter 4. Reemphasize engaging your core to locate 
your neutral pelvis position. When you get a correction from an instructor like 
“Don’t arch your lower back,” sometimes you will overcompensate and tuck 
your pelvis under to limit the arch. Tucking the pelvis overworks your gluteus 
maximus. And you know what happens when you overwork a muscle: It gets 
bigger! Tucking the pelvis also causes tightness in the hamstrings and unusual 
pressure on the discs of the lower spine. How can you advance your tech-
nique when you are constantly fighting to find your placement? Remember 
to create length through your spine; locate your neutral pelvis position while 
engaging the deep core to support the lower back. Abdominal strengthening 
with iliopsoas and lower-back stretching can help you overcome arching your 
back. This reorganization of your placement will allow you to move on and 
advance your skills.

 
104 
Dance anatomy
Psoas major
Iliopsoas:
Psoas minor
Iliacus
Greater
trochanter
Lesser
trochanter
Gluteus minimus
Gluteus medius
Tensor fasciae
latae
Iliotibial band
Figure 6.2 Muscles of the pelvis: (a) front; (b) back; (c) side.
a
b
c
Lateral Hip Power
The gluteus minimus and medius connect the outer surface of the ilium with 
the lateral area of the greater trochanter (figure 6.2). These two muscles help 
with abduction and hip stabilization. When you perform parallel side lunges or 
chassés to the side, the hip abductors are working. The wings that tap dancers 
execute to the side work the gluteus minimus and medius. Typically, these two 
muscles are very strong in modern dancers because of the numerous side leg 
lifts and parallel leg work. Another small muscle called the tensor fasciae latae 
connects the outer ilium with the iliotibial band. The iliotibial band runs from 
the ilium down the side of the thigh to the lateral femur, patella, and tibia.  

 
pelvis anD hips 
105
This is a very strong band of fascia that in some aspects may work as an exter-
nal rotator along with the tensor fasciae latae. Nevertheless, a large portion of 
pelvic stability, which you need for your supporting leg strength, comes from 
the gluteus medius and minimus. While executing the coupé turn-in and passé 
press exercises (pages 110 and 112), visualize the location of the hip abductors 
while focusing on maintaining spinal and pelvic stability.
Control of Pelvic Floor Muscles
The pelvic floor muscles form the bottom of the core and are critical in sup-
porting the pelvis. These muscles are overlooked in dance technique for various 
reasons. Many instructors are unfamiliar with the function of the pelvic floor 
muscles, and dancers are uncomfortable discussing this area. You never hear 
an instructor give cues about the pelvic floor in technique classes!
As discussed in chapter 4, the pelvic floor is a series of muscles that line 
the base of the pelvis. Remember the pelvic diamond? Visualize the two sit 
bones, the pubic bone, and the coccyx bone; visualize the muscles that con-
nect the diamond and form a basin. In a basic modern contraction, the pelvis 
rocks posteriorly, and the sit bones of the pelvic diamond move together very 
slightly with the contraction of the pelvic floor muscles. On arching the lower 
back and tilting the pelvis forward, the sit bones move apart, eccentrically 
lengthening those muscles. There is also a very slight movement of the sacrum, 
which creates the connection of the diamond from the coccyx to the pubic 
bone. For example, a demi-plié in second position should start with the pelvis 
in neutral. On the downward phase, the hips disassociate, the sit bones move 
away from each other, and the pubic bone and coccyx bones move away from 
each other. The opposite occurs on the upward phase. In other words, on the 
downward phase the pelvis stays neutral and the diamond widens; on the 
upward phase the pelvis continues to stay neutral and the diamond shrinks. 
Many of the exercises in this chapter focus on strengthening the pelvic floor 
to improve technique.
Rotation of the Femur
The femur must turn in and out to accommodate all styles of dance. There 
must be an excellent balance of strength and flexibility between the internal 
and external rotators. Deep under the gluteus maximus are six small muscles 
that play a large part in turnout and stabilization of the hip joint. The piriformis 
muscle connects the sacrum and posterior ilium with the greater trochanter. 
The obturator internus and obturator externus connect the ischium and pubic 
bone with the greater trochanter. The gemellus inferior and gemellus superior 
also connect the lower ischium and sit bones with the greater trochanter. The 
quadratus femoris also connects the sit bones with the greater trochanter. 
We’ll refer to these turnout muscles as the “deep six.” 
Internal rotation of the femur is shared by several muscles, some of which 
are discussed in the next chapter. But let’s introduce them now. Two of the 
hamstring muscles (semitendinosus and semimembranosus) have the ability 
to internally rotate. The anterior fibers of the gluteus medius and minimus, as 

 
106 
Dance anatomy
well as the tensor fasciae latae, can assist with internal rotation. Remember 
that the femur can work in various directions without tucking or tilting the 
pelvis. Excellent hip disassociation skills allow for more effective hip move-
ment and more core stability.
The majority of the turnout must come from movement in the hip socket. 
Any time you are required to lift your leg while it’s turned out, initiate the 
movement by contracting the deep external hip rotators to fully turn out 
within the hip socket. Maintain the muscle contraction through the entire 
movement of the leg while other muscles assist. For example, in arabesque, 
the deep rotators contract but the gluteus maximus assists as a turnout muscle 
to help bring the hip into extension. Without the contraction of the deep six 
rotators, your leg would swing back in parallel! When executing plié, allow 
the rotators to contract to keep the femurs open along the frontal plane and 
aligned over the toes. On the downward phase, the inner-thigh muscles assist 
by working eccentrically; on the upward phase, they work concentrically.
Visualize the location of small external rotators as they connect the femur 
with the sacrum and lower pelvis. As the muscle fibers contract and shorten, 
the femur laterally rotates in the socket. The femur can turn out in the hip 
socket without any unwanted movement in the lower back or pelvis, sup-
porting the hip disassociation theory. Practice moving your femur inward and 
outward while sitting, lying down, and standing. Focus on movement deep 
within the socket only; notice how you don’t need to twist your pelvis or 
tuck under to actively rotate your femur in the joint. Just move your thigh, 
not your pelvis or spine.
Turnout might be physically challenging for you. Familiarity with femoral 
anteversion will help if you struggle with turnout. Anteversion is a term used 
to describe the angle of the femur; it means turning forward. This place-
ment in the hip socket causes an abnormal internal rotation of the femur, 
or toeing in, making it anatomically difficult to execute turnout for ballet. 
This alignment issue causes an anterior tilt of the pelvis. If you try to force 
more turnout, you will cause twisting of the knees and rolling in at the foot 
and ankle. This placement might be your personal anatomy and might never 
allow perfect turnout. If that’s the case, then learn to work within your hip’s 
range of motion. Work your feet with less forced turnout and continue to 
work the turnout muscles properly from the hip. Femoral retroversion is the 
exact opposite. The angle of the femur allows for more external rotation, or 
toeing out. This would be more suitable for ballet.
Dance-Focused Exercise
While executing the following exercises, think about maintaining stability 
in your pelvis and lower spine, and allow the femur to move freely in the 
hip socket. Even though the legs can be directed into so many amazing 
moves and angles, you can learn to work the muscles effectively. As one 
group of muscles work to create the movement, the opposing side must 
lengthen and the core must secure the movement. It’s helpful to inhale on 
the preparation and exhale on the movement. While working through the 

 
pelvis anD hips 
107
exercises, visualize each muscle’s location. Focus on the muscle action and 
how it makes your femur move. To challenge your balance skills, close your 
eyes for some of the repetitions. Repeat some of the repetitions at a faster 
pace and notice how changes in tempo challenge your stability. Each exer-
cise directly relates to your technique—use the illustrations to learn which 
muscles work together.

 
108
Plié Heel Squeeze
 
Obturator 
internus
Quadratus 
femoris
Gluteus 
maximus
Obturator 
externus
Piriformis
Gemellus superior
Gemellus inferior
Execution
1.  Lie facedown in a slight demi-plié position, with your forehead resting 
on your hands. Your pelvis must be neutral, not tipped forward with 
an arch in your lower back. Heels are touching each other. Inhale to 
prepare.
 2.  On exhalation, coordinate contraction of the deep abdominals and 
press the heels together, creating an isometric contraction for the 
deep rotators and the lower fibers of the gluteus maximus. Hold this 
position for 6 counts.
 3.  Relax the contraction as you inhale and prepare to repeat. Push and 
relax 10 to 12 times.
 
 
 
Safety tiP Avoid arching the lower back, which will shorten 
the deep hip flexors and tighten the lower back. Remain in your 
natural neutral pelvis with abdominals engaged.

 
109
Muscles Involved
Obturator internus, obturator exter-
nus, piriformis, quadratus femoris, 
gemellus inferior, gemellus superior, 
lower fibers of the gluteus maximus
Dance Focus
One of your goals is to understand 
the principle of hip disassociation and 
how it can improve your performance 
as a dancer in any style of movement. 
Let this exercise help you to focus 
on the deep six muscles that exter-
nally rotate your legs while resisting 
the need to tip your pelvis forward 
or backward. Visualize the femurs 
working separately from the pelvis. 
The strength of the contraction and 
shortening of the deep six should give 
you the effect of the femurs almost 
hovering slightly over the floor with-
out strain in the upper thighs or hip 
flexors. Imagine a grande plié where the thighs are directly to the sides. Also 
imagine a pas de chat where you are completely turned out along your fron-
tal plane and have a perfectly neutral pelvis.
V A R i At i o n
Supine Plié
1.  Lie on your back with your 
legs in a slight demi-plié 
with heels touching. Out-
side edges of the feet are 
on the floor. Place a soccer-
size ball under each knee. 
Inhale to prepare.
 2.  Reemphasize neutral pelvis. 
On exhalation, gently con-
tract the deep six and press 
the thighs into the resistance of the balls. Try not to overrecruit the 
gluteus maximus and pull your pelvis into a posterior tilt.
 3.  Try this several times to organize the contraction equally with both 
sides. Hold the contraction for 6 counts; relax with control as you 
inhale and prepare to repeat.

 
110
Coupé turn-in
 
Gluteus medius 
Tensor 
fasciae 
latae
Execution
1.  Begin while lying on your right side. Your bottom arm is extended on 
the floor overhead; your head rests on the bottom arm. Your top arm 
is on the floor in front of you. Locate your neutral position. Your top 
leg is placed in a parallel coupé position; the foot is just above the 
opposite ankle and the knee is placed on a ball. Organize your trunk 
and inhale to prepare.
 2.  On exhalation, reemphasize stability through the core and pelvis. 
Maintain a strong lift along the waistline on the floor. Gently press the 
knee into the ball, contracting the internal rotators. Allow the lower 
leg to move away from the bottom leg, encouraging more turn-in. 
Hold for 6 counts.
 3.  As you inhale, slowly return with placement. Repeat 10 to 12 times, 
working up to 3 sets. Focus on hip disassociation.
 
 
 
Safety tiP Anchor your pelvis by reemphasizing core control. 
Avoid any movement in the lower back. this firm base allows for 
more fluidity and range of motion in the hip joint and reduces the 
risk of injury to the lower back. Avoid pelvic tilt; maintain a natu-
ral neutral position with the hip flexed.
Muscles Involved
Anterior fibers of the gluteus medius and minimus, tensor fasciae latae

 
111
Dance Focus
Strengthening the turn-in muscles is impor-
tant for maintaining pelvic postural balance. 
If you have a tendency to walk while your 
legs are turned out, you may have weakness 
of the internal rotators; but again, activation 
must occur without loss of pelvic stability. As 
you’re working in a turned-in position, visual-
ize the front of the thigh turning toward the 
midsagittal plane and the head of the femur 
gliding in a slightly posterior direction. You 
don’t have to compensate and move in your 
lower back. Since the gluteus medius and mini-
mus also provide stabilization for the standing 
leg, adding turned-in exercises to your fitness 
program will give you multiple positive results. 
Hip-hop styles of dance that have developed 
over the years are exciting to watch and 
require strength in internal rotation of the hips, 
as do numerous modern movements.
V A R i At i o n
         turn-in With Resistance
1.  Lie on your front with the right knee 
bent and left leg extended along the 
floor. Place an elastic resistance band 
around the outside of your right ankle, 
with the band pulled across to the left 
side of your body. Steady it by tying it 
to a table leg or having someone hold 
it for you. Inhale to prepare.
 2.  On exhalation, internally rotate the 
leg against the resistance of the band. 
Engage the internal rotators while 
stabilizing the pelvis. Try to move 
the leg as far as you can while 
maintaining an anchored pelvis. 
Hold for 6 counts.
 3.  As you inhale, return the leg 
slowly, isolating the internal 
rotators and separating the movement from the pelvis. Repeat slowly 
10 to 12 times. Work up to 3 sets.

 
112
Passé Press
 
Execution
1.  Begin on your right side with the bottom arm overhead and your 
head resting on it. Your top arm is on the floor in front of you. Place 
the left leg into passé position and place the foot on the floor in front 
of the bottom leg. The bottom leg must remain turned out. Feel the 
outside edge of the left foot against the bottom leg. Reorganize your 
trunk by engaging your core to feel an added lift along your right 
side, and inhale to prepare.
 2.  On exhalation, engage the deep abdominals and begin to contract 
the deep six rotators, opening the thigh along the frontal plane. Con-
tinue the stretch, pressing your leg into the resistance of a partner’s 
hand. Hold for 6 counts and slowly return to prepare to repeat 10 to 
12 times.
 3.  As the deep contraction occurs, feel the separation of your thigh from 
your pelvis and supporting leg. Keep the turnout working with the 
bottom leg as well. Resist twisting of the pelvis—you are moving your 
thigh, not your pelvis.
 4. To advance this exercise, repeat in a standing position as in the varia-
tion.
 
 
 
Safety tiP Maintain trunk stability to support the lower back. 
Keep the pelvis level to emphasize the deep rotators and hip 
abductors.
Obturator 
internus
Quadratus 
femoris
Gluteus 
medius
Gluteus 
minimus
Obturator 
externus
Piriformis
Gemellus 
inferior
Gemellus 
superior

 
113
Muscles Involved
Obturator internus, obturator externus, piri-
formis, quadratus femoris, gemellus inferior, 
gemellus superior, posterior fibers of the glu-
teus minimus and medius
Dance Focus
As you perform this exercise, visualize the 
strength of the passé leg giving you the power 
to sail in multiple en dehors pirouettes. Turn-
ing requires a coordination of force, balance, 
timing, and strength. Even while performing 
en dedans pirouettes, you must have an excel-
lent coordinated effort of the working leg 
turning out in passé and the standing leg turn-
ing out. If you lose turnout in one or the other 
hip, the pirouette comes to an unattractive 
end. This exercise reinforces the oppositional 
work between the passé leg turning out and 
the supporting leg turning out and stabilizing 
the body.
V A R i At i o n
Resisted Passé
1.  From a standing turned-out position while facing the barre, bring 
the left leg into a passé as in the illustration above. The right leg 
remains secure and turned out. Reemphasize deep external rotators 
and deep abdominal muscles for excellent posture.
 2.  With assistance from a friend as in the illustration on page 112, press 
your passé leg into the resistance of her hand while firmly maintain-
ing turnout and stability on the standing leg. Hold for 4 counts.
 3.  Slowly relax and prepare to repeat. Your goal is to execute stability 
all the way down the chain of the supporting hip and leg as well as 
isolate the deep six rotators of the passé leg. Repeat 6 times.
 
 
 
Safety tiP Avoid any twisting in the knee of the supporting 
leg by reemphasizing the stability of the standing leg and the 
turnout muscles of the standing leg.

 
114
Gracilis
Adductor 
longus
Adductor 
magnus
Adductor
brevis
inner-thigh Press
 
Execution
1.  While lying on your back with your arms by your sides, lengthen 
through your spine and organize your trunk to locate your healthy 
neutral position. Flex the hips to 90 degrees and place a ball between 
the inner thighs. As you exhale, engage the lower abdominals and 
extend the knees so that the legs are straight and elevated off the 
floor, maintaining placement of the ball. Secure a position of leg 
height that allows your lower spine to remain in neutral.
 2.  Squeeze the ball within the adductors as you internally rotate and 
externally rotate. Repeat the hip rotations and ball squeeze for 6 sets.
 3.  With inhalation, bend the hips and knees to 90 degrees; relax for a 
moment before you reorganize. Repeat for 4 more sets.
 

 
115
 
 
Safety tiP Avoid arching the lower back; work to stay in a 
natural, supported pelvic position by engaging the deep abdomi-
nals.
Muscles Involved
Adductor longus, adductor brevis, adductor magnus, gracilis
Dance Focus
Bringing the legs together, cross-
ing positions of the legs, and 
jumps that have leg beats in the 
air all require fast and firm adduc-
tors. The up phase of the plié 
requires a concentric contraction 
of the adductors, and the down-
ward phase requires an eccentric 
contraction of the adductors. In 
the lower ranges of leg height, 
the inner thighs also help with 
hip flexion and extension. Some 
of the muscle fibers lie in a posi-
tion to produce flexion and some 
lie in a position to produce hip 
extension. Maintaining a bal-
ance between the hip abductors 
and the hip adductors is another 
mechanism for pelvic security. You might spend a lot of time stretching 
the inner thighs for more flexibility, but it is just as important for you to 
strengthen this area as well.

 
116
Gluteus 
maximus
Semitendinosus
Semimembranosus
Biceps femoris
arabesque Prep
Tendu derrière position.
90-degree hold.
Execution
1.  From a standing position with legs hip-width apart, slowly roll down 
until the hands are touching the floor (inverted-V position). Reorganize 
your trunk for balance awareness. Move your right leg into tendu der-
rière position.
 2.  As you inhale, move from tendu to arabesque, stopping the movement at 
90 degrees. Hold this position for 4 counts as you exhale. On inhalation, 
continue to lift the leg as high as you can, focusing on the hip extensors.
 3.  Hold this position for 4 counts as you exhale. Return with control to 
tendu as you inhale. Resist gravity on the downward phase and focus 
on eccentric lengthening of the hip extensors. Repeat 3 times parallel 
and 3 times turned out on each side.
 
 
 
Safety tiP Maintain abdominal support to avoid uncontrol-
lably arching the lower back.

 
117
Muscles Involved
Gluteus maximus, biceps femoris, semitendinosus, semimembranosus
Dance Focus
Arabesque can be an amazing movement 
to watch and execute. It requires detailed 
coordination of hip extension with spinal 
extension. In keeping with the principle of 
hip disassociation, remember to work the 
thigh against the resistance of uncontrolled 
lower-back arch and pelvic twisting. Once 
you have support from your core, hip exten-
sors, and hip rotators, let that power sup-
port any pelvic rotation or anterior tilt as 
the leg goes higher. Feel the movement of 
arabesque being initiated by the hip exten-
sors along with the eccentric lengthening of 
the abdominals to protect your spine. Your 
upper body must tilt forward slightly to cor-
relate with the leg elevating. There is a graceful tug of war going on with 
the gluteus maximus and hamstrings lifting the thigh and the anterior struc-
tures of the core lengthening but maintaining control of your lower back. It 
is a beautiful example of strength, flexibility, and coordination.
V A R i At i o n
Resisted arabesque
1.  Repeat the main exercise but add a resistance band to 
the foot of the arabesque leg. The foot of the sup-
porting leg stands on the other end of the band.
 2.  The resistance band will tighten while moving 
from 90 degrees and upward.
 3.  Reemphasize lumbar control, using the 
hamstrings and gluteus maximus for hip 
extension. Repeat 3 or 4 times.
 

 
118
Hip flexor Pulse
Iliopsoas
Execution
1.  Sit on the floor, leaning back slightly on your hands. Your left leg is 
extended, your right knee is bent, and that foot is on the floor. Visual-
ize the iliopsoas deep under the abdominals, and inhale to prepare.
 2.  On exhalation, move into a small posterior pelvic tilt and bring the 
right knee to your chest in parallel. Perform 4 short pulses with the 
thigh, maintaining a height above 90 degrees. Focus on the iliopsoas 
fibers shortening to elevate your thigh. Feel both ischial sit bones 
equally on the floor.
 3.  Return to starting position with control. Maintain a slight posterior tilt. 
Repeat for 4 to 6 sets with emphasis on iliopsoas contraction.
 
 
 
Safety tiP to emphasize pelvic stability and protect the lower 
spine, avoid lateral tilt (hip hike) of the working leg.
Muscles Involved
Iliopsoas

 
119
Dance Focus
Putting power into the iliopsoas will be your 
secret to getting those legs up in the air. If 
you have flexible hamstrings combined with 
strength and awareness of the iliopsoas, you 
should be confident that your leg height 
will improve. The hip flexor pulse exercise 
is the preparation for a better développé 
and can be executed with a slight posterior 
tilt at first; then you can work into a more 
suitable upright posture for dance. Feel the 
thigh lifting as high as it can from deep 
under the low abdominals, and aim the 
thigh to your ribs. Coordinate the lifting of 
the right thigh with the dropping of the right 
ischial sit bone to stay on the floor; this will 
reduce the tendency of the hip to hike up 
a bit, which takes the work away from the 
iliopsoas and places it into the tensor fasciae 
latae and gluteal muscles. Lifting the thigh 
demonstrates the concentric contraction, but 
you can also hold the leg up for an isometric 
contraction to aid in increased power.
V A R i At i o n
Hip flexor Hold
1.  Begin in the same starting 
position. Reverse the breath-
ing pattern; this time, lift 
your leg to your ribs with 
turnout, feeling the same 
strong contraction of the 
deep iliopsoas. Inhale as the 
leg elevates.
 2.  Bring your thigh to your ribs. 
At the highest point, reach 
under your working leg with your arm to assist with lifting the 
thigh even higher. Hold 4 counts for an isometric contraction.
 3.  Release your arm but maintain the same leg height. Hold for 4 
counts. Exhale and return slowly to the floor. Repeat 4 times.
 

 
120
Quadratus 
femoris
attitude Lift
Execution
1.  Lie on your left side with the left arm over-
head and your head resting on that arm. 
Elongate through your spine. Engage the 
deep abdominals along both sides of 
your body. Your top leg begins the exer-
cise in high attitude à la seconde.
 2.  Breathing comfortably, begin to 
slightly turn the thigh inward for 2 
counts but remain in attitude. Turn 
the thigh out for 2 counts. Repeat 
for 2 sets. Remember to separate 
the thigh from the pelvis. Move only the thigh, not the spine or pelvis.
 3.  While turning the thigh out, elevate your thigh toward your shoulder 
by coordinating the contraction of the deep low external rotators with 
the power of the iliopsoas. Continue the contraction to increase the 
turnout of the thigh as the leg goes higher.
 
 
 
Safety tiP Avoid movement of the pelvis; secure the lower spine.
Muscles Involved
Hip flexion: Iliopsoas
External rotation: Quadratus femoris
Iliopsoas
Turn out.
Turn in.

 
121
Dance Focus
If you condition your iliopsoas complex 
effectively, outside of what any dance 
technique class might offer, you can 
increase the height of your legs. While 
other muscles may be involved in this 
exercise, take this time to connect the 
deep iliopsoas and deep low rotators. 
Notice what happens when you turn your 
thigh inward—your hip hikes and the 
muscle contraction moves to the outside 
of the upper thigh. That is not the place 
where you want to work your développé! 
Let the turn-in and turnout aspect of the 
exercise connect you with the deep low 
rotators and the deep iliopsoas. Visualize 
how the iliopsoas complex runs from the 
lower segments of your spine to the lesser 
trochanter of your femur. Now, focus on 
the quadratus femoris muscle as it runs 
from the outside of the ischial sit bone to 
the posterior surface of the femur. When one pulls on the femur to lift, the 
other pulls on the femur to turn it out. It takes coordination, visualization, 
and action of both to execute an amazing développé to the side.
V A R i At i o n
Kneeling attitude Lift
1.  Kneel on your left knee. Your right leg is 
turned out; the knee is bent and the foot 
is on the floor. Inhale and feel the right 
thigh turning out deep in the hip socket 
with the contraction of the low external 
rotator.
 2.  Slowly begin to lift the thigh toward your 
shoulder by activating the iliopsoas. Main-
tain a strong supporting leg. Do not con-
tinue the movement if you are unable to 
maintain turnout of the thigh deep inside 
the hip—stop, reorganize, and start over.
 3.  Exhale and slowly return to the floor with 
control. Repeat 4 times on each side. 
Remember to separate the stable sit bone 
from the lifting femur. Move only the thigh, not the spine.

 
122
Hip flexor Stretch
Iliopsoas
Execution
1.  Kneel on the right knee. Place your left foot forward on the floor 
with that knee bent at 90 degrees. Organize your trunk and lengthen 
through your spine.
 2.  Create strong posterior pelvic tilt with the abdominals. While lifting 
through the waist, focus on balance skills. The right leg is in slight hip 
extension.
 3.  Begin a long cambré to the left with the right arm overhead. Reem-
phasize the posterior tilt. Hold the stretch for 45 seconds, taking three 
long, deep breaths. Feel lengthening through the anterior hip and 
along the right side of your waist. Slowly return and repeat on each 
side 3 to 5 times.
 

 
123
 
 
Safety tiP Place a pad under the right knee for cushioning. 
Keep the left knee at a 90-degree angle to avoid compression 
forces in the knee joint.
Muscles Involved
Iliopsoas
Dance Focus
Working intensely on the deep hip 
flexors may create unwanted ten-
sion. Your goal is to isolate the 
iliopsoas for lifting the legs above 
90 degrees, not to create an over-
use syndrome. You might need to 
repeatedly stretch the hip flexors 
while you work on strengthening 
the deep hip flexors. Just remember 
that you will receive more benefits 
from your stretches if your body is 
warmed up. Stretching the front of 
the hip is also beneficial for working 
the legs in hip extension. Remain 
in the posterior tilt for the entire 
stretch. If your pelvis begins to com-
pensate and tilt forward, you are 
losing the effectiveness of the stretch. As the pelvis moves into an anterior 
tilt, you are actually shortening the hip flexors!

 

 
7
C
h
a
p
t
e
r
125
legs
T
he magic of dance reveals itself in the beauty of the legs and feet. All dance 
styles show off the capabilities of the legs—they defy gravity and challenge 
what is humanly possible. This aesthetic quality is how you communicate with 
your audience. You know you must dance with your entire body, but this chap-
ter looks at the anatomy of your legs and focuses on precision. Precision means 
the degree of refinement in the movement of your legs. Precise movement 
requires accuracy and coordinated speed of the contractions of your muscles.
Let’s continue by exploring the bones and muscles that contribute to the 
beauty of your legs. The femur, which is the longest and strongest bone in the 
body, angles down from the pelvis to form the top of the knee joint (figure 
7.1). It has numerous muscle attachments that help to create the precision of 
your dance movements and skills. The knee joint is a hinge joint supported 
by strong ligaments. The patella (knee cap) is a free-floating bone within the 
tendon of the thigh muscle group (quadriceps femoris) inserting into the tibia. 
During flexion and extension, the patella moves in a gliding pattern but is at 
risk for injury if there is an imbalance of the quadriceps muscles. Overuse of 
the outside of the thigh muscles can lead to an abnormal lateral glide of the 
patella on landing from jumps.
The femur is held tightly into the 
hip socket, or acetabulum, by strong 
ligaments: the iliofemoral, pubofemoral, 
and ischiofemoral ligaments. Notice that 
their names correlate with the bones 
they connect. When you lift your legs 
to the front, all three ligaments relax a 
bit in order to give you greater range of 
motion. These ligaments become tight 
when you lift your legs to the back or 
tuck your pelvis. The iliofemoral liga-
ment, sometimes called the Y ligament 
because of its shape, is extremely strong 
and therefore contributes to hip stability 
and control of body placement. Tightness 
in this ligament can limit turnout in your 
hip. This is why some dancers tilt the 
pelvis forward, loosening the Y ligament 
to enable more turnout.
Femur
Patella
Tibia
Fibula
Figure 7.1 Bones of the leg.

 
126 
Dance anatomy
b
There are four ligaments of the knee joint: the medial collateral ligament 
(which connects the femur and tibia), the lateral collateral ligament (which 
connects the femur and fibula), the anterior cruciate ligament, and the posterior 
cruciate ligament (which cross over each other and connect the femur and 
the tibia). These ligaments provide support and can be severely injured when 
alignment is compromised, especially when landing from jumps. This relates 
to precision of movement: The femur needs to mechanically stay aligned over 
the tibia, especially on landing. Any deviation will allow the femur and tibia to 
abnormally twist, causing serious stress to the ligaments. The wall sit exercise 
on page 132 emphasizes lining the knees directly over the toes while moving 
the legs along the sagittal plane.
Muscle Awareness
In chapter 6 we discussed the lateral hip muscles, the deep external rotators, 
and the iliopsoas. Now let’s look at the anterior (front), medial (side), and 
other posterior (back) leg muscles. The anterior muscles of the thigh are the 
quadriceps group. The rectus femoris is the largest muscle of the quadriceps 
group, and it runs from the iliac spine to the tibia, crossing the hip joint (figure 
7.2a). The other three quadriceps muscles are the vastus medialis, vastus inter-
medius, and vastus lateralis; notice how their names relate to their locations. 
They originate along the inside, outside, and back of the upper femur and 
insert into the patellar tendon. All of these muscles flex the hip and extend 
the knee. We also include the sar-
torius muscle, which begins at the 
upper iliac spine and runs down to 
the inside surface of the tibia. This 
muscle is the longest in your body, 
helps to extend the knee, and has 
a role in turnout. These muscles 
are very strong and help you keep 
the knee of the supporting leg 
straight. They extend the knees on 
the upward phase of the plié and 
complete a développé movement.
The adductors, or inner thighs, 
begin along different aspects of the 
pubis bone and attach along differ-
ent aspects of the medial femur. 
They are the adductor longus, 
adductor brevis, adductor magnus, 
pectineus, and gracilis (figure 7.2b). 
They adduct your thigh and also 
have the ability to bring your leg to 
the front and back at lower levels. 
Many seasoned ballet dancers be-
lieve the adductors are important 
Psoas major
Tensor fasciae
latae
Sartorius
Rectus femoris
Vastus lateralis
Iliotibial band
Vastus medialis
Vastus
intermedius
Pectineus
Iliacus
Adductor
longus
Adductor
magnus
Gracilis
Piriformis
Gemellus
superior
Obturator
internus
Gemellus
inferior
Quadratus
femoris
Adductor
magnus
Biceps femoris
Gracilis
Gluteus
maximus
Semitendinosus
Semimembranosus
Popliteus
Figure 7.2 Muscles of the leg: (a) front; 
(b) back.
a

 
legs 
127
for holding their legs in external rotation, especially when both legs are on the 
floor. For example, in first position relevé, activating the adductors provides 
added pelvic stability and security of turnout.
The hamstring muscles line the back of the thigh. The biceps femoris origi-
nates along the ischial tuberosity, or sit bone, and femur and inserts into the 
lateral tibia and fibula. The semitendinosus and semimembranosus originate 
at the ischial tuberosity and insert into the medial tibia. All of the hamstring 
muscles flex the knee and extend the hip. The biceps femoris activates strongly 
in arabesque movements. The hamstrings are also important in body place-
ment. If you activate the hamstring muscles and the abdominals while stand-
ing, you can coordinate excellent alignment of the pelvis. This effect will allow 
the standing leg to be more stable so you don’t have to overuse or grip the 
quadriceps muscles.
We must not forget the gluteus maximus. It originates off the posterior sur-
face of the ilium, sacrum, and coccyx bones and inserts into the femur and also 
has fibrous attachments along the iliotibial band. Together the gluteus maximus 
and hamstrings initiate every swing kick to the back, battement derrière, and 
arabesque. The hamstring curl exercise on page 134 focuses on engaging the 
deep abdominals while activating the back of the thighs and buttocks. The 
gluteus maximus is the strongest hip extensor, and some of the lower fibers 
can play a role in external rotation. But note that if you are unable to locate 
and use the deep external rotators, you will have a tendency to overuse the 
gluteus maximus, tuck your pelvis under, and limit turnout.
Precision of Leg Movement
In chapter 6 we discussed the need to improve extensions, but so many dancers 
struggle with overuse of the quadriceps when attempting to lift the legs higher 
than 90 degrees. With any leg lifts to the front, especially turned out, the head 
of the femur must drop downward as the leg begins to elevate (figure 7.3).  
Figure 7.3 Movement of the femur in the hip socket.
b
a

 
128 
Dance anatomy
Visualize the sit bone of the leg that’s lifting reaching downward toward the 
floor. The iliopsoas engages to produce a concentric contraction while the 
gluteus maximus and lower-back muscles lengthen. The supporting leg must 
hold steady by engaging the hamstrings and hip abductors. Anytime you begin 
the movement with a hip hike (elevate the hip), you will engage the anterior 
fibers of the gluteus minimus, gluteus medius, and tensor fasciae latae, which 
will begin to turn your leg inward. The deep external rotators must work to 
keep the femur externally rotated throughout the entire range. Don’t forget 
the principle of axial elongation from chapter 2: Lengthen through your spine 
and engage the core musculature.
If you are performing a développé-type movement, again, the head of the 
femur must glide downward and continue to turn out. The knee comes into 
the ribs as high as possible, focusing on the iliopsoas. Then you can begin the 
concentric contraction of the thighs to straighten the knee. Once you have 
tightened the quadriceps, they cannot assist you in creating more elevation—
your développé is finished. This principle is very similar to the movement of 
the humeral head of the shoulder complex when lifting the arm.
When your knee is bent, the supporting ligaments loosen, meaning the 
stability of your knee depends on the strength of the muscles. As the knee 
extends, a small amount of anatomical rotation occurs within the joint. With 
this in mind, controlled landings aligning the thighs over the knees and the 
knees over the toes allow for less chance of knee injury. Anytime the legs are 
coming downward, either from an aggressive kick or a jump, think about 
precise control. Your muscles will now need to change course quickly and con-
tract to resist gravity. Returning from grande battement to the front requires 
reorganization through the trunk but also requires a concentric contraction of 
the hip extensors. The descending battement exercise on page 142 is a great 
way to think about control on the return of a movement.
Returning safely and effectively from a jump requires eccentric control 
through the quadriceps, hamstrings, and lower-leg plantar flexors, which we 
will get into in the next chapter. Remember from chapter 1 that an eccentric 
contraction represents the muscles working but lengthening at the same time. 
Most of the time the downward phase of movement calls for more eccentric 
contractions for control. Your knee is responsible for approximately one-third 
of the muscle work on landing. Rolling through the toes and forefoot and into 
the heels with eccentric control will soften the landing. The knee and hip can 
then bend with control to absorb the rest of the forces. It is important not to 
put all of your effort into the takeoff phase and have no control for the land-
ing phase. So many injuries occur while landing from jumps!
Dance-Focused Exercise
Each of the following exercises relates directly to your technique. Think about 
moving along the most efficient path. In other words, engage your core mus-
culature for supportive placement, and recruit only the muscles needed for 
accomplishing the movement. Unwanted muscle activity will wear you out; 
energy conservation allows you to dance longer with precision. For example, 

 
legs 
129
you don’t need to overwork your neck and shoulders just to lift your leg to 
the back. Overuse of the neck and shoulders is a hindrance, causes fatigue, 
and increases injury risks.
Use your new principles of dancing:
 1.  Plumb line placement for spinal and postural awareness
 2.  Hip disassociation for thigh movement without spinal or pelvic move-
ment
 3.  Trunk stabilization to increase controlled movement
 4.  Effective breathing for engaging core muscles
Of course, it’s a lot to think about, but once you practice new movement 
strategies, it will become automatic. Once it becomes automatic, you will stabi-
lize one body part, move freely with another, and enhance your performance.

 
130
Adductor 
magnus
Adductor longus
Adductor brevis 
Pectineus
Gracilis
Rectus femoris
Vastus lateralis
Short Arcs
 
Execution
1.  While lying on your back, place a foam roller or small roll of towels 
under your knees, a small ball between your knees, and a 3-pound 
(about 1.5 kg) weight around each ankle. Your feet should be flat on 
the floor. Recheck your neutral postural alignment. Inhale to begin.
 2.  As you exhale, coordinate tightening the quadriceps with squeezing 
the ball to activate the adductors. Extend both knees and hold that 
position for 2 to 4 counts. Return with control.
 3.  Focus on lifting the lower legs, not bearing down into the foam roller 
with the thighs. Repeat 10 to 12 times, then repeat with a quicker 
knee extension and a slower return 10 to 12 more times. Gradually 
increase the ankle weights to 5 pounds (about 2.5 kg).
 
 
 
SAfeTy Tip To maintain a neutral pelvis, engage the deep 
transversus abdominis and avoid iliopsoas contraction. Focus 
on the quadriceps. Avoid knee hyperextension, which increases 
stress to the posterior knee ligaments.

 
131
Muscles Involved
Rectus femoris, vastus medialis, vastus lateralis, adductor longus, adductor 
brevis, adductor magnus, gracilis, pectineus
Dance Focus
All of the quadriceps are the pri-
mary movers for knee extensions, 
but for this exercise focus on the 
vastus medialis and the adductors. 
All of the styles of dance can call for 
abnormal movement surrounding 
the knee. It seems the more cre-
ative and unusual the choreography, 
the more attention that movement 
gets. With that in mind, strengthen 
the quadriceps together with the 
adductors to reduce the compressive 
forces under the patella. Moving the 
knee between the ranges of 0 to 30 
degrees reduces the forces of com-
pression while emphasizing excellent 
vertical alignment of the patella. 
While performing this exercise, think 
about the lower leg floating up as the thigh contracts or an unfolding of the 
knee—this visualization will help with completion of développé. The thigh 
muscles lifting the lower leg is the goal, not pushing downward with the 
thigh. The Russian pas de chat movement in ballet calls for a strong quad-
riceps contraction of the leading leg. Whether the pas de chat is large or 
small, let the thigh muscles lift the tibia.
Focus on the vastus medialis muscle to minimize the tendency of the 
patella gliding in a lateral direction. Also, vary the tempo of the exercise to 
simulate jumping: quick on the take-off phase and then slow on the land-
ing phase. The moment the toes reach the floor, the quadriceps must begin 
to lengthen and remain strong and toned. Some female dancers have less 
quadriceps strength than the average athlete, and some technique or warm-
up classes do not provide adequate quadriceps training. So get working on 
improving thigh strength!

 
132
Rectus femoris
Pectineus
Vastus lateralis
Vastus medialis
Vastus intermedius
Semimembranosus
Semitendinosus
Biceps femoris
Wall Sit
 
Execution
1.  Stand with your back against a wall. Bring your heels away from the 
wall about 2 feet (60 cm). Lean into the wall and place a small ball 
between the knees. Inhale to prepare.
 2.  Exhale and perform a parallel demi-plié by sliding down the wall. Feel 
your weight placed evenly throughout your foot. Reemphasize pres-
sure through the heel if necessary. Contract the adductors into the ball.
 3.  Hold that position for 2 to 4 counts, creating an isometric contraction. 
Slide up the wall to return. Repeat with a deeper demi-plié, taking the 
thighs parallel with the floor. Hold 2 to 4 counts and then slide up the 
wall. Repeat the series 4 to 6 times.

 
133
 
 
SAfeTy Tip All natural curves of the spine should remain 
intact. Reemphasize neutral spine, not a posterior tilt. To reduce 
compression forces in the knee joint, avoid pliés deeper than 90 
degrees of knee flexion.
Muscles Involved
Biceps femoris, vastus medialis, vastus intermedius, vastus lateralis, adductor 
longus, adductor brevis, adductor magnus, gracilis, pectineus, rectus 
femoris, semimembranosus, semitendinosus
Dance Focus
You will notice the challenge 
increase when you bend the knees 
a little deeper. While parallel or 
turned out, grande plié can create 
compression under the patella; it’s 
a wonderful quadriceps exercise if 
your quads are strong enough! As 
the plié deepens, the patella moves 
from its safe vertical alignment 
into a stronger force deeper into 
the femur. Know that grande plié 
can put approximately 7 times 
your body weight directly into the 
knee joint. Multiply your weight 
by 7, and imagine how much that 
is with every grande plié. Maybe 
grande plié should be used a little 
later in the ballet technique class; 
this would allow more time for 
the legs to get warmed up. You 
will need impeccable quadriceps 
strength to execute the hinge of the Horton modern technique, where your 
body weight is back and your knees and thighs maintain your weight and 
stability. The grande cambré lunge in classical ballet calls for deep knee 
flexion and a strong quadriceps contraction. Various contemporary styles of 
choreography might require bearing all of your weight on your knees while 
turning. If you are using this exercise to emphasize alignment of the knees 
over the toes, 4 to 6 repetitions might be enough; but if you are looking to 
gain strength, repeat this exercise to fatigue.

 
134
Hamstring Curl
 
Semimembranosus
Semitendinosus
Gluteus maximus
Biceps femoris
Execution
1.  While lying facedown, rest your forehead on your hands. Legs are 
together and parallel. Bend both knees simultaneously to 90 degrees 
and flex the ankles, keeping knees and ankles touching. Inhale to pre-
pare.
 2.  On exhalation, engage the deep abdominals and lengthen through 
the spine. Lift both thighs slightly off the floor, engaging the ham-
strings and gluteus maximus. Hold for a count of 4.
 3.  Lengthen through the front of the hips. Allow the thighs to hover 
over the floor just about an inch. Inhale to return with control. Repeat 
10 to 12 times.
 
 
 
SAfeTy Tip Reinforce the deep abdominals to protect the 
lower spine. This exercise will also engage stabilizing muscles 
along the spine. Resist arching the lower back—work to stay in 
your natural supported pelvic position.
Muscles Involved
Biceps femoris, semitendinosus, semimembranosus, gluteus maximus

 
135
Dance Focus
The hamstrings provide support in 
perfect body placement, but they 
also flex the knee and extend the hip. 
They have a two-joint action! Some 
dancers have hyperextended knees, 
meaning the knees can continue past 
full extension because of laxity and a 
posterior gravitational torque. If you 
activate the hamstrings a little sooner, 
they can assist in controlling hyperex-
tension. The hamstrings work for you 
each time you execute coupé, passé, 
and attitude positions in ballet as well 
as barrel turns and stag leaps in jazz. 
The biceps femoris also assists with 
turnout; you should feel it contract 
with attitude derrière and turned-out 
arabesque. Try to think about hip 
disassociation: Move your thighs to 
the back as far as you can without 
any movement in your lower spine. Challenge yourself to move the thighs 
against the resistance of the pelvis and spine.
V A R i AT i o n
Hovering plié
1.  Lie facedown in a turned-
out demi-plié position, but 
maintain a neutral position 
of the pelvis. Reemphasize 
deep abdominal support 
for the lower back. Inhale 
to prepare.
 2.  On exhalation, contract the lower abdominals. Lift both legs slightly 
off the floor by engaging the deep rotators and the biceps femoris. 
Let your legs hover an inch or two over the floor. Emphasize the deep 
low external rotators.
 3.  Hold this position for 2 to 4 counts, then slowly return the thighs to 
the floor with control. Repeat 10 to 12 times.
 

 
136
Hamstring Lift
 
Biceps 
femoris
Semimembranosus
Semitendinosus
Gluteus
maximus
Execution
1.  Lie facedown with your hands under your forehead and legs slightly 
turned out (you will later repeat the exercise in parallel). Elongate and 
lengthen through the entire spine. Inhale to prepare.
 2.  As you exhale, focus on the contraction of the hamstrings with the 
deep abdominals and elevate one leg; only lift the leg approximately 
10 degrees but maintain a neutral position of the pelvis.
 3.  Feel the hamstrings and abdominals working together against the 
resistance of the pelvis wanting to move into an anterior tilt. Hold for 
4 counts. As you inhale, slowly return the leg with control. Repeat 12 
times turned out and in parallel.
 
 
 
SAfeTy Tip Activate the abdominals and then lift with the 
hamstrings. Don’t release in the lower back, letting your momen-
tum carry your leg up without control! This will eventually wear 
down the lower segments of your spine and tighten the lower 
back, causing an overuse injury.
Muscles Involved
Biceps femoris, semitendinosus, semimembranosus, gluteus maximus
Dance Focus
You have learned that your hamstrings originate at the sit bones. Because 
of their connection with the pelvis, weakness can cause ineffectiveness in 
pelvic alignment. Think about your plumb line; weakness of the hamstring 
complex will allow your pelvis to tilt forward, moving you out of your 

 
137
optimal body placement. A firm bal-
ance between the lift of the abdomi-
nals and strength of the hamstrings 
facilitates a balanced pelvis and lower 
back. You need to have extreme flex-
ibility in your hamstrings, but it is also 
important to maintain strength. Your 
hamstrings help you with arabesque 
and powerful jumps. Practice leg lifts 
to the back with a new awareness 
of engaging abdominals with ham-
strings to give you added support. As 
the arabesque goes higher, maintain 
that low abdominal support and shift 
your upper torso forward, empha-
sizing spinal extension in the upper 
back and chest while maintaining 
that abdomen–hamstring connection. 
The supported hamstring lift varia-
tion supports the spine and allows 
you to isolate the hamstrings and gluteus maximus without engaging the 
spine extensor muscles. The back of your thighs are fast-twitch muscles that 
move your knee and hip through all levels of rapidly changing dance move-
ments. Sometimes the tops of your thighs will overpower your hamstrings. 
Keep working on strengthening your hamstrings.
V A R i AT i o n
Supported Hamstring Lift
1.  Lay your upper body over a table with your feet on the floor. The 
table’s edge is firm against the hip flexors and your hands are under 
your forehead. Inhale on the preparation.
 2.  On exhalation, engage the deep abdomen and lift one leg off the 
floor with a straight knee, contracting the hamstrings and gluteus 
maximus. Do not allow your pelvis or lower back to move. Hold for  
4 counts and return slowly. Repeat 10 to 12 times each side.
start 
position.
Finish 
position.

 
138
Side Scissor
Adductor 
magnus
Adductor 
longus
Adductor brevis
Gracilis        
Execution
1.  Lie on your right side with your head on your right arm extended 
overhead and left arm on the floor in front of you. Both legs are 
extended. Maintain a neutral spine, and maintain lift in the waist on 
both sides of your body. Stack knees directly on top of each other. 
Inhale to prepare.
 2.  On exhalation, turn out and lift the top leg, then turn out and lift the 
bottom leg. Engage your core musculature to maintain a secure trunk. 
If balance is compromised, bring the legs forward slightly by flexing 
the hips. Remain in neutral for your spine and pelvis.
 3.  Execute small inner-thigh pulses. Feel the pelvic floor, deep transver-
sus abdominis, and adductors contracting. Perform the pulses for 10 
to 12 counts before slowly returning with control. Repeat the series 3 
to 5 times. Increase tempo with each set.
 
 
 
SAfeTy Tip The bottom leg must remain turned out to avoid 
compression of the greater trochanter against the floor. Maintain 
a deep abdominal contraction for spinal stability.

 
139
Muscles Involved
Adductor longus, adductor brevis, adductor magnus, gracilis
Dance Focus
Most dancers seem to spend more time 
stretching the adductors than strengthen-
ing. The gluteus medius and the adduc-
tors work together to provide more pelvic 
stability. Visualize the originations and 
insertions of the inner-thigh muscles; they 
line the medial portion of the femur to 
connect with the pelvis. Even though they 
lose effectiveness at leg heights above 
approximately 50 degrees, they are very 
active in flexion, extension, and of course 
adduction at lower levels. Irish dancers use 
the adductors frequently when the legs are 
crossed to give the audience an illusion of 
seeing only one knee from the front. The 
same principle applies when performing 
bourrées in ballet: The adductors remain 
contracted to cross the legs. Fourth and 
fifth position in ballet calls for the inner 
thighs to be contracted for pelvic stability, 
and jumping combinations with leg beats 
require strong inner thighs as well. Practice 
the side scissor slowly and with control, 
then increase the speed of the leg beats to 
improve precision.

 
140
Assisted Développé
Tensor fasciae
latae     
Gluteus medius
Turn in.
Turn out.
Execution
1.  Stand with your left hand on the barre. The inside (left) leg lies over 
the barre beneath your knee in à la seconde. Organize your place-
ment: Turn out your standing (right) leg and place your right hand on 
your shoulder; your left thigh, which is on the barre, must be higher 
than 90 degrees.
 2.  Turn the left thigh inward and outward, noting the hip hike with turn-
in and the deep low rotators on the external rotation. Repeat 4 times.
 3.  After completing the last turnout of the thigh, begin to extend or 
unfold the knee by lifting the lower leg, not by allowing your thigh to 
bear down into the barre. Keep your leg on the barre while engaging 
the deep hip external rotators and the iliopsoas.
 
 
 
SAfeTy Tip Avoid twisting in the knee of the supporting leg. 
Quadratus 
femoris       
Obturator 
internus      
Obturator 
externus      
Gemellus 
inferior     
Gemellus 
superior    
Piriformis    

 
141
Muscles Involved
Internal rotation: anterior fibers of the gluteus medius and minimus, 
tensor fasciae latae
External rotation: Obturator internus, obturator externus, piriformis, 
quadratus femoris, gemellus inferior, gemellus superior
Knee extension: Rectus femoris, vastus medialis, vastus intermedius, 
vastus lateralis, sartorius
Dance Focus
So, you have figured out how to get 
your thigh to your chest but then 
you start to extend the knee and 
the femur starts to drop. You feel 
this intense overuse of the quad-
riceps. Remember, once you have 
contracted the quadriceps, they 
cannot help you to elevate your 
leg any higher—your développé is 
done! Visualize your femur glued to 
your ribs; increase the deep iliopsoas 
contraction to keep your thigh glued 
to the ribs, and keep the deep low 
rotators contracting very strongly to 
maintain turnout of the thigh. There 
is a spiraling effect of the thigh in 
the hip socket throughout the move-
ment. It might help to remember to 
aim your sit bone down toward the 
floor and let the outside of the thigh 
rotate downward as well. Now, just 
lift the lower leg; visualize the tibia, 
foot, and ankle floating up; and let 
the quadriceps contraction pull to elevate the lower leg. It’s important to 
keep the iliopsoas contracting and the deep rotators contracting to provide 
support to the femur above 90 degrees. Remind yourself to keep turning 
out the back of your thigh. You will also notice the supporting-side gluteus 
medius help to stabilize your pelvis. Let them all work together to give you 
an amazing développé.

 
142
Descending Battement
 
Biceps femoris       
Semimembranosus       
Semitendinosus       
Execution
1.  Lie on your back. Your left knee is bent and your foot is on the floor. 
Your right leg begins at 90 degrees of hip flexion and turned out; the 
knee is fully extended. Secure one end of an elastic band around the 
forefoot; the other end should be stabilized high and behind you. 
Inhale to prepare.
 2.  On exhalation, engage the deep abdominals to secure your lower 
back. Bring your leg down with control against the resistance of the 
band as if returning from grande battement.
 3.  Inhale as the leg goes up. Feel as though you are lifting the leg with 
the upper inner thigh. Increase speed on the upward phase and keep 
it slow and controlled against the resistance on the downward phase. 
Reemphasize trunk control with each battement. Repeat 10 to 12 
times.
 
 
 
SAfeTy Tip Avoid anterior pelvic tilt or lateral pelvic tilt to 
maintain pelvic security. Move only the thigh, not the spine or 
pelvis.

 
143
Muscles Involved
Biceps femoris, semimembranosus, semitendinosus
Dance Focus
Using control when coming down from 
high kicks, grande jetés, or traveling 
leaps will give your work the look of 
defying gravity. Use the band to focus 
on the concentric contraction of the 
hamstrings as the leg comes down. 
Allow the band to give you assistance 
as the leg goes back up and maintain 
the eccentric lengthening through the 
hamstrings and gluteus maximus. Fight 
to hold your turnout through the entire 
range; it will keep the hip from elevat-
ing. At the top of the battement, feel 
as though your leg could lengthen; 
hover and lift before it slowly begins 
to come down. Maintain an anchored 
pelvis and reaffirm the principle of hip 
disassociation. Remind yourself to turn 
out the back of the thigh. This exer-
cise can also be repeated while lying on your side for à la seconde. While 
executing these two exercises, close your eyes for a couple of repetitions to 
focus on deep transversus abdominis work hugging your spine like a corset. 
This is the support you need to be able to move your legs freely.
Variation: side-lying battement.

 

 
8
C
h
a
p
t
e
r
145
Ankles And feet
S
trong and balanced feet provide the foundation for the whole body. 
Knowledge of lower-leg alignment together with core and pelvic 
strength will give your feet the power you need in order to be quick and 
fearless. As a dancer, you need to have a basic understanding of accurate 
alignment and muscle action to improve your technique. There are 26 
bones in your foot and 34 joints, thus creating multiple movement pos-
sibilities. When bearing weight, any joint movement has a direct relation 
to the other joints in your feet. You must be able to dance as a unit with 
all joints working in harmony.
Modern, jazz, ballroom, Irish, and most folk dance styles require similar 
foot and ankle movements. You must be able to travel quickly on your feet 
and rise up on the balls of your feet and the tips of your toes. You might 
need to run and jump in heels or pivot and push with bare feet. Tappers, 
cloggers, and flamenco dancers do a lot of challenging percussive footwork 
that requires intense power. Turning, jumping, pointing, relevé, and plié are 
basic skills needed for all dance techniques. Each style requires unusual posi-
tions of the feet, not to mention particular footwear that is used more for 
aesthetic appearance than for true support. Classical ballet requires extreme 
range of motion for pointe work, but this chapter applies to all styles and 
the importance of education in anatomy. It’s helpful to know the support-
ing structures that keep your arches alive and strong. It’s important to know 
where ankle stability comes from to reduce the risk of ankle sprains. It’s 
also useful to understand basic muscle movement so you can benefit from 
strengthening exercises. Quick and fearless feet don’t just happen—they 
need training, care, and maintenance.
Bony Anatomy
The malleoli (ankle bones) are the projections at the base of the tibia and fibula 
bones. The ankle bones are sites for some of the ankle’s strong supporting 
ligaments. The talus bone fits snugly in between the ankle bones and is some-
what responsible for transmitting your weight to the rest of your foot. It meets 
the calcaneous (heel bone) in the back and the navicular bone in the front 
(figure 8.1). The heel bone provides the base for the attachment of the Achil-
les tendon, and the navicular bone provides the base for the tibialis posterior 
tendon. Both tendons activate to point the foot and ankle. Along the middle 
region of the foot are three cuneiform bones and the cuboid, which meet the 
five metatarsal bones. This middle region gives you mobility for a beautiful 

 
146 
Dance anatomy
point and firmness for support. The metatarsals meet the phalanges, or toe 
bones; flexibility in these joints is needed for the best possible half pointe. All 
of the bones in your feet are connected by ligaments and muscle tendons, 
which provide support. For the rest of the text we break down the foot into 
segments. The forefoot consists of the phalanges and metatarsals; the midfoot 
consists of the navicular, the three cuneiforms, and the cuboid. The rearfoot is 
composed of the calcaneous and the talus.
The bones in your feet are not organized in a flat formation. The inside 
border forms a long arch, which is referred to as the medial longitudinal arch. 
When instructors say, “Don’t roll in,” they are usually referring to this arch 
of your foot flattening out. Even though the outside border of your foot is 
on the floor, it also forms a lateral longitudinal arch. As long as some of your 
weight is placed along the outside arch, the inside arch can activate and lift. 
The transverse arch runs across from the inside to the outside. This arch cre-
ates the striking high instep that so many dancers work for. The arches of 
your feet are supported by the bones in your feet. They need to be strong 
and active to support your weight, jumping activities, balance poses, and 
twisting movements. The arches are also supported by fascia and ligaments. 
The fascia is a very tough band of connective tissue on the sole of your foot. 
It runs between your forefoot and your heel. Maintaining strength in your 
feet will reduce the risk of developing plantar fasciitis, or inflammation of 
the fascia. Weakness and tightness within the arches will cause overuse of 
the fascia. You can avoid this overuse syndrome by maintaining strength and 
flexibility in your feet.
Metatarsals
Cuboid
Calcaneus
Phalanges
Cuneiforms
Navicular
Talus
Figure 8.1 Bones of the foot.

 
ankles anD feet 
147
Foot and Ankle Motion
The ankle joint is capable of pointing and flexing, which in medical terms are 
plantar flexion and dorsiflexion. At the highest point of your relevé is a tiny 
bit of sideways movement capability, which sometimes helps when you’re 
trying to maintain a balanced pose en pointe. The talus sits snugly in a box-
like space. In plié the talus moves slightly to the back, where it fits tight and 
provides stability. In some cases, when the demi-plié is too deep, the talus can 
come into contact with the base of the tibia. This can cause pain and swelling 
and eventually lead to bone spurs. Maintaining strength and eccentric muscle 
control in your legs will help keep your plié from causing this impingement.
During demi-pointe, the talus moves slightly forward out of the security of 
its space, causing instability. The inversion press, winging, and relevé with ball 
exercises in this chapter (pages 156, 158, and 160) focus on ankle support. 
Some dancers struggle with a fully pointed position because the back of the 
talus bone may have an abnormal bony projection that comes into contact 
with the heel bone. This unfortunate posterior impingement limits full-height 
relevé, creates an unstable ankle, and leads to a weight-back situation. When 
you are unable to transfer your center of gravity completely over your half-
pointe or full-pointe position, your body weight will remain too far back. This 
incorrect weight placement can create overuse and stress injuries. Working 
with your weight back compromises balance and overworks the lower-leg 
musculature due to compensation.
The subtalar joint in the rearfoot is located where the talus and calcaneous 
meet. This joint allows for adequate pronation in plié and supination in relevé, 
whether you are working parallel or turned out. Pronation refers to the inside 
arch and talus moving downward, while supination is just the opposite. The 
inside arch and talus move slightly upward. This movement is needed for 
propulsion in relevé and jumps as well as shock absorption on landing. But 
excessive pronation leads to rolling in and undue stress on your arch. Rolling 
in sometimes occurs from forcing the turnout at the feet and not using the 
deep hip external rotators and adductors.
Good movement through the rearfoot dictates needed movement for the 
midfoot. For example, with plié the inner portion of the heel bone will slightly 
move inward so the talus can move slightly inward. This small movement has 
to happen to open the joints of the midfoot. When the midfoot joints loosen, 
flexibility occurs for shock absorption and a soft plié. The exact opposite occurs 
for relevé. The heel and talus will slightly lift so the midfoot joints can tighten. 
The tightness provides a firm arch for relevé. Strengthening the muscles of 
the midfoot region will allow excellent weight transfer onto the first, second, 
and third metatarsals when executing relevé. The arches can then become 
rigid to help stabilize the relevé.
The joints where the metatarsals meet the phalanges must have significant 
strength and flexibility for toe-off during jumping movements. There must 
be an eccentric lengthening under the toes on relevé to provide an adequate 
base. The eccentric lengthening allows the small muscles under the forefoot 
and toes to be long but strong and active. Even in a standing position, your 

 
148 
Dance anatomy
toes should be lengthened and your arch musculature activated to provide 
a firm anchor. The first exercise, doming (page 152), improves arch support 
and reduces the weakness caused by curling of the toes.
Support Ligaments
You probably know a dancer who has had an ankle sprain, a very common 
injury. Numerous ligaments are in the foot and ankle, but we will look at five 
of the ligaments providing support. The medial ligament complex is called the 
deltoid, which originates on the medial malleolus and fans out to attach on 
the navicular, talus, and calcaneous bones. This is an extremely strong com-
bination of ligaments that provide vital stability. The spring ligament is also 
located on the medial side of the foot and connects the calcaneous with the 
navicular bone; it has the principal job of providing a sling for the talus, which 
aids in supporting the weight of the body. Weakness or lengthening along this 
ligament can cause flattening of the foot.
On the outside of your ankle are three ligaments that together provide sta-
bility. These ligaments are not as strong as the deltoid and are usually the first 
ligaments to be injured in a lateral ankle sprain. A lateral ankle sprain refers to 
an injury in which the sole of the foot turns inward, damaging the supporting 
ligaments. The anterior talofibular ligament runs between the talus and the 
fibula; when in relevé this ligament moves into a vertical stable position. The 
calcaneofibular and posterior talofibular ligaments, as you might guess by their 
names, run between the calcaneous, talus, and fibula bones and also help to 
maintain critical alignment and ankle stability.
Muscle Mechanics
Foot and ankle action is allowed by 12 intrinsic muscles located within the 
foot itself and 12 extrinsic muscles that originate outside of the foot and 
have multiple actions. The gastrocnemius is the large muscle that originates 
behind your knee and inserts in the calcaneous bone by way of the Achilles 
tendon (figure 8.2). Underneath the gastrocnemius is the soleus, which also 
connects into the Achilles tendon. The gastrocnemius is a two-joint muscle, 
meaning it can flex your knee and point your foot. The soleus can also point 
your foot and plays a role in maintaining your balance. Together these are 
the two primary movers for relevé and pointing. The soleus is valuable for 
rising from half pointe to full pointe and in securing control on landings from 
jumps. The seated soleus pump exercise (page 162) offers two variations for 
soleus-specific strengthening.
Other muscles that originate in back of the tibia or fibula and assist with 
plantar flexion and inversion are the tibialis posterior, flexor digitorum longus, 
and flexor hallucis longus. The tibialis posterior inserts mainly into the navicular 
bone and provides added support for the inner arch. The flexor digitorum 
longus inserts into digits (toes) 2 through 5.
The flexor hallucis longus tendon deserves more attention. This muscle 
originates along the back of the fibula. It runs along the back of your lower 
leg through a small tunnel beneath the inside ankle bone, and it inserts into 

 
ankles anD feet 
149
Tibialis anterior
Extensor 
hallucis longus
Extensor
digitorum longus
Peroneus
tertius
Peroneus
longus
Peroneus
brevis
Tibialis
posterior
Deep dissection
Superficial dissection
Gastrocnemius
Soleus
Achilles tendon
Flexor
digitorum
longus
Flexor 
hallucis 
longus
Figure 8.2 Muscles of the lower leg and foot: (a) front; (b) back.
b
a
the base of the big toe. This tendon has many jobs: flexion of the big toe, 
push-off power for jumps, and support for the inner arch. Repetitive over-
use of the flexor hallucis longus tendon with pointing and relevé can lead 
to discomfort and inflammation, which has been called dancer’s tendinitis. 
This tendon can also become trapped within the tunnel and cause triggering, 

 
150 
Dance anatomy
which can lead to fraying or tearing. It is imperative to strengthen all of the 
muscles responsible for pointing to avoid overuse of the flexor hallucis longus 
tendon. These exercises are also included in this chapter.
Muscles along the lateral lower leg are the peroneals; they originate at the 
upper fibula. One inserts into the fifth metatarsal and one continues under 
the foot to insert into the first metatarsal. Their job is to provide strength for 
the outside of your lower legs and reduce the risk of lateral ankle sprains. 
Along the front of the tibia is the tibialis anterior, extensor hallucis longus, 
and extensor digitorum longus. These muscles pull the toes upward and flex 
and invert the ankle. All of the extrinsic muscles work to hug your lower leg 
to your ankle and provide support.
The soles of your feet are also layered with supportive muscles (figure 8.3). 
These intrinsic muscles connect the heel with tarsal and metatarsal bones and 
are solely responsible for lengthening the toes. The small muscle supporting 
the inner arch that runs from the big toe to the inside of the heel is called the 
abductor hallucis; you can train this muscle to activate to provide strength to 
the inner-arch area. The big-toe abduction exercise (page 154) can assist you in 
strengthening this muscle. Deep muscles are also located between the metatarsals 
and phalanges; weakness within these intrinsic muscles can cause clawing of the 
toes. The toes must stay lengthened for push-off skills for jumping.
Dance-Focused Exercise
While executing the next series of exercises, visualize the muscles hugging 
your ankle for support. Each time you flex or demi-plié, visualize the talus 
bone securely in its space for support. Think about energy along all of your 
arches. Each time you point your foot, align the second and third metatarsals 
with the tibia bone for a perfect line. Remember to lengthen under the toes to 
avoid clawing; this will give you a wider base during half-pointe. A wider base 
will promote a better platform for balancing. Try to repeat all exercises with 
various speeds and work with control throughout the entire range of motion.

 
151
Adductor
hallucis
Long plantar
ligament
Deep dissection
Plantar
interossei
Dorsal
interossei
Flexor
hallucis
brevis
Lumbricals
Flexor digiti
minimi
Quadratus
plantae
Intermediate dissection
Abductor 
digiti minimi
Flexor 
digitorum
brevis
Abductor 
hallucis
Superficial dissection
Figure 8.3 Intrinsic muscles of the foot.

 
152
Doming
Execution
1.  Begin while seated. Place your forefoot on a small towel roll and place 
your heel on another small towel roll. Use the rolls to balance the 
placement of your foot evenly across the metatarsal heads and the 
heel.
 2.  Lift all toes upward without lifting the forefoot off the towel roll. 
Reestablish equal weight placement. Lengthen under the toes as you 
begin to press them toward the floor.
 3.  Engage the deep intrinsic muscles throughout your arch and draw the 
metatarsal heads toward the heel. The movement is initiated from the 
metatarsal phalangeal joint until the toes are on the floor. Do not curl 
the toes; allow the intrinsic musculature to draw the metatarsal heads 
toward the heel. Repeat 15 times, working up to 30.
Intrinsic
foot muscles 
toes up.
toes down.

 
153
Muscles Involved
Intrinsic foot muscles
Dance Focus
Numerous small muscles are 
located along the soles of your 
feet; they play a significant role 
in pointing your feet, in moving 
from half pointe to full pointe, and 
in pushing off for jumps. Some of 
your choreographic requirements 
can really take a toll on your feet. 
The intrinsic muscles along with 
the anatomy of the bones support 
the various arches in your feet and 
help resist curling the toes. The 
intrinsic muscle group must feel 
active in order to create support. 
Close your eyes and focus on this 
specific area of your feet. Visual-
ize the strong fascia along with the 
numerous muscle fibers contract-
ing to provide control. Whether 
you are dancing barefoot, in pointe 
shoes, or in character shoes, the 
intrinsic musculature must be strong to give you the power and spring 
needed for jumps and pointe work. Some warm-up and basic technique 
classes provide limited education in this specific area of your foot. Again, it 
is up to you to maintain the quality of your arches by taking extra time to 
strengthen your feet.

 
154
Big-Toe Abduction
 
Abductor 
hallucis
Execution
1.  Begin seated. Place your feet on the floor, emphasizing equal weight 
placement between the metatarsal heads and heel.
 2.  Try to open the big toe away from the other toes. Hold for 2 to 4 
counts and then slowly return. Feel the boost of the medial arch as 
the big toe moves.
 3.  Repeat 10 to 12 times to feel the muscle contraction. Work up to 3 
sets of 12.

 
155
Muscles Involved
Abductor hallucis
Dance Focus
The medial arch should have a 
beautiful dome-shaped arch; the 
lack of an arch is typically what 
instructors focus on when cueing 
you to not roll in. Weakness in 
the abductor hallucis and laxity 
in the ligaments over time will 
lead to a flattened medial arch. 
Exaggerating turnout from the 
feet instead of working turnout 
from the hips creates a col-
lapse of the medial arch, which 
can lead to numerous injuries. 
Placing equal weight along the 
lateral arch will assist in organiz-
ing the muscles to provide the 
correct spring needed along the 
medial arch. All dance styles 
require constant shifting of body weight, causing the arches to change 
form; your arches must be strong enough to tolerate these changes. You 
can use this muscle to provide support for your medial longitudinal arch 
whether you are dancing barefoot, en pointe, or in character shoes. The 
medial arch needs to become rigid and secure in relevé, lengthened but 
active in plié, and alive for balancing.

 
156
Inversion Press
 
Tibialis
posterior
Execution
1.  Sit with both knees bent and soles of the feet parallel on the floor. 
Place a medium-size ball between your feet in the area of the fore-
foot.
 2.  With the heels of both feet remaining on the floor, begin to press the 
forefeet into the ball, lifting the inner arches of both feet.
 3.  As you move your forefeet inward, press into the ball and maintain an 
isometric contraction for 2 to 4 counts. Repeat 10 to 12 times, work-
ing up to 3 sets.
 
 
 
SAfeTy TIP Avoid overstretching of the outside of the 
ankle. Use this exercise to focus on the arch-lifting aspect and 
strengthen the inside of the ankle.

 
157
Muscles Involved
Tibialis posterior
Dance Focus
The tibialis posterior supports 
the medial arch and helps resist 
pronation. Although the tibialis 
anterior also will contract, focus 
on the tibialis posterior pulling the 
foot inward and lifting the arch. 
The talus bone needs to stay in a 
relatively neutral position to pro-
vide the most stability for the foot 
and ankle. There is some natural pronation with each plié and some natural 
supination with relevé, but excessive pronation leads to numerous overuse 
injuries. In relevé, feel deep support of this tendon by visualizing its many 
insertions into the navicular bone and tarsal bones. Maintaining strength of 
the tibialis posterior tendon will help provide stability for the foot and ankle 
when landing from jumps as well. The foot begins to articulate as it meets 
the floor from a jump; the tibialis posterior can help your arch feel lifted, 
giving you smoother, more cushioned landings. Vary the tempo with this 
exercise: Move into inversion quickly and return slowly, then reverse the 
tempo change. This will provide changes in velocity of the muscle contrac-
tion, which will simulate challenges and changes in choreography.
V A r i At i o n
Resisted Inversion
1.  Wrap a resistance band around 
the sole of your foot. Stabilize it 
or hold it on the outside of your 
foot.
 2.  Pull the forefoot inward against 
the resistance of the band. Con-
tinue to move through the full 
range of motion.
 3.  This should be done in a pointed 
position and in a flexed position. 
Repeat at least 10 times with con-
trol, working up to 3 sets.

 
158
Winging
Peroneus 
longus
Peroneus 
brevis
Execution
1.  Sit with an elastic band tied together and wrapped around the fore-
foot.
 2.  Breathe comfortably and push the forefeet outward against the resis-
tance of the band.
 3.  Repeat this 10 to 12 times in a pointed position and in a flexed posi-
tion, working up to 3 sets. Reemphasize control through the full range 
of motion.
 
 
 
SAfeTy TIP Avoid creating torque through the knees; isolate 
the movement to the feet and the ankles.

 
159
Muscles Involved
Peroneus longus, peroneus brevis
Dance Focus
The combination of the 
muscles along the lateral 
lower leg and the tibialis pos-
terior (mentioned previously) 
give you support through 
the effect of a stirrup. With 
excessive range of motion 
in relevé, you need security 
to avoid twisting your ankle 
and damaging the ligaments. 
Without adequate strength 
of the peroneus muscles, the 
ankle will continue to twist, 
leaving the joint unstable. 
This goes for every style of 
dance movement and with 
every pointing position, 
relevé, push-off, and landing 
from a jump. Visualize a stir-
rup holding your ankle secure 
so you are free to point your 
foot through extreme ranges. 
The majority of injuries that 
dancers sustain are to the lower leg and foot; it is imperative that you 
strengthen the ankles to reduce the risk of traumatic injury.

 
160
Soleus
Gastrocnemius
Peroneus 
longus
Peroneus 
brevis
Relevé With Ball
start position.
Execution
1.  While facing the barre with your legs parallel, place a small ball 
between the heels. Reorganize your trunk to maintain neutral postural 
alignment. Align the tibia over the second toe.
 2.  Begin to relevé with gentle pressure against the ball and align the 
middle of the talus over the second toe.
 3.  Hold for 2 to 4 counts before returning with control. Repeat this 15 to 
30 times.
 
 
 
SAfeTy TIP to improve ankle support and control, avoid sick-
ling the ankle. Focus on relevé directly over the second and third 
metatarsals.
Muscles Involved
Gastrocnemius, soleus, peroneus longus, peroneus brevis

 
161
Dance Focus
Exercising against your own body 
weight will give you even more 
awareness and dynamic challenge. 
Use this exercise of relevé with the 
ball to reinforce the relationship of 
the talus and the heel during relevé. 
Feel the lateral and posterior lower 
leg giving you incredible support. 
Try it one time allowing the heels to 
supinate just a small amount; notice 
that you are unable to hold the ball 
and notice how the ankles feel really 
unstable. Any traveling movements 
involving pivots require power in 
order to push off in a horizontal 
direction; you will need strength in 
the lateral lower leg combined with 
strength in the gastrocnemius and 
soleus to execute the movement. The 
muscles along the outside of your 
lower leg also provide strength and 
the ability to wing your feet in a coupé-type position. Remember to control 
your movements on the landing. You have a tendency to use all of your 
efforts and momentum on the upward phase and then let gravity bring you 
down. Loss of control on the down phase puts you at risk for injury. You 
must have adequate strength to be able to recover from an extreme off-
balance accident to avoid injury.
V A r i At i o n
eccentrics With Ball
1.  Repeat this exercise, except after relevé, 
release the forefoot and dorsiflex the foot. 
Continue to hold the ball.
 2.  Slowly lower your body back down with 
one foot. Go up with two feet; return 
down with one. Reemphasize control on 
the way down.
 3.  Maintain pressure of the ball between 
the heels. Alternate legs and repeat 10 
to 12 times, working up to 3 sets. Focus 
on eccentric strength of the lower legs 
as if you are landing from a jump.

 
162
Seated Soleus Pump
Tibialis
anterior
Soleus
Heel drop.
Heel lift.
Execution
1.  While seated in a chair with your legs parallel, place your forefeet on 
a ledge while your heels remain on the floor. Check that your knees 
are at a 90-degree angle, and place a small 5-pound weight (about 2 
kg) on top of each thigh to give you more resistance.
 2.  Begin relevé into full range of motion, aligning the second toe with 
the center of the talus. Lengthen under the toes and widen the meta-
tarsals.
 3.  Return to starting position with control. Repeat 15 to 30 times, work-
ing up to 3 sets. Engage the deep soleus.
 
 
 
SAfeTy TIP to maintain control and alignment of the tibia 
bone and second metatarsal, avoid sickling the ankles.
Muscles Involved
Dorsiflexion: Tibialis anterior
Relevé: Soleus

 
163
Dance Focus
Landing from jumps with control cannot 
be emphasized enough. Strengthening the 
lower-leg muscles to control your body 
when coming down from relevé, small 
jumps, and grande allegro movements 
will give you the look of defying gravity 
and injury. Soleus pumps require you to 
maintain muscular strength as the muscle 
lengthens. When your toes first make con-
tact with the floor, there must be a signifi-
cant amount of articulation to cushion the 
landing and a significant amount of muscu-
lar endurance to support your body weight 
against gravity. The gastrocnemius typically 
fires more on the landing phase of jumping, 
so strengthening the soleus will provide 
better assistance for the gastrocnemius. The soleus muscle also contains 
more type I (slow-twitch) muscle fibers, which helps provide awareness for 
balance and security of the lower leg on the ankle. The soleus helps keep 
your body from falling forward when standing and helps maintain balance 
whether you are dancing in character shoes or en pointe. Remember that 
because of the higher content of type I fibers, the soleus is more resistant to 
fatigue; you will need to increase your repetitions to improve strength.
V A r i At i o n
Resistance Band Pump
1.  Sit on the edge of a table or hang your leg over the barre so the barre 
hits just above the back of your knee. Wrap a resistance band around the 
metatarsal heads. Keeping the toes covered, hold the band from above.
 2.  Without activating your quadriceps, push your foot into plantar 
flexion against the 
resistance of the band. 
You don’t even have 
to point your toes; just 
point the ankle.
 3.  Alternate flexing and 
pointing at the ankle 
with emphasis on the 
deep soleus contrac-
tion. Repeat 30 times 
or more, working up 
to 3 sets.
Heel 
drop.
Heel 
lift.

 
164
Toe Isolations
Execution
1.  Sit on the floor with a resistance band wrapped around toes 2 through 
5. Extend your knee, holding the ends of the band in your hands.
 2.  Allow the big toe to remain in dorsiflexion as you point the other toes 
against the resistance of the band.
 3.  Repeat this 10 to 12 times with the ankle in a pointed position and 
the big toe dorsiflexed. Move toes 2 through 5 through the full range 
of motion. You can try this one toe at a time as well to isolate the 
movement even more.
 
 
 
SAfeTy TIP resist the band’s tendency to curl and compress 
the toes. try to lengthen the toes as you point them to work 
through the intrinsic muscle group of the forefoot.
Flexor digitorum 
longus
Extensor
hallucis longus

 
165
Muscles Involved
Big toe: Extensor hallucis longus
Toes 2 through 5: Flexor digitorum longus
Dance Focus
Toe isolations make you aware of the need to use toes 2 through 5 because 
of their role in pushing you off the floor. You might have a tendency to 
overuse the big toe and the flexor hallucis longus for the push-off. Although 
the big toe does play a significant role in the push-off phase, you must 
allow the other toes to assist. Let the big toe remain in the extended posi-
tion so you can isolate the movement of plantar flexion for the other toes. 
You will also feel the extensor hallucis longus working to maintain the 
extension of the big toe. Remember that in most technique classes you 
might not do enough to build extra strength in various parts of your body. 
There is no progressive resistance in a technique class. While you may exe-
cute enough relevés in one class to strengthen your gastrocnemius, it may 
not be enough for the toe flexors or extensors.

 
166
Ankle Dorsiflexion
start position.
Execution
1.  Sit with a resistance band wrapped around your forefoot. Secure the 
other end to a stable base in front of you. Begin with the ankle in a 
softly pointed position; the band must be taut at the start of the exer-
cise.
 2.  Lift the toes against the resistance of the band and continue to 
increase the resistance by flexing the ankle. Focus on the muscles of 
the anterior tibia contracting and the posterior tibia lengthening.
 3.  Hold the contraction for 2 to 4 counts and slowly return to the start-
ing position. Maintain tautness of the band throughout the entire 
range of motion. Repeat 15 to 30 times, working up to 2 or 3 sets.
 
 
 
SAfeTy TIP to avoid sickling or winging of the foot, focus on a 
neutral position of the ankle, aligning the second toe with the tibia.
Muscles Involved
Tibialis anterior, extensor digitorum longus, extensor hallucis longus, pero-
neus tertius
Dance Focus
Keeping the front of the tibia bone strong gives you more security when 
having to dance or turn on your heels. Your warm-up includes a significant 
amount of relevé and pointing the toes but probably doesn’t include 
rocking back on your heels, which some choreographers may want. The 
muscles in the back of your lower legs are getting more work than the 
muscles along the front. This imbalance can create overuse injuries and 
can hold your technique back. More strength along the front of the tibia 
bone may also reduce the risk of shin splints. Every grande plié you execute 
Peroneus 
tertius
Tibialis
anterior
Extensor 
digitorum
longus 
Extensor 
hallucis
longus

 
167
requires contraction 
of the tibialis anterior 
muscle to support your 
tibia bone. This muscle 
also works to transfer 
your weight forward 
to prepare for relevé 
and helps to maintain 
a nice lift in your arch. 
Don’t forget about it 
in your conditioning 
schedule.
start 
position.
finish 
position.
V A r i At i o n
Ball Dorsiflexion
1.  Sit on a table and rest your foot on the top of a stability ball. Slowly 
begin to push the ball forward as the ankle moves into plantar flexion.
 2.  Allow the foot to point as it stays on top of the ball. You may feel 
a gentle stretch along the top of the ankle. Push the ball as far you 
can while keeping the toes lengthened and in contact with the ball. 
Hold that position for 2 to 4 counts.
 3.  Slowly begin to reverse the movement, pulling the ankle back into 
dorsiflexion while pressing the heel down. Lengthen through the 
Achilles and contract the tibialis anterior. Alternate plantar flexion 
and dorsiflexion with the assistance of the ball at least 15 times. 
You can decrease the size of the ball to make the exercise more 
challenging.

 

 
9
C
h
a
p
t
e
r
169
whole-body training  
for dancers
T
he field of dance anatomy and research has experienced enormous growth, 
which is inspiring for those devoted to the field. Excellent dance medicine 
specialists are located throughout the world, and their passion for helping 
dancers continues to grow. But the real value in this development benefits 
you, whether you are a dancer or a teacher. Ongoing research published in 
medical journals gives dance medicine specialists information to assist you. For 
example, studies have shown that if you incorporate simple hip flexor condi-
tioning exercises into your daily routine, you can improve the height of your 
développé. Research also concludes that overuse of the quadriceps with faulty 
turnout can lead to knee pain and injury. Integrating dance-specific exercises 
into your training will enhance performance and decrease risks of injury.
Improvement in arabesque could be as simple as strengthening the abdomi-
nals and hip extensor muscles while improving movement of the thoracic spine. 
Improving turnout could be as simple as understanding good neutral pelvic 
alignment while activating the true hip rotators. By incorporating the principles 
of body placement, you could improve coordination. When your muscles and 
bones are more aligned, you actually need less overall muscle action! Therefore, 
you can perform dance movements without straining and overusing muscles.
Small Props
The exercises in this chapter review musculature previously discussed but use 
props for added resistance. Dance class uses your own body weight for resis-
tance; this might not be enough effort to truly increase your strength. You will 
need to go beyond the training offered in dance class. By adding small apparatus 
and resistance tools, you can build strength beyond the limits of gravity, vary 
your conditioning plan, and challenge your balance skills. Resistance bands 
and free weights have already been introduced, but you can use other props 
to improve technique and keep your training interesting.
Performing exercises on a stability ball, minitrampoline, or rotating discs 
will increase your body awareness (proprioception). These small props make 
the exercises more challenging. Challenging your balance in more extreme 
ways can improve overall balance by transferring the sensations to your dance 
experiences.
You are able to maintain balance from three sources: visual input from your 
eyes, sensory receptors of the inner ear, and receptors in the muscles and 
joints that help postural control. Anytime you try to maintain your balance on 
an uneven or unstable surface, you challenge your sensory receptors to work 
harder. To advance any of the exercises throughout this book, close your eyes 
w

 
170 
Dance anatomy
at various times to focus on integration of mind and body. Have you ever lost 
your balance when the stage lights suddenly change or go to a blackout? Do 
you notice how your balance is weak after an injury? Adolescent growth spurts 
can compromise balance as well as cause fatigue. Any abrupt changes in your 
sensory systems will weaken proprioception. Training your balance skills will 
improve acuity and precision of movement.
Training Specifics
If you’re concerned about fitting all of these exercises into your busy schedule, 
focus on a few exercises at a time and slowly incorporate a few into your 
warm-up and others into your cool-down. Try taking one concept at a time, 
work on it for a week, then gradually add in another. Execute several exer-
cises from the first four chapters every other day and the extremity exercises 
on alternating days. Use the exercises to make positive changes in the way 
you work.
 1.  Organize your thoughts to perform each exercise with efficiency. Align-
ment is essential for precision of movement; it is a whole-body sensation. 
Continue to visualize each movement of your dancing along the various 
planes of your body. Notice how you can gradually change poor habits 
and improve your lines.
 2.  Maintain spinal stability while releasing unnecessary tension. Improve 
your lung capacity by incorporating good breathing patterns while 
dancing. Deeper breathing enhances core control and supports moving 
from your center. Imagine your breath reaching every muscle in your 
body to enhance every movement.
 3.  Improvement in proprioception includes mind–body integration while 
advancing the functional work. Maintain balance awareness while the 
base of support changes during various floor exercises. Continue to 
focus on postural awareness while moving from the floor to the barre 
and into center. Imagine your new balance skills working while you’re 
turning, jumping, and balancing in relevé.
 4.  To gain muscular strength, warm up your body and repeat exercises to 
fatigue without compromising alignment. You can increase repetitions 
or increase resistance, but vary your speed to correlate with changing 
dance tempos. Practice your favorite dance steps with the same attack 
and vigor. Repeat basic jump variations to focus more on controlling 
the landing. Increase the number of repetitions to improve your car-
diorespiratory endurance. To avoid faulty compensations, focus on the 
muscle group creating the movement.
Dance-Focused Exercise
The following exercises are full of challenges. You will add props and more full-
body, functional movement. Imagine applying the principles of each exercise 
to your specific dance style. Memorize the correct desired movement for the 

 
whole-boDy training for Dancers 
171
best results. You are taking your work to the next level, increasing the chal-
lenges for the core and your balance.
Your mind is a powerful tool. Be selective with what you focus on. Quiet 
your mind so that you can concentrate on the specific area of the body 
you are working. Before each exercise, zero in on the starting position and 
movement execution while maintaining a feeling of ease. Speak to yourself 
using only positive reinforcement! Keep the flow of mental talk inspiring 
and optimistic.

 
172
Wall Plié
Execution
1.  Place your back against the wall. Turn out your legs and place your 
feet wider than your hips (feet are aligned according to what your 
turnout allows). Place a ball between each thigh and the wall. Inhale 
to prepare and maintain a neutral spine and pelvis.
 2.  On exhalation, press your thighs into the balls by contracting the 
deep rotators. Focus on maintaining a neutral pelvis. Align the femurs 
over the midtalus and second metatarsals and hold for 2 to 4 counts. 
Repeat 8 times.
Piriformis
Gemellus superior
Gemellus inferior
Obturator internus
Obturator externus
Quadratus 
femoris
Transversus abdominis
Biceps 
femoris

 
173
Muscles Involved
Transversus abdominis, biceps femoris, piriformis, gemellus superior, gemel-
lus inferior, obturator internus, obturator externus, quadratus femoris
Dance Focus
Ease in the hips without strain-
ing through the trunk allows for 
a better turnout. Use the wall 
plié exercise to focus on the deep 
hip rotators while maintaining a 
neutral and secure position of the 
pelvis. Memorize the feeling of 
true external rotation in the hip 
without overuse of the sartorius 
or lateral thigh or tilting of the 
pelvis. Focus on alignment of the 
femur over the second toe; avoid 
any torque throughout the knee. 
The long line of the tibia should 
be placed directly over the center 
of your foot. Close your eyes for 
a moment and visualize the deep 
external obturator as it contracts 
and pulls the femur outward to 
increase the turnout. Now relax 
the rotators. Repeat the detail of 
the contraction again until you 
feel how firm and supportive this 
muscle is in rotating your thigh outward. It’s important to reemphasize hip 
disassociation: Let the movement occur in the hip joint so the thighs open 
into external rotation while the pelvis and spine are stable.

 
174
Internal 
oblique
External 
oblique
Quadratus 
lumborum
Erector 
spinae
Side Bend With Resistance
Execution
1.  Stand firm and steady with legs in second position. Hold the ends of 
a resistance band in each hand overhead. Feel the weight of the arms 
traveling down to your scapulae, and widen the arms enough to pro-
vide challenging resistance throughout the exercise.
 2.  As you begin to inhale, lift and lengthen through the spine. Move 
along your frontal plane and bend directly to the right side. Glide the 
right scapula downward. Maintain firm resistance with the band. Hold 
as you exhale.
 3.  Flex the left ankle and feel lengthening along that leg. Focus on the 
left heel and thigh working together to maintain turnout along the 
leg. Reach the left sit bone to the floor. Inhale to return. Repeat 8 
times on each side.

 
175
 
 
SafeTy TiP Maintain your neutral body placement to avoid 
anterior pelvic tilt, and work to avoid twisting in the knees.
Muscles Involved
Internal oblique, external oblique, quadratus lumborum, erector spinae
Dance Focus
Because of the lack of flexibility along 
the thoracic spine, a side bend can be 
challenging. The rule of axial elongation 
applies throughout the entire length of the 
movement. This will create more height 
along the spinal column to increase motion 
while your head balances with ease on 
top. Feel as though you are moving every 
vertebra separately to achieve a more flex-
ible but secure spine. Any side bend should 
create a long, lifted arch for aesthetics 
and for injury prevention. Lengthening 
along your spine provides for more space 
between the vertebrae and less compres-
sion on the discs. Moving directly along 
your frontal plane for each cambré side 
or side tilt movement will be more effi-
cient and aesthetically pleasing than if you 
moved on a diagonal plane. Awakening 
the lateral breath movement will give your 
spine a flexible but secure quality. Your 
pelvis should feel anchored to resist the 
trunk’s upward pull. Toward the comple-
tion of the side bend, the lower rib cage needs to have a lifted quality as 
well. Visualize a half moon and imagine soaring sideways!

 
176
Erector 
spinae  
Multifidi  
Latissimus 
dorsi  
Trapezius 
Triceps 
External 
oblique
Internal
oblique 
Diagonal Twist
start 
position.
Execution
1.  Sit on a stability ball with hips and knees flexed at 90 degrees and feet 
on the floor. Wrap a resistance band high over the left shoulder; both 
hands hold the ends. Your pelvis remains neutral on the stability ball 
while your trunk rotates to the left. Hands holding the resistance band 
remain aligned with your sternum. Inhale to prepare.
 2.  On exhalation, engage the deep abdominals, obliques, and scapular 
stabilizers to rotate your trunk to the right. The arms pull against the 
resistance of the band in a downward right diagonal pattern.
 3.  Hold this position for 2 to 4 counts. Feel the oblique musculature 
working to support your center. Maintain alignment of the hands and 
extended elbows with the sternum. Return slowly with inhalation. 
Repeat 6 to 8 times on each side.

 
177
 
 
SafeTy TiP Avoid twisting and instability in the lower back by 
maintaining awareness of deep abdominal contraction to support 
the spine.
Muscles Involved
Latissimus dorsi, lower trapezius, triceps brachii, internal oblique, external 
oblique, erector spinae, multifidi
Dance Focus
Coordinating strength in rotational 
and spiraling movements requires 
strength in the core and deep spine. 
To allow for more rotation, release 
tension in the neck and shoulders 
before the spiral occurs. Remember 
to engage the lower abdominals 
to secure the lower spine. This will 
also allow for more rotation. The 
diagonal twist is wonderful for the 
ballroom dancer who has been 
practicing for hours in upper-back 
extension and left trunk rotation. 
Remember the obliques are working 
for you on both sides; the inter-
nal oblique is contracting on the 
same side as the rotation, while the 
external oblique is contracting on 
the opposite side. The same muscle 
assistance applies with the deep 
erector spinae muscles: While mus-
cles contract to produce movement 
on one side, you also have muscles contracting on the opposite side. This 
reinforces the need to move from your center; you have to initiate spiral 
movement from deep in the core and close to the spine.

 
178
High Kick With Resistance
Iliopsoas
Adductor 
longus  
Adductor 
brevis
Execution
1.  Begin with the left hand on the barre and the right leg in a turned-out 
tendu position to the side. Tie one end of a resistance band around 
the ankle of the right leg and the other end to an immovable object 
to the side. Reorganize your neutral placement. Secure the turned-out 
supporting leg by engaging the gluteus medius.
 2.  Bring the leg quickly through first position and cross through fifth into 
a battement devant against the resistance of the band holding firmly 
along the outside. Coordinate your breathing so that you inhale as the 
leg goes up.
 3.  Initiate the movement from the core and inner thighs in the low 
range. Use the brush through first to fifth to emphasize hip adduc-
tion, then engage the iliopsoas as soon as possible to elevate the leg. 
Return slowly with control.

 
179
4.  Lengthen through the spine and quadratus lumborum. Maintain turn-
out throughout the entire exercise and repeat 4 times; then repeat 4 
more times without the resistance.
 
 
 
SafeTy TiP Avoid lateral hip hike. The trunk muscles want to 
pull your pelvis upward. Anchor your pelvis. Move the thigh, not 
the pelvis.
Muscles Involved
Adductor longus, adductor brevis 
(low level), iliopsoas (higher level)
Dance Focus
Lifting the legs with ease and grace 
means no extra adjustments, unnec-
essary weight shift, or overuse of the 
quadriceps. Working effectively the 
first time reduces the risk of injury 
and improves your technique. The 
higher your leg goes, the harder the 
deep iliopsoas must contract. Keep 
working to maintain turnout as much 
as you can. When the working leg 
begins to turn in, the anterior fibers 
of the gluteus minimus and medius 
begin to take over and will elevate 
your hip. Visualize the attachment 
of the iliopsoas on the inside of the 
femur. Initiate the movement from 
that area of the thigh and let your leg 
float up to your chest. With each leg 
lift, lengthen the hamstrings, buttocks, and lower-spine musculature. Train 
your inhalation to help elevate your leg and your exhalation to secure your 
spine as the leg lowers. Your legs can fly!

 
180
Semitendinosus
Semimembranosus
Gemellus 
superior
Piriformis
Gemellus 
inferior
Obturator 
internus
Gluteus 
maximus
Obturator 
externus
Biceps 
femoris
Quadratus 
femoris
attitude on Disc
Execution
1.  Face the barre with the right leg turned out on a disc. Your left leg is 
in coupé position. Organize your placement and balance.
 2.  Coordinate inhalation with hip extension, moving from coupé to atti-
tude derrière. As the leg elevates, there must be a slight accommodat-
ing forward shift of your body. Reemphasize the deep rotators turning 
out the attitude derrière leg. Engage your deep abdominals to support 
the lower spine. Lengthen the thoracic spine into a long arch.
 3.  Hold for 2 to 4 counts, focusing on the gluteus maximus and ham-
strings. With exhalation and control, reverse the movement to return 
to coupé. Repeat 8 times on each side.

 
181
 
 
SafeTy TiP Protect your lower spine by engaging the deep 
abdominals.
Muscles Involved
Piriformis, gemellus superior, gemellus inferior, obturator internus, 
obturator externus, quadratus femoris, gluteus maximus, biceps femoris, 
semitendinosus, semimembranosus
Dance Focus
Initiating extension to the back with the 
muscles that are primarily responsible for 
that movement will improve the qual-
ity of your technique. Your arabesques 
will improve when you can protect your 
lower spine and develop more strength 
in the hamstrings and gluteus maximus. 
Practice moving your leg to the back and 
see how far your leg will go before your 
lower spine moves. You might be capable 
of only 15 degrees of movement; in that 
case, shift forward slightly to accommo-
date but continue to lift the leg from the 
hamstrings and gluteus maximus contrac-
tion. Whether you are moving into a low 
attitude or a full arabesque, engage the 
abdomen to support your spine. Incorpo-
rate more movement along your thoracic 
spine. As you maintain a strong lift in the 
abdomen, visualize the vertebrae in your 
midback moving into extension. You have 
more movement capabilities in the upper 
back and chest area than you think. It’s not 
about only arching your lower back. Use 
the deep turnout muscles to avoid twisting in the pelvis. Remember your 
spine is elongated and moving in the longest possible arch. Coordination 
and beautiful alignment will also reduce tension in the neck and shoulders.

 
182
Plank and Pike
Pectoralis 
major
Transversus 
abdominis
Iliopsoas
start position.
Execution
1.  Lay the front of your trunk over a stability ball. Walk your hands out 
until you reach a plank position with the tibias resting on top of the 
ball. Knees are straight and elbows are straight but not locked. Engage 
the scapular stabilizers and all trunk stabilizers.
 2.  On inhalation, initiate the movement with a slight posterior tilt as well 
as a deep abdominal and hip flexor contraction to elevate your hips 
into a pike. Lengthen through your spine as you pull the ball toward 
your chest, pointing your feet.

 
183
3.  Hold this position for 2 to 4 counts with inhalation. Reemphasize 
scapular depression and adduction. Slowly return to the beginning 
plank position with exhalation. Hold the trunk firm to protect your 
spine. Repeat 6 to 8 times.
 
 
 
SafeTy TiP Maintain scapular stability. Avoid winging of the 
scapula. Engage the deep abdominals to resist gravity pulling 
your spine into extension.
Muscles Involved
Transversus abdominis, iliopsoas, pectoralis major, anterior deltoid
Dance Focus
Some of the most captivating 
and challenging choreogra-
phy comes from dancing on 
the hands. That might mean 
cartwheels, back handsprings, 
push-ups, or falling on one 
hand. Regardless of the move-
ment, you must be prepared and 
strong. Most dance technique 
classes won’t work your upper 
body and core sufficiently; it is 
up to you to put it all together. 
The plank and pike is a fully 
integrated mind-to-body skill. 
The small postural muscles close 
to your spine as well as your 
larger muscles contract. Awaken 
your breathing skills to assist 
with any movement of this kind. 
Practice deep lateral inhalation 
to prepare yourself and forced exhalation on the movement to support 
yourself. But if you find yourself losing stability in the lower back, increase 
your lower-abdominal training. If you find you are unable to maintain stabil-
ity with the scapulae, increase your shoulder exercises. Choreography that 
uses plank-type poses is challenging and risky if you are weak. Conditioning 
will give you a powerful, accomplished look.

 
184
Bounding
Pectoralis 
major
Trapezius
Rhomboid
Serratus 
anterior
Anterior 
deltoid
Execution
1.  Begin in a classic push-up position with hands wider than shoulder 
width on a minitramp. Legs are extended and feet are on the floor. 
Reorganize your trunk for core control. You can also begin with knees 
on the floor.
 2.  While breathing comfortably, bend the elbows with control to initiate 
a push-up. Maintain scapular stability.
 3.  Press into the tramp and push into the air, returning with control. 
Repeat 6 to 8 times.
start position.
finish position.

 
185
 
 
SafeTy TiP Maintain lower-back stability with trunk control. 
Maintain scapular control and engage the wrist flexors to avoid 
hyperextension of the wrists.
Muscles Involved
Pectoralis major, anterior deltoid, serratus anterior, lower trapezius, 
rhomboid
Dance Focus
This rebounding exercise is an 
excellent way to challenge your 
core and shoulders to execute 
almost any tricky choreography. 
This is also an excellent exercise 
for dynamic stability. Bounding on 
the trampoline is another form of 
resistance training. Your muscles 
lengthen under the load in the 
down phase (which is the eccen-
tric contraction), followed by a 
quick, strong concentric contrac-
tion to push you into the air. This 
combination can help you develop 
greater muscular power. The con-
trolled falls made so famous by the 
Graham technique would seem effortless with greater muscular power. All 
fall-and-recover movements in jazz styles would require less tension if you 
had greater muscular power. Training safely with organized rebounding-
type exercises will prepare you for the complexity of atypical choreographic 
falls.

 
186
Rectus 
abdominis
External 
oblique
Erector
spinae
Internal 
oblique
Gluteus 
maximus
Semimembranosus
Semitendinosus
Biceps femoris
Gastrocnemius
Soleus
Intrinsic foot 
muscles
airplane Balance
 
Execution
1.  Stand in the middle of the minitramp on one leg in parallel position. 
The other leg is in parallel arabesque. Lengthen along your spine and 
move into a flat-back position. Bring your arms out to the side.
 2.  Organize your balance skills and place your weight between the ball 
of the foot and the heel. Using the intrinsic muscles of your foot, add 
a small demi-plié.
 3.  Maintain your balance for 10 to 30 seconds. Rest and repeat on each 
side 3 times. Breathe comfortably. Release tension in the neck and 
shoulders. Use abdominal control and the principle of axial elonga-
tion.
 

 
187
 
 
SafeTy TiP Try this on the floor first before using the trampo-
line. Balance in a short demi-plié; maintain knee alignment over 
the second toe.
Muscles Involved
Rectus abdominis, internal oblique, external oblique, erector spinae
Standing leg: Intrinsic foot muscles, gastrocnemius, soleus, 
semimembranosus, semitendinosus, gluteus maximus, gluteus 
minimus, biceps femoris
Arabesque leg: Semimembranosus, semitendinosus, gluteus maximus, 
biceps femoris
Dance Focus
Improving balance skills can reduce 
the risk of injury, relieve unneces-
sary tension, and improve jumps and 
turns. Take a little time each day to 
practice balancing. If you don’t have 
a minitramp, then balance in the sand 
or on a pillow. Find your center and 
placement beginning along the arches 
of your foot. Align your weight over 
the first and fifth metatarsals and the 
heel. Feel the deep intrinsics support-
ing you. Focus on your deep postural 
muscles along your spine and down 
the leg. When you are truly balanced, 
you will actually need less muscular 
effort, which means more efficient work. Breathe comfortably through the 
balancing process. Let your breathing quiet your center and release tension. 
Gather your thoughts and organize your body to maintain a healthy balance 
between body, mind, and spirit.

 
188
Parallel Dégagé
 
Gluteus 
medius
Execution
1.  Stand with your legs parallel. Loop an elastic band around both ankles 
and rest both hands on the barre.
 2.  Breathing comfortably, begin to move your gesture leg in a series of 
parallel dégagés against the resistance of the band.
 3.  Maintain your stable neutral position by lifting from the waist and 
holding your pelvis steady and firm. Feel the gluteus medius of the 
gesture leg working against the resistance of the band and the gluteus 
medius of the supporting leg helping you maintain a secure pelvis.
 4.  Begin with 8 to 10 repetitions on each leg. Work up to 3 full sets.
 

 
189
 
 
SafeTy TiP Maintain stability in the lower back. Do not allow 
the resistance of the band to hike up the hip. Isolate the move-
ment at the thigh only.
Muscles Involved
Gluteus medius
Dance Focus
Remember, in order to truly gain 
strength you must add resistance train-
ing to your conditioning program. 
Pelvic stability is another key to improv-
ing posture and technique. Let this 
exercise help you get in tune with the 
outside of your pelvis to assist you in 
gaining strength. The gluteus medius 
will help you on the supporting leg 
with développé and grande battement 
work. The gluteus medius also will help 
your gesture leg during all side layout 
positions, traveling steps to the side, 
and jumping combinations. For added 
pelvic stability, feel the lengthening 
along the spine and squeeze the but-
tocks together. Focus on separating 
your thigh from your lower back, which 
will want to move. Feel solid all the 
way down the supporting leg. As you 
increase the number of repetitions, you also will feel the work along the 
hips of the supporting leg and the gesture leg.
Although the gluteus medius is the main muscle worked, this exercise 
engages the whole body due to its focus on stability. 

 

 
191
ExErcisE findEr
spinE
Locating Neutral .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 20
Leg Glide  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 22
Trunk Curl Isometrics  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 24
Hip Flexor Isometrics  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 26
Spinal Brace  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 28
Ischial Squeeze  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 30
ribs and brEath
Lateral Breathing  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 40
Breathing With Side Bend  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 42
Breathing With Port de Bras  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 44
Thoracic Extension  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 46
Breathing Plié  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 48
corE
Side Bend  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 58
Trunk Curl  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 60
Oblique Lift  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 62
Side Lift  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 64
Coccyx Balance .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 66
Modified Swan  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 68
Trunk Twist .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 70
shouldEr GirdlE and arms
External and Internal Rotation  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 82
Wall Press .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 84
Port de Bras  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 86
Biceps Curl  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 88
Triceps Pull  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 90

 
192 
exercise finder
Vs   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 92
Rowing .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 94
Plank  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 96
Reverse Plank  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 98
pElvis and hips
Plié Heel Squeeze  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 108
Coupé Turn-In  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 110
Passé Press  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 112
Inner-Thigh Press  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 114
Arabesque Prep  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 116
Hip Flexor Pulse  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 118
Attitude Lift  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 120
Hip Flexor Stretch .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 122
lEGs
Short Arcs .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 130
Wall Sit .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 132
Hamstring Curl  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 134
Hamstring Lift .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 136
Side Scissor .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 138
Assisted Développé .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 140
Descending Battement  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 142
anklEs and fEEt
Doming  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 152
Big-Toe Abduction  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 154
Inversion Press  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 156
Winging  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 158
Relevé With Ball  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 160
Seated Soleus Pump  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 162
Toe Isolations  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 164
Ankle Dorsiflexion  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 166

 
exercise finder 
193
WholE body
Wall Plié  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 172
Side Bend With Resistance  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 174
Diagonal Twist  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 176
High Kick With Resistance  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 178
Attitude on Disc  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 180
Plank and Pike  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 182
Bounding  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 184
Airplane Balance .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 186
Parallel Dégagé .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 188

 

 
195
about thE author
J
acqui Greene Haas has been the athletic trainer for the Cincinnati Ballet 
since 1989, is the director of dance medicine academic seminars (www.
dancemedicine.net), and is the director of the dance medicine division of Wel-
lington Orthopedics in Cincinnati, Ohio, where she treats dancers in physical 
therapy, postsurgical rehabilitation, and general conditioning.
A former professional ballet dancer with Boston Ballet, Southern Ballet The-
atre, Tampa Ballet, New Orleans Ballet, and Cincinnati Ballet, Jacqui holds a BA 
in dance from the University of South Florida and an athletic training certificate 
from the University of Cincinnati. She also has a certificate in Pilates instruc-
tion from St. Francis Memorial Hospital dance division in San Francisco and a 
certificate in Pilates rehabilitation from Polestar Education in Miami, Florida. 
She has developed injury-prevention programs for numerous dance studios 
as well as the McGing Irish Dancers, the School for Creative and Performing 
Arts, and the University of Cincinnati dance department.
Jacqui is a frequent presenter, speaking to dancers, instructors, and health 
care practitioners, including presentations at the International Association of 
Dance Medicine and Science and the National Athletic Trainers’ Association 
conferences. She has been published in Dance magazine and Advance Reha-
bilitation magazine.
Photo courtesy of Peter Mueller

 

 
You’ll find other outstanding dance resources at
www.HumanKinetics.com/dance
In the U.S. call 1-800-747-4457
Australia 08 8372 0999 • Canada 1-800-465-7301 
Europe +44 (0) 113 255 5665 • New Zealand 0800 222 062
HUMAN KINETICS
The Premier Publisher for Sports & Fitness 
P.O. Box 5076 • Champaign, IL 61825-5076 USA

 

 
ANATOMY SERIES
ANATOMY SERIES
ANATOMY SERIES
ANATOMY SERIES
O
S
S
O
S
S
O
S
S
ANATOMY SERIES
ANATOMY SERIES
ANATOMY SERIES
ANATOMY SERIES
ANATOMY SERIES
ANATOMY SERIES
ANATOMY SERIES
ANATOMY SERIES
ANATOMY SERIES
ANATOMY SERIES
ANATOMY SERIES
ANATOMY SERIES
ANATOMY SERIES
ANATOMY SERIES
Each book in the Anatomy Series provides detailed, full-color anatomical illustrations of the 
muscles in action and step-by-step instructions that detail perfect technique and form for each 
pose, exercise, movement, stretch, and stroke.
To place your order, U.S. customers call TOLL FREE1-800-747-4457 
In Canada call 1-800-465-7301 • In Europe call +44 (0) 113 255 5665 • In Australia call 08 8372 0999   
In New Zealand call 0800 222 062 • or visit www.HumanKinetics.com/Anatomy  
HUMAN KINETICS
The Premier Publisher for Sports & Fitness
P.O. Box 5076, Champaign, IL 61825-5076
POSTERS

 

