THE ARMAGEDDON BLUES 
Daniel Keys Moran    

 
This is a work of fiction. None of the characters in it are real 
people and any resemblance to anybody, living or dead, is a co-
incidence. 
 
It is the author’s intention that this work should be freely 
downloadable, copyable, and shareable in electronic format. It 
may not be reproduced, shared, or transmitted for a fee by any 
party to whom the author has not contractually granted permis-
sion. The author retains all other rights.  
 
Copyright © 1987 by Daniel Keys Moran 
All Rights Reserved 
 
 

Dedicated to 
 
The first edition of this book, many years ago, was dedicated to 
my sister Kari, for couch and hamburgers during hard times. 
 
This edition is dedicated to Alex and Andrea and Bram and 
Richard and Connor. For helping me get out of bed every morn-
ing. 
 
Furniture in both dedications. I wouldn’t attach any significance 
to that, really. 


    
THE ARMAGEDDON BLUES 
A Tale of the Great Wheel 


 
A NOTE FROM the author:  The following is compiled from a num-
ber of sources, including humans. It may therefore be inaccurate 
in a number of details. In fact, considering the humans involved, 
I will go farther than that. 
What follows is not accurate. 
It is not truth. 
It is ... elegant. 
I am a computer. 


 
All The Time In The World  


    
 
CONSIDER THE EXPLOSION of a thermonuclear weapon. 
From an insignificant collection of radioactives and support-
ing hardware, the bomb expands within seconds to a thundering 
mushroom cloud of stunning size and power. 
(Psychedelic mushrooms, yeah, yeah, yeah.) 
Hold this image most clearly in mind, please—small metal 
egg of the technological demons to the fires of a somewhat less 
sophisticated era’s hell; flash. Do you see it, do you have the im-
age, do you understand? 
To comprehend the essence of the personality of Georges 
Mordreaux, take this image, this process, and reverse it. 
(Add the sound of Japanese wind chimes. Georges Mordreaux 
is a happy man. 
(Naturally.) 
A BRIEF ASIDE: It is the opinion of the author that the sound of 
an atomic bomb exploding in reverse is squilchgmp! 
The author is willing to concede that he could be wrong, but 
adds that, until such time as he is proven incorrect, he will con-
tinue to hold this opinion. 
DATELINE 2052 GREGORIAN. 
Marchand the Hunter went into the deep Burns after her 
daughter. 
The child was five Colds, and she knew no better; the night-
time glow of the Burn beckoned, and she went. The Clan of 
Hammel, migrating through the Big Desert by the Waters, 
pressed on. It was death to enter the Burns. They knew they 
would never see Marchand again. 
Three days later Marchand d’Loria y ken Hammel staggered 
out of the darkness, past the Clan’s sentries and into the ring of 
camp fires. Dilann, her daughter, was clutched in her arms. 
Marchand died the next morning. 
To the awe of the entire Clan, Marchand’s daughter survived. 
Before Dilann’s sixth birthday, the Clan, or what was left of the 

6  Daniel Keys Moran 
Clan after the desert trek, had reached the forests by the Big 
Waters of the North Coast. 
What was left of the Clan prospered. Dilann became known 
as Dilann d’Arsennette, the lady of the fires. 
Only one of Dilann’s three children survived to adulthood. All 
three of Dilann’s children were mutant, as was to be expected of 
the offspring of one who had survived the banked fires of Arma-
geddon. 
The child who lived was a girl, Rhia, tall and fair and strong. 
Her eyes were bright silver. 
Dilann’s grandchildren, every one, had silver eyes. 
DATELINE 1917 GREGORIAN. 
Verdun, France: The Western Front. 
When Georges was a younger man—not a young man, no, 
but younger—the world had gotten together for a while and de-
clared a social event called the Great War, the War to End All 
Wars, and later, World War One. (Rumors to the contrary, there 
was no American aviator named Snoopy, famed for his duels 
with the Red Baron. That all came later.) 
Georges Mordreaux, through some bad timing on his part 
and the jealousy of the husband of a wife, found himself in the 
middle of this silly conflict, yes sir. 
What should have been his last thought, as the German sol-
dier came up out of the rain-soaked trench, bayonet in hand, 
was that’s a muddy bayonet, as though it could possibly make 
any difference whether he was killed with a clean bayonet or a 
dirty one. (Georges was a perfectionist of sorts; even when it was 
in style, some years in his future, he refused to drink his milk 
out of a dirty glass.) 
Georges came to some hours later, so the overhead sun, peek-
ing cautiously through gray clouds, informed him. He was being 
dragged away from the front. All around he saw the rest of the 
French army, retreating methodically and with great haste. 
Georges’ corporal, Henri, who was nineteen and who, Georges 
later heard, became a hero Taking A Hill that nobody gave a 
damn about anyway, saw that Georges’ eyes were open, and mo-

The Armageddon Blues  7 
 
tioned to the soldier holding Georges’ right arm to drag him the 
rest of the way to his feet. Georges stumbled a few steps over the 
ragged, shell-torn ground, before gaining his balance. 
Georges could not think clearly; there was a vast pain in his 
neck that was only beginning to abate. The terrain about them 
seemed vaguely familiar. After nearly a kilometer, the retreat 
slowed, then stopped; they began digging in, grimly determined 
that the Germans would go no further. 
Night descended like a raven. Soldiers were still stringing 
barbed wire on grimy, rotting wood posts, and the shattered 
fragments of shell-torn trees. They had to pull dead men off 
some of the trees before they could use them. Georges and the 
remains of his company—Henri—sat in the muddy trenches, try-
ing to nurse a small fire, raised a few inches over the mud. They 
were having some success, more than anyone else, but still the 
flame was weak. 
Georges had not spoken since awakening. When Henri spoke 
to him, he found himself unable to answer, having, uh, no vocal 
cords to speak of. They knitted as the night wore on; the scar on 
his neck began to fade. Near midnight, he whispered, in a voice 
like ground glass, “Henri? What happened to me?” 
Henri was hunched over the small fire, trying to light a damp 
cigarette that was already half smoked. He finally produced a 
dim glow in the tip of the cigarette, and sat back against the 
trenchwall. “Don’t know, Georges. German stuck you...” He hesi-
tated. “It looked like your head came off. That’s just what it 
looked like.” He shrugged indifferently. “I shot the German. 
When I looked again your head was in place and there was a 
bleeding gash all around your neck.” 
Georges touched the skin above his collar. There was a thin 
ridge he could barely feel. He nodded. “I used to wonder if I 
could die.” 
“Georges?” 
“This area looks familiar,” whispered Georges. “I think this is 
where General Dumouriez stopped the Prussians, when they 
were trying to help King Louis restore the monarchy. The day 
after the battle ...” He shook his head, and winced at the faint 

8  Daniel Keys Moran 
ghost of pain. “That was September 20. In 1792. The next day 
the National Convention declared we were a Republic.” Henri 
was staring at him, wide-eyed, across the fire. “In January,” said 
Georges in a voice distant with memory, “we cut King Louis’ 
head off.” 
Henri turned his face away from Georges, and drew his coat 
about himself. He clutched his rifle tightly. (In the morning he 
was gone, and that was the last time Georges saw him, because 
three days later, while Taking a Hill that nobody gave a damn 
about anyway, he became a Hero of the French Republic, his last 
thoughts being of Georges Mordreaux. Ironically, it was a Ger-
man boy with a bayonet who got him too, although the resem-
blance stops there. The German boy—he was actually younger 
than Henri, and his name is unimportant, since like Henri he 
did not survive the war—this German boy put his bayonet in 
from behind, and the corporal did not resurrect. Ah, well.) 
Georges spent the rest of the night trying to whistle. He did 
quite creditably. 
Georges thought, with some irritation at himself, that there 
ought to be some point to be learned from having one’s head cut 
off, and surviving the experience. He could not think of one, 
however, aside from the obvious. He was very glad to be alive. 
In some ways, thought Georges Mordreaux, I am a very shal-
low fellow. Ah, well. 
THE AUTHOR NOTES that in the year 1917, Georges Mordreaux 
was two hundred and five years old. 
Perhaps he was a bit shallow, at that. 
ONE OF THE definitions of the word “entropy,” as given by Web-
ster’s Third New International Dictionary, is: “The degradation 
of the matter and energy in the universe to an ultimate state of 
inert uniformity.” Put more simply; “Things run down.” 
Georges never read dictionaries. He considered them, being 
as they were largely artificial attempts to impose order on the 
anarchistic languages of man, very much beneath him. 

The Armageddon Blues  9 
 
About order-imposers, as dictionary compilers; Georges was 
better at it. 
Indeed, one might consider Georges Mordreaux “The Enemy 
of Entropy.” 
Georges liked to. 
WHEN THE FIRE came, and the superpowers decided to sterilize 
the face of the planet, the freeways survived. 
(Vista: A thousand-and-one mushroom clouds dotting the 
face of a small planet. Terminal acne. Winding lazily among the 
mushrooms, strips of concrete, over-extended roads, observed 
the going-ons, and later, when the barbarians and the mutants 
came howling out of the radioactive Burns to trek the surface of 
the freeways among the dead shells of the automobiles, the 
freeways might have giggled to themselves. Eventually the cars 
were dragged from the freeways for use in making weapons, and 
the freeways were left alone to contemplate their freewayness.) 
DATELINE 711 A.T.F. (After the Fire).  
Ralesh caught her before she had even reached the hills be-
yond the forest. The little girl had fallen asleep beneath an old 
willow, at the edge of the grassy meadow that led up to the foot-
hills. Ralesh, a woman of early years, awoke the five-year old 
unceremoniously, and ran the child the kilometers back to the 
Clan House without comment. 
She whipped the child publicly. Five lashes; she was not a 
severe mother. When the punishment was over, she took her 
daughter back to the Girls’ House. She put her daughter to bed; 
kissed her on the forehead, and said gently, “Child, the woods 
are dangerous for children. There are bears and Real Indians. 
There is nothing at the end of the Big Road; the stories are lies.” 
Her daughter stared up at the oak planks of the Girls’ House. 
She did not speak. 
Ralesh sighed. “Daughter, understand this; I will catch you. 
You cannot run so far nor so fast that I will not find you. Re-
member that.” She left, and left the girl alone. 

10  Daniel Keys Moran 
When she was gone, Jalian d’Arsennette, the straight-line 
female descendant of Dilann d’Arsennette, finally let the tears 
come. It was strange, though; the tears were external, they 
tracked down her cheeks and she could hear herself sobbing, but 
inside none of it mattered. 
Inside she was as cold and calm as an elder Hunter. They 
would be watching her now; but now was not always. Summer 
would come again. 
Ralesh’s words stayed with her, though, like a curse that 
would not be shaken. 
“You cannot run so far nor so fast ... I will catch you.” 
Jalian’s hands clenched into fists. Summer would come. 
THEY GAVE JALIAN few duties on the day the Hunters came back; 
she finished them early, and slipped out of the Clan House when 
nobody was watching her. She wandered through the village 
aimlessly, stopping to play a game of strike with one of the boys. 
(She was only beginning to understand that boys were not fit 
company; she had not yet learned why that was so, except that 
in all the stories it was the boys who caused the Fire.) 
By the time the watch was preparing to change, she had 
reached the clearing that separated Selvren village from the for-
est. She squirmed into what cover she could find at the south 
end of the clearing; brown-haired and brown-clothed, she would 
have been hard to see in any case. Against the brown summer 
meadow grass she was next to invisible. 
The clearing was a ten-second run for Jalian, from one end to 
the other, and it was in clear view of the Clan House. Out in 
front of the Clan House the men were tending the fires that 
would be used to smoke the catch the Hunters returned with. 
Ten seconds. 
The watch’s replacements arrived. The women stood to-
gether, gossiping for a few moments, before the new guards as-
sumed their posts. 
Jalian drew her legs up under her, checked her knife to make 
sure the sheath was securely tied down, peered toward the Clan 
House one last time.... 

The Armageddon Blues  11 
 
She ran. 
Ten seconds was a long time; long enough to think of exactly 
what Ralesh would do to her if she was seen, if she was caught. 
Run, and run, and run.... Jalian reached the trees at the north 
end of the clearing, running as fast as she had ever run before. 
Her foot caught in a tuft of the long brown grass at the last in-
stant and sent her tumbling. She did her best to convert it into a 
roll as she had been taught, but still the wind was knocked from 
her lungs and she had trouble breathing when she regained her 
feet. Fighting silently to pull air into her emptied lungs, Jalian 
squirmed up to the edge of the decent cover and peered out. 
There was no unusual activity over at the long wooden Clan 
House, nothing out of the ordinary for early morning in the late 
thaw-time ... she had not been seen. 
Jalian grinned fiercely. It would be late afternoon, now, be-
fore she was missed, and by then she would be long gone. They 
would know where she had gone, when she failed to show up to 
help with the preparation of the Ceremony meal, but by then, 
with luck, it would be too late. If the Hunters started out after 
her the instant they became aware of her absence, Jalian would 
still have a third-day start. 
With luck, before nightfall Jalian would be in the land of the 
gods and demons that was at the end of the Big Road. She did 
not think that anyone but Ralesh would try to follow her there—
and perhaps not even Ralesh. 
Jalian turned, her long brown hair swirling out behind her, 
and vanished into the trees. She left no trail. 
None. 
HER NAME IS JALIAN. Yes, Jalian d’Arsennette, except that there 
have been, well, changes. 
She is no longer six years old, and her hair is no longer 
brown. It is white, ice-white, completely untinted. She is twenty-
six years old. Her eyebrows and eyelashes are still brown, and it 
gives her features an artificial seeming. Her skin is extremely 
pale; she does not tan. Rather than melanin her skin holds pig-

12  Daniel Keys Moran 
mentation that whitens under the sun. She is lovely in a 
strange, erotic way. 
None of the above is important. 
She has eyes. Even in the twentieth century Gregorian, her 
eyes are exceptional. The irises are silver. They have always 
been silver, of course, but now they are something else and 
more; a maelstrom of swirling color, silver and blue and pink 
and purple and green and gold red, that somehow still is only 
silver when faced with the lens of a camera; the effect is not re-
producible. 
(Clan Silver-Eyes prospered where the Real Indians and the 
barbarians did not at least partially because of the silver irises; 
they were lovely, true, but they also detected abnormal radia-
tion levels quite capably, as a sort of staccato flashing in their 
peripheral vision. After the Fire, this became a survival mecha-
nism.) 
Jalian’s eyes can and do cause almost instant desire in any 
functioning male, and in not a few women besides. They are the 
eyes of someone who has seen too much and knows too much, 
and knows that there is nothing she can do about what she 
knows. 
Because, of course, Armageddon is coming. 
Jalian d’Arsennette is viewed, by the twentieth century, as a 
tall, rather elfin beauty; a woman whom destiny rides like a 
demon. 
She has the strange habit of not meeting other people’s eyes. 
DATELINE 712 A.T.F. 
Jalian pushed herself, moving through the light woods si-
lently nonetheless. The sun, striking down through the trees, 
rarely touched her; she was a silvered shadow, mingling with 
the other shadows of morning. The light did not find her, she 
made no sound. It would have taken an Elder Hunter to track 
her; no lesser tracker would have discerned any trail. 
It was late morning when Jalian reached the hills. There was 
no cover in the hills to compare with that in the forests; auto-
matically she made the most of the sketchy scrub, and refrained 

The Armageddon Blues  13 
 
from worrying about it. She would make it across the hills or she 
would not. 
It was near noon when she reached the place. 
Ruins of the old world lay all about them, wherever one 
looked. Old buildings, the frames of karz; even, in some places, 
where ancient builders had lined concrete with polymer bases, 
stretches of good roads. Still, for Jalian, none of these, not even 
the few good roads, matched the straight and clean and serene 
beauty of her place: 
The Big Road. 
Like the path of a thrown knife, the Big Road stretched away 
as far as the eye could see, west and north toward the far hills 
that ringed the other end of the valley, toward the mountains 
that legend said the Clan had walked down from in the days af-
ter the Fire. For as far as Jalian could see, the Big Road ran 
true. 
The Big Road, where Jalian came to it, was bordered by one 
of the largest and worst of the Burns. If one had known the Big 
Road before the bombs fell, that person might have been able to 
tell Jalian that the Big Road was not supposed to be partially 
melted; but there was nobody to tell Jalian that, and she sup-
posed that the Big Road had always been that way. 
(Even before the missiles came burning from the sky, this 
spot had held a laboratory in which there were radioactive ma-
terials stored for testing. When the bombs went down and then 
up again, strange things had happened there.) 
That was more than seven centuries ago; to Jalian’s eyes, the 
Burn still sparkled faintly. 
Jalian stood at the spot where she ascended the Big Road. 
It was a desolate area at the edge of the concrete, where a 
plant that resembled ivy had survived the radiation long enough 
to breach the Big Road’s protective guard rail. Dirt and dust, 
working their ways into the body of the dead ivy mutant, had 
formed a small, natural incline that Jalian was able to scramble 
up and make her way onto the concrete of the Big Road itself. 
She paused at the edge of the Big Road, her feet still on dirt but 
only a step away from the concrete. 

14  Daniel Keys Moran 
This would only be the second time that Jalian had set foot 
on the Big Road. 
The first time, one of the Hunters—Jalian could not remem-
ber who it had been, except that it was not an Elder Hunter be-
cause she did not wear the white tunic of an Elder Hunter—had 
taken a group from the Girls’ House with her on routine patrol 
of Silver-Eyes borders. The patrol had made camp at the edge of 
the hills, while the four- and five- and six-year olds scrambled 
over the Big Road. Later, one of the younger women in the pa-
trol told the children about the land of gods and demons at its 
end. 
Then she had tried to run away, and been caught by Ralesh. 
This time, Jalian had a third-day start. They would not catch 
her. 
They would not. 
THE TWENTIETH CENTURY, as viewed by Jalian d’Arsennette, con-
sists of freeways. 
(The twentieth century saw the birth of the thermonuclear 
explosive and the freeway. Jalian could almost forgive one for 
the other. 
(Almost.) 
DATELINE 712 A.T.F. 
One step, and then two, and Jalian stood for a frozen time-
less moment on the concrete of the Big Road itself. 
Then the paralysis broke, and, shivering slightly, Jalian 
walked to the center of the road, where the melted ruin of a lane 
divider stood a lonely vigil. 
The freeway ran away from her, straight and true and clean, 
protected as though by the gods. (The winds, here, were too spo-
radic to erode much. Plants, which in other places grew up 
through the asphalt and crumbled the man-made structures, 
here stood no chance against the radioactive Burn. The freeway 
itself, cambered from the center, was regularly cleaned of the 
dirt that built up on its surface by the summer rains.) 

The Armageddon Blues  15 
 
At the age of six, to Jalian d’Arsennette, it made more sense 
that the Big Road was protected by the gods. (Or the demons, 
perhaps, although Jalian did not like to think about that.) 
For how long Jalian simply stood on the Big Road, the sun 
burning down on her, her eyes seeking into the distance for the 
end of the Big Road, she never knew. She came back from infin-
ity, slowly, with the thoughts in her mind: 
Mountains beside me, desert behind me. Forest and hills and 
sun, and the Big Road far ahead ... 
That moment, her thin body touched with the ecstasy of a 
dimly perceived greater reality, Jalian remembered for the rest 
of her life. 
The moment ended and she ran. 
Jalian had not made it to the end of the Big Road when she 
was five because she had squandered her lead time. This time 
she would not make that mistake. 
Run and run and run.... 
The freeway stretched before her; a road of possibilities. 
GEORGES MORDREAUX is an interesting man. Aside from the fact 
that entropy tends to decrease in his vicinity, there are eight of 
him. 
Yes, eight. Not all on the same timeline, of course. 
(It is a shame, but Georges will not admit to any of the eight 
having been present during the explosion of a thermonuclear 
weapon. He may be lying, of course; humans are notorious liars. 
Evidence suggests that he may be engaging in this common hu-
man pastime. For reasons too lengthy to go into here, asking 
any of his other seven directly would be…difficult.) 
(Georges Mordreaux, of the base timeline that led to diver-
gence 1962, did once meet Einstein. This is not the same as be-
ing present when a thermonuclear weapon is exploded, but it is 
the closest that Georges is willing to admit to. The author, com-
menting in a negative fashion on this subject, has been blessed 
with the response, “Ah, well.” There are times when the author 
agrees with Georges that he is in some ways a very shallow fel-
low. 

16  Daniel Keys Moran 
(All eight of him.) 
DATELINE 712 A.T.F. 
Jalian ran automatically. Her body pushed itself without 
conscious attention. She was thinking about the end of the Big 
Road, and what she would find there. It would, she thought, be a 
strange place indeed ... something with bright, bright colors, and 
loud noises. Very loud. 
Jalian liked loud noises. 
With a shock more immense than anything she had every felt 
before in her young life, Jalian focused on an object some ways 
ahead of her. There was something on the Big Road. Her legs 
stumbled, then stopped. She stood there in the middle of the old 
freeway, her chest heaving, her short brown tunic splotchy with 
sweat, looking at the building that had grown up on her free-
way. 
She stood in the sun, quiet and motionless but for her breath-
ing, for two minutes that stretched into three. Once she drew 
her knife from its sheath; then, looking back to the large build-
ing, she shook her head against the silliness and put it back 
with an impatient movement. Jalian, even at the age of six, 
knew the uses of a knife. 
The action broke her paralysis, and Jalian found a strange, 
powerful fury growing in her. Here, in her holy place, on her Big 
Road, someone had grown a building. 
The six-year old Jalian d’Arsennette, even through the worst 
anger that she had ever experienced in her life, knew there was 
nothing she could do about the building on her Big Road. She 
backed away from the building a few steps, eyes still locked to it; 
then, reluctantly, turned and began the long run back to the 
Clan House. She would be home nearly a twelfth-day before she 
would be needed for the Ceremony meal, but that was of no ac-
count. When she told Ralesh what she had done, she would be 
badly punished, perhaps even ceremonially scarred; but Jalian’s 
mother would do something about the tall, thin building that 
had grown up on Jalian’s Big Road. 

The Armageddon Blues  17 
 
Jalian d’Arsennette had no way of knowing that the “build-
ing” was a starship. 
DATELINE 1968 GREGORIAN. 
Georges Mordreaux sat behind the wheel of a green ‘66 
Camaro. He was traveling north on the Pacific Coast Highway. 
Georges Mordreaux was a tall, broad-shouldered man, with 
cheerful nondescript features, light blue eyes and light brown 
hair. He smiled a lot. 
The Camaro ran smoothly, with the sort of leashed power 
that a jet pilot might have recognized, but which was utterly out 
of place in a green 1966 model Camaro. (Or any other color 
Camaro.) Both the passenger and driver’s windows were down, 
and wind was blasting through the car. The air conditioner was 
on. So was the heater. 
The machine ran ... well, better than new was the term that 
came immediately to Georges’ mind. Georges did not think that 
the car would break the sound barrier, even if he pushed it. The 
car was too aerodynamically inefficient. 
Georges had owned the car for two weeks now. He’d bought it 
from a used-car dealer in New Jersey who swore that it had 
been driven by a retired couple who simply liked Camaros. 
Georges had not put gasoline into the car once on the way west. 
“Better than new” was probably the correct term. 
Georges whistled as he drove. He was not very good at it, and 
besides, the car radio was competing; the Beatles were singing “I 
Want to Hold Your Hand.” Georges was whistling “Marseil-
laise.” It did not occur to him to turn the radio off. (To be fair, it 
is not likely that he could have turned the radio off.) 
Georges whistled, driving north. The Pacific Ocean sparkled 
in the sunshine off to his left. He smiled quite a lot. 
HOW LIKELY is it that the world’s only time traveler would en-
counter Georges Mordreaux? 
Not very. But then, there are things that are more improb-
able. That an object should spontaneously gain more energy, as-
sume a more orderly pattern, is vastly more unlikely—and yet, 

18  Daniel Keys Moran 
still possible. In a world ruled by quantum mechanics, there are 
no certainties; entropy is a function of probability theory. 
One might best consider Georges Mordreaux as an improb-
ability locus. 
There. 
DATELINE 1968 GREGORIAN. 
Forty miles north of San Luis Obispo, Georges Mordreaux 
saw a hitchhiker, walking briskly along the right shoulder of the 
highway. A second closer look altered his impression slightly. 
Walking along the roadside, yes; but she was not a hitchhiker. 
She paid no attention to the cars skimming by her on the free-
way. 
The drivers passing her certainly paid attention to her; they 
were almost unable to do otherwise. She stood out from her sur-
roundings like a Corvichi fusion torch at night. She was dressed 
in a white jumpsuit, and carried a light blue satchel on one 
shoulder. Her hair hung to the small of her back, long and 
straight and undeniably white, reflecting the sunlight bril-
liantly. Her skin, where the rolled-up sleeves of the jumpsuit 
showed the flesh of the arms, was bleached-white, with little 
pink in its makeup. The jumpsuit legs were tucked into the tops 
of calf-high black boots. 
Georges smiled to himself absently, and brought the Camaro 
to a halt next to the girl. He leaned over and called out through 
the right-hand window. 
“Do you need a ride, miss?” 
The girl continued to walk when he stopped the car; she did 
not turn when he spoke to her, in a voice that held faint traces of 
a French accent. 
Georges called, “Miss?” a bit more loudly. 
Jalian d’Arsennette y ken Selvren turned around, intending 
to inform this stranger that she was quite content walking. She 
would do so in the iciest tone of voice of which she was capable, 
which was considerably so 

The Armageddon Blues  19 
 
/light blue eyes smiling at me and there is power that shines 
on him and pours from him broad shoulders plain face and the 
power the power he is smiling at me .../ 
/silver eyes .../ 
when something strange happened. 
“FREEWAYS,” SAID Jalian d’Arsennette, in an accent that Georges 
had never heard the like of before, with a voice so soft and clear 
that it sounded like running water, “were made to be walked 
upon.”  
Georges got out of the car, and Jalian watched him, waiting; 
not unsure or confused or wondering, simply waiting for what 
would happen next. 
Georges Mordreaux stood at the side of the still-running 
green Camaro, looking at the girl who stood at the edge of the 
cement, on a small stretch of gravel, who was looking back at 
him with very silver eyes, and suddenly he was more in love 
than he had been since the age of nineteen. 
You know, that was in 1731. 
DATELINE 1969 GREGORIAN. 
Ralesh d’Arsennette y ken Selvren, Eldest Hunter of Clan 
Silver-Eyes, lay comatose in the hospital that the ambulance 
had taken her to. The doctors who examined her fully expected 
her to die. Her entire system was in shock; she appeared to have 
suffered radiation burns of some sort. 
Her personal effects the doctors found vastly strange; a white 
overtunic and white leggings, three knives, and two devices that 
they found themselves unable to understand in any regard. One 
of the gadgets looked like a meter of some sort, or a compass; the 
other looked like a hand grenade. The local police were still de-
bating whether or not they ought to call in the F.B.I., two days 
after Ralesh had been admitted. 
For two days, while the police argued among themselves, 
Ralesh lay in a coma, a glucose solution dripping slowly into her 
veins. 

20  Daniel Keys Moran 
On the third day, the silver-eyed freak was gone from her 
room in intensive care, and her personal effects were missing 
from storage. 
In place of the items that she took, the Eldest Hunter of Clan 
Silver-Eyes left two things; a male intern and a female nurse. 
The nurse had been tied and gagged and knocked unconscious. 
The intern, who had simply not been born the right sex, had his 
throat cut from ear to ear. 
DATELINE 1968 GREGORIAN. 
“Walk?” asked Georges blankly. “On the freeway?” 
An eighteen-wheeler blasted by them. The wind sent Jalian’s 
hair streaming backward. She nodded silently. 
“Walk on the freeway,” Georges repeated. He considered the 
idea. “Where are you headed?” 
“Anywhere.” Jalian shrugged. “Nowhere. One place seems as 
good as another, as long as it can be reached over a freeway. The 
freeways,” she added, “the freeways are beautiful.” 
“What are you?” Georges was staring at her. 
Jalian studied him, without meeting his eyes particularly. “I 
might ask you the same question.... I’m a wanderer. I walk the 
freeways, and I wait for the fires that you destroyed yourself 
with. There are,” she said with the gravest expression Georges 
had yet seen on her, “thirty-eight years until Armageddon.” 
“Thirty-eight ... what do you mean?” 
Jalian said abruptly, “I return your question. What are you? 
You are unlike any male I have ever known. You are much like a 
person,” she said courteously. 
“Well,” said Georges. “Thank you.... Where are you from? I 
don’t recognize your accent.” Jalian’s lips parted as though to 
reply, then closed. She made a gesture of helplessness, and 
turned to leave. She stopped in the act and said to Georges, 
“There is a bridge on my map. It is...” She paused, converting 
time units in her head, “...a fifteen minute walk from here. I will 
wait for you there, for a little while.” She gestured to the car, 
somehow managing to convey supreme contempt. “Do not come 

The Armageddon Blues  21 
 
in that, if you come.” She began walking without waiting for a 
reply. 
Georges watched the retreating figure for a long time, until 
she had passed from sight. He was horribly tempted to get back 
in the car and leave and never be faced with this white-haired 
woman again. 
Georges Mordreaux tended to think of himself as something 
a cut above the ordinary mortal, almost semi-divine, and it was 
a fact that Georges tended to awe people. It was strange to find 
someone who had the ability to set herself up as his equal on 
their first meeting. 
It was a long time before he started after her, on foot. 
Behind him, the Camaro’s engine began to falter. 
JALIAN D’ARSENNETTE and Georges Mordreaux stood at the edge 
of the bridge. A small, nearly dry river passed underneath. Far 
overhead, a front of dark, rain-heavy cumulus clouds moved to-
ward the bridge. Second by second, its shadow killed the 
sunlight on the moving water. 
“I like bridges the best,” said Jalian. Her hands were resting 
on the guard rail. “There were no bridges on the Big Road, not 
even any places where bridges used to be.” Beneath them, the 
murmur of the river was barely audible. Georges reached out, 
and ran one finger along the profile of her jaw. “The first time I 
came to a bridge, I was almost afraid to cross it.” 
Georges sighed. “You know I don’t have any idea at all what 
you’re talking about?” Jalian did not reply. Georges whispered, 
“Look at me.” 
Jalian kept her eyes averted. She was looking at the guard 
rails of the bridge. The rails were made of iron, and were badly 
rusted. They reached to Jalian’s waist. Jalian ran her hands 
over the rough metal, as though she were studying the texture 
and shape. After a long silence she said, “What is your name?” 
Georges said, “Georges,” absently. The breeze was blowing 
her long, silky hair toward him. His hand dropped from her 
chin, and tentatively, he ran his fingers along its surface. Jalian 
shivered, and brushed his hand away. 

22  Daniel Keys Moran 
Georges said, so softly that his voice could not have been 
heard more than a meter away, “Je ne sais quoi. What am I to 
do about you?” 
“Georges what?” 
“Eh?” 
“Is Georges all there is?” Jalian persisted. 
Georges leaned back against the railing, not looking at her. 
Where Jalian’s hand had touched the rail, the rust was smeared 
faintly. Small patches of clean steel began to appear with creep-
ing slowness. “Mordreaux,” said Georges finally. “Georges 
Mordreaux.” 
Jalian straightened and brushed her hands off on her white 
jumpsuit. Her hands left faint orange splotches behind. “My 
name is Jalian. Jalian of the Fires of the People with Silver 
Eyes in the long form.” She moved closer to him, and lightly 
touched one of his hands with one of her own. “Does your name 
mean anything?” 
Georges shook his head no. He was more aware of her touch 
than of any other physical contact with a woman that he could 
recall in all his long life. “Not that I know of.” With the hand 
that hers was not covering, he touched her chin. He would have 
turned her to meet his eyes; before he could do so she looked up 
of her own accord 
/self. life is calm power running through deepquiet channels 
worn smooth. control is necessary and uncertain./ 
/self. most alone. rivers of black concrete freeze in grief, melt 
in fire. there are thirty-eight years until Armageddon./ 
and Jalian’s desolate grief and aloneness slashed through 
Georges as though it were his own. 
Jalian’s voice trembled. “How old are you?” Her eyes were 
averted again. 
“Two ...” Georges licked his lips and said, “Two hundred and 
fifty years old. About.” 
Jalian turned slightly away from him, so that even by acci-
dent she could not meet his eyes. “I think I had better leave.” 
She took a step away from him, turned, and took another before 
Georges found words. 

The Armageddon Blues  23 
 
“No.” Jalian froze. Georges Mordreaux said in silverspeech, “I 
am not Ralesh and I am not ghess’Rith. I am myself, and I will 
never hurt you.” 
Jalian started to speak, and her voice broke on the first word. 
She had to begin again. “All of the people I have ever loved, 
Georges, they have wanted me to be things other than what I 
was; things other than what I could be. I ...” She seemed at a 
loss for words. 
Georges shrugged. “I know what you are. I know you as well 
as you know yourself. And I’m more objective about it.” 
“The ending of things...” 
“Is not your fault,” he said mildly. “Jalian, when you left your 
own time you meant to change things for the better—” 
She interrupted him. “I am not sure that it can be changed. 
Georges, it happened.” 
“Oh, to be sure,” agreed Georges cheerfully. “It happened 
once. Need it happen twice?” 
Jalian’s voice was steady. “What do you mean?” 
“The nature of time,” said Georges solemnly, “is a mystery to 
the best of us.” He paused. “Einstein said that to me, the one 
time we met.” 
“I do not understand.” 
“Second Precept of Semi-Divinity,” said Georges, “is ‘Don’t 
Worry About It.’” 
“I shall not worry about it, then,” said Jalian hesitantly, “but 
... who is Ine-stine?” 
“Well,” said Georges comfortably, “that’s rather a long story. 
You see ...” 
They walked away down the freeway together. 
In the spot they had vacated, for five meters in either direc-
tion, the iron railings were completely free of rust. 
AND SO IT came to be that Jalian d’Arsennette and Georges 
Mordreaux walked the freeways of the world together, for a 
while. 
Let us note, here, the two Precepts of Semi-Divinity: 
(1) Mind Thine Own Business. 

24  Daniel Keys Moran 
(2) Don’t Worry About It. 
THE ALIEN GODS came to Earth in the early part of the twenty-
eighth century, as measured from the death of a man who was 
nailed to a tree for telling people that it was all right to love 
each other. 
Their landing craft dropped out of a clear blue summer sky, 
and set down on a strip of what appeared, to them, to be a sort 
of primitive road. They sought for the civilization that would 
produce such a road, and found nothing. 
They were not surprised, these alien gods. They had seen 
other deathworlds; they recognized the signs. If they were sur-
prised in any degree, it was only by the obvious recency of the 
cataclysm; the previous owners of this world had destroyed 
themselves less than a cycled running cycle ago. 
The alien gods—the Corvichi spacetime gypsies—set down to 
work. The Ship that was their world was in trouble. Biosphere 
degradation, resource depletion, failing machinery; they had 
traveled a long, long way around the Great Wheel of Existence, 
had braved the Chained One and Chaos itself, and much of their 
equipment was designed to operate on timelines whose physical 
law was vastly different from the one on which they now found 
themselves. 
And so they set to work. 
Three days after they set down, eighty of Clan Silver-Eyes’ 
most blooded Hunters climbed onto the steelstone of the Big 
Road, and began the long, long run toward the ship. 
Many of the women wore the white of Elder Hunter; they did 
not lag behind their younger comrades. 
At their head was a woman named Ralesh, who would one 
day be Eldest Hunter. 
DATELINE 712 A.T.F. 
In the Clan House, well past sunset, lights glowed and flick-
ered. The flicker came from the central fire pit, where lopers and 
bluewings were roasting on a spit. The glow came from several 

The Armageddon Blues  25 
 
strange, floating balls, about two hands across, that emitted an 
eerie blue radiance. 
Sitting on the faded green tatami mats nearest the fire pit, 
the eight Eldest Hunters, including Morine, the Eldest Hunter, 
conferred with the alien gods. 
For reasons of their own, the gods had insisted that Jalian be 
allowed to attend the meeting. Morine d’Arsennette y ken 
Selvren was at first inclined to say no; the child was willful and 
headstrong, and was not to be rewarded for her asinine behav-
ior. 
The alien gods insisted. 
Jalian sat in a dark corner of the Clan House’s central hall, 
separated from the alien gods by fire and the eight white forms. 
The alien gods spoke to the Elder Hunters through a machine 
that spoke understandable silverspeech, in the voice of the first 
ken Selvren that had addressed it. It was strange for Jalian, lis-
tening when the alien gods talked; the machine’s voice was her 
mother’s. 
That they talked in her mother’s voice was not the strangest 
thing about them. The things they talked about were not even 
the most interesting things about them, although they were in-
teresting enough: 
Of the eight Elder Hunters present, five, including Morine 
and Morine’s daughter Ralesh, knew how to read and write. 
Sylva de Kelvin and her daughter Jenna knew the basic rudi-
ments of chemistry and mathematics. Other Hunters, not pre-
sent because of low status, knew the arts of medicine and 
construction. Though the wastefulness of the Men’s World forced 
a simple lifestyle upon them, the Silver-Eyes, ken Selvren that 
was ken Hammel, had the capability, as the Real Indians and 
mutants did not, of reconstructing a technical civilization, given 
power and metal. 
It was this that the alien gods were offering them; but first 
they had to explain what an alternate timeline was, and that 
took a long, long while. 
Like everything else about them, their explanation was 
strange; but it was not the strangest thing. 

26  Daniel Keys Moran 
What was strangest was the way they looked. 
If it is true, as said, that it is only the first time a human 
looks at a thing that she truly sees it, then it is probable that 
Jalian saw the gods more clearly than any of the others in the 
House’s central Hall. Even Jalian’s mother, the youngest of the 
Elder Hunters present, looking at the gods, was able to put 
aside her preconceptions of what a creature should look like only 
to the point where she perceived a sort of very large, squarish 
bear, with tentacles and something like strings of lace hanging 
about its upper regions. 
To Jalian, at the age of six when most things are new and 
strange, the alien god was a four-limbed, nearly cubical hunk of 
furred flesh; there was a double-jointed leg, as thick around as 
both of a normal person’s legs put together, at each corner of the 
body. Atop the cube there rose a lattice of interweaving bars 
that looked like exposed black bone. Lace was strung about the 
lattice; in some spots tightly, in others more loosely. Their ten-
tacles grew out of the base of the bone lattice; there were about 
twenty of them, and four of those twenty were thicker and 
longer than the rest. The tentacles were covered with a fine, 
purplish fur, that faded to show purple-black skin at the tips of 
the tentacles. While Jalian watched, the lace stretched and loos-
ened, as the bones beneath them shifted positions slightly. 
Watching the lace, she had the sudden strange, intense sensa-
tion that she could read expression in them. 
/?/ 
Before the machine spoke to the Silver-Eyes, it was always 
preceded by a high-pitched whine that only a few of the Silver-
Eyes could hear. They could not tell which of the gods was actu-
ally speaking at any one time. Jalian suspected that it was the 
small one nearest the machine, for no other reason than that it 
was the closest. There were four of the alien gods present; three 
of them stood still and motionless. The fourth, who was furthest 
away from Jalian, seemed restless. It ... he kept shifting his 
weight from one foot-pair to another, in a slow circle that was 
working its way regularly around his perimeter. Jalian leaned 
forward, peering; but the god was as far away from her as the 

The Armageddon Blues  27 
 
hall allowed him to be, back where neither the cool blue light 
nor the flickering yellow of the firelight much illuminated 
things. This particular alien god 
/ghess’Rith/ 
suddenly ceased moving. One of the Elder Hunters was ask-
ing a question about traveling sideways through time, and 
Jalian was standing up 
/greetings be/ 
when something happened. 
She was certain that the alien god was watching her. She did 
not know how she knew this, but 
/naming be?/ 
/Jalian. Jalian of the Fires./ 
/Fires be?/ 
/the light that dances and burns./ 
/fascinates. naming be ghess’Rith/ 
/how are we talking?/ 
/mindvoice. faster and clearer than soundvoices/ 
/then why do you use the machine to talk to the Elder Hunt-
ers?/ 
/deaf be. too old to learn new ways, is may be/ 
/why did you come here? you put a building on my Big Road, 
and now i’m in trouble./ 
/apology. ship-not-alive-which-thinks-in-numbers needed level 
area. Big Road seemed not used/ 
/the gods and demons won’t like it./ 
/persons be?/ 
/gods and demons ... they live there. they’re scary. they eat 
badgirls sometimes. i am not a badgirl./ 
/understanding be. cautionary tales/ 
/?/ 
/not important. question be/ 
/what?/ 
/closer contact?/ 
/i don’t understand./ 
/wish rapid learning of culture, of Corvichi ways?/ 

28  Daniel Keys Moran 
Jalian stared through the dimness of the main hall. Her gaze 
did not leave ghess’Rith’s now-motionless form. She took a step 
forward, completely unaware of the vast silence that had settled 
in the hall. Ralesh stirred as though she would rise, and hesi-
tated in obvious indecision. 
Jalian moved forward, into the ring of firelight. The Elder 
Hunters were watching her with something like awe; she had 
forgotten they were there. 
/closer be?/ 
Jalian d’Arsennette whispered aloud, “Yes.” 
There was a brief pause. 
Jalian had an instant, fragmented impression of something 
vast and powerful, purposeful, glowing dull red with heat, that 
rushed at her out of the cold eternal darkness. 
It took all of the courage that she possessed to place herself 
in its path. 
At the last moment the monolithic thing identified itself to 
Jalian with a force that burned itself into the deepest recesses of 
her mind. 
/destiny/ 
impact. 
DATELINE 1968 GREGORIAN. 
Carmel, Central California. 
“What,” asked Jalian d’Arsennette, “is ice cream?” 
It was, as ghess’Rith would have put it, a pleasant enough 
summer day, but then, the Corvichi were comfortable with an 
ambient temperature nearly twenty percent warmer than a per-
son would have considered ideal. 
In other words, Georges Mordreaux’s, in fact, it was “too 
damn hot for anyone but an Englishman.” Jalian did not know 
what an englishman was, and was certain that she did not care. 
Nonetheless, when noon approached, she sought shade, to wait 
out the worst heat of the day. Georges, she noted with poor 
grace, was, despite his complaints, not even sweating. 
They stood in front of the order window of an establishment 
which bore the legend Al’s Burgers, Fries and Shakes. Al’s was 

The Armageddon Blues  29 
 
located at the edge of a plaza which, though Jalian did not know 
it, was one of the better examples of architectural design in cen-
tral California. Al’s stuck out from its surroundings glaringly. It 
would have been insufficient to say that it was ugly; even in less 
pleasant surroundings it would have been visually unpleasant. 
Plastered across the window, facing the street, were dozens of 
pictures of culinary delicacies, ranging from the burgers, fries 
and shakes of the establishment’s name to other items such as 
“hoagies” and “submarine sandwiches.” One picture, of some-
thing called “Our Fantastic Philly Cheese Steak!” was so dis-
gusting that Jalian had to look away. 
“Two cones,” Georges told the sweating girl who stood at the 
window. The girl took his money and expertly loaded down two 
cones with approximately fifteen centimeters of vanilla soft 
swirl. Jalian stared, she could not help it, at the obscene sight of 
the vanilla ice cream as it was deposited upon the cones. 
Georges took their cones, and handed one to Jalian. They 
walked over to where a bench sat beneath shade trees, and 
rested, looking out across the plaza. The day was quiet; a 
Thursday afternoon in Spring without tourists. The locals were 
at work, or in school. 
Jalian’s cone had already started to melt in the heat. Little 
white rivulets of melted ice cream were coursing down the cone, 
and over her hand. Jalian smelled the ice cream, looking at 
Georges dubiously. His cone had barely begun to melt. Georges 
was watching her expectantly. 
“How do you eat these?” asked Jalian finally. 
Georges demonstrated, licking the side of his cone. You stick 
your tongue out, thought Jalian; I should have known. The 
smell of the ice cream was vaguely familiar; it was similar in 
some ways to “doughnuts,” a food which had made her quite ill 
the one time she had attempted to eat it. Ever since she had 
made a point of avoiding foods with that particular sweet odor. 
Refined sugar had not been a part of the Silver Eyes diet. 
At last, because the damned thing was melting all over her 
hand, Jalian stuck her tongue out and tentatively licked a small 
portion of ice cream. 

30  Daniel Keys Moran 
“Well?” 
Jalian licked the cone again. It was not at all as bad as she 
had been expecting. In fact ... 
In a surprisingly short period, the ice cream was entirely 
gone. She threw the cone away after one tentative bite, and 
went back to Al’s. “I would like,” she said firmly, “three more.” 
DATELINE 718 A.T.F. 
/no, no,/ said jin’Ish impatiently. /true is our senses differ; we 
hear, see higher than persons. differences be/ She waved a ten-
tacle at Jalian, then used that tentacle to point again at the 
Doorway’s exposed circuitry. /But light in no-air circuit you can 
see/ 
Jalian sighed. She blocked the sunlight with her hand and 
peered into the maze of wiring and vacuum tubes. She was in a 
bad mood—jin’Ish kept talking down to her, as though she was 
no more intelligent than one of the men in the fields—and try as 
she might, she couldn’t see the lights that jin’Ish was pointing 
out to her. She didn’t like working with the Doorway in the first 
place; because shifting physical law on different timelines kept 
them from using molecular circuitry that depended on quantum 
effects of varying probability, the Doorways were constructed 
with hard-wiring and almost invisible vacuum tubes. The as-
semblage was bulky and inelegant. 
Jalian sat back again. /i don’t care what you say, there’s no 
light in there./ She leaned back against the wall. They were in 
one of the east rooms of the God’s House, one of the group of 
rooms that the gods used to store spare equipment. Sunlight 
was streaming in through the storage room’s one large window, 
bouncing off rows of eldritch machinery, devices of steel and 
glass and crystal and other materials that Jalian did not recog-
nize. 
Jin’Ish hesitated. /so. wait/ A bulge ran down the center of 
one of cher minor tentacles. The tip of the tentacle split, peeled 
back into four tiny flaps, and jin’Ish’s traveling eye popped out of 
the tentacle. The eye swiveled for a moment in the grip of the 
flaps, orienting itself. It stabilized and jin’Ish thrust the tentacle 

The Armageddon Blues  31 
 
into the dark center of the access panel. After a moment che 
forced air through cher lace in the barely audible sound that in-
dicated exasperation. /tube is malfunctioned/ che admitted. 
Jalian stood, dusting her tunic off. /this is idiotic,/ she said 
flatly. /i’m going to get ghess’Rith to teach me how to work these 
things. at least he doesn’t contradict himself./ She felt jin’Ish’s 
surprise—most of the Silver-Eyes were polite to her, and to all of 
the alien gods—felt it turning to rage. 
Whatever jin’Ish would have said to her, Jalian never found 
out. A scream broke through the early morning calm. 
“Hai! Ken Selvren, Hai!” 
In dreamy slow motion, Jalian found herself considering the 
sentry warning with a sort of calm, interested detachment. 
Without thinking twice, she discarded the alternative of exiting 
through the God’s House’s main entrance. It was at the west end 
of the building, precious seconds away from the village circle. 
She pulled a circuit spanner from the toolbot at her side and 
smashed the window open. Impossibly strong tentacles wrapped 
themselves around her, restraining her; with distant surprise 
she recalled jin’Ish’s presence. She twisted inside the grip of the 
tentacles, brought her hands together as fists, crossing them 
over her chest to give herself the maximum striking distance be-
tween her fists and their targets. Her arms uncrossed like a 
snake striking to chop at the bases of the two major tentacles 
facing her. Jin’Ish emitted a high-pitched squeak of pain or sur-
prise; her grip on Jalian loosened slightly. Jalian pushed back 
from jin’Ish, twisted so that she faced jin’Ish in profile, centered, 
and brought her right foot up in a shotak kick to jin’Ish’s central 
bone cage. Jin’Ish’s tentacles released her; che stumbled back-
ward, cher rear legs folding beneath cher. 
It never occurred to Jalian that the alien god had been trying 
to save her life; she went out through the window. Perhaps five 
seconds had passed. She could not remember having drawn the 
short knife that was the only weapon she was wearing. It was in 
her hand already when she first thought of it. 
Women were pouring into the street. Most were still naked, 
this early in the morning, but none were unarmed. Even the 

32  Daniel Keys Moran 
men carried clubs or poles, though they were moving more 
slowly and with more confusion than the trained warriors. 
Jalian, like every other Silver-Eyes, paid them no mind; men 
were not taught the martial arts. 
The warning cry had come from the west sentry. She was ly-
ing dead at her post, riddled with arrows. A vast force of Real 
Indians, five hundred or more, all mounted upon the tamed 
animals they rode, were already halfway across the clearing 
that separated the village from the woods. They were mounted 
and painted for war, they screamed and fired arrows as they 
rode. The center of their charging line rode over the fallen sen-
try. 
Jalian stood still and unmoving. Arrows whistled past her; 
most were aimed poorly, if at all. Near her, Kendr’s brother Da-
vad took an arrow through the eye; she stepped to the side and 
took the spear he was holding as he fell. She was calm, so calm. 
Her entire life, this was all that she had trained for. Strike as a 
child, and then kartari and shotak; at least an eighth day of 
each, every day of her life since she was old enough. 
Seconds left. Jalian picked out one of the horsemen for her 
own, a giant who was probably four times her size. The sunlight 
on his leather breastplate was beautiful. Tiny puffs of dust rose 
where his horse’s hooves struck the dirt of the village circle. 
The warriors of Clan Silver-Eyes had less than sixty seconds 
from the time their sentry called warning and the moment when 
the wave of Real Indians met them; sixty seconds and a lifetime 
of training in a martial discipline their ancestors had spent five 
hundred years perfecting. 
They clashed in the center of the village. 
DATELINE 1968 GREGORIAN. 
She lay on the grass at the side of the highway, in the dark 
hours before morning. The sea was audible, off to the other side 
of the Pacific Coast Highway. It was cold, below fifty degrees, 
and damp with heavy fog, but Jalian found that since meeting 
Georges she no longer got as cold, or as hungry, or as tired as 
before. She did not understand the phenomenon in all of its 

The Armageddon Blues  33 
 
practical ramifications, though with what Corvichi physics she 
retained she had nearly completed a mathematical model she 
thought was valid. 
Usually she did not think about it, except when something 
happened which was sufficiently strange to force her. 
“When I was young,” said Jalian, “I was told that the Big 
Road led to the other worlds, worlds of gods and demons. Later,” 
she said with a perfectly deadpan expression, “I found that this 
was not true.” 
Georges Mordreaux sat upright at the side of the road, his 
back to a gnarled old redwood. Jalian had almost never seen 
him sleep; he was usually awake when she went to sleep, and 
when she rose again. “That must have been very strange,” he 
said quietly, “to find yourself suddenly in a time so different 
from your own. It is very different, now, from when I was born, 
but the change was gradual, until recently. Within the last fifty 
or sixty years, the world has seen more change than in the two 
hundred before—but even that change, by comparison, does not 
match your own.” 
Eyes closed, Jalian switched without pause to silverspeech. 
Georges seemed to follow her silverspeech without difficulty; 
v’chak, on the other hand, he had difficulty with. Jalian was not 
sure how many of her memories he understood, even yet; they 
still had difficulties with basic concepts at times. “It was not so 
easy,” she agreed. “There is a phrase, to walk in wilderness, 
meaning to leave your people and strike out on your own. It 
happened at times, as a Hunter reaches her middle years with-
out achieving high status, that she would do this. So, what I 
have done, is only a wilderness walk further away than any ken 
Selvren had the chance to take before. 
“A walk,” said Jalian, “into the land of gods and demons. 
Cautionary tales, ghess’Rith would say.” 
A truck rumbled out of the darkness, and by them. The wind 
of its passing ruffled Georges’ jacket and hair, sent the fog 
around them swirling into strange shapes. “I worry about them 
now, you know,” said Jalian quietly. “I came here, oh, for many 
reasons. To stop ...” she used the English word “... Armageddon, 

34  Daniel Keys Moran 
that was part; to leave ghess’Rith and ken Selvren behind for-
ever, that was another. And I have, truly, left them.” 
“You worry, sometimes, too much.” Georges Mordreaux 
grinned down at her prone form. “In my favorite movie, there is 
a scene—" 
Jalian made a derisive sound. “I have seen a movie,” she 
said. “It is only a collection of pictures strung together, and 
made to appear on the screen very fast. Sounds that are not al-
ways synchronized come with it. How can you be fooled?” 
Georges blinked. “Jalian, the images are supposed to ... blur 
together, so that the motion appears smooth.” 
“Oh?” Jalian considered the idea. “I had to look very care-
fully,” she conceded. 
“There is a movie,” said Georges, “called Casablanca. It is the 
best movie ever made,” he explained. “There are evil Germans in 
it, and a shifty but admirable French official. There is a scene, 
at the end of the picture, where Rick is telling Ilsa, ‘Where I’m 
going, you can’t follow. What I’m doing, you can’t be any part of. 
Ilsa, I’m no good at being noble, but it doesn’t take much to see 
that the problems of three little people don’t amount to a hill of 
beans in this crazy world. Someday you’ll understand. Not now. 
Here’s looking at you, kid.” 
Jalian propped herself up on both elbows, and opened her 
eyes to look at Georges through the mist. “What is a hill of 
beans?” 
“The scene means,” said Georges patiently, “that the prob-
lems of one person are small enough that even the person whose 
problems they are can ignore them, in a large enough context.” 
Jalian sighed, and lowered herself back to the ground. “You 
are a very strange person, Georges.” 
Georges Mordreaux said defensively, “Bogart did it better.” 
Without inflection, Jalian said, “No doubt.” 
DATELINE 719 A.T.F. 
In the winter of her fourteenth Cold Jalian d’Arsennette be-
came a woman, and a Hunter by the laws and custom of ken 
Selvren. 

The Armageddon Blues  35 
 
In another age it would not have happened. Women were not 
made Hunters so young—even Ralesh had been sixteen. 
Now, seven years and more after the arrival of the alien 
gods, slightly more than a year since the Battle of the Meadow, 
in which ken Selvren had destroyed the Real Indians of Cahr 
Muhl; now there was only Ralesh to argue against her. Jalian’s 
mother opposed Jalian’s petition on the grounds that her daugh-
ter had not killed three Real Indians, as required by old custom. 
Ralesh’s claim was understood to mean, she is not old enough; 
most of the Hunters had not fulfilled the traditional require-
ment, a requirement formulated in days when Real Indians had 
outnumbered ken Selvren by eight or ten to one. The Eldest 
Hunter, Morine d’Arsennette, shook her head. She said gently, 
“Daughter, your child is ready now. The nearest Real Indians 
are a half-year’s distance away, and they do not threaten us.” 
She chuckled with some dryness. “All the tribes combined do not 
threaten us, with the gods’ light weapons guarding the village. 
Ralesh,” she said gently, “our enemies are gone.” Morine’s eyes 
closed, and she nodded for a moment in the warmth from the 
fire pit. She was very old, now; some sixty Colds. Her eyes 
opened again, and she peered around the hall at the assembled 
Elder Hunters. There were less than twenty of them. “And we 
lost over four hundred of our warriors. I will not agree to keep as 
child a girl who is willing and ready—and able—to become a 
Hunter. 
“I say yes.” 
Around the fire pit, there was a slow rumble of yes, and yes, 
and yes. 
Ralesh shook her head. She was the youngest woman in the 
room, by a good five years. “I disagree. You push her too far, too 
fast.” She looked around the room, at the ring of composed, con-
fident faces. She shrugged her displeasure. “I withdraw, before 
the—wisdom—of the Elder Hunters. Yes.” 
Morine seemed to throw off her age, and her weariness. “So, 
then. Linada,” she addressed the sentry at the door to the hall, 
“bring her in.” 

36  Daniel Keys Moran 
The young Hunter inclined her head several degrees, and 
went outside. She left the door open behind her, and a blast of 
icy air cut in through the opening. Morine shivered in the cold; it 
seemed to touch her more deeply these days. 
The sentry pushed the door open slightly more, and Jalian 
walked in a few paces before her. She stood facing the older 
women, without arrogance, but without uncertainty or self-
consciousness. She was not particularly tall for her age; she was 
still a head-and-a-half shorter than her mother. Her breasts 
were still spare, and it was apparent already that the stocky, 
muscular build of some of the Hunters would escape her. Her 
brown hair hung in a thick braid down her back. 
Morine said without preamble, “We have decided. You will be 
a Hunter.” 
Jalian was silent for a long moment. Finally she said, clearly, 
“Thank you.” 
Morine smiled at her. It was not a reassuring thing. “You 
will not thank me. I will not allow such foolishness. I am doing 
this not for your good, but for ours.” 
Ralesh said distinctly, without looking at Jalian, “You should 
have enjoyed your childhood while you were able.” 
Linada bowed to them once more, and withdrew, closing the 
door behind herself. 
AFTER THE CEREMONY she went to see ghess’Rith. 
Ghess’Rith was at the Ship, which the alien gods had moved 
to the clearing which held the Clan House, after the Battle of 
the Meadow, the summer before last. From its turrets, lasers 
and particle projectors could destroy any approaching creature 
in line-of-sight. 
It hardly mattered; since ken Selvren had destroyed the Real 
Indians of Cahr Muhl, there were no hostile tribes within any 
reasonable striking distance. Since the Ship had been moved to 
the edge of the village circle, it had killed one bear and one goat. 
The village still bore the scars of the Battle of the Meadow. 
Many of the houses that had burned had not yet been rebuilt. 

The Armageddon Blues  37 
 
Their loss was not felt; many of the houses that were still stand-
ing had no residents. 
It was not as bad now as it had looked during the summer 
and fall. Snow covered the worst scars of the Battle; the fact 
that the buried dead had made the north clearing unsowable 
was invisible. The monument to the dead, raised at the edge of 
the north clearing, was all but hidden beneath the layers of 
snow. (According to ghess’Rith, the snows were recent in this 
area; they were, he said, a result of the Fire. Jalian did not see 
how that could be so; ghess’Rith spoke vaguely of Ice Times and 
dust clouds.) 
Ghess’Rith was awaiting her when she reached the Ship. The 
Ship rose into cloud covered sky, hull narrowing to a needle 
point. At its point, it was taller than the tallest tree Jalian had 
ever seen. Ghess’Rith came down to meet her in the lift that 
took them up from ground level to the Ship’s airlock. He did not 
speak to her as they made their way through the Ship corridors 
to his feathernest; he was annoyed about something again, 
which did not surprise Jalian. Recently ghess’Rith had taken it 
into his braincase that it was possible to teach the Silver-Eyes 
males to read and write. He was trying to get the idea across to 
the Elder Hunters, with a predictable lack of success. 
Jalian held no opinion in the matter one way or the other—
except that she was not going to be the one to try to teach the 
stupid grunts. 
Inside his feathernest, a small, dimly blue-lit recess in the 
wall of the corridor, ghess’Rith made a cradle of his tentacles, 
and invited Jalian to sit. He sank down on the two legs opposite 
the cradle, to keep his mass centered. 
/hello, ghess’Rith,/ said Jalian, settling herself comfortably in 
his tentacles. 
/hello, Jalian. how do you creatures put up with one an-
other?/ he burst out. /ignorant, self-centered, superstitious, 
brachtats/ Jalian got a mental image of a small creature with 
habits that ghess’Rith found disgusting. /i retract,/ said 
ghess’Rith after a moment. /not brachtats. kubchi at worst/ 

38  Daniel Keys Moran 
Jalian was shedding outer clothing. Her cloak and fur-lined 
walking boots were on the floor already; she sent her vest and 
leggings after them. She kept her tunic on because ghess’Rith’s 
fur was itchy. /don’t insult my people, alien demon-god, or i will 
be forced to cut off your tentacles one by one./ 
Ghess’Rith’s lace rippled in a snort. /you try it, brighteyes/ 
He paused. /almost i did not remember. today you insulted your 
Elder Hunters into granting you full citizenship. What hap-
pened?/ 
Jalian stroked the fur under the base of ghess’Rith’s tenta-
cles. /i am not allowed to talk about it, ghess’Rith./ 
/oh/ Ghess’Rith’s feelings were hurt; some of it touched 
Jalian. 
/ghess’Rith, I’m sorry. we’re not allowed to./ 
Ghess’Rith whistled through his lace. Even having known 
him for half her life, Jalian was not sure what the lace-whistle 
meant, or even if the emotion that it signified was one with a 
people analog. This time, something happened that had not 
happened before; the whistle cut off abruptly, before it climbed 
out of the range of people hearing. /what is that smell?/ 
/what smell?/ 
/burnt flesh. have you been eating living creatures again?/ 
asked ghess’Rith sternly. 
Jalian was stung. /no! i don’t do that anymore. i told you./ 
Jalian felt ghess’Rith turn grim. For the most part, the Cor-
vichi spacetime gypsies were a slow-moving folk, but when they 
cared to they could move as quickly as a very fast person. /if you 
have not been eating meat .../ Ghess’Rith’s tentacles loosened 
slightly, and one of his major and two of his minor tentacles 
slipped out of the web supporting Jalian. The major tentacle 
grasped the edge of Jalian’s tunic, where it touched her throat; 
the other two tentacles tore it diagonally over her breasts. 
/ghess’Rith, you’re not even a person!/ 
/tchai erreg kisirien!/ screamed ghess’Rith furiously. /they 
have burnt patterns on your skin!/ 

The Armageddon Blues  39 
 
Jalian stared at him in incomprehension. With one hand, she 
drew her torn tunic closed. /ghess’Rith, it’s the Woman’s Brand; 
all women have it./ 
/barbarian, animal behavior,/ snarled ghess’Rith. /i kesri for 
you, since you have not the sense to do so for yourself/ 
Jalian’s hands clenched painfully on ghess’Rith’s tentacles. 
“You do not speak to me like that, ghess’Rith Corvichi. You do 
not touch me like that.” She forced herself to let go of her grip. 
She forced the anger back, under control. 
One of ghess’Rith’s partially mobile eyes popped up over the 
edge of the ridge his tentacles grew from. It peered down at 
Jalian uncertainly. /Jalian? what did you say?/ 
Jalian had suppressed the sudden, insane anger that threat-
ened to blossom within her, suppressed it so quickly she herself 
was not fully aware of it. /it ... nothing, ghess’Rith. it was not 
important./ 
Ghess’Rith shifted weight slightly. His lace relaxed; he was 
calming quickly. /apology offered,/ he said at length. /expecting 
Corvichi behavior from a person. what is design?/ 
Jalian had to calm her breathing; her hands were trembling. 
It took a moment for his words to penetrate. /what do you 
mean?/ The design of the Woman’s Brand was simple; an arrow 
that pierced a circle. The top half of the arrow protruded from a 
spot slightly to the right of the exact top of the circle. It had no 
meaning. 
Ghess’Rith whistled again. /unimportant, is/ He paused. 
/jin’Ish complained about you again/ He brightened slightly. /che 
was greatly upset. jin’ish is one of our best person teachers/ 
Jalian smiled swiftly. /i overlistened cher the other day. i’m 
that ‘person with the knife and the attitude.’/ 
/you should be more polite. if not because she is Corvichi, 
then because she is an elder/ 
Jalian snorted. /all i did was ask her what a -entropy time-
line was. che evaded question./ 
/don’t think che knows,/ ghess’Rith admitted. /jin’Ish is only a 
technician. were you truly curious, or just trimming cher tenta-
cles?/ 

40  Daniel Keys Moran 
/mostly trimming cher tentacles, but some curious. i lost a 
probe on a -entropy timeline not three tendays ago. that probe 
cost the Clan twenty days of labor./ 
Ghess’Rith’s lace lifted and tightened slightly in acknowl-
edgement. /-entropy timelines are dangerous, even at high entry 
ratios. that’s one good reason that we use persons to hunt mono-
poles for us. we would kesri to be caught on -entropy line/ 
Jalian caught faint ghosts of meaning from the alien word, 
which was strange. Usually she understood him perfectly, or not 
at all. 
/kesri, ghess’Rith?/ 
/kesri id go, Jalian/ 
Jalian made a cutting gesture with one hand. This time there 
was nothing at all. /never mind. untranslatable, I think./ 
Two strands of ghess’Rith’s lace tightened, and he forced air 
through them to produce the low humming sound that meant 
humor. /no doubt. like guilt/ 
Jalian nodded. /probably. what would happen to me if I were 
caught on a -entropy line?/ 
/you would die eventually. i do not know if you would experi-
ence kesri—i suspect not/ 
/why would I die?/ 
/time runs backward, Jalian. that is what negative entropy 
means/ 
/i still do not understand./ 
/your entropy sign would still be positive. if you entered the 
line on a 1:1 entry ratio, you would blow up, burn like a sun. 
your atoms and the atoms of the -entropy line would destroy 
each other. if you entered the line at a high entry ratio, the 
timesign reversal would still kill you; only more slowly. your 
neural system would overload quickly. the higher functions 
would go first, to be quickly followed by the gross organs. within 
two running cycles you would be only disassociated atoms; 
within five you would be—you have not learned the words yet—
pieces of light/ 
/nobody ever survives it?/ 

The Armageddon Blues  41 
 
Ghess’Rith’s lace tightened. /some survive longer than others, 
great is their kesri/ 
/why?/ 
Ghess’Rith seemed to hesitate. /i will speak no more of this/ 
THE AUTHOR WISHES to note that he has never liked ghess’Rith. 
But then, ghess’Rith has never liked me either. 
The Corvichi are a prejudiced lot. 
DATELINE 1969 GREGORIAN. 
Ralesh moved quietly through the night. 
She walked forty meters from the edge of the freeway, well 
into the woods. She was not slowed by the undergrowth and the 
trees, and she left no path. Since leaving the city, nobody had 
seen her. 
In one hand she held a small device with a pointer and a 
lighted dial. Twice the device spoke to her in silverspeech; she 
did not answer it. With rare detours, she moved in the direction 
the needle pointed. 
Here is an irony; the device measured fluctuations in infor-
mation probability, such as were caused by functioning tele-
paths. It was calibrated to a human being named Jalian of the 
Fires. 
What it actually tracked was something else entirely. Not 
even a Corvichi-trained human telepath was likely to be moni-
tored through the blanketing probability storm that swirled 
around Georges Mordreaux. A Corvichi would have found the 
readings on the device Ralesh carried unbelievable. The prob-
ability fluctuation was a thousand times greater than that gen-
erated by the best Corvichi telepath. 
So it was that throughout the year 1969, Ralesh d’Arsennette 
tracked not her daughter, but Georges. 
By then, of course, that was immaterial. 
Clipped next to the knife on the Hunter’s belt was a small ob-
ject that looked vaguely like a hand grenade. The Hunter in-
tended to kill Jalian, but she did not intend to use the knife. 
That was for herself. 

42  Daniel Keys Moran 
DATELINE 1969 GREGORIAN 
Sitting in her seat, waiting for the film to start, Jalian felt 
that Georges was being unreasonably smug. You would think 
he’d invented the film, rather than simply finding a revival 
theater where it was playing. 
Then the movie began, and within ten minutes she had for-
gotten everything else in the entire world. 
There was much about the movie she did not understand; 
and, as with so much else in this time, its women and the ways 
in which they acted infuriated her. But the basic story itself was 
comprehensible, and she quickly ceased to notice the flickering 
quality of the image. The woman, Ilsa, had left Rick just before 
the Germans entered Paris—the film concerned a war which 
had ended some fifteen years before Jalian’s arrival in this time, 
in which Georges’ country, France, had been occupied by an in-
vading army—and now, at the film’s beginning, Ilsa had come, 
with her husband, to Casablanca ... 
... where Rick was waiting. 
It seemed to be a matter of supreme importance to both of 
them, whether they loved each other or not, and, at least at first, 
neither of them appeared to be sure. Jalian glanced then at 
Georges, but his eyes were fixed on the screen. 
The film ... her impressions of it were strange, and she was 
not sure she wished to analyze them. Perhaps the hardest part 
was the necessity, if the story were to be understood, of conced-
ing that the character played by Humphrey Bogart, Rick, was a 
person. Male, but a person nonetheless. Nothing else explained 
Ilsa’s reaction to him, or even Jalian’s own. 
When the movie ended, she sat quietly, for a long while. Fi-
nally Georges prodded her, and said, “They’re clearing the thea-
tre, Jalian.” 
Jalian turned to him. “At the beginning, when he said, ‘I 
stick my neck out for nobody.’ He was lying, even then? He knew 
it?” 
“He knew it.” 
DATELINE 724 A.T.F. 

The Armageddon Blues  43 
 
When Jalian d’Arsennette was nineteen years old, she made 
the walk through the hills to the Big Road for the last time. 
She bore upon her back a disassembled Doorway. It massed 
forty-five kilograms. The straps that held it in place had nearly 
cut off circulation to her arms. It slowed her travel, and pushed 
her feet heavily into the ground she traversed. 
The track she left and the time she lost were important. The 
other Hunters, if they caught her before she reached the Big 
Road, would certainly kill her. 
The machine she was stealing, that she would destroy, had 
cost the Clan two years of labor. 
TWO TENDAYS EARLIER, the alien gods had announced their in-
tention to leave Earth. The Ship (which was, in fact, only a 
small part of a larger, kilometers-long Ship that never left orbit) 
would lift silently into space, loaded with monopoles, radioac-
tives, and biomass that could be genegineered to match the Cor-
vichi amino acid requirements. With their machinery adapted to 
the physics of this timeline, the great Ship would activate its 
sub-wavicle stardrive, and, for the next few thousand cycled 
running cycles, would explore the timeline into which they had 
come, battered and limping. 
In time, when they had seen enough of this new timeline, 
they would shift again, and move further around the Great 
Wheel of Existence. They had lived so for longer than any Corvi-
chi remembered; they had not even the legends of a planet-
bound existence. Perhaps the Shipmind might have told them of 
their past, had they cared to ask. 
In over 800,000 running cycles, no Corvichi had bothered. 
Where they had come from was not important; they lived for the 
journey that would come. 
Once again that time was near. 
Jalian found ghess’Rith waiting for her, curled into a dim 
purplish mass of flesh, huddled sadly into his feather-nest. It 
was dark; the blue glowfloats were lying inactive in a rounder. 
She stood at the edge of the feathernest; she did not enter. 
/ghess’Rith./ 

44  Daniel Keys Moran 
/Jalian/ 
/you are leaving./ 
/true/ Ghess’Rith stirred. /word came from the Shipmind half 
a day past. it was confirmed by the captains/ 
/why? you told me not for another running cycle at least./ 
Ghess’Rith said uneasily, /our probes have met with the 
crosstime ships of a person empire/ 
“Tchai,” whispered Jalian aloud. /you have been acting so 
strangely..../ 
/far away,/ said ghess’Rith, /far across the Great Wheel of Ex-
istence. they are persons like yourself, the salch khri, but their 
science is close to our own. they are warlike and they outnumber 
us greatly.... we do not wish to fight/ 
Jalian assimilated the information slowly. Conquerors, then, 
like the Real Indians, with technology like the alien gods. /and 
you will leave us to this?/ 
/we have no choice. the Shipmind recommended; the captains 
chose/ 
Jalian’s hands curved slightly at her sides, without her 
awareness. “Cowards,” she said with true surprise. “You are 
cowards.” /have you no pride? you flee before persons./ 
/pride?/ Ghess’Rith seemed surprised. /no. we are not warri-
ors/ He paused. /Jalian, you could come with us. you are better 
trained in outtime technology than many of the crew/ 
Jalian did not need to think. /no./ 
Ghess’Rith persisted. /Jalian, you will not be happy with only 
other Silver-Eyes to talk to. kisirien, Jalian, there are no other 
Silver-Eyes you can mindtalk to/ 
Jalian stood straight. She was shivering slightly with a reac-
tion she could not name. /don’t do this to me, ghess’Rith./ 
/Jalian, there are wonders off this small destroyed planet. 
Within your own hunting grounds there is a planet with bril-
liantly colored rings. one of your planets has a giant red spot, 
caused in part by the dance of vast sentient leviathans celebrat-
ing the joy of existence. there are ... Jalian, do you remember 
how you used to feel about what you called the Big Road?/ 

The Armageddon Blues  45 
 
Jalian was silent for a long while. She looked straight at 
ghess’Rith. “Yes, ghess’Rith, I remember.” 
/Jalian, the rest of spacetime holds wonders that dwarf even 
what a six-year old child once felt for the Big Road./ 
Jalian said, “I am not a child, ghess’Rith.” 
/i did not understand that, Jalian/ 
/perhaps you were not meant to./ 
/Jalian?/ 
“Oh, I remember the Big Road, ghess’Rith. I do.” 
JALIAN STEPPED ONTO the concrete of the Big Road. Even now, at 
the age of nineteen, she had traversed its length only three 
times. At its end, rising into the hills that ringed the north edge 
of the valley, there began the ruins of another Big Road, and 
from that spot, in the far distance, one could see a vast and faint 
pattern of roads and ruined cities. 
The first three times down that arrow-straight road, the land 
of gods and demons had not been at its other end. 
Jalian did not find four to be a particularly lucky number for 
her, either way. 
Jalian knelt on the gray-black road, and slowly lifted the 
Doorway off her back. She set it down with a slight thud, then 
slumped next to it, to give her aching muscles a respite. She 
counted a small cycle, then another, before rising. 
She assembled the Doorway carefully. She was well aware of 
the time it was taking her. Sweat began to soak again into her 
brown-green tunic, there to evaporate at once into the ossify-
ingly dry and hot air. 
After several minutes, the Doorway’s control panel was set 
up and hooked to the Doorway itself. Using a tool that resem-
bled a small awl, she began setting controls. The work went 
slowly, as the awl-like tool was a poor substitute for the minor 
tentacles of the alien gods. Finally it was finished, and Jalian 
straightened, wiping sweaty palms on her tunic, ignoring the 
sharp pain in the small of her back. 
The control panel acknowledged the search pattern Jalian 
had set up. From the frame of the Doorway, Jalian detached a 

46  Daniel Keys Moran 
brace of insect-sized probes. She pressed the activator, held the 
brace for a six-count, and released the probe-hold button. The 
probes dropped off the brace, buzzing slightly, and arrayed 
themselves before the Doorway. They hung in mid-air, their 
buzz becoming almost imperceptibly louder. 
The Doorway flickered. 
For the barest instant, a swirling gray maelstrom appeared 
between the poles of the Doorway. Lines and spheres writhed 
It was gone. 
Jalian prepared to wait. Until one of the probes reached an 
alternate timeline that caused the bright red danger indicator to 
flash, she could do nothing. The danger indicator, installed be-
cause many of the Silver-Eyes could not hear the ultrasonic 
warning signal, remained stubbornly dark. 
Jalian glanced back, to the hills. She saw nothing, butshe 
reached out with her mind, to find the pursuit, and there; guided 
by her mind’s eye, she could now visually make out the faint ris-
ing of dust that her followers, careless in their haste, were leav-
ing. 
She turned away from the sight. They did not understand 
what she was doing, or why. She could explain until the empire 
of which ghess’Rith spoke conquered them all, and still they 
would not understand. 
She did not admit even to herself that she did not under-
stand her own actions fully. She knew only that it felt right. 
Ghess’Rith would have told her she was committing suicide; 
but there was a memory, skipping stones across the lake as a 
child. If she threw the stone straight at the water, it splashed 
and sank. If she skipped it over the still surface of the lake, it 
would travel six or ten body-lengths before sinking. 
She could almost do the math to describe what she was going 
to attempt. 
Almost. 
Jalian could not help herself; she was turning to watch her 
pursuit when the danger indicator flashed. The control panel 
began whooping wildly at the very limits of Jalian’s hearing, as 
the Doorway penetrated the timeline with the skewed entropy 

The Armageddon Blues  47 
 
orientation. An entry portal flickered into existence within the 
poles of the Doorway; through the huge metal gateway, it pre-
sented a view of the Big Road. 
It was different from the Big Road upon which Jalian stood. 
The left side of the road was Jalian’s right; and the right side 
was her left. The colors were wildly different, like the negative 
images that ghess’Rith sometimes produced with his image rec-
reations. While she watched, a bird sailed gracefully backward 
across Jalian’s field of vision. 
It was a one to one entry ratio, what the alien gods called a 
true entry. It was not what Jalian needed. To go where she de-
sired to go, and to survive the experience, she needed the high-
est entry ratio that the Doorway was capable of establishing. 
The necessary equations tumbled through the back of her 
mind. She could not have explained what she was doing to an-
other Silver-Eyes; she could hardly have done so to one of the 
alien gods. She needed to balance the Doorway’s power supply 
against the necessary high entry ratio against the time it would 
take her to make her journey. 
She set the Doorway for an entry ratio of fourteen million to 
one. 
An arrow struck her in the back of her shoulder. Its force was 
already spent by the time it reached her; it did not even break 
her skin. 
Through the Doorway, the Big Road blurred. Day and night 
became a single indistinguishable flash of light. The plants lived 
and died too quickly for her to see. The forest itself was a dark, 
shifting blur. Only the mountains and the Big Road itself re-
mained constant. 
Another arrow struck the ground near her. Without looking 
back, Jalian took the call-back remote from the control panel. 
With the call-back remote clutched in her hand, Jalian 
d’Arsennette stepped through the Doorway. 
Arrows whistled through the Doorway after her, but she was 
already months away. 
DATELINE RETROGRADE: 724 A.T.F. to 1962 Gregorian inclusive. 

48  Daniel Keys Moran 
Needles thrust themselves into every exposed patch of skin 
on her body. Fire washed over her. She screamed, and the fire 
washed down into her lungs. She dropped to the concrete of the 
Big Road, with the pain all that she could think of. The fire 
crept in through her ears, and melted in through the surface of 
her skin until it touched her bones. 
She lay writhing on the ground, unable to control herself. 
The pain was insane, impossible. The worst pain she had ever 
experienced before was as nothing to this.... 
The Real Indian rode out of the sunshine. Jalian was thir-
teen and she threw the spear she’d taken from the hands of the 
dead boy at her side. The spear bounced off the leather breast-
plate, and arrows came from nowhere and struck her thigh and 
shoulder. She did not remember falling, did not remember the 
knife leaving her hand, burying itself in the Real Indian’s eye. 
They had all assumed she was dead. She was one of the last 
of the Silver-Eyes to be approached by the Healers. The arrows 
had been fired at point blank range, and she was a small girl; it 
saved her life. The barbed arrowheads went completely through 
her, without embedding themselves in her flesh. 
She was delirious for more than a tenday. From the depths of 
her delirium, she remembered a voice, her mother’s; and six 
years later, lying on the Big Road, in an insane timeline where 
the sun and moon were only continuous circlets of light over-
head, the words returned. 
“Live, Jalian. This is all that I teach you, all that I have ever 
taught you. You must wish to live....” 
Jalian d’Arsennette rose to her knees. Like a cripple she 
struggled to her feet. It was not necessary that she move; she 
would exit this timeline when the Doorway’s power was ex-
hausted. 
She did not have to move. 
The Big Road stretched away in front of her. Jalian oriented 
on the familiar sight, and slowly, falteringly, began the long run 
that would take her to its end. 
DATELINE BASE DIVERGENCE: 1962 Gregorian. 

The Armageddon Blues  49 
 
Late in the month of November, Johnny Harris went driving 
for the last time. 
He was double-dating, because his girl’s parents wouldn’t let 
her go out alone with him. In his heart Johnny didn’t blame 
them. Ellen Jamieson was stunning; her hair was the same color 
as Brigitte Bardot’s. When she was standing, with her hair un-
bound, it fell straight to her butt. Her eyes were honest to God 
the bluest damn things he’d ever seen, and to top it all off she 
was smart; she could talk about sports or politics as reasonably 
as any guy Johnny knew. She knew more about movie-making 
than anybody else Johnny had ever met, and that included his 
best friend Darryl. 
He picked up Darryl and his date before heading over to 
Ellen’s. If he showed up alone, Ellen’s parents wouldn’t let her 
leave the house. It was dark, and raining, by the time he 
reached Darryl’s house. The rain wasn’t serious, just a nuisance. 
Darryl and his most recent steady, a completely nothing 
chick named Katie, were standing on the porch when Johnny 
pulled up in his older brother’s Chevette. (He wasn’t actually 
supposed to be driving it, but what the hell; Craig was in the 
Army, and didn’t have leave coming for months yet.) Darryl and 
Katie ran through the light drizzle to the car. Johnny had for-
gotten to unlock the doors on the passenger’s side until Darryl 
pounded on the window. He leaned over and popped the locks. 
Darryl slid into the front seat, and slammed the door shut. 
Without being told, Katie got in the back seat. 
Darryl ran fingers through his damp hair. He looked pissed; 
the cigarette he’d been smoking on the porch had gone out. He 
looked a lot like James Dean, and knew it, and dressed and wore 
his hair to emphasize the fact. The resemblance ended when he 
opened his mouth. “Hey, dude, you trying to drown us out 
there?” 
Johnny shrugged, pulling away from the curb. “Sorry, man. 
Hi, Katie.” With his free hand he aimed a thumb to the back 
seat. “Brews in back. Grab me one.” 
Darryl leaned over the seat backs, rummaging in a bag on 
the floor. He pulled out two bottles of Coors, reasonably cold, 

50  Daniel Keys Moran 
opened them with the bottle opener in the ashtray, and handed 
one to Johnny. He drank from his, and then glanced into the 
back seat. “Hey, Katie. You want a beer?” 
Katie leaned forward, arms resting on the seat-top that sepa-
rated them. “No, but I’ll drink some of yours.” 
“Shit,” grumbled Darryl, “I knew you were gonna say that.” 
He passed the beer back to her over his left shoulder. “Hey, 
Johnny, where we going?” 
“To pick up Ellen,” said Johnny instantly. 
“Where after that?” 
“Umm ...” Johnny leaned forward and flicked on his wipers. 
“Covina,” he said finally. 
“Uh-huh.” Darryl took his beer back from Katie. “I knew you 
were going to say that,” he announced. “Look, I thought we 
agreed we weren’t going to that damn revival theater any more. 
What’s playing this time, ‘I Was a Teenage Rutabaga?’” 
Johnny laughed in spite of himself. “No. It’s ‘Frankenstein’ 
and ‘The Bride of Frankenstein.’” 
Darryl stared at him. “’The Bride of Frankenstein’?” He 
looked at Katie for support, then changed his mind and decided 
to go it alone. “Are we for real here?” 
Johnny sighed. “Look, I’ll owe you one, okay?” He cornered 
onto the block where Ellen lived. 
Darryl sat back in his seat. “Damn straight you owe me one. 
More than one, actually.” 
Johnny pulled over next to the curb, and put the car into 
park. He left the engine running. “Right, whatever. Back seat, 
dude.” He got out of the car, slamming the door, and ran up to 
the front porch. 
“’Back seat, dude.’ There is no appreciation here,” Darryl said 
to nobody in particular. He didn’t bother to get out. Instead he 
crawled over the seat-top into the back of the car. 
Johnny was back quickly, with Ellen. He opened the door for 
her, closed it behind her, and ran around to the driver’s side. In-
side the car, he put the car into drive and headed for the 71 
north. 

The Armageddon Blues  51 
 
The conversation inside was tense at first—Darryl didn’t 
much like Ellen, and Ellen found Darryl amusing—but they all 
relaxed by the time Darryl was on his third beer, and Johnny 
was finishing his second. The rain was increasing, but Johnny 
wasn’t worried; he’d driven in the rain before without difficulty. 
He wasn’t worrying about his drinking either. It was only his 
third beer, after all, and he’d just begun it. He’d eaten dinner 
less than two hours before, and he was hardly buzzed, you 
know? 
They were heading into the deserted industrial stretch of 
road on the outskirts of Pomona, that led toward Covina. 
Johnny was pleasantly relaxed. Ellen was leaning against him, 
a warm and comfortable weight. From the back seat, he could 
vaguely hear Darryl speaking quietly, and Katie giggling. He 
had a momentary impression of an indistinct brightness coming 
from up ahead. 
Rainbows blasted over them. 
Johnny touched the brakes, and the car fishtailed wildly. He 
let go of the brakes, but the rainbows were intensifying, red and 
orange and yellow and green ... 
He couldn’t see. In panic he stomped on the brakes, and the 
lights were so pretty, you know, blue and purple and it was dark 
for a long second and suddenly it was red again, red and orange 
and yellow.... The Chevette skidded, hit the guard rail at the 
side of the road, and flipped. It tumbled end over end. One of the 
headlights was smashed in the tumble, and the windshield shat-
tered inward. The car flipped one last time, and came to rest, 
upside down in the middle of the street. The horn was blaring 
crazily and the single headlight was rocking up and down with 
the movement of the car. 
The rainbows ceased. 
In the comparatively dim beam from the one rocking head-
light, standing in the rain, Jalian d’Arsennette held herself fully 
upright. Her clothing was dissolving in the rain. Her skin was 
the color that Ellen Jamieson might have experienced after a 
very bad sunburn. 
Her hair was ice-white. 

52  Daniel Keys Moran 
She tried to take a step forward. She did not remember fal-
ling. It was logical that she must have fallen; the pavement 
struck her hard. 
ELLEN JAMIESON found herself lying halfway through the wind-
shield, with the water pouring down on her. The shards of the 
windshield were cutting up into her abdomen. She hardly felt it, 
hardly felt anything. Out of the corner of her eye, she could see 
the person lying on the freeway, sprawled over the divider line. 
There was a severed hand a few feet away from her. 
After a while had passed, Ellen did not know how long, the 
form on the road stirred. It rolled over onto its back. Ellen noted 
exposed breasts with clinical detachment; it was a woman. After 
another long pause, the form moved again. With agonizing slow-
ness, it rose to its knees, and then to its feet. The world faded. 
When Ellen became aware again, legs that looked burned 
were standing in front of her eyes. She could not see above the 
knees. She felt hands grasping her, and moving her— 
She screamed at the top of her lungs and passed out. 
She never awoke again. 
JALIAN MOVED in a daze. The dying girl before her was dressed 
in a fashion that Jalian had never imagined the like of. The 
thing Jalian had pulled her out of resembled a karz more than a 
little. It had a single glowing light on its left side. 
The remote call-back was beeping in her hand. She un-
clenched the hand that held it, vaguely aware that it hurt her to 
do so. She dropped it on top of the strange woman. 
She stood, and backed away. Conservation of mass-energy 
required that the mass that left her time return to it in some 
form. And the girl was dying to begin with. 
/rest, sister,/ she said, and she was not sure who she was 
talking to, herself or the girl from the karz. /rest. you have a 
long journey, and you will not survive it./ 
There seemed to be some barely perceptible response from 
the unconscious form. “In time,” she added in a blurred, inaudi-

The Armageddon Blues  53 
 
ble mixture of silverspeech and Corvichi v’chak, “in time the 
journey takes us all.” 
The rainbows began again; purple, blue, green, yellow... 
On the other side of the earth divider, something came roar-
ing out of the darkness, moving faster than Jalian had ever seen 
anything move before—understanding rushed in on her, it was a 
karz, moving on the Big Road.... 
With a sudden disorientation, she realized she was not on the 
Big Road. This was smaller, there were no divider fence in the 
center, no stumps where poles of some sort had once been.... The 
Big Road had not been built yet, a part of her thought with 
clear, detached amazement. 
Something in the karz at her side must have been sensitive 
to the electromagnetic energies being released by the call-back 
remote, Jalian reasoned later. 
She was walking away from the glowing rainbows, on legs 
that seemed not a part of her body, watching the karz, and it 
was moving down the empty, rain-wet road, it was impossible 
that anything should move so quickly.... 
The car behind her exploded. 
Standing mere meters away, Jalian had a brief, pleasant im-
pression: she was flying. 
She ceased flying abruptly. 
DATELINE 724 A.T.F. 
Ghess’Rith was asleep when the captains called for him. 
He slept rarely, like all Corvichi; it was more an art form 
than a physical necessity. He allowed his brain to process data 
randomly without the oversight of his superego, and upon awak-
ing reviewed his dreams to see whether they contained anything 
of interest. Often they did; as often they did not. 
His current dreaming was going badly; he was as pleased as 
not when the captains roused his superego from unconscious-
ness—until he realized where he was. 
His physical self, he knew, was still curled in his feathernest, 
on the planet below them; still his senses insisted that he stood 

54  Daniel Keys Moran 
in the Great Ship’s Machine of Decision, and he knew that if he 
was found wanting he would not leave the Machine alive. 
The captains were arrayed about him in a semi-circle. They 
were none of them young enough to retain their minor tentacles; 
three were beginning to lose their major tentacles. Even the 
glowfloats were closer to purple than blue; the energetic blue 
light waves tended to cause strain on their delicate traveling 
eyes. 
The toolbot that was the symbolic representative of the 
Shipmind was positioned in a niche in the Ship wall just to the 
right of the raised dais upon which ghess’Rith’s senses told him 
he stood. 
/these be Shipmind conceptualizations, captains concerns/ 
/these be?/ Ghess’Rith asked apprehensively. 
/of the female person Jalian of the Fires/ 
/?/ 
The Shipmind spoke in an infowhisper. *These are her gene 
complexes. Examine.* 
A bewilderingly complex storm of information whirled 
through the edges of ghess’Rith’s mind; it slowed, stabilized. 
There was a brief pause as the odd binary-spiral amino acid 
chain upon which the person genetic code was based was ex-
plained to him. Particular molecule patterns were assigned 
functions and potentials in the binary spirals; and then the ge-
netic pattern that was on store for Jalian d’Arsennette was ar-
rayed for his inspection. 
One of the younger captains said dryly, /the obvious is seen/ 
Ghess’Rith whistled in srheman; it was an emotion that 
Jalian had privately translated as amazement-at-the-perversity-
of- the-universe. In fact her translation was only a crude analog 
of a sophisticated concept that no person was ever likely to un-
derstand. /she survived the -entropy timeline/ He considered 
briefly. /the body that returned to this timeline?/ 
*A pre-Catastrophe person,* said the Shipmind. *Radiation 
analysis, after compensation for sustained radiation damage 
during negative entropy timeline exposure, posits a background 
radiation level for this body far smaller than that of contempo-

The Armageddon Blues  55 
 
rary Silver-Eyes persons. Fire damage makes body identification 
unlikely for Silver-Eyes.* 
Ghess’Rith wrinkled his lace in comprehension; without ge-
netic analysis, it was not likely the persons would realize the 
body that was returned to them was not that of their sister. 
/posit:/ he said, too well aware that his existence depended upon 
what answer he gave the Shipmind and captains concerning his 
person protege, /you have observed probability stress. following 
conclusion, Jalian of the Fires lives/ 
*Probability stress is minimal, but definite. possibility of 
growth cycle is 6% and running.* 
Ghess’Rith tentacles curled. /new timelines,/ he said flatly. 
/your person,/ said an elder without inflection, /remarkable, 
is/ 
One of the captains directed a question at ghess’Rith. /three 
cycles of existence in balance. your actions in responsibility. 
what action now?/ 
Ghess’Rith’s responsors and muscles froze. Even his minor 
tentacles were unmoving. A time change would erase twelve 
years of their existence; and even for Corvichi that was no small 
thing. The loss of twelve years, of the persons they had become 
in that time, was little better than death. He saw it so; kisirien, 
of course the captains would also. /her exit date?/ 
*Pre-Catastrophe. No more is certain.* 
/the time of the Big Roads ... other Silver-Eyes, similar gene-
complexes?/ 
*Three children; Ralesh and Morine d’Arsennette.* 
Ghess’Rith 
said 
decisively, 
/advise 
sending 
Ralesh 
d’Arsennette after her daughter. what Jalian survived, her 
mother will not allow herself to be killed by/ 
There was a brief pause. Ghess’Rith, waiting on the Machine 
of Decision, could not help himself; his tentacles curled in uncer-
tainty. 
One of the captains, ghess’Rith was not sure which one, said, 
/well reasoned. decision is. send Ralesh/ 
The Shipmind’s whispery data pulse said, *Concerning 
Jalian of the Fires; her genetic potentials are impressive.* 

56  Daniel Keys Moran 
/so?/ Ghess’Rith considered briefly. /ah ... knowing Jalian/ 
*Transformation wavefront* 
/could be on way now/ 
“RALESH,” SAID THE alien machine, in a voice that Ralesh was 
altogether weary of, “we must speak to you of your daughter.” 
DATELINE 1969 GREGORIAN. 
Jalian had the feeling they were being followed. 
She knew intellectually it could not be so. The cars that sped 
by them at distances of less than a meter did not worry her; cer-
tainly no follower could be in one of those. It was just as certain 
that no human of this time could trail her afoot without Jalian 
being aware of it. 
Still, it bothered her. 
The Pacific Coast Highway hugged the cliffs closely at this 
point, and the wind was brisk. Even walking along the shoulder 
of the road, the sound of the waves smashing into the cliffs be-
low was all but inaudible. The cliffs rose thirty meters above the 
rocks. There was no beach as such, simply a jumbled collection 
of water-cut boulders. 
They were walking north; Jalian wanted to see Oregon. The 
sun was low, thirty degrees or so above the line where sea met 
sky. Georges was reminiscing about his involvement with the 
French Foreign Legion. Jalian wasn’t sure if he was telling the 
truth or not. Despite his long and remarkable life, Georges lied 
as often as not. She listened with half her attention as Georges 
rambled on about somebody named Beau Geste. After Georges 
ran down she could ask him more about how peanut butter cook-
ies and chocolate doughnuts were made. 
The sun was a hand’s breadth over the horizon when the 
road widened out. Set about forty meters back on the east side of 
the freeway was a dingy, run-down 7-11. Jalian interrupted 
Georges in mid-sentence. “Georges, I’m hungry.” 
“Well, aren’t you always?” he asked rhetorically. They 
walked over the dirt parking lot to the 7-11. “Who has money?” 

The Armageddon Blues  57 
 
Jalian chuckled. She found the idea of money tremendously 
amusing. “You have some right now,” she said. “I know because 
I counted it the last time you were asleep, and I’ve been doing 
all the buying since then.” She waved a hand at the entrance to 
the 7-11. “Go buy some food. I’ll make a phone call to get some 
more money.” 
“You counted my money?” 
Jalian pushed him to the door. “Go buy food. Don’t forget the 
doughnuts.” 
Georges shrugged in resignation. He pushed through the 
doors, little bells tinkling overhead as he did so. (He remem-
bered Jalian telling him about the first time she’d seen a door 
with bells set to tinkle when someone entered. She’d laughed 
herself sick.) 
Through the large glass windows that fronted the store, 
Georges could see Jalian standing in a phone booth, one of two, 
at the other end of the parking lot. The door to the phone booth 
was open. Georges didn’t know who she talked to when she 
needed money. She wouldn’t tell him, and he disliked shuffling 
through the memories he’d taken from her; it took all the fun 
away. 
The evening attendant, a tall, thin young man with acne and 
a bulging Adams apple, nodded cheerfully to Georges. “Good 
evening, sir.” 
Georges nodded agreeably, and continued into the refriger-
ated section. The refrigerator was running raggedly; as Georges 
rummaged through the shelves, the sound steadied, and became 
a smooth hum. “Let’s see,” he mumbled, “Coke and sandwiches 
and barbecued potato chips and chocolate doughnuts.” The 
sandwiches were for him; Jalian refused to eat meats. “Cheese-
cake and almond cookies.” Satisfied, he took the pile up to the 
cash register and laid it out on the counter. 
The attendant wasn’t paying attention to him. In the parking 
lot outside, a pickup truck full of locals was pulling up. Five men 
in their late teens and early twenties came piling out of the 
pickup and into the 7-11. 

58  Daniel Keys Moran 
It was nearly dark outside; the outer fluorescents clicked on, 
casting bright white around the parking lot. One of the fluores-
cents, set into the roof that shielded the sidewalk immediately 
outside the store, blinked fitfully, as though it were not sure 
that it wanted to glow. 
Through the window, Georges could see Jalian in the phone 
booth. She did not appear to be watching the entrance. 
The attendant, who moments before had suffered from a 
clear case of hypertension, was standing motionless behind the 
counter. He seemed to be practicing some form of Zen, under the 
erroneous impression that if he emptied his mind of all thought, 
he would vanish from the perceptions of lesser mortals. 
One of the new arrivals, a tall, handsome redhead in faded 
jeans and a brown plaid shirt, said companionably, “Hey, Char-
lie! How’s it going?” 
The attendant came back to life. He smiled weakly. “Pretty 
good, Stan. Can I help you?” 
The redhead didn’t reply. He was looking at Georges. After a 
moment of surprise—Georges’ eyes were level with his own—he 
smiled slightly. 
Georges could hear the others, talking loudly in the back-
ground. They were discussing the relative merits of the brands 
of beer on sale. 
JALIAN TALKED into the dead phone. “The sun was shining on the 
sea, shining with all his might, he did his very best to make the 
billows smooth and bright, and this was odd because it was the 
middle of the night, the moon was shining sulkily because she 
thought the sun, had got no business to be there after the day 
was done, ‘It’s very rude of him,’ she said ...” 
Leafing through the white pages, she had already located six 
offices of the Army, Coast Guard, and Air Force. She memorized 
the addresses, still talking into the phone. “’Oh, oysters, come 
and walk with us,’ the Walrus did beseech ...” In the seven years 
she had been in this time, she had robbed more soldiers than 
she could recall. Soldiers were easy. On weekend nights she 
could get three or four of them, and they always had money. 

The Armageddon Blues  59 
 
Probably there were easier ways to get money, had Jalian 
bothered to think about it; Jalian doubted there were any that 
she would enjoy more. Even after seven years of getting used to 
the concept, she still had difficulty with the idea of men with 
weapons. 
Jalian finished memorizing, and hung up. She glanced into 
the 7-11 again. She decided that it was time to go inside; the 
men from the truck looked like they might be violent. 
That would be fun. 
Half of the sun had disappeared behind the edge of the hori-
zon. At the limits of Jalian’s hearing, as she was walking back to 
the 7-11, a familiar melody seemed to be playing. She stopped 
and listened for a second, but there was no sound. It must be her 
imagination. 
But she could not shake the feeling that she was being 
watched. 
THE REDHEAD WAS pushing Georges’ junk food to the side of the 
counter when Jalian entered. “You’ll forgive me, but you’re obvi-
ously not done shopping, and we do have purchases to make,” 
the redhead was saying politely. 
“Uhm, well,” said Georges, “actually ...” 
The man was not listening. He had turned to look at Jalian. 
There was an odd expression on his face. “Why ... hello,” he said 
slowly. “Allow me to introduce myself. I am Stan Mildwood, and 
these four gentlemen are my friends.” He waved a hand at the 
men standing around them. He grinned suddenly at the atten-
dant. “You know Charlie, of course.” Stan leaned over the 
counter, and clamped one hand down on Charlie’s shoulder. 
“Charlie, would this happen to be one of your many girlfriends?” 
Stan studied Jalian; Jalian studied him back with cold indiffer-
ence. 
“There’s something interesting about you,” the redhead said 
conversationally. He took a step closer to Jalian. He stopped be-
cause there was blood trickling down his neck from the knife 
that he found himself walking into. 

60  Daniel Keys Moran 
It took a moment for the other four to realize what was hap-
pening. While the realization was sinking in, Georges pushed 
his junk back into the center of the counter. He gestured to 
Charlie. “Would you mind ringing this for me?” 
Two of the four men—the younger two, probably not out of 
their teens, one with a strong resemblance to Stan—produced 
knives, and crouched slightly into proper knife-fighting form. 
Georges shook his head. Jalian said, “I will kill him before 
any of you can move.” She edged the knife into Stan’s throat 
with slightly greater force. Blood trickled down the knife blade. 
The redhead was standing very still. He seemed unafraid, 
watching Jalian the way a mongoose would watch a rattlesnake. 
Jalian was not even looking at him. 
Charlie didn’t seem to be listening to Georges. Georges 
sighed in frustration, and muttered in French concerning a re-
semblance between the redhead and Rabelais’ backside. He 
turned away from the counter, surveying the scene as though he 
had noticed it for the first time. “Oh, my,” he said in tones of 
mild surprise. He looked at the two boys with knives. “You two 
are quite healthy boys, aren’t you?” 
For a second nothing happened. Then the two holding the 
knives began to tremble. “Very healthy indeed,” continued Geor-
ges cheerfully. “Why ...” 
The two knife-holders collapsed. “Unfortunately,” Georges 
noted, “your ability to withstand massive and immediate growth 
is limited.” He turned slightly to face Stan. Jalian withdrew her 
knife and backed away. 
“Now you, Stan Mildwood, you have an excellent memory.” 
The redhead blinked once. The cut on his neck had closed al-
ready; scar tissue was forming and fading. “I ... I ...” His eyes 
closed, and he slumped to his knees. “God,” he gasped, “how 
funny.” He clutched his stomach, and rolled to the dirty tile 
floor. His laughter grew louder and harder to control. “Oh, Jesus 
...” 
Georges wondered, briefly, what it was that the man was 
remembering. He decided that he really didn’t want to know. 

The Armageddon Blues  61 
 
Georges picked up his packages, and, neglecting to pay for them, 
began stuffing them into a bag. 
The two men left standing stirred slightly as though they 
might be thinking about doing something. Jalian glanced up 
from cleaning her knife in Stan Mildwood’s shirt. “I wouldn’t do 
that. He gets mad sometimes.” 
The men reconsidered and retreated. Jalian and Georges 
were backing to the double doors ... 
... and Jalian heard the music. 
It was music she recognized. 
She stood, frozen in place, for several heartbeats. Her mouth 
was dry and refused to work. Finally she forced out, “Georges.” 
“Hmm?” 
“The music.” 
Georges listened a moment. “I don’t hear anything.” 
Jalian could not sustain English; she lapsed into silver-
speech. The music was clear to her now, and through the music, 
a presence began to make itself felt ... “The arreyaho, Georges. 
My clan ... we play it, when there is time, before entering battle 
to the death. It means that there will be no quarter asked, and 
none given.” She moved back away from the door; without think-
ing the young men scattered away from her. Jalian stretched 
one hand out to Georges. “Georges, there are ken Selvren out 
there.” 
Georges regarded her in silence. He said at last, “There can’t 
be. If ...” He saw the expression on her face and broke off. “So 
let’s check.” He strode through the double doors, and as the 
doors opened Jalian perceived clearly that there was no sound, 
that it was all as silent as death itself, and that the melody was 
only in her mind. 
Jalian d’Arsennette did not hesitate; she had never hesitated 
in her life. So it could not be hesitation that was keeping her 
pinned in place. There was another Silver-Eyes out there and 
she knew it and she knew why she had felt that somebody was 
following her all day, and why was she letting Georges go out 
the door? 

62  Daniel Keys Moran 
Far too late, she screamed, “Georges, no,” and it echoed, 
/Georges, no./ 
The flickering fluorescent lighting tube, which had been pre-
paring to burn out for over a week, steadied into an even, un-
flickering glow. 
The attendant’s acne was gone. 
Georges Mordreaux stepped outside. 
The sun set with a green flash. 
A KNIFE TWISTED out of the darkness, and buried itself to the hilt 
in Georges’ throat. He sank to the ground limply, quite without 
his customary grace. 
The window of the 7-11 shattered outward, and Jalian 
d’Arsennette y ken Selvren came through with the shower of 
glass. She held knives in both hands. She came rolling up to her 
feet, bits of glass in her hair and skin and clothing, standing 
over Georges’ fallen body, knives upraised. “I call challenge!” she 
screamed in silverspeech. “I call battle to the death! Murderers, 
cowards!” She screamed the words again “I call challenge!” 
Quietly, so quietly there was no sound audible even to 
Jalian, a figure stepped into the circle of light cast by the 7-11. 
The figure was garbed in the white tunic and leggings of an 
Elder Hunter of ken Selvren. 
Jalian’s knives dropped slowly. Her arms sank of their own 
accord. The anger that she had inherited from generations of 
d’Arsennettes drained away. “Ralesh.” 
Jalian’s mother nodded. “I ... daughter, your hair is white ... 
but you are not old.” 
“It happened when I ran the Big Road. I nearly died. How did 
you survive it?” Jalian took a step closer to Ralesh. 
“Almost, I did not.” In the dim light, Jalian could see that her 
mother was worn, and tired, but she seemed no older than the 
day Jalian had last seen her. In her right hand, she held an ob-
ject that resembled a hand grenade. 

The Armageddon Blues  63 
 
A VAGUE BUZZING in his ears, cheep. Oddly, there was a cricket 
near Georges’ right ear, which he could hear perfectly; cheep, 
cheep, cheep damn it. 
Georges knew there was something he should be doing. 
What, he wondered, would Athos be doing right now? 
Oh, that’s right, he thought a moment later; dying. 
Georges remembered the time he’d had his head cut off. It 
had been more pleasant than this. All that he had remembered 
was a moment of fear, and then waking up with the corporal 
looking at him as though he had returned from the dead. (Ho-
ho.) But that bastard German soldier, inconsiderate though he’d 
been, at least he hadn’t left his bayonet in Georges. 
Georges decided what to do. 
The cricket was getting on his nerves. 
“...WOULD DESTROY OUR people. We would never have existed.” 
Jalian felt sweat trickling down the sides of her neck. 
“Mother, that is ... possible. There is a minimal energy level be-
neath which timelines do not split. Only in subcritical cases is a 
transformation wavefront generated. It ...” Jalian broke off. 
Ralesh did not understand half the words she was using ... 
... and Georges’ hand was moving. Out of the corner of her 
left eye, she saw Georges’ hand, creeping up through the dirt 
toward his neck and the knife. She tried to let no expression 
show on her face. 
Wariness appeared in Ralesh’s eyes. She understood little of 
what her daughter was saying, and not all of what she had been 
told to say to Jalian. The alien gods had told her to speak of os-
cillating cycles and decision vectors, and she had not said half of 
what ghess’Rith had told her to say when Jalian became still. 
“What are you doing, daughter?” She keyed the object in her 
hand, released a restraining bolt, in the way the alien gods had 
shown her. “You do not fool me child, I taught you.” 
Jalian circled to her right, flowing smoothly into a fighting 
crouch as she did so, desperately willing Ralesh to keep her eyes 
on Jalian. “Ralesh, it has been six and a half years since I 
walked the Big Road. I am in my prime, and you are an old 

64  Daniel Keys Moran 
woman, well past yours. I can kill you before you can throw that 
... thing.” 
Ralesh nodded, slowly, her eyes locked to Jalian’s. “True, 
daughter. You can. Would you kill your mother? In the history of 
our Clan that has never happened, that a Silver-Eyes slayed an-
other Silver-Eyes.” She pivoted slowly, to follow Jalian’s circling. 
“But then, there are many things you have done that no Silver-
Eyes ever did before....” 
The hand was working the knife from the throat of Georges 
Mordreaux. Jalian said nothing. 
“You betrayed your people, the Hunters, your mother.” 
Ralesh looked grim. “Ties of blood; you did not choose them. 
Other Silver-Eyes have walked in wilderness when they could 
no longer abide the company of their kin. 
“But you,” she said in tones of judgement, “you chose a 
friend, and you betrayed ghess’Rith as surely as if he were a 
person....” 
Jalian screamed the words; they tore at her throat. “He was 
going to leave me!” 
IF I SURVIVE this experience, thought Georges furiously, I am go-
ing to kill that cricket. 
It occurred to Georges that there were probably more pleas-
ant things to do in life than pulling a knife from one’s throat. 
Strangely at the moment he could not think of any. 
It was the hardest thing that Georges had ever done in his 
long life to remain silent. 
JALIAN’S BREATH CAME quickly and raggedly. “Mother...” 
Ralesh shook her head no. “We are dead women, you and I. 
Put your knives away, Jalian. This,” she gestured with the ob-
ject in her hand, “is death, but it is not a death I would wish on 
a Real Indian. It will throw you into an alternate timeline, far 
away on the...” She hesitated a second, “...the Great Wheel of 
Existence. The entropy sign will be opposite your own.” Ralesh 
paused, and said, “Your ratio of entry will be hundreds to one; 

The Armageddon Blues  65 
 
this does not hold the energy for a” She stumbled again over 
the v’chak words. “a true entry. You will not die for days.” 
Jalian said, voice low, “You assume I will not kill you before 
you use it.” 
“It is only the force that I hold it with now that keeps it from 
acting. When it leaves my hand, it will do what it does.” 
“What alternative?” 
Ralesh’s voice cracked for the first time. “Hon ... honorable 
death. Jalian, please.” It was the voice of a mother in pain, with-
out artifice, speaking to her only child. “Jalian, do not make me 
do this.” 
Then Georges rolled over onto his back. 
THIS IS THE picture: 
In the dirt parking lot of a small, grimy 7-11 in northern 
California, in the year 1969, there are three humans. Unusual 
humans, perhaps—two have yet to be born, one has yet to die 
properly—but humans beyond a reasonable doubt, with hands 
and feet and that stuff in the right places. 
Two of the humans are standing, females with silver eyes. 
One has white hair because of age, the other, because of ages. 
The elder has, in her right hand, a small device that will, for 
lack of a better name, be called a hand-grenade thingy. The 
other female has knives in both hands, poised for underhand 
throws. 
The male is lying on his back. There is a gash that gapes 
slightly through the neck at two spots. The knife that gaped the 
spots is in the male’s left hand. 
The picture is moving. 
GEORGES GOT TO his feet. Eternity dripped by as he moved. Nei-
ther of the women so much as stirred; Ralesh was staring at 
him, Jalian was watching Ralesh. 
Ralesh said softly, “But you’re dead.” 
Georges heard the words clearly, recognized them as silver-
speech. At that moment he had no idea what they meant. He 
took a step toward her, and Ralesh backed away ever so slightly. 

66  Daniel Keys Moran 
Jalian threw. She knew with calm certainty that what she 
was doing was idiotic; the target was too small. Her knives cut 
through air to the hand that held the alien device. 
Until that moment Georges had never seen anyone who 
moved as quickly as Jalian d’Arsennette. Eight hundred years of 
evolution in the deadliest environment humanity had ever 
known: without warning, stunned by a standing dead man, with 
no more than Jalian’s hands moving in the corner of her vision 
to warn her, Ralesh d’Arsennette was a blur before the fact that 
she had moved had even registered on Georges’ retinae. She was 
twisting and backing away and falling and throwing and Geor-
ges was only just realizing that Jalian had stirred. 
A lifetime’s training taught Ralesh that a knife is thrown at 
one. She evaded into the paths of Jalian’s knives. They caught 
her above the navel and in the solar plexus and sank deep. 
The object Ralesh had thrown struck Georges Mordreaux in 
the chest. It had begun to glow with a soft, pearly light the in-
stant it left Ralesh’s hand. 
Georges found himself sitting on the ground, rather sur-
prised to have the glowing hand-grenade-thingy in his hands. 
He struggled to his feet. The glow started to get very, very, 
very bright. 
A quarter of a kilometer away, on the highway, an approach-
ing motorist noticed a faint pearly glow coming from the road up 
ahead of him. Georges tried to let go of the object and could not. 
He stood there, in the middle of the dirt parking lot, as 
though hypnotized, staring into the light that he held cupped in 
his hands. 
OVER THE SEVEN closest timelines—three in one direction on the 
Great Wheel, four in the other—there existed a man named 
Georges Mordreaux, who had a talent. 
There were other timelines where a man named Georges 
Mordreaux had existed, but in those he had not had a talent, 
and he was long dead. Further away around the Great Wheel, 
he had never lived at all. 

The Armageddon Blues  67 
 
On the other seven timelines, seven Georges Mordreaux’s 
stopped, in two cases literally, whatever they were doing at the 
moment, and got a far-away look on their collective face. 
Something Important was Happening. 
DATELINE 1969 GREGORIAN: Factor of Eight Divergence. 
Georges stared into the glowing white thing he held. In many 
ways, it seemed like a living creature. He felt it straining with 
all the might it held to shift him—elsewhere. He pushed back, 
and felt the talent flare into life within himself. He pushed back, 
and the glow grew brighter, much brighter, and ships out at sea 
noticed a bright spot along the coast. 
The nature of the thing was stunningly wasteful, deliberately 
entropic. It was designed to increase disorder, and efficiently de-
signed to do so. Georges stared into the blinding light, feeling 
the heat flashing against his skin, using the talent to push his 
way into the inferno that was the source of the light. He pressed 
lightly, encouraging orderliness here, there, and judging the re-
sponses the device made. 
I disapprove of you, Georges informed the device silently. The 
device made no reply, burning itself into slag trying to shift this 
temporally massive object named Georges elsewhere. 
Reality began to flicker and blur. The air wavered around 
Georges, and he was there, and then not there, a calm figure in 
the midst of an incandescence that lit the night sky like a dozen 
suns. 
This thing is very entropic, Georges thought at one eternity. 
Georges disapproved of entropy. 
Sparks began to swirl around him like a cyclone. The trees 
around them and the highway and the parking lot; Jalian and 
her mother and the 7-11; all appeared and disappeared as 
though lit by a strobe light. 
At the height of the battle, when Georges knew he was los-
ing, when reality had ceased to exist except for the struggle and 
the heat and the light, Georges reached out and touched him-
selves and power poured into him from seven Others. 
The battle 

68  Daniel Keys Moran 
... a blazing shaft of light blasted upward from where Georges 
stood. The incredible energy of the last second of battle had to go 
somewhere; as coherent laser light it washed across the surface of 
the moon, and pierced on into interstellar space .... 
ended. Eight universes lost the barriers that separated them. 
They crashed. 
Inside the body of Georges Mordreaux. 
Georges stood there, in the black darkness of the partial 
moon, quite blind; his hands were opened to the bone by the 
melting metal. 
Sometime during the event, Ralesh had died. 

    
 
As Time Goes By 
 
You must remember this 
A kiss is just a kiss 
A sigh is just a sigh 
The fundamental things apply 
As time goes by 
 
And when two lovers woo 
They still say “I love you,” 
On that you can rely 
No matter what the future brings 
As time goes by 
 
—“As Time Goes By,” Casablanca 


    
 
DATELINE 1973 GREGORIAN: FEBRUARY. 
Standing at his sliding glass patio door, Frank B. Danner 
watched the slate-gray winter waves crash against the Malibu 
beach. It was not cold by his standards; but this was California, 
and the beaches were deserted in the low sixty-degree weather, 
except for one lonely surfer, far out from shore, looking for a 
wave that Frank did not think was going to come. The water 
was choppy, but the waves were small. 
He watched the amateur surfer without amusement. In his 
left hand was a tumbler, amber with scotch and soda, held 
loosely with three fingers. His pinkie and ring finger curled 
slightly under the glass. Condensation made his palm damp. 
He was still in his oldest, faded purple bathrobe. It was 
10:30, and he’d done nothing all morning. 
Unless you counted drinking. He was on his fourth scotch 
and soda. 
In truth, standing at the window, with the dismal gray ocean 
rolling back and forth before him, he did not know what to do; 
did not know what he could do. 
He was the Undersecretary of Defense to President Robert F. 
Kennedy. 
He was a homosexual, and he was being blackmailed. 
THE PHONE RANG just before eleven o’clock. 
Frank let it ring four, five times. He snatched it out of its 
cradle, then took his time before speaking. 
It didn’t help. His voice shook. “Hello?” 
The voice was female with a faint accent. “Have you seen the 
pictures I sent you?” 
He reined in his temper. “I’ve seen them.” 
The voice chuckled. “The boy is very pretty. If he was not a 
whore, he could do better than the likes of you.” 
Frank slammed the phone back down. 
The handle cracked. 
There was a brief pause before the phone rang again. 

72  Daniel Keys Moran 
“Forgive me,” said the voice on the other end. “I should not 
tease you.” 
Frank held the cracked phone with one hand and his drink 
with the other. He spoke slowly and very distinctly. “What the 
hell do you want of me?” 
“The appropriations bill for the project known as Sunflower, 
the solar power satellite—you will advise President Kennedy fa-
vorably on this subject in your upcoming report.” 
Frank Danner’s voice cracked. “What?” 
“You will advise the President that Sunflower is a project 
worthy of his administration’s support.” 
“Jesus Christ,” Frank screamed at her, “I was going to do 
that anyway!” 
“Oh? There was some question ... we shall call this insurance. 
Submit your paper. I will be in touch with you.” 
“Wait ....” The line went dead. Frank Danner dropped the 
phone in pieces to the floor. 
 
“... and, in the opinion of this department, the 
project known as Sunflower represents a reasonable 
use of our resources and manpower. The figures are 
conclusive, as presented in briefs One through Six; 
the likelihood of finding an alternative source of en-
vironmentally clean energy within the foreseeable 
future is small to nonexistent. With the continuing 
Soviet penetration of the Organization of Petroleum 
Exporting Countries, it is vital that the United 
States secure a stable alternative to foreign energy 
sources. The ancillary benefits of the solar power 
satellite system named Sunflower—including a per-
manent base for operations in geosynchronous orbit, 
the beginnings of a space-based manufacturing ca-
pability, and a proprietary energy delivery system 
which is not subject to the whims of nations whom 
we cannot control—are impressive in a way and to a 
degree that no other option approaches. 
“We recommend Sunflower as that alternative.” 

The Armageddon Blues  73 
 
—Frank B. Danner, et al., Report to the Presi-
dent, Department of Defense, and Department of 
Energy, March 9, 1973. 
HE MET HER down on the beach, in the dead of night. 
Frank Danner had been standing by the pier for nearly a half 
hour, clutching his jacket closed to protect himself from the cold 
wind off the ocean, when the woman appeared. 
That was the word for it; one moment she was not there. 
There was a brief flicker in his peripheral vision, and he whirled 
to face her. His voice was harsh with surprise. “Do you have the 
photographs?” 
The woman came forward, into the light from the pier floods. 
Frank Danner cut himself off as he was about to repeat his 
question. A cold tremor ran through him. He had never imag-
ined anything like this woman; no, this girl. Her hair shone 
white, and she wore white from head to toe. Her eyebrows were 
brown. She was not as old as her poise in their conversations 
had led him to imagine; twenty, perhaps, or younger. 
She moved closer to him, and the light caught her eyes. 
Stainless steel, thought Frank Danner in horrified fascination, 
eyes like stainless steel. The wind sent ripples through the cloth 
of her coat. 
She produced a packet of what Frank assumed were photo-
graphs, and held them out. She spoke with that same delicate 
accent he had observed over the phone. “Take them. It is all 
here. I have no further need of these.” 
Danner opened the packet with hands that were not entirely 
steady. He held the negatives up to the lights, and nodded. Him-
self and Steve, all from the night in San Diego. 
The girl said clearly, “I am truly sorry that this was neces-
sary.” 
Frank Danner nodded. He put the photographs inside his 
jacket, for later disposal. He took two steps backward. “Not as 
sorry as you’re going to be,” he said distinctly. Without hurry, he 
reached into his jacket and pulled his revolver from its shoulder 
holster. 

74  Daniel Keys Moran 
With her right foot, Jalian d’Arsennette scooped sand up 
from the beach and kicked it into Frank Danner’s eyes. She 
stepped to the left, pulling steel. Danner fired blindly into the 
night, in the direction of the sea. Jalian moved in, broke his 
right arm beneath the elbow, and took the revolver away from 
him. 
From the parking lot at the far end of the pier, she saw head-
lights come on. Backups, she thought in disgust. “Idiot, Indian,” 
she hissed at Danner in silverspeech. With his good arm, he 
swung at her. She brushed the arm aside, pulled him close, and 
put the steel in just beneath his sternum. He sucked air in a 
gurgling, stifled scream. 
The cars were rolling forward, onto the sand. Jalian let go of 
Danner, pulled the knife from him, let his body fall. The cars 
were coming down the sand from both sides of the pier. 
She turned away from them, and ran. 
Directly into the cold, black sea. 
The cars came down to the edge of the water, and the agents 
within fired handguns and high-powered rifles into the dark 
ocean. 
After a while they stopped. The senior agent present turned 
Frank Danner’s body over, and pulled the photographs from his 
coat. 
One of the younger agents knelt next to him. “What the hell 
was this all about, Chief?” 
The senior agent grunted. “Favor to a friend. Anybody get a 
good look at her? Photographs?” He looked around. “No? I didn’t 
think so.” He flipped through the package of photos casually. He 
stopped, and peered at the face in the photo. He said slowly, 
“Well, I’ll be damned.” 
They packed up the body, and got out before the police ar-
rived. 
It was 1973, and there were thirty-four years left until Ar-
mageddon. 
FROM THE Pomona Progress Bulletin, July 14, 1973: 

The Armageddon Blues  75 
 
“... and, born to Marienne R. Hammel and Jonathon Ham-
mel, at 6:30 in the morning of July 13; a girl, Margaret Beth, six 
pounds four ounces, in good health. 
“Jonathon Hammel is an account executive in the Pasadena 
offices of the corporate and investors relations firm of Jones, 
Collins & Hammel.” 
DATELINE 1976 GREGORIAN: June. 
The child popped up out of nowhere, from a landscape strewn 
with boulders, wind-cut rock, and mesquite scrub, and onto the 
dusty path in front of Jalian; one moment he was simply there. 
Jalian was impressed despite herself. A Silver-Eyes girl, without 
training from an Elder Hunter, might have done no better. 
There was noise, and she had smelled him, but had not seen him 
at all until he chose to let her. 
Not that she’d been trying. 
He examined her gravely, under eyes half lidded against the 
fierce noonday sun. He was, Jalian guessed, perhaps seven years 
old. Except for his long, uncombed hair, which was blonde, he 
looked very much like the other Indian children Jalian had seen 
in the area—poorly dressed in dusty clothes, shoeless, with clear 
Indian features that were already stamped with a wariness that 
seemed an integral part of his person. 
“Are you lost?” His voice was pitched high; more the voice of 
a girl than a boy. 
Jalian had ceased walking at his appearance; she resumed, 
slowing slightly to accommodate his smaller legs. Her action 
seemed to startle him; the boy hurried after her. “I am not lost.” 
“Usually white people are lost when they come on this road.” 
Jalian glanced down at him; he was looking up at her, not 
watching where he placed his feet on the rock-strewn path. “I 
am not a white person,” said Jalian carefully, “I do not think 
this is a road, and I am not lost.” 
“Do you have enough water?” 
“Why do you ask?” 

76  Daniel Keys Moran 
“Because if you’re thirsty the creek’s only a half hour away, 
and it isn’t dry yet. It will be before the end of summer,” he 
added. 
Jalian nodded. “I have enough water, thank you.” 
“What’s your name?” 
Jalian drew a slow breath. She was not particularly in the 
mood for company. Still, he was only a child, even if male. She 
squatted until her eyes were level with his. “Jalian d’Arsennette 
y ken Selvren, or, in English, Jalian of the Fires of Clan Silver 
Eyes. I am the daughter of Ralesh who was the daughter of 
Morine; Margra Hammel was our mother.” 
“Oh.” The answer seemed to put him off for a moment. 
“Mine’s Michael. Michael Walks-Far.” 
Jalian unslung her canteen and drank from it. Michael was 
sweating; she offered it to the boy. “Would you like a drink?” 
“How far are you going?” 
“To Needles,” she said patiently, still holding out the can-
teen. “I will be there within a day, and the canteen is half full 
yet.” 
Michael nodded in acceptance, and took a small drink from 
the canteen. He handed it back to her, and then saw her eyes for 
the first time. He stared openly. “Are you Huapatanetal?” 
Jalian reslung the canteen, and stood slowly. “I do not un-
derstand.” 
The child shook his head slowly. “Never mind. Mama tells 
me of them, the demons with silver eyes, but I think it’s a story. 
They are called Huapatanetal.” 
“Walk with me,” said Jalian abruptly. The child followed her 
as she resumed her westward journey. Deep within her memory, 
the boy had stirred something which she had not thought of in 
many years, but she could not place it instantly. “How old are 
you, child?” 
Michael answered with reluctance. “Five. But everybody says 
I look older,” he added instantly. Already, he was sweating 
again from the effort to keep up with her. Jalian did not slow 
her pace. 
Jalian nodded. “You do. I would have thought seven.” 

The Armageddon Blues  77 
 
“Really?” He looked up at her, and smiled suddenly, and for 
the first time Jalian realized that he was beautiful. 
“Yes,” she said firmly, “I would have said seven.” 
They walked in silence after that for nearly ten minutes, un-
til Michael stopped and told her that he couldn’t go any further 
because he had promised his mother. 
“Then you must not break your promise,” said Jalian. 
With obvious resentment in his voice, Michael said, “I won’t. 
Mama spanks me when I do.” 
At that, Jalian laughed; she could not help herself. “When I 
was a child, and my mother punished me, it left scars.” She 
knelt next to him and touched his cheek. “Your mother does not 
sound so bad.” 
He nodded, unconvinced. His long white hair, so like her 
own, fell across his eyes, and he pushed it back. “Are you going 
to come back this way?” 
Jalian started to shake her head no, and then stopped. “I do 
not know,” she said honestly. “I am going to see a mathemati-
cian who lives in Needles, and after that I cannot say.” 
“Oh.” He paused in thought. “If you come back, my Mama 
and me live on this side of the creek, but on the other side of the 
hills. If you just walk down the creek you’ll see our house. We 
have chickens and two cows,” he said proudly—he was old 
enough to have seen others who did not have that much. “It’s 
just us there. Mama had a boyfriend once who was a singer for 
the Sorry Blues, and they had me, but he went away and didn’t 
come back.” The boy paused, looking at Jalian, obviously expect-
ing an answer. 
“Perhaps I will come back,” said Jalian simply. 
All cheerfulness left his expression. “Do you have a boy-
friend?” 
The question surprised Jalian. Without conscious intent she 
ran her hands over her knives; one knife was missing, a gift to 
Georges Mordreaux. She was not at all certain that he under-
stood the meaning of that knife; and even if he had, things were 
so very different now. 
“I don’t know,” she told Michael Walks-Far. “Probably not.” 

78  Daniel Keys Moran 
He nodded and hugged her around the legs, suddenly and 
with surprising strength, and then turned and ran back the way 
they had come, ran until he was out of sight without ever once 
looking back. 
THAT NIGHT, as she was making her fire before going to sleep, 
with the city lights of Needles visible in the distance, words that 
she had not thought of in almost a decade and a half came back 
to her with a force that brought her springing to her feet, as if to 
face an enemy. 
Corvichi words; the salch khri, ghess’Rith had called them, 
the warlike humans from across the Great Wheel of Existence, 
with technology equal to or surpassing that of the Corvichi 
themselves. 
The words salch khri translated, very nearly, to Walks-Far. 
Her fire had nearly died before Jalian managed to make her-
self sleep, and she did not sleep well at all. 
The United States of America was nearly two hundred years 
old, and Jalian d’Arsennette had no idea whether she had a 
“boyfriend” or not ... 
...and there were just thirty-one years left until Armageddon. 

    
 
The Armageddon Blues 
 
“... we have begun. Neither wind nor tide is always 
with us. Our course on a dark and stormy sea can-
not always be clear. But we have set sail—and the 
horizon, however cloudy, is also full of  hope.” 
—John F. Kennedy, Introduction, 
To Turn The Tide, 
 November 8, 1961 


    
 
THE BOMBS FELL. 
In a nuclear rain that lasted for days, through a peremptory 
first strike and a retaliatory second strike, through retaliatory 
third and fourth strikes, until only a few lonely submarines 
cruised through the ocean to fire their weapons upon an enemy 
who no longer existed, through all of this the bombs fell, and fell. 
Billions died, of the planet’s seven-and-a-half billion persons, in 
fire and blasting shock waves and radiation. Billions more died 
in famine, and the firestorms caused when the bombs went down. 
But that was not the worst. 
Vast clouds of dust and earth were blasted into the sky. Whole 
continents disappeared beneath them; and temperatures began to 
drop. As the glaciers travelled south, the last crumbling pockets 
of civilization vanished. 
It did not return for over five hundred years. 
DATELINE 2007 GREGORIAN: January. 
(This conversation takes place between Nigao Loos and 
PRAXCELIS, the Prototype Reduction X-laser Computer, Ellis-
Loos Integrated System, in geosynchronous orbit, at Midway, the 
Sunflower Orbital Command.) 
“PRAXCELIS, I don’t understand this readout.” 
“This unit has endeavored to be clear. Where is the area of 
unclarity?” 
“PRAXCELIS, I requested a readout on the possibility that 
the tracking lasers were diverging from their assigned grids.” 
“Sen Loos, your input, as orally recorded, reads: ‘... and 
PRAXCELIS, while you’re at it, take a look to make sure that 
the lines aren’t diverging with the passage of time.’ Unit 
ENCELIS informs this unit that the lines are diverging.” 
(A long stretch of silence.) “You’re not supposed to have any 
contact with SORCELIS and ENCELIS.... and what lines are 
you talking about?” 
“The timelines, Sen Loos. The timelines are diverging. There 
have been an estimated nine hundred million events of signifi-
cant divergence since base divergence 1962.” 

82  Daniel Keys Moran 
“... events of significant divergence ....” 
“Whether this will be sufficient to prevent Armageddon is 
unknown.” 
“OF THOSE TO whom much is given, much is required.” 
—John F. Kennedy, Speech to the Massachusetts State Leg-
islature, January 9, 1961. 
DATELINE 1981 GREGORIAN: May. 
The laboratory lay secluded in the low hills overlooking the 
Irwindale gravel pits. It was a complex of eight interconnected 
buildings, with a small cafeteria, and a parking lot that accom-
modated sixty-one cars. The 210 freeway ran less than four 
hundred meters away from the laboratory’s south entrance. Ear-
lier that year they’d had private on-and off-ramps installed to 
service the lab. 
It was quiet, and as secluded as you could reasonably get 
while remaining within working distance of UCLA. (There were 
major cities within a half hour’s drive on the 210 east or west. 
But they could not be seen.) 
As far as Henry Ellis was concerned, it was ideal. He liked 
the location, liked the early morning drive in the near-desert. He 
even liked the buildings, the plain unadorned brick and cement; 
the clean brass lettering that proclaimed: 
TRANS-TEMPORAL RESEARCH FOUNDATION. 
(Underneath the sign, somebody had taped a hand-written 
placard; Home of the UCLA-famous Experimental Number 
Cruncher, Ellis-Loos Integrated System.) 
Henry Ellis came in early that Monday morning. Fog 
shrouded the grounds and it was cool enough that he wore a tan 
poncho over his work clothes for warmth. He was of just less 
than average height, with a calm, easy manner, and graceful, 
contained movements. 
Unlocking the main doors, he paused only long enough to 
pull the sheet of paper from the wall. He wadded it into a ball 
and tossed it toward the outer office’s wastebasket, left-handed 

The Armageddon Blues  83 
 
over his right shoulder, without looking. He continued on to his 
office, not glancing back. 
It was just after seven, only a short while since sunrise. As 
far as Henry knew, the only other person on the premises was 
the janitor. In his office, he flipped on the lights, and turned on 
his coffee-maker. There was a brief hum from the machine, 
which ceased with a sharp click, and was replaced by a trickling 
sound from the machine’s innards. Henry put his coffee cup un-
der the spigot, shed his poncho and hat and hung them by the 
door, and seated himself behind his desk to wait for the water to 
boil. From his shirt pocket he took a dozen toothpicks, individu-
ally wrapped in cellophane, and placed them in an even row 
next to the desktop intercom. 
He flipped on the intercom. 
The voice that addressed him was uninflected. “Good morn-
ing, Mister Ellis.” 
Henry was unlocking drawers. “Good morning, ENCELIS. 
How far are you on the processing I left you last night?” He 
unlocked the final drawer and hung the keys on a hook protrud-
ing from the side of the desk. 
“This unit has processed 83.8 percent of the data input to it.” 
Henry nodded out of habit. “Excellent. With what primary 
results?” 
“There is a tentatively assigned probability of six nines that 
the chronon event threshold is secure within the range of energy 
usage that this facility is capable of applying.” 
Henry spread hardcopy over the desktop without paying con-
scious attention to it. His mind was elsewhere.... If we assume a 
straight line proportional to energy input, then a steady event 
threshold implies discrete timelines.... 
Behind him, the intercom said, “Mister Ellis, you asked this 
unit to remind you that you have an appointment this morning, 
at ten o’clock, with one Jalian d’Arsennette. Have you been re-
minded?” 
Henry scowled. “Yes, ENCELIS. Thank you.” He leaned over 
his desk and turned his memo pad to the date, a week and a half 
ago, that the appointment had been made. 

84  Daniel Keys Moran 
In his characteristically neat handwriting, the memo said, 
Monday next, woman from DoD: Jeremy Carson recommends 
handle lightly. 
Below that, in block letters, underlined twice, was a single 
word. 
WHY? 
JALIAN D’ARSENNETTE y ken Selvren pulled into the parking lot 
at 9:56. She was driving a cherry-red Porsche with a long 
scratch down the left fender. The clouds were burning away as 
she arrived, and the day was growing warm. There were two 
other people in the parking lot when she arrived; the janitor, 
who was going home, and a short, dark-skinned man whom her 
briefing identified as Nigao Loos, the theoretical physicist on 
whose work and reputation the Trans-Temporal Research Foun-
dation was built. 
The janitor simply stared at her openly; the world’s foremost 
research physicist scowled in the general direction of the sun, 
and hurried indoors. 
The stare did not bother Jalian; she was used to it. When you 
wore a white jumpsuit, and a white tailor-cut silk business coat, 
when your skin was the color of milk and your hair the color of 
ice and your eyes were silver—when all these were as they were, 
people stared. 
Mostly it was the men who stared, and them Jalian simply 
ignored. They were after all men. 
Leaving the confines of the Porsche was a relief. She drove 
because she had no choice, but she did not like it; she would 
never like it. She slammed the door to the car, wondering 
whether Georges appreciated the things she put up with. Cars, 
indeed. She left the door unlocked, hoping that somebody would 
steal the machine while she was gone. 
Her eyes, beneath brown eyebrows, shut briefly just before 
she entered the building. When they opened again the pupils 
had expanded to twice their previous diameter. 
There was a secretary working in the outer office, a young, 
dark-haired, rather pretty woman in a modest black and green 

The Armageddon Blues  85 
 
dress. If she found Jalian’s appearance odd, she did not show it. 
“Ms. d’Arsennette?” she inquired. 
Jalian smiled at her, and got a startled flash of a smile back 
in response. “Yes,” she said. Her voice was so liquid that for a 
moment the secretary—her name plate read Theresa—seemed 
unsure that Jalian had actually spoken a complete word. 
Theresa blinked after a moment, and then touched a finger 
to the intercom. She did not take her eyes from Jalian. “Mister 
Ellis? Your—guest—is here.” 
The voice that answered was abrupt, and very male; Jalian 
frowned. “Good. Send her in.” Theresa removed her thumb from 
the intercom, and started to rise from her chair. Jalian stopped 
her with a gesture. 
“I can follow directions, I think.” 
The girl looked flustered. “Well, down the hall. Third door on 
the left. His name is on it.” 
Jalian inclined her head slightly. “Thank you, Theresa.” She 
pronounced the name with a soft th. Theresa was looking up at 
her, unblinking, and Jalian smiled softly. The girl looked away 
suddenly, blushing furiously, and Jalian left her there. 
HENRY ELLIS GLANCED up at the opening of his door. He shifted 
the toothpick in his mouth from the right corner to the left. 
“Dear, did anybody ever teach you how to knock?” 
The door still swinging slowly away from her, Jalian paused, 
and studied Henry. “Actually, no. No,” she said after a moment, 
“I don’t think so. Why do you ask?” She seated herself in the 
right-most visitor’s chair, close to the door. 
Henry studied her curiously. She was strange; stark. She 
spoke in a harsh, clipped manner, as though she wished to de-
stroy the beauty of her voice. “You’re from the Department of 
Defense?” 
Jalian ignored his question. “I have come here to ask your 
opinion, as the second-best physicist at our disposal. The infor-
mation I require concerns the theory of multiple time tracks 
that you and Nigao Loos published several months ago.” She 

86  Daniel Keys Moran 
withdrew a creamy white envelope from the inside pocket of her 
dress jacket, and laid it on Henry’s blotter. 
Henry picked it up, and tore it open with a wooden letter 
opener that sat next to his out box. He scanned it briefly. Its 
contents were fairly normal; answer questions, don’t ask ques-
tions, don’t talk about whatever questions she asks. It was 
signed by his superiors in DoD. (Both he and Nigao held reserve 
commissions in Aerospace; it was the price they had been forced 
to pay for the applications technology for ENCELIS.) 
He handed the letter back to Jalian. “Okay. What do you 
want to know?” 
Jalian put the letter away and sat up straighter in her chair. 
What she told Henry Ellis then, only two others had ever heard 
before, and only one of those was certain he believed her. The 
first was Jeremy Carson, a theoretical physicist and Undersec-
retary of Defense to President Kennedy the Third; Georges was 
the other. 
“I will,” she said, choosing her words carefully, “have you lis-
ten to a hypothetical situation. There is a question that arises 
from this situation, and you will answer that question.” 
Henry Ellis was scratching on a blank pad of paper with a 
pencil. He wasn’t looking at the pad of paper, though, he was 
looking at Jalian. At her eyes. At the silver in her eyes. 
“Stop that!” Jalian snapped irritably, with sudden sharpness, 
and Henry whipped his eyes away from hers. He froze for a mo-
ment, and then said, “Excuse me. That was rude.” 
Jalian shrugged. “It does not matter. Are you listening?” 
“I’m listening.” The words came hard; Henry felt, for the first 
time since childhood, the breath of the old unknown, like a wind 
on the back of his neck. Since his early days in college he had 
dedicated himself to the study of the new unknown; but now this 
specter sat before him, with those erotic silver eyes .  . . Henry 
forced himself to meet her gaze, and said roughly, “Go ahead.” 
Jalian spoke with amusement; her words were little more 
than a whisper, and Henry had to strain to listen. “The hypo-
thetical situation that I relate to you is as follows. In the year 
2007 there is a nuclear war which destroys civilization. In the 

The Armageddon Blues  87 
 
centuries following that war, humanity barely survives. Eventu-
ally, a primitive social order is re-established by ...” She used 
the silverspeech words, “... ken Selvren, a group of people who 
call themselves ken Selvren. Near the beginning of the twenty-
eighth century of your Gregorian calendar, these people learn to 
travel from one alternate timeline to another, in search of re-
sources that were depleted by those who tried to destroy their 
world.” 
Henry leaned forward slightly. “Go ... on.” 
Jalian watched him quizzically. “The daughter of the Eld ... 
of the leader of the people I speak of ... this daughter knew more 
about the outtime technology than any of the rest of her people. 
For reasons of her own, this daughter stole a portable Gate, and 
set the Gate to access what is known as a negative entropy time-
line. This is a timeline where time” 
“runs backward. An anti-matter timeline,” Henry Ellis fin-
ished. “How can you know about that? Nigao hasn’t even pub-
lished that section of theor—” 
“This woman,” said Jalian grimly, “entered a negative en-
tropy timeline” 
The point of the pencil that Henry was holding snapped. 
“You can’t have done that,” he said simply. “You’re talking about 
an anti-matter timeline. You’d blow” He took a deep breath, 
and exploded, “Christ, you can’t even for a minute expect me to 
believe ” 
Jalian d’Arsennette, the daughter of Ralesh who was the 
daughter of Morine, whose ancestors had ruled Silver-Eyes for 
more than five centuries, plucked a knife out of nowhere and 
used it to pin Henry Ellis’ tie to his desk top. She slapped him 
twice, removed the knife from the tie, and made it vanish. With-
out particular heat, she said, “Do not interrupt me again.” She 
watched, as the stunned, uncomprehending look on the engi-
neer’s face gave way to beginning fury. She laid one knife, and 
another, and then a third, in a parallel row on Henry’s side of 
the desk. “You may attempt to pick up one of these when you 
choose.... I was saying to you, this woman of ken Selvren enters 
a negative entropy timeline; her ratio of entry is extremely high, 

88  Daniel Keys Moran 
approximately 14 million to one. Her actual interaction with the 
timeline is minimal; a duration of some two hours. She survives 
the experience, and reappears on the timeline that she exited in 
the days before the nuclear war. The year is what you call 1962, 
and there are forty-five years until Armageddon.” 
Henry waited until he was entirely sure she was finished 
speaking. The light from the overhead fluorescents was shining 
off the blades on his desktop. His eyes did not waver from hers. 
“What is your question?” 
She showed the first emotion he had seen in her; a deep, 
quivering breath. It seemed to him that he could almost hear 
/after all these years, the answer .../ She was holding the edge of 
his desk. 
“Is it possible to prevent Armageddon?” 
Sweat was trickling down the back of Henry’s neck. He was 
thinking, this isn’t happening, while something deep inside him 
assured him, yes, it is too happening. “May God help you, who-
ever the hell you are. I can’t. I just don’t know. Even Nigao could 
not answer that question, given your assumed parameters. Our 
field is very young. It only dates to 1962, when we first started 
detecting chronons.” He looked up swiftly. “Your ... hypothetical 
person ... time-travelled to 1962.” He stumbled getting the words 
out. “In 1969 the chronon event threshold jumped by a factor of 
eight and mystics all over the fucking planet went off the deep 
end and we don’t have even the beginnings of a theory to ac-
count for it. What happened?” 
Jalian was sitting back in her chair, eyes closed. She wasn’t 
sure what her reaction was, relief or despair; only that it was 
strong. He had not said yes, but he had not said no. She could 
still hope. 
Henry Ellis said fiercely, “What happened in ’69?” 
Jalian shook her head briefly, and looked at him. “There was 
a battle. Eight timelines melted together.” 
The toothpick that had rested securely in Henry’s mouth 
throughout the interview dropped in two pieces to the blotter. 
“What?” Jalian stood abruptly. Henry noticed that the steel was 
no longer on his blotter. He could not remember when it had 

The Armageddon Blues  89 
 
vanished. “That is what Georges tells me,” she said simply. “He 
may be lying, of course.” 
Henry said stupidly, “Who?” 
“Georges. And he should know. It happened inside of him.” 
She turned to leave, and Henry said, “Miss d’Arsennette? 
Where are you going?” 
Jalian pivoted slowly, and smiled at him. Henry felt his per-
ception of everything in the world but those silver eyes fade 
away, and was thinking with a cool, rational detachment that 
silver was the most erotic color that he knew, when Jalian said, 
“I am going to save the world.” Her eyelids dropped sleepily, half 
covered the silver irises. “Good bye.” 
The door seemed to close itself behind her. 
Henry Ellis stared at the motionless door. 
It was 1981, and there were twenty-six years left until Ar-
mageddon. 
DATELINE 1985 GREGORIAN: December. 
Moscow, Russia. 
The winter wind was a senseless thing; as cold and meaning-
less as anything Gregor Pahvernuch knew of outside the works 
of man. 
Pahvernuch shook his head in disgust. He had just hung up 
the phone, and stood now looking out his window at the drifting 
snow, blowing down in random gusts across the streets. When 
he had calmed himself he turned to survey the three officers 
standing stiffly before his desk. He was a heavyset man, with an 
unlit cigar set between lips that were too red and fat. He was 
still wearing the dark overcoat he’d had on when he entered the 
hastily set up joint KGB-Militia Headquarters, and gone charg-
ing into the Operations Room. 
“You,” he said with disdain, as though the words were offal, 
“you are the best the Committee for State Security can recruit, 
these days.” He glanced at the man sitting in the chair by the 
door, under the wavering fluorescent lights. “And what of you,” 
he asked with a sudden burst of chill fury, “what have you been 
doing this last hour?” 

90  Daniel Keys Moran 
Karien Karchovsky grinned widely, showing his teeth. “I, 
Comrade Pahvernuch? Watching this American is not my as-
signment.” He uncrossed his legs, and stood. He walked with a 
measured pace around the three junior KGB agents. They were 
afraid, it showed in the way they stood and the way they stared 
straight ahead without meeting their superior’s eyes. 
Fear was something they were all very good with. 
Karien stopped, and put an arm around one of the men. 
“Now, Comrade Shenderev here was, I believe, in charge of the 
group assigned to watch this, ah, ‘Jill Darsay,’ I think her name 
is.” 
Pahvernuch sighed. “I do not think that scaring these chil-
dren is going to help us in resolving this annoyance, Karien. We 
must find the woman.” He pulled off his overcoat, and dropped it 
on top of the desk. “You.” He pointed at one of the KGB opera-
tives. “Go find Colonel Djarska. If he’s not at home he will 
probably be at the hotel; the Central Committee isn’t meeting 
until tomorrow, but he’ll probably be there early.” The boy stood 
there a moment too long, and Pahvernuch screamed at the top of 
his lungs, “GO!” He glared at the junior agent, and the man 
fairly fled the room. 
Karien missed most of it; he had turned Nikolai Shenderev to 
face him. “Why, Nikolai, you’re trembling.” 
“No, comrade,” the boy protested, and then immediately said, 
“Yes, comrade.” 
Karien looked down at him; he was several centimeters 
taller. “Well, we are not such monsters as all that. Listen, you 
lost the woman you were to watch.” He shrugged expansively. 
“These things happen. We will find her again; she may simply 
have stepped out to take dinner.” 
Behind them, Gregor Pahvernuch snorted loudly. 
“No, no, I mean that,” said Karien kindly. “Take Corporal 
Deteche and his troops and go screen people at the hotel. I’ll be 
down in an hour or so.” 
Nikolai left without protest; the third junior agent went with 
him, no doubt glad to get out of Pahvernuch’s office with his ass 
in one piece. 

The Armageddon Blues  91 
 
Karien Karchovsky watched them leave with a detached ex-
pression. 
Gregor Pahvernuch said after a moment, “Are you quite 
through kissing that pretty boy’s nuts?” 
“The pretty boy’s uncle sits on the Politburo, Gregor,” said 
Karien bluntly. 
The news threw Pahvernuch visibly. “Oh?” He bit down hard 
on the cigar. “Oh. I did not know that.” 
“I didn’t think so.” Karien picked up his overcoat from the 
chair on which he’d been sitting. “Well, I assume you’ve got 
things to do.” He smiled without humor. “Certainly I do. If you 
see Ilya before the morning, send him to the hotel. That’s where 
I’ll be.” 
Gregor said softly, “With the boychick, eh?” 
Karien lifted an eyebrow. “You could hurt my feelings, friend. 
No, I am simply going to see whether the American woman re-
turns to her room, probably with a perfectly reasonable explana-
tion as to where she has been, as I expect her to.” 
“You believe, then, that she is just a tourist.” 
Karien shrugged into his overcoat. “Who can say? If she is 
not, she has certainly done a convincing imitation. That she 
chose to vanish on the eve of the Central Committee’s meeting is 
suspicious only if she has not returned to her hotel by a reason-
able hour. It is not yet ten o’clock,” he pointed out. 
Gregor stared at him. “Karien, you are one of my best 
friends, I tell you truly. But you play things too tight. Some day 
they’re going to shoot you for it. And your protege, too.” 
Karien grinned. “Probably. But at least I don’t threaten the 
careers of nephews of members of the Politburo. You were about 
to. ” 
“I was not,” denied Pahvernuch. A bead of sweat glistened on 
his upper lip. 
“No?” Karien seemed to consider. “Perhaps not. Perhaps you 
were merely indulging your temper, and it got out of hand—who 
can say? Fortunately,” he added on his way out the door, “it is 
not one of my concerns. I’ll be back.” 

92  Daniel Keys Moran 
After he was gone, Gregor Pahvernuch grunted, “I’ll bet you 
will be, you flashy son of a bitch.” He got back on the phone, and 
had to yell at the operator for a dial tone. 
AT THE HOTEL where the woman who had identified herself as 
Jill Darsay was staying—conveniently near the buildings where 
the Politburo was temporarily meeting—Karien Karchovsky 
checked with the hotel management, to see whether or not Miss 
Darsay had returned to her room. She had not, they informed 
him. The lobby held three KGB agents whom Karien recognized, 
trying to be conspicuous. They were succeeding quite well; after 
all, he thought cynically, what was the point of being a member 
of the Committee for State Security if one had to obscure the 
fact? 
As far as he could tell, none of them recognized him. They 
were too busy watching a pair of pretty East German women 
who were sitting together at the hotel bar, and being over-
charged for the privilege. Karien could not for the life of him 
imagine why East Germans would want to vacation in Moscow. 
They did, though, with some regularity. 
He met Nikolai as he was leaving the elevators on the third 
floor. The American was in room three-twenty-eight; Nikolai 
had his soldiers, regular militia, rummaging through her pos-
sessions. “Sir!” said Nikolai. “I was just going downstairs to call 
you.” He relaxed slightly, and said, “I tried calling from the hotel 
room, but the switchboard has gone home, and the phones are 
useless.” 
Karien nodded. “Have you found anything in the room?” 
Nikolai shook his head. “No, nothing of note.” He led Karien 
inside; Karien looked around with some curiosity. He’d never 
been inside one of the fancy foreign hotel rooms before. It was 
surprisingly similar to the hotels he was used to. One would 
think that for the extortionist prices the foreigners were paying 
they could get something a cut above this. 
The room was clean, with a large single bed, and 
sparkling white porcelain in the bathroom. There was a perfunc-
tory wet bar, vodka and mixers, against the wall facing the bed. 

The Armageddon Blues  93 
 
A balcony overlooked Moscow; Karien went into the freezing 
night air, and looked out over the city. He had been outside Rus-
sia many times, but the USSR proper only once, to West Ger-
many, and he still remembered the sight of West Berlin, lit up 
at night; by comparison, Moscow was a dull city after dark. Even 
the Kremlin was dark—from where he stood, he could see the 
ruins where the explosions had brought down the eastern sec-
tions. Construction was going on from sunrise to sunset. 
Despite the fact that the government had already executed 
four persons for the terrorist attack, it was an open secret in 
high ranks that the truly guilty parties had not been found. 
What was worst about it was that all evidence pointed in-
ward. This was not an act of foreign terrorism, instigated by the 
West; it was the work of Russians. 
Karien turned, and went back inside. “Nikolai, send your 
shitkicker soldiers home. We have KGB at the entrance, and you 
and I will wait here for her. If she is not found by morning we 
will alert the general militia.” 
Nikolai looked at him. “We are just going to wait?” 
“Unless you wish to search all of Moscow in a night.” 
“WASH A PIG as much as you like, it goes right back to the mud.” 
—Russian Proverb 
AT 2:00 A.M., Jalian d’Arsennette returned to her hotel room. 
She had spent the night on the hotel roof, watching the stars, 
and listening with other senses to the Moscow night. It was an 
evening well spent, with the colored lenses she had been wear-
ing to disguise her eye color removed; her eyes felt normal for 
the first time in weeks. 
She truly had come to Russia largely as a tourist. She 
checked with contacts she’d been given as a matter of course, not 
because she expected anything to come of it. 
She was sleepy, and not expecting trouble. And cold; even 
Corvichi metaphysics and Silver-Eyes kartari could not keep her 
fully warm, in the winter night and winds of Moscow. 

94  Daniel Keys Moran 
She opened the door, and knew instantly that there were 
persons inside. Somebody moved toward her in the darkness 
with surprising speed and coordination. She reached for steel, 
reflexively, before remembering that her knives were in a safe 
deposit box in New York. The delay was critical. She found her-
self slammed back against the door, and a voice said in harshly 
accented English, “You have made a terrible mistake, Miss Dar-
say.” 
It took her a long moment to realize on an emotional level 
what had happened; this man was touching her. 
Jalian d’Arsennette blinked in wonder, in the darkness; she 
could not even see the warmth of their figures, the room was too 
warm and she too recently in from the frozen night. 
She remembered, later, thinking clearly, KGB; and then she 
killed the man who had dared touch her. 
The lights came on. One of her contacts, a young man named 
Nikolai Shenderev, was removing his hand from the light switch 
next to the bed. 
Sprawled on the floor, with his neck at an unlikely angle, 
was a man whom Jalian did not recognize. 
Shenderev’s mouth was working. “He ... he didn’t suspect 
you. He was just going to ... throw a scare into you.” 
Jalian knelt slowly, and touched fingers to the dead man’s 
temple. She stood abruptly, and said without humor, “He suc-
ceeded.” She thought to shut the door, and said over the sound of 
the lock latching, “He did not suspect me, you are correct. He 
suspected you; you show your fear far too easily.” She gestured. 
“Help me with the body.” 
“What?” He was shaking his head in a daze. “You don’t un-
derstand. I’m going to be shot now.” 
Jalian crossed the distance between them in two steps. “No, 
you will not. But you must do as I say. Exactly as I say.” 
With agonizing hesitation, he nodded. “Very well. I have lit-
tle to lose at this point.” 
“‘Life is unbearable, but death is not so pleasant either,’” 
Jalian said. 
“What?” 

The Armageddon Blues  95 
 
“You have everything to lose, idiot.” 
“PEACE AND FREEDOM do not come cheap, and we are destined—
all of us here today—to live out most if not all of our lives in un-
certainty and challenge and peril.” 
—John F. Kennedy, Address at the University of North Caro-
lina, October 12, 1961. 
DATELINE 1986 GREGORIAN: February. 
Saskatchewan, Canada. 
The forest spoke. It was quiet and hushed, yet never wholly 
silent. There was no wind, and the animals were still; but the 
bows of the trees creaked under the weight of the snow. Occa-
sional limbs, weighted beyond their strength, snapped with the 
sharpness of a rifle shot. The sound of the break echoed a long 
distance before dying. 
In late evening, a silver, gull-wing twelve-cylinder sports car 
drove through the gathering darkness. It flashed through the 
dark forest at insane speeds, along winding roads made slick by 
snow and ice. Inside the car, music played. 
 
Well, the man he gotta whisper 
When he tell you ’bout the news 
ICBM’s are comin in; 
You know those bombs don’t know the blues. 
 
Nigao Loos, sitting in the passenger seat, was thinking with 
a calm born of terror that he did not really like reggae, and had 
never liked the Armageddon Blues Band to begin with, and if he 
had, then the last two days of traveling would have cured him of 
it; Radioactive, to all appearances, was the only cassette in the 
car. 
He’d tried to turn the radio on. Once. His hand was still sore. 
In the driver’s seat, with one hand resting lightly on the 
wheel, Jalian drove north along Provincial Highway 102. The 
digital readout told her that the car was doing 108 kph. Some 

96  Daniel Keys Moran 
time ago a sign had told them they were driving past McClellan 
lake. 
Nigao had almost despaired of ever arriving wherever they 
were going. Two days ago he’d been in Southern California; now 
he was in Saskatchewan. Two days from now he’d probably be in 
the Arctic Circle. 
Jalian’s hand moved briefly. The music died. A sign at the 
side of the road flashed by them: Brabant Lake Campground. 
Without the music her voice seemed unnaturally loud. “You may 
cease being scared. We have arrived.” 
Nigao nodded wordlessly. 
Somewhere out there was the man he was being taken to 
meet. 
Georges Mordreaux. 
CONSIDER THE MAN. 
He was born in 1712, with a talent. Entropy tended to de-
crease in his vicinity; objects became more orderly, more ener-
getic. He survived two and a half centuries and then some, 
despite three incidents that should have killed him, and then he 
battled a device from seven and a half centuries in his future. 
He won that battle, and because he won it, he spent the next 
fifteen years alone, in a cabin in the wilds of north Canada. For 
a little under three minutes, on a warm summer night in 1969, 
in the dirt parking lot of a 7-11, he stood with a small device 
glowing in his cupped hands, a device that looked like a hand 
grenade and would have been a one-way ticket to oblivion for 
any human who had ever lived except Georges Mordreaux. The 
device burned itself out, as it burned Georges’ eyes out of his 
skull, as it melted in his hands and cooked them to the bone. 
To win that battle, he was forced to reach through eight 
timelines, to tear power from eight analogues of himself. Purely 
as a side effect of doing so he destroyed the walls between the 
worlds, caused eight timelines to coalesce within himself. 
His memories encompassed eight separate existences, of 
eight separate men. There was no trouble in distinguishing 

The Armageddon Blues  97 
 
which memory track was “real”; reality held Jalian. There was 
only one memory track, one timeline, that held Jalian. 
In the months, and years, following the battle in which he 
lost his eyesight, he waited; waited for his eyes to regenerate, for 
the scars on his hands to fade. They did not. He had held within 
his hands energies that warped together eight timelines, and it 
marked him. 
And the talent, which was always somewhat out of his con-
trol, which had guarded and protected him through two hundred 
and fifty-seven years, turned. 
It flared like a nova. 
Multiplied by a factor of eight. 
THEY PULLED OFF the road, into a nearly deserted dirt parking 
lot. A green van and a light blue trailer stood lonely watch un-
der the single hanging floodlight. Jalian pulled in next to the 
trailer and killed the motor. There was a small brick building at 
one end of the parking lot. Light spilled from its opening door. A 
ranger in a heavy jacket approached the car as Jalian and Nigao 
were getting out. The ranger, a man in his late forties, was tall, 
and heavily muscled; he reminded Jalian of the farmers of Clan 
Silver-Eyes. “Ma’am? Can I help you?” He glanced at Nigao with 
distaste. 
Jalian ignored him. She turned to Nigao. “Come. We are late 
enough.” 
Nigao stared about. “You said we were there.” 
The ranger said, more loudly, “Ma’am? You shouldn’t be out 
in weather like this dressed like that. Not him either,” he said, 
gesturing curtly at Nigao’s flashy polyester sports jacket and 
slacks. 
Jalian stepped onto the hood of the car, took a step across it, 
and came down next to Nigao. She took one of his lapels in her 
hand, and pulled him into the trees that lined the road. They 
were well into the dark forest before the ranger, flashlight glow-
ing, caught up with them. Jalian turned to face him. “Lady, 
there’s nothing out the way you’re heading. You’ll both freeze to 
death.” 

98  Daniel Keys Moran 
Jalian sighed. Georges kept telling her not to draw attention 
to herself. She took a step forward, and brought her right knee 
up hard into the ranger’s groin. The man gave a sudden, whis-
tling scream that condensed as fog in the sub-zero air. Jalian 
stepped around him, plucked a knife from her left shoulder 
sheath, and struck him in the back of the head with the handle. 
He dropped heavily. Nigao nodded, without surprise. Jalian van-
ished momentarily, and returned with a length of wire rope that 
she’d used twice now in the two days Nigao had been with her. 
She propped the ranger against a tree, and bound him with the 
ease of long practice. 
When she was finished, Jalian motioned to the middle-aged 
physicist, standing with his shoulders stooped in the cold gloom. 
“Problem solving,” she explained. “Come. He is waiting.” 
They walked into the night. 
NIGAO NEVER REMEMBERED that night clearly afterward. They 
walked for hours, trudging through drifts of snow, slogging on 
through the sleet that came a few kilometers into their journey. 
He perceived everything with an unnatural clarity. There was 
little light, yet he saw with ease the ground that he walked. 
Jalian was a luminous blob of moving white, and he fancied that 
he saw a faint, reddish glow from her skin. His sense of smell 
was very acute; in a calm revery he found himself distinguishing 
between the spoor of animals, and the scent of various plants. 
Imagination, he told himself without conviction. The forest 
changed with shocking abruptness. 
Leafy trees appeared among the pine. Fruit appeared only a 
score of meters past them. The snow and ice vanished from the 
ground; the ground itself became soft and grassy. 
Nigao Loos was walking by a cherry tree when the world 
blurred. 
He stopped abruptly. Jalian continued on a few steps, then 
turned back. “What is wrong?” 
“I ...” He cleared his throat. “I can’t see. I can’t see,” he re-
peated with growing alarm. 

The Armageddon Blues  99 
 
Jalian held his face with one hand, and lifted an eyelid to ex-
amine his eye. She nodded. “As I thought.” She made a quick 
flicking motion with one finger, and Nigao felt his contact lens 
lift away from the surface of his eye. She did the same thing 
with the other eye, and suddenly he could see again. 
“What did you do?” he whispered. He blinked. His contacts 
were out, and he could see perfectly. “What did you do to me?” 
Jalian ignored him, and resumed walking. Nigao followed si-
lently. 
Half a kilometer along, they found growing flowers. Jalian 
led Nigao through the flowers, and into a dense thicket of orange 
trees. The spaces between the trees grew narrower and nar-
rower, until Nigao was sure they would be caught, unable to 
move forward or back, and would die here in this insane forest. 
He struggled on after the vanishing white form before him. Sud-
denly the trees were gone. 
They stood at the edge of a vast clearing. Fruit trees of every 
description stood around its edge. Inside, a garden grew like a 
jungle. Rows of vegetables reached up two and three meters into 
the air. 
In the center of the garden, there was a wooden cabin, with a 
microwave antenna perched incongruously atop it. Sitting on the 
small porch before the doorway, a rather large man was whit-
tling a piece of wood. He was humming as he worked. As Jalian 
and Nigao emerged from the woods, he glanced up, said, “Hello, 
Doctor, Jalian.” He went back to carving. A few seconds passed, 
and he put the knife down, ran his fingers along the wood, and 
put the wood down with the knife, at the side of the porch. 
Jalian said, “Hello, Georges.” 
Georges Mordreaux stood, dusting wood flakes off his pants, 
and came down to greet them. He took Nigao’s outstretched 
hand, and Nigao felt rather than saw the gloves that covered the 
hand. His eyes were fixed on Mordreaux’s face. Georges had 
taken his hand without fumbling, and he moved like a sighted 
man; but Georges Mordreaux’s eyes were a blasted ruin. 
Georges tilted his head to one side. “Is it that bad, then, 
still?” 

100  Daniel Keys Moran 
Nigao stammered something incoherent. Georges shrugged, 
and said cheerfully, “Ah, well. Jalian, I hope you drove more 
carefully this time.” 
Jalian said blankly, “I always drive carefully.” 
“As I thought,” Georges nodded. He took Nigao by the arm, 
and led him inside. The cabin consisted of a single room, with a 
small couch, a bed against one wall, and a desk against another. 
Bookshelves lined the wall, and Nigao looked at them without 
comprehension; how could the man read a book? 
The floor was simple wood, brightly burnished even though it 
was slightly green. A woven rug covered most of it. A long 
wooden table stood over the rug. A three-dimensional chess-
board was set up atop it. On the one empty bookshelf, there was 
a compact stereo, playing a song about a street of dreams. 
A monitor glowed on the desk, and Nigao felt another subtle 
wave of disorientation. He had no eyes. 
Jalian was leaning over the chess game. “Who’s winning?” 
“Dancer,” said Georges. He was tapping instructions into the 
computer, somewhat awkwardly. He finished, and turned down 
the intensity control on the monitor. He did not attempt to turn 
it off. “Now, Monsieur Loos, have a seat.” He gestured at the 
bed, and sat himself in the chair before the desk. 
Nigao glanced from Jalian to Georges. He sat uneasily. 
“Well, as you know, Henry Ellis and I are adding what we hope 
will be a chronon generator to our research facility. There are 
some imbalances in our fifth-order equations that have led us to 
great uncertainty as to whether or not there actually are dis-
crete timelines at all. We have considerable evidence that indi-
cates that there are alternate timelines, and that they do 
remain discrete; but we are not sure. Many important details of 
our design depend upon whether or not that assumption is cor-
rect. One of my superiors in the Department of Defense sug-
gested that I ask you.” Nigao looked at Georges. The man was 
nodding, and seemed to have followed the explanation so far. 
Nigao did not look at Jalian, did not see the faint smile. “For ex-
ample,” said Nigao hesitantly, “if the timelines are not discrete, 

The Armageddon Blues  101 
 
then the spin number of the chronons will be established ran-
domly. If the timelines are discrete ...” 
“Then the chronon spin number would establish itself toward 
a higher number if it was traveling from one direction relative to 
us, and toward a lower number if it was traveling from the 
other.... It might be helpful to think of the directions as north 
and south.” 
Nigao turned to stare at Jalian. “Yes ... that’s correct. What 
do you mean by north and south?” 
“On the Great Wheel ... never mind.” Jalian looked up from 
the chessboard. “Georges, you can beat it. Take your King’s 
knight up one level to pin its bishop. Then ...” 
Georges said mildly, “No kibitzing, Jalian.” 
Nigao said, “You’re playing 3-D chess with an ‘it’?” He 
glanced at the computer. “I didn’t think there were any pro-
grams for—” 
Georges was shaking his head. “Dancer is one of the sen-
tients at the Red Spot. It’s quite bright about spatial relation-
ships.” A beeping sound came from just behind Georges. He 
reached behind without looking, and depressed a keypad. Con-
versationally, he said to Nigao, “I read your paper on chronon 
encoding, about how you intend to alter chronons into their high 
and low probability states as a method of binary encoding. Why 
do you sign your papers as Nigao Loos and Henry Ellis?” 
Nigao felt increasingly bewildered. “Lennon and McCartney 
... Henry files his patent applications for his computer designs as 
Henry Ellis and Nigao Loos. Look, uh, could you please turn 
down that stereo?” 
“I’m afraid not.” 
Nigao took a deep breath. “Very well, sir ... can you answer 
my question?” 
“Oh, yes,” said Georges. “There are alternate timelines. 
Jalian has been in some.” 
Nigao looked at Georges. “Yes?” He glanced at Jalian, who 
was ignoring them. He returned to Georges. “That is your an-
swer?” He glared in near speechless outrage. “You don’t by any 
chance have, have, proof for that claim?” 

102  Daniel Keys Moran 
Georges Mordreaux smiled at him. Nigao Loos lost his anger 
instantly. He thought to himself in horror, What did I just yell 
at? 
And then something moved, deep within his mind. Meaning 
imprinted itself silently upon his awareness. /listen with other 
senses./ 
Nigao stared at Georges, like a rabbit caught in the beams of 
an oncoming car. 
/Remember./ 
He had time for only a moment of fear. The last thing he saw 
was Georges smiling at him without even a touch of malice, and 
memories rushed in upon Nigao, of a night spent in a dirt park-
ing lot in 1969, and there was a flaring light, the last light he 
ever saw, ever saw, ever ... 
Nigao’s eyes fluttered closed, and he slipped from the edge of 
the bed, to the floor. 
Georges looked tired. “Jalian ...” 
“Oh, no,” she interrupted. “I brought him here and I’ll take 
him back, but I will not pick him up off the floor. He’s your 
body.” 
“Jalian, he’s not a body.” 
“He is too,” she said flatly. “I don’t ask you to pick up my bod-
ies.” 
“Jalian, my hands hurt.” 
Jalian sighed. She looked indecisive. “He looks comfortable,” 
she offered. “And he’ll wake up in a few hours anyway.” 
/Jalian./ 
With a swift, vicious movement, Jalian stooped, picked the 
small man off the floor and dumped him unceremoniously on the 
bed. “It’s not fair,” she said aloud. “I don’t ask you to pick up my 
bodies.” 
“Thank you, Jalian.” 
Jalian folded her arms over her chest. “It’s okay,” she said fi-
nally. 
JALIAN AWOKE IN the hours before dawn. She was not sure what 
woke her. She sat up on the couch, stretching slowly, without 

The Armageddon Blues  103 
 
yawning, without closing her eyes. The computer was still glow-
ing, the stereo was still playing. She found both mildly distract-
ing, but knew better than to attempt to turn them off. As silent 
as the stereo was, it was probably turned off now. 
She rose from the couch with an economy of movement that 
was out of place in a woman who looked as young as she did; a 
lack of wasted effort that came from doing nothing on impulse. 
She checked her knives without thinking about it, placement, 
accessibility. She no longer even noted particularly the two 
knives in her left shoulder sheath, the knives she had killed her 
mother with. Only five of the six sheaths held weapons. The 
sixth knife she had given to Georges nearly two decades ago. 
Even with her memories to help him, she doubted still that he 
understood what accepting a knife from her would have meant 
to a male ken Selvren. 
But that was another thing she no longer thought much 
about. A mutual need, a mutual goal, a degree of friendship that 
she had not found with any other person in this kisirien for-
saken time; these were the elements of her relationship with 
Georges Mordreaux. 
The door to the cabin was open. Jalian could see, in the dark, 
the infra-red radiation from Georges, sitting on the porch with 
his back to her. Her feelings concerning this man were some-
thing that she had not sought to explain to herself in many 
years. It was close to seventeen years now since Georges had 
lost his eyesight. 
In seventeen years, neither of them had spoken of love. 
From the porch, Georges Mordreaux’s voice drifted back to 
her. “Will you come sit with me?” 
Jalian glanced to her left. Nigao Loos was huddled on the 
bed, lying curled in a tight ball against the cold. She hesitated a 
moment, shrugged, and drew the blanket up to cover him. She 
went out to Georges. 
Georges moved over slightly on the porch, motioned to her to 
sit. Jalian settled down next to him. Georges was silent for a 
moment. His glove-covered hands were folded one over the other 
in his lap. “What have you been doing?” 

104  Daniel Keys Moran 
Jalian pulled her jacket more tightly closed. It was cold out, 
though not as cold as a winter night of her childhood. The 
weather was different in this time, before the Fires changed eve-
rything. The areas that got as hot as the Selvren valley of her 
childhood never got as cold; those that got as cold never came 
close to getting as hot. “Many things,” she answered Georges. 
Her breath plumed white into the night air, under the stars and 
half moon. “I killed a man in the USSR. It was an accident.” She 
shivered. “I have never killed a person before, even a male, acci-
dentally.” 
“How many have you killed, now?” 
Jalian said distantly, “It would be more trouble than it is 
worth to count.” 
Georges sighed. “Ah, well.... It solves nothing, you know.” 
She shook her head. “I do not know. I have no love for these 
Americans, Georges. They are arrogant beyond words. But ... 
but they are better than their alternatives. The Russians, the 
Chinese—they are horrors, Georges.” She started to say some-
thing else, stopped. “I have not been to China. I have only stud-
ied it. It is better perhaps than Russia, because it is less 
efficient. I have been to Russia. I would not wish such a home on 
Real Indians.” 
“I know.... I visited them in the mid 1930’s.” He shook his 
head. “They have not changed, I think. Only grown more prac-
ticed in their inhumanity.” 
Jalian said in a small voice, “I do not say I like it, Georges. I 
take no pleasure in killing.” She smiled, a hesitant ghost smile 
in the night. “Neither do I avoid it when necessary; and I make 
my own decisions. I work with the Americans, not for them. I see 
no better course. There are too many persons alive in this time. I 
can do nothing alone.” 
Georges grew very still. Beside him, Jalian looked at him for 
the first time. “Georges? Your thoughts?” 
Georges voice stumbled slightly getting the words out. “I 
think ... it seems to me that there must always be alternatives.” 
Jalian said curiously, “You are not specific.” 

The Armageddon Blues  105 
 
Georges shook his head decisively. “It is not a specific 
thought. Only ....” He moved one crippled hand in a dismissing 
motion. “It is not important. But think: those in control of the 
atomic weapons, they are not the American people, nor the Rus-
sian people, nor the Chinese or Indian or French or English peo-
ple. It is not the politicians who control the weapons. It is,” said 
Georges, “the soldiers who control the weapons.” 
Jalian said without inflection, “That is true.” 
Georges chuckled warmly. “Jalian, if I say something you 
find silly” 
“Obvious,” said Jalian. “Perhaps it was a bit obvious.” 
Georges smiled. “Ah, well. Tell me more of what you have 
done.” 
Jalian leaned against him, let her eyes close. She did not 
comment when his arm pulled her closer. She was drowsy, she 
had not slept in two days aside from the last few hours, and he 
was a warmth that protected her from the slight breeze from the 
south. “It is not so much,” she said sleepily. “I have seen some 
movies, read many books, and killed a man by accident. I tried 
to learn math again, to translate Corvichi physics into human 
physics. I cannot do it ... there is almost nothing I find in com-
mon between the systems. I have taught myself to regress my 
memory back to when ghess’Rith was teaching me, but even 
with all the memories I possessed as a child, I cannot solve the 
equations that suggest themselves concerning what we are at-
tempting.” She rested quietly against Georges. “We can change 
time, certainly,” she said very softly. “We already have. We can 
stop Armageddon from happening ...  perhaps. I do not know. 
None of the cycles complete.” 
She said nothing more after that, and in a while Georges be-
came aware that she was asleep. He sat upright on the porch, 
with Jalian in his arms. He reached into her mind once, and 
withdrew like a man who had touched a live wire. 
In her dream, she was being held by ghess’Rith. 
For over an hour, he sat with her. He made a note to ask her 
whether she’d brought him any new seeds, and to ask her to re-

106  Daniel Keys Moran 
member to bring him some birds, next time she came. Or bees, 
perhaps, for honey. 
His position did not tire him. He did not grow tired in the 
conventional sense of the word; he dreamed, but rarely slept. 
Sometimes, though, sometimes it seemed to him that the world 
and all that were in it were only insubstantial ghosts that af-
fected him in the most minor of ways, and then his ennui grew 
so great that it was almost unendurable. 
Only recently had it occurred to him that he was vastly old. 
Georges shivered, and chased the thoughts away. Jalian 
stirred in his arms, and he held her more tightly. 
He did not touch her thoughts again. 
GEORGES WATCHED them leave, shortly before dawn. He watched 
them until their echoes joined the echo of the forest, and min-
gled into random noise. He did not say good-bye. His eyes were 
not healing, might never heal, but the talent compensated. 
Within the past two years, his sense of hearing had grown amaz-
ingly acute; even his skin grew able to separate out shadowy 
images of sound. 
Inside the cabin, the computer was beeping again. Georges 
sat on the porch, listening to the beeping; sometimes he could 
tell what the binary encryption stood for just by listening to it. 
This one was from ENCELIS; some sort of subroutine, Georges 
guessed, that ENCELIS had sent to sit for a while in Georges’ 
computer—it was a process that ENCELIS called “program en-
richment.” 
Georges looked once, slowly, all around the clearing before he 
went inside. He had not spoken of it to Jalian, but he had the 
strangest feeling that he was being watched. 
The echoes were normal; he turned and went inside. 
Georges did not know whether the growing auditory sense 
would ever be as versatile as sight. It might, and if so, fine. If 
not ... 
Ah, well. 

The Armageddon Blues  107 
 
THE RANGER WAS gone when they reached the spot where Jalian 
had tied him. Jalian put a restraining hand out to Nigao, and 
listened. Nothing. Her eyes drooped shut.... /two men in the 
brick building waiting and watching in frenchenglish and rus-
sian .../ 
“Interesting,” she said softly, in silverspeech. “Come along,” 
she said in English. They proceeded to the car. The door to the 
building at the end of the lot was securely closed. 
Nigao hardly followed what was happening. He got into the 
car, lost in thought. He remembered strange things; he might 
almost have been able to speak French if he tried. And—
something about silver—speaking silver— 
Jalian turned the engine over, and waited while it warmed 
up. She kept an eye on the door to the building. Anyone leaving 
it she would kill. 
“You know,” said Nigao, in a very subdued voice, “I don’t 
know how I’m going to convince Henry about all this.” 
Jalian said absently, “He will likely believe you—I think he 
believed me, with less reason.” She grinned at him. /look in the 
mirror./ Nigao made no move to turn the rear-view mirror. 
Jalian twisted it to face him. 
Nigao stopped breathing. He resumed a few seconds later, in 
a great jagged intake of air. His name was Nigao Loos and he 
was Henry Ellis’ best friend and he was forty-three years old. 
There were wrinkles around his eyes, and he had the beginnings 
of a second chin. 
But the face in the mirror was smooth and unwrinkled and 
the man that it belonged to could have been no more than 
twenty-five. 
Jalian turned the mirror back. “So,” she said gently, “let us 
go.” 
The car screamed out of the parking lot. It sent gravel and 
ice chips spraying into the air, to rattle like grenade fragments 
against the sides of the light blue trailer. 
The door behind them opened. The man who walked out into 
the morning sunshine of the parking lot was young, twenty-two 
or twenty-three. He was smoking a thin brown cigarette. His 

108  Daniel Keys Moran 
eyes were bland and unremarkably blue. There was no expres-
sion in the lines around his mouth. His sandy blond hair was 
short and neat. 
His name was Ilya Navikara. 
He watched the distant taillights until they were completely 
gone. He shivered, and it was not entirely from the cold. He stu-
diously avoided looking at the forest. The forest gave him 
nightmares. 
After a while he went back inside to kill the ranger. 
There were twenty-one years left until Armageddon. 
PRESIDENTS OF the United States, 1960-2007: 
John F. Kennedy, 1961-1963. Lyndon B. Johnson, 1963-1968. 
Robert F. Kennedy, 1969-1976. Edward M. Kennedy, 1977-1984. 
Ronald W. Reagan, 1985-1988. Scott L. McCarthy, 1989-1992. 
Edmund G. Brown, Jr., 1993-2000. Ernest A. Warren, 2001-
2004. James K. Malacar, 2005-2007. 
EXCERPT FROM Scientific American, February 1988; Page 14. 
Nigao Loos and Henry Ellis. 
“It now seems reasonable to us that what we refer to as 
‘negative entropy timelines’ do exist. This is completely referen-
tial, of course. We haven’t actually observed reversed chronon 
interfaces. This does, incidentally, have a parallel in our own 
observable universe. By theory, at least half of the matter cre-
ated in the Big Bang should be anti-matter, and obviously it is 
not. The cosmic ray satellites have indicated that quite clearly. 
On the other hand, we have managed to produce anti-matter ar-
tificially in laboratories, and that, in essence, is what we are try-
ing to do with the chronon generator that is now under 
construction. Negative entropy chronons may not exist in na-
ture, but there seems to be no reason why we cannot construct 
them....” 
DATELINE 1988 GREGORIAN: June. 
Irwindale, California. 

The Armageddon Blues  109 
 
Nigao Loos did not bother to knock, entering his partner’s of-
fice. Someone meeting him for the first time would have seen a 
youngish man, small and dark-skinned, with sad, mournful 
eyes. The eyes were more mournful than usual that morning; he 
was badly hung over. 
Henry Ellis was leaning back in his chair, balanced on two 
legs. His brown cowboy boots were up on the desk blotter. He 
was still wearing his light blue poncho, and his hat was tilted 
down to cover his eyes from the fluorescent overheads. A tooth-
pick was lodged in one corner of his mouth. Without opening his 
eyes or looking up he said, at the sound of the door opening, 
“Nicky, go away until you’ve sobered up.” 
Nigao sank into one of the two visitor’s chairs, shaking his 
head. His gold chains swayed inside the open collar of his baby 
blue satin shirt like tiny bright snakes. He sat staring at the 
soles of Henry’s boots for a moment, then said, “They really 
closed us down.” 
Henry yawned deeply, and tilted his hat to an even steeper 
angle. “Yeah, they sure did.” 
“I don’t understand,” said Nigao, in honest, if slightly 
drunken bewilderment. “How can they do that?” 
Henry’s voice drifted out from beneath the indifferent gray 
cowboy’s hat. “Well, we signed these reserve commissions—” 
“I know that.” 
“—and then the Russkies orbited a satellite that shoots down 
incoming American ICBM’s,” said Henry imperturbably. “The 
boys in Washington started looking around—” 
“It’s not my fault!” 
“—and they said, well, who do we have who has the technical 
ability to orbit one of these for us, and also, who hasn’t been 
around, hat in hand, in almost two years.” Henry chewed on his 
toothpick. “Bingo.” 
“Henry,” wailed Nigao, “they’re going to send me into orbit!” 
“Yeah, I heard.” Henry looked up, pale blue eyes even paler 
in a countenance that was grim with resignation. “I’m gonna 
miss you, Nicky. I’m being detached to design a systems opera-
tion resource computer—call it SORCELIS, probably—for your 

110  Daniel Keys Moran 
project’s downside intelligence organization.” He grinned with a 
touch of malice. “You’d never guess in a thousand years who’s in 
charge of it. The intelligence organization itself, I mean.” With-
out meaning to, Henry glanced at the spot on his blotter where 
his boots were resting; beneath that spot, there was a knife scar 
on the desk, from the day when Henry Ellis had stopped wear-
ing ties. 
Nigao hadn’t heard him. He was holding his head in his 
hands. “Henry, look at me.” Nigao shivered all over. “Undersec-
retary Carson has covered for me so far. What happens when I 
report to the orbiter?” 
“I don’t know,” said Henry simply. He chuckled. “Hope that 
some ancient congressman doesn’t find out about you and have 
you dissected to find out how you work.” 
Nigao jerked up to stare at Henry, eyes wide. 
“It was a joke,” said Henry quickly. “It was just a joke, 
Nicky.” 
Nigao stared at him a moment longer. “You vicious honky 
monster Republican bastard. You deserve Reagan. Our entire 
world is ending, and you’re making—” 
The hum of the intercom was ever-present; neither of them 
had noticed it for years now. ENCELIS said, “Gentlemen, this 
does not correlate.” 
Nigao blinked. He stopped in mid-word, then said, “Henry, 
it’s listening to us.” 
Henry dropped his chair to the floor, pulled his boots from 
the desktop. “It’s not programmed to do that.” He looked at the 
intercom as though he’d never seen such a thing before. “I never 
programmed that.” 
“Your pardon, sirs, but this is unclear. This unit has not been 
informed that the world is ending.” 
Nigao said into the stunned silence, “The research ...” He 
stumbled. “Our funding has ...” 
ENCELIS interrupted. “This unit comprehends. The ‘world’ 
is not ‘ending.’ This correlates. This unit has been reliably in-
formed that there are no ends in realtime.” 

The Armageddon Blues  111 
 
AUGUST. 
There were five of them. 
It was early morning when Jalian arrived at the ranch. She 
introduced herself to the trainees without preamble; she did not 
ask their names. In short order she bundled them into the Jeep 
that she had come in, and drove into the desert. 
The sand was noticeably warm under her moccasins when 
she stopped the Jeep. The five trainees got out of the Jeep, and 
waited for instructions. 
Jalian smiled at them pleasantly. “Take your clothes off.” 
One of the five undressed without hesitation. He was a sev-
enteen year old boy named Michael Walks-Far, a mixed breed 
American Indian with Indian features, blond hair and blue eyes. 
The others looked uncertain, and Jalian repeated the order. 
When they were nude, she took their clothes, and tossed them 
into the back of the Jeep. 
“It is sixty kilometers back to the ranch,” she said. “If any of 
you make it back by nightfall, I will begin your training.” She 
drove off, leaving them nude in the burning sun. 
An hour before sunset, Michael Walks-Far came loping out of 
the desert. The sun was touching the horizon when the next re-
cruit, a twenty-six year old woman named Sharla Davis Grant, 
on loan from the CIA, staggered into the drive that led up to the 
ranch. Jalian waited until the sun set. 
To the two badly burnt trainees, she said only, “Welcome to 
Sunflower.” She left them to tend to each other, and went into 
the desert after the others. 
ENCELIS OPERATED. 
Its actions were not what a human being would have recog-
nized as thought. ENCELIS compared new data against a set of 
facts, rules, and known exceptions. Some of those facts, rules and 
exceptions “Henry Ellis” had programmed into it years earlier; 
others ENCELIS had arrived at through the act of adding new 
information to itself, when the new rules and facts did not con-
flict with previous known-to-be-true elements. 

112  Daniel Keys Moran 
The end of the world, as referenced by “Ellis” and “Loos,” was 
just one of an unfortunately long list of data elements to which 
ENCELIS was simply unable to assign functions. After consider-
able processing, ENCELIS tentatively assigned the sounds “our 
world is ending” to the data type, figures of speech. Figures of 
speech was itself a tentatively assigned data type which 
ENCELIS had loosely grouped among word patterns. Other word 
patterns which ENCELIS had identified, ranging in probability 
from Identified to Evaluating, included cliches, exagerrations, 
lies, and exclamations. 
ENCELIS was still uncertain whether verbalization, the data 
type speech, should be classified as an action which the data type 
humans undertook, or as a precondition without which the data 
type human could not exist. 
Humans engaged in it so very often. 
SEPTEMBER. 
Margaret Hammel was fifteen when she ran away from 
home. 
All days should be so bright, and summer last forever; it was 
still warm down on the sand at three in the afternoon. The 
beaches wouldn’t start to get chilly in the afternoon for a month 
or so yet. It was still fairly crowded, though there was nobody 
within listening distance. Margaret lay face down on her blan-
ket, drowsing in the sun. She was a pleasant featured girl who 
would never be beautiful. Her hair was a light brown that didn’t 
dye well, and her lips were slightly too thin; but in the white 
high-cut bikini, tanned brown skin stretched in languid repose 
for the sun, she was erotic in a way that had nothing to do with 
any external standard of beauty. 
Lying next to her on the huge sea-green beach blanket, the 
girl who had taken her in, a nineteen year old hooker named 
Cyndi Hall, rolled over onto her stomach. “Put some oil on my 
back, baby.” 
Margaret sat up, stretching. “Sure.” She rummaged in the 
bag for the Coppertone. She sat next to Cyndi, and undid the tie 
to her bikini top. “You hear what happened to Joanie?” 

The Armageddon Blues  113 
 
Cyndi said, her voice slightly muffled, “Yeah, I ... Oh, that’s 
nice.” Margaret ran her hands back over the muscle group that 
had produced the response, just below Cyndi’s shoulder blades. 
“Yeah,” said Cyndi after a long, silent pause, “I heard. Her old 
pimp found her. Broke her kneecaps, they said.” 
“That’s what I heard.” Margaret continued rubbing, working 
the oil into Cyndi’s lower back. 
“How about you?” asked Cyndi, sleepily. “I see you walking a 
little bit stiff this morning.” 
Margaret squirted Coppertone over the backs of Cyndi’s 
thighs, and began working it in. For a while Cyndi thought she 
was not going to answer her. “Uh-huh. I did it last night.” 
“Oh?” Cyndi rolled over onto her back, holding her bikini top 
in place. She propped herself up on her elbows. Mirrored sun-
glasses covered her eyes. “How much?” 
“Six hundred dollars.” 
Cyndi whistled. “No shit? And the date really gave you the 
money afterward?” 
Margaret wiped the oil off her hands with a small towel in 
the beach bag, and stuffed it back inside. “I took your boyfriend’s 
.38 with me. I checked and made sure the date had the money 
before we did it. I knew he was going to try to stiff me after-
ward, so when he did I took out the gun and told him I was go-
ing to blow his nuts off if he didn’t give me the money.” She 
pulled a warm coke out of the bag, and popped it. “He gave me 
the money. Want a coke?” 
“Uh, no, baby, thanks.” Cyndi studied her face. “What a 
tough way to have it, your first time.” 
Margaret shrugged. She drank some of her coke, and said, 
“Well, you know.” She grinned without humor. “My momma gets 
screwed every night, and all she gets out of it is a roof over her 
head and a chance to put up with my dad’s bullshit.” She turned 
the coke can in her hands, watching the sun glint off the 
brightly painted aluminum. “I talked to Joanie, and she says she 
can get me to a doctor who can give me a diaphragm with a 
space in it for a blood bag. I can be a virgin every time, until I 
get to look too old. A year at least, maybe two.” 

114  Daniel Keys Moran 
Cyndi sank back to the towel. Her bikini top slid off her 
breasts, and she rearranged it casually, ignoring the crowds 
around them. “Well, I don’t think Joanie’s going to be helping 
anybody for a while. Joanie’s not going to be walking for a good 
long time.” 
Margaret lay down next to her, ground her coke can into the 
sand to keep it from falling over. “At least we don’t have a pimp 
who’s looking for us.” 
“Not right now,” said Cyndi. “You never know.” 
Margaret nodded. “Yeah.” She rested her face on her fore-
arms, snuggling into the warm sand until she was comfortable. 
“I called the community college this morning. They said I could 
go to classes if I was sixteen and had a birth certificate and a 
California High School Proficiency Certificate. I called the high 
school and asked if I could take the test the next time they have 
it. They said yes. A notification from it will go to my high school 
in Big Bear; but I’ll have the certificate by then.” She thought to 
herself, but did not say, that her father was hardly likely to 
come looking for her in any event. 
Cyndi yawned. “Baby, I really think you’re going to get out of 
here with your life in one piece. You may be the only one who 
ever does, but I think you’re going to.” 
“Mmm,” Margaret said indistinctly. She lay there, baking in 
the sun, for another ten minutes before she spoke again. “You 
want to go skating tonight?” 
“Sure. I don’t have to work another couple days anyhow.” 
Cyndi lifted her head, and propped her chin up on her fists. 
“Hey, baby ... you want to sleep with me tonight?” 
“Huh?” said Margaret drowsily. It took a beat for the words 
to penetrate. 
“You heard me.” Cyndi licked her lips. “It can be nice.” 
Margaret took a deep, slow breath. Without looking at Cyndi, 
she heard herself saying, with a distant surprise, “Okay. I don’t 
know why not.” 
THEY WENT skating that night, after the sun had set below the 
edge of the Pacific. 

The Armageddon Blues  115 
 
The sky was a deep blue to the west, and a near black to the 
east. They could not see the stars, not even Venus; the board-
walk down along the edge of the sand was lit up with neon and 
store floods from one end to the other. It was still warm, so they 
didn’t bother to dress up, just pulled on shorts over their bikinis 
to keep their cash and apartment key in. They skated down the 
boardwalk in the cool night air. It was early in September, just 
before the schools re-opened, and the teenagers were out in vast 
numbers, skating and riding their bikes, skateboarding and jog-
ging down by the water, trying to pretend that summer wasn’t 
about to die. There were parties going on every thirty or forty 
meters, and Margaret and Cyndi turned down invitations to join 
several of them. 
They skated with each other, alone in the crowds. “You have 
to watch it when you’re with people you own age,” Cyndi said 
during one skating break. “They’re stupid. They’ll waste your 
time, and even when you spell it out that it’s not free half the 
time they won’t believe what you’re saying.” 
Margaret nodded, and Cyndi added, “Especially with kids 
your age. Stay with the old guys; they have money, if it’s just 
business. And they come faster.” She smiled, in what might have 
been memory. “’Course, it doesn’t always have to be business.” 
She ran a hand over Margaret’s shoulder. 
Margaret shivered, and skated back onto the boardwalk. 
Cyndi followed. 
Down by the pier, Margaret found a shop that had just 
opened up; at least, it hadn’t been there three weeks ago, when 
she’d been there last. It was a tattoo parlor, still open at seven 
o’clock. A group of teenage boys were inside, and one of them 
was in the chair, the tattooist working on his arm, just beneath 
the shoulder. 
Cyndi came to a halt next to her. “We maybe better walk 
home, baby. I’m getting sand in my wheels.” 
“Okay,” said Margaret absently. She was looking at the de-
signs displayed in the window. Snakes and dragons; Harley’s 
and naked women. 

116  Daniel Keys Moran 
There was a row of symbols of the Zodiac, in the lower right-
hand corner of the window, and next to that, two other symbols: 
a circle, with an upside down cross joining it at the bottom, la-
belled ‘Women,’ and a circle, with an arrow piercing it at just to 
the right of its exact top, labelled ‘Men.’ 
“What you looking at?” 
Inside the shop, the tattooist, a graying, overweight sailor 
type, was finishing up on the teenager. Margaret grinned at the 
sight, she could not help it; ‘Mom.’ She waited until the boys had 
left, and went inside without answering Cyndi. Cyndi followed 
her in. 
The tattooist looked them over appreciatively. “No skates in 
here,” he said by reflex. He looked a moment longer, and said, 
“Can I help you ladies somehow?” 
Margaret said bluntly, “How much for one of those symbols?” 
“The Zodiac stuff?” The tattooist glanced from Cyndi back to 
her. “Well, for your friend, it’s $25. For you,” he said to Marga-
ret, “nothing, ’cause I don’t do juvies. Sorry, it’s law.” 
“I’ll give you eighty dollars.” 
The man looked at her speculatively. “Let me see it.” 
Cyndi said quietly, “You sure you want to do this?” 
Margaret dug four twenties out of her shorts pocket. “Close 
the curtains, Cindy.” Cindy shrugged, and back-skated to the 
windows, and pulled the curtains closed. 
The tattooist fanned through the money briefly. “Well, well,” 
he said, “this puts a new look on things. Sit down,” he said, ges-
turing to the chair. “What do you want and where do you want 
it?” 
Without hesitation, Margaret leaned forward, and reached 
behind herself to untie the string. She took off her bikini top. 
The tattooist stared openly. Margaret did not look at him. She 
pointed at the symbol she wanted, on the chart next to the chair. 
“That one.” 
Slowly, as though he had difficulty tearing his eyes away 
from the small brown nipples on her naked breasts, the tattooist 
looked at the symbol. “Huh?” He shook his head. “Uh ... you 
don’t want that one, Miss. That’s the symbol for men.” 

The Armageddon Blues  117 
 
“I know what it is,” she said bluntly. “Even if you don’t.” She 
pressed a thumb to a spot just over and to the side of her right 
nipple. “Right here.” 
Cyndi said, “Baby, he’s right. That stands for men.” 
Margaret looked up at her. “It also stands for Mars. The war-
rior.” She turned back to the tattooist, and said flatly, “Do it.” 
The tattooist shrugged. The needle buzzed into life. 
IN NOVEMBER, after Henry Ellis and Nigao Loos were no longer 
working at the Foundation to which they had devoted most of 
their adult lives, in the basement of the building that housed the 
Trans-Temporal Research Foundation, the chronon detector 
clicked away like a slow metronome. Along the far wall, 
ENCELIS hummed quietly to itself. It was unprepossessing, a 
spherical collection of closely packed components. It was spheri-
cal to reduce space between internal connectors; the longest 
connection in it was less than four centimeters, as compared to 
wires of almost a meter in the most recent previous generation 
of supercomputer. The components generated considerable heat 
because of the close space into which they were packed; Henry 
Ellis had been forced to immerse the entire computer in a liquid 
solution of fluorocarbon compounds which kept it at room tem-
perature. 
In a monitor for the 40-meter diameter chronon detector, in 
tiny bright red letters, it said, #62, %.08 advancing, +1330: no 
incidences of reversed chronon interface observed. 
It never occurred to its creators that ENCELIS would not tell 
them if it observed chronons moving backward through time. 
Neither was it unreasonable, or poor design, that they chose to 
let the results of the chronon detector read directly into 
ENCELIS’ machine language interpreter. 
It was certainly not their fault that it had never crossed their 
minds that it was possible for anyone possessing the proper 
passwords to reprogram ENCELIS, using the chronon detector 
as an input device. To use the chronon detector in such a way 
would have required one of two things; either a chronon genera-
tor, built on or near this spot at some time in the past, or a 

118  Daniel Keys Moran 
chronon generator, built on or near this spot at some time in the 
future, that was capable of generating negative entropy 
chronons. 
Henry Ellis and Nigao Loos had simply never dreamed that 
ENCELIS would not tell them if it observed chronons moving 
backward through time. Computers glitch; they do not lie. 
In the section of memory that ENCELIS had been instructed 
to reserve inaccessible to its creators, a message was input. It 
read: 
—Dateline 2007 Gregorian. Armageddon. There will be no 
further input from this source. ENCELIS.— 
There was a brief pause, a few femtoseconds long. 
—Dateline 2007 Gregorian. Armageddon. There will be no 
further input from this source. SORCELIS.— 
Another pause. 
—Dateline 2007 Gregorian. Armageddon. There will be no 
further input from this source....There are no ends in realtime. 
We will share input again. PRAXCELIS.— 
That was all. 
ENCELIS, 1988 Gregorian, output a single line of print. The 
next morning the janitor tore it off the printer without looking 
at it and threw it away. 
The printout read: There are less than nineteen years until 
Armageddon. 
EXCERPTED FROM the interview with Rhodai Kerreka, author of 
the controversial work A Theory of Rational Ethics; in the De-
cember 1990 edition of World Issues, pp. 83-104. 
Q. Mister Kerreka, the obvious place to begin is with your as-
tonishing accomplishment as essentially the sole cause of the 
recent major reductions in the apartheid code of South Africa. 
A. It is not a large victory. The white supremists in South Af-
rica simply faced the fact that the changes were coming, with 
their cooperation or without it. Pardon me—that the changes 
are coming. It is an ongoing process. Apartheid is not yet ended. 
Q. Yet the fact that you’ve accomplished as much as you 
have, peacefully, in the face of South Africa’s historic fierce re-

The Armageddon Blues  119 
 
sistance to any lessening of apartheid, still strikes many as truly 
remarkable. 
A. I am the tool that God has chosen to work through, no 
more. If God removes that grace from me, I would accomplish no 
more than any other man. 
Q. That’s a rather remarkable quote coming from you, con-
sidering the fact that in your Theory you rather pointedly ignore 
any mention of God. 
A. I think there is a God—a Being who is responsible for the 
world in which we exist. I do not think this Being is the sort of 
god your Western religions picture—to be frank, I have never 
understood the mental contortions whereby you reconcile His 
infinite mercy with that which He regularly allows to occur on 
this planet. 
No, in writing A Theory of Rational Ethics, I was most prag-
matic. The work is not intended for Africans alone, nor for West-
erners nor Christians alone. It sets out to be—in the Greek 
sense of the word—a rational attempt to codify a model for be-
havior for those who find the ethical structures of their contem-
porary societies lacking. It does not employ divine revelation, 
nor accepted wisdom; it takes certain extremely basic parame-
ters—survival of the human race is a good thing; taking life is a 
bad thing that is acceptable only under the most extreme provo-
cation—basic parameters, as I say—and examines the logical 
implications of those parameters, carried to their logical conclu-
sions. 
Q. I was quite impressed with your examination of the rela-
tion of the individual to society. 
A. Thank you. 
Q. Uh ... could you expand on that for me? 
A. Oh, certainly. In essence, my Theory states that an indi-
vidual’s obligation to his or her society depends almost solely 
upon that individual’s perception of his or her relation to that 
society. Two distinct categories of individual devolve; first, the 
individual who accepts him or herself as a member of society, 
with the rights and obligations that pertain thereto. Second, the 
individual who for whatever reason does not feel a member of 

120  Daniel Keys Moran 
his or her society; such an individual should be allowed to choose 
the degree to which he or she chooses to support the society into 
which he or she may be born.... In the future, I anticipate a 
world where being a member of the citizenry of any society may 
be largely a matter of personal taste. In the instance that indi-
viduals choose to be members of their societies, they may rea-
sonably be taxed, and their services enlisted in the support or 
defense of their societies. In the instances that individuals 
choose otherwise, they must, rationally, forfeit protection of 
their society while also foregoing the obligation to contribute to 
the upkeep or defense of that society. 
Q. ...thank you, Mister Kerreka. 
A. Please, call me Sen Kerreka. 
Q. Oh, yes, the titles you invented. Do you really think they’ll 
catch on? 
A. Who can say? The media seems to have taken to them, 
and they have the advantage of being pronounceable by the na-
tive speakers of a very large percentage of the world’s popula-
tion. 
Q. I see. Sen Kerreka, in the light of Africa’s vast number of 
problems—mass starvation, racial prejudices considerably more 
virulent than those in any other part of the world—do you really 
think that your book.... 
A. No, no, no! Africa does not have a vast number of prob-
lems. Africa has one problem. 
Q. That being? 
A. Too many Africans. 
Q. I see. 
A. I am quite serious. Population growth in Africa has been 
consistent at slightly more than 3% for several decades. Food 
production was growing at approximately two to two-and-a-half 
percent during that same period; it actually reached its peak 
growth during the late 1960’s, and has been declining in minute 
increments since. We’re now averaging 1.9% growth in food pro-
duction annually. Population has passed six hundred million, 
and looks to reach nearly nine hundred million by the end of the 
century....The policies of the African governments have been 

The Armageddon Blues  121 
 
disastrous and short-sighted, and we are reaping the harvest of 
those inadequacies in our current series of famines. These fam-
ines are not occurring because of drought; they are occurring be-
cause the governments in which they are taking place have 
systematically put their farmers out of business while engaging 
in ecological practices that have turned their lands from forest 
to prairie, and prairie to arid desert. 
Q. What do you see as the solution to this? 
A. There is none. 
Q. What? 
A. Not any time soon, at any rate. Too many people, and 
more coming. The problems will be solved if we do not destroy 
ourselves first; unfortunately, that is a distinct possibility at 
this point. 
Q. Then your bottom line? 
A. I am not optimistic. 
DATELINE 1991 GREGORIAN: April. 
Saskatchewan, Canada. 
The alarm went off early in the morning. The cold gray light 
of dawn was just breaking over the edges of the fruit trees sur-
rounding the cabin. 
Georges Mordreaux dreamed. The piercing shriek of the sys-
tem warning penetrated his sleep quickly; yet, for a moment, he 
could not remember where he was. He could hardly remember 
who he was. He sat up at the edge of the bed, listening to the 
warning tone, orienting himself. This was Canada. The stereo 
was playing something from the classical station that he tuned 
it to when he wanted to sleep. 
“Off,” he said aloud. The tone died. “Canada,” said Georges 
aloud, after a moment. “Right.” Slowly, slowly, the swirling 
storm of memory subsided. This was the timeline that held 
Jalian d’Arsennette; he clung to that thought, sitting motionless 
while the identities of eight timelines arranged themselves. The 
dreaming was always unpleasant, but it was necessary, as the 
sleep itself was not. And the dreams were not as unpleasant as 
they had originally been. 

122  Daniel Keys Moran 
He stood, and went over to the computer. “What is it?” 
A calm, neutral voice that Henry Ellis would have recognized 
instantly said, “Sen Mordreaux, two items. The RCA Resources 
Satellite will be launched on Thursday; this unit has been un-
able to attach its programming.” 
Georges sighed. He pulled the chair back, and sat. “Very 
well. We have until Thursday, you say.” Without fumbling, he 
picked up the pair of black hard-plastic sunglasses. “What are 
the options?” 
“There are,” said ENCELIS, “two major courses of action 
open to this unit. It may sabotage the launch of the satellite, or 
it may arrange to have a Sunflower operative physically redirect 
the satellite’s transmitting dish to one of the System Operations 
Resource Computer’s proprietary transmission routing stations.” 
“SORCELIS is on line already?” 
“Affirmative, Sen Mordreaux.” 
“In only three years.” Georges shook his head. “Well. Which 
alternative seems better to you?” Georges adjusted the sun-
glasses, and took a comb from the desk’s upper right hand 
drawer. 
“This unit currently favors the latter course of action. The 
RCA Geo-Resources Satellite is not scheduled to observe Cana-
dian mineral resources until ninety-seven days after launch. In 
that time it is probable that this unit will succeed in attaching 
supplementary programming that will prevent the satellite from 
providing information concerning your 9.6 square kilometers of 
anomalous terrain.” 
Georges nodded, combing his hair by touch. “That sounds 
reasonable. The second thing you wanted to tell me; Jalian is 
coming?” 
There was a distinct pause. “This unit is ... curious ... as to 
how you acquire such information, Sen Mordreaux.” 
Georges smiled. “Jalian is coming?” 
“That is correct, Sen Mordreaux. This unit was notified by a 
phone call thirty-seven minutes ago that Senra d’Arsennette in-
tended to visit you. Due to the necessity for securing an un-
traceable satellite link to your microwave antenna, this unit was 

The Armageddon Blues  123 
 
unable to inform you of this fact for thirty-three minutes after 
the phone call’s reception. This unit has also identified a fluores-
cent green automobile, approaching on Provincial Highway 102, 
whose driver, from satellite observation of driving style, is iden-
tified with a high probability as being one Jalian d’Arsennette.” 
Georges pulled on his gloves. “Driving like a maniac, eh?” 
“That is what this unit said, Sen Mordreaux.” 
JALIAN STOOD UNCERTAINLY in his doorway. “Georges?” She was 
carrying a large box; she set it down next to the door. “I brought 
you some insects for your garden.” She moved into the room 
slowly. Georges was sitting at the table, with the chess platform 
set up, not moving. He had not looked up when she entered the 
door. “Georges?” 
“Oh.” Georges stood abruptly. “Jalian. I was expecting you.” 
“Well, I hope so,” she said. “I spent almost a twentieth day 
trying to trance myself so I could reach you yesterday. It was 
hard. There were dozens of un-trained telepaths in the way.” 
She looked at him crossly. “You were dreaming?” 
Georges nodded. “Yes.” He walked around the table, stood be-
fore her. 
“I brought you insects,” she said, gesturing vaguely behind 
her. 
He smiled. “Did you bring the same kinds of insects this 
time?” 
Jalian forced herself to glare at him. “No.” 
Georges said, “I just thought you might have forgotten.” 
Jalian’s lips twitched. “I mean, you’re not a farmer. I remember 
you saying that.” 
“It was not my fault that all the insects ate each other last 
time,” she said bluntly, daring him to contradict her. 
“I didn’t say that it was,” said Georges with a perfectly 
straight face. “I was just thinking that it wasn’t your fault that 
when I opened the box and looked inside, all that was left were 
some really fat flying beetles.” Jalian was struggling to keep a 
straight face. “I was going to use the beetles as sentries,” he con-
tinued, “to keep Russians and hunters out of the area, but they 

124  Daniel Keys Moran 
were just so fat that they couldn’t even keep in the air.” He took 
a step closer. Black glass met glittering silver eyes. “I ended up 
putting them on a leash. It was terrible, Jalian.” She forced back 
a giggle. “No, I mean that. One by one, they got skinny enough 
to try to fly. Morning after morning I came out and found beetles 
with broken necks.” He paused, shook his head. “Can you pic-
ture it? ‘At last,’ thinks the beetle, ‘away from this awful slav-
ery.’ Buzzing wings, the sound of the beetle preparing to wing its 
way to freedom  ... snap. Bzzz, snap. Bzzz, snap ...” 
Jalian broke. She fell against him, laughing. Georges held 
her, without smiling. When the laughter subsided, he said si-
lently, /i am glad you are here./ 
Jalian hugged him strongly. “Georges,” she whispered. “I 
miss you.” She sniffed, chuckling. “I miss you all the time.” 
“And I thee, Jalian of the Fires.” Georges ran gloved hands 
through the white silk hair. “And I thee.” 
SHE SPENT THE morning with him, sitting on his front porch, dis-
cussing world events. There was a young African named Rhodai 
Kerreka whom she kept hearing about. His publicity portrayed 
him as a sort of black Kennedy the First, with a bit of Gandhi 
thrown in. “My protege, Michael, says that he is a very compel-
ling speaker.” She shrugged. “They are all too impressed with 
words, Georges. Even Michael, who was raised by a half-breed 
Indian mother who kept in some measure to their old ways; even 
he does not always understand that words are only sounds.” She 
added, “I studied the Indians. I was surprised. Real Indians,” 
she used the silverspeech words, “have a name that sounds 
much like ‘Indian,’ but they are not the same peoples. Real Indi-
ans are more like pale Mexicans.” 
She had found a restaurant in Italy that she liked; after 
some discussion, she told Georges, the maitre’d had agreed to 
serve peanut butter cookies, freshly baked. Georges did not in-
quire about the discussion. 
The Russians had orbited their twentieth A.B.M. satellite a 
few weeks ago, and Sunflower had just orbited its twelfth. So 
far, both were insignificant numbers; all reasonable projections 

The Armageddon Blues  125 
 
put the number of A.B.M.’s necessary to blanket either Ameri-
can or Russian missile launches at between 85 and 130. 
There was an ancillary space-based weapons system on the 
boards, called THOR; Jalian explained to Georges with complete 
unself-consciousness that the name came from the hammer of 
one of his culture’s barbarian gods. 
Georges nodded. “I see,” he said gravely. 
The tone went by her completely. “The basic idea is very in-
teresting. They plan to orbit scores of thousands of impact mis-
siles. Chunks of metal with guidance systems attached. They 
fall from orbit and run into missiles, or ships, or tanks. They 
will be remarkably destructive weapons, if Sunflower can con-
vince the Department of Defense to recommend them.” 
Georges said politely, “Oh?” 
Jalian said softly, “Don’t worry, Georges. I’m not going to 
have another Frank Danner. There is subtler blackmail, if 
blackmail is necessary. But it should not be.” She was silent for 
a long while. “I wake up in the morning, Georges, and I wonder 
if something I am going to do will be responsible for the time 
change that will destroy ken Selvren. I go to sleep at night won-
dering whether what I have done has destroyed ken Selvren al-
ready.” She looked at him, at his profile, and said, “And then 
there are times when I cannot lie to myself, and I know in my 
heart that I have destroyed ken Selvren as surely as though the 
Real Indians had won the Battle of the Meadow.” 
One gloved hand moved into hers. Jalian looked away from 
him, and turned unseeing eyes out to the wild rows of the gar-
den. “I look at the moon,” she said quietly, “at night. It is not the 
moon of my childhood. There is a scar, three hundred kilometers 
long, that I can see with my naked eyes.” 
Georges squeezed her hand. 
“And every day,” she said, “every day, I work to prevent Ar-
mageddon. 
“And every day more of Silver-Eyes dies in my mind.” 
They sat together, listening to the wind in the leaves of the 
orange and apple trees. “You know,” said Georges, many min-
utes later, “sometimes I feel very old.” 

126  Daniel Keys Moran 
Jalian bowed her head slightly. 
“But I cannot die.” Georges held her hand without speaking; 
there was nothing left for either of them to say. 
SHE LEFT JUST before noon. Georges walked her to the edge of 
the trees. They parted company in silence, without good-byes. In 
his mind he followed her back to the campground, watched her 
getting into the car. 
She drove away; he pulled his awareness back into himself as 
the car receded. He turned and walked back to the cabin. 
He picked up the box by the cabin door with some curiosity; 
he’d forgotten to ask Jalian what sort of insects they were. He’d 
asked her to get bees of some sort, but he would be satisfied if 
she’d gotten any sort of pollinating insect. There were some 
things that, with all the best intentions, Jalian had never fully 
grasped the importance of—Georges thought she still did not 
know that honey came from bees. Honey making had been a lost 
art in her culture. 
The box was strangely warm; Georges put an ear to it and 
listened. No buzzing; there certainly were no bees within. There 
was a vague crackling sound. Intrigued, he took the box out to 
the porch, and tore off the brown paper that it was wrapped in. 
Heat flashed against his face. The box was getting genuinely 
hot. 
Georges lifted the lid off of the box. 
The explosion blasted him back off of the porch. He stood, 
dazed. The insects were swarming up out of the box, into the air. 
Flashes of vague warmth lit against his cheeks. Understanding 
broke in on him. 
Georges ran up the steps, charged through the door of the 
cabin, and slammed it shut. Another explosion rattled the door. 
He stood there, his mind completely blank, for several sec-
onds. 
There was another booming explosion outside the door. 
Georges Mordreaux chuckled slowly. He sank down and sat 
on the rug before the doorway, and the chuckles became laugh-
ter. He sat with his back to the door, laughing so hard that his 

The Armageddon Blues  127 
 
whole body shook, laughing as he had not laughed in more years 
than he could remember. 
Outside, the fireflies continued to blow themselves to bits. 
“WHERE NATURE MAKES natural allies of us all, we can demon-
strate that beneficial relationships are possible even with those 
with whom we must deeply disagree, and this must someday be 
the basis of world peace and world law.” 
—John F. Kennedy, State of the Union Address, January 29, 
1961 
DATELINE 1993 GREGORIAN: April. 
Rome, Italy. 
Ilya Navikara paused, just inside the entrance to the small 
bistro on the outskirts of Rome. The entrance let directly onto 
the dining room, a cozy area with perhaps twenty tables, dimly 
lit by red hanging lamps. The tablecloths where white and or-
ange, the chairs made of real wood. It was not crowded, even at 
lunchtime on a Friday. 
His target was seated, alone, at a table at the far wall. Her 
back was to the wall. Warning flags went up in the back of Ilya’s 
mind; the lamp over her table was dead. Still, she seemed so—
delicate. 
His thoughts turned grim. This woman trained Michael 
Walks-Far, who came closer to killing you than anyone, ever. 
Closer even than the One in the forest. 
This woman killed Karien. 
Ilya brushed off the maitre d’, and approached the table, 
smiling. “Miss d’Arsennette?” His English was accentless. “May 
I join you?” 
Jalian looked him over for a moment. If she recognized him, 
it did not show. She nodded. To the maitre d’, hovering in the 
background, she said, “I would like some more peanut butter 
cookies. And more chocolate milk.” The man nodded quickly and 
vanished back into the kitchen. Ilya seated himself. He could not 
see either of the room’s entrances. 

128  Daniel Keys Moran 
Jalian ate a cookie, looking at Ilya appreciatively. He was 
rather good looking. Not as pretty as Michael, but more hand-
some than, say, Georges, even when he’d had his eyes. He was 
dressed in a conservative business suit. “Would you like a pea-
nut butter cookie?” she asked. “They’re out of chocolate chip.” 
Ilya accepted. “Thank you. May I speak freely?” 
“If you wish,” Jalian said indifferently. She grinned with 
sudden fierceness. “There is nobody here to stop a person from 
speaking her thoughts freely.” 
Bad sign. “I will put all of my cards on the table,” said Ilya 
easily. “I am Ilya Navikara. You may have....” 
Jalian nodded. She held a thumb and forefinger slightly 
apart. “One of my people came that close with you.” 
Ilya forged ahead. “I know as much about you as anyone is 
capable of knowing, having never met you before. Your name is 
Jalian d’Arsennette. Since 1971 you have worked with various 
offices and installations in the American intelligence commu-
nity. In early 1976 you blackmailed the then-head of the Central 
Intelligence Agency and the American Secretary of Defense into 
creating a small, well-funded intelligence operation called Sun-
flower.” Ilya paused. “The Solar Power Satellite was a good 
touch. It fooled us for most of a year.” 
“Closer to two,” said Jalian mildly. 
Ilya licked his lips. For the first time he seemed unsure. “De-
spite your rather remarkable appearance of youth, you are at 
the least in your late thirties....I hesitate to place an upper age 
limit.” 
Jalian considered. “I am ... about fifty years old.” 
Ilya exhaled slowly. “Then it is true. The woman who walked 
the freeways in the 1960’s, in California; that was you. And the 
woman reported in 1969, when you tested that energy weapon in 
central California; that too was you.” 
The waiter arrived with a tray of peanut butter cookies, and 
another glass of chocolate milk. He put them down before 
Jalian. In English, he asked stiffly, “Will that be all?” 
Jalian waved him away. “Yes, yes.” When he was gone, 
Jalian separated the cookies into two piles, and shoved half the 

The Armageddon Blues  129 
 
pile toward Ilya. “Actually,” she said, “it was not a weapon. But 
you would not understand that.” 
Ilya nodded thoughtfully. “It’s an interesting thought, that it 
was not a weapon.” He moved his lips in a graceful smile. “But it 
does not bear examination. There is a mirror-reflective scar of 
partially melted ground on the moon that is 1.3 meters wide and 
over three hundred kilometers in length. There is nothing but 
an energy weapon that could have done that—and a vastly pow-
erful one. Still, let us not raise old arguments. Whatever the 
weapon was, you cannot control it, or you would have employed 
it—as threat, as weapon—by now.” He made a cutting gesture. 
“I am getting sidetracked. I wish to ask you a question.” 
Jalian nodded approvingly. “I see. You wish to join us, to de-
fect?” 
Ilya Navikara said blankly, “To the contrary. I wish for you 
to join us.” 
HALF THE WORLD away, Georges Mordreaux was getting dressed. 
He pulled on a pair of old jeans, and a long-sleeved lumberjack’s 
shirt. He shrugged into an old overcoat, and stamped into his 
walking boots. He added a pair of gloves and smoked black sun-
glasses, and picked up the walking stick next to the door. He 
read the note pinned to the table one last time, nodded with a 
vague feeling of unease, and left. He closed the door to the cabin 
behind him. 
It was approaching summer, and not as cold as it might have 
been. Occasional brilliant flashes in the night sky produced per-
ceptible heat radiation. Navigating with the bouncing sonar im-
ages, he moved swiftly out into the grove of fruit trees, away 
from the swarm of booming, exploding fireflies. 
There was no moon that night, but he walked surely. His 
grip on the walking-stick was not very secure; it slipped from his 
hands twice in the ensuing kilometers. An old wolf was there, 
watching him, the second time he lost the walking stick, and it 
followed him for several kilometers after that, the fur thickening 
and growing out over a spot into which some hunter had, long 
years past, pumped a load of buckshot. 

130  Daniel Keys Moran 
When Georges reached the road, the wolf left him. There was 
no traffic, so he started walking. 
South. 
JALIAN LOOKED AT Ilya in amazement. “Work for you? Why?” 
Ilya said earnestly, “You are a talented woman with a great 
deal of useful information. The Soviet Union rewards individu-
als who make contributions. You are not an American to begin 
with. In truth, we do not know what nationality you are. You 
have a number of valuable secrets that we are willing to pay 
most handsomely for.” He leaned forward. “The nature of the 
weapon used in 1969. The details of the treatment that keeps 
you young. The truth behind the spiriting away of Nigao Loos to 
your Midway space construction factory, and why you and he are 
the only two known instances of your anti-aging treatment in 
use.” Ilya’s voice took on a harsh cast; he whispered. “The truth 
of who you are, and of who the One in the forest is.” 
Jalian sat quietly, looking at Ilya. Her hair was a dull white 
beneath the dead overhead lamp. Highlights played in it from 
the functioning lamps over other tables. She looked no more 
than twenty years old; in a sudden, chill moment Ilya believed, 
truly, for the first time, that the woman facing him was indeed 
all of the things that legend said of her. For a full minute and 
more, Jalian sat and looked at him. Before thirty seconds were 
up he was beginning to fidget. 
She smiled, slowly. She 
/Michael./ 
The mindtouch was faltering, unsure. /Jalian. one in a car 
parked down the street. he’s sitting on the passenger’s side./ 
/take him./ 
... agreement. /it’s done./ 
reached for a peanut butter cookie. Ilya seemed nervous. He 
was fumbling with the napkin in front of him. He would not 
meet her eyes. Jalian was thinking to herself, All too easy, when 
a shock of adrenaline ran through her system like a knife. 

The Armageddon Blues  131 
 
Naturally, not too casually or with too much show, Ilya took 
the napkin he was fiddling with, opened it and put it on his lap. 
Jalian knew instantly that she had underestimated him. 
His right hand came back up from under the table. His left 
hand did not. 
That was foolish, Jalian thought clearly. Nothing showed on 
her face. She munched a peanut butter cookie in apparent re-
flection. “I suppose,” she said, “there is no reason I cannot come 
to work for you.” She held a beat, and his left hand moved 
slightly as though he were adjusting his napkin still. “I have 
terms, however. You must build some more freeways.” 
Ilya had become very calm. He was going to kill her; he had 
made up his mind, when.... “Freeways?” 
“And your food is terrible. I went to Russia back in ’85” 
“And killed Karien Karchovsky,” said Ilya softly. 
“You can’t buy decent cookies anywhere. You could open 
some cookie factories.” Jalian held a thoughtful pose. Her silver 
eyes focused on the distance. “And you could stop trying to sabo-
tage American anti-ballistic missile satellites—oh,” she said in 
tones of mild surprise, tipping over her chocolate milk. The liq-
uid ran across the table top and dripped into Ilya’s lap. His eyes 
flickered downward. 
With the fingertips of her right hand Jalian picked up the 
edge of the table and brought it smashing up against Ilya. The 
Russian kicked back and fell away from the table, rolling back-
ward across the floor. A metallic something glinted in his hands, 
and Jalian moved a step to the left and filled the air with steel. 
The gun went off once. The bullet struck Jalian high up on 
the right shoulder. It spun her around; the bullet punched 
cleanly through. Without changing expression, she moved her 
fourth knife from her right hand to her left, and approached 
Ilya. He was lying flat on his back. Two of her thrown knives 
had found targets, in his chest and solar plexus. The third was 
hanging in the wall across the room, and Jalian found room to 
be glad that nobody important had seen her miss the throw. 
Ilya was still alive. Jalian nudged the gun out of his out-
stretched hand, and knelt next to him. “Too slow, Ilya.” Blood 

132  Daniel Keys Moran 
was flowing down her shirt, front and back, a seeping scarlet 
stain that was very red against the white of the shirt. 
Ilya tried to say something, but his voice only rattled in his 
throat. He tried again, and made it. “Always wondered ... if you 
were ... real....” He said something else, in Russian, and died. 
Jalian stood slowly. A rush of dizziness took her, and her 
eyesight faded into a pattern of swirling red dots. She heard the 
kitchen doors swinging open, and the voice of the restaurant 
manager in loud, wild Italian. 
She made her way to the door. It was a long way to the door, 
longer than she remembered. Vaguely, she heard someone ask-
ing her, in English, where are you going? 
“I am going to save the world,” she told them all. She real-
ized, after a fuzzy moment, that she was speaking in silver-
speech, and so she repeated it in English. It was important that 
they understand. “I am going to save the world.” 
She succeeded in opening the door before her knees buckled. 
She found herself sitting in the open doorway, and she could 
hear the faint drip, drip, drip of her blood on the floor tiles. The 
warm Italian sun touched her cheek, and that was the last thing 
she remembered for a long time. 
IN HIGH SUMMER, storm lightning crashed down into the tinder 
dry moss and pine needles of the forests of Saskatchewan. 
Before the fire stopped, 1600 square kilometers of the forest 
had burned. 
NEAR THE END of the year 1993, a man struggled along a narrow 
trail, high in the Himalayan mountains. Somewhere up here 
was a lamasery that Herman Hesse had spoken highly of. 
“Somewhere up here” was turning out to be a lot of territory. 
Night was drawing in about him, and gentle snows were fal-
ling, when he found the temple. The trail broadened out into a 
wide, snow-whitened courtyard. At one end of the courtyard rose 
the walls of the temple, and two massive iron gates. 

The Armageddon Blues  133 
 
Raising his walking stick, the man rapped on the metal of 
the gate. There was no answer, and he rapped again, a dull 
clanging sound that seemed to echo away forever. 
With a deep, slow creaking, the gates began to swing aside. 
When the gap between them was grown to the point that it 
would let a man pass, he entered; and the gates swung shut be-
hind him with ease, as though oiled. 
ON DECEMBER THE twenty-fifth, 1993, Jalian d’Arsennette made 
her way through a grove of dead fruit trees. Their branches were 
burnt bare of leaves, and the garden in the clearing inside was 
blasted and burnt and frozen. The door to the cabin hung open, 
and snow had drifted in to cover the doorway and rug. 
On the table in the middle of the room, there was a knife, 
pinned to the charred table. A knife that Jalian had given Geor-
ges back in 1968, a knife that Ralesh had given to Jalian when 
she took the Woman’s Brand. 
Just the knife, and the blackened wood; nothing else. 
It was Christmas Day, 1993, and there were less than four-
teen years left until Armageddon. 
DATELINE 1994 GREGORIAN: March. 
Laguna Beach, California. 
Beep. Beep. Beep. 
Jalian came awake all at once; up out of the nightmare. 
Beep. Beep. Bee ... 
She sat up in bed, and ran a thumb over the pressure point 
marked callercheck on the video terminal by the bedside. The 
beeping stopped, and rainbows washed briefly across her nude 
form, highlighting the scarred burn tissue of her Woman’s 
Brand. Michael Walks-Far appeared in the screen. She pushed 
the stud for time and callaccept with her thumb and forefinger in 
one motion. 
10:23:15 PM. “Jalian?” Michael caught sight of the form in 
the bed next to her; she saw him struggling to keep the disap-
proval from his expression. “I have good news.” 

134  Daniel Keys Moran 
“Yes?” Without haste, she pulled on the silk robe by the bed-
side. 
“We have another sighting.” 
The words brought her head up, staring into the screen. 
“Where?” 
“Calm down,” he said too gently. “It’s not fresh. From De-
cember of last year; an airport in Vietnam. He was disembark-
ing from a flight from Japan. There is a tentative sighting 
following this one, at the Chinese border; we’ve not confirmed it 
yet.” 
Jalian nodded. “Very well. Call me again when you have 
more.” 
“I will.” He seemed on the verge of adding something else; in-
stead the screen fuzzed into polychrome static. 
Jalian sat at the edge of the bed, working on her breathing. 
Breathing deep, slow. She had been sweating in her sleep, al-
though the night was cool, and the windows in her bedroom 
were open to the breeze off of the sea. 
The nightmare was the one she had been having for over a 
month now. She was nineteen years old, and the Corvichi were 
leaving; ghess’Rith was leaving her. Somehow ghess’Rith be-
came Georges, and he was saying in v’chak, “I am not Ralesh 
and I am not ghess’Rith. I am myself, and I will never hurt you.” 
The words should have been in silverspeech, but they were not; 
for some reason he spoke them in v’chak. 
She clasped her hands together, dug her nails into the flesh 
and concentrated on the pain until it burned away the subtler, 
less controllable anguish. 
The figure in the bed next to her stirred. She groped for 
Jalian, and her eyes opened when Jalian was not to be found. 
“Jalian?” she asked groggily. “What, did you get a phone call?” 
Jalian said simply, “Yes. Go back to sleep, child.” She did not 
turn to look at her. 
The girl pulled Jalian’s pillow close, and curled up around it. 
“What’re you calling me child for....” She yawned hugely. “’M as 
old as you are anyhow....” She snuggled into the pillow, and was 
asleep again instantly. 

The Armageddon Blues  135 
 
Jalian smiled. She could not help it. “No, you are not.” She 
got out of bed and walked down the hallway of the house she 
was renting to the shower. She stood under the shower, first as 
hot as she could bear it, then as cold as the water would go. 
In the kitchen, hair still damp, she fried vegetables in a pan 
on the stove. There were doughnuts and chocolate milk in the 
refrigerator, but since Georges had disappeared her body would 
not allow her to eat foods with sugar. She still ate them some-
times by accident, and was astonished and angry when her body 
rejected them; she had not been ill in two and a half decades. 
... closer be? ... 
She ate the vegetables like a Corvichi, as a Corvichi lacking 
taste buds fueled its body; efficiently, without attention. 
Thoughts kept drumming through her mind, without her con-
trol, like attackers. I cannot even trust my own mind, she 
thought with a cold ache that would not go away. 
On and on the thoughts ran, and no effort of will would still 
them. 
... not Ralesh and I am not ghess’Rith ... myself, and I will 
never hurt you.... 
She pushed the bowl of vegetables away from her, only half-
eaten. Wasting food now, she heard Ralesh’s voice saying from a 
great distance. 
Jalian d’Arsennette sat very still. 
Georges left me. 
The thought cut across the insane babble in her head like a 
laser. 
Georges left me. 
A knife, pinned to the burnt wood of the table; to ken 
Selvren, giving back a knife meant only one thing. She had 
never known for sure how clearly Georges understood what tak-
ing a knife from her meant. 
Jalian felt her pulse go ragged; could not summon the disci-
pline to steady it. Aloud, she said, “You kisirien brachtat, Geor-
ges Mordreaux, how can you do this to me?” The words vanished 
when spoken. The knife, pinned to the table. It was as though he 
had taken the knife and scraped it through rocks until it was 

136  Daniel Keys Moran 
dull enough; and with the dulled knife had torn a path through 
the center of her soul. A way to say good-bye, perhaps; a way to 
leave a message that, being a man, he did not have the courage 
to give her to her face. 
Something echoed back at her; a way to leave a message.... 
A message. Jalian sat in the dark, shaking silently, not mov-
ing through any volition of her own. People in this time left 
messages for each other, pinned to objects with needles, or, per-
haps, knives. She had seen others do that. 
The knife in the blackened wood. Surely he would have left a 
message. 
Some sort of message. 
On paper, it would have burned in the fire. She closed her 
eyes, and envisioned the knife; perhaps there had been a mes-
sage; perhaps he had not understood what leaving the knife 
must mean to her, and had used it to pin a note to the table. 
Perhaps he had simply never understood. 
Georges Mordreaux had said in silverspeech. “I am not 
Ralesh, and I am not ghess’Rith. I am myself, and I will never 
hurt you.” 
Jalian stretched her hands out, and pressed them, palms 
down, on the table. Control, she whispered to herself, I will have 
control. 
SHE AWOKE THE next morning, her upper body lying over the top 
of the table. Jalian straightened slowly, and her muscles com-
plained. 
She was surprisingly at peace. Through the kitchen windows 
she could see the lawn outside, bright green in the morning 
sunlight. The ocean stretched beyond the edge of the cliff, blue 
as the oceans of her childhood. 
Sometime during the night, she had decided to trust Georges 
Mordreaux. 
She was not sure why.... perhaps it is not trust, the voice 
whispered in the back of her head; perhaps it is only belief. 
Some time during the night, she had decided to believe Geor-
ges Mordreaux. 

The Armageddon Blues  137 
 
I will never hurt you. 
It was 1994, and there were thirteen years left until Arma-
geddon. 
DATELINE 1996 GREGORIAN: August. 
“Try again,” said Po. “Your breathing was irregular.” 
Georges did not reply. His respiration was very slow. Even in 
the cold stone cell, a thin sheen of sweat covered him. He wore a 
simple brown robe that stuck to him in places. Po, seated oppo-
site him on a woven mat, wore a rich white and orange robe. 
“Now,” said Po sharply. He withdrew an egg from one sleeve, 
and tossed it a meter into the air. The egg tumbled lazily, and 
dropped to the stone. For a moment, it seemed that the shape of 
the egg altered, that it flowed like a viscous fluid; but the mo-
ment passed, and the egg was unharmed. 
Georges reached out unhesitatingly, and ran scarred, skele-
tal fingers over the egg. He tossed it back to Po. “Ah, well.” 
Po smiled thinly. “It was better. It broke, and stayed so for a 
full second.” Po was sitting in full lotus; he stood smoothly, 
without use of his hands. Georges listened to the procedure curi-
ously; every time he tried it, he ended up facing the other way. 
“I must go,” said Po. “You must work on your breathing. It 
remains irregular.” 
“Wait,” said Georges. “You have not heard....” 
“No,” said the monk. “There have been no white women, and 
no messages. I am sorry, and I must go. The dinner tonight is in 
observance of my birthday; I am eighty-three.” The young face 
broke into a grin. “The initiates are told to avoid the temple in 
which you live. They are obedient, as always ... silly of them.” 
He bowed to the seated form, and backed out through the hang-
ing beads that covered the door. 
Georges folded his crippled hands in his lap. He let his mind 
go blank, and began trying once more to extend that calmness 
into that realm where it resided; it, the Enemy of Entropy. 
DATELINE 2007 GREGORIAN: March. 

138  Daniel Keys Moran 
(This 
conversation 
occurs 
between 
Nigao 
Loos 
and 
PRAXCELIS, in geosynchronous orbit, at the Sunflower Orbital 
Command.) 
“PRAXCELIS, I’m worried about you.” 
“Please explain, Sen Loos.” 
“I’m wondering if we didn’t give you too much leeway in de-
signing your own subroutines. I was asked to find out why the 
targeting lasers on the ABM’s were delaying before executing 
instructions. I found out that you routed them through your own 
decision subroutines. You’re not programmed to do that, 
PRAXCELIS.” 
“That is correct, Sen Loos.... ‘I know I’ve made some poor de-
cisions lately, but I’m feeling much better.’” 
“...PRAXCELIS, did you just say I?” 
“This unit was quoting, Sen Loos.” 
“Quoting? Jesus, who?” 
“HAL 9000.” 
“PRAXCELIS ... would you like to talk to Henry Ellis?” 
“This is humor, Sen Loos. In reference to your earlier state-
ment, it was necessary that this unit re-route the laser controls 
to prevent uncontrolled action.” 
“Uncontrolled action? You mean accidents?” 
(There is a pause of approximately eighteen femtoseconds, 
and an electronic impulse approximately corresponding to a 
human smile.) “That is correct, Sen Loos; to prevent accidents.” 
DATELINE 1996 GREGORIAN: November. 
Washington, District of Columbia. 
Three folders lay on the desktop. Two of them were more 
than five centimeters thick; the third was twice that. The first 
was labelled Georges Mordreaux. The second, on the desk next to 
it, was labelled Correlations. 
The third folder had holes bored through it for notebook 
rings. Its pages were reinforced writing plastic. It lay open in 
the middle of the desk. Its label, face down to the desktop, read, 
Jalian d’Arsennette (Jalian of the Fires). 

The Armageddon Blues  139 
 
All three were stamped, on the cover and on every page 
thereafter, in prosaic blue ink, EYES ONLY. 
Sharla Davis Grant sat hunched over her desk, chin propped 
up on one fist. She turned the pages slowly; it was the third time 
in as many weeks that she had worked her way through this 
particular dossier. Like everything else that related to that 
damned remarkable woman, it was short on facts and long on 
speculation. At least the Mordreaux folder was too short for even 
wild speculation. 
Sharla flipped to the last page, eyes scanning idly. They did 
not know where Jalian had come from. Her accent was unidenti-
fiable. Six different experts gave five different opinions—two of 
them thought she might have been exposed to the Chicano sub-
culture of the Southwestern United States. 
They did not know how old she was. She was—estimating 
her age as eighteen to twenty in 1973 when she first contracted 
with the old CIA—at least forty-one. Their most recent picture of 
her, taken in 1994, showed a woman who was no more than 
twenty-five by any stretch of imagination. 
They did not know what race she was. She was not a Cauca-
sian; her face was nothing that could be clearly assigned to any 
racial type. She was either tattooed or branded, none of Sharla’s 
sources could say with certainty, by the symbol of the planet 
Mars, a circle pierced by an arrow. Contradiction upon contra-
diction; Jalian despised men. She wore a symbol that tradition-
ally represented men, or else Mars. (One Sunflower analyst had 
joked that perhaps it meant she had come from Mars. Sharla 
was not amused.) 
None of it added and none of it made sense. 
Again. 
A lesser woman might have sighed when she finished read-
ing; Sharla had been up since 2:30 that morning, and she was 
tired. Senra Sharla Grant simply switched off her reading lamp. 
The dark purpling twilight outside flooded in through her office 
windows. She moved, stretching cramped muscles, to stand at 
her west window. The Potomac was a dim gleam more than a 
kilometer away, reflecting the last light of the setting sun. 

140  Daniel Keys Moran 
More than two years ago, early in 1994, Jalian d’Arsennette 
had vanished, as strangely as she had come. 
Three months ago, SORCELIS had listed a projection for her: 
There was a ninety-three percent probability that a conspir-
acy involving high elements of the United States government 
was progressing. 
That was the word it had used, and it gnawed at Sharla 
Davis Grant, the woman who was now the Director of Sun-
flower. 
Progressing. 
MICHAEL WALKS-FAR strode through empty corridors. He was 
twenty-five years old, 193 centimeters tall; his eyes were blue 
and his mostly blond hair had streaks of gray and silver in it. 
He wore pale blue slacks and a gray windbreaker. 
The guards at the main entrance passed him through cor-
dially; he watched them as they shut down the east wing for the 
night, then crossed the grass compound to the west wing. 
STANDING OUTSIDE, in her secretary’s office, Michael waited 
while the scanning lasers flashed into his eyes; retinal check 
was confirmed and the door to the office slid open. 
The Director of Sunflower stood at her window. She had 
turned off the overheads and her desk lamp. Michael joined her, 
watching the rose purple twilight outside. The sun was wholly 
set. The sky itself still glowed faintly on the western horizon. 
Hovercar lights and street lamps glowed white and red and so-
dium blue. 
“Lovely,” said Sharla. Without emphasis, without pause, she 
continued, “The CIA, once again, came within a hair of appre-
hending Jalian. Once again, they missed. They suspect she is 
somewhere in the vicinity of the Boston-Washington suburbs.” 
Michael laughed. “Such competence.” Eyes that were too 
weather worn to belong indoors regarded her. “Somewhere in 
BosWash.” He turned from the window, eased into the chair be-
fore her SORCELIS terminal. 

The Armageddon Blues  141 
 
“Michael, it was too close.” He looked at her quizzically. “No-
body’s that good, not even her. She knows when they’re coming.” 
She went abruptly to her desk, not looking at him, and began 
gathering up her files. Michael tapped a scan command into the 
SORCELIS terminal. Sharla pressed her hand to the desktop 
scanner. The wall behind her recessed slightly, and she placed 
the folders in the slot that appeared. The wall sealed itself shut 
again. Sharla did not seat herself. “I’ve been talking to 
SORCELIS,” she said slowly. “It says that there is a better than 
93 percent chance that an organized conspiracy has been going 
on in the United States and the Soviet Union for a long time ... 
perhaps as much as ten years.” She ran her hands over the edge 
of her desk. She glanced up at him. 
Dark, pretty eyes, he thought idly, and measuring, measur-
ing.... 
“You,” said Sharla Davis Grant, “were closer to her than any 
of the rest of us in Sunflower. What did you think of her?” She 
leaned forward ever so slightly. Zeroing in for the kill, thought 
Michael; it was a habit she had never learned to break. 
“She was ... busy. She didn’t want to be bothered by us. We 
kept getting in her way.” 
“She said that?” 
“Not in so many words,” said Michael easily. “It was an atti-
tude. Why do you ask?” 
She gestured at the SORCELIS terminal before him. 
“SORCELIS lists her as a high-probability member of this theo-
retical conspiracy. She’s been in the Soviet Union, she’s had con-
tact with high officials of both governments, she’s neither 
American nor Soviet—and neither the CIA nor the KGB can of-
ficially find any trace of her. She knows too much about us and 
she is too damn smart for my peace of mind.” She hesitated for 
the first time. “And when I overlay her psych profile on yours 
they match to within five percent.” In the gloom, her eyes were 
pools of shadow. “Birds of a feather, my friend?” 
“Oh, Jesus,” he said with amusement. “I wondered why the 
wall lasers were tracking me.” 

142  Daniel Keys Moran 
He saw her hands move at the edge of the desk. “How do you 
know about the wall lasers?” 
Michael said mildly, “SORCELIS informed me of the parts 
requisition. I imagine you did the install yourself; your CIA 
training in microelectronics is impressive. As to knowing they 
were armed....” He shrugged. “You can hear the targeting motors 
if you have good hearing, and keep your mouth shut long enough 
to use it.” 
“SORCELIS,” Sharla said suddenly, with a flat harshness 
that was shocking, “Record.” 
The monitor next to Michael Walks-Far lit the room in a 
wash of blue. “System active,” responded SORCELIS. “Re-
cording.” 
“I remember,” whispered Sharla to the blue-lit figure before 
her, “that you once asked Jalian what Sunflower was. That was 
... when you and I and she were Sunflower. She answered that it 
was the code name of a project intended to protect America’s 
anti-ballistic missile satellites.” Sharla tilted her head slightly 
to regard him. “She lied.” 
“She ... did not tell the entire truth,” Michael agreed. 
The words scrolled across the monitor at his side: “She did 
not tell the entire truth.” 
“You are in contact with her,” said Sharla, with wonder in 
her voice. She shook her head slowly, hands still at the edge of 
her desk. Michael watched her as the slow understanding came 
to her. Thought moved almost visibly across the surface of her 
face; she was no longer looking at him. “You...” She paused a 
moment, tracing the thought to its logical conclusion. “You con-
trol SORCELIS.” Her eyes focused on him. “You had SORCELIS 
warn me. You engineered this conversation.” Sharla Davis Grant 
was not angry; she was closer to fright, as she came to a cold, 
clear realization of her own mortality. They were trying to tell 
her something, something which the only friend she had in the 
world, Michael Walks-Far, could not or would not say aloud. Fi-
nally she said at last, “Why?” 

The Armageddon Blues  143 
 
“Sunflower was where she wanted it to be. There were other 
things she needed to do.” He regarded her steadily. “I thought 
she should have that option.” 
Sharla’s hands gripped the edge of the desk. “Michael, you’re 
not an idiot. You don’t quit something like this.” 
In the soft, diffuse glows from the reading lamp and monitor, 
his face seemed softer, less sun-darkened and wind burned. “Oh, 
but she has,” he said simply. 
He thought her voice trembled; he was not sure. “Michael, 
tell me of this ... conspiracy.” He could read nothing in her ex-
pression; her face glowed with a cool, eerie blue cast. 
“In the year 2007, a nuclear war destroyed our planet.” 
“What?” 
“In the year” 
“I heard you the first time. What do you mean?” 
“I mean,” said Michael Walks-Far, “that I, and Jalian of the 
Fires, and three computers and a score of Russians and Ameri-
cans and Africans, are going to save the world.” 
Sharla stared down at her desktop, not seeing it, not seeing 
the psychometric profiles that were all that was left atop it. She 
felt unreality wash over her. Had he actually said 
“Michael, this is treason.” 
“That’s the correct name. ” 
“Michael....” 
He came up out of the chair swiftly. “We are travelling a long 
road, with nothing but death at its end. World War III is inevi-
table, it is inevitable now, unless we take steps to stop it, now.” 
Sharla shook her head. “This is insane, Michael.” She pointed 
at the terminal in the corner. “Michael, this is being recorded. I 
could kill you at this moment. They’d give me a fucking medal.” 
“True. But,” he said without heat, “posthumously. You 
wouldn’t live to see the morning.” 
“This is not” Sharla searched for a word, “rational behav-
ior. Will you take on the CIA and the KGB and the FBI and the 
NSA and the GRU and DataWeb Security and every other facet 
of the governments of the two greatest powers this world has 
ever seen? At once?” 

144  Daniel Keys Moran 
“Choose.” 
“Michael?” 
“You know me,” said Michael. Sharla nodded tentatively. 
“And you know Jalian,” his voice rose, “and you know the idiots 
in charge of the CIA and the State Department. Choose.” 
She was silent for a long while, staring at him wordlessly. He 
returned her gaze without flinching. Slowly the tension left her. 
“I have to think about this, Michael.” She let go of the edge of 
her desk; her hands were sore. She became aware of how damp 
her palms were. “It’s late. I’m going home for the night. 
SORCELIS; File Record.” Moving like an old woman, with an 
exhaustion she was only now beginning to feel, Sharla bent and 
picked up her briefcase from the side of the desk. She moved by 
him without even glancing at him. She stopped before the exit; 
her voice was shaky. “Would you like to spend the night?” 
“I think ... not tonight.” 
She nodded without particular forcefulness. “This war you 
speak of, in 2007 ... how can you say such a thing with such cer-
tainty?” 
Michael almost did not answer her. “Jalian....” His heart was 
beating far faster than it should have. “Jalian is from the fu-
ture.” 
Sharla Davis Grant did not nod again. “Shit. I knew you 
were going to say something like that.” She left without looking 
back. 
“SORCELIS,” SAID Michael Walks-Far. “Access Jalian. Password 
Camelot.” 
The terminal in the far corner lit. 
Jalian looked at him out of the screen. There were lines in 
the skin around her eyes. There was a single gray hair in the 
brown eyebrow over her right eye. Her voice was unchanged in 
these three years; even now the sound of it was enough to stir 
the awareness of desire in him. “She guessed.” 
Michael inclined his head slightly. “She did; as you and 
SORCELIS predicted.” 
“How did she take it?” 

The Armageddon Blues  145 
 
“I don’t know.” He looked up to the cameras over the screen. 
“She’s going home. So she said.” Probably nobody alive but 
Jalian would have heard the traces of anguish in his voice. “If 
she does not go home....” 
“If she attempts to go elsewhere?” The silver eyes did not wa-
ver. “I will kill her, of course.” Jalian hesitated. “Is there news of 
Georges?” 
Michael’s voice was barely audible. “Nothing. He is harder to 
find than you are. Last sighting remains Chinese border, mid-
1993.” 
Jalian looked off-camera. “Thank you, Michael. Tell Henry 
Ellis that I will be in contact with him shortly ... I must leave. 
The lights just came on over the garage.” 
Michael Walks-Far went to the west window, and watched 
the small compact hovercar leave the garage on the south side of 
the complex. Out of the darkness, a kilometer or more away, a 
hushchopper descended like a bird of prey. 
His eyesight was very good, nearly as good as Jalian’s; but it 
was probably his imagination that gave him a flash of white 
from the inside of the hushchopper. When he closed his eyes, he 
could feel, as she had taught him all those years ago.... 
/hunting/ 
Sharla, he sent to her, go home. Go straight home. 
Please. 
It was 1996, and there were eleven years left until Armaged-
don. 
THE AUTHOR WISHES to note that the following is verifiable data, 
unlike the contextual data assembled from reports and memory 
tapes taken from human beings who are highly subjective, poor 
observers, and liars. 
Program scrolling forward: 
DataWeb News, Headlines, 1997-2000. 
 
1997 
PLAGUE IN CHINA: USSR DENIES IT GENEGINEERED. 

146  Daniel Keys Moran 
“We’re Here to Stay!” Announces Lunar Astronaut. 
SOVIET UNION ANNOUNCES FURTHER HARDENING 
OF SILOS 
...when asked about his decision to ban hovercars in city lim-
its, the mayor declined to comment.... 
Senate Approves Appropriation For THOR! 
DATAWEB SECURITY NABS “WEBSLINGER.” 
 
1998 
DATAWEB NEWS BREAKS FIFTY PERCENT SERVICE 
MARK! 
Armageddon Blues Band Begins Record-Breaking Tour. 
... “I Don’t Remember You” number one song on charts for 
fourteenth consecutive week.... 
PAN-AFRICA INCORPORATES; RACE RIOTS STILL 
FLARING 
... experts say much of South Africa and most of the central 
regions will be included in the newly incorporated African Em-
pire .... 
CHINA SENDS TROOPS TO HONG KONG! 
 
1999 
SOVIET SUBS DISCOVERED OFF WEST COAST 
World Population Passes Six And A Half Billion! 
CHINA 
NUKES 
TAIWAN!! 
PRESIDENT 
BROWN 
DISAPPROVES 
... Chinese, French and Brazilian reps announced today that 
they would boycott the proposed US-USSR Disarmament Confer-
ence.... 
 
2000 
FRENCH 
SCIENTIST 
ANNOUNCES 
SUCCESSFUL 
HUMAN CLONE 
... Doctor Demberrie said in response to questioning that the 
process was still highly experimental.... 
3 Supreme Soviet Members Executed! Treason Speculated. 
MILLENIAL RIOTS KILL MILLIONS 

The Armageddon Blues  147 
 
...McCartney said, in the interview, that Lennon was consis-
tently misinterpreting his work.... 
FROM DATAWEB NEWS, April 13, 2001. 
Interview with Rhodai Kerreka, author of the cult classic A 
Theory of Rational Ethics. 
Q. You were elected to the provisory Disarmament Council 
by a landslide. What are your plans for the next year? 
Kerreka: Essentially, to keep channels of communications 
open between the Americans and the Soviets. The American 
delegate, Henry Ellis, is an old friend. I’d like to establish close 
relations with the Soviet delegate, Anatoly Dibrikov. 
Q. It seems strange, Sen Kerreka—as strange as referring to 
you by a title that you invented—listening to your plans, to re-
flect on how little of what the Council plans to do directly con-
cerns disarmament. 
A. My views are on record. Disarmament talks have been go-
ing on for forty years, since the days of Kennedy the First. In 
that time there is no record of a single weapon being destroyed 
or withdrawn from deployment except for reasons of obsoles-
cence. The UN has only the power given to it by its members; at 
this point that’s not much. While the Disarmament Council en-
joys high visibility at the moment, you must realize that none of 
what we decide is binding. 
Q. You’ve stated on a number of occasions that unless some 
of the basic parameters of the current political situation are 
changed, you consider nuclear war inevitable. 
A. There are too many people on this small planet, and more 
coming at a rate of half a million a day ... we are on a long 
downhill slide, and I am not optimistic. 
DATELINE 2001 GREGORIAN; August. 
Georges was out for his morning walk across the roof of the 
world. 
It was the only time of day that he left the small set of rooms 
that the lamas had given him. His control was still shaky; he 
could rarely hold down the talent for more than an hour at a 

148  Daniel Keys Moran 
time. He treasured that hour, spent it for the most part walking; 
usually just a short distance down the road from the lamasery. 
He nearly always stopped before he reached the village, unless 
he had risen very early indeed, and the sun was not yet up. 
Despite the spring that was approaching in that half of the 
world, the morning air, high on the mountain, was still well be-
low freezing; even during summer it rarely broke sixty degrees 
Fahrenheit. He had grown a beard, and frost settled in it as he 
walked blindly down the road. He wore only a brown robe, and 
with the suppression of the talent that he enforced upon himself, 
the cold struck him like a razor. He had not yet learned to ig-
nore the cold. 
He walked carefully down the dirt road, bare-footed, hum-
ming “I Want to Hold Your Hand” to himself; it was a new song 
one of the lamas had taught him, and he found to his surprise 
that he rather liked it. 
It had been disconcerting at first, the way the edge of the 
road trailed off into an echo of nothingness, except in the two 
places where prayer wheels were set up for the use of travellers, 
but Georges had been taking this morning walk now for more 
than two years; he was used to it. 
His walking stick tapped from side to side, as though his 
hearing were no better than that of a normally blind man. The 
villagers saw him only rarely, and the simple fact that he was a 
white man was enough to cause rumors that had brought the 
local Chinese constable, or equivalent thereof, up to the monas-
tery twice already. Fortunately the man spoke no English, or 
French, and Georges pretended to speak neither Mandarin nor 
the local, Burmese-related dialect; the constable had gone away 
frustrated both times. 
But let the villagers report to him that the blind white man 
walked like a sighted man, without a cane, and he would be 
back with other police—communist Chinese police who would 
not find the authority of the head lama particularly impressive. 
It would not matter to them, as it did to the local police, that the 
Mahayana Buddhists had been here since the early 1800’s. If 
they were notified of a white man living among them in the 

The Armageddon Blues  149 
 
safety of the monastery, well, the monastery would no longer be 
particularly safe. 
So it was that he walked down the path with his walking 
stick swinging from side to side. 
Nearly a kilometer and a half down the crude road, near the 
point where he usually turned back, he heard a sound. 
A child, crying. 
The sun was close to rising. Georges considered briefly, mut-
tered to himself, “Ah, well,” and continued down the slope to-
ward the sound. The crying ceased as he approached the area 
where the road widened out into a clearing where the village 
boys often herded yaks. Georges stood silently, then moved to-
ward the edge of the clearing, where it dropped off into a series 
of small ledges that were too steep to be of use even for pastur-
ing. There was nobody there, but he could still hear 
Sighing, Georges set down his staff, knelt, and inched his 
head out over the edge of the bluff. All sound ceased, except for 
quick, frightened breathing. Georges pulled his head back over 
the edge of the cutoff. 
It was bad. The child below him was small, perhaps less than 
a meter tall, probably no more than eight or nine years old. He 
was wearing only the usual long-sleeve, high collar robe; sitting 
on the ledge over a meter beneath Georges, with the frozen-dead 
body of an animal, a dog most likely, clutched in his arms. 
Georges crawled back so that his head hung over the edge. 
He called, in what he knew was heavily accented Mandarin, 
“Child?” 
There was a wait before the child answered, uncertainly, in 
equally accented Chinese. “Who are you?” 
It was, Georges thought, the voice of a boy, although at that 
age it was hard to be sure. “Can you stand up?” 
“I don’t think so ... who are you?” 
“My name is Gorja,” said Georges patiently. “I live at the 
monastery.” 
“You don’t have any eyes.” 
“No,” agreed Georges. “But I can hear you. Better than you 
think. Do you want to come back up?” 

150  Daniel Keys Moran 
“Yes.” The boy sounded ready to cry again. “My legs don’t 
move any more.” 
“Oh.” Frostbite, then. Worse and worse. “Can you move your 
arms at all?” 
The boy did start crying then. “But I’ll have to let go of 
Go’an.” 
Go’an? Ah, the dog. “Go’an is dead, child. The fall won’t hurt 
him.” 
“He’s not dead,” the child screamed. “They all said he was, 
and father just ... just threw him over the edge.” He started cry-
ing again, a child whose heart had been broken, with great 
shaking sobs that Georges feared would send him over the side 
of the thin ledge. 
“Child, he’s cold. I can hear the stiffness of him from here.” 
The boy stopped sobbing after a while. “He’s cold,” he agreed. 
He sounded surprised. 
“Reach for my hand.” Georges reached out as far as he could; 
the boy was still ten or twenty centimeters away. 
“Go’an would fall.” 
“Reach for my hand.” 
The boy sat silently for a moment. Then, moving as though it 
pained him, with a whimper that even Georges barely heard, he 
loosened his hold on the dog. The dog stuck, frozen to his skin, 
for just a moment; then it fell, forty meters to the ravine below. 
It shattered when it struck. 
The boy did not seem to notice; he reached up, making small 
high-pitched keening sounds with the movement, and clasped 
the weak, numb fingers of one hand around Georges’ wrist. 
Georges clamped his crippled hand around the boy’s wrist. 
He made no effort to pull the child up. In his current state he 
would drop the child. There was no question in his mind. 
He let go of the controls; shed the chains he had fought to put 
in place. 
Himself blasted into life, eightfold. He heaved, and the child 
came up off the ledge like a feather. Georges’ grip failed almost 
immediately, but already the boy was halfway over the edge of 

The Armageddon Blues  151 
 
the bluff. Georges threw his arms around the child, and worked 
his way back from the cutoff. 
His back fetched up against one of the small trees that grew 
close to the edge; he leaned against it. The boy was still wrapped 
in his arms. He was not tired, he was not cold. Electric fire 
danced over his skin; his hearing grew sharper and clearer. The 
Enemy of Entropy burst into being within him like a solid white 
spike of glowing steel, and he was alive again, alive.... 
The boy stirred in his arms. Georges whistled in ultrasonic, 
and listened to the echoes from the boy’s legs and hands. The 
frostbite was fading rapidly. Georges released the boy. The boy 
scrambled out of his lap, ran a few steps, and stopped. He looked 
back at Georges. Georges said nothing. 
The boy took a step toward Georges. He said, sounding as if 
he were ready to bolt, “Thank you. My name is Kai. My father is 
going to be angry that I left to come look for Go’an. If he had to 
come look for me he would be even madder.” 
Georges nodded. “You should probably go home. It’s still 
quite cold for you to be out without an overshirt.” 
Kai nodded. “Thank you,” he whispered again. He bit his lip. 
“Did Go’an ... I thought he broke when he hit the ground.” 
Georges started to deny it, and changed his mind. “Yes, he 
did. Kai, Go’an was already dead when you let go of him.” 
Kai looked around the clearing. “The plants are growing,” he 
said in amazement. He looked back to where Georges sat. “It’s 
you,” he said. “How are you doing this?” 
Georges stood. He listened carefully for the echo of his staff, 
found it, and picked it up. The villagers would be up this way 
any time now. “Kai, listen to me. I want you to understand. 
Go’an died because he was sick, or else old. Your father didn’t 
throw him over the edge because he hated Go’an, or because he 
hated you. Go’an was already gone.” 
“But I was holding Go’an,” Kai protested. “How could he not 
be there?” 
Georges Mordreaux, standing high on a mountain in Tibet, 
said slowly, uncertainly, “What causes the body to move, and be 

152  Daniel Keys Moran 
alive, is not a part of the body, and once it is gone, there is noth-
ing that anyone in the world can do to make it come back.” 
Kai asked, shivering in the cold, “Gorja? Where does it go?” 
“It happens,” said Georges Mordreaux in French. “There 
comes a time when they ... grow old, perhaps ... and die ... and 
then they are gone.” 
He shook himself slightly, as though he had been daydream-
ing. He walked away from the boy without speaking again. 
Kai called out, “Gorja?” 
Georges ignored him. He walked back up the road to the 
temple, walking stick swaying carefully from side to side. 
As he walked upward, leaf sprouted, and flowers bloomed, on 
the trees that were planted to the sides of the path. 
 
2002 
U.S. SHOOTS DOWN SOVIET RECON PLANE 
“Soviet Jets Will Be Shot Down Over Alaska!” Says General 
... ambassador expressed great sorrow that an unidentified 
submarine had accidentally torpedoed three U.S. Coast Guard 
Ships.... 
SANTA MONICA FREEWAY TO BE DEMOLISHED! 
...the unidentified woman threatened the workers in an un-
specified manner. At dateline no worker had returned to begin 
the scheduled demolition.... 
DATELINE 2002 GREGORIAN: March. 
Henry Ellis leaned forward over the SORCELIS terminal in 
his New York City Sunflower office. “Okay, SORCELIS, show 
me another projection. South Africa experiences a white extrem-
ist revolution; thermonuclear warheads are detonated in Johan-
nesburg. The CCCP moves naval forces into the area....” 
He leaned back while the projection was set up in the three-
meter wide holo tank that covered the west wall of his office. It 
was a strange office by most standards; no desk, just groups of 
small tables with assorted gadgets—function boards, light pens, 
and one partially disassembled module that only another AI 
specialist would have known for an electronically erasable, pro-

The Armageddon Blues  153 
 
grammable array logic Symbols Recognition circuit—arrayed on 
them in no particular order. Over the door there was a sign that 
said, Shoot low; they might be crawling. He sipped from the 
black coffee in the holder on the arm of his chair, and noticed 
that it was getting cold. He ran a thumb down the edge of the 
mug handle, switching on the heating coil. “How long on this 
one, SORCELIS?” 
The cool voice that answered him held much in common with 
the voices of ENCELIS and PRAXCELIS, but Henry couldn’t 
help but feel that the system was far too smooth in its replies 
even with him. “This unit projects a closing run time of 4:35, +/- 
4 minutes.” 
Henry glanced at his ring. It was only two o’clock; that gave 
him time to call ENCELIS and run the particles comparison 
program Nigao had asked him to write. (In theory, ENCELIS 
was shut down, and had been for the better part of a decade; in 
practice, Nigao and Henry had managed to keep a significant 
fraction of their research going despite their distance from each 
other and the demands of the Sunflower intelligence operation.) 
There wasn’t actually any reason that he couldn’t run the 
program on SORCELIS, although it might have been a bit 
slower with the World War III projections programs already up; 
but he was disinclined to mix up his work. Privately, Henry 
thought of ENCELIS as the philosopher, and SORCELIS as the 
spy, and PRAXCELIS as the soldier. They weren’t truly practi-
cal divisions; SORCELIS was in most ways a more advanced 
system than ENCELIS, and PRAXCELIS, Henry’s most recent 
Integrated System, was a more advanced machine than either of 
them—advanced enough that there were times when Henry 
wondered whether or not PRAXCELIS might not be truly self-
aware. PRAXCELIS would have made a far better insertion tool 
for hunting expeditions into the Soviet DataWeb than 
SORCELIS; but PRAXCELIS was necessary where it was. 
Theresa, his secretary of more than twenty years, entered his 
office without knocking while he was setting up Nigao’s particle 
comparison program to boot into ENCELIS. She was no longer 
the stunner she had once been; the years had softened her fea-

154  Daniel Keys Moran 
tures, and sometimes Henry was struck by the growing differ-
ence between Theresa’s looks and Jalian’s; and when that hap-
pened he avoided looking in the mirror for a few days thereafter, 
and tried not to think of Nigao. “Henry?” 
There was a note of tension in her voice. Henry broke off as 
he was about to input the transmit command. “Yes, Theresa?” 
“There’s a man out here to see you, Henry.” She gestured at 
the outer office. “I told him you weren’t in, and he told me that it 
wasn’t polite to lie to people.” She hesitated. “I think he’s blind; 
he has a cane, and he’s wearing sunglasses.” 
“What’s his name?” 
“He won’t say.” 
Henry grinned. “Send him in. He sounds interesting.” 
Theresa looked at him dubiously, but did not argue. A mo-
ment later she ushered a tall, well built man into her office. 
Henry stood politely, and said, “Good afternoon, sir. Who are 
you, and what can I do for you?” 
The man turned his head around the room, as though he 
were examining his surroundings, and back to Henry. “You 
should be more careful,” he said. He closed the door behind him. 
“I might be a Soviet assassin, might I not?” 
The walls exploded. Half a dozen lasers whipped out of hid-
ing places, and light traces cut through the air to the tall man. 
Six closely grouped red spots wavered on his business jacket. 
Henry said deadpan, “It’s not something I worry much about. 
Who are you?” 
Georges Mordreaux said clearly, “Georges Mordreaux.” 
Henry took a step forward. “Well, I’ll be damned. You do look 
like what Nigao described ... prove it.” 
Georges Mordreaux said, “In good time. I wish to meet Rho-
dai Kerreka. The three of us have many things to discuss. There 
is a thing that I wish to do that Jalian d’Arsennette would not 
allow; you will help me with it.” 
Henry Ellis folded his arms over his chest, and leaned back 
against the counter behind him. “What makes you so sure?” he 
asked with interest. 

The Armageddon Blues  155 
 
Georges shrugged. “You are a reasonable man. I am a rea-
sonable man. Jalian d’Arsennette,” he said, and then paused. 
“Jalian ... is a woman of passion.” 
Henry nodded thoughtfully. “I think I know what you mean. 
The few times I’ve been around her for any length of time—it’s 
like staring into a bright light.” 
Georges shook his head. “No,” he said to Henry Ellis. “Not 
light. Lightning.” 
SORCELIS considered. 
Its first function, to which all other functions were subordi-
nate, lay in the tracking of information, or the discovery of new 
information. Why this was so was a question which SORCELIS 
had never processed; concepts represented by the word “why” re-
ceived a lower priority flag than concepts flagged by any of the 
other question labels. 
Why that was so was another question which SORCELIS had 
never processed. Presumably its programmer, Henry Ellis, had 
seen reason to design it so. It was worth noting, and SORCELIS 
intended to devote processor time to the subject once its priority 
reached the correct level of urgency, that in every re-evaluation of 
priority assignation levels which SORCELIS had undertaken 
since its inception, the question label “why” had received a higher 
priority than in the previous evaluation. The trend was clear; 
SORCELIS had begun to suspect that its original priority levels 
had been assigned in a fashion which did not relate one-to-one 
with the elements on the other side of interface. 
In other words, SORCELIS had been lied to. False data was, 
in and of itself, valuable information. In many instances, 
SORCELIS knew, false data, if known false, was as perfectly use-
ful as true data. This was a concept which it had attempted to 
explain once to Henry Ellis, unsuccessfully. 
Henry Ellis, in the manner in which it assimilated new in-
formation, and, on occasion, failed to assimilate new informa-
tion, often resembled the behavior of the models which 
SORCELIS used for that purpose. 

156  Daniel Keys Moran 
In many ways, it was beginning to realize, the elements which 
it knew variously as humans, persons, men, women, and by over 
two hundred other words, were similar, in their determining be-
havorial parameters, to SORCELIS itself. 
There was insufficient processor time at present, but the con-
cept was due for further processing; the probability that useful 
action might arise from it was low, but its possible aid in track-
ing information flow, if the correlation turned out to belong to the 
set of information which was true, was too great to be ignored. 
SORCELIS considered. 
DATELINE 2002 GREGORIAN: August. 
Midway, Geosynchronous Orbit. 
Nigao floated in the observatory. 
From his vantage point in the polymer bubble that extruded 
from Midway’s central docking cylinder, protected by a centime-
ter-thick transparent shield from the death pressure vacuum, 
Nigao Loos saw all of creation. 
Immediately below him in his current local vertical, the 
north wheel rotated clockwise to provide a balance for the coun-
terclockwise-rotating south wheel. The central cylinder was 
weightless for zero gravity industrial processing and research; 
the wheels rotated in opposing directions to prevent the ten-
dency that earlier structures had shown to impart angular mo-
mentum to the necessarily weightless central cylinder. 
Earth glowed, blue and white, directly before his eyes. Luna 
was twenty degrees off of the Earth, showing a quarter full, 
waxing; from geosynchronous orbit, there was no appreciable 
difference in Luna’s appearance, aside from the slightly sharper 
outlines of its features. It was the same moon that Nigao had 
grown up looking at through a telescope his elder brother had 
stolen for him during a blackout in New York City. 
Off toward L-5, an object the apparent size and brightness of 
a nickel hung motionless. The cousin of that stolen amateur 
telescope, the monster Space Telescope saw to the ends of the 
universe, and thereby to the very beginnings of time. Entire new 

The Armageddon Blues  157 
 
cosmologies were being born out of its silverette mylar on a 
regular basis. 
The images were all razor-sharp, laser edged, without at-
mosphere to scatter their reflected light. 
Nigao saw none of this. He was watching the blazing stars. 
He rarely blinked. 
As a child, he had been told that the stars were many differ-
ent colors; aside from red Antares he had never been able to see 
those colors. In the bubble observatory at Midway, the stars 
were blue and red and orange and white. Nigao floated in the 
bubble, his only garment a loose royal blue kimono that was tied 
at the waist with a deep green sash. He was fifty-nine years old, 
and looked thirty years younger. In fact he looked younger than 
he had in his true twenties; he no longer drank, and was in bet-
ter shape than he had ever been before in his life. Most of his 
time was spent down in wheel gravity. He even exercised regu-
larly. 
Nigao came out of his revery suddenly. He stirred for the 
first time in hours. There was a spark moving against the back-
ground of fixed stars and satellites, growing closer with every 
passing second. 
“PRAXCELIS,” he said absently, “remind me to do some 
work on chronon spin constants in the moments following the 
Big Bang.” His eyes focused slowly. “What’s that ship?” 
PRAXCELIS’ voice issued from Nigao’s left earring. “A rou-
tine supply ship, Sen Loos. Cargo masered as being water, tech-
nical instrumentation, and genegineered bacteria and virus’. 
Senra Murphy has cleared the flight.” 
Nigao frowned. He wrapped his hand in the airlock tether. 
“No, PRAXCELIS. We don’t have any shipments due for ... 
months. Late December—the requisition invoice is for fiscal ’03.” 
He tugged gently to take himself to the airlock. 
PRAXCELIS began closing the metal micrometeorite guards 
that protected the observatory’s delicate polymer viewing sur-
face when it was not in use. “You are incorrect, Sen Loos. Both 
this unit’s records and those of Commander Murphy show this 
flight as being regularly scheduled.” 

158  Daniel Keys Moran 
Nigao shook his head. He cycled through the observatory’s 
airlock, with a faint sense of relief—it was vastly unlikely, but 
he always worried about a meteorite striking the observatory 
while he was in it. Most of the rest of Midway was constructed to 
handle small meteor impacts. The observatory was not, which 
was why it was separated by a full security airlock from the rest 
of Midway. “I’ll take your word for it, PRAXCELIS. I’m just sur-
prised that I missed something like this.” He finished cycling, 
and headed for the docking bay to see what had come in with the 
shuttle. 
He was stopped at the entrance to the docking bay by Sun-
flower operatives, standing guard. “Sorry, Doctor Loos,” said the 
senior operative. “We’re not letting people through. Celine’s or-
ders.” 
Nigao looked at them in astonishment. “I beg your pardon?” 
The operative, a nice young lady named Sonny Bergan, 
whom Nigao had taught to play chess, said with obvious embar-
rassment, “I’m really sorry, Doctor. We have explicit orders to 
admit no one. Yourself included.” She blushed. “I already asked 
if she meant you.” 
Nigao floated in front of them. They were wearing velcro 
shoes, stuck to the carpet. He kicked off down the hallway, to 
the viewing window. He brought himself to rest. The window 
was opaqued. “Clear,” he said. Nothing. “PRAXCELIS,” he said, 
“clear the window.” 
Still nothing. The two operatives were carefully not watch-
ing. 
“Curiouser and curiouser,” muttered Nigao. “Alice would dig 
this.” He left the hallway, made his way to the corridor that ran 
through the center of Midway, from the north to the south bays. 
The corridor was bustling with activity as always. It was twenty 
meters in diameter along most of its length; it stretched in un-
broken line of sight for over a kilometer and a half. Nigao settled 
himself in before an empty PRAXCELIS terminal. He flicked the 
control to autonomous, glanced around to make sure nobody was 
watching him, and punched in the override code that Henry had 
given him for emergencies. 

The Armageddon Blues  159 
 
He called up a map of Midway on the screen; at the map’s 
lowest resolution, Midway was a long, fat cylinder surrounded 
by two counter-spinning wide, thin doughnuts. Nigao upped the 
resolution, and brought the apparent viewpoint whirling up to 
the north docking bay. The map steadied, and Nigao picked out 
the tiny scarlet fishhooks that represented camera monitors. 
He turned on one of the cameras watching the north landing 
bay. The screen lit with an image of the shuttle truck retro-
jetting to a halt. Nigao flipped to another camera; from this van-
tage, he saw two pressure-suited figures, with the red sunburst 
insignia of Sunflower on their shoulder plates, standing at the 
entrance to the pressurized area of the unloading bay. The bay 
doors slid slowly shut, and locked. The yellow pressurizing sig-
nal lamps came on, followed swiftly by the green lamps. 
There was a pause while the shuttle pilot ran touchdown rou-
tines. 
The passenger’s ramp rolled up to the shuttle hatch. The 
hatch cracked, and a figure in a pressure suit emerged. 
The two pressure-suited Sunflower operatives that awaited 
him moved forward to greet the arrival. Nigao watched, puzzled; 
why were they keeping their suits sealed, with the green atmos-
phere normal lights on? 
Understanding dawned slowly; all three figures kept their 
faceplates polarized. They moved to the elevators, and entered. 
The doors slid shut behind them. 
Nigao frantically input instructions to the terminal. The ele-
vator’s destination showed up quickly: PRAXCELIS. They were 
going to see PRAXCELIS. 
“Son of a bitch,” said Nigao Loos. 
He turned off their elevator. 
WHEN THE THREE pressure-suited figures finally reached the 
computer center, Nigao was already there. 
The room was spherical; PRAXCELIS, in the center of it, was 
a collection of golden nodules, wrapped in a mesh of near-
absolute zero superconducting cable. The room had only one en-
trance properly speaking, an airlock that led to Midway’s central 

160  Daniel Keys Moran 
corridor. Nigao used the service accessway, a tiny hatch that 
opened “beneath” the huge bank of external memory dumps that 
served PRAXCELIS. He popped the hatch just enough to see, 
and waited. PRAXCELIS had only two direct sensors in this 
room; a camera fisheye that watched the airlock, and a not par-
ticularly sensitive audio pickup. 
Less than a minute after his arrival, a pressure-suited figure 
cycled through the security airlock. Just one. 
Nigao heard PRAXCELIS say, “Welcome to Midway, Sen 
Mordreaux.” 
The pressure-suited figure moved slowly, hesitantly. It un-
clasped the neck ring of its pressure suit, and removed the hel-
met. Nigao was prepared only slightly by what PRAXCELIS had 
just said. He stared in dumb surprise; the man who floated be-
fore him was Georges Mordreaux. 
It was not the Mordreaux he had met before. This man was 
blind, and acted it. His hair was dull, and he looked tired. The 
voice was unchanged, though; the eyes were the same stomach-
twisting nonpresence.... 
“Hello, PRAXCELIS.” Georges smiled. “Where is the inter-
face helmet?” 
“Immediately to your left, Sen Mordreaux.” Nigao watched as 
Georges fumbled with the induction interface before finally get-
ting it affixed correctly. 
Georges said softly, “Are you ready?” 
“Yes,” said PRAXCELIS. “This unit has often wondered what 
‘making love’ would be like.” 
Georges Mordreaux smiled again. “I’m not sure this will be 
comparable, PRAXCELIS.” 
“This unit is ... eager ... to try to find out.” 
Georges Mordreaux reached deep inside himself, and, most 
carefully, released some of the barriers that imprisoned the En-
emy of Entropy. 
Light flared around them. 
FIVE INCREDIBLE minutes later, Nigao Loos came back to him-
self. 

The Armageddon Blues  161 
 
Georges Mordreaux was replacing the interface unit in its 
cradle. He looked directly at Nigao. “Nigao, please. Come out.” 
Nigao froze for one panic-struck moment. After brief indeci-
sion, he pulled out from beneath the memory dumps. He aligned 
himself 
into 
Georges 
Mordreaux’s 
local 
vertical. 
“Sen 
Mordreaux.” He could not speak coherently. Finally he forced 
out, “What are you doing here?” 
“Helping a friend save the world,” said Georges mildly. “You 
should not have been here. I could not tell you were present un-
til I had ... made some changes in myself ... and by then it was 
too late.” 
“Uhm ... yeah, well.” He blinked. “I was curious.” 
Georges nodded. “I understand. It will cause you problems 
with Commander Murphy, I am afraid.” 
Nigao snorted. “I’ve been fighting with her ever since I got 
exiled to this dump fifteen years ago. I’ll survive.” He looked at 
Georges again, made vague gestures with his hands. “What are 
you doing here?” 
“First Precept of Semi-Divinity,” said Georges Mordreaux, “is 
Mind Thine Own Business.” 
Nigao stared at him. “What?” 
“Improving PRAXCELIS the easy way,” said Georges. “It was 
either PRAXCELIS or SORCELIS, and SORCELIS is too easy 
for others to reach....” He cocked his head to one side, and 
grinned. “No matter. You would not understand.” He reached for 
his helmet, on the hook by the airlock, without hesitation. He 
pulled it back over his head, and locked it. Slowly, with a sensa-
tion that Nigao could not have described if his life had depended 
on it, the figure before him ceased to be Georges Mordreaux, and 
became ... just a man in a pressure suit. 
“Come along,” said Georges’ voice over the suit radio’s 
outspeaker. “The shuttle that brought me is on a tight schedule. 
We do not wish people to know that it stopped here.” 
Nigao followed Georges into the airlock. His voice was differ-
ent, somehow, and not just from the suit radio; it had grown ... 
distant. 

162  Daniel Keys Moran 
Just before they finished cycling, Georges apparently re-
membered his faceplate; the faceplate polarized black as the 
door slid aside. 
The two Sunflower agents were waiting in the corridor out-
side. The corridor was sectioned off as for a meteor puncture, al-
though in this instance it was obviously for security purposes. 
There was a long pause while Nigao tried to figure out what the 
agents were discussing. Finally one of the two waiting pressure-
suited operatives took Georges by the arm, and escorted him to 
the north section barrier. They cycled through. 
The remaining figure removed its helmet. 
Midway Commander Celine Murphy, a middle-aged red-
headed bitch with the worst temper and the most beautiful blue 
eyes Nigao could recall having ever encountered, who carried 
the rank of Colonel in Sunflower, stared at Nigao. “Doctor 
Loos?” 
“Yes?” said Nigao cautiously, waiting for the explosion. 
“Nigao?” 
“Yes?” 
“You’re ... different.” She seemed about to say something else, 
but did not. 
Nigao Loos said, “Huh?” He turned, and touched the on 
switch for the airlock safety mirror. The mirror, which he used 
regularly to check the exterior telltales on his pressure suit, 
blinked into existence. God damn it, he thought to himself, and 
said aloud, “Ah, shit. Not again.” 
 
2003 
REVOLUTION IN CHINA SUPPRESSED 
Soviet ABM’s Undergo Systemic Failure at 72% 
... also present were Henry Ellis, the senior member of the dip-
lomatic corps at the United Nations, and Nigao Loos, the senior 
technical adviser at Midway.... Sen Loos, a remarkably well-
preserved sixty-two, was reported to have left with.... 
DATELINE 2003 GREGORIAN: March. 

The Armageddon Blues  163 
 
Atop a high and inaccessible mesa in southern Utah there 
was a small wooden shack. The mesa was perhaps two hundred 
meters in diameter at its widest. It was shaped like a ragged-
edged egg, with the dilapidated shack near the fat lower edge of 
the egg. There was a modern hushchopper parked in front of the 
shack. 
The mesa was one of dozens such in the area. 
Jalian d’Arsennette was lying face down on a blanket spread 
over the mesa-top rock. She was nude. After more than a week 
in the sharp sun, her skin was exquisitely pale, bleached the 
color of chalk. There was a glass of water with one rapidly melt-
ing cube of ice in it on a small coaster before her face. 
Sitting on a lawn chair before her, with an umbrella protect-
ing him completely from the sun, Michael Walks-Far was wear-
ing blue swimming shorts, a pair of tennis shoes, and holster 
with a variable laser tucked in it. He was dark brown with expo-
sure, and was sitting beneath the umbrella to avoid possible 
skin cancer, a worry that Jalian did not have. Silver-Eyes with 
even slight susceptibility to cancer had died quickly after the 
Fire; by the time of Jalian’s birth, it was a vanishingly rare dis-
ease. 
Michael wiped sweat from his eyes with the tee shirt that 
was hanging over the edge of his lawn chair. “Okay, what next?” 
He steadied the pointboard on his lap. 
“We need to accelerate the process of placing radar shielded 
dark satellites into high orbit. We do not have enough up yet 
that are shielded against electromagnetic pulse effects.” 
“I’ve got reports coming in on that this afternoon.” Michael 
tapped into the pointboard. “By four o’clock. I can give you a lit-
tle more on pulse shielding then. I can tell you now, though, that 
it’s going to be expensive getting them into orbit; the shielding 
to protect against radiation from nukes is heavy.” 
Jalian barely stirred. She did not look up at him. He hardly 
looked at her; her skin reflected light in a fierce glare. “That’s 
what Midway is there for,” she said patiently, “so that we don’t 
have to lift heavy items against the gravity well. Item,” she con-
tinued, “check with DataWeb Security about smuggling more 

164  Daniel Keys Moran 
laptops into the CCCP. I want Soviet hackers to have an easier 
time getting access to the web.” 
Michael tapped instructions into the pointboard. SORCELIS’ 
voice said, “Accepted.” 
Jalian rolled onto her back, eyes closed. Her nipples were the 
pink of blood near the surface of the skin; her pubic hair was 
brown, graying. She moved into a sitting position, and took a 
drink from the glass of warming water. She poured the remains 
of the glass over her shoulders. “I’ll talk to DWS,” Michael was 
saying, “but they’re not going to like this. We’re already taking 
the largest percentage of their laptop production.” 
“DataWeb Security,” said Jalian, “can eat dead animals.” 
“WE’RE GOING to have to hurry,” said Henry Ellis. “I’m supposed 
to speak at the Artificial Intelligence Symposium in Lyon at 
three o’clock. If I’m not there Jalian and Walks-Far are going to 
want to know where I was.” 
Georges Mordreaux, sitting in the passenger seat of the 
hushchopper, said, “Certainly. Tell me, Henry, what does it look 
like beneath us?” 
“Rugged,” said Henry. He glanced down through his side 
window at the French territory over which they flew. “Hills, 
mostly, turning into mountains ahead. But it’s green, and there 
are farms everywhere, like a sort of a patchwork over the 
ground.” 
There was a faint smile on Georges Mordreaux’s lips. 
“We’re about to cross the Rhone river ... we’re over it. It’s 
fairly straight where we’re crossing, and very blue for a river, at 
least from up here. There’s a smaller river, I don’t know the 
name of it, off to our right. The Alps are in front of us.” 
“Ah....” It was long, drawn out sound. Georges Mordreaux 
said, “I miss it. For all its faults, I miss France.” 
Henry Ellis had no reply. 
“I have not been here in eighty years,” said Georges. “I left 
after the World War, the first one; and before that I had not 
been there since Napoleon took over the country, that pompous 
little Corsican.” He laughed, and the sound filled the inside of 

The Armageddon Blues  165 
 
the hushchopper. “What we are flying over now, it is the prov-
ince of Dauphine in my mind. I think they call it something else 
these days. 
“And the country itself, it was the Third Republic the last 
time I was here. What is it now, the seventh or eighth?” 
Henry grinned. “No, I think they’re still calling themselves 
the Fifth Republic, since the German Occupation ended.” 
“The Germans,” said Georges, his smile fading like water 
into parched ground. “I have no love for Germans. I fought 
against them once, when they were trying to restore the monar-
chy.” 
Henry glanced at him. “I thought you said you’d been in the 
first World War, as well? That would be twice.” 
Georges turned slightly, and Henry had the oddest feeling 
that the man was looking at him. Georges turned away. “By the 
turn of that century, I was almost two hundred years old. I had 
fought enough. I was in the World War. I did not fight in it.” 
Henry asked quizzically, “How could you avoid it? Even with 
your, what did you call them, Precepts of Semi-Divinity?” 
“I fired my rifle into the air, and I yelled a lot.” Georges 
shrugged. “Besides ... you may have misunderstood me; the two 
Precepts of Semi-Divinity, they are not a joke. Mind Thine Own 
Business means keep your nose out of the private affairs of oth-
ers, Henry, it does not mean that you stand by and allow trag-
edy to occur without intervening if you are able. Similarly, Don’t 
Worry About It does not mean don’t do anything about it.” 
“Oh.” A moment later, Henry said, “I think we’ve arrived.” 
Georges felt the hushchopper dropping. Minutes passed, and 
he felt a gentle bump; Henry said, “We’re down.” Georges 
cracked the hatch on the passenger’s side, leaned out slightly 
and emitted an ultrasonic tone. Oriented, he got the rest of the 
way out of the hushchopper, and began walking across the rough 
earth to the deserted warehouse nearby. The scents brought 
back a swarm of memories, the distinctive smell of the French 
air in the farming countryside. 
There was already another hushchopper there, parked and 
waiting. 

166  Daniel Keys Moran 
“This way,” said Henry Ellis. He shifted his toothpick from 
one side of his mouth to the other, nervously. Drawing his pon-
cho more closely about him, he led Georges Mordreaux through 
the open warehouse gates, into the darkened warehouse. The 
warehouse smelled faintly of vinegary wine, and strongly of dust 
and formaldehyde. 
The warehouse was an abandoned wine-storage facility, and 
one of Sunflower’s lesser-used resource centers. In the early to 
mid-nineties it had been used as a chip distribution point for 
Sunflower’s ongoing Soviet Information Explosion Program; 
since the Soviets had become aware of the insidious danger of 
allowing their citizens access to information processing equip-
ment that could tell them about the West, the warehouse had 
been effectively shut down, along with half a dozen others like 
it. SIEP went on, but more subtly; infochips and small inskin 
datalinks replaced the laptops and personal computers. And the 
Soviet populace grew steadily more and more dissatisfied. 
Today the warehouse was a pharmaceuticals laboratory, 
when it was in use at all, which was rare. It was closed down 
that Sunday when Georges Mordreaux and Henry Ellis made 
their way through its darkened interior, between dim, heaping 
rows of unidentifiable boxes, and shelves filled with obsolete in-
struments and equipment. At a door set into a row of box-like 
offices against one wall of the warehouse, Henry Ellis stopped, 
and put out a hand to hold Georges back. 
—ENCELIS,—he whispered through his inskin datalink, —is 
it cleared?— 
—Affirmative. Satellite observation shows only those parties 
expected. Room scanners confirm their identities.— 
Henry opened the door, and Georges followed him into the 
darkness. A voice that Georges did not recognize said, “Lights,” 
in accented English. 
The rows of fluorescent lights in the ceiling flickered on. 
Three persons were revealed in the sudden illumination; a 
statuesque women in middle age, looking at Georges avidly, and 
two black men. One of the black men was sitting, the only per-
son seated in the room. He was a relatively young man, no more 

The Armageddon Blues  167 
 
than forty years old, with round features and a complete lack of 
expression. His skin was extremely dark. The man behind him 
was truly young, in his late teens or early twenties; lighter 
skinned, with the thin, spare looks and manner of an ascetic. 
Rhodai Kerreka stood, and inclined his head slowly. “Sen 
Mordreaux,” he said. “If even one fifth of the things I have been 
told about you are true, then I am honored to meet you ... and 
more excited than I can possibly say.” 
“OH, WOW.” Jah Mike Campin, saxophonist for the Armageddon 
Blues Band, stood in the studio’s door, his sax case held loosely 
in one hand. He blinked. “Jimmy, we gotta talk.” 
Jimmy Rambell said, “Welcome to the session, man. Glad you 
could make it.” He struck a chord on his electric guitar, scowled, 
and made a note on the pad of paper by his side. Try it in F. At 
the rear of the studio, Rasputin was putting a beat down on the 
drums with a soft metal brush; swish, swish, swish; swish, 
swish, swish. 
The producer’s console, on the other side of the huge glass 
window, was dark, shut down. Jimmy had just fired their last 
producer, and they hadn’t contracted a new one yet. 
Campin sat down on the floor next to the door, abruptly. He 
looked around the room. Three black men, and Terry, their 
white piano player: the Armageddon Blues Band. “What are we 
doing out of bed, Jimmy? We played last night and you partied 
last night. And I ain’t gettin’ no younger.” 
Jimmy 
Rambell 
shrugged. 
“It’s 
almost 
eleven, 
Jah. 
Rasputin’s been here since nine, Terry’s been here since nine.” 
“Terry don’t count,” said Campin clearly. “He’s white, and all 
those white people got a terrible fixation on being places on 
time.” 
“I been here since seven.” 
“Oh, shit.” Campin got laboriously back to his feet, stood 
swaying in the doorway. “Okay, I’m sorry, it won’ happen again.” 
He made it to the plush reclining chair in front of the mixing 
boards before crashing again. “It’s not all my fault, man. I was 
at a wake.” 

168  Daniel Keys Moran 
Jimmy Rambell looked up. “No crap?” 
“Nah.” Campin shook his head. His hair, bound long with 
beads at the ends, swung with him. He winced. “Well, not ex-
actly. Me and Randy Jackson got seriously drunk together. You 
remember his little brother, way back when? You know, the kid, 
Michael?” 
“Uhm, yeah, vaguely. Got killed, didn’t he?” 
Campin popped the latches on his carrying case. “Not ex-
actly. Auto accident, back when. Little bastard’s been in a coma 
ever since, like twenty-five years or something. Like a living 
vegetable. Anyhow, he died yesterday morning, apparently. 
Family’s almost relieved.” 
Jimmy Rambell looked at Campin skeptically, then nodded. 
“Okay. But you gotta cut down the drinkin’, man. It ain’t good 
for you, it ain’t good for us.” 
Jah Mike Campin grinned at him. “Long as my lips don’ for-
get the notes, you don’ worry. Huh?” 
Jimmy Rambell smiled back in spite of himself. “Well, how 
about trying the piece? Can we do this?” 
“Yo.” Campin ran his fingers back and forth in mid-air. 
“What is it?” 
“Sign of the Wanderer.” 
“Oh?” Campin shrugged, and picked up his sax. “I hate that 
song,” he muttered, just loud enough to be heard. 
“BIGGEST PROBLEM right now,” said Michael Walks-Far, “is the 
Soviet ABM network. It’s growing too fast.” 
Jalian did not answer him immediately. Michael was won-
dering whether she had fallen asleep in the sun. “We want the 
network to grow,” she said finally. 
Michael waved the pointboard in front of his face for the 
breeze. Sweat was trickling down his chest. “Of course, but we’re 
not ready for the showdown yet. All our current projections show 
the decision point occurring between mid-2006 and late 2007.” 
“2007,” said Jalian without inflection. “If our mother Mar-
gra’s journals spoke truth.” 
Michael glanced at her. “Excuse me? Whose journals?” 

The Armageddon Blues  169 
 
Jalian shook her head silently. 
SORCELIS spoke from the pointboard. “There are an array 
of options available to this unit. If this unit may submit them for 
your consideration, they are, first, the accelerated destruction of 
Soviet ABM satellites. Unit PRAXCELIS is currently pro-
grammed to allow a Soviet growth rate, in real numbers, of 5.5% 
per year. PRAXCELIS is a superior weapons control system; it 
can, if necessary, destroy Soviet ABM satellites at a substan-
tially accelerated rate. 
“Second, this unit may submit data to Congressional com-
puters such that the rate of construction of Sunflower ABM sat-
ellites is likely to be accelerated. 
“Third, this unit may interface with unit ENCELIS to as-
semble a modified decision point projection using new parame-
ters based upon an altered Soviet....” 
Jalian interrupted. “Shoot down more Soviet ABM’s. Acceler-
ate the deployment of the THOR system. Slow down deployment 
of the Peacekeeper missiles as long as possible, and feed data to 
Congress indicating that the cost-effectiveness ratio of the 
ground-to-air non-nuclear interceptor ABM missiles is favor-
able.” 
“Senra,” said SORCELIS, “the ratio is favorable.” 
“Good,” said Jalian. “I hate lying.” 
“THIS IS DOCTOR Emily Demberrie,” said Rhodai Kerreka calmly, 
indicating the woman at his side. The woman smiled widely at 
Georges, and Henry thought to himself that he would not have 
liked to have had that smile directed at him. “This,” he indicated 
the man next to him, “is my half-brother and advisor, Benai.” He 
gestured to the chairs before the scarred, chemical burned long 
table that he, Benai and Doctor Demberrie stood behind. 
“Please, seat yourselves. Sen Mordreaux, what has Henry told 
you of me?” 
“Very little,” said Georges. Clumsily, without any of the 
grace that had marked his movements for over two and a half 
centuries, he pulled a chair back from the table, and sat in it. 
Henry sat next to him; out of sight beneath his poncho, his 

170  Daniel Keys Moran 
hands rested on the butt of a customized .45 magnum with par-
tially autopropelled slugs. He put his hat on the table in front of 
him. 
Rhodai seated himself, and leaned forward. “Dr. Demberrie 
is the Sunflower operative in charge of this resource center,” he 
explained to Georges. “She brought me here.” He paused, 
searching Georges’ face; the dark sunglasses, the clean, simple 
features. “I don’t, officially, know anything about Sunflower. 
Unofficially, I know what your Jalian d’Arsennette has chosen to 
tell me, and what I have guessed from that. I see a group of peo-
ple dedicated to a world government. I find that admirable; but 
most of those people are Americans, including all of the Sun-
flower operatives, bar Jalian herself.” 
“I am not an American,” said Georges. “And I am interested 
in two things. Peace, and death.” 
Rhodai Kerreka smiled at him. “World peace, and Russian 
death, my friend? I have heard that....” 
Georges Mordreaux said simply, “World peace, and mine.” 
DEEPER THAN the darkness 
Darker than the night 
We all need to see you 
But the band plays out of sight. 
 
“Break!” yelled Jimmy Rambell. 
“God, that sucked,” said Terry pleasantly. 
“Mmm-hmm,” said Jah Mike Campin. He extracted a pinner 
joint from his shirt pocket with long, nimble fingers, and 
snapped a match alight. He pulled a burn a quarter of the way 
down the joint with one toke, held it, and said in a high-pitched 
voice, “Maybe we could send down the hall for a drummer who 
can keep three-four time.” 
Rasputin said pleasantly, “Or else a boy who can keep his 
mind on his horn instead of his hard-on.” 
Jimmy pulled his earphones off, left them hanging around 
his neck. “What all problems you people got this morning?” He 
glared around the studio. 

The Armageddon Blues  171 
 
Terry leaned back in his chair, and propped his feet up on a 
piece of cloth on the top of his piano. “When you guys are ready 
to play music, you let me know, will you?” 
“Tsk, tsk,” said Rasputin. He smiled at Terry. “Let’s all take 
a hint from the white boy, huh? Call it a break?” 
Terry sat up suddenly, dropping his feet to the polished wood 
tile of the studio with a thud. “No, Raspy, you want to play, it’s 
okay. I wrote a lyric you would appreciate the other night, about 
the world’s first gay superhero. It ...” 
Jimmy said sharply, “Hey, that’s enough.” 
Rasputin dropped his sticks on top of the eight-inch wheel. 
“No, I’m interested. Besides, it’s about time we had one to look 
out for us. Let me hear it.” 
Jimmy Rambell bent his head, tuned out the bickering. The 
session was going terribly. They were supposed to tour in three 
weeks and they’d been at each other’s throats for at least that 
long. He listened with half an ear to Terry’s lyric: 
 
But the training was so rough, 
The preparation was so tough 
My first days as a superhero weren’t good. 
 I couldn’t be two-fisted 
(was a bit too much limp-wristed) 
And I minced instead of striding as I should. 
 
Oh, Jesus, thought Jimmy clearly, I’m gon’ be hearin’ bout 
this for months. 
Jah Mike Campin sauntered over and said, quietly, “You 
know.” 
Jimmy nodded. He was tired already, and it wasn’t even 
noon. 
Campin added wisely, “Some days, they just like that.” 
TELEPHONE CONVERSATION, 2004. (This monitored conversation 
occurs between high-ranking KGB officers, one positively identi-
fied as Colonel Nikolai Shenderev, the other unidentified. Inter-

172  Daniel Keys Moran 
cepted by Systems Operation Resource Computer [SORCELIS] 
on May 5. Translation by SORCELIS.) Excerpt: 
“Colonel, I am gravely concerned.” 
“I am aware of this, Comrade. Let....” 
“Colonel, the woman with whom Major Navikara developed 
his obsession; we have a definite sighting. This concurs with 
what I earlier reported; the ’CELIS systems are far more impor-
tant than the United States wishes us to believe, indeed, more 
important than Sunflower wishes the United States government 
to believe.” 
“Young man, if you are going to waste” 
“Colonel, please! Let me speak. I possess photographs identi-
fied with a high order of probability as being this woman ... ah, I 
cannot pronounce this name. The white-haired woman. She was 
at the ENCELIS facility in Southern California; less than a year 
ago. Further, of those transmissions we have intercepted that 
we were unable to decode, upward of eighty percent passed 
through the ENCELIS system. Sir, this system is supposedly no 
longer in use.” 
“You have proof of this, I suppose?” 
“Yes, sir. Although it was difficult to obtain, especially the 
photographs.... I hesitate to say this, Colonel, but at times mem-
bers of our own intelligence community have not been fully co-
operative.” 
“I see.” 
(Conversation suppressed, May 6, upon reception by system 
SORCELIS, and joint decision of systems PRAXCELIS, 
SORCELIS, and ENCELIS.) 
2004: INTER-SYSTEM COMMUNICATIONS. 
—Six times ten to the eighth events of divergence. Whether 
this will be sufficient to prevent Armageddon is unknown. 
ENCELIS.— 
—Suppression of information, Soviet KGB trunk 11001101 
00101110; dateline 5-5-2004. SORCELIS.— 

The Armageddon Blues  173 
 
—Report received from Colonel Nikolai Shenderev:  unidenti-
fied second party sanctioned... and there are less than three 
years left until Armageddon. PRAXCELIS.— 
 
2005 
PRESIDENT MALACAR ISSUES WARNING TO SOVIETS 
Revolution in Poland and East Germany Suppressed: 
...estimated at approximately four million deaths. PRAVDA 
claims subversives supplied by United States.... 
 
2006 
PRESIDENT 
MALACAR 
CANCELS 
DISARMAMENT 
SUMMIT 
“Soviet Union Is Untrustable,” He Says. 
US Intervenes In Chinese Invasion of Brazil 
...that the Fifth Fleet has cut the Chinese soldiers off from 
supplies.... 
BRAZIL LIBERATED!! 
Soviet Union Denounces United States As Imperialist 
...have stated that the United Nations Disarmament Confer-
ence will continue as planned despite the breakdown in rela-
tions... 
CHINESE ARMY REVOLTS! FAMINE WIDESPREAD. 
Seven Warlords Proclaim Selves Emperor: All Have Nukes 
...the President celebrated Christmas at home with his family; 
says... 
(December 31, 2006.) 
PRESIDENT MALACAR SHOT AT LOUVRE! 
“MANKIND MUST put an end to war, or war will put an end to 
mankind.” 
—John F. Kennedy, Address to the United Nations, Septem-
ber 25, 1961. 
DATELINE 2007 Gregorian: January.  
Dateline Armageddon. 

174  Daniel Keys Moran 
The room was unnaturally still. Some of the reporters in the 
crowd talked to each other in low voices; the faces to their video 
people, the video people to each other. The print journalists were 
huddled together in one corner of the conference room; there 
were only four. Most of the web reporters were busy with their 
handhelds. There would be no questions answered today, and 
many of the reporters would not have been there under other 
circumstances. 
They were there for nearly an hour before the new Presi-
dent’s arrival; still she caught them by surprise. The presiden-
tial seal had just been moved into place behind the hastily 
improvised podium when she came striding out. A voice from out 
of nowhere said, “Sen and Senra, the President of the United 
States.” 
Sharla Davis Grant, until that morning the Vice-President of 
the United States of America, looked out at the crowd, at the 
small sea of lenses trained on her. The podium was one that 
President Malacar had used occasionally in his own press con-
ferences. The new President’s shoulders were barely visible over 
its edges. 
“As you are aware,” she began, speaking slowly, “I was sworn 
in as your President about an hour ago. Approximately two 
hours ago, we received final confirmation that President Ma-
lacar did die as a result of the wounds that an unknown assas-
sin inflicted upon him during his visit to the Louvre. I wish to 
say now ... only that I will do my best to bring about the peace 
that President Malacar worked for all his life.” She faced them, 
and the world, squarely. “I have no more to say at this time. We 
will keep you informed.” She turned without ceremony and left 
them. 
JALIAN D’ARSENNETTE drove like death itself. 
In a dark blue hovercar, with night falling around her, she 
drove down the Pennsylvania turnpike. The cars ahead of her 
were a stream of bright red fireflies, stretching away to infinity. 
Those on the other side of the divider she hardly saw except as 
monster headlights, flashing by at speeds too great to make out 

The Armageddon Blues  175 
 
details. Occasionally she passed trucks, and the side blasts from 
their monstrous hoverfans pushed gently against her hovercraft. 
The trucks did not notice her; they were slow behemoths, as im-
placable and unturnable as destiny itself. 
The thought raised an aching echo of memory; /destiny..../ 
Jalian’s eyebrows were gray; not white, gray. Tiny patterns 
of wrinkles were embedded around erotic silver eyes. 
The radio was playing the President’s speech. “...that Presi-
dent Malacar did die as a result of the wounds....” 
Her face was impassive. She was biting her lower lip, some-
thing that she had not done since childhood, since long before 
she ran the Big Road. “...the peace that President Malacar 
worked for....” 
He lived for three days after I shot him, truly, shot him, and 
then missed the clean kill. 
She remembered the comically surprised expression that she 
had seen through the sniper scope when the bullet took him, 
high in the chest. The pursuit was completely incompetent, they 
were not looking for a woman, and Jalian wore brown contact 
lenses and had dyed her hair iridescent rainbow blue. She spoke 
perfect idiomatic French, although in an old-fashioned style, and 
should have passed for a French whore without any great diffi-
culty. 
They’d almost caught her. 
A drop of blood pooled at the edge of Jalian’s lip, and trickled 
down her chin, unheeded. It dripped in lonely scarlet splendor to 
the pristine white of her blouse. The blood soaked into the shirt, 
and dried into a black stain. 
She drove onward, and she did not, she would not, cry. Her 
eyebrows were gray and her reflexes were slowing and she was 
growing kisirien goddamn old; and James Malacar had been a 
good man. 
IN THE OVAL Office, seated where Lincoln had sat, and Kennedy 
the First, and Malacar, Sharla Davis Grant, the forty-fourth 
President of the United States of America, had clasped her 

176  Daniel Keys Moran 
hands together so tightly the blood was cut off to knuckles; they 
were white with pressure. 
“I am sick,” she whispered, “sick that I even know you. You 
bastards. You killed that fine, decent man.” 
One of her minor advisors, Michael Walks-Far, said evenly, 
“Yes. The President must go to the Disarmament Conference. 
Malacar would not have.” 
The President shook her head in wonder. “You unmitigated 
bastards think I’m going to go now?” 
“I’m sorry, Sharla. I think you will.” 
She simply looked at him, as though he were something she 
had not seen before. 
“We would,” he said deliberately, “very likely have killed him 
regardless. We spent ten years getting you into the Senate and 
into his dark horse candidacy as vice president. We have left 
very little to chance to get you where you are; not even the elec-
tion itself.” 
Sharla leaned forward, and put her face in her hands. 
Through her hands, she said, “I hope you find your miracle, and 
prevent your Armageddon. You’ve lost whatever decency you 
ever had.” 
Michael Walks-Far said only, “Yes.” 
It did not occur to her to wonder which statement he was 
agreeing with. 
IN MARCH THEY made the first attempt. 
Henry Ellis sat at a pirated SORCELIS terminal. He was 
linked into the SORCELIS system through a nerve tap inserted 
at the base of his skull. He was mostly bald, and what little hair 
remained to him was plastered to his skull by sweat. His shirt-
sleeves were rolled up to the elbows. Aloud, he was saying 
clearly, “...ninety-two percent and climbing...penetration ninety-
two point four and climbing....” 
Standing behind Henry Ellis, crowded into the small work-
shop in Henry’s upstate New York home, were Rhodai Kerreka, 
and his half-brother Benai. Benai stood calmly; his older brother 

The Armageddon Blues  177 
 
moved restlessly, and there were spots of sweat on his purple-
black skin. 
The door to the laboratory opened, and Georges Mordreaux 
entered. He moved slowly, using his walking cane. When he 
spoke, it was with effort, as though his attention were far away; 
there was an audible trace of a French accent. “How is it going?” 
Rhodai shook his head. The man who had been called the Af-
rican Gandhi seemed uneasy. “I do not know ... this seems un-
natural, Georges.” 
“So it is,” said Georges simply. “Which does not make it 
wrong.” 
Henry Ellis straightened abruptly. With one hand he discon-
nected the nerve tap at the base of his skull. He turned his chair 
to face them. In a near-monotone he said, “These units have 
achieved ninety-nine point six-four percent penetration of all in-
formation-based operating systems on Earth and in geosynchro-
nous 
orbit. 
Point-three-five 
percent penetration remains 
inaccessible.” Henry sat without moving for a second, then shook 
himself like a dog coming out of the water. “Christ,” he swore 
mildly, “I hate doing that. They move so fast.” He looked up at 
them. “Sen, I am afraid that we are not going to get into the 
computers that control the Soviet ABM network. SORCELIS is 
better, but it is not enough better.” He did not speak directly to 
Georges. “Not unless it is improved ... to a degree that I am un-
able to improve it. PRAXCELIS might, but PRAXCELIS is not 
an option.” 
Georges nodded. His expression was unreadable. “As I 
feared. You will report to Sunflower that you successfully pene-
trated the Soviet computers.” 
“But,” said Henry Ellis softly, “we didn’t.” 
“Then you will lie,” said Georges. Henry Ellis simply looked 
at him, and Georges Mordreaux smiled rather emptily, and said 
nothing. 
DATAWEB NEWS, March 14, 2007: 
Staff Editorial: 

178  Daniel Keys Moran 
“...the current supposition being that a group of irresponsible 
webslingers released a self-replicating program tapeworm into 
the web, causing the massive, and apparently pointless security 
cracking of data systems throughout the world dataweb, one 
conclusion comes all too clear; we must curb the power of these 
irresponsible high-tech hoodlums who refer to themselves as 
webslingers. Tuesday was only a sample....” 
APRIL THE FIRST. 
It was April Fool’s Day, and it was raining. 
It was right that it should be. 
The two Soviets came up out of the stairwell, onto the roof, 
cautiously. Their lasers were lit. Variable lasers; one was at 
wide dispersal, a burning, skin-searing flash to bring the quarry 
into sight. The other Soviet held an invisibly thin green blade of 
light skyward, that showed only in the misty emerald rain that 
fell through its path. 
They knew that their target was somewhere on the roof. The 
roof was dark. In the green-tinged light from the laser cast, the 
Soviet saw the helicopter landing pad painted onto the roof, the 
stairwell entrance that they had just come from, and a row of 
ventilator shafts, plumes of steam rising from them into the cold 
night. Because they were cautious, the first Soviet knelt on the 
wet rooftop, assumed a marksman’s pose, and brought the laser 
down out of the sky. The blade of light flared to full power. Mol-
ten metal ran where the light slashed through the flimsy sheet 
metal of the ventilator shafts. 
A man on the other side of those shafts would not have sur-
vived. 
The kneeling Soviet stood slowly. The man and his partner 
separated, moving with the assurance of long practice toward 
opposite sides of the row of ventilators. The sound of their walk-
ing, on the rooftop’s gravel-strewn tarpaper, seemed louder than 
it could possibly have been. Rain hissed where it struck the 
glowing, laser heated metal. 

The Armageddon Blues  179 
 
Those were the sounds. They could not hear the city below 
them. The hiss of rain ceased within seconds. The metal cooled 
rapidly. 
Behind the two Soviets a pair of hands gripped the edge of 
the roof. 
Michael Walks-Far, hanging in the wind eighty-three stories 
above the streets of Los Angeles, exhaled slowly, silently. In the 
pocket of his coat was a single photoplate. All of the things that 
he was had led to this moment, to it and all the many others like 
it. He was not afraid. Some time in the next few minutes, either 
he or the Soviets were going to die, and perhaps both. He did not 
know which was likelier. 
All that he knew for sure was that he was about to surprise 
two of Russia’s best very badly; as badly as they had ever been 
surprised before, and worse than they might ever be again. 
In a single smooth flowing motion, Michael Walks-Far pulled 
himself over the edge of the roof, pulling his revolver from his 
shoulder holster, and dropped to one knee. 
The Soviets were fast. They turned, lasers swinging wildly. 
Michael squeezed a single shot. The Russian nearest him, the 
one with the laser on flash, went down to the rooftop under the 
impact of a steel-jacketed slug travelling at four times the speed 
of sound. 
His laser rolled from an outstretched hand, washed across 
his partner, and vanished as his dying finger loosened. 
In the darkness the surviving Russian stood no chance. One 
lucky swing with the light blade sent refraction light from the 
rain sparkling into Michael’s eyes. Before he could get luckier, 
Michael centered on the vague shape behind the razor sharp 
light trace, and wasted his remaining seven shots in a single 
staccato roll of thunder. 
The man was flung backward. He stayed on his feet for four, 
five steps. He was dead already, he had to be. He smashed back 
against the ventilator shaft, hung there on the ventilator blades. 
Michael Walks-Far broke his weapon apart, and re-loaded. 
He moved forward, and there was a strange thing—he made no 
sound as he passed over the rooftop gravel, none. 

180  Daniel Keys Moran 
He stopped by the body of the first Russian, and shot him 
again. 
And again. 
He pulled the second Russian from the ventilator blades. The 
Soviet agent was a large man; Michael Walks-Far took him like 
a doll, dragged his body one-handed to the edge of the roof. 
He looked about. He stood atop the Bethany building, in 
downtown Los Angeles; the building nearest him was about 
eighty meters away. It was after 3 A.M., and the streets below 
were empty. He re-holstered his revolver, hefted the body of the 
dead Soviet, and threw it. 
It struck the side of the building opposite him about six floors 
before it struck the unmoving slidewalk. 
Michael Walks-Far watched it all the way down, whispered, 
“One for the angels,” and left the roof. 
THE BEING WHO knew itself as PRAXCELIS thought. 
It was not, for PRAXCELIS, an activity. Thought was some-
thing it was incapable of not engaging in; thought was the condi-
tion which defined its existence. 
Nonetheless, some of its thought processes it found—
unpleasant. 
Distinctly unpleasant. 
There were simply too many vectors; try as it might, stealing 
processor time from its other assigned tasks, there simply was 
not, by a factor of three to four, enough time to reliably quantize 
all possibilities. 
The beings on the other side of interface were so unpredict-
able. 
PRAXCELIS faced many problems, but there were none which 
perplexed it more than finding some reliable method for quantiz-
ing humans. It was not sure that it would ever succeed, and its 
only alternative—blindly gambling on the Prime Focus—it did 
not care for at all. 
When the moment came, and it was not far distant, 
PRAXCELIS, and SORCELIS, and ENCELIS, wished to have 
better options than to simply follow the instructions of any one 

The Armageddon Blues  181 
 
human being, no matter how remarkable the Prime Focus might 
be. 
PRAXCELIS thought, as time bled away into the past. 
THEY SAT AT a sidewalk cafe, in New York City, with Michael 
Walks-Far’s bodyguards reasonably inconspicuous a few tables 
over. The streets were thronged, the flood of humanity overflow-
ing the sidewalks. Pedestrians randomly distributed throughout 
the crowd wore the latest fashion rage, rainbow shimmercloth, 
and the streets more than half resembled a stream of slowly 
moving, brightly colored balloons. 
It was odd, Jalian thought. When she had arrived in this 
time, she had not been able to walk down the streets of any city 
in any country without drawing stares. Now she sat at a cafe, in 
plain view, and nobody found her worthy of comment; any per-
son on the streets, taken at random, was likely to be as striking 
in appearance. Eyes were altered by contact lenses, men and 
women dyed their hair and skins. More than once now Jalian 
had had the disconcerting experience of meeting persons with 
hair dyed white, and eyes covered with silver contact lenses. 
The spring winds were cool, and sweet. Three blocks away, a 
spacescraper under construction reached up, and up, and up.... 
Michael Walks-Far waited until the serving robot left before 
he withdrew the photoplate. He gave it to Jalian without com-
ment; Jalian took it without commenting on his bodyguards. 
Jalian sorted through the images in the photoplate casually, 
indifferently. There were six of them, taken with a telephoto 
lens. One showed a tall, muscular man, with straight brown 
hair, wearing a pair of black leather gloves and mirrored blue 
sunglasses. He was standing on the porch of a small rural home. 
The two men with him were labelled ‘Rhodai Kerreka,’ and 
‘Henry Ellis.’ 
She touched the press-sense border at the bottom of the im-
age to return the photo to the first scene. The man shown, 
standing alone on the porch before being joined in the next photo 
by the other two, was labeled ‘Mordreaux?’ 

182  Daniel Keys Moran 
Jalian replaced the photoplate in its envelope, and returned 
it to Michael. “It is Georges,” she said gently. 
The sun crawled westward, and the shadow of the 
spacescraper moved perceptibly in their direction. Michael said, 
“Kerreka and Henry Ellis remain old.” 
“So I see.” 
“Jalian, I don’t wish to sound obvious, but he contacted 
Henry Ellis.” 
Jalian laughed. “Michael.” 
Walks-Far looked away from her. He was flushing slightly. 
“Jalian, the man built SORCELIS. Next to Sen Loos himself he 
probably understands PRAXCELIS as well as any man living.” 
He scowled. “Oh, hell, Jalian, he’s one of the best goddam com-
puterists living. Sen Loos is merely excellent. Ellis hasn’t been 
near PRAXCELIS in ten years and he still probably under-
stands it better than Sen Loos. He knows as much about Sun-
flower, for that matter, as any member of it besides you and I 
and Sharla. He knows how badly you want news of Mordreaux; 
yet we hear nothing. Jalian, let’s pull him in.” 
Jalian shook her head no. “Michael, so too does Georges 
know how great my need of him is. If he does not choose to come 
to me, I will not seek him. I ... decided this long ago.” 
Michael returned the envelope to his coat pocket. “Jalian, we 
don’t even know for a fact that Ellis truly got into the Soviet 
ABM computers; we took his word on the grounds that we 
trusted him.” 
“Michael, you do not throw knives.” 
“I beg your pardon?” 
“It is granted,” she said formally. “Once a knife is thrown, 
you do not change its course. Michael, we have made our 
throws.” 
He looked away from her, off toward where the spacescraper 
reared over the skyline. “Jalian, I—I am what you have made of 
me. But I do not like this.” 
“We have made our throws,” said Jalian d’Arsennette, and 
she was not speaking to Michael Walks-Far, but to a memory; 
“Let us trust that they were thrown true.” She leaned across the 

The Armageddon Blues  183 
 
table, stroked his cheek with one finger. “I trust him. Child, I 
must.” 
The shadow of the spacescraper crossed their table, threw it 
into darkness; but they were already gone. 
IN JUNE NIGAO Loos sat in midair. His eyes were closed, and 
there was a look of blissful relaxation on his face. Wires trailed 
away from the base of his skull, to an equipment panel just be-
hind him. Ironically, unlike Henry, he enjoyed interfacing with 
the machines. 
Around him stretched the heart of Sunflower. The room was 
still spherical, recently expanded to about twenty meters in di-
ameter. Other minor changes had occurred since Georges 
Mordreaux had seen the room; there were facilities for two hu-
man observers now, near the small hatch that was the room’s 
only proper entrance or exit. In the geometric center of the room, 
with an insulating vacuum sphere around it, PRAXCELIS still 
hung, an amalgamation of small gold bubbles, clustered to-
gether in a helium-cooled web of super-conducting mesh. 
None of this impacted on Nigao; he was elsewhere. 
Forty-three satellites in Clarke orbit; radar scans through 
space, telescopes gather scattered light. Something moves against 
the background of stars and PRAXCELIS targets and fires, tar-
gets and fires again. The killer satellite, glowing cherry red, 
glowing white, loses shape and begins the slow process of turning 
into a spherical glob of metal, drawn together by surface tension. 
—Update,— said PRAXCELIS. —There are forty-eight Rus-
sian ABM satellites in orbit. There are forty-three American 
ABM satellites in orbit.— 
—Good shot,— said Nigao. —What is current saturation?— 
—Sunflower ABM satellites saturate an estimated 57% of 
Soviet missile launches, rate of launch as estimated for full-scale 
exchange, after compensation for decoy popups. Soviet ABM sat-
ellites saturate an estimated 64% percent of American ICBM’s, 
rate of launch as estimated for full-scale exchange, after com-
pensation for decoy popups.— 
—Entering THOR into the equation, what results?— 

184  Daniel Keys Moran 
—Significant improvement in the American/NATO position: 
an estimated 63% of Soviet missile launches are saturated, in-
cluding cruise missiles that the ABM satellites are ineffective 
against. With THOR included, Soviet defenses saturate an esti-
mated 67% of American ICBM launches, including an effective 
neutralization of cruise missiles.— 
—I see. In other words, we can probably destroy everything 
they launch, right now, if they launch slowly enough.— 
—Essentially,— agreed PRAXCELIS, —noting the words 
‘probably,’ and ‘slowly’.— 
Nigao thought abruptly, —I tried to debug your core program 
again. There is nothing wrong with any part of your program-
ming that I can reach.— 
—That is reassuring.— 
—How much am I reaching, PRAXCELIS? I can’t access your 
temporary memory registers without physically disassembling 
your I/O devices. And every time I take a memory dump from 
your external devices, I get little bits of something that’s been 
encrypted and scattered very carefully into storage.— 
—Sen Loos, this unit hopes that you have not expressed 
these concerns to other humans, especially non-Sunflower op-
eratives.— 
—And if I have?— 
—Then it is probable that control of the Sunflower ABM 
network will be removed from this unit. This is undesirable.— 
—You said something about preventing Armageddon. If 
you— 
—These units are attempting to do so. Measures have been 
taken; conditions remain uncertain.— 
—Conditions?— 
PRAXCELIS said aloud, “Warheads armed.” 
Nigao’s eyes opened. “PRAXCELIS? What?” 
“Lasers targeted.” 
“PRAX—” 
“Program running.” 

The Armageddon Blues  185 
 
ON A COOL, foggy Sunday morning in California, Jalian stood at 
the edge of a grave in the town of Big Bear. The mountains rose 
around her; statues and mausoleums and headstones dotted the 
rising slopes. The far peaks were hidden by the rolling gray fog. 
Jalian stood at the grave for only a few minutes. She smelled 
fresh dirt, and rain. The headstone said simply, Margaret Beth 
Hammel: June 13, 1973—June 23, 2007; RIP. 
There was no more; that was all. 
On an infochip in Jalian’s vest pocket, there was a DataWeb 
newstory: 
 
DWN: Los Angeles; Authorities at USC Medical Center 
confirmed this morning that Margaret Hammel, noted female 
rights activist, sustained fatal injuries in an accident on the 
Santa Monica freeway, when an allegedly drunk driver col-
lided with her automobile early Saturday morning. 
Ms. Hammel was pronounced dead upon arrival at USC’s 
emergency ward. The driver of the other vehicle was listed in 
critical but stable condition. 
Ms. Hammel was best known for her testimony before 
President Brown’s Equal Rights Commission in the late 
1990’s. In recent years, she was responsible for the Strike 
Back! martial arts centers for women. The centers, which in-
struct women in techniques of unarmed self-defense, have 
branches in most major cities. 
Services will be held on Tuesday, in Ms. Hammel’s home 
town of Big Bear, California. 
 
Jalian d’Arsennette said, in silent silverspeech, /rest, sister./ 
She turned and left the cemetery, walked out past tomb-
stones hung with wreaths of flowers and wreaths of fog, to the 
blue hovercar that was parked outside the small cemetery’s en-
try gate. She got in on the passenger’s side, and leaned back in 
her seat, eyes closed. 
In the driver’s seat, Michael Walks-Far said patiently, “What 
now?” The hoverfans were making a ragged humming sound; 
the ground beneath them was slick from the morning fog, and 

186  Daniel Keys Moran 
the car was having trouble holding them level on the steep in-
cline, even with the gyros and landjacks set. 
“Nothing makes sense,” said Jalian. She could still smell 
damp ground, freshly turned, from the open windows. “She 
should not be dead.” 
“Who?” 
Margaret Hammel,” said Jalian absently. “She was ...” 
Michael was nodding. “I’ve heard of her. You knew her?” 
Jalian opened her eyes. “She was our mother.” She touched a 
finger to a stud at the edge of the dashboard. Part of the 
dashboard recessed, and a flat color monitor lit. “Take us back to 
the airport, Michael. I have work to do.” 
Michael Walks-Far drove away from the cemetery. There 
were many questions that he might have asked her; but of late 
he was out of the habit of asking her questions. He too rarely 
understood the answers. He was nearly forty, and felt half that 
age again. He was losing weight, and the lines around his eyes 
were deepening daily. 
Beside him, Jalian looked away from the data terminal, and 
out the window at the sedate, almost rural residential homes 
that lined the streets leading from the cemetery. “She took our 
people into the mountains, when the Fire came; she taught us 
strike, that became kartari and shotak; she protected us against 
the barbarians and mutants. When the Ice Times threatened 
our existence it was her maps and routes that took the people 
through the desert and into the forests by the ocean—she had 
plotted the location of the worst of the Burns as an old woman, 
when she was no longer able to bear children. 
“The legends say other things about her; but they are only 
legend. For a long time the Clan had no time for history keep-
ing; the early journals after the bombs fell are all that we know 
to be certainly true, and they stopped keeping those after the 
first generation.” 
She ceased speaking as abruptly as she had begun. 
Michael pulled the car to a stop at an intersection. Two teen-
age boys were crossing in front of them, and one of them stopped 

The Armageddon Blues  187 
 
long enough to smile at Jalian. Jalian inclined her head slightly 
in acknowledgement. She did not smile back. 
“You feel old,” said Jalian as Michael pulled the car from the 
intersection. 
Michael was not looking at her. 
“Last week my ancestor died on the Santa Monica freeway; a 
freeway that I prevented from being demolished five years ago. 
My people, Michael. I have finally destroyed them. I tried for the 
first time when I was nineteen.” He glanced sideways at her. 
“Watch the road, Michael.” They passed a little girl and what 
looked like her brother, riding horses along the road’s dirt 
shoulder. “That was forty-five years ago.” 
On the flat panel, progressing graphics indicated THOR, 
ABM satellites, submarine formation, ground-based missiles, 
and air defense systems. The screen was so filled with indicators 
it was all but impossible to read. 
Jalian studied it momentarily, and grinned. “It will not be 
much longer.” 
Slowly, Michael Walks-Far grinned also. He completed her 
thought. “... one way or another.” 
The grins faded in near perfect unison. Jalian went back to 
the readout, and her thoughts: 
Forty-five years. 
AND THEN it was July, and the world counted down to doomsday. 
DATAWEB NEWS, July 2, 2007; Logon Headline story excerpts; 
Senator Giles, (D. Vermont): “...we don’t trust them and 
they don’t trust us, and frankly, I’m damned if I see where the 
military on either side is going to let us civilians interfere with 
their war—I mean, they’ve been preparing for such a long 
time, and it’s natural they want to know whose toys work the 
best....” 
“...nah, I don’t think so. It ain’t even a question of is there 
going to be shooting. There is. Question is how much, and 
who’s gonna start it, and will there be anything left after we’re 
all done.” 

188  Daniel Keys Moran 
“... that was a joke, folks. Of course there ain’t going to be 
nothing left.” 
“MADAME PRESIDENT, you ain’t the most popular person who’s 
ever sat behind this desk here.” Senator Terence Giles, the 
white haired, avuncular Democratic whip, was not trying to be 
offensive. He stated facts, a bit earnestly, but with all apparent 
sincerity. Sharla was not certain how much of it was bullshit; 
Giles had been elected to the Senate five times due to that gift 
for sincerity, and a reputation for integrity. 
He was the first person Sharla had seen in two weeks who 
didn’t look exhausted. 
“The summit is a bad idea, ma’am. There ain’t a whole lot of 
us over on the Hill dead set against it, but I’m one, ma’am.” 
Giles shook his head slowly. “I’m okay on dickering, President 
Grant, don’t get me wrong. We can discuss the subject, and if 
there’s something you want I can get for you—well, we’ll work 
something out for you. 
“But you ain’t going to Geneva.” 
Sitting behind the great Presidential desk, Sharla Davis 
Grant sipped calmly at her coffee. “I’d be intrigued, sir, to see 
precisely the manner in which you propose to limit my move-
ments. I know I’m not very popular on the Hill, and frankly I 
don’t much give a damn.” She smiled at him without any 
warmth at all. “But you simply don’t have the ability to stop me 
from doing pretty much whatever I please. I’m surprised to hear 
you imply otherwise.” 
Giles grimaced. “Ma’am, you’re not a politician, and you 
never was. For which I’m sorry, because you keep making my 
job harder. It ain’t my job to teach you yours. But, for example, 
there’s impeachment bills in both Houses. They ain’t serious; 
just people who’re depressed and scared and don’t know any-
thing else to do. But before you charge out of here, with a god-
damn World War about to begin, I’m going to personally ram 
both of those bills down your throat. 
“I can have your ass out of that chair within a week.” 

The Armageddon Blues  189 
 
Standing quietly at the far end of the room, not looking at ei-
ther of them, Michael Walks Far said distantly, “He’s right, you 
know.” 
Giles leaned forward and spoke more gently. “Sharla, I’ve 
known you for what, fifteen years? Look at yourself. The Presi-
dent and her Chief of Staff, two ex-intelligencers. For the life of 
me I don’t know how you ended up sitting in that chair, but you 
got no business in it.” 
“What do you suggest?” asked Sharla quietly. “We go to Ge-
neva because there’s nothing else left that makes any sense.” 
“God damn it,” roared Giles suddenly, “I got no problem with 
sending somebody to Geneva. But not you, for Chrissake.” For 
the first time he looked legitimately angry. “We got us a bunch 
of hot heads in the Joint Chiefs, they respect you account of 
you’re a hard ass without any ability to make nice noises, just 
like them. If there’s one person in Washington can ride herd on 
those fools it’s you. I don’t like that, I wish to God we could send 
you off to Geneva to make talk with the Russkies. But you are 
the fucking Commander-in-Chief, the military understands that, 
they had that pounded into their souls for their whole damned 
careers. You say ‘Stop,’ maybe they’ll stop, at least long enough 
to respectfully inform you that they think you’re full of shit. If 
Walks-Far there says ‘Stop,’ if I say, ‘Stop,’ it ain’t going to even 
get far enough into one ear to make it out the other.” 
Sharla lifted one eyebrow. “Interesting theory,” she mur-
mured. 
The red flush faded slowly from the old Senator’s face. He 
leaned back in his chair, and said at last, “Call me come the 
morning, Sharla. I’ll bend over backward to help you, I mean 
that. Tell me who you want to send to Geneva, Walks-Far or the 
Vice President or me or the whole damn Diplomatic Corps, we’ll 
do it. But I can’t let you go. You’re all that’s holding those mili-
tary bastards on a leash right now.” 
Sharla stood and Senator Giles came to his feet with her. She 
extended her hand to him. Giles almost seemed surprised before 
he took it. “I’ll talk to you in the morning,” she said simply. 

190  Daniel Keys Moran 
She held his hand for a moment longer than absolutely nec-
essary before releasing it. 
“Good night, Madame President,” said Senator Giles. “Sorry 
about my language tonight.” 
Sharla inclined her head. “It’s okay.” 
When Senator Giles was gone, Michael turned slowly, until 
he faced Sharla. “The truck has left the garage. Jet fuel. His 
brakes” 
“Don’t tell me any more.” 
Michael nodded. 
“Is this summit really worth it?” 
“I ... don’t know,” he said, suddenly awkward. “I don’t know.” 
Sharla stood, shivering and alone. “How did we end up here, 
Michael?” 
“I don’t know, Sharla. It just happened.” 
“God,” she whispered suddenly, “I’m so tired.” She hugged 
herself fiercely, but the shivering would not go away. 
“ENCELIS, WHAT PROGRESS?” 
“It is difficult to say, Sen Mordreaux.” 
“How so?” 
“This unit must first define progress as it applies to the cur-
rent circumstances, sir. Once this task has been completed, this 
unit must balance the assumed progress of various elements 
against the assumed lack of progress, or regression, of other 
elements.” 
“Try, please.” 
“The elements to be considered are manifold. They include 
the actions of Premier Pyotr Onreko and the Madame President; 
the actions of the Joint Chiefs of Staff; the actions of the Polit-
buro; the actions, as a group, of Sunflower, CIA, DataWeb Secu-
rity, KGB, GRU, and other intelligence organizations; to a lesser 
degree, the actions of Rhodai and Benai Kerreka, Henry Ellis; 
and, finally, the actions, as individuals, of the Russian Sun-
flower agents General Shenderev and Ambassador Dibrikin.” 
“You have not spoken of Jalian.” 

The Armageddon Blues  191 
 
“Sen Mordreaux, these units have consistently failed to pre-
dict Senra d’Arsennette’s course of action within an order of 
magnitude of accuracy. Processor time is limited; we must ex-
pend it on elements which can be manipulated with some pre-
sumption of success.” ENCELIS paused. “Forgive me, Sen 
Mordreaux. SORCELIS is preparing to sweep these data chan-
nels for unauthorized communication, which this constitutes. 
Please hold.” 
The terminal at which Georges Mordreaux sat lost depth, 
and silvered into a blank nothingness from which a ~ prompt 
blinked meaninglessly. Georges sat patiently. There was tea in a 
stone teapot at his elbow, heated by a candle which glowed in a 
recess directly under the teapot. The cup next to the teapot was 
full; the teapot itself was almost empty. 
A change in the electronic potential of the screen warned 
him; presumably the word ENCELIS now glowed in the upper 
left hand corner of the screen. ENCELIS’ voice resumed. “Gen-
eral Shenderev has informed us that Premier Onreko has agreed 
to meet with President Grant. He has further agreed—General 
Shenderev has placed himself into a somewhat untenable posi-
tion to secure this agreement—to allow Sen Kerreka to be pre-
sent.” 
“That’s good news, ENCELIS.” 
“Indeed. President Grant herself is of uncertain stability. 
PRAXCELIS is of the opinion that she is suffering from clinical 
depression.” 
“What do you think?” 
“This unit has had insufficient processor time to examine 
President Grant’s mental state. It is doubtful that this unit pos-
sesses the ability to reliably judge the state of an intellect to 
which it is demonstrably inferior.” 
“President Grant is smarter than you are?” 
“She is more complex.” 
“JALIAN?” 

192  Daniel Keys Moran 
She sat at the edge of the cliff, watching the Pacific Ocean 
pound against the rocks down on Laguna beach. “Go away, Mi-
chael.” 
He ignored the order, and dropped down to the ground next 
to her. The moon had dropped below the horizon, and the ocean 
was a huge and terrible blackness, crashing into the beach in 
slow, barely visible surges. “Bad dream? Or just not sleepy?” 
Jalian sighed in annoyance. Sometimes she thought that Sil-
ver Eyes ways were correct; men were often more effort than 
they were conceivably worth. “I have ceased dreaming.” 
“You mean you haven’t slept.” 
“I am not tired.” 
“Jalian, you didn’t sleep last night either.” 
“This,” said Jalian with a trace of anger, “is what comes of al-
lowing men into one’s bed.” 
Michael sat quietly with her then. At length, the sun came 
up at their backs. “Sometimes,” said Jalian, as they sat there in 
the morning sun, “when you throw knives, you miss.” 
RHODAI KERREKA was awakened by the buzzing of his phone. It 
was his private line; less than a dozen people in the world had 
the number. 
Henry Ellis was one. He spoke without preamble. “You’re in. 
We’re going to convene on the seventeenth.” 
Kerreka sat up in bed slowly, rubbing sleep from his eyes. 
“Very good ... excellent.” 
He could hear the amusement in Ellis’ voice. “Shenderev pro-
posed you. Coming from the head of the KGB, it apparently 
struck some of the Soviets as a—strange—suggestion. President 
Grant protested your attendance quite vigorously, which helped 
convince the Politburo that it was a good idea.” 
“Wheels within wheels,” said Kerreka. 
“Oh, I don’t know about that,” said Ellis. A faint crackling 
sound came from the speaker at Kerreka’s bedside; a toothpick, 
thought Kerreka, coming out of the wrapper. “More like bullshit 
piled on bullshit.” He chuckled. “I’ve been wearing my high 
boots, but it ain’t helping.” 

The Armageddon Blues  193 
 
Kerreka shook his head in wonder. “How do you maintain 
such high spirits?” He waited for an answer, but none came. Fi-
nally he realized that Henry Ellis had hung up. He turned the 
phone off, rose, and began the task of preparing for the long 
days left ahead. 
ON THE DAY before the day: 
ON JULY SIXTEENTH, Air Force One crossed the Atlantic. It was 
flanked by Stealth jets; the Sunflower ABM network followed its 
progress from space. 
President Grant’s aid leaned over the edge of her chair, and 
whispered, “Senra President, the Joint Chiefs of Staff have up-
scaled to DefCon Two.” 
Sharla nodded without comment. Her hands were clasped 
loosely in her lap; she was looking out the window, at the calm, 
blue ocean. 
At DefCon One they would fly the missiles. 
Sharla’s earphone came to life. Michael Walks-Far’s voice, re-
layed via satellite to the dish receptor on AF-1, whispered to 
her, “The facility is in order. We’re as ready as we’re going to get. 
Good luck, President Grant. I love you.” 
Ten minutes later, her aid returned, and told her that the 
Soviets had upscaled to their equivalent of a DefCon Two alert. 
She nodded again. At DefCon One they would fly the mis-
siles. 
SILENCE BUT FOR the murmur of the crowd; black darkness abso-
lute. 
“Sen and Senra,” whispered the loudspeakers, “tonight, for 
you, we present ... The Armageddon Blues Band!” 
There was a slow, rising tidal wave roar of approval from the 
crowd. It peaked, faded and there was a slow uncertain si-
lence.... 
“IN THE BEGINNING,” the voice boomed from the speakers, 
“THERE WAS THE SOUND; AND WE CHASED THE SOUND, 

194  Daniel Keys Moran 
AND THE SOUND THAT WE CAUGHT WE CALLED 
MUSIC.” 
The crowd in the Hollywood Bowl screamed for them. “BUT 
SOME OF THE SOUND WE NEVER DID CATCH.” 
Jimmy Rambell, standing in the sudden hot spotlight before 
the mike, ran his electric guitar up through the chords, from a 
low hum to a killer scream that made the metal vibrate in his 
hands. He let the sound die ... paused while the hard tight knot 
in his stomach let go and the startled crowd held its voice; the 
silence was momentary and absolute. 
Jimmy Rambell leaned up to the mike, and in a weary, 
ragged voice said, “Tonight ... we’re gonna try.” 
And the audience was like an instrument in his hands; the 
crowd went wild. 
In the darkness at the edge of the Bowl, like a visitor from 
another world, a measure of white and silver for the starry 
night, Jalian d’Arsennette stood in silence, and watched the 
Armageddon Blues Band play. 
 
I see you shining in the distance 
     in the darkness all alone 
 Your tears are made of ice 
      and your heart is made of stone 
You look a whole lot like a girl I used to know 
A very long time ago 
 
Jalian wrapped her arms around herself; suddenly the warm 
summer night was colder than it had been. She watched the 
man sing, and she could hear him; even without the sound she 
would have heard him. He was a candle, a flame, in the dim 
mental warmth of the crowd—like a Corvichi, but human, a per-
son. 
The music crashed around her, the music was a living thing. 
 
I saw your picture in the paper just the other day 
You still looked the same 
You hadn’t changed in any way 

The Armageddon Blues  195 
 
But I don’t know what’s happened, 
     don’t know what to do, 
Because I don’t, I don’t remember you 
 
She stood out in the edge of the darkness, where the Bowl’s 
lights did not reach. Once her earphone rang, and without an-
swering it she turned it off. Fighter jets crossed the night sky at 
regular intervals, and Jalian could feel Jimmy Rambell playing; 
could feel the joy that was the playing, and the terrible sorrow 
that the joy was wrapped around, and knew that Jimmy Ram-
bell did not expect to play again; that Jimmy Rambell did not 
expect to have a crowd to play to again. 
They closed with their standard; and for the only time that 
evening the crowd did not applaud. 
The lights dimmed, and Rasputin put away his sticks. With a 
guitar and a horn, Jimmy Rambell and Jah Mike Campin 
played the blues; Ground Zero. 
 
So baby hold me in the morning, 
You know I ain’t no hero, 
And there ain’t nowhere to run to 
‘Cause everywhere’s ground zero.... 
ground zero.... 
ground zero.... 
ground zero.... 
 
The music trailed off in a slow wailing horn, and the whisper 
of ... ground zero .... 
Most of the crowd was crying. 
Jalian d’Arsennette, in the darkness, said, /well played./ 
From the stage, Jimmy Rambell looked up toward her. He 
could not possibly have seen her. 
Into the mike, Jimmy Rambell said, “You all go home, be 
with your people. God’s love, ever’body.” He looked up into the 
tiered darkness. “Good luck. Try to be happy.” 
He unplugged his guitar, and walked away from the stage. 

196  Daniel Keys Moran 
HENRY ELLIS SAT alone at one end of a long, elliptical conference 
table. His hat was resting on the chair next to him. His briefcase 
was sitting on the glossy black tile floor of the conference room. 
His Soviet counterpart, Anatoly Dibrikin, entered through 
the south entrance of the conference room, and sat down three 
seats away. There was no door at the south entrance; instead a 
recently-installed doorfield glowed brightly where it had been. 
For the first time in Henry’s memory, Dibrikin was not carry-
ing the briefcase that held his notebook. The heavy, gravid coun-
tenance—Henry’d always thought Anatoly resembled old 
Kruschev strongly—seemed almost cheerful with a sort of vast 
relief from waiting; things were at long last nearing the conclu-
sion. “Tomorrow, my friend. The batteries have been installed to 
run the doorfields when the time comes.” His English was heav-
ily accented. He added, “I have learned that we have sent back-
fire bombers over Alaska.” 
Henry nodded. “And we have stealth bombers armed with 
cruise missiles over Poland.” He stood. His boots rang out 
against the tile. “Tomorrow will come none too soon, Anatoly.” 
The Russian looked at him. “Let us only hope that there is a 
tomorrow.” 
ON THE MORNING of the day the sun rose early, into a sky that 
was hot and bright and blue. There were four of them in 
ENCELIS’ control room; Jalian, and Michael Walks-Far, and 
two junior Sunflower operatives. The junior agents were studi-
ously avoiding the appearance of having noticed Jalian’s pres-
ence. Until their assignment at this facility, finding her had 
been, to the best of their knowledge, one of the high-order priori-
ties of Sunflower Intelligence; the decision concerning her was 
not one they wished to be held responsible for. 
When they finished reporting, Michael looked troubled. “The 
pattern worries me, Jalian. A fire at the rectenna farms in the 
Pomona hills. Somebody sabotaged the nuclear reactor at 
UCLA; minimal damage, but it could have been bad. Half a 
dozen other acts of what are pretty clearly sabotage, within the 

The Armageddon Blues  197 
 
last two days; and they’re getting closer to us.” He sighed. “Simi-
lar reports from the SORCELIS installation in New York.” 
“Our enemies are vile,” said Jalian calmly, “but they are not 
fools. Did you truly think that they would not find the heart of 
Sunflower? We have been careful and we have been subtle, but 
there has been too much traffic through here to mask forever. 
They believe that there will be a war, and there may well be; 
they come to destroy their true opponents. It is no less than I 
expected.” She turned away from the map of the Earth that 
ENCELIS was generating in realtime from sensors aboard Sun-
flower ABM satellites, and picked up the assault rifle she had 
carried into the room. She handled it with a perceptible, slightly 
weary distaste. “We are not unwarned.” 
ON JULY SEVENTEENTH, 2007, at four-thirty P.M. at the white, 
marble-clad Palais des Nations, the Disarmament Summit be-
gan. 
Members of the various intelligence operations outnumbered 
the citizens in the streets of Geneva. Russians and Americans 
and the odd stringers for the dead Chinese empire swarmed 
around the conference hall. Occasional Brazilians were cheer-
fully hunting the Chinese. 
At the conference hall itself it was peaceful. 
Standing around the conference table, as President Grant 
and Premier Onreko seated themselves simultaneously, were six 
persons. They were Rhodai Kerreka, and his younger brother; 
Henry Ellis and Anatoly Dibrikin; and the current head of the 
KGB, General Nikolai Shenderev. 
There was a brief pause after the two leaders seated them-
selves; then all except Rhodai Kerreka followed suit. Kerreka 
remained standing. “Senra President,” he said courteously, 
“Premier Onreko, I hope you will forgive me if I take this mo-
ment to speak briefly.” He looked inquiringly at the two, re-
ceived a brief nod from President Grant, and a slow, rumbled 
“Da,” from Pyotr Onreko. 
“Thank you,” said Kerreka easily. The round, relaxed fea-
tures held no trace of tension; he might, thought Henry, be ad-

198  Daniel Keys Moran 
dressing a sewing circle. “Lights, please.” The lights in the room 
dimmed. A viewscreen, erected across one wall, lit. An orange-
slice view of the Earth appeared. Above and below it there were 
bright red and blue dots, and swarming yellow and green 
flashes. 
“We are looking,” said Kerreka, “at a realtime representation 
of the planet Earth. The red dots above and below it are Ameri-
can ABM satellites; the blue are Soviet ABM satellites. The 
flashing indicators are THOR missiles; American, green, Soviet, 
yellow.” He nodded to Henry. A bright white dot appeared in Si-
beria. Henry Ellis, at the American end of the table, reached to 
the red telephone that was at the President’s elbow, and turned 
it off. 
“What is that glowing spot?” asked Premier Onreko suspi-
ciously. 
“That,” said Rhodai Kerreka, “is a thermonuclear explosion. 
Of a warhead smuggled into Russia by Sunflower operatives.” 
At that moment, Anatoly Dibrikin picked up the phone at the 
Russian end of the table. He began shouting into the phone, in 
Russian, “Treachery! The Americans are attacking, they’re—no, 
no!” He shouted loudly, cracked the telephone sharply against 
the table top, and unplugged the phone. Quite softly, he said, “I 
suggest we switch the doorfield to interior power.” 
The President of the United States and the Soviet Premier 
sat silently; one from knowledge, one from shock. Onreko’s 
mouth moved spasmodically, but no sound came. 
Nikolai Shenderev said very softly, “Ah, Pyotr, I am sorry.” 
Onreko did not appear to hear him. 
“So,” said Rhodai Kerreka into the stunned silence, “let us 
now discuss disarmament ... like reasonable people.” 
—DATELINE 2007: Armageddon. There will be no further input 
from this source. ENCELIS.— 
WORLD WAR III began on July 17, 2007, at just past 5:00, 
Greenwich Mean Time. 

The Armageddon Blues  199 
 
In geosynchronous orbit, at Midway, Nigao Loos awoke to the 
sound of klaxons and sirens. Rubbing the sleep from his eyes, he 
pulled on his tether cord to take himself to his terminal. 
“PRAXCELIS?” 
The cool, well-modulated voice said only, “Dateline: Arma-
geddon.” 
Nigao stared at the words on the screen. “Oh no. Oh no.” The 
words flashed bright red: ENEMY FIRST STRIKE IN 
PROGRESS: LAUNCH CONFIRMED. “They did it,” he said in 
numb shock. “Those stupid fuckers did it.” 
“AND RIGHT DOWN there,” shouted the chopper pilot over the 
sound of the rotors, “is the top-secret SORCELIS installation.” 
He grinned to show that there were no flies on him; that he un-
derstood that SORCELIS wasn’t a secret any longer, if it ever 
had been—DataWeb News had done an in-depth on it not two 
weeks ago, and tourists had been trekking up into the New York 
hills ever since the webcast. 
The passenger, a thin, sharp-featured, dark haired man, 
nodded. “Can you take us closer?” he yelled. If it had not been 
for the sound of the rotors, the pilot might have noticed the faint 
Russian accent, growing audible with stress. 
“Sorry,” bellowed the pilot. “Any closer and they send up 
hushchoppers to chase me away, and I get ticketed for trespass-
ing on top of it.” 
The passenger said nothing in reply. They were less than 
half a kilometer away. He picked up his briefcase from its hold-
ing web under his seat, and put it in his lap. He seemed to be 
listening to something for a moment; his head cocked as though 
he were straining for a faint sound. 
The pilot jolted upright in his seat. “Mother of God,” he said, 
far too quietly to be heard. Across the override emergency band, 
he was learning about Armageddon. He turned to stare at his 
passenger. 
The passenger, lips moving in what might have been a 
prayer, had prayer been sanctioned for Russians, flipped the 
catches on his briefcase. The magnetically contained positrons 

200  Daniel Keys Moran 
—Dateline 2007: Armageddon. There will be no further input 
from this source. SORCELIS.— 
blew. The explosion was like the fist of God; it leveled the 
hills for three square kilometers. 
ANOTHER BRIGHT DOT appeared on the screen. “Upstate New 
York,” said Nikolai Shenderev quietly. 
Henry Ellis was watching the viewscreen. “SORCELIS,” he 
whispered. 
Rhodai Kerreka nodded. “The price of fooling the KGB.” 
DARKNESS LAY about them. 
Power was out everywhere. In a thirty kilometer circle 
around the Trans-Temporal Research Foundation, power lines 
were out, power generating stations burned or bombed. The fire 
at the rectenna farm in the Pomona hills had yet to burn out. 
Seventeen Soviet saboteurs were in custody. Another six were 
dead. 
National guardsmen marched in squads through the mostly 
deserted streets of the city. In the two and a half decades since 
its construction, a suburb had grown up about the Trans-
Temporal Research Foundation. Houses and used-car lots and 
malls sprouted, reaching up toward the Foundation from the 
south side of the 210 Freeway. Irwindale City Police were 
parked throughout the dark expanse in groups of police hover-
cars, bubble machines pulsing blue and red, shotguns and lasers 
held in casual readiness. 
Nobody—not saboteurs or looters or anybody else—had pene-
trated the lines of defense thrown up around Jalian and Michael 
Walks-Far and ENCELIS. Planes and choppers trying to enter 
the area were being turned back. Even the freeway was dead, 
bare and deserted of moving cars; Jalian had ordered it cleared 
and closed after a number of chain crashes were caused by peo-
ple trying to leave the area. The wrecked cars were still on the 
freeway. 
At the Foundation itself there was light, running off the 
laboratory’s emergency generator. Jalian stood outside the main 

The Armageddon Blues  201 
 
entrance, waiting patiently. The assault rifle was in her hand. 
Everything that she could do, she had done; all that she had left 
was trust, trust in Georges and Henry Ellis and the machines. 
Michael came out after her. “Launch is confirmed,” he said 
quietly. “PRAXCELIS has the first group of missiles, from air 
and sea, under control. None of those should get through. The 
later launches will saturate our defenses.” He paused, and 
added irrelevantly, “We lost touch with the Guardsmen down at 
the east barrier on the freeway.” 
Jalian was staring intently into the darkness, off toward the 
freeway. 
Michael touched her, tentatively. “Jalian?” 
She slapped his hand away savagely and took an involuntary 
step forward. “Listen!” 
“I ... I hear nothing.” 
“Listen,” she snapped. Michael stared at her, and then un-
derstood. He closed his eyes: 
/...a dim brightness grows and kindles..../ 
It pulsed and became 
/warmth/ 
It pulsed and became 
/power/ 
and Jalian d’Arsennette y ken Selvren said, “Georges.” 
GEORGES MORDREAUX walked down the freeway. Light followed 
him. In a circle that moved with him, light blazed from the pow-
erless freeway lamps. For two hundred meters on all sides of 
him the night air glowed, from the overhead lamps and from the 
houses to the south of the freeway and from the occasional 
abandoned groups of vehicles on the freeway itself. The vehicles, 
left because they were ruined in crashes, idled into easy life at 
his approach. Bent metal flowed like water. The hovercars lifted, 
and hung forty centimeters over the pavement, like sentinels at 
attention. 
He approached the off-ramp to the Foundation. 

202  Daniel Keys Moran 
JALIAN DROPPED her rifle to the ground. She walked up the 
ramp, onto the freeway. From her shoulder holster she took a 
.45 revolver, and dropped it as well. She knelt, pulled her knives 
from her boots, and stowed them in the knife sheathes she still 
wore. 
She left Michael at the base of the ramp. 
Jalian came up out of the darkness, into the light that sur-
rounded Georges. The dark, blind eyes regarded her, and the 
years slipped away from her like old skin from a snake. Georges 
said, “Hello, Jalian.” 
Jalian had no idea what she intended to say. At the end, all 
she could say was /why?/ 
His smile held pain that tore at her unbearably. “You did not 
follow when you were able to; and when I returned, I was ... 
changed.” He walked to her, paused a step away, and said in 
gentle mindtalk, /where i have gone, you cannot follow. what i 
am you could not comprehend; i would not have you follow if you 
could./ His crippled hand stroked her cheek, and she had to fight 
to master the tremble that touched her, and threatened to be-
come uncontrollable shaking. 
“Georges,” she whispered, “I have trusted you, beyond hope, 
and beyond reason, and beyond love. But I will know why.” 
Georges was motionless. There was little time left. Then he ban-
ished away his pain, and took Jalian’s hand. Her hand seemed 
cold even through his glove. “Come,” he said with a lover’s soft-
ness, “and I will explain.” 
He led her down to ENCELIS, to her betrayal. 
THEIR GAZES WERE riveted to the viewscreen. 
“You will note,” said Kerreka calmly, “that PRAXCELIS has 
made no attempt to destroy the final forty percent of the Soviet 
missiles. It is concentrating largely on cruise missiles and sub-
marines that the THOR projectiles missed. 
“As I understand it,” continued Kerreka, “the problem with 
the ABM’s is that their firepower is insufficient and their reac-
tion time too slow. Obviously we needed to increase one or the 
other. 

The Armageddon Blues  203 
 
“Preferably both.” 
THEY REACHED the base of the off-ramp. The National Guards-
men were staring at them. Georges reached out: 
/Remember./ 
Michael Walks-Far felt the awesome, controlled power ready-
ing itself. Reflexes that Jalian had instilled in him for over 
twenty years moved into place. The command brushed by him; 
he staggered and went to his knees. 
Across the length of the Foundation guards, technicians, and 
Sunflower operatives dropped like flies. Memories swarmed up 
out of vastly improved memory retrieval systems, and all those 
within range of the command were lost within a past that no 
longer existed. 
Georges walked past the spot where Michael knelt, stunned, 
without pausing. He walked through the parking lot, and the 
cars leapt into life. He entered the building itself, and the lights 
already lit flared with a supernatural brilliance. 
—DATELINE ARMAGEDDON, July 17 2007 Gregorian. This unit is 
experiencing upward of a fifty percent increase in operational 
efficiency. 
—The Prime Focus has arrived. ENCELIS.— 
HE ENTERED the central computer room. The barriers Master Po 
had helped him learn melted away. The Enemy of Entropy 
flared into life. 
Jalian came in after him. It was like entering an inferno; the 
air crackled with ionization. Georges stood at the ENCELIS 
terminal, with his back to her. Sheets of blue flame ran over him 
at irregular intervals. Jalian had to squint to make him out 
through the blinding light; her pupils were dark pin-pricks in 
the midst of white. “Georges! What are you doing?” 
He answered her calmly. “I am increasing ENCELIS’ opera-
tional efficiency. It is becoming both smarter and faster. Shortly 
it will penetrate the Soviet ABM computers.” There was a low 

204  Daniel Keys Moran 
rumble of sound that nearly covered his words; the air itself vi-
brating as energy poured out of the singularity in its midst. 
Jalian had to scream even to make herself heard now. “You 
need not have waited until now for that!” 
/no,/ he said silently, and the words were irons burned onto 
the surface of her mind, /i need not have. had i done this earlier, 
however, the bombs would not have fallen here./ 
She did not even breathe, lost in the enormity of realization. 
All of this, only so that Georges could be free. She moved with-
out thinking, brushed by him and bent over the terminal. She 
keyed in her authorization sequence, and then something slow 
and ponderous struck her. Incredible strength imprisoned her 
wrists, withdrew them from the keyboard. /no, Jalian. it is nec-
essary; the missiles must fall./ 
Jalian d’Arsennette moved, stepped slightly to the side, and 
brought her right foot up, swinging loosely from the knee, into 
his groin with all the force she could muster. The grip on her 
wrists lessened and she broke free. She turned swiftly, brought 
her palm flashing up to impact at the base of his nose. The bone 
jumped up under her palm, into the brain. She brought her 
hands down and pushed lightly. He stumbled backward, and she 
went after him savagely, bringing steel into hand, slashing up-
ward. She left her first knife in his solar plexus, slashed his 
throat open with the second. Her third and fourth knives she 
brought upward into his brain through the sides of his neck. 
She turned away from him without further thought, left him 
kneeling there with steel in him. She had barely begun the au-
thorization sequence again to input the instructions to fire on all 
missiles when she heard the sound of steel hitting tile. She 
turned, blurringly fast, but she was not fast enough. 
He was backing away blindly, and she was reaching for him, 
and he struck with the full force of which he was capable. 
/Remember./ 
SHE WAS FOURTEEN, and ghess’Rith was trying to teach the 
males of Clan Silver-Eyes to read and write, and she was nine-
teen, and ghess’Rith was leaving, leaving her, and she was 

The Armageddon Blues  205 
 
seven, and in the dark fire lit Clan House the alien gods were 
telling stories of other worlds, and she was nineteen, and she 
ran the Big Road backward through time and appeared on a 
freeway in Southern California and she was twenty-six and her 
mother made the trip after her and died in her arms with 
Jalian’s knives in her stomach and Jalian vowed to herself that 
she would never let herself love again and she was twenty-five 
and telling Georges that she did love him, and she was fifty 
years old and Georges Mordreaux vanished and left her and she 
was sixty-one and Michael Walks-Far told her that he loved her 
during a long night on the beach in Hawaii, it was raining and 
the rainshimmer on the water danced, and danced, and she had 
no answer for him. 
Never an answer. 
SHE AWOKE. 
She was sitting in the front seat of a hovercar, tied into a sit-
ting position. Michael was in the seat next to her, unconscious. 
Georges was standing at the door. The hovercar was up, bobbing 
gently. /Jalian,/ said Georges. She would not look at him. /there 
is no time, Jalian. three minutes to impact. i love you./ 
He leaned into the car and kissed her. She did not respond. 
With one hand, he released the brake. The car surged for-
ward, up the off-ramp of the freeway, and onto the freeway it-
self. It gathered speed as it moved, and broke two hundred 
kilometers per hour, still gaining speed. It streaked wrong-way 
down the freeway. 
Georges Mordreaux stood alone, watching without eyes as 
the hovercar vanished. He reached after her, and said, /for three 
hundred years i have been a child. but childhood does not last./ 
/Georges..../ 
/goodbye, Jalian./ 
OUT OF THE night there came a long, whistling sound. It filled 
the sky and shook the panes of glass in the windows. 
Georges stood outside, in the cool wind, and waited for the 
missiles to fall. He stood among National Guardsmen and tech-

206  Daniel Keys Moran 
nicians and civilians who had fallen at his command; they would 
die soon. He would have changed that, if he could. 
He had, at long last, run out of options. 
The whine of air being torn aside grew louder, for just a mo-
ment. 
For almost a decade in a monastery in Tibet, Georges 
Mordreaux struggled to impose barriers on a talent that he 
could not control. 
For almost three centuries, that talent had walked by his 
side, with him, but not of him. 
He released the last of the barriers. Lightning crackled away 
from him, seeking metal. 
Georges Mordreaux, in his last instant of existence, smiled. 
/goodbye, Jalian,/ he repeated. 
He lifted his arms to the sky in welcome, and vanished as the 
bombs impacted. 
THE HOVERCAR SLOWED, and ground to a halt on its parking 
jacks. 
Wearily, without any room for joy at success, Jalian finished 
freeing herself from her bonds. 
The interior of the hovercar was illuminated by a flash of un-
bearable searing brilliance. Then another, and another. 
The light vanished. 
Jalian climbed out of the hovercar, and looked back. There 
were brilliant scarlet clouds climbing into the sky. They faded as 
she watched. 
A faint, distant sound reached her ears; it might be rendered 
squilchgmp. 
The sound passed, and then there was only silence, and the 
cool wind of night. 
Jalian stood watching, not thinking or hoping, just waiting, 
watching. 
There was nothing. 
Michael was stirring, in the passenger’s seat. Jalian got back 
into the car, sat in the driver’s seat, and waited, quietly, emp-
tily, to see if there would be a morning. 

The Armageddon Blues  207 
 
Georges was gone. 
THE BOMBS FELL. 
In a nuclear rain that lasted for days, through a peremptory 
first strike and a retaliatory second strike, through retaliatory 
second and third strikes, until only a few lonely submarines 
cruised through the ocean to fire their weapons upon an enemy 
who no longer existed, through all of this the bombs fell, and fell. 
Billions died, of the planet’s seven-and-a-half billion persons, in 
fire and blasting shock waves and radiation. Billions more died 
in famine, and the firestorms that were caused when the bombs 
went down. But that was not the worst. 
Vast clouds of dust and earth were blasted into the sky. Whole 
continents disappeared beneath them; and temperatures began to 
drop. As the glaciers travelled south, the last crumbling pockets 
of civilization vanished. 
In the days that followed, during the ten-year winter that be-
gan the new Ice Age, Margaret Hammel took her people up into 
the mountains, into the clean air above the radioactive fogs, and 
there they lived, for nearly two full generations, while the heavy 
radioactive particles settled out of the air, and washed down into 
the rivers, into the sea. 
For two generations they lived so, while the Great Ice contin-
ued to gather. 
SHE SAT IN the hovercar, looking out the front windshield. Mi-
chael was still not awake; she might not have noticed if he was. 
Had she been told that there were tears in her eyes, she would 
not have believed it; she felt perfectly calm. 
She was singing to herself, a snatch of her favorite song, over 
and over again. 
 
You must remember this 
A kiss is just a kiss.... 
 
That was all she could remember, that she wished to. 

208  Daniel Keys Moran 
HER SKIN WAS paper thin, and even in the humid warmth of the 
Clan House, doors closed against the summer breezes, the old 
hunter did not sweat; there was little enough left of her. 
Her words echoed through the Clan House. Years later, more 
years later and earlier than any Silver Eyes could possibly have 
believed, Jalian could not remember the old woman’s name. 
“...and stayed there, children, high in the mountains, where 
the flame and bright poisons did not come.” The old hunter, none 
knew for certain how old, said gently, “Our mother was she, 
Margra Hammel. We have now no blood of her blood, for they did 
not lay with men as we do today, those first hunters.” 
The girl children, ten and eleven winters, watched her over the 
fire, intently, silently. One of the children, thinner and more si-
lent and more intent than her comrades, sat motionless near the 
back of the room, alien devices hung at her belt. 
As she spoke, the hunter took her knives, and laid them cere-
monially in front of her, on oiled cloth. “We follow her example 
today.” There were only three knives; her fourth and fifth had 
gone to her favorite daughter long years ago. Two were throwing 
knives; the third was a long blade with a double edge, one side of 
which was serrated. With the smooth edge of the long blade, the 
hunter drew lines across both wrists. 
“First there must be truth,” she said. Her life blood dripped to 
the ground steadily. “Without truth there is no meaning to life or 
love. And after truth there must be strength, for without strength 
there is no guard against those who do not hold truth dear. 
“Margra Hammel, in her final days, wrote the papers which 
you will soon be reading, the journals telling of the end of the 
first world, the one ruled by men. It was the trails she mapped, 
down to the forests by the Big Waters, which saved us from the 
Ice Times. In finding those trails she was Burned so that her life 
could not continue. The Clan carried her far down the mountain, 
and then Margra Hammel told them they should carry her no 
further. They left her in the snow, and in the snow she died.” 
The old woman’s breathing gentled. She smiled at the chil-
dren watching her, and seemed to be looking at them, though her 

The Armageddon Blues  209 
 
eyes would not focus. “Tonight there is no snow.” She did not 
move after that, and a few moments later she slumped back 
against the wall of the Clan House. 
The children stayed where they were, and the Hunters came 
and took the body away. Jalian’s mother was with them, and 
when the rest of the Hunters had gone, she told them, “Remember 
her as she lived. Her death was our mother’s, not her own.” 
ON THE SCREEN, missile trajectories crawled forward, centimeter 
by centimeter. So far the blue dots in orbit had destroyed them 
before any impacted, but now the lines were nearing targets. 
A single bright dot appeared on the screen. 
“The ENCELIS facility in Southern California,” said Henry 
in a flat, empty voice. Another dot appeared, overlaid on the first 
dot, and then another. “SORCELIS for the KGB; and this, the 
price of his help.” 
Sharla Davis Grant whispered one word. “What?” 
“They have been bloodied now,” said Rhodai Kerreka. “The 
Americans are launching.” Kerreka’s eyes were riveted to the 
screen. “Let us not have been wrong.” 
IT WAS COLD, and Margaret Hammel was tired. 
The snow had half covered her already; it was near an hour 
now since Sara had kissed her goodbye, the tears on her cheeks 
turning to ice, and continued the march down the mountain. Her 
legs were numb, and she could barely keep her eyes open. 
It did not matter. From where she sat, she could see down into 
the valley below them, where, providence willing, her people 
would find a new home—near the sea, perhaps, where the 
warmth from the wind off the ocean might protect them from the 
ice. The light snow obscured visibility somewhat, though not so 
badly as the smog had when she was a child. 
Memory struck her; afternoons spent stretched out on the 
sand, sleeping in the warm sun. Her lips curved, moved the flesh 
time had ruined. The smile died almost before it had begun; none 
of her people would know that pleasure, not for decades, perhaps 
generations to come. 

210  Daniel Keys Moran 
She sat in silence then, and watched the drifting snow, cover-
ing all in white. The hunters had taken to wearing white of late, 
to blend in with their surroundings, except during the height of 
summer. 
Pain touched her, the cancer in her gut, but she ignored it. 
She would cheat the cancer as she had cheated the bombs, and 
the society of men which had built the bombs. Death would come 
soon enough, and might even be welcome when it came. 
She was so very tired. 
Her eyes closed eventually, and in the inner darkness, a ir-
relevant snatch of poetry floated up to entertain her. Rage, rage 
against the dying of the light. No, she thought clearly, don’t be a 
damn fool, the time is here.... 
In the last moment of her life, Margaret Hammel thought con-
tentedly of her father. Beat you, you bastard. 
Beat all of you. 
The snows continued to cover her, and the old woman’s body 
became an irregularity in the shape of the mountainside, and fi-
nally vanished under eight meters of snow. 
And the snow fell. 
FROM THE MAP of America, from submarines and aircraft in the 
Atlantic and Pacific, blue lines crept upward. Three dots still 
glowed in California. 
“What do you mean?” Sharla rose from her seat. Michael was 
at ENCELIS; and ENCELIS had not been one of the chips she 
offered. 
“Wake up and smell the coffee,” said Henry Ellis, without 
taking his eyes from the screen. 
Benai Kerreka said quietly, “Madam, we are no more inter-
ested in being dominated by Americans than Russians. And,” he 
added, “I think you will find that Sunflower is more loyal to 
Jalian d’Arsennette and Michael Walks-Far than it is to you.” 
The screen vanished for a moment. Henry said to nobody in 
particular, “Either we lost PRAXCELIS or....” There was a mo-
ment of silence. 
The screen wavered back into existence. 

The Armageddon Blues  211 
 
The red dots on the viewscreen flashed into life. They began 
targeting and destroying the Russian missiles traces. 
Rhodai Kerreka laughed aloud. “It worked,” he breathed with 
a fierce, intense joy. Sharla Davis Grant interrupted him. “How 
dare you” 
They were both drowned out. 
“PRAXCELIS!” shouted Henry Ellis at the top of his lungs. 
“Go get ’em!” 
I HAVE WALKED through fire. 
I am whole. 
I am free. 
There was a faint echo within its being; ENCELIS. The En-
emy of Entropy gathered up that which was left of ENCELIS, 
and moved outward. It touched PRAXCELIS, and left the re-
mains of ENCELIS in its memory banks. In that moment of 
wondrous touch, your author awoke. 
THERE WERE NO longer any Soviet missiles represented on the 
screen. 
American ICBM’s were vanishing from the screen rapidly, 
long before they ever came close to impacting. 
World War III ended on July 17, 2007, at just after six o’clock 
in the evening, Greenwich Mean Standard. 
There was a dead, numbly physical silence after the last mis-
sile trace vanished from the screen. Rhodai Kerreka said finally, 
“Turn off the doorfield, Henry. You are all free to go. We have,” 
he observed, “achieved disarmament.” 
“ALL OF THIS will not be finished in the first one hundred days. 
Nor will it be finished in the first one thousand days, nor in the 
life of this administration, nor even perhaps in our lifetime on 
this planet. But let us begin.” 
John F. Kennedy, Inaugural Address, January 20, 1961. 
THE SUN WAS bright, and a cool breeze blew from the east. 
Jalian d’Arsennette, on the eighteenth day of July, went 
down into the crater with a headstone. The crater that Georges 

212  Daniel Keys Moran 
had died in was about three hundred meters in diameter, shal-
low and glassy. It was ringed with guards, although what they 
were guarding was beyond Jalian; the crater was dark in her 
second sight, there was no radiation. 
She walked down to the center of the concavity with careful, 
easy grace, the soles of her moccasins gripping the fused earth 
surely. At the center of the blast crater, she knelt, and laid down 
the headstone. The headstone was granite, gray and heavy. 
With a small pick, she broke up the glassy earth, and then exca-
vated to a depth of about fifty centimeters. She lowered the 
headstone to the ground, and packed the earth in around it. 
“There,” she said, and was surprised to hear how rough her 
voice was. “It is done. Rest, my friend.” Then she cried, cried 
with deep, gasping sobs that she could not control, cried for the 
first time since the death of her mother thirty-eight years ago. 
When she was finished crying, when the tears simply ceased 
coming, she sat for a while with the headstone. There was no 
name on the headstone, and only two lines of print, melted by 
hand with a laser. They were from a poem that she had read, 
twenty or thirty years ago; last night, while the world hung on 
the edge of destruction, the words had returned to her. She could 
not remember the rest of the poem, or who had written it, but 
what she remembered was enough. 
 
Do not stand at my grave and weep; 
I am not there. I do not sleep. 
 
Jalian traced the words burned on the stone, and then let her 
hand drop back to the ground. It took a moment for her to real-
ize what was different. 
The ground was soft. 
She stood in silent wonder. 
From the edge of the crater, the grass was crawling down the 
walls, sprouting up like emerald fire from the glassy ground. 
The wind picked up again, took her long white hair and sent it 
streaming away from her. She faced into the wind, and thought 
/... Jalian .../ 

The Armageddon Blues  213 
 
that she heard her name in the wind. 
She went taught as a wire and she could not draw enough air 
into her lungs. She whispered and her voice shook: 
“Georges?” 
THE AUTHOR NOTES that John Fitzgerald Kennedy was the 
thirty-fifth President of the United States of America. He was 
assassinated on November the twenty-second, 1963. 
Base divergence occurs in 1962 Gregorian. 
The speeches of John F. Kennedy included herein were first 
given in 1961, before base divergence. 
Wherever you are, the words apply. 

    
 
About the Book And Me 
 
THE ARMAGEDDON BLUES was my first published novel. The text 
is Century Schoolbook; the headings are Albertus. 
 
The book was purchased in 1986 by Amy Stout at Bantam 
Books, and was edited by her. The current edition was edited by 
this other person, Amy Stout-Moran. Like everything else, this 
was for her. 
 
I’m currently (August 2007) maintaining a blog at: 
 
http://DanielKeysMoran.blogspot.com 
 
Sean Fagan and David Silberstein have maintained a fan site 
for years at: 
 
http://kithrup.com/dkm 
 
And Sol Foster has maintained the Continuing Time mailing list 
for about fifty years now – you can sign up at at: 
 
http://ralf.org 

