On 
Sequoia 
Time 
 
BY DANIEL KEYS MORAN 

 
 
This is a work of fiction. None of the characters in it are real 
people and any resemblance to anybody, living or dead, is a 
coincidence – though my grandfather, R.D. Montgomery, did 
own a ranch in Arizona. 
 
It is the author’s intention that this work should be freely 
downloadable, copyable, and shareable, in its originally pub-
lished format as an Adobe Acrobat file. It may not be repro-
duced, shared, or transmitted for a fee by any party to whom 
the author has not contractually granted permission. The au-
thor retains all other rights.  
 
Copyright © 1996 by Daniel Keys Moran 

On 
Sequoia 
Time 
 

 
 
John Muir called the sequoia the “king 
of all the conifers of the world, the no-
blest of a noble race.”  The trees were 
named for the Cherokee chief Se-
quoyah, the man who invented the 
Cherokee alphabet. 
 
They are the largest and very nearly the 
oldest of all living things. 

 
 
- 1 - 
WHEN MY GRANDFATHER CHARLES was seven years old he first 
saw the box canyon where he would spend most of his adult life, 
the canyon where he would plant the tree. 
It was late afternoon on Wednesday, July 2, 1924, that 
Charles saw the entrance, and a little bit inside. They were driv-
ing a two-lane, poorly paved road through northern Arizona. 
(They were moving from Idaho to California. After twelve years 
of trying to make the same sixteen acres of Idaho farmland feed 
his family, with a little left over to sell, my great-grandfather 
had seen the writing on the wall, and packed it in.) Charles sus-
pected they were lost, but from the way the muscles in his fa-
ther’s neck were standing out he knew better than to say any-
thing about it. 
Charles had very good eyes in those days, and when he 
pointed the canyon’s entrance out to his older sister she could 
not see it. 
They sat in the back seat of a battered old Model T, a car that 
had probably come off the assembly line looking old. It wouldn’t 
go faster than forty miles an hour and it complained above 
thirty. Aside from their clothes and some boxes of kitchen uten-
sils tied on top of the car it was the only thing their family 
owned. 
His sister Abby peered out the dirty window at the place 
where two mesas came together, about four or five miles off. 
“Right there,” Charles insisted. “There’s a opening in there and 
you could go inside, maybe.” 
“I don’t see it,” said Abby crossly, and that was the end of the 
matter. 
WHEN HE WAS TWENTY-NINE my grandfather came back looking 
for the canyon. It was the summer of 1946; World War II was 
over, and Charles had just gotten out of the Marine Corps. 
His eyesight wasn’t as good as it had been as a child. Four 
years of constant studying in college had damaged his vision, 
and it had gotten worse during the campaign to take Okinawa 

Page 2 
Moran 
 
from the Japanese. He’d broken his glasses early on and had to 
work and fight without them for several months; it had nearly 
cost him his life. 
He went hunting for the canyon with binoculars and a brand 
new pair of glasses, a parting gift from Uncle Sam. 
It took him a good part of the summer just to find the road on 
which his family had come to California. He drove a black pre-
war Packard that reminded him sometimes of the Model T in 
which his family had moved to California. It ran a bit faster but 
it was just as ugly and beat up. 
The hunt for the road took up most of his time. There were a 
dozen roads his father might have come by, including several 
that were not even listed on the map he had. His father had died 
during the war (at home, of a heart attack) and his mother had 
verified, when Charles asked, that they had indeed been lost 
much of the time while driving through northern Arizona. 
On a hot, dusty day in early August he finally found it. 
The entrance was just as he remembered it across the span of 
twenty-two years; a small gap between two mesas, not quite five 
miles off the road. In 1924 the road had been about as good as 
roads in those parts got; by 1946 it was rutted and worn away in 
places. By the time I first visited my grandfather’s ranch in the 
mid-70’s it was almost entirely gone. 
Charles drove the Packard slowly off the road. The spare in 
back held air, but the tread was mostly gone and Charles did not 
want to take a chance on it. So he drove carefully, and made 
three miles before the terrain got so rough that he decided to 
hike the rest of the way. Driving across the desert floor like that 
raised up a cloud of dust that hung in the dry still air behind 
him like a long rope; when he got out of the car the dust trail 
was still visible all the way back out to the road. 
He walked the last mile and stood at the entrance to the box 
canyon. The entrance was not wide, only about forty yards 
across. The way Grandpa told it to me years later, the instant he 
first stood there he knew he was home. A spring just inside 
poured up and over its borders, turning into a slow-moving 
thread of a creek that ran westward down the length of the can-

On Sequoia Time 
Page 3 
yon. Charles walked the canyon from end to end that first day, 
even though it was afternoon when he found it and after dark 
when he left. It ran over a mile and a half wide, and four miles 
long. Because of the spring, there were bushes and shrubs grow-
ing inside, and even a pair of small trees. He saw one rabbit that 
hid from him quickly. 
He was a city boy, then, but he figured that if he saw one rab-
bit, there were probably twenty he didn’t see, and he was right 
about that. 
As he was hiking back up out of the canyon the wind hit him. 
It came up slow and gentle, a breeze that moved the warm, still 
desert air pleasantly. Then it got both stiffer and colder, and by 
the time Charles reached the entrance to the canyon he was 
leaning into it, shivering, pushing for each step he took. 
When he left the canyon it stopped with remarkable abrupt-
ness. 
After he looked at the lay of the land he realized what was 
happening. What was no more than a gentle breeze outside the 
canyon was being channeled and tightened by the converging 
walls of the two mesas, until the breeze, moving across several 
dozens of square miles, turned into a small hurricane at the en-
trance to the canyon. 
That was why he planted the trees, of course—as a wind-
break. 
HE NEVER COULD tell me, or anyone, why he’d come looking for 
the canyon in the first place. The one time I asked him why he’d 
spent an entire summer looking for something he’d seen just 
once, when he was only seven years old, Grandpa looked at me 
with those wise blue eyes, scratched his bald, leathery skull, and 
grinned at me. “Danny, damn if I know.” 
CHARLES CAME BACK to the canyon permanently in 1951, with 
his wife Laurinda and their three children. One of them was my 
mother. 

Page 4 
Moran 
 
I FIRST SPENT THE SUMMER with my grandfather in 1975, when I 
was twelve years old. 
Grandpa was fifty-seven then, and Grandma was fifty-two. I 
don’t believe I knew their first names then. 
The only people at the ranch were my grandfather and 
grandmother; all the children had left long ago. The ranch, the 
desert surrounding it, the mountains rising up above it, were 
both fascinating and very foreign to a boy from Los Angeles. 
There are two kinds of sequoias; I don’t specifically remember 
having seen one of either kind before then, though surely I must 
have. The tree was not impressive, the first time I saw it; just 
about my height, and struggling. 
Over the course of the years Grandpa had planted several 
rows of trees at the entrance to the box canyon, staggered to 
muffle the wind. It worked; the trees at the entrance to the can-
yon got shaken up every afternoon when it got cold and the wind 
came up, but the trees away from the entrance were barely 
stirred at all, and back at the ranch house the wind was never 
worse than a gentle breeze. 
Five rows of trees had been planted when I stayed that first 
summer. Lots of them were fruit trees—apple trees mostly, be-
cause Grandpa liked apples and apple pie. There were a couple 
of citrus trees too, though because of the cold they never did so 
well. (It gets very cold in northern Arizona at night, and during 
the winter you get snow and ice.) 
Grandpa ended up planting seven rows of trees before he 
died. There were orange trees and apple trees, oaks and a couple 
varieties of evergreen. There was even, for a while, a cherry tree, 
but as I recall it died the second or third summer I spent at the 
ranch. 
The sequoia stood in the fifth row of trees, with scraggly or-
ange trees on both sides of it, well back from the wind. Grandpa 
had just planted it that summer, and it was still small and thin, 
about five feet tall, but you could already tell it was going to do 
better than the citrus we had planted around it. 

On Sequoia Time 
Page 5 
I SPENT THREE SUMMERS at the ranch. When I was fifteen I 
stopped going, not because I wanted to, but because my parents 
got divorced and life spun out of control for a while. 
The sequoia was nine feet tall then, in the summer of 1977. 
MY GRANDFATHER DIED almost twenty years later, in ’96, of pan-
creatic cancer. It is one of the more unpleasant ways to die. 
Grandma lasted three more years, but after Grandpa died she 
was never really the same. She died in June of ’99, and that 
summer was the last time I ever visited the ranch. 
We flew to Arizona for Grandma’s funeral. It was a small fu-
neral; myself and my older sister Janet, my mother and her sis-
ter Beth, and half a dozen of my grandmother’s friends, old folks 
of her generation who made the rounds at the funerals, waiting 
patiently and with not much fear for their turn to come. 
After the funeral my mother and aunt and sister and I drove 
out to the ranch together. Janet had never been there before; we 
wandered around and looked at things while my mother and 
aunt went through my grandmother’s few possessions. 
The ranch had gone to seed. I’d done the work that had to be 
done on my visits, but no more, and it showed. The wood needed 
painting, and the pens where the cows and the one pig had been 
kept were falling apart. 
A small colony of coyotes who didn’t know they were supposed 
to be afraid of humans had taken up residence in the abandoned 
horse shed, about sixty yards from the main house. I suppose 
Grandma had never gone out to the shed after the horses were 
sold. The coyotes stared at us and we stared at them, and we all 
agreed to leave each other alone. 
The creek kept along as it had since that day in ’46 when my 
grandfather had first seen it. It was small enough a that a 
grown man could step entirely across it. Janet had to take a 
slight hop. 
You could barely see where the garden had once been. It was 
a slightly empty spot, with a couple fewer weeds, in the midst of 
the general desolation. 

Page 6 
Moran 
 
THE TREES WERE GORGEOUS: a small forest, shady and cool in late 
afternoon. The evergreens were all doing well, and the oaks, and 
the walnut tree. Only half of the citrus trees had survived, 
though, and none of the tropicals my grandfather had tried to 
plant. The corpse of a palm tree, about nine feet tall and virtu-
ally mummified, had managed to avoid falling over. I guessed it 
had been dead at least as long as Grandpa. 
The sequoia was eighteen feet tall. 
My sister and I stood together and admired it. It was worth 
admiring: the tallest tree in the small forest by a good bit, the 
thick bark was a healthy deep brown and the needles glistened a 
lustrous dark green in the late afternoon sunlight. 
When we were done admiring it we left it alone and went 
back to the ranch house to pick up Mom and Aunt Beth. Aunt 
Beth was worried about Grandma’s cats; she’d had four and they 
weren’t in the house, and Aunt Beth couldn’t find them. We 
looked briefly but it was getting late and I didn’t want to drive 
back in the dark. We drove away from that canyon and I don’t 
recall looking back. 
No human ever saw that canyon again. 
THE TREE GREW. 
In 1972, when my grandfather planted the sequoia, humans 
had wiped out most of a population of trees that had existed 
since before the coming of humans to the American continents. 
The only remaining native populations of Great Sequoias were 
found in an area about 280 miles long, and less than twenty 
wide, in California on the western slopes of the Sierra Nevada. 
They were almost never found at heights of less than a mile 
above sea level. 
The summer I was thirteen I took two books on trees with me 
to visit my grandparents’ ranch. I knew that the small tree was 
a redwood, but what type of redwood neither I nor my grandfa-
ther knew. 
The books told me. It was a California big-tree, a Sequoiaden-
dron Giganteum. Of the two kinds of sequoias, the giant sequoia 
is the one likeliest to survive in the cold, at high altitudes. My 

On Sequoia Time 
Page 7 
grandfather had planted wisely, at least this once. The Sequoia 
Sempervirens can grow taller than the sequoiadendron, but it’s 
thinner and it handles the cold more poorly; and that canyon got 
cold. 
The tree found itself in an environment that suited it. The 
other trees, particularly the thick-sapped pines, helped protect it 
from the wind; and it was closer to the water than most of the 
other trees, too. 
By the time the tree had reached thirty-five feet the United 
States was fighting a “police action” in Brazil to preserve what 
was left of the rain forests. Without euphamisms it was a war, 
and a losing one. Too many people had a vested interest in the 
slash-and-burn beef-growing economy that was consuming the 
rain forests, starting with the desperately poor South American 
Indians who had no other way to survive, and working step by 
step up the economic ladder to McDonald’s corporation stock-
holders. 
While the rain forests died, life in the canyon flourished. The 
rabbit population, without my grandfather’s .22 rifle to keep it 
in check, exploded. My grandmother’s cats—tough farm cats, 
pushing twenty pounds—did well even without Grandma to take 
care of them. Shortly there were eight cats, and then eleven, and 
the cat population leveled off at around twenty. There would 
have been more except that the coyotes wanted the same food, 
the desert mice and squirrels and rabbits, and were tougher 
about going after it. The coyotes rarely hunted the cats; it hap-
pened at times, but it was always a fierce fight. For five years 
one tom, a big orange glandular monster who weighed thirty-
three pounds, made it a riskier proposition than usual; he killed 
and ate two young coyotes before a rattler finally got him one 
night. 
The rattlesnakes my grandfather had spent nearly four dec-
ades warring against outlasted him; they killed more of the cats 
than the coyotes ever did. 
About the time the sequoia was nearing forty-eight feet, a 
couple of owls nested in its lower branches. The owls fed off the 

Page 8 
Moran 
 
snakes, including the rattlers; baby owls were born the next 
summer. 
The sequoia broke fifty feet the year the last of the rain for-
ests went up in flames. 
LIFE IN THE CANYON continued quietly. Water came up from the 
ground. The sun warmed the canyon during the day, and during 
the night the mammals retreated to their burrows, the owls 
tucked their wings beneath their heads, and the snakes and liz-
ards and insects grew still. Tree sap turned sluggish; it would 
stay liquid, and keep the trees alive, well below the freezing 
point of water. 
The sequoia’s bark grew thicker as the tree grew taller. It was 
still very young, for a sequoia. Giant sequoias can live a very 
long time; nobody really knows how long. Humans had found gi-
ant sequoias as much as thirty-five hundred years old, and there 
was no reason to believe that they might not live longer. 
The sequoia in my grandfather’s canyon might have been ex-
pected to live a long time, even by sequoia standards. Though it 
had competition for soil and water, it grew fast, and got up into 
the sunlight, putting most of the other trees into its shade. By 
the time it was tall enough to take the brunt of the canyon’s 
wind itself, there was no danger that the wind would kill it. 
The giant sequoia was not the only thing that thrived in that 
canyon. So did the pines surrounding it, and the animals that 
lived among them, the owls and the snakes and the lizards, the 
coyotes and the rabbits and bees. There was water and there 
was sunlight and there was food enough for everything; and the 
wild creatures flourished. 
Some days, when the sun came slanting down into the canyon 
just right, it was so beautiful that seeing it would have made 
you glad to be alive. 
The cats, living in the wild where size was important, got big-
ger and bigger with the passage of the years, until most of them 
approached the size of the glandular monster who had once been 
such a freak. These were not mutants; the genes for size had 
been floating around in the cat population, but they had not 

On Sequoia Time 
Page 9 
been selected for. Now they were selected for and the cats got 
big, quickly, and gave the coyotes and owls some real competi-
tion for the rabbits and desert mice, snakes and lizards. 
Quickly is a relative word: the sequoia continued to grow, too, 
at its own pace. It was young and beautiful, with dark brown 
branches laden with dusky green leaves, the branches radiating 
outward from its trunk in a conical pattern, all the way from the 
ground to the top of the tree. In later life the branches near the 
ground would wither away, leaving the tree with a smooth trunk 
reaching up as much as two hundred feet; but for now the tree 
was young, and its growth was everywhere. The tree drank the 
water, and dug down into the soil, and reached for the sun. 
As adults, giant sequoias can reach heights of three hundred 
and fifty feet; by this time the sequoia in my grandfather’s can-
yon had nearly reached a hundred. 
—I was dead by then, of course, and so were you, and your 
grandchildren, and everyone your grandchildren had ever 
known or loved. 
And still the tree grew. 

 
 
- 2 - 
WHEN THE TREE was a hundred and sixty-one feet tall the skies 
above it turned scarlet at midnight. 
Two warring groups of humans had tossed nukes at each 
other, and everyone else. 
(Who were these humans? I doubt it matters, but for what it’s 
worth they were a group of people in what used to be India, and 
another group in what was once South America. Why did North 
America get nuked? The United States was gone a long time by 
then, and its remnants were of no threat to anyone—but every-
body had extra nukes they didn’t need, and there was not a con-
tinent on the planet that didn’t receive a few dozen.) 
The bombs fell, in a nuclear rain that lasted for days, through 
a peremptory first strike and a retaliatory second strike, 
through retaliatory second and third strikes, until only subma-
rines and spaceships remained to launch weapons at one an-
other. Through all of this, the bombs fell, and fell. The nuclear 
explosions were bad enough in and of themselves, and were suc-
ceeded by firestorms of epic size that burned to the ground every 
sequoia on the west coast of North America. 
Worse was to follow. Vast clouds of dust and earth were 
blasted into the sky. Whole continents disappeared beneath 
them; and temperatures began to drop. 
IN THE CANYON, the sky was an angry orange color for two or 
three days, and then it got dark and started to get cold. 
In the war, and the small Ice Age that followed, most of the 
living things on the planet’s surface died, and a lot of those be-
neath the ocean. The canyon I had spent three months in, dur-
ing the days when I was alive, survived better than most places. 
The canyon was not near any military targets, and most of the 
species living between its walls made it through. The rabbits 
had a very hard time of it, and as a result the coyotes died out. 
But six of the cats survived, four of them females, and in time 
kittens appeared, and the cats and rabbits struggled on. 

On Sequoia Time 
Page 11 
It was worse almost everywhere else in the world; and worse 
in ways the world had never seen before. There had been die-offs 
before, to be sure. The great majority of the species that had 
ever existed on the surface of the planet were extinct by the time 
the last sequoia was planted by my grandfather. 
Sixty-five million years ago an asteroid crashed into the 
Earth, near what is now Mexico. It blasted so much soot and 
smoke and dust into the sky that years passed in which the 
planet received no sunlight. Every species of land animal larger 
than a turtle died off. 
This die-off was different, though. It was an orderly catastro-
phe, planned for and carried out by our children, twenty-five 
generations removed. This disaster is what finally killed the 
whales, who had hung on through the slaughter of humans who 
wanted to slice them up and use their fat as a lubricant or a 
fuel; who had hung on while those same humans bred new hu-
mans, billions upon billions upon billions, and with sheer num-
bers poisoned the water the whales lived in and the air they 
breathed. They had hung on through the rise and fall of empires, 
but they were the largest of all the animals and the ones most 
damaged when the radioactive debris was inevitably washed 
down to the sea. The Earth tried to cleanse itself, to wash away 
the poisons; and the water ended up where it always did. It de-
stroyed the food chain the whales depended upon; and it is a 
good question whether the last whales died of radiation poison-
ing or starvation. 
THE TREE WAS NOT a complex thing, but it had a sort of aware-
ness, a knowledge of when things were well and when they were 
not. For a very long time after that things were not well. Many 
of the trees that had provided it with a windbreak died off as the 
cold got worse. The spring that fed the stream slowed for several 
decades, and when it eventually resumed its flow, it was con-
taminated by radioactive isotopes that might have killed the 
tree, had it been younger or smaller. It did kill some of the other 
trees, among those that had survived the cold. 

 
 
Slowly though, slowly even by the tree’s standards, things be-
gan to get better. The winds that had nearly killed it, winter af-
ter brutal winter, stopped being so severe. The winters them-
selves grew warmer, as did the summers; and the radiation lev-
els, still lethal elsewhere in the world, declined in the area 
around the canyon to the point where plants and animals 
stopped dying of it, much, and started mutating instead. Most of 
the mutants died too, of course; that’s what mutants do. 
THINGS WERE A LITTLE SIMPLER in the canyon, a little less com-
plex; here as everywhere else the great war had knocked out 
some of the links in the elaborate chain that made life on Earth 
a viable affair. 
But life in the canyon hung on. The tree pushed ahead with 
the serious business of growing. It broke two hundred feet just 
weeks before a human being staggered into the canyon to die. 
The man came in off the desert, from the east where the fire-
ball sun hung in the morning sky. He was half dead already. He 
was six generations removed from the men and women who had 
pulled the trigger and launched the nukes; but in six genera-
tions the fighting had not stopped. Instead it had spread, though 
with less dangerous weapons now, north and south and east and 
west. He wore combat armor that was supposed to protect him 
from incidental radiation, still high six generations after the 
great war, and it did that. What it did not do was protect him 
from the artillery that had destroyed the rest of his squad. I’ve 
said that my sister and I were the last human beings to see the 
canyon, and this is true. The soldier was flash-blinded and deaf-
ened. His right arm was shattered from the elbow down, and a 
stress fracture in his right leg slowed but did not stop him. Oc-
casionally he called out, in a high cracked voice, words that may 
have meant something to someone who spoke his language. 
He climbed up into the canyon, walked a few hundred yards 
and then sat down in the shade of an apple tree that was almost 
as bad off as he was. 
It took two days before the lack of water killed him. He was 
only a dozen yards from the slow small stream that now curled 

On Sequoia Time 
Page 13 
its way around the sequoia’s wide base, but he could neither 
hear nor see it, and so he suffered, screaming out occasionally to 
an audience of cats who were trying to decide what he was, and 
whether he was edible. 
The tree took little enough notice of it. The man’s dying was 
not affecting its sunlight or its water. Indirectly, after the cats 
ate him, he would end up fertilizing the ground in the great 
tree’s vicinity, which was all to the good. 
We might dwell upon that man, that soldier dying in pain in 
the desert beneath the harsh sun. We might, but we will not. He 
was only one man; and worse was coming. 
NOT ALL HUMANS died in that great war. Some of those who did 
not decided that, if the human race was to survive, the race it-
self needed to change. (Perhaps they were right about that. I 
don’t know. The old design hadn't worked out very well, but then 
the new one didn’t do much better—) 
They remade themselves. With genetic engineering they cre-
ated children who were stronger and faster, who thought more 
clearly and more quickly than you or I. They reinvented them-
selves from the ground up, generation after generation, to be the 
greatest warriors the world had ever seen. Before the tree had 
reached two hundred and twenty-five feet, the new humans had 
killed off the remnants of the old humans, the ones who looked 
more or less like you and me, and were therefore forced to turn 
their attentions to one another. 
You might wonder if these humans were really human. They 
were. They were people, at least, more so than you and I in all 
the ways that count. They did not always look like us, but that 
does not matter. I do not know if you could say that they were 
better than us; but they were more than us. 
When I was a boy I used to read sci-fi stories, or watch epi-
sodes of Star Trek, about how as humans evolved we would turn 
into something that was all brains and no hormones, all intellect 
and no emotions. 
That isn’t what happened. These people who were descended 
from us were capable of a range of experience that would have 

 
 
destroyed any of us, our best or our worst. They were more dan-
gerous and more generous than us; they grew angrier and hap-
pier, grieved harder and rejoiced with more abandon. Love was 
an emotion so deep they could not lie about it, hatred a passion 
so black it was always lethal to someone. 
The tree was three hundred and fourteen feet tall when the 
human race finally killed itself, and everything else too. They 
did it with nanotechnology. One group of humans, who were 
good people—they would tell you so—created a molecule-sized 
nanomachine that fed on living creatures, and that reproduced 
itself, using common materials, to make more such nanomachi-
nes. They intended to use the nanomachine on other humans, 
who were bad people and who they hated and wanted to kill. 
Unfortunately something went wrong. 
It was humanity’s last mistake in a very long line—the Big 
One. The nanomachines got loose before the good humans who 
had created them completed the controls that would have let 
them protect themselves from their creation. 
The nanomachines ate them and their children first. Poetic 
justice, you might say, if that sort of thing amuses you. The 
nanomachines did not stop after eating their creators; they were 
not designed to. They drifted out on the winds, to the oceans, to 
the furthest reaches of the planet. And where they found bio-
mass, they ate it. They swarmed over living creatures, reproduc-
ing and eating. They ate indiscriminately, people and pets and 
leather and wood and rubber and plastic; and when they were 
done nothing remained but a gray sludge of dead nanomachines 
with nothing left to eat. 
The tree was—well, I do not know if fortunate is the word. It 
was all the way around the planet from the spot where the world 
ended; and years passed before the first spores of the gray 
sludge came drifting in across the desert, born on the back of the 
wind. 
THE TREE WAS, in a sense, the last representative of the human 
race, the last thing that might have said to an uncaring uni-
verse, they were not so bad. My grandfather planted that tree, 

On Sequoia Time 
Page 15 
and he cared for it while it was young and needed the care. He 
planted that windbreak for himself, for his own reasons; but any 
orchard of trees might have served as a windbreak, and more 
effectively than the trees he planted and labored over. And he 
loved that sequoia. It was the first tree he showed me, the first 
summer I visited him; it was the only one I ever heard him men-
tion, or worry over. He worried that it would survive the win-
ters, worried that he had planted it in a location that would 
stunt its growth, or kill it. And partially because he worried 
about it, it did survive; and because of the location he picked, it 
lasted longer than anything. 
There were other things created by the human race that stood 
in monument, despite the nanomachines that were busy turning 
the world, from the depths of the Mariani Trench to the heights 
of Everest, into a vast gray sludge. Between its wars and its 
building humanity had inflicted scars upon the planet that 
would be erased only in the course of geologic time. The 
nanomachines did not eat metal or stone or cement or glass; 
weapons and vehicles and buildings littered the surface of the 
planet when the nanomachines were done. 
But of the good things the human race did, there was one 
thing that still survived; and that one thing was the tree. 
Perhaps it’s foolish to talk this way, for the tree was just a 
tree. So far as I know it had no emotions. It could not think or 
reason. And yet it could feel, and had a sort of awareness of it-
self, and it knew that something was wrong. The nanomachines 
first entered the canyon on the wind; and they made short work 
of almost everything. All the animals, the lizards and bees and 
snakes and cats and rabbits and owls and crows, died within 
hours. The smaller trees took days to die, and even the oaks, 
large though some of them had grown, were gone within a week. 
But an adult California big-tree, a giant sequoia, is huge. The 
gray sludge ate away at the tree, stripped it of its leaves, but the 
tree was made of more than two million pounds of living hard-
wood. Its bark alone was two to three feet thick, and the bark 
served to slow the attack of the nanomachines. The bark pro-

 
 
tected the tree, as evolution had designed it to, significantly 
slowed the nanomachine attack. 
Months passed while the tree struggled for life. It was the last 
living thing on the surface of the planet that humanity had 
killed. 
HERE ARE SOME of the things we killed: 
Hawks and seaweed. Horses. Puppies and kittens and par-
rots. Lions and lizards, lobsters and clams. Sharks. Grass and 
crabgrass and all the flowers, every last one of them; a rose by 
any other name was just as dead. Bats and vultures and pigeons 
and bluebirds, boa constrictors and garden snakes and earth-
worms. Elephants and marijuana plants. Milkweed and tum-
bleweed and all the other plants humans named “weeds” and 
tried to destroy because they couldn’t figure out a way to make 
use of them. Snails and frogs and raccoons and bears. We killed 
the dolphins and the seals and the squid and the starfish, jelly-
fish and sea anemones and sea horses and all the animals that 
made the beautiful shells humans treasured. 
We killed everything—the air and the ground and the water, 
and everything that lived in those places. 
THE LAST THING we killed was the tree. 
Half a year had passed since the gray sludge’s arrival. The 
tree’s leaves had gone first, and then its branches. The 
nanomachines ate inward, chewing away at the hardwood. They 
worked quickly enough, under the circumstances. The tree was 
twenty-five feet around, and it took the nanomachines a long 
time to eat their way through it. They got started at the base 
first, about ten feet above the ground. Other nanomachines at-
tacked the tree along its length, but the invasion at the tree’s 
base was the worst one. 
If by some quirk of fate my grandfather had been able to see 
the canyon at that moment, he would not have recognized it as 
the place where he’d grown old and died. Every tree, except the 
great sequoia itself, had toppled to the ground and sunk into a 
sludge of gray dust. Where grass and shrubs had sprouted, bare 

On Sequoia Time 
Page 17 
rock stood forth. The wind that had always gathered at the 
mouth of the canyon once again had nothing to stop it, and each 
evening it blew the dirt and dust back into the canyon, leaving 
nothing but the exposed rock behind. 
Only the one tree still stood above the expanse of pale rock, 
covered in a gray blanket of molecule-sized machines. 
Only the one tree, in all the world, still maintained a flicker of 
life. Sap flowed sluggishly within the tree’s core, even at the 
end. The gray sludge ate inexorably away at the tree’s base, un-
til the day the wind came up, the wind that had tried to knock 
my grandfather over almost two thousand years before— 
And the tree my grandfather planted, fell. 
The fall took quite a while, at least on the human scale. On 
sequoia time it was faster than the downstroke of a humming-
bird’s wings. 
The fall lasted either a long time or an instant; it doesn’t mat-
ter. When the tree’s thousand tons of hardwood struck the bare 
stone surface of the canyon the tree shattered, and the sound of 
its death echoed up and down the length of the canyon for al-
most thirty seconds before it faded, and the canyon grew quiet 
again except for the wind. 
 
 
The End 

